THE EXCELLENCY OF Monarchical Government, Especially of the English Monarchy;
WHEREIN Is largely Treated of the several BENEFITS of KINGLY GOVERNMENT, and
the INCONVENIENCE of COMMONWEALTHS.

ALSO OF The several Badges of SOVEREIGNTY in General, and particularly
according to the CONSTITUTIONS of our LAWS.

LIKEWISE OF The Duty of SUBJECTS, and the Mischiefs of FACTION, SEDITION and
REBELLION.

In all which The PRINCIPLES and PRACTICES of our late COMMONWEALTHS.

MEN are Considered.

By NATHANIEL JOHNSTON Dr. in Physic.

Decet timeri Caesarem, at plus diligi.

Senec. Octav. LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXVI.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
WHile every one strives to outdo each other in the Presents they make, as
Testimonies of their unbounded Wishes, That Your Majesty may see many and many
happy Years: I presume to lay this Treatise, Of the Excellency of the English
Monarchy, at Your Sacred Feet, as the best Expression of that Veneration I owe
to Majesty; at least, the best my small Capacity enables me to render. Which I
am the rather emboldned to, seeing that, where Monarchy is the Theme, an humble
Recourse for Patronage seems owing to none less than a King; or Application to
be made to any less than the Best of Princes, to countenance a Discourse of the
Best of Governments. My want of Skill to copy all the Beauties of the English
Monarchy, (an Excellency no Hand can pretend to) will not, I hope, lessen the
Esteem of the Subject. But the falling short of setting out its Inimitable
Perfections, will leave Your Majesty a large Field to exercise that Divine
Virtue and Property of a King, to Forgive. All that a Writer can perform in a
Subject of this Nature, is, to give an Historical Account of the Rise,
Progress, and Constitution of the Government; to show the Admirable Order and
Firmness of its Composition; to collect the Real, Solid, and Certain Benefits
arising from it; which are best Illustrated, by comparing it with all other
Systems of Government, and reflecting, as well upon the weak Foundations, and
unfortunate Issue, as the long Series of Inconveniences which ever attend them;
especially that which is Antimonarchical and Popular. This is the Province of
an Author, and my Aim in this Treatise. But to demonstrate the Practical
Excellence of our Monarchy, is the business of the Monarch; and will be the
peculiar Advantage of Your Majest'ys Reign, to carry the Honor of this Nation
higher, than any thing I could copy from the Records of your most Famous
Ancestors, and most Heroic Predecessors. So that it is my greatest comfort
(next to the hopes of Your Majesty's gracious Acceptance of these my
Endeavors) that those more able Pens, who shall undertake to transmit to
Posterity, the Memorials of Your Majesty's happy Reign, will fall shorter of
the Original, than perhaps I have done: For as their Abilities will exceed
mine, so will their Subject be incomparably greater. I am conscious to my self
that what I have attempted is far below the Dignity of the Matter: But I shall
never repent my Labor, if Your Majesty vouchsafe to cast a Gracious Eye upon
it, merely as an Instance of my unshaken Loyalty, in Order to Your Service, and
the Benefit of Your People; and to accept it, as an Homage, and Offering of my
Zeal, and Duty, and an unfeigned Testimony, That I am

Newyears-day, 1685/86. Your MAJESTY'S Most Humble, Most Obedient, and Most
Devoted Subject, N. JOHNSTON.

THE Introduction.
WHEN a Fire happens in any considerable Building (much more in a magnificent
Palace) every one runs with his Bucket, works at the Engine, helps to rear the
Ladders, or do something to stay the Ravage of the Flames; and when the
devouring Element has reduced all to Cinder, and Embers, then has he leisure
to consider the Proximate Causes of it, the unhappy Accidents that produced it,
and the ways and means whereby so wasting a Destruction might have been
prevented. After which, he surveys in his Melancholy Thoughts, the former
curious Arrchitecture, the rare contrivance, largeness, and beauty of the
Rooms, and Stateliness of the whole Pile. And after some time, allowed to his
affrightment and astonishment, begins to forecast, how a more durable Structure
may be raised again, of less combustible, or perishable Materials. He thinks
then of facing it with Jasper Crusting, and flooring of it with Marble, and so
securing it, that nothing but the last deflagration shall dissolve it.

So those of his Majesty's Subjects, who lived before the Calamitous Fire was
kindled in his Blessed Father's Dominions, could not without a most anxious
Concern, reflect on the ancient Glory of that so well-disposed, and beautiful
Monarchy, brought to that sad Catastrophe, by those who at first, may he
presumed, designed no such Mischief: but by prosperous success, and fatal
Intervening Accidents, devolved the Power into such Hands, as by an implacable
Malice, and incredible Barbarity were not satiated even with the sacred Blood
of the Blessed Martyr.

Those erected a most Tyrannical Commonwealth, and Oligarchy (Governments
unknown to these Isles, since the Roman Conquest) and with inexpressible
Cruelty, and Devastation, for many Years exhausted the Blood and Treasure of
the Subjects.

But when they had filled the measure of their Wickedness, and the Usurped
Power rolled from one Hand to another, The miraculous Restoration of His late
Majesty, reseated the Monarchy again, and settled us in a most profound Peace,
while all the neighboring Countries were harassed with cruel Hostilities, and
most Bloody Wars.

However though that great Prince, by the Blessing of God, laid the Foundation
of a Glorious Temple of Concord, Peace, and Eternity of Empire; yet for some
Years before his Death, we saw a strange Propensity, in Malcontents,
tumultuous Petitioners, Associators, and daring Promotors of the Bill of
Seclusion, to involve the Kingdom again in a Civil War.

Having a natural Inclination, rather to employ the time I had to spare from
the diligent Attendance upon my Profession, in the Study of Antiquities, than
in other Divertisements; It was, during these later Revolutions, that I did
more immediately employ some of my vacant Hours in revising not only my former
Collections, out of our own, and other choice Historians, but in perusing some
of the Works of our ablest Masters in the Laws, for the establishing my own
Judgment, and digested something suitable to the then State of Affairs.

Which while I was essaying, some Persons of Honor (to whom I must ever pay a
ready Obedience) suggested to me, that some Treatise discovering the Excellency
of the English Monarchy, would be useful to the Public.

This to me was a sufficient Command, and from thenceforward, I began to Plot
out something toward it. Which from a design of some few Sheets (by the large
extent of the Subject) has swelled to this Volume; which the considerate will
easily judge I could not well comprize in a less Bulk, since almost every
Chapter contains what might have required a single Treatise.

There being also scarce one particular Branch of the Constitution of the
Monarchy, the black Parliament did not alter; I have been obliged under all
those Heads to examine their Principles, detect their Frauds, sinister designs,
and the mischievous Consequences of those alterations or subversions they made,
and have treated so much the largelier of those Pests of all Governments,
Faction, Sedition, and Rebellion, as I conceived the quiet repose, and
tranquillity of the Government required it.

Yet I flatter my self, that all concerned therein, will take my advice,
reasoning and collections in good part: Since I have no other design, but to
prevent their Personal Rain, and the Calamities that have been so wastingly
brought upon these Kingdoms by them; and may be brought again, if ever the like
should be attempted.

For the effectual prevention of which, I am in hopes, that the right
understanding the Constitution of the Government, will be an useful Antidote,
and would wish all Malcontents to consider (what the consulting of History,
and their own Experience may teach them) that however the English Monarchy for
a time, by Faction, Sedition, or Rebellion, may be weakened, or Eclipsed; yet
the just Monarohy, like the Sun, ever dissipates all the Mists, hazy Weather,
and Clouds; and will at last (though sometimes not without Thunder and
Lightning) clear the Air, and shine with more Powerfullness, and Splendour than
before.

The rude shocks of popular Disturbance, do but more securely establish the
Throne. It being the Prudence of every Governor to make more defensible that
part of the Fortress, which by any Assault, has been found most weak, and
untenable.

As I have endeavored on the one hand to keep the Subjects in their Duty, and
by all Dehortments, reclaim them from Sedition and Rebellion, and have laid
open the ancient State of the Government, and the absoluteness of our Princes,
for some Ages after the Conquest: nevertheless I would not be understood to
intend the reducing the Subject to their Pristine Bondage. This is far from my
Thoughts.

What I have done in this kind, is not only because the subject matter required
the describing the ancient Model of the Government, and that of late the Power
of our Monarchs has been endeavored to be too much restrained, but
principally upon three Accounts.

First, to discover the gradual Relaxations of the absoluteness of our Princes,
for the greater case of the Subjects. Secondly, to let all know that our
Liberties, Privileges, and Immunities, have proceeded from the Grants,
Benevolences, and Gracious Condescensions of our Kings. Thirdly, to induce the
Subjects with due thankfullness to acknowledge the bountiful Favor of our
Sovereigns, and the Wisdom of our Ancestors, in soliciting for, and obtaining
such Liberties as we enjoy, beyond the degree of any Subjects, either to
Crowned Heads, or Republics. There being such Barriers set in England, betwixt
the Sovereign, and his Subjects, as neither can remove without fatal
Inconvenience.

For as the Princes greatest Ease, Prosperity, and Glory, is when he Reigns,
not so much over the bodies, as in the hearts of his Subjects, and rules by the
Laws: So the Peoples Profit, Plenty and Tranquillity, is the most certain and
established, when they are content with the Enfranchisements the Laws allow,
and endeavor not to invade the Prerogatives of the Crown; as the Houses of
Parliament, (...). 6. Hist. p. 452. C.
convened 1641. did by their dethroning Propositions and Bills: which if they
had been granted, would not only have unsoveraigned the King, but rendered the
condition of the Subject more miserable and enslaved, than it had been for many
centuries of years bypast.

I have endeavored in the whole work, to discover how much the English
Monarchy excells other ancient and modern Governments, and even the Utopia and
Fictitious Ideas of the Philosophers. The judicious Polybius has a memorable
observation, That every Monarchy is not to be called a Kingdom; but that only,
which is yielded to by the willing, [that is, which is freely submitted to, to
distinguish it from Tyranny] and which is governed by Counsel, rather than by
fear or force. Also that every Government of few, is not to be called the
Principality of the Optimacy: but that wherein the just and Prudent by Election
have the Power. That, he says further, is not to be called the Empire of the
People, where every multitude has Power of doing what they will or purpose;
but where the Countries Customs flourish, where the Gods are worshipped,
Parents honored, the Elder Persons reverenced, and the Laws obeyed.

All which I hope I have made apparent, are better provided for in our
Hereditary Monarchy, than in any other known Government, especially as to the
Peoples benefit in the rare Constitution of the Legislative, and yet the
Sovereign has retained sufficient Power to secure the Peace of his Countries,
and be able to bear the Port of a great and just Monarch.

In this Treatise I meddle not with the Arcana Imperii, they have too much of
Majesty impressed upon them, to be described by such Pencils as I can use; and
like the Kings Coin, are incircled with a Decus and Tutamen, may neither be
clipped, nor adulterated.

Neither have I meddled with the Religious part of the Government, that not
being my Province. I write abstractedly of the Sovereign, and the Constitution,
without regard to the Religion of the Prince: as being well satisfied, that
whatever Qualifications the Subjects may wish for in their Prince; yet Religion
qua Religion, should neither influence the Succession, nor their Obedience.

In so great an undertaking, I hope it will be considered, that as in a great
Building, all the Rooms are not alike richly furnished, There are some Vtensils
fit for the Kitchen, which are not for the Dining Room: Some Pictures suit the
Hall, others the Staircase: Such as are for Chimney-pieces, are not agreeable
to the Great Chamber: The choicest are fit for the withdrawing Room, and the
enriched Closets.

So in this work I am obliged to keep a decorum. In some places I have reason
to use a more close and contracted, in others a more free and loose way of
Arguing. Sometimes I am forced to use the significant, though obsolete, Saxon,
or the crabbed Terms of Law, and Arts, and intermix the less refined Sentences
of old Authors, according as the subject matter required; so that I could no
ways use that politeness of phrase, or roundness of Period^ the curious may
expect.

I presume not, that every one will be equally delighted with the researches I
have made into the usages of remote Ages: or with the Censures upon some men's
later Actions. But most, I hope, will find good use of either; and when they
consider I have endeavored to follow great Authors, and have faithfully quoted
them, they will more readily acquit me.

Therefore I beg that the Ingenious Peruser will not pass his Censure upon
parcels; but after he has perused the whole, will be so charitable to believe,
that those Parts, which are less acceptable to him, may be grateful to others;
and will allow, that in so great a work (wherein much variety of Reading and
Argument was requisite) I cannot expect to adapt things to the Genius of every
one.

Yet as far as I am able, even in this particular, I have endeavored it; Non
vero nudas and sparsas sententias dedimus, nedi^ Huerent, and effet quod
dicitur Arena sine Calce; sed eas inter se haud indecentervinximus, and
interdum velut cemento quodam commitimus nostrorum verborum. Ut Phryg^ones e
varii coloris filo unum aliquod Aulaeum formant, sic nos e mill aliquot
particulis uniforme hoc and cohaerens corpus. Lipsii Polit. de Concilio and
Forma Operis.
by interspersing in every Chapter, either Historical Remarques, or the weighty
Sentences of Grave Authors: and though I lose some of the Elegancy and
Emphasis, in rendering them into English; yet I hope the Reader will have
recourse to the Margent, where he will find I have not wittingly falsified any
Quotation.

What Apology Lipsius makes for himself, I must crave the benefit of; That
though I have culled out from Learned Authors great variety of Sentences, yet I
have not so scatteringly strowed them, that they might seem Sand without Lime;
but have with such Cement as I could, not undecently inlaid them. And as the
workers of Hangings, from threads of diverse colors weave one piece of
Tapistry: So from a thousand Arguments, and materials I have fashioned the
uniform and connected discourse of the English Monarchy: which though in single
branches, has with great Judgment and Arts been composed by others; yet, that
I know of, has not been so digested in one body before.

This consideration leads me to another necessary Apology for my self; that
whereas (by an heedlesness I dare not excuse) I had not in my first draught,
noted the Pages in some Modern Authors, nor the Authors themselves, yet have
transcribed their whole Sentences. I desire the candid Authors, and Reader, not
to Interpret this a studied Plagiarism; but rather impute it to the good
Opinion I had, of the vivacity and significancy of their expressions, which
made me insert them, and no design to vend stolen Wares undiscovered; for it
will be easily found, that I challenge them not as my own: and if the attentive
collate such places, he will find, that what ever rich Gemms or Metals I have
borrowed, I have endeavored to place them with advantage: and though I cannot
say, I have enriched them in the setting; yet have mostly used some workmanship
about them, or have added some ancient Authority parallel to them.

This having been the product of many spare Hours, and my Profession (which no
other studies have ever interfered with) having often obliged me, to leave the
matter abruptly, in the middle of a Paragraph; whereby I returned not again to
it, with the same warmth and train of thoughts; and the sending up my Copy in
parcels, at distant times, to the Press, I hope will prevail with the
considerate to pardon what inconnexion, broken ends, or some small repetition
may be found in it.

I must here also advertise the Reader that the whole Original was writ, and
the most part Printed, before the last Session of Parliament Nov. the 9th. So
that what has fallen out since, he can expect no touches upon: and though at
present the Harmony be not the same that was formerly betwixt the King and his
two Houses; yet it is to be hoped that, betwixt so Wise and Gracious a King,
and so Loyal a Parliament, there can be no long discord, especially when it is
considered who will have the greatest advantage by it.

If this Treatise contribute any thing to it, I shall think my self very happy.
However I hope, Gentlemen and Scholars will find it a pleasing divertisement in
their Closets and Studies; it being fitted for the hours of such recess, and
upon every head (there being variety of matter collected, and great Volumes
epitomized, and several Authors noted who treat upon that Subject) it will be a
Promptuary or Commonplace, out of which many, out of this Ore, upon occasions
of moment, may digest for their own use refineder notions, and having a
competent store of Observations, from Writers of good esteem, laid before them,
may with more ease bring them to the Test of their own Judgments.

Having dealt thus frankly with all, I hope, Gentlemen will allow me that plea,
which most require, that for some Moles, Dimples or Scars, an otherwise
tolerable mien is not to be contemned: and though I must expect the fate of all
Builders, that most will conclude they could have contrived better; In magnis
veluse yat est.
yet I hope three things: First, That the well-wishers to English Monarchy will
have a favorable opinion of the design, what ever they have of the
performance. Secondly, That this may excite some, who have more leisure,
greater helps, and more refined Judgments, to undertake this useful subject,
with happier Auspices. And lastly, That none will entertain a worse opinion of
the Government by reason of my unskilful describing of it, or despise the
whole, because I may (for all my Circumspection) have committed Errors in
following the Sentiments of some. Authors, or mistaken the true sense of any of
them; which has not been done wilfully by

N. Johnston.

OF THE EXCELLENCY OF Monarchical Government, Especially of the English
Monarchy; WHEREIN, Is largely Treated of the several Benefits of KINGLY
GOVERNMENT, and the Inconvenience of COMMONWEALTHS, etc.
CHAP. I. A Comparison of the Body Natural and Politic; with an account of the
subject Matter treated of.
FROM the Contemplation of our selves, in the Faculties of our Souls, and the
Subservience of our Bodies, no doubt wise Men have framed the Idaeas of
Government; with is agreeable to what the Great and Ancient Philosopher (...).
Arist. Polit. lib. 1. c. 5.
notes, That every living Creature consists of Body and Soul, whereof the one
by Nature commands, and the other obeys: and in another place (...). Ib.
he distinguishes the manner of the Soul's Rule; in that it rules the Body by
a Masterly and Absolute, and the Mind rules the Affections by a Kingly Command.

As the Natural Body consists of Head and Members, made stable and erect by the
Bones, tied together and curiously interwoven by the Nerves, Ligaments,
Tendons, Muscles, and Membranes; Comparison of the natural with the Politic
body.
pervaded by the nutritious juice, Lympha and Blood; irradiated by Natural,
Vital, and Animal spirits; animated and enlivened in all its motions by the
Energy of a Rational Soul: So in the Political, the Sovereign the Head, and the
People the Members, are held together by the strong Sinews and Nerves of good
Laws and Political Constitutions; actuated and enlivened in all their motions
by the influence of the Prince and his Government (as the Soul, Archaeus and
Celestial fire) whereby every Member performs its Offices in this great
Economy, the whole System is kept in regular and orderly Motion, is firmly
established, and enabled to exert all those beneficial Powers that are admired
in a well composed Body Politic. The Body without the Head, being but a Trunk
and inanimate Carcass; and the Head without the Body, as a curious piece of
Clock-work without Motion.

It must be owned to be a noble Enterprise to make researches into the
constituent Parts, Harmony and Composure of Government, which is that benign
Supreme Power which influenceth vast Societies of men, and combines all
tempers, constitutions and interests in one noble Machine, for the benefit of
the whole and every part; and makes every Dominion a little World; wherein
Beauty, Order, and the Blessings of this Life are inspired into all the
Members, how minute soever, with that calmness (when no disturbances are given
it) that we scarce hear the motions of the Sic orbem Reipubli^e esse conversum,
ut vix sonitum audire, vix impressam orbitam vi^ere possumus. Cic. ^^ Attic.
Ep. 36.
Machine, or see the Springs that move it.

But as in the Body Natural the (...).
Philosopher observes, That by the turbulence of depraved Appetites, by heady
Rashness, and seducing Passions in the vicious and ill-affected, the Body seems
to command the Soul, and Reason is dethroned: So in the Commonweal, when from
mistakes and misguided Zeal, Discontent, Ambition, and other vicious
Inclinations, People are infected, whereby the Malignant Fever of Sedition, or
the Pest of Rebellion rages in a State; the Sovereign is, for a time, kept
from the Exercise of his Royal Power, The Scheme of the whole work.
and sometimes dethroned.

But to leave this pleasing Allegory, which I could pursue in comparing all the
Members of the Body, and Faculties of the Soul with the constituent Parts and
Offices of Government: I shall, instead of that, draw a short Scheme of my
design in this Work, which I had never undertaken, if it had not been that I
was invited to it by a Great and Wise Minister of State, My Lord President.
whose glorious Service to his Prince and Country will be celebrated in
remotest Ages: and having lived to make some Observations on the Causes and
Managery of the Rebellion against King Charles the Martyr, and the tendency to
another Civil War of later date; and revolving with my self, that though many
wise and judicious Persons both know, and have learnedly writ, of the secret
Springs and Movements of them, infinitely beyond what I can pretend to: and
that both our own Countrymen have, in Parts, writ of all the branches of the
English Government, and many Foreigners of Politics in general, or such as were
fitted for the Governments under which they lived; yet having met with none
that had so particularly writ of the Excellency of the English Monarchy, as to
illustrate it so as it might be useful to the preventing Seditions and
Rebellions, and to clear the Commodiousness and Necessity of submitting to it;
and placing a great Portion of our happiness here in living under it, I
conceived it might be a profitable Essay to excite those, who have not leisure
and opportunity to peruse great and numerous Volumes, to extract, for their
use, such things as had occurred in my poor Reading, to induce them to prize it
as they ought, and to furnish them with such Arguments, as my low Reasoning was
able, whereby to answer the Objections of our late Republicans against it, and
discover their Methods of Proceedings toward the overthrowing it, and to
caution all the well-meaning Subjects against all the Arts of Factious and
Seditious People and Principles.

And though I cannot promise my self the success I wish; yet I hope I may
excite some more knowing, learned and judicious, to furnish our little World
with a more Copious and Elaborate Piece, which may supply my defects, and more
abundantly satisfy the ingenious and curious Reader, to whom I shall now draw
the Curtain, and expose the Model of the designed Work.

First, Therefore, cap. 2.
as a Foundation, I shall treat of the necessity of Government in General; In
which Chapter I shall discourse of its Original in Families, etc. cap. 3.
Then that the People are not the original of Government. Then cap. 4.
of the benefit of Government in instituting Laws; In cap. 5.
securing Property and other particulars. From this I proceed to treat of the
cap. 6.
inconvenience of Democracy, and of the several cap. 7.
Forms of Common Wealth Governments, before and in, Aristotle's time. After
which cap. 8.
of the inconvenience of all kinds of Republic Governments Then of the
preference cap. 9.
of Monarchical Government before all others. In all which Chapters I touch
upon the Principles and Practices of our late Republicans, which having
dispatched, I give the Character of a good cap. 10.
King in general. Then that the care cap. 11.
of Religion is incumbent upon Kings. Then of the cap. 12.
Clemency, Prudence, cap. 13.
Courage cap. 14.
and Military Conduct of Kings; of the cap. 15.
burden and care of Kings. cap. 16.
The Excellency of Hereditary Monarchy. Then I proceed to the King's Authority
and cap. 17.
Sovereignty in general; and more cap. 18.
particularly according to our Laws by the Enumeration of many particulars.
cap. 19.
Then, as a Corollary, that the Sovereign is not accountable to any upon Earth.
That the King is not to be cap. 20.
Resisted or Rebelled against. In what cases he may cap. 21.
dispense with the Execution of the Laws of his Country. Then I treat of the
King's Authority cap. 22.
in making Laws, and of the Laws of the Romans in Britain, and of the British
and German Polity. Next of the Saxons cap. 23.
great Councils, of whom they consisted, and how the Laws were established by
the respective Kings. Then of the great cap. 24.
Councils from the Conquest to the beginning of Hen. 3. Then of the great
Councils cap. 25.
and Parliaments during the Reign of Hen. 3. to the end of Edw. 3. After which
of the Parliaments cap. 26.
of England during the Reign of Edw. 2. to the 22. of King Charles the 2d. Then
of Modern cap. 27.
rightly constituted Parliaments, and of the Factious cap. 28.
Members of Parliaments; wherein I discourse, at large of the Encroachments of
some Parliaments, especially of some Houses of Commons. Then from the great
Council I pass to the cap. 29.
Right Honorable the Privy Council, their Qualifications, to be at the King's
sole appointing. Of Ministers cap. 30.
of State, etc. Then of the King's Sovereignty in appointing cap. 31.
Magistrates, cap. 32.
Judges, Justices cap. 33.
of Peace and their Sessions; Of the Kings Sovereignty in making cap. 34.
War and Peace. Concerning cap. 35.
raising Money upon the Subject, and obligation of Subjects to supply the
Sovereign.

Having thus dispatched the particulars, that more immediately relate to the
Sovereign, I come to the Subjects, and first discourse cap. 36.
of the Nobility; Then of the cap. 37.
Gentry, and the cap. 38.
Commonalty. Then of the disposition cap. 39.
of the Common People: Next of the Subjects obedience. cap. 40.
Which last leads me naturally to discourse of the contrary, viz. cap. 41.
Faction and Sedition, and the causers and causes of them under Ten several
heads. Then of the signs cap. 42.
of them: Then of the cap. 43.
Prognostics of Faction and Sedition; After which I pass to the Remedies cap.
44.
of Faction and Sedition. Then of the Preservatives cap. 45.
against Sedition and Faction; and Lastly, of Conspiracies cap. 46.
and Rebellions.

In all which I have endeavored to divert the Reader with variety of History,
The Authors Apology for himself.
and Quotations out of such most approved Authors as I judged most suitable to
my Design, and would be most grateful to the Reader; whom I desire, according
to my poor Talent, to please as well as instruct; and have chosen rather to
give him the Authorities I use in their own Language, and thereby be just to
the Authors, than to follow the way of many Writers in this Age, who though
they take the Notions and Hints from such as have writ before them, yet by
varying Expressions and new-wording things more Modishly, their Writings pass
for Originals.

Because I design this Work principally for the Nobility and Gentry, as well as
the Learned of all Ranks, I have judged it a duty incumbent upon me to give
them the Greek and Latin Quotations, whereby they may be excited to peruse such
Authors as have been valued in all Ages; and lest some might complain of the
interruption by them of the continued discourse, I have mostly placed them in
the Margent, upon which they may cast their Eye, only when they please. And
though the whole may look more like a piece of Mosaic Work, than a beautiful
Picture to be viewed uno intuitu; yet I hope the Ingenious Reader will find,
that as I have bestowed some pains in disposing and placing the Gems and
Stones; so he will find, in the perusal, some lively Figures and Images, which
will bear proportion to the great Leviathan of Government, I design to
represent; and though I cannot pretend to heighten and enrich all things with
floridness of Language, yet he will find something to commend it, as a Country
piece, where it received its first and last hand.

Mr. Hobs having adorned the Frontispiece of his Leviathan with the figure of a
Giant's Head, on all parts of which are swarms of all Orders, Offices, and
Employments of mankind, that are combined in Government, delineated as the
Picts are supposed to have painted their Bodies, or Trajan's Column is
engraven. A Parallel betwixt the Humane Body and Government.


So I think it not improper to give a rude draught of the Comparison betwixt
the Parts and Offices of Humane Bodies and of the great Colossus of Government
-- Sic parvis componere magna --

The common People I may not unfitly with their Tillage and Labor, call the
common Digestor, like the Stomach that affords nourishment to this great
Behemoth; the (...). lib. 2. Polit. c. 2.
Philosopher telling us that the Husbandman's toil is for nourishment. The
Mechanical Traders are the Bowels and lacteal Vessels, which transmit the
nourishment in the inferior Belly. The Merchants are the Veua Porta. The lower
Magistrates and Corporate Towns may be resembled to the Glandules and the
Viscera, that promote the secretion and distribution of the nutritive Juices.

The Gentry and Yeomanry are the Muscles, Ligaments, and Membranes which make
up the fleshy and robust Parts. The wealthy are the fat and plumpy Parts. The
Learned part of Mankind may be judged the Organs of Sense; The Military the
Hands and Feet; The solid and judicious the Bones that give stability and
erectness.

The Bishops and Judges bear some parallel to the Heart and Liver, by whose
functions the Religion and Laws are brought to refinedness and a racy Spirit.
The Preachers and Pleading Lawyers have some Analogy to the Lungs and Midriff,
which if untainted contribute much to the spiritualizing of the blood.

The Nobility are the Vital Spirits, who, by a liberal Education, give a
generous mien to the whole.

The Counselors of State may well be compared to the Brain, from whose Spirits
the progressive and regular Motions are directed.

The Laws Spiritual and Temporal, Leges a ligando.
by some are compared to the Nerves and Sinews, that bind and fasten together
all the Contexture; or may be resembled to the Blood which permeates the whole
mass and keeps every part from putrefaction.

The Sovereign is that Forma Informans, that divinae particula aurae, The
Philosophers (...), the forming Soul, the Portion of Divine Spirit and
Ubiquitary power that presides and governs all.

CHAP. II. Of the necessity of Government in general, in Families first, and
after in Societies.
HAving represented Government by the energy of the Soul in the combination
with the Body in individuals: The next Idea of it illustrated in Families. The
first Society of Man and Wife.
Therefore the Philosopher says, (...). 1 Polit. c. 1.
There is a necessity to conjoyn those, whereof one cannot be without the
other, as Male and Female for the cause of Procreation. To which according to
Hesiod (...). Sit Domusimprimis, vxor and Taurus arator.
he adds a servant: but supposing in the first beginning there were no men
servants born, he makes that an Ox, as being the usefullest for all the
employments this first joined couple had use of in Tilling the ground, and I
doubt not but under that name he includes either all the Creatures serviceable
to man, or all that Species, as Bull, Cow, Calf and Ox.

Therefore the same great Philosopher (...). Idem c. 8. The second society of a
Family.
makes it his first consideration of Government to discourse of the three
constituent parts of a Family; The first Despotic of a Master over his
Servants; the second Paternal, of a Father over his Children, and the third
Nuptial, which is the Authority of the Husband over the Wife; and from hence we
may judge that Polybius considered his (...) about which a late Author gives a
large account.

Now the Master of the Family, according to (...). Pol l. 1. c. 1.
Aristotle, in several places of his Politics was as King; as expressly in one
place he says, Every house is governed by Kingly command, by him that is
eminentest in Age. The Fathers Government.
In which short sentence we may note, that this must relate to an Infancy in
the World before Families were embodied, and seems to overthrow the opinion of
its Eternity ascribed to the Philosopher, and however is a plain illustration
of the Rise and Original of Kingly Government from that of the Paternal.

In this Family the same Philosopher (...). P. lib. 1. c. 8.
distinguishes the Husband's rule. That over the Wife is civilly, that over
the Children Kingly; both which words are used for a milder sort of Government,
than that which was masterly over Servants. So that it is not to give Parents
the Power of Saturn to devour their Children; nor was there need for a late
Author French Monarchy, p. 68.
to bewail the state of Children under such a Tyranny (as he accounts it) of
Parents. For I shall hereafter I hope make it appear that Kingly Government is
of all other the least Arbitrary (as exercised especially in England) and that
Kings are justly styled Patres Patriae, Fathers of their Countries, and that it
is Kingly as well as Fatherly, to govern without asperity and bitterness, by
benevolence and Paternal care, which never was known in Republican Patriots.
However all I will infer at present from hence is, that Government is coeval
with Families, and shall speak more of it in the Chapter of Monarchy. Society
of Families.


From these private Lares and Occonomies sprung up Societies. For man being of
all the Creation only endowed with Speech, and that furnishing him with
discourse upon things troublesome and pleasant, profitable and unprofitable,
just and unjust; For (...). Polit. lib. 1. c. 2. (...). ib.
that before all other Creatures, says the Philosopher, it is the Property of
man that he alone has the sense of Good and Evil, Just and Unjust; from thence
it must follow not only that man is a sociable Creature, or fitted for
Political Government, but that Society is founded in Nature.

For the Tongue cannot be employed reasonably but in Company; none but one
crazed in his Sense, will hold Parley with himself, or talk to himself the
thoughts of his heart; State of France p. 1.
Nature that gave man a Tongue, gave him also Inclination to Society, where he
might use it, Why Man is Sociable.
as a late Author out of Aristotle words it.

The same is demonstrated by the Moral Virtues, which are proper and peculiar
to mankind. How and to whom shall Justice be administ'red but amongst men? How
shall Fortitude appear but upon such occasions as appear amongst men? Where
shall Prudence have place unless in debating and resolving the affairs of men?
Who can be liberal if he gives not to many? Who shall enjoy the sweets of
Friendship, if he have not to whom he may be a Friend, with whom to share his
happiness. Nature therefore that has made Virtue proper to man, has also made
it proper to man to live in Company.

These praecognita being granted, it will be easy to evince, People the Subject
of Government.
that no Society can be happy without Government; the body of the People being
the Subject matter of it; of which the Philosopher Polit. lib. 4. c. 4. lib. 7.
c. 4. lib. 6. c. 1.
reckons several kinds, as Fishers at Tarentum and Byzantium, Mariners at
Athens, Merchants at Aegina and Chios, Skippers at the Island Tenedos, and in
all places are Husbandmen, Artificers, Soldiers, and Nobles; so that Government
is most necessary to combine these into Societies for mutual safety and profit.
Therefore the same (...). Polit. lib. 1. cap. 1, and 3.
Philosopher observes that to obey and command (which are the Characteristics
of Government) are not only to be numbered among the profitable but the
necessary; For as soon as we are born we fall under that discrimination.

The great Sine imperio nec dom^s ulla, nec civit^s, nec gens, nec hominum
universum genus stare, nec rerum natura omnis, nec ipse mundus potuit. Lib. 3.
de. L^. initic.
Orator assures us that without Government, The necessity of Government.
neither House, City or Nation, nor the Complex of Mankind or Nature, nor the
World it self could subsist.

So the divine Plato Tom. 2. p. 391.
tells us that it is a Law established by Nature, that the Inferior should
yield to the Superior in Eminence, and that Law would be inverted if we did not
yield to them, and live according to the direction of our Governors.

So the Aborigines in Genus hominum agresle sine legibus sine imperio.
Sallust are those only which are reputed a wild sort of men without Laws and
Government; and Tacitus Incerti nimium solutique megis sine Dominoquamin
liberate.
speaking of the Babarous Parthians, calls them loose and unsettled, rather
without a Lord than in Liberty: and there may be good reason for it; since, as
Justin Ab exalibus Seytharum Parthorum Impirium suisse dedudum. lib. 22.
notes, they sprung from the People banished from the Scythians, and so we may
suppose them none of the most civilized among them.

Uncontrouled Liberty may seem sweet and be affected by a set of People led by
Appetite only, The Evil of Liberty.
and upon the first notion: but when the Wise and Sober reflect upon the
inconveniences of it (where lawless and unlimitted) there inevitably will
appear a necessity of Government and Laws, to rescind the Luxuriousness of our
depraved desires, without which we should all run into Spruns and Ramel-wood,
and the Capreoli, Suckers, Wi^s, Neque sera hominum pectora fr^geseunt, donec
vim senserint imperii.
and Brambles would choke up the richest Soil; yea the rude dispositions of men
without the force of Government, would not more be broken than those of untamed
Beasts.

Mr. Hobs Levi ^han.
has introduced, in the condition of Nature, an imaginary State of War,
whereby every man, in his pure Naturals, The state of Nature, not a state of
War.
had right to every thing his brawny Arm, or daring Soul could gripe, covet, or
affright his fellows from possessing; and ascribes to his Aborigines such a
baseness and villainy in their Nature, as degrades them to that Bestiality
rarely found amongst Savages. Allowing them scarce Reason, or such an one as
was wholly subordinate to their Appetites; as if he had taken his observation
from the Swine-Trough, where he had seen the master Boar pass from Trough to
Trough, to drive the weaker from their feeding, till he had been satisfied.
Earl of Clarendon's Survey, c. 13, 14, 15.
All which (says a most Judicious Nobleman) he does for no other end but that
he might fit man for those Chains and Fetters he has provided for him;
depriving him of the greatest glory and happiness that can be attributed to him
of Gentleness and Benevolence, which is conspicuous in man's Nature; and on the
contrary making him the only Creature, that out of the malignity of his own
Nature, and the base fear he makes inseparable from it, should be obliged, for
his own benefit, and the defense of his Rapine, to worry and destroy all of his
own kind, till they all became yoaked by Covenant of his own contriving, never
yet entered into by any one man, or in Nature possible to be entered into; as in
due place I shall make appear.

Supposing however by the Law of Nature, every man may defend himself and annoy
those whom he has power over; Review of observations. p. 20, 21. Whatever the
state of Nature was, yet Government is necessary.
yet how much more eligible is it to part with that Right, and yet to do
nothing contrary to Nature, when Reason tells us we shall obtain a more
excellent good, the benefit of Peace and Prosperity in Society; which together
with Safety and Plenty are what Government aims at. The People finding by
reason, that the good they wanted was not attainable without a Common
Protector, to administer Justice equally amongst them; and the sense of the
miseries that would befall them sor want of this made their Routs become
Societies: The Salus populi, in the Constitution of Government being the prime
end of it, as most agreeable with the joint Interest of Rulers and People.

The multitude therefore that do not consider the Reason, that made all People
commit themselves, The reasons why all must. quit the state of Nature, to
submit to Government.
their lives and fortunes to the trust of their Rulers, ought to be convinced
that their giving up their Right of defending themselves and subjecting them to
Government, and restraining their own Arbitrary Wills, and yielding themselves
to the Conduct of their lawful Superiors, will conduce most to the obtaining of
that most excellent good, the benefit of Peace and Society, every one being in
less danger of mischief from the rapacious and bloody minded, living in Society
and under the Protection of the Government, than where every one might follow
his own Inclinations. This also being the chiefest preservation from that
Misery and Confusion which Sedition and Rebellion (generally blanched with the
abused names of Salus populi) have brought many Nations to.

so the Judicious Chancellor De laudibus LL. Angliae, c. 14.
Fortescue says, that no Nation by its own Consent was incorporated into a
Kingdom, but that thereby they might, Government necessary for Preservation.
with more safety than before, maintain themselves, and enjoy their goods from
such misfortunes and losses as they stood in fear of.

Therefore the old Adversus Mathematicos lib. 2. Stobaei Sermon. 42.
Persians (says Sextus Empiricus) for five days together, after the death of
their King, permitted the People to live Lawless, that after the Experience of
the Slaughter, Rapine, and other Outrages committed in that short interval,
they might learn to hold the Government in more esteem.

Self-preservation and an ardent desire of happiness (says a Nalson Common
Interest.
learned Author) are the two Poles upon which all our Natural and Rational
desire and aversions move. These are the Tutelars and Inseparable Companions of
Mankind through all the vicissitudes of Life. These are the potentest
incentments to Society and Government, which not only allure but necessitate
the Congress, Combination, and Cement of Confederacies in Societies, for the
mutual Preservation and Peaceable Possession of that Happiness all do covet.

This implanted Love to our selves made all Mortals exercise their best
faculties, to defend and ensure themselves against every thing they could
foresee or fear would be capable of disturbing their felicity, the peaceable
fruition of which was the upshot of all their desires and appetites; which was
no ways so likely to be effected, as by Union in Government. For to be rich and
not able to defend our wealth, is to expose our selves as a prey; and to be
safe and poor, is to be securely miserable: both which are avoided by the
benefit of Government.

Furthermore, The Common People not to be ordered without Government.
if we consider the nature of the common people which make up the gross body,
we shall find an absolute necessity of Government. For as the Orator Cicero pro
Planeio.
observes, in the multitude is a great variety and change of opinions, they are
as unconstant as the weather, nothing being so familiar with them as the change
of their affections; being not led by choice and wisdom to judge of things, sed
impetu and quadam temeritate, without Council, Reason, Discrimination Sallust.
ad Casarem.
or Diligence to search the Causes, and forecast the Event of things, by custom
rather than judgment, following one another sentiments, as to their
short-sightedness seems most eligible: Their Wills and Appetites being no less
various than their features and countenances: Their actions and designs turning
to as diverse ends, as the desires that guide them are diverse; so that it were
impossible they should continue long together in society and peace, or enjoy
the benefits desired, if there were not some strong tie, which, holding them
united together, should draw them all along to the same end.

When there is no Cum nec Imperii majestas ulla nec Magistratuum aut Curatorum
est Imperium. Bodinus de Repub. l. 4. c. 1.
Government, Against Anarchy.
that which is left is known by the name of Anarchy, which is described by
Bodinus, to be where there is no Majesty of Empire, nor power of command in
Magistrates, or subordinate Officers; no form of a City, none found to command
or obey: Of all Governments (continues he) Tyranny is the worst, but of all
Tyrannies, Omnium deterrima plebis impotentissima potestas; ex his tamen
omnibus nihil Anarchiae magis pestiferum. Idem.
that of Many is most pernicious, and the impotent power of the people is the
worst; yet Anarchy is the most pestiferous of all. This indeed dissolves all
into the first confused Chaos, where is nothing of order but a jumble of
jarring parts, every one justiling other out of its place.

Imagine a person placed upon such an Hill that he might see below him a
confused multitude, various in their Interests and Appetites, let loose to the
fiery bent of their wills. He would be amazed to hear the boisterous clamors,
and see the strange turmoils and tempestuous tossings of that crowd, the
desultory actions, and all the pageantry of Garboiles, before the last
downright counter-scufflle, which the sage wisdom of one man (if he might be
heard) would be able to compose.

Even so it is in Anarchy, or wherever the Peoples unbridled will governs;
Xenoph. de Rep. Athenarum. Thucyd. lib. 3.
this is a Mart wherein voices are bought and sold, poverty and ignorance
driving the crowds to null that to day, which they have eagerly pursued the day
before; scarce forbearing the same day to condemn and absolve, nothing being
done amongst them but in tumultuary ferments, and an high boiling fret, or a
dead torpidness and irresolution; the Ebbings and Flowings of the Ocean being
more regular than theirs; whereas all Government (according to the Polit. l. 4.
c. 4.
Philosopher) subsists and is established in firmness and constancy, by every
man's knowing what is his right to enjoy, and his duty to do, or as Coeius
hominum Juris consensu and utibitatis communione sociatus. De Civitate Dei, c.
23.
St. Augustine calls it, a society of Men incorporated for common benefits, by
the agreement of Laws.

It is a grave saying of Populus negligit rempublicam, magnitudine nimia
communium curarum expers. 1. Hist. Privata cuique stimulatio vile decus
publicum. 2. Annal.
Tacitus, That the common People neglect the affairs of the Commonweal, by
their over-bulkiness, void of public spirit and care; and in another place,
That the incentives to their private profit produce a disregarding neglect of
the public.

Quod omnia aetatis membra, familiasque singulas in unum corpus cogit. De Rep.
lib. 1.
Bodinus compares a Commonwealth or Government to a Ship, and well observes,
that without the Keel (which unites the Stern, and Fore-castle, Ribs, etc.) it
would be but inform lignum: So a Community without Government (which unites
the members of all Ages, and all Families in one body) can no ways deserve the
name of society: Such a People headless, is not worthy to be called a Body
Politic; for Government no ways consists in the number of Persons, or the
heads of Citizens, but in the combination of them, under one Sovereign Power.

The unwieldy bulk of numerous Armies, wanting Conduct and Discipline, rarely
effect any glorious enterprise. In the Tumults of Naples, the Rascality were
forced to set up an Head, though it were but the frothy boisterous Thomas
Anello. So were Cade, Ket, Tyler, and others in our popular Rebellions, set up
as the Captains, Leaders, and Idols of the Clowns. From whence we may learn,
that even such people as rose up (as they pretended) to suppress Magistrates,
Monarchy or Tyranny, level Estates, and set all at liberty, yet once imbodied,
were forced to choose Captains to lead them, to whose Orders there was a
necessity of submission.

If we thoughtfully consider, How Superiority and Government founded in Nature.
we shall find that Government is founded in nature, in which state there is no
such thing as equality; for the Parent, by priority of natural cause, must be
superior to the Children. Yea, if we should believe People to be Juvenes ab
Aquilone creati, like Grasshoppers or Locusts, or like Cadmus his men, sprung up
at once out of the Earth, underived from any pre-existent Parent, all of them
having equal Origin and Power; yet a short converse one with another, would
have necessitated them to embody in Societies.

We Christians believe God made Man after his own Image, Dominion given to Man.
and gave him dominion over all the Creatures of our sublunary world; and it is
not reasonable to think, that he endowed him not with faculties necessary for
the administration of that great Empire, not only over the Brutes, but over his
own Species.

For the Philosopher (...). 1. Polit. c. 5.
notes, that nature has made some fit to command, and others to obey or serve;
of which we have many and great Instances: So Julius Caesar and others (whose
great actions are recorded in History) manifested more sublime Spirits, than
any of those who were subdued by them; Some born to Empire.
and when those great Heroes were dead, though their Officers and Soldiers
survived (by whose prowess and valor they had effected those wonders) yet we
read of a sudden degeneracy, as if the soul had expired, and left the carcass
only of an Army.

The Orator observes, that no Nation was ever so Barbarous, No Nation so
Savage, wherein some Government has not been.
as to be wholly void of Religious Worshippers, since every where, some Deity
or other has been acknowledged. Even so we may affirm, that never any People
were so rude, wild, and savage, but they found a necessity of Government, of
which they had at least, in their first embodying, some unpollished Model, and
some sort of Institutes appointed by, and coeval with their Governors, by
which their political interests and private concerns were regulated, without
the infinite disorder which would happen to all public transactions, which
should be the product of tumultuous votes, where every meeting would be a
jumble of great and small, The Mischiefs of tumultuous voting, and want of
Magistrates.
soft and hard sculls, a pudling of business, and putting all things to chance,
and blundering in a maze, till at last some Men's wisdom formed them into order.

How then is that condition of a People to be wailed, which Tacitus Ea demum
libertas Romae est, non Senatus, non Magistratus, non Leges, non Mores Majorum,
non Instituta Patrum. 1 Annal.
describes to be the Roman State of liberty, wherein there was no Senate, no
Magistrates, no Laws, no Ancient Usage, no Institutes of the Fathers.

From all which we may conclude, that the same nature that ordered societies,
gives them prudence to know that to preserve the Society and the peace of it,
it was necessary, that there should be one or some, who, laying aside private
advantage and particular Interest, should employ their minds, bend all their
thoughts, and direct their actions for the public good, and by the sinews of
power hold all so fast united, as they should guide them to the same end; and
we must determine, that Government is absolutely necessary for the being and
well-being of a People, though there be servitude in it, which made Seneca
(comparing Augustus's times with the preceding irregular ones) say, Salva esse
Roma non potuit, nisi benesicio servitutis.
The City could not have been safe without the benefit of servitude.

CHAP. III. That the People are not the Original of Authority and Government.
BEfore I proceed to treat of the several forms of Government; I judge it
requisite to examine some positions made use of by Republicans; so long at
least, as they argue against Monarchical Government, or till they obtain their
ends in the subverting of it.

One of which is, that supreme power is originally and fundamentally in the
People, for whose benefit all Government was established. Secondly, That there
is a tacit reservation of power in them, to vary the form of Government, and
change the Persons when the people finds it convenient for them. The Law of
Nature, as they say, justifying any attempt to shake off those Bonds and
Fetters imposed on them by their Superiors, or voluntarily yielded to by
themselves, if they judge that thereby their common Freedom is impeached; for
that, they say, the People never submitted to any Government, but by way of
Agreement and Contract, unless in cases of absolute Conquest.

Therefore one (whom the Commonwealth-men esteem their Mr. Algernon Sydney.
Martyr) asserted, That Kings have Usurped over the People a power inconsistent
with their natural liberty, and that Kings owe their right to prescription,
which the greatest Tyrant may maintain by force, and to that consent which they
may procure by violence or flattery.

I am sensible, that I might more orderly have placed what I have to answer to
these assertions, in the Chapter of Monarchy; but intending to prove that to be
the best of all the known Governments, and that Chapter and the other preceding
it, being so large, I judge it not so fit to clog it with this, but make it as
a preliminary. For though I oppose Monarchy principally to this sentiment; yet
it has something in it also of use, to the right stating of the Original of
Government in general.

First therefore I shall endeavor to evince, That God Almighty was the
Original Donor of the Authoritative Power of Government, The Power was given
from God to One, and not to Many; there neither was nor is Natural Freedom.
and that not to any collective body of the People; Secondly, that there never
was such a state of primitive freedom, or natural liberty, as is challenged;
Thirdly, That where ever the Peoples Election was admitted in constituting a
Sovereign, they capitulated not for any reservery of power of resumption; and
Lastly, that in the present State of our English Monarchy, no such Power ought
to be challenged.

First then (with a Reverend Dr. Hammond's Address to the Lord Fairfax, p. 8,
9. The State of Government in the first Ages Kingly.
Author) it is to be considered, that if Adam had never fallen, and his
posterity had remained in the same innocence, yet in order to civil life, they
would have been capable of civil precept, and in reason one man, or more,
should have had the superiority over all others, as Parents over Children; and
the consideration of the diverse orders of Angels, that never fell, evidenceth,
that even in the state of Innocence, God designed Superiority, not Equality.

But since from the Fall it is apparent, that the irregular passions of Men,
have caused a need both of Rules and Rulers, Laws and Lawmakers: it was but
reasonable that God should, and it is most certain that he did design and
appoint Government; and so gave not man that freedom which is supposed to be
the foundation of this Doctrine. Hence we may note what God says to Eve, Genesis
3.16.
That her desire shall be subject to her Husband, and he shall rule over her:
so that here is the first Dominion. And the second we find in Scripture, is,
Genesis 4.7.
where God tells Cain that his Brother Abel's desire shall be subject to him,
and he shall rule over him; and this was as he was the firstborn, though after
he wickedly slew Abel.

We have reason to judge, (according to Scripture) that God gave Adam (as an
universal Monarch) Dominion over all his Fellow Creatures, and of all Men that
should be born into the World as long as he lived, and the like may be said of
Noah: so that whatever property (as it is clear Cain and Abel had) and what
share of Government over any part of the World, either of their Sons had, they
held it all of them originally by gift and Assignment, Allotment and Authority,
without awaiting the Election or consent of, or entering into any Articles or
Capitulations with the People that were to be governed by them.

So that in the Infancy of the World all Men were born Subjects, either to him
that was naturally their Father, or to him that by Right of Primogeniture was
representatively their Father. That this continued for many succeeding
Generations is most apparent in the Blessing that Jacob and Esau received from
their Father Isaac. For Rebecca knowing that such a Blessing was of the same
force, that now the last Will and Testament, or Deed of Gift of a Parent is,
and of much more absolute force, contrived that way to obtain the Blessing of
Primogeniture for her Son Jacob, that his Brother Esau might serve hm.

Dudley Digs, p. 15.
After the multiplying of Mankind (though I cannot say with a Learned Author,
there were so many absolute Princes within the compass of a Parish, that a Man
had scarce room to walk in a Territory, when a Commonwealth was lodged in a
Cottage) yet it appears from Genesis 10.32. That the Families that sprung from
Noah's Sons divided the Earth, and gave distinction to Nations, and the Cadets
of the first Houses traveling to distant places, exercised Authority, and gave
Laws to their Descendants; and being thus separated to settle new Plantations,
every Planter becoming so by himself a Father, increased to a Family, and that
into diverse Families, those into a City, and thence into diverse Cities, and at
last into a large Dominion.

Review of Observations, p. 2.
So that a King in the first Ages of the World was no more than a common Father,
either by natural right, as a Parent, or after by a legal Right, as the eldest
Descendant of such a Father; and when the pleasantness or profitable
commodiousness of one Soil allured several to covet it, then arose Contests,
and the Conqueror possessed it, forcing the Conquered to seek other
Habitations, or made them his Slaves, and so a Succession of some brave Princes
enlarged their Dominions to Empires, establishing them by just Laws, and good
Government.

So upon the overthrow and breaking up of Kingdoms, Instance may be given that
some victorious Person obtained the Peoples Subjection to him; for that being
deprived of their natural common Father, and Sovereign, they necessarily
entertained such supply of their loss, as their Fortunes could best afford
them: and whatever those conquered People did, it was no other but the choosing
of one to bear the known Office of the true natural common Father; even as
those might do, who either like Swarms and Colonies, voluntarily separated from
the main Stock, to more roomy and rich Plantations; or those who escaped from
the Conquerors Sword into a remote unpeopled Land, settled themselves in
Society, and under the Government of one. For as hereafter I shall make it
appear, the world was grown to a great Age, e're any form of Government was
known but what was Kingly. Whereas if the People had known of any such Right
they had of Government inherent in, and connatural to themselves, we should in
the Sacred or Profane Histories have had Instances of it: whereas we find the
very Savage Americans (who, if any People, live according to natural Instinct)
to be governed by Kings, and not Republics.

Having thus far Illustrated the Government in the Golden Age of the World,
wherein we find no Footsteps, or the least tract of any popular Suffrages, but
an entailing of Sovereign Authority; We may farther consider, God appointed
Kings.
that the Government of the several Kingdoms in this World have been, and are
by the appointment of the Sovereign of the whole World, not only by Gods
appointment of Moses, the several Judges, and Kings of Israel, and Judah; but
by the frequent expressions in Scripture, that by God Kings Reign, that Kings
are the Ministers of God, that God will give deliverance to his King, to his
anointed, etc. By which Expressions we may rationally Jus Reg. p. 15. 21.
conclude that God has reserved to himself the immediate Dependence of the
supreme Power, to shut out the restless and extravagant Multitudes from the
frequent Revolutions they would make, and the desolations they would occasion,
if they had any ground to think the supreme Power depended on theirs, or that
they were not bound to obey for Conscience sake their Governors.

Whence also are they styled Gods, but to denote they were not made by Men? And
as it is most clear that inferior Magistrates derive their Power from the King,
and not from the People, as supreme: so by that Analogy which runs in a
dependence, and chains through the whole Creation, Kings should derive their
Power from God alone, who is their King, and, as the Romans 13. v. 13, 14.
Apostle says, are ordained of God, and so no humane Ordinance: for Supremacy
is affixt to the King, but Governors are sent by him; and if the King were the
Creature or Creation of the People, it would have been expressed that they were
commissioned, or sent by them; whereas it is expressly said, They are of God.

That Kings or Sovereigns derive their Power from God alone, The Testimony of
Authors.
and consequently not from the People, is attested by the joint consent of all
unbiased Learned Men, Fathers and Schoolmen in all Ages, who have unanimously
given their Suffrages for the same, as grounded upon solid Reason.

Contra Gentes.
So Tertullian says, Let Kings know that from God only they have their Empire,
in whose Power they only are. So St. De Civitate Dei, lib. 5. cap. 21.
Augustine, Let us not attribute to any other the Power of giving Kingdoms, and
Empires, but to the true God.

So in the Civil Law, Cod. de veteri Codice enucleand.
we find Deo anctore, nostrum gubernante Imperium, quod nobis a Coelesti
Majestate traditum: God being the Author, governing our Empire, which was
delivered to us from the Heavenly Majesty.

Novel. 6. Instit. Nov. 40, 45, 46, 133. pr.
Justinian acknowlegeth his Obligation to take care of his People, because he
received the charge of them from God.

And certainly the People are happier in such acknowledgments, than if Kings
think it only a charge conferred on them by the People, and that they were
therefore only answerable to them.

The Reader that would be further satisfied, may consult Arniseus, Cap. de
essentia majestatis. Marca Archbishop of Paris de Concordia Sacerdotum and
Imperii, Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Number. 2. Graswinckelius de Jure Majestatis, Cap. 8.
Number. 2. The Learned and Loyal Kings Advocate of Scotland, and the Authorities I
have cited in the Chapter of Monarchy.

Besides what I have urged hitherto we may (with a Dr. Hammond's Address, p.
10, 11.
Reverend Author) consider that the Sovereign has an higher Power than the
People can give, not as representing them; but as representing God himself. For
every supreme Magistrate has a Power that never was in the People to give; for
never any Man was by God or Nature invested with Power of his own Life to take
it away, or kill himself lawfully. For all Christians generally declare against
this Self-murder, as a Crime equally against the sixth Commandment, as the
killing of any other Man.

Now this Power of Life being so essential a part of the Supremacy, and no part
of the natural Liberty, cannot be inherent naturally in a Community of Men,
which have no more Power so united, than each single Person has. So that
though it cannot be said with some, Nemo est dominus Membrorum suorum (for Man
has the power over his Members, to cause one to be cut off, for the preserving
the whole; and the Jew under Gods own Government, had power to make himself a
Slave) yet this Jus Gladii, the Right and Power of the Sword (which is really
the Sovereign Power) is by the (...). Romans 13.2.
Ordinance of God, not the Donation of the People. For it was not in the Power
of the People to dispense with Gods Precept, Thou shall not kill, nor to
distinguish shedding of Blood with the Sword of Vengeance, from Murder; and
consequently the Power is not derived to Kings and Princes by private Men, who
cannot transfer that Power they never had; according to that known Maxim, Nemo
plus juris transfer ad alium potest, quam ipse habet: but it is bestowed on
them by God Almighty, who is the sole Arbiter of Life and Death, who can only
take it away, because he gave it.

The supreme Magistrate therefore, as God's Deputy, has the Power communicated
to him, as an Endowment necessary to that Power which is designed to protect
and govern others. So Agamemnon having received contumelious Language from his
Officers in a Council of War, to let them understand his Sovereign Power, tells
them Homer, Hiad. 6.
(...). That he had Power of Death.

When Kings are Elective, though it be the act of the People, and not of God
immediately that designs or nominates the Person to that Office; yet does not
this Nomination bestow this Power; but God who alone has this Power, bestows
it on him who is so Elected. Which we may illustrate by the Example of choosing
inferior Officers. For though a Corporation by the Grant of a Sovereign, has
Power to choose a Mayor, or chief Officer; yet they give him not the Power of
Executing that Office so and so: For that is appointed and limited by the
King's especial Grace and Favor. The nominating of the person being granted to
them by the Sovereign, but the qualifications of his Office and Power, are by
the sole Prescript of the King's Charter and Laws.

Having hitherto founded my Reasoning upon the History of Moses, and the
Authority of Scripture, I might bring in a long Discourse out of profane
Historians, Greeks, and Romans, as well as more modern Writers, who give an
account of the Foundations of Kingdoms; but since a late French Monarchy, p. 16.
Author has made such a flourish out of Polybius, slily and maliciously
endeavoring to represent Monarchy as a Tyrannical Government, wh^ the (...),
the three constituent parts, viz. Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy were not so
evenly poised, and attemper'd, ad pondus, as Lycurgus endeavored it in the
Lacedaemonian State: I shall content my self with an Epitome (not a Paraphrase,
as the forementioned Author has made) of what Polybius Lib. 6. Histor. p. 197.
Edit. Basil.
has left in his Excellent History; wherein he deducing matters from such an
Original as those who knew not, or believed not the Creation could do, delivers
us his sense of the mutations and managery of Government to this purpose.

That when by reason of some great Inundation, (...).
great Plague or Death, all Institutions and Arts having been lost; In process
of time, by the propagation of those that escaped these Devastations, a
multitude grew who herded according to their kind, and for the weakness of
their Party (in respect of ravenous Creatures as well as their Savage
Neighbors, we may suppose) they associated together, it necessarily followed
that he who in the Strength of his Body, and confidence of Spirit excelled the
rest, obtained the Princedom and Empire, as we see in Bulls, Goats, Cocks, etc.
and so the rest obeyed that Man who was properly the Monarch, and in Process of
time, (...).
by familiar Conversation, and living together under this one Head, like a
select Flock or Herd, these Mortals began to think of Honest and Just, and
their contraries, and by the noble or ignoble actions of some of the Society,
the Sense of Honor and Disgrace was impressed in their Minds, and consequently
of Profitable and Incommodious. Idem, page 198.
He that was their Governor excelling in Power, and in the opinion of all
endowed with those qualifications, were judged good and profitable, and
administering to his Subjects, what was competent to every of them. They now
fearing no violence, most willingly submitted themselves to him, and he being
venerable to them, (...).
with unanimous consent they impugn and revenge themselves on those who oppose
or conspire against his Government; and so from a Monarch he becomes a King,
when reason had obtained the Principality, which before Fierceness and Power
possessed.

So that in all this first settlement of Monarchy or a Kingdom (in the purest
state of Nature we can conceive described) we have no mention in this judicious
Author, of Compact, with the People, or Election, but of submitting.

It is true upon the degeneracy of Kings, Factions arising, he speaks of
Election, not of those of strong Bodies only, and daring Souls; for such he
presumes made themselves Masters; but of such as by their Wills and Reason
(experimentally discovered in their Actions) were most agreeable to the Peoples
liking.

But that this was done by the force of Faction, appears from what he subjoins,
(...).
that those who were thus destined for the Kingdom, selected special places,
and encompassed them with Rampires, or Walls, fortifying them for the security
of themselves, and to supply their Subjects with necessaries; from whence arose
the great Cities which had large Sokes, by which means they possessed the whole
Country of the Kingdom.

I do own that he makes offense and hatred of the People, or envy against the
succeeding Princes who were debauched and degenerated, (...).
to be the causes why in process of time some of the Noblest became the leaders
of the People, to repress such Princes, and root out the Monarchy and Kingdom:
But still it was because Factions increased, and so Aristocracy was changed
into Oligarchy; which set of Rulers oppressing the People, whose discontents
being observed by some popular Persons, they animated them to join to subvert
the Oligarchy. Hitherto we find nothing of the imaginary delegation of the
Peoples Power to one or more, but prosperous events crowned their Rebellions
against their Superiors. What follows is observable, that the People having
slain the Optimacy, fearing the Injustice of Superiors, they durst not set a
King over themselves, nor trust the Government in the hands of a few, having so
late Instances of their Tyranny and Sloth. (...).
So the single and sincere Hope which was only left in themselves, induced them
to establish a Democracy, and so to themselves receive the Trust and Providence
of the Commonweal, which the French Monarchy, or Absolute Power, p. 20.
Paraphrast calls their last untainted hope, founded on themselves, that is, in
their own Strength.

So that till the forms of Government by a King or Tyrant, Aristocracy or
Oligarchy were wholly subverted, we hear not a Syllable of the Peoples
challenging a power, and then it is no wonder (when they have slain the
richest, and divided the spoil, and have entertained an opinion that they shall
never be Servants more; but live in an equal Freedom and Wealth) if they be
blown up with a popular Pride, and call themselves the supreme Power. But what
is this to the natural Freedom pleaded for, when it is nothing but the
headstrong unbridledness of the Multitude, that have cast their Riders, and got
loose the Reins on their own Neck?

Idem, page 199.
Polybius goes on to tell us how Democracy was soon overturned after, though
for a while those who had Experience of the Oppression of the Rich, were
delighted with the Equality and Liberty of the present State, (...).
that seemed sweet to them above all Treasure: yet afterward some growing
Rich, little valued that Equality and Liberty, which custom had made them
slight and nauseate; and so began to contemn the Poor, and excelling the rest
in Riches, began to covet Rule; yet knowing they could not by their own
Interest or eminence of Virtue obtain it, they began to be lavish of their
Wealth, and variously bait the People, and so corrupt them into Tumults and
Sedition; and the People being thereby raised to hopes of living upon the Goods
of those of contrary Factions, by following some magnanimous and daring Captain
(who yet for his Poverty could not Lawfully aspire to the Honors of the
Commonwealth) found no better or easier way to rise, but by heightning
Factions, whereby Parties being imbodied, Murdered, Plundered, and Destroyed
one another; till at last, wearied, or one Man getting a greater interest in
the People than the rest, and being fortunate to overtop the rest, they submit
to such, and after all their miseries return again to Monarchy.

I cannot dismiss (...).
Polybius without noting from him how preferrable Monarchy is to any of the
popular sorts of Government. For he observing that as Iron is wasted by rust,
Wood by worms; so that although they might escape exterior defacings, yet they
will decay by those inbred devourers. So he observes that all simple
Governments are apt to some evil that is peculiar and consequential to their
Nature, as he instanceth in a Kingdom changed into Monarchy absolute, by which
he means that which we now call Tyranny; Aristocracy into Oligarchy, Idem, page
200.
and Democracy into Bestial Chirocracy, (...).
when the Seditious of the people prevail more by Fisticuffs than reason: When
he enumerates the causes of the Envy and Hatred of the People against the King
that is turned Tyrant, he never mentions that the People challenged any
Original Right, or that they conferred any trust upon him, or made any compact
with him to govern so and so. But that some young Princes degenerating from
their Just, Prudent, Wise and Valorous Ancestors, giving themselves up to
Debauchery, and because of their plenty following their Pleasures, committed
excess in there Habits, eat more deliciously and luxuriously, indulged
themselves in prohibited Lusts, by some necessities or wantonness galling the
Necks of their Subjects, or committed some contumelious or outrageous Act
against some powerful Person, or committing the managery of affairs to some
unfit or envied Person, lost the affections of some popular persons, and by
their immersing themselves in Pleasure, neglecting the Inspection into their
affairs, or by their sloth and lasiness, neglecting the timely redress of
Evils, or suppressing of some growing Faction, gave opportunity to some of the
most popular and daring of their Subjects to conspire together to put an end to
their Lives and Governments.

But in all this he mentions nothing of those miserable devastations, which
are brought upon whole Countries, that in popular Governments are torn in
pieces by them; as too often I shall have occasion to mention. For certainly,
one days misrule by the Rabble, may do more mischief to a Country, than the
whole age of a vicious Prince; and the pretenses of making Government more
easy for the People, and that the end of it is the Peoples safety, has
ushered in all Tragical Revolutions and Rebellions; and however Philosophers
and other Writers of Greece and Rome declaim against Tyranny and absolute
Monarchy: yet they conceal not the perpetual intestine, as well as Foreign
Wars, betwixt one Commonweal and another; or what Butcheries Countries have
undergone, wherever the People got a participation of the executive parts of
the Sovereignty.

It is not unfit to be observed what the great (...). Arist. de Repub. l. 5. c.
10. initio.
Philosopher notes, that a Kingdom is the refuge and defense of the good,
against the injury of the People: for, says he, a King is constituted of the
good, and those that excel in virtue and virtuous actions; but a Tyrant is
taken out of the People and Multitude, against the Noble and Illustrious; as he
instanceth in Phidon at Argos, Phalaris in Ionia, Panaetius among the
Leontines, Cypselus at Corinth, Pisistratus at Athens, and Dionysius at
Syracuse, by the cunning leading of the People. So that according to his
opinion, and the experience of all ages, the People may be truly said to be the
Original of Tyrants, and not of Kings. For wherever an unlawful Government was
introduced, which properly might be called Tyranny, it was brought upon the
People by their own choice; some ambitious cunning man having wound himself
into their good opinion, was by their strongth and assistance able to suppress
the Nobility, and establish himself their Executioner, after he had long been
their Creature.

Those who please themselves with the notion of Compact and Agreement, mostly
do it for some ill end, to make a plausible Scheme, to decoy the People into an
opinion, that Princes can claim no more Power as of right belonging to them,
than the People shall entrust them withal; which they may from time to time (as
they shall see cause in order to the pretended public weal and safety) either
enlarge or restrain at their pleasure.

These must suppose (says a most profound Bishop of Lincoln, Preface to the
Power of Princes.
Scholar) a multitude all free without any sort of dependences on Parents,
under no restraint, but every one at full liberty to do what he lists, with
an equality of Power in them, none having authority over other; which surely
was never yet found in any People or Country, since the Creation of the World,
if these men will own its Creation, or the Scripture-History of it; and if they
could in Authentic History, point out some Parallel story they would do well to
produce it: for though I have quoted Polybius his conjecture of a state nearest
it, yet he makes no such inference from it that I can find. But the
forementioned Reverend Bishop has suggested so many quaeries to be answered,
before any thing can be yielded to in this way of contract, that it will puzzle
the ablest of the Patrons of this popular way of constituting Government, to
solve any of them; whereby to satisfy any considerate man of the legality of
such a way, or the consentaneousness of it to Principles of nature, and the
state of Liberty, these men are such pretenders to.

It would be resolved, whether Women and Children, Madmen and Fools, had the
freedom of suffrage, as well as Men of Age, and Fortunes, and understandings?
If any were excluded, who did it, and by what authority? If all were admitted,
whether with equal right to every one, or with some inequality? Was the Wives
interest toward making up the bargain equal with that of the Husband, and the
Child with that of the Parents? and the Servant's (if there were, or could be
any such thing as Master and Servant) equal with that of his Master's? If one
had not an equal share and interest in the business, whence did the inequality
arise? who made the difference among them? and what right had any man? and how
came he to have that right to give more or less power to one than another?

If all were equal, who could summon the rest to convene, or appoint the day
and place of meeting? Or when met, take upon him the Authority and Office of
regulating their proceedings, or presiding or moderating in their Assembly, of
determining such doubts and differences as might arise, while matters were
under debate, of calculating the voices, and drawing up the Articles of
Agreement in case they should agree?

Supposing all these doubts were cleared, and the Contract made as they would
have it; it may be demanded, whether majority of Votes shall conclude all that
are present, Dissenters as well as others? Whether by virtue of an Act of those
upon the place, an obligation shall lie upon such as are casually, necessarily,
or willingly absent, when it was free for them to do so, no man having power to
require their appearance? And whether a contract made by such persons as were
at liberty before, can debar those that shall succeed them in the next
Generation, from the use of that liberty their Ancestors had and enjoyed? If
so, by what Law and Right are the said respective persons so concluded, and
whence should the obligation spring?

None of these look like the Dictates of the Laws of Nature, and other Laws
besides that (according to the Hypothesis) could be none, when as yet there was
no Government, and the Contract it self as a bare contract (without the help of
some Law or other to give it force) cannot operate upon any but the
Contractors; for it can have no cogency upon those that never gave consent
thereto.

I know no other resolve can be given to most of these quaeries, but that, as
it is fabled of Thebes, that the Stones that composed the Walls, came into
their places by the Music of Orpheus, without any Artificer's hand: So some
cunning and fluent Orator, learned above the rudeness of such an age, who had
signalized himself by many feats of Arms, Arts and Skill, by which he had got
an ascendent over the People, and yet so circumspect as to have avoided envy
and emulation; such amongst them who was most hardy to encounter dangers, had
most bodily strength to overcome any single person, and such as had by degrees
worn of the rudeness of his Companions, and taught them something of
consideration, and the use of reason to understand justice and honest dealing,
and to see the advantages that prudence and a wise head has over-raw and
uncultivated strength, not only in deciding controversies, and administering
Justice, but even in providing against, and expelling danger: Such an one as
this might have made himself the head of a Colony; but what is this to the
Original power of the People?

Have we not much more reason to judge the rise of Government (as I have
hitherto inculcated) was from primogeniture, and by Gods appointment, than from
any such Chaos, or existence of Prae-Adamites, or a race of People sprung up
none knows when or where.

To gratify the insatiable Republican as much as may be, let us suppose a
Colony, or swarm of younger Brothers, men that lived poorly in their native
Country, Women, Children and Servants, not tied by any preceding Allegiance to
a Prince, or to have shaken off the yoke, or to be banished, or freely
dismissed by those under whose Government they had been born, and to be
absolved from all Allegiance, and declared manumitted and restored to that
absolute freedom, which they could claim as the birthright of mankind, that
privilege of nature equally common to every one as the air and light, and to
enjoy this freedom as an unlimited power, to use their abilities as will did
prompt; and those to pass into an unpeopled Land, which no Prince or People
laid a claim to: Would not every one conclude these were as free to live as
they listed, as any people under the Sun; and to be any ways restrained of
this, would be very grievous, and an Invasion of that right to freedom every
one might challenge?

Yet can it be conceived, that these could continue long without the
consideration, that it was not so delightful to do what every one liked, as it
would be miserable to suffer as much as it pleased others to inflict; or that
the powerful could take comfort in that hostile estate, wherein he was in
continual fears of others mischievous designs against him, who had in this
imagined state D. Digs Unlawfulness of Resistance, p. 3.
as much right in any thing as the present Possessor.

The consideration of this surely would oblige every one to transfer his
particular power into one or more hands, tying themselves by obligation, not to
make use of that natural power of resisting the power set over them, but to aid
him or them, when he or they summoned their strength, or required their
assistance. In requital of which submission of private strength, the whole
Government becomes their Guard, whereby they are secured from the dangers of
private injuries.

But can it be thought that any such Governor or Governors would take upon
him or them, the burden of spending his whole time in watchfulness, anxiety
and care, for the preserving such a society in peace, and the free enjoyments
of what they should acquire, without having a power to execute impartial
Justice upon Offenders, in raising forces to suppress any Tumults or
Insurrections, in rewarding and promoting the inferior Ministers; or would
yield himself to be accountable to any party of that people who should fancy
themselves aggrieved.

But on the other side, to make the Government useful, it must be established,
that every one yield his life to Sovereign Justice, to be capitally punished,
if he transgress such Laws as they had agreed upon to be so inflicted, or in
lesser offenses to yield to proportionable punishments.

Now if it were to be understood as a tacit Covenant, that when ever the
Subjects found themselves aggrieved, they might reassume their Power, and
depose or change their Sovereign; every Offender that could engage his
Relations or Dependents to back him, would be remonstrating, and to avoid the
punishment (especially if Capital) would adventure his life in Arms, and so
defeat the great end and design of Government.

But further, supposing that this People oblige themselves and Posterities, by
Oaths and other Authentic Bonds, to assist the Government against all
Disturbers, Domestic and Foreign; and to be subject, and pay all due obedience
to the Government and Laws: By what justice, or reason, or pretense of natural
Right, could they or their Posterity claim a power of re-assumption of that
Original Power they had divested themselves of?

It is manifest that a People may consent to subject themselves to a Sovereign
without limitation, as appears by the famous Institut. de Jure naturali Gent.
and Civ. 56. Vlpian, lib. 1. sect. De Constitutione Principis.
Lex Regia among the Romans, wherein it is expressed thus, Populus Imperatori,
and in Imperatorem, omne Imperium suum, and potestatem transtulit, That they
transfer to and upon their Governor all the Power they singly, or in
combination had. After which the right of Nature, which remains for them
innocently to make use of, is that freedom, not which any Law gives, but which
no Law takes away.

Therefore, if we consider Men once to have been in such an imaginary State of
freedom, and after to have yielded up themselves to be subject, and thereto
tied themselves and their Posterities, in the strongest obligations that can be
invented; What power can such People now have of substracting their obedience,
since their Ancestors, many Centuries of Ages since, and in all successive
Generations, have either transferred what Power they ever could claim, to their
Governors, or by his Laws and their own consents have bound themselves in
fidelity to the Sovereign, his Heirs and lawful Successors.

So that in what Vtopia soever this Doctrine of the Original of Power being in
the People, and their Power of re-assuming it, may be asserted; it can have no
place in our happy Islands. For the Government of England is a successive
Hereditary Monarchy, declared so by all our Laws: so that with us, allegations
of natural Right have no sort of place, our Kings having their Power
established by Birthright, by Consent, by Prescription and Law, which are all
the ways whereby any right can be legally established.

Therefore we must look upon all such as cast in such Baits for the People to
nibble at, that they intend to make a prey of them; and having fastened the
gilded Hook in their Jaws, may draw them out of their own Element to a free air
indeed, but such as will stifle them. For when any Subjects (by the instigation
of such pretended Patriots) are excited to put in their claim of Original
Power, and shake the Government; though their Rebellion be prosperous, it is
not without vast effusion of Blood that the Government can be changed. After
which, how will it be possible that the Community of the People can be put into
that pristin state of freedom, those State-Mountebanks promise? but rather into
an Anarchy, which is contrary to the end of all Society, and to quiet and
peace, and is the Parent of all confusion, which is much worse than the hardest
subjection.

This truth (by a most chargeable trial) we experimented in the late War, when
the Pretended Saviors of the Nation, and great Promoters of Spiritual and
Temporal Liberty, having wheedled the People into a belief of their honest
Intentions, and by their prosperous Arms overthrown the most temperate
Monarchy, by the effusion of infinite Blood and Treasure; by pretended
agreements of the People, they assumed the Government to themselves; enslaving
both the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty, more than any Foreign Conqueror
would do, or ever their Ancestors had been in any Age; and the Golden Scepter,
and that of King Edward with the Dove, was turned into a Rod of Iron and a
Flaming Sword, Basilisks and Fiery Serpents.

CHAP. IV. The Benefit of Government from the Establishing and Instituting of
Laws.
THe (...).Rhetor. ad Alex. c. 1.
Philosopher describes Law to be the Promulgation of what by the common consent
of the City is defined, which commands upon Terms how every thing is to be
done. Which is to be understood after Government is established, where the
Lawgivers are agreed upon, and the Subjects known that are to obey them.

In another place, the same (...). Ethic. Nicom. c. 5.
Philosopher says, Laws are to be declared concerning all things that may
respect the common Benefit of all, or of the Optimacy, viz. the Nobility or
Prime Gentry, or the Sovereign, or be agreeable to Virtue, or to any other
Necessity of the People: and these he calls Common Laws.

The same (...). De Repab. l. 2. c. 6.
Learned and Wise Composer of Politics tells us, That the Law has no force to
compel Obedience, but as it receives it from Usage and Custom; and this springs
not from any thing so much as from length of Time, and multitude of Years.

Of these kind of Laws few Nations make such use as we do in England, under the
Title of Common Laws and Customs; and it is no small Credit to them, that so
Judicious and Ancient a Writer has given such a Character of these kind of
Laws, by which we have something more than a shadow of ours.

The same (...). Ibid.
Philosopher likewise, with great Judgment, tells us, That to forego Laws
received and long used, and over-easily to substitute new ones, is to make weak
and infirm the Laws themselves. Yet he is not for tying Posterity to the Laws
of their Progenitors too strictly; for that it is likely (says he) the first
Ancestors of them being such as he calls (...), Sons of the Earth, or such as
escaped from some great Calamities and Destructions, were rude and illiterate,
such as he calls (...): so that it would be (...). Ibid.
absurd to persist in their Decrees; therefore he says, All seek not their
(...). Ibid.
Countries Laws, but those only that are good, as generally such are which have
had the Approbation of Ages.

By what has been noted from so Ancient and Judicious an Author, I may easily
infer, That Laws resulted from Government, and were the necessary Products of
such Counsels as the first Leaders or Monarchs entertained to order their
People by; and since he (...). Ibid.
makes the Laws of such like validity and force in the Commonwealth, as the
Rules and Orders of Parents in private Families, we may well conclude, That as
those had their Origination from the Will of the Father of the Family, so the
other from the Prince, who is his Peoples Common Parent.

Therefore, in Homer Kings are called (...), Givers of Laws, or Judges of the
People, as well as (...), Pastors or Feeders, Conductors, Defenders or
Shepherds of the People. So in Sacred Writ, the first Hebrew Captains or Kings
were called Judges. Therefore Pomponius Laetus says, In the ancientest Times,
before Laws were agreed upon, the King's Will was a Law: And Regis nutus and
Arbitrium pro Legibus, lib. 10.
Dionysius is express, That the intimation of their Mind by Signs, and their
absolute Wills, were in stead of Laws.

Romulus ad libitum imperitaverat, dein Numa Religionibus and Divino Jure
Populum devinxit. Sed praecipuus Servius Tullius sanctor Legum fuit, quis etiam
R^g ^s obtemperarent. 3 Annal.
Tacitus giving an account of the Roman Laws, says of Romulus, That he
commanded at his own pleasure; and after him Numa bound the People with
Religion and Divine Laws. Some were found under Tullus and Ancus; but the
principal Institutor of Laws was Servius Tullius, to which even Kings should
obey; that is, they thought themselves obliged to observe and keep the Laws
they had appointed. He then notes, That after Tarquin was expelled, the People
prepared many Laws for the defense of their Liberty, and to strengthen their
Concord against the Factions of the Fathers.

A late Judicious Nalson, Common Interest, p. 14, 15.
Author says, That God and Nature investing Primogeniture with the Right of
Kings and Magistrates, they made Laws; and this not being observed, or wilfully
disowned by some Popular Patrons (who would possess the People, that the Laws
made Kings and Governors) has created the greatest Mischiefs, by giving an
Inlet to the Changes of Governors and Government. For, granting this most
enormous Doctrine, and dangerous Principle; Laws being alterable for the
Convenience of Prince or People, by consequence the Right of the Sovereign (if
it be only from the Laws) must be precarious also.

The Opinion is in it self most absurd and unreasonable; for there never could
be Laws, till there was some Form of Government to establish and enact such
Laws, and give them their energy and vigor: For nothing can have the force or
power of a Law, or oblige men to Obedience, unless it proceed from such Person
or Persons as have a Right to command, and Authority to punish the Disobedience
and Neglect of those who ought to be subject to it: So that it is almost
impossible to find the least Footsteps of Law, that is by far so ancient as
Government.

If we consider the Infancy of the World, when Nations were divided by the
Swarms that made new Colonies; we may easily conceive, that Differences and
Quarrels would not only fall out amongst them about Boundaries; but within the
District of one Government, the Shares of distinct Families and Persons would
be allotted, and these would require the Preservation of those Peculiars, from
the Incroachment of Thieves, Robbers, or other mischievous Persons: From whence
must spring a necessity of Laws, to prevent Domestic Quarrels and Injuries,
and to ascertain to every man his Right, and effect those good things which
would make the Society happy.

Which Laws (as far as we have any Record of History) were first appointed by
those who first led the Colonies, or such as they choose out to assist in such a
design of concern, who being supreme over the People, had the only Power of
making Laws, and exacting obedience to them: Consentaneous to which the
Sergeants at a late Call gave this Motto, A Deo Rex, a Rege Lex. The Benefits
Societies enjoy by Laws.


But however we conceive of the first Authors and Institutors of Laws, it no
ways lessens the benefit all Societies enjoy by being governed by Laws, adapted
to the Constitution of the People and Government. For as (...). Polit. lib. 1.
c. 2.
Aristotle observes, Of all living Creatures man is the best; so he is the
worst, if not governed by Laws and Judgment.

Both Lib. 12. de LL.
Plato and Lib. 5. and ult. E^kic.
Aristotle agree, that Men Just and most Eminent in Virtue, being as Gods among
Men, are under no Law, living as regularly (...). Polit. lib. 3. c. 13.
on their own accord, as others constrained by the Laws; for these good Men are
Laws themselves, exciting others to Virtue by their Examples. Yet since this is
but the Portion of a few, there is a necessity of enforcing the Laws by
Authority upon those that are not obedient to them, nor a Law to themselves.

As to the use of Laws, The Usefulness of Laws.
the 1 de Oratore.
Orator tells us that by their Authority we are taught to subdue our Lusts, to
circumscribe, and bound our unlawful desires; to defend our own, and restrain
our Eyes and Hands from that which belongs to others.

They were, says the same Cicero, Major hareditas unicuique nesteum a Jure and
Legious quam aliis a quibus illa bona relicta surt. Id. pro Caecinna.
invented for the security of every one, a greater and more plentiful
Inheritance coming to us by them, than from those that left us our Estates.

These are fitted for the Diseases of the Commonwealth, ex malis moribus
oriuntur bonae leges. They restrain Men from their depraved Appetites, the
over-boilings of their Lusts, the debauchery of their Lives, the Injustice of
their Rapines, stop the Effusion of Innocent Blood, secure every Man's
Interest, instruct and dispose all to do well, and secure them when they do so.

Hedges are set up (says Mr. Hobs Civil Wars.
) to stop Travelers, and keep them in the way that is allowed and prescribed,
and for hindering them from choosing a way for themselves. So Laws are made to
guide, govern, and punish Men, who presume to decline the Rule, and choose
another to walk by, that is more agreeable to their own Appetite and
Convenience. The poorest necessitated Man (says a Fr. White, Sacred Laws.
Judicious Author) amidst the Calamities of his wretched Life, would yet be
more unhappy, were not Laws and Government his Sanctuary. Oppression, the
heaviest of all miseries, would crush him to pieces, and break the Repose of
his shortest Slumbers. The malice of the Clown, the dark Arts of the City would
surround us; and what we most prize (though we want the comfort of it) no Man's
Life could be safe a minute without them; nothing could be sure, nothing
certain, no commerce, no conversation: These protect the Orphan, the Widow, and
the Stranger.

Seneca elegantly calls the Laws, Virtutes Armatas, because they compel evil
manners into good order: for without Laws Men are but a more cunning and
pernicious sort of Brutes; and where they are instituted and prevail, humane
Nature is most civilized, refined and polite.

It is said of the Liberal Arts, that Emolliunt mores, nec sinunt esse feros:
They soften Men's minds and manners, they correct that churlishness of temper,
and addulce and mellow the austere, sour and crabbed Disposition, tame and
make gentle the Savage Natures, file off the Asperities of them: all which is
equally true of the force and efficacy of the Laws put in Execution.

What would this great World we live in, be less than a great Bedlam, were it
not for these Political Combinations, civil appointments, and Laws which in all
places and Countries not only curb and command that untamed Pride, Fury, and
Malice, which too naturally resides in many; But the Laws likewise form and
incorporate Men into civil Societies, making those persons capable of Living,
conversing, and dwelling together, as Men endowed with rational and religious
Faculties; who otherwise would appear no better than a company of wild and
Savage Creatures. The Honor given to Lawmakers.


So great Veneration had the Ancients for the Laws, that they esteemed the
Lawgivers Stephanus Niger Exposit. Carm. Pythag. Leges primo rudibus hominum
animis simplices eram. Maximeque fama celebravit Cretensium quas Minos,
Spartanorum quas Lycurgus; ac mox Atheniensibus qu^sitiores jam and plures
Solon praeseripsit. T^^it. 3 Annal.
Holy, and such as had Correspondence with the Deities they worshipped, and
were, while they lived, for these great Blessings to their People, deified. So
Minos among the Egyptians makes Mercury the Author of the Laws, and among the
Cretians, Jupiter. Lycurgus among the Lacedaemonians fathered them on Apollo,
Numa Pompilius derived them from the whispers of the Goddess Aegeria: the
Persians from Zoroaster, Xamolxis among the Goths, deduces them from Vesta; and
that Moses received the Jewish Laws from God Almighty we all believe.

So that as every where we find the Heathens make the Gods descend for their
Production, and celestial Wisdom to flow into them (says the learned Mr. White
in his Sacred Laws of the Land; in which little Treatise is comprehended a
great deal of curious Learning) and who further adds, That as Livy allows to
Antiquity (mixing things humane with divine) to deduce the Original of Cities
from Gods or Goddesses, to make their beginnings more majestic; the same may be
said of the Laws (says my learned Author) if it be Lawful to Canonize any, to
carry them up to Heaven, or fetch them down from thence, that Glory is alone
due to the Laws, yea to the sacred Laws of our Land: And in another place he
says, It was not so much the Charms of the Sibyls Leaves, nor Numa's Shield,
or the Palladium that made the Roman Common weal so much to raise its lofty
Head, as the just and wholesome Sanction of the Laws obeyed and reverenced.

On the contrary, Bodin De Republica:
observes, that the overthrow of Carthage was without difficulty, and certainly
prognosticated, since neither Virtue nor Law had place there.

Hence the Orator observes, That if the Laws be once abandoned, or but
negligently guarded, not to say oppressed, there is nothing any man can be sure
to receive from his Ancestors, or leave to his Posterity. Which leads me to the
second head of the Benefit by Government, which is Propriety.

CHAP. V. Propriety secured by Government.
WE find that Plato, Arist. Polit. lib. 2.
Socrates and Lycurgus, proposed a Community of all things in their
Commonwealth, not only in Goods, Chattels and Lands, but also in Wives and
Children.

As to Community of Goods, the Argument that Socrates used was, That if every
one might call every thing his own, and not his own, it would be a means
whereby a City would be perfectly one.

On the contrary, Aristotle argues, That this would create endless disputes.
For he that took pains would never agree that he who took no pains should have
an equal share; and in a little time, one would be coveting a larger dividend
than another, and this would destroy the great virtue of Temperance, and would
allow it no place: for that consists in abstaining from what is another.
Neither would there be room for Liberality, i^ none had of his own to give.
Besides, by possessing in common, Sloth, Idleness and Negligence would be
encouraged; (...). Polit. lib. 1. c. 3.
because whatever thing is common to many, has less care employed about it, or
it is not with that sedulousness provided for, because what is every bodies
work is no bodies work: according to our English Proverb, The mean Pot never
boils well. So he concludes, That possessing in common gives more occasions to
differences, than where every one knows his own. Therefore it is more
conducible to the well-being of a People to unite in one order of Discipline,
than in unity of Stock and Community of Goods.

There was some difference in the modus of this community. For we read that
Pericles and Cimo pulled down the Enclosures of their Gardens and Fields, that
the meaner sort might have free liberty to take the Fruits. This kind of
Community was received at Tarentum, and the Agrarian Law at Rome allowed
something of it.

But I believe this kind of Community was little practiced, but rather every
one enjoyed his separate share, and some Commons, as we have in England, were
best un-enclosed, according to that of Sicut coelum Diis, ita terras generi
mortalium datas; quaeque sunt vacuae, e^s publicas esse. Annal. l. 13.
Boiocolus in Tacitus, That as the Heavens were given to the Gods, so the Earth
was given to Men; and those places that were empty or unpossessed in several,
were for the public, or common to all.

The Anabaptists in Germany, were very earnest to have obtained such a
Community, where they were powerful enough to eject the right Owners out of
their Estates, pleading the Apostles usage: And in our late Confusions (among
the many revivals of obsolete opinions and Heresies) we had some that were very
fond of a notion, That the perfectest State of a Commonwealth was not only
where there should be no distinction of Dignities and Degrees, but Estates
should be levelled; and some that foresaw the People would not easily consent
to this (as an Essay) begun to dig and cultivate Commons, enticing the Poor to
join with them, of which, as I remember, one Everard was the chief.

As to Communities of Wives, Arist. Polit. lib. 2. c. 3.
Plato would have it so, that because, Against Community of Wives.
when every one might call every Man's Wife and Child his own, there would be an
amicable concord in the enjoying and providing for them. But the Philosopher
argues against this, much what as he did against the Community of Goods;
especially, by reason that the Children would be neglected by the Fathers; none
being certain whether such or such a Son were his or no; and so all Paternal
affection would be abolished, and all Cognations wholly obliterated, and there
would be no way to distinguish ones own Issue, but by the similitude, as among
the Garamants of the superior Africa, and the Pharsalian Mare (...). Ib.
which was called Just, because the had always her Foals like the Horse that
got them. Besides that, Parricide might be committed, and injury done by
Children to Parents (which no civil Government ought to allow) and yet the
Father not be truly known.

But to leave this, Subjects now very sollicitous to preserve their Properties.
because I do not read that any Commonwealth did ever, or not long enjoy the
benefit of any such institution; we may note, that as in other things, so in
this, the custom of Men is much changed. All being now so jealous of any breach
made upon their Property, that Princes are looked upon as Tyrannical and
Arbitrary, that shall, for the necessary support of the Government, lay any
imposition upon the People, without their consents; which made, in King Charles
the First's time, that outcry against Ship Money; though the Legality of it was
owned by twelve Judges, and very ancient Records were produced, and much
learning and reading shown in the arguments for it. But this point is now
adjusted to the satisfaction of the whole.

The English Subject enjoys many choice peculiar Privileges and advantages, The
Privileges of the English Subjects in their Property.
far transcending those of the Subjects of most Princes: So that any rougher
touch upon that tender part, must needs gall, and the lightest Yoke be uneasy
to the neck unaccustomed to it. By his Birthright he has something he can
call his own; he has not only the protection of his Person, but the
inheritance of his Freehold, his Liberty and Property secured to him by Law; he
cannot be violently assaulted in the one, or forceably invaded in the other,
but the public Justice of the Kingdom will be satisfied for it, and call the
Aggressors to a strict account.

We have such a grand Charter of all just and reasonable Privileges and
Immunities, continued and confirmed to us, by the Piety, Munificence and Royal
bounty of our Princes, that we may dispute peaceable and happy living with all
other Subjects of the World.

The Government we live under, being settled and supported by known and
excellent Laws, such as for their policy and prudence, justice and equity in
their composition, challenge all the constitutions of Europe (in which part of
the World are (if any where) to be found the greatest perfections of Human
Nature) to (...) the like. They do so justly and clearly support the Grandeur
of Majesty, the Dignity of the Crown, with the Peace, Liberty and Property of
the Subject, Whether Property was before Government, or not.
that all Nations round about envy us for that felicity they can never hope to
enjoy.

To disturb this blessed condition of the English Subject, there are two
Extremes: The one of a People fond of a Notion, of the Primitive fundamental of
Government in the People, that they will needs have Property in order of Nature
before Government; without considering that nothing is gained to their
advantage by the concession of it. For it must also be Bishop of Lincoln's
Preface to Power of Princes.
proved, that it was before it in order of time; for as one of the principal
ends of Government is the preservation of men's acquisitions, of Cattle and
Fields, by their industry; so we must suppose some Government first, because
the right which any man has to the acquired stock and lands, must be
ascertained to him by some Law, which supposes Government. So that the dispute
(says the Reverend Bishop) is de Lana Caprina, and when men have crowded
themselves into the Circle, they reap nothing but a Brainsick giddiness; and it
is like the dispute in Macrobius, Whether the Hen or Egg were first.

All that believe the Creation, must own, that Adam's Government was before any
Man's property, and the like may be said of Noah; so that there is no need to
have recourse to Articles, or capitulations with the People (which those make
such a noise with) unless they can first evince the World to be Eternal, and
Men to have sprung in some rank Soil, as Tubera terrae, Mushroms after a
fruitful shower.

Another Extreme is what Mr. Hobbs every where in his Leviathan, Against
Arbitrary Sovereignty.
endeavors to establish, (viz) That the Sovereign should be so absolute and so
arbitrary, that he should upon Exigents of State, or at his own pleasure, have
the disposal of every Subjects fortune, which how necessary it may be for vast
Empires (such as the Ottomans) I dispute not. But the Sovereigns of
Christendom, especially of England, take no such measures to the advantages of
themselves, or their Subjects slavery.

The most judicious Earl of Clarendon, in his eleborate Treatise against Survey
of Leviathan, p. 110.
Mr. Hobbs, has with great judgment refuted this opinion, from whose Armory I
shall borrow some of the Artillery, though I dare not presume to use them with
the same dexterity, and address his Lordship does.

This Propriety (says he) introduces the beauty of building, and the
cultivating of the Earth, by art as well as industry, that they and their
Children might dwell in the Houses they were at the charge to build, and reap
the Harvest of those lands they had been at the charge to sow: whatsoever is of
civility and good manners, all that is of art and beauty, of rule and solid
wealth in the world, is the product of this; the Child of beloved property; and
they (...) at would strangle this Issue, desire to demolish all buildings,
eradicate all plantations to make the Earth barren, and live again in Tents,
and nourish their Cattle by successive marches into the Fields where the Grass
grows. Nothing but joy in propriety redeemed us from this barbarity, and
nothing but security in the same can preserve us from returning to it again.

If there be no Propriety (continues the great Lord) there is nothing worth
defending from foreign Enemies, or from one another, and consequently it is no
matter what becomes of the Commonwealth. For the Government can never be so
vigorously assisted by a People who have nothing to lose, as by those who
defending it, defend their own Goods and Estates; which if they do not believe
their own, they will not much care into whose hands they fall.

To this wise Lord I may add what a great Seneca. Jure civili omnia Regis sum,
and tamen illa quorum ad Regem pertinet universa possessio, in singulos dominos
discerpta sunt, and unaquaeque res habet possessorem suum. Itaque dare Regi
domum and mancipia and pecuniam possumus, nec donare illi de suo dicimur. Ad
Reges enim po^stas omnium pertinet, ad s^gula proprietas.
Statesman and Scholar has long since observed. That though by the Civil Law
all are the Kings; yet even those things (whereof the Universal possession
belongs to the King) have their peculiar Owners: So that we may give the King,
House, Freehold or Money, yet are not said to give him his own. For to the King
the Power over all appertains, but to every single Person his Property,
according to that of Bulgaris to Zeno, Omnia Rex possidet Imperio, singuli
dominio.

If it were thus under the absolute Power of the Roman Emperors in Seneca's
time, how much more secure may we judge Propriety in ours, when so guarded by
the Royal Sword and Scepter; that in several cases Actions may be brought in
defense of a Man's right, even against the Crown, and the Judges have pronounced
Sentence against some claims of the King, and ought to do so.

Whatever pains Mr. Hobs takes to render those precious words of Property
unvaluable and insignificant, we see that a better Philosopher than He, and who
understood the Rules of Government (having lived under just such a Sovereign as
Mr. Hobs would set up) gives his judgment otherwise, where he expressly tells
us, that he is Errat si quis tutum sibiesse Regem putat, ubi nihil a Rege tutum
est. Securitas securita^e paciscenda est.
much deceived that thinks that King is in safety, from whom the Subject is not
safe in what he enjoys; the security of the one being from the stipulation of
the security of the other.

That in former ages also the condition of the English Subject has been
happier, in enjoying greater security, as to their Persons and Estates, than
the Subjects of Foreign Countries: and that the English Laws and Government
have been very tender of them, appears by what another De laudibus Legum Ang.
c. 37.
Lord Chancellor writes, who lived in a turbulent age, and was forced into
exile with the Prince, eldest Son to King Henry the Sixth. He in many places,
treats of the miseries of the Peasants in France, and of the generality of the
French Subjects, too tedious here to relate, and in his free way of Dialogue
with the Prince, he divides Kingly Government into that which is Regal and
Absolute, and that which is Political. In which last are condescensions of
Princes to bound their Prerogative, and this he commends to his Prince, saying,
Quis enim potentior liberiorve esse potesi, quam qui non solum alios, sed
seipsum sufficit debellare? Ib.
No Prince can be reputed powerfuller or freer than that Prince, who is not
only able to master and subdue others, but also his own oppressive and
extorting disposition, which he says, a King that governs Politically, can do,
and ever does.

Therefore we may look upon all such, as now, or in the late times, have made
such terrible outcries, for fear of their Properties being invaded (since we
find two such great Men in distant ages so freely and elaborately writing
against Arbitrariness) as men that rather design Sedition and Rebellion, by
raising in the Peoples minds, groundless jealousies and fears, than that there
can be any umbrages of such fears in the constitution of the Government,
especially under such a just Prince as we have, who will make the Laws the
Rule, by which he will square his Royal Administration, and has given such
assurance of it in his never to be sufficiently valued Declaration, at his
Majesty's first sitting in his Council, to the infinite joy of his Subjects of
all conditions.

Therefore since we have our Properties so well secured and provided for, by
the gracious Grants of our Sovereigns in Magna Charta, the Petition of Right,
and other Acts; let us thankfully acknowledge this great Blessing, and with so
much more duty and industry, endeavor to defend, in our several capacities,
the Royal Prerogatives of our Kings; which as much appertain to them, and in a
more transcendent way, than our Properties are ascertained unto us.

For it must be owned, that the primary end of all Government, is for the
better ordering the People, whereby they may live in accord among themselves,
and follow their several employments under the protection of the Sovereign.
Therefore whoever endeavor to disjoynt and discompose the frame of Government
(by the wisdom of our Ancestors and long experience, found so agreeable to the
English Genius) are to be reputed, either ignorant of their own happiness, or
designers of as horrid mischiefs: Whether they be such, as according to Mr.
Hobs's Principles, may lessen the affection and tenderness of Princes to their
Subjects, or lessen the duty and obedience of Subjects to their Prince, and
make them less love the constitution of Government they live under; or they be
such as would cramp the Sovereign Power, and wrap it in soft Ermines and Robes
of State, without a Sword or Scepter.

Having thus far treated of Government in general, and of the usefulness of it
to mankind: I think it necessary to give an account of the several Governments
which have been hitherto used in the World; and that I may give a more distinct
account of them, I have chosen to represent them as I find they have been
practiced in the ancientest times: and finding so many in the last age and this
so zealous for a Commonwealth-Government, and some yet bewitched with the
notions of it, I think it incumbent on me, to be more copious in the
representing of the inconveniences of all other Governments besides Monarchy,
tht as far as my reading may afford me helps, I may disabuse his Majesty's
Subjects, and represent to them the excellency and beauty of the English
Monarchy, which is the whole scope and intendment of this discourse; and I must
beg pardon, if either in the words of my Authors (whom I shall endeavor
faithfully to quote) or in my own, I use any smarter or sharper expressions
than they are willing to hear. For I think it much more advantageous to the
persons concerned, that they feel the acrimony of my Ink, and the small
punctures of my Pen, than that following such mischievous Principles of our
late Republicans, they should have their bloods tainted, or suffer the edge of
those severe Laws, which are steeled against Rebels, and think it safer for
them to be blackned by my Ink, than that their blood should stain the Scaffolds.

CHAP. VI. Of Democracy, and the Inconveniences of it.
ALL Ages have allowed of Aristotle's division of Government: where he says
(...). Polit. l. 3. c. 7.
that the Republic and the public Administration are the same, and this public
administration is the Lord or Sovereign of the City, and that Sovereign is
either one, a few, or the multitude, (...). In Democracy the People is the
Prince, and in Oligarchy the few.

To this division 4. Annal.
Tacitus assents, where he says, Cunctas Nationes, and Vrbes, Populus, aut
Primores, aut singuli regunt. That either the People, the principal Citizens,
or single Persons govern all Nations and Cities.

Every one of these are again subdivided. The Government of one is either a
(...). Polit. l. 3. c. 7.
King, who rules for the good of his whole Subjects, or a Tyrant, who
pretending the Protection of the People against the too severe Rule of a King,
or the States, exercises Arbitrary Rule over all. The few constitute an (...).
Polit. li. 4. c. 8.
Aristocracy, wherein a select, and small number of the principal Citizens Rule
for the public good; or Oligarchy where the Rich only rule for their particular
Profit. As to the Rule of the People, or wherein all the People have by
amicable consent an equal right in the Government, and accord to manage it for
the common good of the whole, it is called Democracy: If not for the common
benefit of Rich and Poor, it is called Oclocracy, or the mis-rule of the Rabble.
All (...).
which he includes in that division, that whatever forms of Administration
regard the common benefit, they are regular, and such as are consentaneous to
Justice; but whoever having the Administration, consult their own Profit only,
they are depraved and distorted from the right Forms of Government.

The (...), a mixture of all these, or any two of them, is often mentioned by
the Philosopher; but of this I have no present occasion to discourse.

I shall begin with democracy; which is the Clay and Iron Feet of
Nebuchadnezzar's Image. It is but one remove from Anarchy, wherein all the
People have, or pretend to have equal right to Authority, where all govern and
all obey. For the People (says the Philosopher) is a Monarch or simple
Government by aggregation of many, being many Lords, not as single Persons, but
as Members of the All; which he thus expresses, Polit. l. 4. c. 4.
(...).

Of this sort of Government the (...). Ibid.
Philosopher makes five Kinds. The first when Rich and Poor are equally capable
of Government. Subdivisions of Democracy.
The second when a small real Estate is required to capacitate them. A third
where all Citizens, not by some Qualifications debarred, are admitted; but so
that the (...).
Laws govern, or are the Standard. A fourth where only the Inhabitants of the
City, not those that live dispersed in the Villages depending on the City, had
share in Government, the Law also being the Rule. The fifth when the Multitude
rule by majority of Voices, and not the Law; so that their temporary Votes were
Law.

We have resemblance of these kinds of Governments in our Corporations,
Concerning the Democracies in Corporations.
where in the Elections of Magistrates, in some places all Freemen, in others
those only who have Burgage Land, in others a Common Council solely, have Vote,
and the whole Body, or such and such parts have Power to make Bylaws.

If we had no other Argument against Democracy but this, that it is of that
narrow capacity that it cannot be adapted to order Regions of large extent, it
would be sufficient to discredit it; for we find in those incorporated little
Democracies, there are more Factions and divisions than in the whole large
adjoining tracts of Land about them, though the Villages contain a much
numerouser People.

It is rarely found but that in all Votes relating to the public, Combinations
are made by Kindreds, Companies, or Factions. The inferior sort having equal
Vote, often out-number the Richer and Wiser, and so businesses are aukwardly or
tumultuarily determined, and the meaner People must either neglect their
domestic affairs, to attend frequent Conventions, or leave the managery to a
stirring factious Party, which is (...). Polit. l. 5. c. 5.
contrary to the fundamental equality and freedom they labor for. As these
Corporations were first created by the Sovereigns Grace and Favor, for the
increase of Trade, and enriching the places, and administration of Justice: so
while they keep themselves within the bounds of their Duties, are Loyal to
their Prince, and Faithful to the Government, and presume not by their
Pragmaticalness to dispose of the Fate of the Empire, or by their factious
Elections to make disturbances; It is very necessary they should enjoy all
their municipal Privileges. But so many Corporations having of late acted
contrary, it is no wonder that the late King, upon solid reason of State,
issued out his Quo Warranto's against them; and in all the new Charters
reserved a Power in the Crown of displacing the Evil Magistrates at pleasure.

But to leave this to another place, I shall note out of the Philosopher such
Arguments as he uses against Democracy. 1. Argument against Democracy,
Injustice.
As first that the common People being the greater number, and the Sovereignty
being supposed to be in the whole complex Body, whatever they approve must be
established as a Right and Law, Vbi plebs est domina, necesse est ut quod
plurimis visum sit, hoc quoque sit ratum and hoc sit jus. Polit. l. 6. c. 2.
and suppose they vote a Dividend of the richer Citizens Estates among
themselves; though this by the force of their Government be just, yet in its
own nature it is great Injustice to destroy the rich Man's Propriety, as well
as it were for the Rich to do the same to the Poor.

2dly. 2. Against the Common Peoples Liberty of Elections.
Liberty being the principle of all Democratical Government, it consists in two
things, either to live Plerisque jucundius est licenter vivere quam modeste.
Ib. c. 2.
licentiously, which in Athens and other places was very fatal, and as
Demosthenes, Isocrates, and Cicero complain that under the specious pretense of
Liberty, even Anarchy prevailed. Or Secondly in the free and uncontrollable
Power of choosing their Magistrates, and this accasioned the contest of parties
for Victory; hence Crowds, Tumults, Routs, Riots, Frays and Quarrels, and
after all, Heart-burnings.

In Licurg. Vide Giphanii Com. in c. 7. l. 2. Polit. Arist.
Plutarch gives us an account of the manner of some Elections for Senators,
that certain Persons being closed in a Room where they might hear the peoples
Voices, but not see the People, One Competitor after another was proposed, and
him who was judged to have most Voices, they carried Crowned to the Temples of
the Gods, Women and Children following him with Shouts. This (...). L. 2.
Polit. c. 9.
Aristotle calls a Childish action in so grave an affair, it being not fit for
any to seek Magistracy in such a way, that by the judgment of the Multitude
only, is thought fit to Rule; but (...). Ibid.
he that is worthy, be he willing or unwilling, should have the place.
Therefore we observe where the King has the sole Power of nominating Judges,
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, etc. though they are of as great advantage to the
Peace and order of the Government, as Mayors, Sheriffs, or Common Council Men
of Corporations, there are neither Hubbubs or Quarrels at their Elections, and
they are generally better qualified than such as court the peoples Favor.
Therefore Rempublicam perituram in qua viri Principes consultant, Populus vero
and imperita plebecula decernit.
Laertius exclaims justly that the Commonweal must perish, in which the
Nobility consult, but the People and unskillful common Rabble give Judgment.

3dly. 3. Their Faction.
In this Government there is a continual spawning of Faction. So it is Giphanii
Comment. in lib. 5. c. 5. Polit.
observed that at Athens the Democratical Government mostly obtained, yet in
the Attick State there were no less than three Factions, according to the
tripartite division of the People: viz. the Diacrii, that inhabited the
mountainous Parts, who were for pure Democracy; the Pediaci, who inhabited the
lower Grounds, and they were for a mixture of Oligarchy; and the Parulii, or
Inhabitants on the Seacoasts, and those were a mixture of both; which
Aristotle calls the Politic. Hence Pisistratus appearing an Enemy to the
Pediaci, made himself gracious with the People, and so easily got the
Government. So he instanceth in the changes of those of Milesia, by the
Prytania, which was like a Consulship or Dictatorship at ^^me. So he gives an
account of Dionysius feigning himself to be wounded by the Nobility, who hated
him for his love to the People, raised a great Envy and Rage of the People
against them, and so established himself. So Theagenes by slaying the Cattle of
the Nobility, animated the People of Maegara to follow him, till by suppressing
the Nobility and Richer, he got himself to be Master of all. The like we may
read in Lib. 13. c. 9.
Diodorus Siculus, that Agathocles did at Syracuse. All which Changes were the
Issues of Factions betwixt the Nobility and Common People, which is as
inseparable from this sort of Government, as the Prickle is from the Thistle,
or the Husk from the Corn.

Fourthly, The Philosopher notes, That in this Government the Demagogues were
most used. These indeed were the Bellwethers of Faction, the Conductors of the
Peoples Wills and Affections, by the power of their Popularness. The (...).
Pol. l. 4. c. 4.
Philosopher tells us, there was no use of them, where the Law commanded; but
where Matters were judged by the Decrees of the People only, they were of use,
being the Authors that all things might be reduced to the Power of the People,
whom they wrought upon by their Suasives, to place or displace Magistrates, or
to enlarge or circumscribe their Power. Therefore he scarce allows the (...).
Id. l. 5. c. 5.
Name of Government to this kind of Republic, because where the Laws have not
Authority, there is no Commonwealth; for that these Demagogues making the
Mobile Lord over the Laws, and constantly raising Factions against the Rich,
Civitate ex una duas faciant, of one City or Society made two: So that in that
Contest mostly an Oligarchy prevailed; and by the petulancy of the Demagogues
(who led the People by Herds, pretending, as it was their Office, Neminem
plebem injuria afficere.
that none should injure the People) they exasperated the Nobility to subvert
the Government, or having got a powerful Ascendant, usurped it themselves; as
the Philosopher instanceth in the Islands of Chios and Rhodes, in the Cities of
Heraclea, of Pontus, in the Colonies of the Athenians at Megaris; the Nobles
being abused and banished, righted themselves by Arms, and obtained the
Government; and Thrasymachus did the like at Cuma.

These Demagogues among the Grecians, the Ephori among the Lacedaemonians, and
the Tribunes of the People among the Romans, are often compared, as Officers of
the same kind, chosen to support the Peoples Interests. The Philosopher gives
us an account how the Demagogues comported themselves at the places
before-named; of which number, he says, were Pericles, Cilon, Hyperbolus,
Lycurgus, Hyperides, Demosthenes.

Concerning the Ephori, Of the Ephori.
Saepe valde pauperes accidit esse in hoc Magistratu, qui propter paupertatem
sunt venales. Polit. lib. 2. c. 7.
Aristotle says, That among the Lacedaemonians they had the greatest Power, and
being chosen by the People, it often happened that very poor men obtained the
Office, who by reason of their poverty were mercenary, as he instanceth in the
Andrici, where they being corrupted with Money, lost the City. He further adds,
That though these were chosen by the ignorant Populace, and often were men very
unfit for their Office; yet they had Judgment in Capital matters, and did not
judge in Cases of Death or Ignominy by written Laws, but arbitrarily; so that
the very Kings of Sparta were forced to observe, caress, and reverence them.

As to the Tribunes of Rome, The Tribunes of Rome.
they caused many grievous Troubles about the Agrarian Laws. Sp. Cassius being
the first (according to Valerius) that raised those Disputes, and was slain by
his Father; though Livy and Dionysius say it was Licinius Stolo, and after many
years Q. Flaminius put the same in execution, the Senate being against it. So
Gracchus, Tiberius, Titius, etc. did upon the same account raise great
Commotions.

This was for the taking the ancient Possessions from the Rich, and
distributing them among the Poor, Therefore Giphan. Comment. in c. 7. lib. 2.
Polit.
Cicero says, It was a pleasant thing to the People, for that they were
thereby supported without Labor; but the good Citizens resisted it, because it
would extinguish Industry, and exhaust the Treasury, and inure the People to
Sloth.

From all which, we may conclude, That Democracy in its Constitution is only
fitted for small Principalities; and in it neither Industry, or worthy Persons,
can have Encouragement: How obnoxious it is to Factions, or must have a mixture
of other Governments to support it, in being headed by some few popular
Persons; or must have a shadow of Monarchy, in the ruling Demagogues, Ephori,
or Tribunes; otherwise it cannot subsist.

This leads me to the Fifth Argument of the Philosopher against Democracy,
Democracy least durable.
That it was never found to be of any long continuance: For, (...). Polit. lib.
6. c. 4.
he says, That all Tyrannical Constitutions are Popular: And it is well known,
That, of all Governments what is Tyrannical, is the most short-lived. Liberty
being the End and Scope pretended, according to the Fundamental Constitution of
Democracy, Vicissim parere and imperare.
to Obey and Rule by Turns; the sweetness of Command induces them that have
once obtained it, to continue it; and the Slavery of obeying such Fellows and
Companions, continually provokes others to cast off the Yoke: So that from
hence Jars and Feuds shatter the Government in pieces. Besides, the unwieldy
Body of the People seldom continue long in one mind, nor can transact things
without delegation of Power to some few; by all which their instability is
discovered, and the shortness of their continuance shows the feeble and
impotent Principles they are founded upon. For where ever it has had any
duration, it has not been from its intrinsic adapture, but from the mixture
of other Forms in their kinds more durable; Democracy being in it self such a
Rolling-ground, that nothing stable can be built upon it.

It is not to be denied, Where Aristotle allows of Democracy.
that Aristotle in some Cases allows of Democracy; but it is where the (...).
Polit. lib. 6. c. 4.
Multitudes live by Husbandry, Pasture, or Feeding of Cattle. For these being
continually employed, have not much public Business, nor leisure to attend the
Assemblies; it being more pleasant and profitable for them to mind their
private Affairs, than to bear Office where little Profit is to be had. But he
likewise observes, That those that lived upon Tillage and Pasture (being the
ancientest sort of People, before Luxury brought in Handicrafts and Artizans)
easilier yielded to the Government of a Single Person, or Tyranny, or
Oligarchy, so long as they could enjoy their Country Farms in peace. Whereas
those in Cities, consisting of Tradesmen, Artificers, the mercenary Multitude,
and such as lead an idle Life, having Leisure and Curiosity to carry them to
the Assemblies, were more subject to Democracy, or Aristocracy, or any Novelty
or Change.

There are three things which render Democracy most taking with the Vulgar. The
plausible Pleas for Democracy answered.
First, Pretended impartial Administration of Justice. Secondly, The specious,
but empty Name of Liberty. Thirdly, The so much applauded Equality, by which
they seem to reduce their Civil Constitutions to the primary Laws of Nature,
which gave to all men Common Right.

Concerning the first, (says a Judicious Dudley Digs of Resistance p. 22. 1.
That Justice is not so impartially administered.
Author, whose Discourse on this Head I shall epitomize) Their Hopes that
Justice should be more equally administered, are grounded upon this, That though
some Rivers may be corrupted, yet the Ocean cannot. A man may satisfy the
Interests of some few, and corrupt them into favor and respect of Persons; but
it is hard to do the same with a Multitude: for to buy Justice of so many,
would be no thriving Trade.

But this, though plausible, is but a very fallacious Argument: For it is found
by experience, that some few more crafty Citizens, who have gained Credit with
the People, order Business in their close Committees, and so undiscernably lead
the Multitude to whatever they call the Public Good (of which they, having
prevailed upon their Affections, are esteemed the most competent Judges) by
which any one of the Juncto (for they must gratify each other mutually) is
enabled to cross the Course of Law in a Friend's behalf, and to put a sharper
Edge upon the Sword of Justice when it strikes an Enemy.

These kind of men, by frothy Eloquence in set Speeches, cunningly fitted to
the Capacity of the Common People, having got the Art of changing the Peoples
Opinion of Just and Unjust, (for Reasons are not weighed, where such Numbers
hold the Balance) their Art is to apply their Harangues to that which rules
the weaker men, the Affections; and these are easily convinced, and made the
Measures of their Judgments, the want of weight in the Suaden'o docent, non
docendo suadent.
Premises being supplied by an extraordinary love to the Conclusion.

The Judgments of Right and Wrong (being not like Mathematical Knowledge) are
as various as their Interests different, because they concern Meum and Tuum,
wherein Profit is the Vtilitas Justi prope matter and Aequi est.
Parent of Equitable and Just; and these Ruling men, when they have a mind to
do a man a prejudice, can easily transfer his Business to the Common Peoples
Verdict, where they shall be sure to have their Fleece torn off by the Brambles
or Briars, or suffer as cruel Death (if they be judged Capital Offenders) as
those may be conceived to undergo that are rolled to death in a spiked Barrel.
So we find the Grecian Emperor Isacius Angelus, and the two De Wits were torn
in pieces, when exposed to be worried by the Rabble.

Secondly, as to Liberty; 2. True Liberty is wanting in Democracy.
it is strange Men should so generally fall in love with a bare sound, and
court a name of freedom, which duly examined, signifies nothing. They cannot
mean by it a looseness from all Laws; they dare not own such pernicious
License; the true debate is not, Whether they shall admit the Bonds of Laws
(for they readily embrace them, being forged and fitted by themselves) but who
shall impose them? The question is not, Whether Non an servirent, sed an
servirent uni vel pluribus.
they should serve, but, Whether they should serve one or more? and with them
it is commonly called Liberty, to serve many Masters.

Now if we rightly consider, the restraint of our Freedom is that which is most
valuable amongst the benefits of Government. For this it is preserves Peace
among men, by it their hands are tied up from doing injury. Every one, it is
true, could wish to retain full and absolute liberty, but not upon condition
all others should enjoy the same. For that love to it, and delight in it, is
overbalanced by the fears, and the sad consideration arising from the thoughts
of others freedom, to make us suffer as much as they may be tempted to inflict.

Besides, where can true Liberty be, where the unconstant Mobile have the
dispensing of it; who have no clear Idea of it, are always catching at the
shadow, and the ungrasped Cloud, for Juno. Their Votes are easily corrupted,
when a Platarc. in Vita Marii.
Marius pours out Bushels of Corn in the Forum, to buy them: They are impelled
as we see in crowds, first one way, then another, ebbing and flowing in their
actions, like the unconstant Ocean; and this they call their Liberty, which
rather is their servile Bondage, being all this while in the shorter or longer
Chain of their corrupt affections or weak judgments. For how can we think the
common body competent Judges to manage affairs, who besides inconstancy and
disorder, do every thing in such a manner as it is very hard to separate
Tumults and Multitudes; and amongst Judges, so qualified as they are, it is not
enough to give prudent Council, but it must likewise be fortunate; otherwise
the judicious giver of it, may probably find a great abridgment of his Liberty,
if not worse.

Thirdly, Concerning Equality, Concerning Equality.
while they urge it comes nearer to the Law of Nature; by the same reason they
must dissolve Government, since it would take away all Magistrates, Superiors
and Inferiors. Besides, it is against Nature it self, that there should be such
Equality; as to instance, if in Rewards it had been intended, Nature would have
made all men equally deserving: and Reason teaches us, that since we may excel
others by Education and Industry; greater Encouragements should be allotted in
consideration of the charges of good breeding, and of the extraordinary studies
whereby Men enable themselves to serve the Public. Besides, this Equality,
though pretended to conserve, does in truth destroy Unity; for none are so
quarrelsome, none so subject to envy as equals: Every one being Judge in his
own case, will yield nothing to common Justice.

To close this Chapter, We may judge of the thriving of popular States, by what
we observe of Commons, which are always poor and bare of good and wholesome
Grass, comparatively with Enclosures. If these Wafts be taken into one Man's
hand, he causes the fertile crop of Thistles to be Mowed, stubbs up the Shrubs
and Brambles, ploughs up the Brakes, trencheth and cultivates the Whole, and
increases the profit four fold; whereas, when it lies in common, every one
serves his present turn of it, overstocks it, and nothing is bred upon it, but
poor Jades and Beasts of Burden.

Yea, the greater part of Men in a popular State, being bred up to gain, make
Profit the rule of their Actions, entertain but little sense of Honor, and
thereby the State is soon corrupted by their low affections: so that though
some may be rich, yet the State can never be glorious.

In the standing Pools of popular Government, from the putrilage and mud, spawn
swarms of Tadpols. The rankness of such soil brings store of Tares and Goss,
Docks and Nettles: Here the Henbane, Nightshade and Aconite grow too
luxuriantly; so that the medicinal and fragrant Plants rarely find room or
cultivation.

CHAP. VII. Of the several Forms of Government in Greece, before and in
Aristotle's time, and of the Roman Commonwealth.
THE Philosopher observes, (...). Polit. lib. 3. c. 15.
that in remote Ages, when there were fewer Persons of the sublimest eminence
for Valor, Wisdom, Virtue and public spiritedness to protect by their Courage
and Conduct, to institute Laws by their Wisdom, to be a living Law by their
just dealing and example, to study the emolument and benefit of the common
People, by their good will to them; (...). Ibid.
Kingly Government was solely used. But after that many grew up to be equal in
virtue, they endured Kings no longer, but settled Commonwealths, and used an
Aristocratical Government, where the eminentest in Virtue only governed: but
when these degenerated, and begun to make profit of their public places,
Oligarchy began, where respect was not so much had to Virtue, as to Riches and
Honors; and these growing Tyrannical, the People revolted from them, and so
Democracy was introduced.

Of Aristocracy the Philosopher makes four kinds: The first and best consisting
of men absolutely (...). Polit. lib. 4. c. 7.
good and virtuous, not in supposition only. Several kinds of Aristocracy.
The second, where respect was not only had to Virtue, but also to Riches. The
Third, where, besides Virtue, also Respect was had to the Peoples Liberty, as
in Lacedaemonia, where the Ephori were introduced. The fourth, where Respect
was had to Virtue, Riches, and the Peoples liberty, as at Carthage.

The same Philosopher Polit. lib. 4. c. 5. Four kinds of Oligarchy.
makes four kinds of Oligarchy. The first, wherein those of the largest
proportion of Estate, according to a certain limit, were capable of Authority,
and all under that degree were excluded; so that whoever had acquired such a
proportion of Estate, was capable of Rule, without any other qualification. The
second was, when the Census was less, whereby the Government was in more hands,
and those had power to choose others in the room of such as deceased. As it is
usual in our Common-councils. In the third kind great Riches were required, so
that there were fewer Governors, and they had greater Authority, and their
Children succeeded them. The last kind was, wherein the greatest Estates only
were capacitated: But the Governors were not tied to the observance of Laws,
but ruled according to their own wills, as they agreed among themselves.

That form of Government which the A^ist. Polit. lib. 4. c. 8.
Philosopher calls (...), Of the Government called (...).
seems rather an Idea of Government, than that ever (as it is described) it was
put in practice. For he instanceth in no State but that of Sparta, that had any
resemblance of it, and the Thurians which degenerated into Democracy. However I
shall give such an account as I find of it in him, or in such Commentators as I
have by me, especially in Giphanius: First, He makes it a (...). Ibid.
commixture of Democracy and Oligarchy; wherein the Poor and Rich had an equal
capacity to the Office and Administration of Government, and calls it properly
a Republic, because those Governments which incline to Democracy, were so
called, because they seemed most fitted for the Peoples good; but those which
inclined more to Oligarchy, were used to be styled Aristocracies, (...). Polit.
lib. 4. c. 8.
because those that are rich are commonly Persons of good education, and
ennobled, which things he says appertain to Virtue. So that there being three
necessary ingredients or terms in a Commonwealth, Virtue, Riches and Liberty,
this (...) directly includes the two last; and the first also is included,
because amongst (...). Ibid.
most, the Rich are reputed amongst the best deserving. So he makes this kind
of Government to be different from Democracy and Oligarchy, because mixed of
both; so that in one particular he shows the combinations of these two in
Polity, by setting a mulct upon the Rich that absented themselves from the
administration of the Government, and reward upon the Poor that should attend
it, which in Oligarchy had no place.

Another sort of Commixture Lib. 4. Polit. c. 13.
he makes, that whereas in Oligarchy, there is only respect had to great
wealth, and in Democracy, no respect at all had to it; This Polity is mixed of
a middle sort of Riches, and such men he judges the best tempered, as not
covetous and greedy as the Poor, nor being wealthy enough to do mischief, but
contenting themselves with their Mediocrity.

A third kind of their mixture he makes, that whereas in Oligarchy, the
Magistrates are chosen by Riches and Suffrage, and in Democracy without these;
the Composition is, That the Election be by Suffrage only, without respect had
to Wealth.

As to the Roman Commonwealth; The Sovereignty, after the expulsion of Kings,
consisted in the Senate, the Consuls and Tribunes of the People, all of them
seeming checks upon others; but at some times one part, especially the Patricii
or the Plebs, assumed or exercised more power, one than the other, according to
the prevalency of either party.

As to the Senate of Rome, Romulus elected an Hundred out of the Patricii, Of
the Roman Senate.
to be his Council, to assist him in determining matters concerning the
Commonweal. Tarquinus Priscus added an Hundred more, Alexand. ab Alex.
Genialium Dierum, lib. 9. c. 2.
and Brutus, according to most Authors, another Hundred; and though at first,
only the Patricii were chosen, yet after, the Commoners also were chosen,
called Senatores minorum Gentium.

These had the consulting part under their care, were the great Judicature, to
which last Appeals were made, and by their ratifying of things, added the force
of the Senatus consultum, by which they decreed honors and punishments.

Concerning the Consuls, after the expulsion of Tarquinius Superbus, the
Government of the City, which was before in Rosini Antiq. Romans lib. 7. c. 9.
one (the King) was now divided betwixt two, who at first were called Praetores
quod praeirent Populo, and not long after Consules from consulting for the
People. These at first, had the executive parts of most things relating to the
Government, under their care; but after, by the consent of the Senate, they
chose two Censors, who took an account, not only of the number and riches of
the People, but had power to enquire into every man's life.

They also for administering Justice, Pighius.
created two Officers, the Praetor Vrbanus for City-affairs, and Peregrinus for
Foreign affairs, like our Mayors. These Consuls had the Government of the
Military Force, and other Jurisdictions too long to be here inserted. They were
at first but two for a year, after four or more by removable resignation or
death. The People got one of the Consuls to be chosen of the Plebeians.

Concerning the Tribunes of the People, Of the Tribunes of the People.
we may note that the Commonalty, finding Rosini Epitome rerum Romans lib. 7. c.
25.
themselves oppressed by the Wealthier sort, departed unto the Aventine Mount,
threatening the Nobility they would depart the City, and never again adventure
themselves in War for the defense thereof, unless they had some release and
easment, and had certain Magistrates chosen, who should be Sacrosancti: that
is, such as might not be hurt nor violently used, not so much as in words: and
those Magistrates should be the Protectors of the Commonalty, who being at
first chosen from the military Tribunes, and they having the name of Tribunes
from the distinction of the Romans into Tribes; that they might be
distinguished from the military Tribunes, were called the Tribunes of the
People. At Pighius Tyrannofugio.
first they were only two, but after increased to the number of ten. They had
power to hinder any Proceedings in the Senate, which they thought might prove
prejudicial to the Commons. At Stadius in Florum, lib. 3. c. 2. Eorum Autoritas
magis in intercedendo, quam jubendo.
first they had not Authority to enact any new Decrees, as afterward by
abusing their Authority, and by Connivance they usurped; for in old time they
sat Pighius ut supra.
without the door of the Senate, whither whatsoever was determined within the
Senate, was sent to them to be perused, and if they approved it, they
subscribed a Roman T for Tribunus.

When any new Laws were to be proposed, the Godwyn's Roman Antiqu. lib. 3.
sect. 2.
Praetors, Consuls, Dictators, Interrex, Decemviri, military Tribunes,
Triumviri, and Tribunes of the People only had liberty to propose them, and
they were exposed to view of the People for three Market days, and after the
Magistrates assembled the People to hear the Law, which by the Proponent was
pleaded for by an Oration, and seconded by others, and if not liked, it was
opposed in the same manner. The People being assembled according to the triple
distinction of them into Tribes, and the division of each Tribe into ten
Curiae, or Parishes, and the Centuries or Hundreds, the Assemblies were called
Comitia, Tributa Centuriata, or Curiata. Now into a Pitcher were put the names
of these several divisions, and that Tribe or Centuries Name which was first
drawn, was called Tribus, vel Centuria Praerogativa; because they were first
asked their Voices, and commonly the vote of that was followed by the rest,
especially in choice of Consuls: the Curia upon which the first Lot did fall,
was called Principium. Hubert in Lib. 1. Cicer. Epist. Sermon. 2.
Now while the People were busy in their Lottery, if any Tribune of the Commons
should intercidere, or forbid the Proceeding, he might be heard, and the whole
Assembly was for that time dismissed; or if the Consuls commanded supplications
to be offered up in behalf of the Emperor, or if it fell on some forbidding of
Feasts, or if any were seized with the Falling Sickness, or the Soothsayers
found any unlucky Signs: upon any of these the Assembly was dissolved;
otherwise the Law that was approved by the People, was recorded, being graven
Tacit. Annal. 11.
in Brass, and put in the Treasure house. That which was determined in the
Sigonius de Jure, lib. 3. cap. 1.
Parish-Assemblies was called Lex Curiata, that in the Centuries, Lex
Centuriata, that which was in the Assembly of the Tribes was not called a Law,
but Plebiscitum.

CHAP. VIII. The Inconveniences of all kinds of Republic Governments.
I Shall now consider all these forms of Commonwealths in gross, and hope to
satisfy the ingenuous and unbiased Reader, That if a People were in a capacity
to choose their own Government, they should have no reason to choose a
Commonwealth, rather than Kingly Government: much less that they should
endeavor to innovate or introduce it, where already so Geometrically composed
as it is in England, both for the glory and benefit of the King and People.

It is Judiciously noted by a late Nalson's Common Interest, c. 3. The Benefits
designed in all Societies.
Learned Writer, That the happiness of all Societies principally consists in
the securing domestic Peace, or protection from foreign Enemies, securing to
every Member of the Society their particular right and property, free from
encroachment and oppression; or in the equal distribution of Justice to all,
according to their proportion of Reward or Punishment. Through all which heads
I shall endeavor to show that in Commonwealths these Particulars cannot or
have not so effectually been secured, as in a rightly constituted Monarchy.

First as to the securing domestic Peace, 1. Securing Domestic Peace.
the very constitutions of Commonwealths, requiring many Magistrates of equal
Authority, subject to the Political Diseases of State; Viz. Covetousness,
Ambition, Oppression and Faction, and all the Concomitants of these, make them
more subject to Intestine Discords than Monarchy can be.

First, Ibid. Covetousness in Commonwealthsmen causes Discords.
It must be considered that in all Commonwealth Governments, there is a
necessity of change of Persons, either annually chosen, or to be for some few
Years duration; and all such must at the same time intend the interests of
their private affairs separate from the public: and there being most tempting
Probabilities of a private and particular advantage to be made of all public
Trust, where there is Power; it is a perpetual Spur to ambitious and selfish
Spirits, to court such Employments which are like to be serviceable to their
Honor or private Fortunes; and the (...). Polit lib. 5. c. 4.
best Men being restrained by their modesty and paucity, those that have
designs by direct or indirect ways, wind themselves into those places, and by
the rotation knowing they shall not long enjoy them, they will improve the time
in enriching themselves, and connive at others that do so, lest they themselves
should be called to an account: every ones rapaciousness being likelier to be
so much the eagerer, because he knows it may not come again to his turn to have
the Quarry to prey upon. Therefore the common interest (if it be regarded) must
be only as it is subservient to these By-ends.

Thus in our late Republic, the great Business (even of the zealousest
Pretenders to the Public) was to enrich themselves and their Confederates, as
was apparent by the considerable Estates they had, even after they had been
forced to disgorge those fat Portions of Crown, Bishops, Dean, and Chapter, and
Cathedral Lands.

By this observation we may conclude that the constituent parts of this
Government, being ever like to be such, the miserable People must be
continually spunged, to feed so many greedy Worms, and when the Prey grows
scarce, these Bloodhounds will be sure to fight who shall get the best Share.

Besides, there must be continual Heart-Burnings and Part-making, Factions
among them.
when those that are endowed with (...). Polit. l. 5. c. 7.
great Souls, or are equal in Fortitude, or Virtue, have not the eminentest
command (at least as they judge) according to their Worth and Merits. By which
means some will be carrying things by Arbitrary Power over their Equals, as the
Philosopher instanceth in Pausanius in Lacedaemon, Hanno at Carthage, Lysander,
and Eniadas, and the Partheniae, who judging themselves equal with those that
had rule, and being by them slighted and branded with the title of Bastards,
conspired to have slain the Senate and Optimacy.

To instance in all the Factions in Commonwealths, were to write a voluminous
History. I shall touch upon some, and show that the causes either given or
taken will always be the same in these kinds of Government; the very
Constitution of them, by the purity and equality of Dignity and Power,
naturally producing Jealousies, Animosities and Aemulations: whereas the (...).
Polit. l. 3. c. 15.
Philosopher well notes, that many may disagree among themselves, but one
cannot. The difference of Judgment as to Conduct and Managery among multitudes
of Equals embarrassing Debates, the Result must be according to the prevailing
of some Faction: Every one Judging most advantageously of his own council and
advice; and those whose Councils are rejected, will look upon it as a
Diminution of that esteem for Wisdom and Policy, which they think they deserve,
and these Discontents will occasion making of Parties, entering into
Confederacies, and Combinations of Faction, and frequently end in popular
Insurrections, Tumults, and Disorders, to which Republics, by their make are
thus propense.

Since therefore they are the seminaries of Faction, we can expect no wholesome
Fruit from such corrupt Seed; for all factions endeavor to suppress their
Opposites, and those heats, underminings and jarrs, are not confined to their
Senate House, but are dispersed, according to the places of their Residence,
Estates; Marriages or Alliances, through the whole Dominions, every one
strengthening his Interest what he can; and the nature of Mankind being to side
with one or other, if the Parties be Proud, Ambitious, Covetous, or Imperious,
they will be most absolute and arbitrary in such places where they can prevail;
and if Persons admitted to Copartnership of Rule, be not of their own Nature
guilty of such Vices, the desires of every one to be reputed the wisest, and to
gain the leading of a Party, or obtain the supreme Authority, are apt to taint
such, who being exalted, not born to Greatness, would have all to judge that
such Promotions are the pure-pute effects of their Merits, and whoever sets
that high value upon himself, cannot escape the danger of unsupportable Pride,
as well as Vanity, which will hurry them on to over-bear all Opposition.

I shall now proceed to some few Instances of the Ruins brought upon many by
Faction. The Athenian Changes and Factions.
At Athens, after the death of Codrus, the race of their Hereditary Kings
ceased, and there succeeded Kings for term of Life, like as the Elective Kings
of Poland. After twelve such Kings ending in Alcmenon, they constituted
Decennial Kings, or Archontes, whereof Erixias was the last; and then they
passed to annual Magistrates, like Lord Mayors, or Burgo-Masters: and all these
changes were by the prevalence of one Faction after another. Solon was one of
these yearly Magistrates, and he compiled their Laws, such as the Romans in
aftertimes sent to peruse, and reduced into twelve Tables. These were framed
unto the Practice and maintenance of popular Government, which in Solon's own
Lifetime were violated, and almost extinguished: for Pisistratus the Son of
Hippocrates, finding the Citizens distracted betwixt two Factions, whereof
Megacles and Lycurgus (two Citizens of noble Families) were become the heads,
took occasion by their contention and Insolence, to raise a third Faction more
powerful, because more plausible; for that he seemed a Protector of the
Citizens in general: and having once got love and credit, he wounded himself,
and feigned that by Malice of his Enemies, he had like to have been slain for
his love to the good Citizens, and so procured a Guard, and made himself Lord:
but he was soon driven out by Megacles and Lycurgus, and then the Aemulation
began afresh betwixt the former Factions; and Megacles finding himself too
weak, called in Pisistratus, but he was once more expelled, and was restored a
third time, and governed Athens seventeen Years, and his Son Hippias succeeded
him, who was at last forced to fly to Darius.

I shall under this Head only touch upon one example more in Athens. Concerning
the 30 Tyrants of Athens.
After the Lacedaemonians had subverted the Walls of Athens, thirty Men were
appointed by the People to compile a Body of their Laws, and these had supreme
Authority, and were made Judges; and in cases wherein the Laws were defective,
had power to give Sentence according to their own pleasures. At first they
exercised their Authority upon lewd and wicked Persons, such as were odious to
the People. But afterward all sorts of People (under the notion of Perturbers
of the Peace) were Fined, Imprisoned, or put to Death, according as they among
themselves judged fit.

To strengthen their own Tyranny, they associated three Thousand Citizens to
them, the rest they disarmed, exercising the greatest Tyranny imaginable upon
them, and agreed amongst themselves that every one should name one, whose Goods
should be seized on, and the owner put to Death; upon which Theramenes, one of
the Thirty discovering his detestation at those proceedings (though there had
been a Law that none of the three Thousand should suffer Death at the
appointment of the Thirty, but have a legal Trial) yet Critias, one of these
thirty Tyrants, ordered Theramenes's name to be blotted out of the Number.
Theramenes urged the ill consequence to the rest of the Thirty, if without any
just reason the names of any might be expunged by the overruling of one or more
of the number; but every one thought fit rather to preserve his own Life by
Silence, than presently to draw upon himself the danger which as yet he thought
concerned him little, and perhaps would never come near him: so the Tyrants
interpreting Silence, Consent; he was forthwith condemned, and compelled to
drink Poison.

These Proceedings caused many Citizens to fly, who under the conduct of
Thrasybulus made head against them, and at last the Lacedaemonians removed the
thirty Tyrants to Sparta; and the Citizens rose against the Captains of the
tyrannical Faction, and slew them as they were coming to a Parley, and so put
an end to that worst of Miseries they had undergone, since those thirty were
constituted. In which sad History we may observe, that these Tyrants were
elected by the People, and at last after their outrageous cruelties, were by
the People destroyed: and no doubt they at first appeared such to the People as
they might confide in for Administration of Impartial Justice; into which
belief they had cunningly bewitched them; and they were by the same Hands that
raised them, demolished. For as Sir History, p. 278.
W. Raleigh well observes in popular States, when any mischief happens, the
People take revenge on the Commanders; and where any Judgment is left to them
(as in popular States, they will be always pushing on for a Share) there will
be very dismal and indirect Proceedings: and when their Judgment proves sound,
it is by chance rather than otherwise.

In Carthage, Of Factions in Carthage.
Factious and disorderly popular Government was as fatal as in any other place.
Hanno and Bomilcar were two famous Captains, but the heads of two several
Factions, and such Enemies to one another, that when they were chosen Generals
against Agathocles, Bomilcar suffered Hanno to be cut in pieces rather than he
would assist him. So Hanno and Amilcar being joined against the Mercenaries,
Amilcar could perform nothing by reason of the envy of Hanno, till for the
public Service sake they were made Friends.

The Barchine Family (of which Hannibal was the third in Succession that was
General of the Carthaginians) had the greatest Interest both in the Senate, and
among the People for some time; none being able either to tax his, or his
Families Virtue, or to perform the like service for the Commonweal. Yet we
find, that when Hannibal and his Brother Mago, had so far overrun Italy, that
nothing but the supply of Men and Money, to complete the Conquest, was wanting;
yet the Faction of Hanno wrought upon the people (not by detracting from the
Valor and Conduct of Hannibal and the Family, but by the general reprehension
of the War) that when Mago was sent over for Recruits, he had wrought so on the
covetousness of those that were loath to lay out their Money before extreme
necessity required it, and had more feeling of their own present commodity,
than sense of the public need; that he got little encouragement: and when the
matter being proposed to the People, they yielded to a supply, yet Hanno and
his Party gave so many impediments to the Execution, suggesting the danger,
that if Hannibal and his Brother conquered, he would make himself King, that by
that means, he cunningly undermined that brave man, and brought at last ruin
upon the whole Commonwealth. When Scipio (without the compliance of the Senate,
but with the concurrence of the People) translated the War to Africa, so that
the Carthaginians were forced to recall Hannibal, who not able to master Scipio,
the whole Commonwealth was subjected to the Romans, of whose Factions and civil
Discords, I shall now give a short account.

When the Truce betwixt the Romans and Veientes was concluded for Forty years,
there arose a Sedition about the Lex Livius, lib. 2. An. V.C. 281.
Agraria, which was appeased by the raising a War against the Sabines, Aequi
and Volsci: Such new Wars being the only extinguishers of the Domestic Fires,
which constantly, in peaceable times, were kindled betwixt the Optimacy, or the
Patricii and the Plebs.

At the instigation of some desperate Bankrupts (who thought themselves
wrongfully oppressed by the Senate and Consuls) the People made a dangerous
uproar in the Holy Mount, 'till Menenius Agrippa, by the discreet allusion of
the inconvenience of the discord betwixt the Head and the Belly, brought them
to some reconciliation, on condition they might have some new Magistrates
erected, to whom they might appeal in matters of variance betwixt them and the
Consuls; which were therefore called the Tribunes of the People.

After this the ten Idem, lib. 3. An. V.C. 297.
Men, called the Decemvirate, with Appius Claudius, ruled all, and wrested the
power from the Senate and Consuls; but he and they were forced to resign to the
Senate again, after some few years Tyranny.

Before the Siege of the Veii, they changed the Government of Consuls to
Military Tribunes, who usurped the power for almost Seventy years; so as by
civil Inter patres plebemque certamina exarsere, modo turbulenti Tribuni, modo
Consules praevalidi, and in Vrbe ac Foro tentamenta Civilium bellorum, mox e
plebe infima C. Marius and nobilium saevissemus L. Sylla.
differences there was great interruption, that one while Consuls ruled,
another while there was an Anarchy, then the Tribunes were restored, and after
many years the consular Authority was established, but so as one of the Consuls
should be a Plebeian.

Concerning the Seditions by Tiberius Gracchus and Caius his Brother, and
Apuleius Saturninus suppressed by Marius, of Livius Drusus by Philippus, and
that betwixt Marius and Cinna against Sylla, and the Victam armis libertatem in
Dominatione^^ verterunt. Tacit. 2. Histor. lib. 3. c. 14, 15, 16.
calamities the People underwent in those Tragical Factions, betwixt Pompey and
Caesar, I must refer the curious Reader to Florus and the Roman Historians.
Therefore Cum dissentionibus omnia centurbari in m^ltorum Imperiis necesse est.
Pacis interest omnium potestat^n conserre ad unum.
Tacitus makes a most true remark, That since in the command of many, it is
unavoidable, but that all things will be disturbed by Factions; therefore for
peace sake, it is behoveful that the Power be devolved on one: as likewise in
Discordanti sape Pa^ i.e non aliud remedium fuisse, quam si ab uno regeretur.
another place, That there is no other remedy, where disagreements are in ones
Country, but that one should govern.

Therefore before the Government was changed at Rome unto that of Emperors,
They had no other remedy in great Exigents, 1. Annal. Livius, lib. 2. Necessity
of choosing a Dictator.
than to choose a Dictator, whether it were in imminent danger from Enemies
abroad, or Factions at home. So Appius Claudius at a pinch cries, Agedum,
Dictatorem, a quo nulla provocatio, creemus, Let us choose a Dictator from whom
is no Appeal. For his power was such, as Jus vitae penes unum illum esse, nec
adversus Dictatoriam vim, aut Tribunus Plebis, aut ipsa Plebs attollere coulos,
aut hiscere audebat. Lib. 6.
Livy tells us, That he had the Power of Death, and against whose Authority,
neither the Tribunes of the People, nor the People themselves durst lift up
their eyes or gape to oppose. By the choosing of this Officer, with such
absolute Power, we may infer how necessary it was in a Commonwealth (to avoid
the diversity of opinions, the factions of Parties, and the evil consequences
that would result from them) to fix the Power in one, who might be a temporary
Monarch: by which it is sufficiently evident what deference is to be paid to
Monarchy; it being no small addition to the power of Julius Caesar, that he was
in vested in the perpetual Dictatorship, That being an authority known, and as
far as I can judge, gave him a fuller and vaster extent of Power, than the
Title of Imperator, which implied no more than General of an Army.

That all Republics are subject to Factions, appears farther in the Philosopher
in several particulars, as in the use though not the name of Demagogues, as
well in them, (...). Polit. lib. 5. c. 11. Heinsti.
who were the Peoples Flatterers, as in Democracy, and that their Magistrates
were chosen by tumultuous Elections, as he particularly instanceth at Elis,
where the Senatorship being for life, by reason of the longer duration of the
Honor and Profit, the contests were so much the more violent.

But above all the inconveniences of these Commonwealths (which was bottomed
upon the securing of one Faction against another) he (...). -- (...). Polit. l.
5. c. 6.
reckons the keeping up of a standing Army in War and Peace, which, he says,
was by reason of the distrust among themselves, whereby they were obliged to
commit themselves to the custody of Soldiers, and the Commander being by that
means empowered to be a Judge or Arbiter betwixt them, made himself Lord of
both, as he instanceth in the time of the Government of the Family of the
Alvidi at Larissa, and at Samos and Abydus, and in Timophanes at Corinth. For
this reason, the Romans fearing Camillus, banished him: So Julius Caesar, for
ten years, having the command in Gaul, was able to master the Senate with more
ease.

If we had never heard of any such thing in the World before, yet we had the
too late calamitous experience of it, in our late Republican Government; which
was no longer able to subsist, but while it had an Army (maintained at the
charge of the enslaved People) to secure them: yet they falling into Factions
themselves, their Army did so likewise, and the Houses and Army at last came to
have several Interests, and to have competitions for Sovereignty (which any
wise man might have foreseen) and at last, the Army being divided, the happy
Restoration of the King was thereby much facilitated.

Having thus cleared, That a Commonwealth cannot so well defend it self against
a Foreign Enemy.
I hope, the point, That a Commonwealth Government is less conducible than
Monarchy, to prevent intestine Discords; I shall now proceed to discourse how
difficult it is in this Form also, to defend their Subjects from Foreign
Invasions, especially without the constituting of Dictators or Generals, with
unsociable Power, which is in effect, a temporary Monarchy.

In all Wars nothing is more requisite than Unity of Councils, and Secrecy in
the conduct of Affairs, which is most difficult to be obtained, where many are
at the Helm. Besides, among so many different judgments (as there must be in
such a Body, before they can arrive at a Resolution) favorable opportunities
for Action, are by protractions irrecoverably lost; and the fear they have of
impowering their General too much (lest he should establish himself in the
Sovereignty) makes them limit and restrain him, so as he cannot take
advantages, when offered: and thereby Commanders are cautelous and wary not to
offend so many Masters; whereby time is lost in procuring new Instructions, and
sometimes for the reasons aforesaid more Generals than one are appointed, that
one may be a check to the other: So Lib 8.
Herodotus observes, That the difference of Generals, when in equal command,
has lost victories, as at Isthmus, by the dissension betwixt Themistocles and
Euribias the Persians had almost mastered all: So Thucydides notes, that so
long as Pericles, by his own judgment and will, governed the Affairs of Athens,
so long all things were prosperous; but after by the Factions of evil-disposed
persons, he was opposed, he sped as ill.

Besides, in the numerous Masters in a Commonwealth, the saving of every ones
own Stake, will be the principle of their Nalson's Common Interest, c. 3.
care and sedulity; So that if a Foreign Power give them a defeat, they will be
easily induced to follow (as they of late used to call it) Providence in all
Revolutions; and if they can obtain any assurance of enjoying their private
Laws, or obtaining an higher pitch of greatness, under another power, they will
not easily resist the temptation of betraying the Liberty of their Country; and
so quitting the leaking Vessel of the Commonwealth, will either fairly tack
about in their private Shalop, and stand in with the next Shore of safety, or
by striking Sail, come under the Lee of the Conqueror, or strike into the
assistance of him, in hope to have a share of the Plunder.

Besides, in the Multitude of Counselors (if there happen any notable
miscarriages of State) there is safety to themselves. In Miscarriages, the
Authors difficultly known.
It being difficult to fix it upon any one single person, every one shrowding
himself in the complex Act of the whole: So that though they singly put in for
the glory of prosperous Achievements; yet in unfortunate or unlucky Councils
and Actions, they skreen themselves under the majority of Votes; which because
they always may do, it must necessarily make some more Supine, and less
Vigilant over the Public. It is in these muddy Pools of Commonwealths, the
devouring Otters may safelier lodge; here the gliding slippery Eel finds Covert,
the Horseleeches abound, the Water-rats lodge in their Banks, and the Uliginous
parts swarm with Frogs and Toads, every one preying upon other. Here the
Cockatrice breeds, and the fiery Basilisks, as well as Lizards and Newts.
Africa is not more fruitful of Monsters than they of Harpyes. This is the
common Sewer that receives all the sludg and filth of People; the hopes and
expectation of Liberty alluring all.

As to the Peoples living freer from oppression in a Republic, Great Injustice
and Oppression in Commonwealths.
than under Monarchy, it is evidently found the contrary; as I shall make it
appear in the Chapter of Monarchy: And there is strong reason for it, since in
this form, these Lords the States, will be continually striving to enlarge, not
only their Power but their Riches; and the more they increase in either, the
more must the common and middle ranked Men be oppressed and exhausted.

It has been from the insolence, oppressing and engrossing of Estates by the
Governing Party, that the Th^rians changed their Polit. lib. 5. c. 6.
Aristocracy to Democracy, that the Messeniac War was occasioned, that the
Revolutions were at Lygdamus in the Isle of Nexos, Maffilia, Istria, Heraclea
and Enidus. So the Philosopher says, That the unjust Judgments, or unusual
Severities, exercised by the revengeful temper of the Factions, caused great
Convulsions in the State, as he particularly instanceth in Eurition at
Heraclea, and Archias at Thebes; who both being justly condemned for Adultery,
yet, because in an unusual way of Contumely, they were tied to Stakes in the
Market place, they out of revenge, excited their Friends to assist them, and
overthrew the Oligarchy.

Besides, when Men are thus established in Power, few can have Redress for
their private injuries and wrongs, being that every complaint would but look
like contempt of Authority; because the Party oppressing, being one of the
Associates in Power, Example in our late Republicans.
and joint Rulers, he would influence the residue to vindicate him. Hence we
saw in the late long Parliaments Members (yea their Officers and common
Soldiers) that they were such Tyrants in their Residence and Quarters, that
none durst question their outrages, lest they should be brought before
Committees, for Malignancy or Delinquency. It being a characteristic note of a
disaffected Person, not to resign up ones self to an absolute slavery to their
imperious Commands.

The World never knew greater oppression, than those that styled themselves
Keepers (indeed Jaylors) of the Liberties of England, were guilty of. It would
trouble (says a judicious Malson's Common Interest.
Author) a public Accountant to cast up those vast Sums, and incredible
Treasures, which in less than twice seven years they raised, and spent, to
support the worst of all luxurious Rebellion, and to act upon the public
charge and Theater of the Nation (not Masks and Plays, as they had charged
one great part of the Expenses of the Court on) but the most real and inhumane
Tragedies, and those infinite in number, one of which was such as the Sun never
saw, or any History could parallel.

It would be endless to recount the Annual Revenue of the Crown, Bishops,
Chapter and Cathedral Lands, besides the Money they received for the purchase
of them; the constant, heavy and unheard of Assesments, free Quarter, Plunder,
Sequestration, Compositions, Decimations, Excise and Customs, voluntary
Contributions of Plate, Jewels, etc. Sums borrowed on the Public Faith (which
some found to their cost, was but fides Punica) and almost innumerable ways and
arts they had to squeeze and drain the Treasure of the Nation into their
bottomless Gulf: so that the same Writer is confident, That not any three
Kings of England, since William the Conqueror, to this present, were so
expensive to England, as that one Tyrannical and Prodigal Parliament.

The Nation was then, and ever will be: under any Usurping Republic, in worse
than Egyptian Bondage. In every County a Committee was placed to seize the
Estates and Rents of all the Loyal Subjects, with such a Tyrannical
Arbitrariness, as never was known under any Kings Reign; and as if that were
not enough, there were added to them Basha Major Generals, and the sucking
Vermin in every Town and Hamlet, were either fireside Troopers, or some well
affected Person whose Information would be believed before the best in the
Parish. Every one that would not worship those Pagods, were proceeded against
by some of those, or their Arbitrary High Courts of Justice, or were convened
before the House of Commons, where every one of those Parliament Demarchs were
as absolute as the Laws of their own will could make them.

No Person could either question their Actions or Authority, but he paid his
Life or Fortune, or one of them, for his presumption: so that we saw the whole
Kingdom brought into a slavery, far greater than theirs that wear Canvase Cloth
and Wooden Shoes, and not only look like Ghosts, but really are so, as they
made all which they either suspected, feared, or hated: All which was never to
have been altered (as long as their standing Force should be true to them) to
the incredible charge, oppression and impoverishment of the Subjects, Friend
and Foe; though they had the Policy to lay the heaviest Burden and Load upon
the Backs of their Enemies, if possible to break them; keeping the Loyal
Nobility and Gentry so poor, that many of them have not been able, or ever will
be, to forget the kindness of that Government, which was the ruin of them and
their Families.

I shall now pass to the last head of Rewards and Punishments, No just
Distribution of rewards or Punishments.
and executing of Justice; none of which can be according to merit, where
prevalent Faction shall sway the Balance, and open and shut the Eyes of Justice
by the cunning Instruments of Partiality. It being impossible to separate
Faction and Interest from this kind of Authority, so that none shall obtain any
thing, but according as they shall be judged favorable or advantageous to the
Interest of the ruling Faction. So that the Virtuous shall have the least
share; since Virtue is not over natural to Mankind, it is like to thrive but
poorly in a soil where it is not tenderly cherished, and frequently refreshed
with the encouraging Dews of Reward and Benefit. But those shall have the
greatest share that can best wheedle, or seem by a wellmanaged Flattery, to
join with the topmost governing Party.

I shall therefore give some examples of the Ingratitude of Commonwealths to
the well-deserving great and brave Men, Ingratitude of Commonwealths.
who have served their Country, and been ill rewarded by the governing Part, or
been exposed to be baited or worried by the People, instigated by Factions; or
suffered base Ignominy, Banishment, or Death.

I shall begin with Athens, the eye of Greece, and the Seat of the Muses.

When Xerxes invaded Greece, The ill usage of Themistocles.
the Athenians and Peloponnesians were the most considerable States; yet the
Athenians were forced to leave their City and get into their Navy, which might
carry the whole People and their Power to some remote Country, where they might
enjoy more secure Habitations.

The Spartans were unwilling to hazard a Sea-Battle near Salamis, but would
have weighed Anchor, and gone to Isthmus. Themistocles did all he could to
persuade the staying and joining of the Fleets there, to wait the Enemy, who
would have less Sea room; whereas if they fought elsewhere, by his numbers, he
would have overborn the Confederates: and when he could not prevail, but that
they would weigh Anchor the next day, he sent a private message to the Persian
Captains, that the Grecian Fleet intended to fly, and in the interim advised
the Grecian Fleet to be in a readiness against all Events: By which Stratagem
he toiled the Persian Fleet to make the Attacque with that disadvantage he
desired; and the Grecians obtained a most memorable Victory. Several other
great Services he did, not only in saving of Athens, but the rest of Greece
from Xerxes. But when the Athenians were returned to their City, and rebuilt it
after the Battle of Mycale, the People were so proud of their Exploits, that
they not only endeavored to get the Command of many Towns and Islands of the
Greeks, but within their own Walls would admit no Government but merely
Democratical; which being argued against by Themistocles, they laid upon him
the Punishment of the Ostracism, banishing him for ten Years; before which time
was expired, a new accusation was framed against him by the Lacedaemonians, that
he intended to betray Sir Walt. Raleigh b, lib. 3. cap. 8. sect. 7.
Greece to Xerxes.

So that he was forced to fly to Artaxerxes, who afterward would have employed
him against Greece; but he decided the great Conflict betwixt thankfulness to
his well-deserving Patron, and natural Affection to his own ill-deserving
People, by finishing his Life with a draught of Poison.

This Ostracism was a Sentence of Banishment writ upon an Oyster-shell; and the
like in Sicily, writ on a Leaf, was called Petalismus. This was so often abused
by exterminating Persons, not so much for Crimes, as by factious Envy made use
of to remove out of the way Persons that were like to oppose the prevailing
Factions, that the (...). Polit. lib. 3. c. 13.
Philosopher confesses it had been better for the Lawgivers at the first so
to have attempered the Commonwealth, that they might have had no need of such a
Medicine.

Miltiades had done the Athenians great Service at the Battle of Marathon
against Darius, Of Ingratitude to Miltiades.
yet after by this ungrateful People, he was cast into Prison, and fined fifty
Talents. Where his weak and wounded Body (having broken his Thigh at the
assault against Paros) being not able to endure the one, nor his Estate the
other, after a few days he ended his Life; and this was occasioned by the Envy
of Xantippus, Father of Pericles. This Envy of the better sort against each
other by their private Factions assisted by unthankful and witless People,
brought the Athenians not many years after from a victorious and famous
Commonweal, to a base Subjection and Slavery.

I might instance in Aristides, Cimon, and many others; but shall pass to
Phocyon, The ill Treatment of Phocyon.
who had been Forty five times (without ever suing for the place) chosen
Governor of Athens. He had been in good esteem with King Philip, and by King
Alexander was presented with two Hundred Talents in Silver, and the choice of
one of four Cities of Asia; but refused those and other Gifts, howsoever
importunately thrust upon him, resting well contented with his honest Poverty.
During his Government, having given his Promise for Nicanors's safe coming to
the Piraeus, to treat with the Athenians, and his safe return, about their
joining with Cassander or Polypserchon, and finding that the Athenians
practiced with Dercillus to take Nicanor Prisoner, he was nothing pleased with
such a trick of politic Dishonesty, and so did quietly permit him to depart:
at which the Athenians were so incensed, that he was forced to save himself by
Flight with some others, whom Polypserchon sent to Athens, where neither he nor
the rest were suffered to speak for themselves, but were condemned to dye by
the unjust Judgment of wicked Men, by drinking Poison: which, says Sir Walter
Raleigh, Lib. 4. c. 3. sect. 15.
by the just Judgment of God, so infected the City of Athens, as from that day
forward, it never brought forth any worthy Man resembling the Virtue of their
Ancestors.

It is not to be expressed what Honors the Athenians gave to Antigonus and
Demetrius his Son, The Ingrati^ the Athenians to (...) metrius.
when they assisted them in their necessities, and declining Fortune; but when
after his Fathers defeat, and death at the Battle of Ipsus, Demetrius fled to
Athens for succor, they sent their Ambassadors to meet him, with a Decree of
the People, that no King should be admitted into their City, Which example I
the rather mention, that the difference may be observed betwixt the
generousness of Princes, and such Commonweals: for when soon after Demetrius
reduced Athens to his Obedience, they being almost Famished and yielding to his
Mercy, he did not take away the Lives of these unthankful Men, but gave them
Food, and placed such for Magistrates as were acceptable to the People; yet a
second time when Demetrius was overcome by Pyrrhus, and Lysimachus, the
Athenians were as ungrateful as ever. The ill usage of Sophocles and
Phthiodorus.


Sophocles and Phthiodorus the Athenian Generals were condemned to Exile by the
People, pretending they had taken Money for making Peace in Sicily; whereas
indeed there was not any means of making War. And Alcibiades with Nicias choose
rather to banish themselves, than undergo the Judgment of the incensed
multitude, and adventure their Estates, Honors and Lives upon the Tongues of
shameful Accusers. And though (says the same excellent Idem, Lib. 3. c. 8.
sect. 8.
Historian) it is the part of an Honest and Valiant Man, to do what reason
wills, and not what Opinion expects, and to measure Honor and Dishonor by
the assurance of his Conscience, rather than by the malicious Report and
Censure of such; yet they are to be excused, as having before their Eyes the
Injustice of the People, knowing that a wicked Sentence is infinitely worse
than a wicked Fact, as being held a Precedent and Pattern, whereby Oppression
beginning upon one, is extended as warrantable upon all.

The Insolence of the Athenians having after this expedition wearied some of
the principal Men of Athens; Ingratitude to Alcibiades.
four Hundred of them got so far the Power into their Hands, that what they had
agreed upon in private, was only propounded to the People for their consent:
but this lasted not long. For their Fleet and Army (which was then at Samos)
revoked Alcibiades from Banishment, who had lived in Sparta (the other famous
Commonweal) where in Council and good Performances, he so far excelled all the
Lacedaemonians, that all their good success was ascribed to his Wit and Valor:
yet there he began to be envied, and so withdrew to Persia. Being now called
home, some of those four Hundred would have resigned their Government, yet the
most of the Faction labored to obtain Peace of the Lacedaemonians, desiring
chiefly to maintain their own Authority.

This Alcibiades won many Victories for the Athenians, and was made high
Admiral; yet he was forced afterward to banish himself, only because his
Lieutenant, contrary to the express Command of Alcibiades, fighting with the
Enemies in his absence, had lost a great part of the Fleet.

I shall add one Story more, and so pass to the Romans.

The Athenians having appointed ten Captains over their Fleet, The ten Athenian
Sea-Captains.
wherewith they beat Callicratidas the Lacedaemonian Admiral; yet six of these
Captains were put to Death upon in formation that they had not rescued some
Citizens, who were lost by the breaking of their Vessels by a Storm, which
happened when those Captains were obliged to follow the Enemy, and two of them
had like to have been shipwracked themselves: and besides, they offered in
their own defense, that they left a sufficient number of Ships to have
succored those that were wracked. But one that escaped in a Meal-tub, having
told the People, that those that were drowned, had charged him to desire the
People to revenge their Deaths upon the Captains; this was a sufficient
incentive to the People, precipitately to put them them to death. The absent
Captains escaped, and when the Fury of the People was over, the Sentence
against the rest was revoked too late.

All these ungrateful usages of such great Commanders is ascribed to the
violence of the People. But we may suppose, if it had not been for the Arts of
such Magistrates as were Enemies to those Worthies, and envied them the Glory
of their great Achievements, the People had been better Instructed. Hour it
shows the tendency of such a complex Body of Magistrates and People: and though
Athens had as much of the Popular Government called Democratical, as any else
in Greece; yet the source of all was from the Texture of the Republic
Government in general.

I shall now pass to the Romans, Concerning the Roman Ingratitude.
and only single two or three of the many Examples of their Ingratitude to
their deserving Chiestains, to illustrate, That Rewards were not bestowed as
they ought to have been, even to such as were the greatest Preservers of their
Country, and such as raised the Glory of the Roman Name to the highest pitch of
Glory.

T. Martius, Coriolanus.
called Coriolanus, had conquered the Volsci and Aequi; yet, under pretext that
he had advised to sell Corn in time of Dearth at an higher Rate than was
convenient, he was banished: Yet he took not that Revenge he might have done,
in joining with the Volsci.

Furius Camillus subdued the Falisci, Furius Camillus.
but was banished the City, upon a Suggestion of some Inequality of dividing
the Spoil, and retired to ARdaea; from whence (when the Gauls under Brennus had
got all Rome but the Capitol) he, forgetting the Ingratitude of his Country,
drew an Army together, with which he fell upon the dispersed Gauls, and so
saved his Country.

The two Scipio's strangely enlarged the Roman Empire, The Two Scipio's
by conquering every place where they were employed. Publius Scipio, the elder
Brother, overthrew Hannibal, and subjected the whole State of Carthage; by
which he deservedly had the Style of Africanus, as his Brother had that of
Asiaticus, by conquering the Kingdom of Macedon, and giving Laws to all Greece,
and other Territories in Asia.

Concerning the elder, the Senate was unwilling he should carry the War into
Africa: But the People were earnest for it. Concerning Publius Scipio, the
elder Brother.
Upon which the Learned Sir Walter Raleigh, l. 5. c. 3. sect. 18.
Historian and Statesman observes, That it is often found in Councils of State,
that the busy and obstinate Heads of a few do carry all the rest, and many
times Men make a surrender of their own Judgments to the Wisdom that has
gotten it self a Name, by giving happy Directions in Troubles bypast;
therefore he that reposeth himself upon the Advice of many, shall often find
himself deceived: The Counsel of the Many being wholly directed by the Empire
of a Few, that oversway the rest. For here Q. Fabius was accounted the Oracle
of his time; for his wary Nature suited well with the Business that fell out in
the chief of his Employment; therefore others adhered to him, that was grown
old in following one Course, from which they would not shift as the change of
Times required. But the People (who though they could not well advise and
deliberate, yet could well apprehend) embraced the needful Motion of Scipio,
and furnished him with all Supplies and Furtherance they could.

From hence I may note the Inconvenience of this Government, wherein sometimes
the Senators shall be led by one, or some few, one way, and then by others, and
sometimes the People shall overruled the Votes of the Senate: For though this
may be fortunate at some times, yet at others it may be as fatal.

The great Success of Scipio was celebrated with that excess of Joy, and
deservedly, as Rome perhaps never showed the like; and his Brother L. Scipio's
Triumph was not much less than it. Yet these two so famous Brothers afterward
were called, one after another, by two Tribunes of the People, to Judgment, in
probability by the instigation of some of the Faction of the Senate against
them.

The African could not endure that such unworthy Men should question him of
purloining from the common Treasure, or of being hired by Antiochus to make an
ill Bargain for his Country: When therefore the Day of Answer came, he appeared
before the Tribunes, not humbled as one accused, but followed by a great Train
of his Friends and Clients, with which he passed through the midst of the
Assembly; and having Audience, told the People, That upon the same day of the
Year he fought a great Battle against Hannibal, and finished the Punic War by a
signal Victory: In memory of which, he thought it no fit Season to brabble at
the Law, but intended to visit the Capitol, and there give Thanks to Jupiter,
and the rest of the Gods, by whose Grace, both on that day, and at other times,
he had well and happily discharged the most weighty Business of the Commonweal;
and that if from the seventeenth Year of his Life, until he now grew old, the
Honorable Places by them conferred on him, had prevented the Capacity of his
Age, and yet his Deserts had exceeded the Greatness of those Honorable Places,
that then they would pray, That the Princes and Great ones of the City might
still be like to him. So all followed him, except the Tribunes, and their
Slaves, and one of the Cryers, by whom ridiculously they cited him to Judgment,
until for very shame (as not knowing what else to do) they granted him,
unrequested, a longer Day.

But after, when he perceived that the Tribunes would not let fall the Suit, he
willingly withdrew from that unthankful Rome, that could suffer him to undergo
such Indignities, and so spent the rest of his time at Linternum. Concerning
Lucius Scipio, the younger Brother.


The same Tribunes proceeded more sharply with his Brother Lucius Scipio the
Asiatick (whose wise Conduct and Valor had subjected Greece and Macedonia to
the Roman Yoke, and extended their Empire over those rich Countries). They
propounded a Decree unto the People touching Money received of Antiochus, not
brought into the Common Treasury; that the Senate should give Charge unto one
of the Praetors to inquire and Judicially determine thereof: And Matters were
so carried against him, that he was condemned in a Sum of Money far greater
than his Ability; and for non-payment, his Body should have been laid up in
Prison; but he was freed from the Rigor of this by Gracchus the Tribune: and
his Estate being confiscated, when there neither appeared any Sign of his being
beholden to Antiochus, nor there was found so much as he was condemned to pay;
then fell his Accusers, and all whose Hands had been against him, into the
Indignation of the People.

It is observed, That Cato the elder (who had been his Treasurer) was a
Promoter of this. A Man, says Sir Walter Raleigh, of great, but not perfect
Virtue; Temperate, Valiant, and of singular Industry; Frugal of the Public,
and of his own; who though not to be corrupted with Bribes, yet was unmerciful
and unconscionable in increasing his own Wealth, by such means as the Laws did
permit. Ambition was his Vice, which being joined with Envy, troubled both
himself, and the whole City: And some write, That Fabius Maximus, out of some
private displeasure, countenanced these Proceedings.

From these and other Examples it may well be noted, Summary of the Reman
Discords.
how this famous Commonweal was pestered with Faction; the want of sufficient
Employment were Sparks that helped the kindling of the Fire of them, which now
began to appear, and first caught hold of those great Worthies, to whose Valor
and Conduct Rome was so indebted. But these factious Contentions did not long
while contain themselves within heat of Words and cunning Practice: for when
the Art of Leading the Multitude into such quarrelsom Business, grew to
perfection, they that found themselves overmatched by their Adversaries, at
this kind of Weapon, began to make opposition, first with Clubs and Stones,
afterward with Swords, and, finally, proceeded from Frays and Murders in the
Streets, to Battles in the Fields.

During the whole time of their Commonwealth, there were Heart-burnings betwixt
the Plebs, or ordinary Rank of People, and the Patres Conscripti Patricii, or
Senatorian Order: Those never owning themselves to be the Delegates of the
People, but an Order of themselves, that endeavored to keep the Government in
themselves, taking State and Authority upon them, using a sort of Arbitrary
Government, endeavoring to win a great Power over the People, decreeing, That
the Consuls provide that the Commonweal receive no detriment. On the other
hand, the People were restless, by Representatives to get a share in the
Government, and the Senate as stoutly opposed such Encroachments and
Innovations, (these kind of Emulations being the inseparable Diseases of all
Commonwealths;) so that in one of the Mutinies the whole Commonalty forsook the
City, and Live. lib. 2.
embodied upon Mount Aventine, till they were gratified, as I have before
hinted, in the Tribuni Plebis, who were chosen by them to look after their
Concerns in all Debates, and who exercised a very imperious Power sometimes.
Yet this did not suffice; but afterward they more violently contended to have
the Choice of one of the Consuls: and the Fury of the People was so great, that
the Senators durst not come to the House; and this Feud was so durable, that it
caused a five-years Anarchy, and at last the Senate was forced to yield to the
Peoples Importunities.

After the death of C. Gracchus, and Saturnius, a Popular Man, who by the
Senate was put out of the way; it was not long e're Marius, a famous Captain of
theirs, was so condemned, who, by force of Arms, returned to the City, and
murdered all the principal Senators; which giving unto Sylla (who prospered
therein) opportunity to make himself absolute Lord of Rome, taught Caesar (a
Man of higher Spirit) to affect and obtain the like Sovereign Power, who by the
like decree of the Senate, was provoked.

If all that I have hitherto mentioned, be not sufficient to put a People out
of love with this way of Government, they may hug their Chains and Fetters as
long as they please, for me.

I know these People magnify the wise contrivances of the State of Venice,
Concerning three Modern Commonwealths.
the United Provinces, and Switzerland. But they may consider, That the first
is an Optimacy mixed with a restrained and elective Monarchy; and they all are
more beholden to the Situation of their Countries, and the interest their
Neighbors have (lest they should fall into the hands of others) than for any
excellency of their Constitution, why they should have any likelihood of
duration.

The Prince of Orange's Stat-holder-ship, being Hereditary in the Family,
contributes something to the suppressing of any potent Faction; yet none knows,
but in process of time, Factions may arise amongst them, and then the World
will see them molder, as other such Commonwealths (sometimes as flourishing as
they;) and then they will either be made a prey to their Neighbors, or submit
to a Monarch of their own. However it is experimentally known, That in no other
State, the Subjects pay so much for their protection; and that from their first
Revolt, they have been very few years without being engaged in chargeable Wars.

CHAP. IX. Of Monarchical Government, and the Preference of it before other
Forms.
IN the commendation of Monarchy, all Authors are so copious, that it is more
difficult to order and compose with Beauty, the Jewels of the Crown, than to
amass and heap them. That it has been the most Ancient and Primitive
Government of the World, we have the Universal suffrage and Testimony of all
the preserved Records of remotest Ages; Royal Authority and Kings being coaeval
with what ever Monuments we find of the Origin of Nations.

The Writings of Moses (much ancienter than any other Historian, The Antiquity
of Monarchy illustrated in Adam's Sovereignty.
and of more Authority) evidently prove the Sovereignty of Adam and Noah:
Whence St. Chrysostom well observes, That at the Creation, God made one Man,
not many; to intimate to us, That he did design Monarchy, not Aristocracy or
Democracy. For it cannot be doubted, but that the Posterity of Adam, during his
life, were his Subjects, both by the Law of God and Nature: The Charter of God
Almighty giving to Adam, Dominion over all the inferior Creation; and to Noah,
over every living Creature. Hence the Ovid. Metam.
Poet speaking of the Origin of things, owns his Dominion over the Creatures.

Sanctius his Animal, mentisque capacius altae,
Deerat adhuc, and quod dominari in caetera posset.
Natus homo est --
Indeed it were absurd and irrational to believe, that God who had made the
Lion King of the four footed Beasts, the Eagle Sovereign of the feathered Fowl,
and the Whale over the Fishes; should leave the most glorious part of the
Creation, under the confusion of Anarchy or Parity.

Therefore Natura commenta est Reges, quod ex aliis animantibus, and Apibus
praesertim, licet dignoscere.
Seneca elegantly, Monarchical Government most natural.
and according to his manner, rightly observes, that Nature it self points out
Kings, as we may know in several living Creatures, especially in Bees: and
Virgil. Georg.
Virgil, before him, has given us a curious description of the Obedience Bees
pay to their King: Praeterea Regem non sic Aegyptus, and ingens
Lydia, nec Populi Parthorum, aut Medus Hydaspes,
Observant, Rege incolumi, men's omnibus una est;
Amisso, rupere fidem -- Illum admirantur, and omnes
Circumstant fremitu denso, stipantque frequentes;
Et saepe attollunt humeris, and corpora bello
Objectant --


So there may be observed a Dux ipse Gregis, amongst all brute Creatures.

It is from Paternal Power, That many Authors deduce the naturalness of
Monarchy, which was first exercised in Families, Hords and Septs, as I have
Cap. 2.
elsewhere cleared: therefore the Philosopher (...). Polit. lib. 6. c. 12.
sets it down as a Fundamental Truth, That that which begets commands, by
reason of his tender Love and older Age, which is a kind of Kingly Government.
The sense of which is, That the Paternal Government has a resemblance to
Monarchical Rule; and that it was according to the order of Nature, that the
Elder should Rule, as he confirms by the Oracle and Authority of (...).
Homer, who making Jupiter Sovereign, calls him Father of Men and Gods; and the
great Badge of Sovereignty, to have Power of Life and Death, is owned by the
Pater vitae necisque potestatem habebat. in filios. Cicero.
Orator, in his time, to remain, when he says, The Father had the Power of
Life and Death over his Children. So that what Brutus, the first Consul, did in
beheading his two Sons, in not taken by most to be done qua Consul, but as
Parent; for that the Consuls never had any Regal Power without leave of the
People.

If we consider the Scope of Numb. 11.
Moses's Expostulation with God Almighty; Why layest thou the burden of all
this People upon me? Have I conceived all this People? Have I begotten them?]
must from hence infer, That if He had been their common Parent, he ought to
have had the Charge and Government of them; so natural seems the Connection
betwixt Fatherly Authority and Filial Obedience: and that this was an Original
Truth, the Philosopher cites (...). Odyss. 11.
Homer, who says, That every Father, to his Children and his Wives, gives Laws.

This kind of Power seems to be confirmed in Scripture, concerning Cain,
Abraham sacrificing Isaac, Thamar and Jephtha. But in after times, when Fathers
abused that Authority, it was judged expedient to deprive them of it, and place
it in the hands of the more public Father, the King.

Having thus cleared the point, The Antiquity of Monarchy from History and
Testimony.
That Monarchy is according to the Institution of Nature. I come now to speak
of the Antiquity of it. Vide Stillingfleet 's Origines Sacrae.
Sanconiathan, of greater Antiquity than any Greek Historian, gives a large
account of the Phoenician Monarchy; the like Manetho gives of the Egyptian,
and the true Berosus of the Babylonian. So Polit. lib. 5. c. 11.
Aristotle speaks of the long Duration of the Molossiac Kingdom, which began in
Pyrrhus Son of Achilles, and, according to De Antiquis Familiis Regum.
Reinerus, lasted nine Hundred and Fifty years; and the Lacedaemonian,
according to Plutarch, Eusebius and others, continued near upon as long.

The Philosopher (...). L. 1. c. 1.
advances the Origin of Kingly Government, as high as the Heathen Religion or
Philosophy could carry him, when he says, That the very Heathen Deities were
under this Form and Regimen: So what Herodotus says of the Egyptians, may as
truly be said of all other Nations, That they could not live without Kings. So
Isocrates says, Before Democracy and Oligarchy, the barbarous Nations and
Cities of Greece obeyed Kings. Therefore the Philosopher (...). Ibid.
says, At first Kings governed Cities, and now Nations. So Salust In terris
nomen Imperii primum fuit.
says, The name of Empire was first known in the World; and Justin Principio
rerum Nationumque omnium imperium penes Reges erat. Lib. 1.
most expressly, In the beginning of all things and Nations, the Power and
Government was solely and absolutely in Kings. So Certum est omnes Antiquas
Gentes Regibus paruisse. Lib. 3. de LL.
Cicero says, That it is certain that all Ancient Nations did obey Kings. If
we consult Homer, Plato, Lucretius, Diodorus Siculus, lib. 2. Josephus lib. 4.
c. 1. or any Historian, Greek or Latin, we shall find no Tract of Time, nor
Society of Men, without Kingly Government.

The first Popular State we read of, The first Commonwealths.
is that of Athens, after the Reign of Erixias Anno Mundi 3275. and after that
several other Cities of Greece, as Sparta, Corinth, etc. followed their
examples, expelling their Kings, and in their Rooms erected little
Commonwealths, but great Tyrannies, being in a continual broil, either among
themselves, about their Magistrates, or with their Neighbors for Pre-eminence,
till the time of Alexander the Great, and the Macedonian Monarchy, when the
Country returned to their pristin Government, and might so have continued, if
the Roman Arms and Ambition had not overthrown it.

As to Rome it self, it was two Hundred and Fifty Years under Kings; and Kingly
Government was found under Lavinius, when the Trojans came from that little
Kingdom of Pergamus. Therefore Vrbem Romam a principio Reges habucre. 1. Annal.
Tacitus tells us, That the City of Rome, from the beginning, had Kings to
govern it. Their Commonwealth began upon the Regifugium: So that (says a
Judicious Dr. Nals^n's Common Interest.
Author) for three Thousand Years Monarchy possessed an Universal and
Uninterrupted Empire over all the Affairs of the Universe; so that the Sun, the
glorious Monarch of the day, does not, in all his Travels round the earthly
Globe, behold any spot of Ground inhabited by any thing but Brutes, where
Monarchy, either is not at present, or has not been the Ancient Original and
fundamental way of Government.

From the consideration of this Naturalness of Monarchy, Authors deducing
Monarchy from a Divine Original.
and the Venerable Antiquity of it, we may conclude the reason why the best and
Ancientest Writers have adorned it with such Eulogiums, deducing its Original
from the Divine Being. So Hesiod (...). Theog. v. 91.
says, Kings are from Jove; and (...). Hymn. in Jovem.
Callimachus adds, that none are so Divine as they: So in Homer (...). Ihad. 6.
v. 277.
as well as in Hesiod, they are styled, nourished of God, and born of God; not
as deriving their Pedigrees, but Kingly Honors from Jove, as Eustachius notes;
and from Homer's making the Scepter of Agamemnon to be the Gift of Jove (though
a late Absolute Power, p. 63.
Author contemptuously compares it to a Constables Staff) He (...). Iliad. 4.
v. 738.
says, The King has both his Scepter and Jurisdiction from God: Of which the
curious Reader may see more Authorities in the learned Tract of Archbishop
Usher's Power of Princes.

(...).
Plato, according to Synesius de Regno, makes the Regal Office to be a Divine
Good among Men; and a King to be as it were, a God among Men: And (...). In
Politico.
Diotogenes the Pythagorean says, that God has given him Dominion.

Others have styled them Gods, which a late Absolute Power, p. 66.
Author says, may be allowed for want of a better in Hobs's State of Ignorance
and Atheism, and would have him have the Epithete of Optimus as well as
Maximus. Thus some take a Liberty to ridicule all things most Sacred and
Venerable: But I shall have occasion to enquire into such Men's Principles
afterward, and at present shall only say, That no Man's Hyperbole, or
Expression, is further to be understood, than as it makes the Kingly Original
from God, and makes Kings his Viceroys upon Earth. Therefore I shall not balk
such Authorities.

2. de LL.
Plato affirms Monarchy to be the most uncompounded, the Mother of all
Governments, and that a King is to be a God amongst Men; and a King is a living
Image of God, says the (...). Menander.
Poet. So the Grecian Orator says, God from Heaven (...), did send the Regal
Power unto the Earth.

(...). Apud Stob. Ser^. 46.
Diotogenes yet raises the Character higher, according to the Sovereignties of
his Age; That the King, having a Power uncontrollable, and being himself a
Living Law, is the Figure or Adumbration of God among Men: And in Idem, 121.
another place, Of all things which are most honorable, the Best, indeed, is
God; but on Earth, and amongst Men, the King. (...). c. 37.
So Agapetus observes, That although the King in the Nature of his Body be of
the same Mold with every other Man; yet in respect of the Eminence of his
Dignity, he is like unto God over all, whose Image he bears, and by him
holds that Power which he has over all Men.

Hence it was, that the Roman Emperors (not to make Researches further) in
their Augustine 's Numismata per totum.
Coins used some Emblems and Impressions proper to their Gods, or their
Religion; inferring, That they derived their Character from them. So in the
Coins of Julius Caesar we find the Image of Venus, from whom he deduced his
Extraction. So we find the Goddess Victory, the Image of Mars, and the Caduceus
often, and Ensigns of the High Priest; and not only in his, but in many other
Emperors Coins, the Thunderbolt, to denote, they had the same Power upon Earth,
that their Jupiter had in Heaven: according to that of the Poet, Jupiter in
coelis, Caesar regit omnia terris.

After that Julius Caesar was in Divos relatus, we find a Star over his Head,
or himself sitting in the Habit of a God, holding in his Hand a Cornucopia
ascribed to the Genii and Hero's, and in his Left Hand holding the Goddess
Victory.

So in one of Augustus's Coins, we find Victory sitting upon a Celestial Globe,
holding a Scarf in a Circular Figure in its Hand, denoting Eternity.

In Otho's Coin Jupiter is placed in a Chair, with a Spear in his Hand, with
the Circumscription, Jovis Custos, Jupiter Custos. For it appears out of the
Verses of Ennius, and out of Hyginus and Apuleius, that in the Nominative Case
Jovis was used for Jupiter. So in a Coin of Titus the Sella Jovis and
Thunderbolt are to be found. And Trajan holds a Thunderbolt and Spear, and is
Crowned by the Goddess Victory; and in another, Jupiter with his Thunderbolt in
his Hand is shrowding Trajan under his Pallium, according to which, Pan^gy.
Pliny says of him, Te dedit qui erga omne hominum genus vice tua fungeris. So
in the same Trajan and Hadrian's Coins, the Head of the Sun is figured with a
radiated Crown, as representing them; of which Custom the Tabulae Heliacae may
be consulted: and although Chrysologus reprehends it as a proud affectation in
the Persian Kings, that with radiated Heads they place themselves in the figure
of the Sun, or are effeminate into that of the Moon, or assume the form of
Stars; yet we may suppose such Impresses were to testify to the People from
whence they derived their Origination, or whose Tutelarship they were under.

For after Christianity obtained, Constantine wore in his great Ensign called
the Labarum, the Figure of the Cross, and the Letters which appeared to him in
the Air, with the Circumscription, sub hoc signo vinces. So Octavius Strada de
Imp. Romans p. 294, 338.
Theophylact and Manuel Comnenius, in their Medals, have Christ figured putting
a Garland upon their Heads.

Hence a grave Principis potestas publi^t est in terris (...) Majest (...).
Carisburiensis. l. 4. c. 1.
Author says, The Prince's Public Power in Earth is a kind of Image of the
Divine Majesty; in the same sense with that of Com in 13. Romans
St. Ambrose, Princes for the correcting of Vice, and prohibiting of Evil, are
erected of God, having his Image, that the People may be under One.

We Christians have the Authority of Holy Scripture, That by God Kings reign,
and that they are his Anointed. So Daniel says to Nebuchadnezzar, The God of
heaven has given thee a kingdom; and to Cyrus, God gave to Nebuchadnezzar thy
father a kingdom.

So Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussa and Reges conslimuntur. Lib. 5.
c. 24.
Irenaeus affirms, That by whose Command they are born Men, by his Command
likewise they are ordained Kings. Agreeable to which, is that of Apolog. cap.
31. Inde est Imperator, unde homo antequam Imperator; inde porestas illi, und
and spiritus.
Tertullian, Thence is the Emperor, whence he became Man before he was
Emperor; thence he has his Authority, from whence he has his Breath.

A late Absolute Power, p. 46.
Author scornfully confronts the Sentiments of so many Learned and Judicious
Persons, with that of Aratus, (...), That all men are the Offspring of the
Deity. Which if we allow in his sense, then Pierce Plowman is of as good Divine
Authority as any Crowned Heads. Whereas St. Paul's Application makes it to be
meant quite another way, viz. of the Creation of Man by God Almighty. But I
shall pass to other Remarks.

The Philosopher makes Four kinds of Kingly Government. Aristotle's Division of
Kingly Government.
First, That of Sparta, where there were two Kings of two Royal Families, the
one a Check upon another: And this was, he says, (...). Polit. lib. 3. c. 14.
a Generalship only of an Army; for they had not the Power of Life and Death,
but in Expeditions of War; as he instanceth in Agamemnon, whom Homer makes
patiently to endure the Reproaches of the Great Men in the Assemblies. For, he
affirms, That in Times of Peace the Power of Life and Death was in the Senate
and the Ephori. So in the Roman Commonweal, the Generals having the Style of
Praetores and Imperatores, when the Republic was changed by Julius Caesar, he
retained the Military Name of Imperator, which the Grecians rendered King: And
thence it is that Ammianus says, That Valentinian was the first that changed
the Roman Empire from a Principality to a Kingdom. But to return from this
Digression: This Laconic Commonwealth had Hereditary Kings, with a Power in War
and Divine things, limited by Law: Of which the Curious may read Plutarc. de
Lycurgo, and Xenophon de Republica Lacedaemoniae, and Page 384.
Giphanii Comment. in Arist. Polit.

The second kind of Kingly Government, he calls that which was amongst the
Barbarous (for such the Grecians styled all Nations that were none of their
Country); and this, he says, had a Power equal to the Tyrannical, yet was
legitimate, (...).
and according to the Use of the Country; for that the Barbarous Nations were
more prone to Servitude than the Grecians; and the Asiaticks endured with less
trouble than the Europeans, that Command which he calls Absolute, as of Masters
over Servants. This he calls in reality, (...).
Tyrannical Government; but Kingly also, in that it is firm, legitimate, and
according to the Use of the Country. For that, he (...). Polit. lib. 3. cap.
10. H^insii.
says, Citizens or Subjects defend Kings, but Guards of Strangers are employed
by Tyrants: Kings commanding lawfully, over the willing; and Tyrants, over the
unwilling, and without Rules of Law.

The third kind he calls that which among the Grecians was styled the
Aesmynetian: And this, he (...), Optiva tyrannis, i. suffragio (...).
says, was an Elective Tyranny, either perpetual for Life, or for a time. And
this, because it was a Command over the Willing (such Persons being elected) he
styles a Kingly Government, and instanceth in the Mitylenians, who chose
Pittacus to be their King, against Alcaeus and Antimenides, who were banished.
Such Halicarnass^us, lib. 5.
Dionysius makes the Roman Dictators: Such the Cumaeni, by an honester Name
styled their Tyrants; and such were the (...) of Athens. Such a Kingdom Timolio
held at Syracuse, which he, as well as Pittacus, spontaneously resigned, and
did not convert into a Tyranny, as Dionysius did; or as Sylla and Julius Caesar
did at Rome, and Aratus at Sicyon, according to the Lib. 3. de Officiis.
Orator.

The last kind he calls (...). Lib. 3. Polit. c. 10. Heinsii.
Heroic, because it was used in the Heroic Ages, and had three
Characteristicks of true Kingly Government; That it was a Power exercised over
the Willing, Fatherly, and Legitimate. For, he says, the first Kings, either
for the Benefits they conferred on the Multitude, by Invention of Arts, Conduct
in War, or leading them out in Colonies, or supplying them with Lands,
governing those who lonies, or supplying them with Lands, governing those who
freely yielded to obey, were in that esteem, and had that Power and Authority
which was requisite.

These had command in War, and in things sacred, where there were no Priests,
and did determine Causes; and all these things, some Kings administered without
Oath; others were sworn to the observation of them, by the lifting up the
Scepter: and (...). Ibid.
concludes that in ancient times Kings had Rule and were Lords over all affairs
of the City, and those at home and abroad. From whence and from what the
Philosopher delivered in the beginning of this work and elsewhere, Comm^nt. in
lib. 1. Polit. initic.
Giphanius with Thucydides concludes, That these Hereditary Kings had such a
Power as was restrained by certain Laws, and they did not Reign as they listed,
and at their Pleasure; but by certain Prescripts of Laws, such, we may presume,
as they ordained.

This was that Monarchy which was known in the first Ages of the World. All
People in all Ages, and all places having by constant Experience found it most
conducive to their Happiness, and well-being. For had there been any other
form, under which Mankind could have rationally promised themselves more, or
more certain Happiness than under this; all humane care would long e're this
have hit on it, and there would have been an universal Regifugium.

But supposing we should quit these Topics of Monarchy, Other commendable
Qualifications of Monarchy.
being according to the Law of Nature, and that it is venerably for its
Antiquity; there are other Commodities wherein it excells other Forms.

As first that it is freest from the Canker of Faction, which corrodes and
consumes all other Governments. Hence the most judicious Tacitus, 1. Annal.
Historian tells us what Asinius Gallus replied to Tiberius, That the Body of
the Empire is one, and so is to be governed by one Soul; and in Arduum sape
eodem loci potentiam and concordiam esse. Idem.
another place tells us how difficult it is to find Concord among Equals in
Power, especially where not only, (as at Sparta) there were two races of Kings
governing at once, but as many of them as there were Senators, or Magistrates,
which by Bands and Confederacies, are restlessly making Parties against each
other, whereby the Administration rowls from one Faction to another: whereas
Kingly Government is uniform and equal in it self; and when by Factions,
Commonweals have been brought almost to utter ruin, a Omnem potestatem ad unum
conferri pacis interfuit. Tacitus, 1. Histor.
single Persons Conduct has restored all. As Perculsum undique ordinavit
Imperii corpus, quod ita haud dubie nunquam coire and consentire potuisset,
nisi unius Praesidis nutu quasi anima and mente regeretur. Lib. 4. c. 3.
Florus writes of Augustus Caesar, that he ordered the shaken and distracted
Body of the Empire, which without doubt could never have been united in one
Form again, unless by the Direction of one President, as a Soul and Spirit:
Even so we experienced in his late Majesty's admirable, yea miraculous
Retauration, which effected as great Blessings to these Islands, as that of
Augustus to the Roman Empire.

Besides, it is a strong Argument for the Preference of Monarchical Government
to all sorts of Republics, that in all popular States, we find all great
affairs managed by some one leading Man, who by the dexterity of his Address,
Power of his Eloquence, or the Strength of his Arguments, induces so many as
are necessary to join with him to effect them, unless when by contrary
renitency they are dissolved into Faction.

So when the Senate of Rome was in a most critical Debate, An delenda esset
Carthago? Cato showing them the Grapes which a few Years before grew there,
illustrated from thence the dangerous vicinity of so potent and opulent a
State, as had contended with them for the universal Empire, and wanted only the
skill of an uti Victoria, to have effected it. By which he cooled the warm
Debates of the Senate, and brought them to an affirmative Determination. So
Cicero often prevailed, so Demosthenes, and so the Daemagogues in popular
States, who are Nalson's Common Interest.
pro tempore Monarchs; the very head of every Faction in a Republic being a
King in Disguise, or a Tyrant in the dress of a Private Man.

The single Government being freed from the prime Cause of all intestine decay,
viz. Faction: It necessarily follows that it must be of longer Duration,
Monarchy more durable.
as being built upon stronger and firmer Foundations than any other Model.
Ambitions, Aemulations, Hostile Parities, popular Insolences, Senatorian
Tyranny, tumultuous Elections, and infinite causes of Discords are the
inseparable Associates, and close Conomitants of all other Forms. But in
Monarchy, hereditary Succession is as a Golden Chain, that holds fast together
and close every part of the Royal Contexture in it self, and leaves no Chasms,
Chinks, or Ruptures, whereby any dissolving cause can be admitted entrance to
subvert or disjoint the Frame.

I have before spoke of this Head, and shall only add, that as Kingly
Government was the first; so when Commonwealths were introduced with much
struggling, they kept Life a while in Greece and Rome; but have been reduced to
Monarchy again about one Thousand seven Hundred Years since.

Tacitus after his short way tells us, Vrbem Romam a principio Reges habuere.
Libertatem and consulatum L. Brutus instituit. Dictaturae ad tempus sumebantur,
neque Decemviralis Potestas ultra biennium, neque Tribunorum militum Consulare
jus diu valuit. Non Cinnae, non Syllae longa dominatio; and Pompeii, Crassique
potentia cito in Caesarem; Lepidi atque Antonii arma in Augustum cessere, qui
cuncta discordiis civilibus fessa nomine Principis sub Imperium accepit. Tacit.
l. 1. Annal. Monarchy has no Private Ends.
that Rome had Kings first; that L. Brutus appointed Liberty and Consulship;
Dictatorship was sometimes assumed; the Decemvirate lasted not alive two Years;
nor did the Consular right of the Tribunes of the People long continue; nor was
the command of Cinna or Sylla durable; and the power of Pompey and Crassus
devolved upon Caesar, as the Arms of Anthony did upon Augustus, who received
all (being weakened, wearied, tired out, or spent with civil Discords) under the
Empire of a Prince. From whose very Name the title of semper Augustus, and
Caesar is continued to this day, which duration in no Commonwealth can be
found. Therefore every one that desires to live under an uniform, unchangeable,
and durable Government, must prize and value Monarchy most.

It is furthermore the peculiar Excellency of Monarchy, that it has no
separate or distinct Interests, or Designs, from the Good of the Public; the
End of all just Empire being the Safety and Profit of the Subjects, says a
Finis justi Imperii, utilitas obedientium and salus. Ammianus, lib. 30.
Judicious Historian. For a King, neither in time of Peace or War, can ever
have any Good or Evil befall him, wherein his Subjects have not their share. It
is only in Monarchy where Paternal and Conjugal Love are in the highest degree
and relation, betwixt the Prince and his People; the Nalson's Common Interest,
p. 111.
Blessings of Happiness, or the Miseries of Infelicity, are stowed in the same
Bottom. So that a Monarch consulting the Safety, Honor, Welfare, Peace, and
Prosperity of his People, does at the same time consult his own Interest in
every one of them; and this must of necessity oblige him to act strenuously and
constantly in all his Endeavors for the attainment of those Ends. This will
induce him to exert all his Royal Virtues, of Justice, Fortitude, etc. will
cause him to be watchful to suppress the Turbulent and Factious, who would
discompose the happy Harmony at home, and be vigilant against the Attempts of
Foreign Powers. For the State can neither sink by Intestine Discords, or fall
by Foreign force, but he must be ruined with it, and so out of the natural
Tenderness, care and concern for the Safety, Peace, and Happiness of himself
and People, he must be truly a Father of his Country; whereas the Members or
Representatives of a Republic, are at best but Guardians (and greedy ones, as
we of late experienced) who generally commit great Wastes. Objection, That
Monarchy is apt to turn to Tyranny.


The common objection, perpetually in the Mouths of Democratick Factious
People, is that Monarchy is apt to degenerate into Tyranny, according to that
of the (...). Lib. 5. Polit. c. 10.
Philosopher; who, having recounted the external and intrinsic causes of the
decay of other forms of Governments, says, that the dissolution of Kingdoms
happens rarely from external Causes, and so they are more durable; but it may
happen from two intrinsic ones, viz. the Dissension of those of the Royal
Family, or Princes, or when Kings govern something Tyrannically.

But this is only true where Monarchy is Absolute, Arbitrary, and Unbounded;
which in the English Monarchy is much otherwise. For though the Kings of
England (where they have not precluded themselves by their gracious
Condescentions and Grants to their People) are not limited by any other Power
than their own Royal Pleasure: Yet their Concessions have been so many, and
formed into Laws (as Measures and Standards of Government) that they are Mounds
and Boundaries, which the Monarchy has no less Prudently than Indulgently been
pleased to give it self, thereby to ease the Subject of any just occasion of
Fears or Jealousies (which receive their Birth from the formidable redundancy
of their absolute Power) and by this means the Government is secured from the
falling intoan Arbitrary and Tyrannical way of Rulers, and the Minds of the
Subjects freed from the dreadful apprehension of Slavery. And as by this
Incomparable method of goodness, and generosity in our Princes, the Subjects of
all conditions are the more powerfully obliged to all dutiful Allegiance to
their temperate Government; so the Government it self is thereby rendered more
capable of effectually answering all the Ends and Intentions of Society.

When it is debated whether Monarchy or Tyranny be the most convenient
Government; the true Sense of it is this, Comparison betwixt a King and Tyrant.
Whether the People shall live more happily when the supreme Power is in one,
and the Person by the Laws of the Country is known, whereby no Room is left for
Division and Faction, concerning that single Sovereign? Or, When one Man, being
more active and crafty than his Fellows, who ought to have an equal share in
the Authority, raises a Faction upon some plausible pretenses, and under the
color of serving his Confederated Party, persuades them to be commanded by
him, and so exercises the supreme Power in an Illegal way: which as is
compassed by engaging the People in misery, under color of making them more
happy; so it must be kept up by as bad Arts, and an Army must be maintained to
make good by force what Law cannot justify.

In this manner as the question is to be stated betwixt a Lawful King and
Tyrant. So if it be enquired whether Monarchy or Aristocracy be better; it is
not whether a bad King be better than a good Commonwealth consisting of the
Optimacy: but the Comparison ought to be betwixt a good King, and a good
Aristocracy, or betwixt them when both bad.

First, Comparison betwixt a King and a Commonwealth.
Therefore it is to be considered, That a People may easilier have a good King,
than a good Nobility (taking Good) in a Political Sense, as providing for the
Peoples Happiness;) because the King's Interest is the same with that of the
Peoples, which is a strong State-security: whereas the Commonwealth of Greece,
affords us many Examples of Persons selling their Country, and putting their
great Councils upon ill attempts, and laboring with their utmost cunning, to
frustrate good Designs; because their Dependence upon a Foreign State or
Kingdom, was worth much more unto them, than they could hope to gain by honest
Service to their Country.

Supposing both the King and Optimacy be willing to promote the Peoples
Happiness; yet he is more able to compass that End, by reason he has a more
United Power, and the Execution of all Designs depends upon a single resolve;
and therefore may be managed with a certain closeness and all convenient
swiftness, so that good Councils shall be first discovered in their effects:
Whereas a great Body move slowly, and most times the opportunity of Doing is
gone by, while they are but half way in their deliberation.

Besides, More Inconveniences under Commonwealths, than under Kings, cateris
paribus.
as there are many Advantages peculiar to Monarchy (as in these three Chapters
I hope I have evinced) so there is not one Inconvenience, to which a People,
living under Aristocracy, are not subject in a much higher Degree than they are
under Monarchy. For supposing a King cruel, yet one Man's Cruelty cannot reach
so many as that of Multiplied oppressors, when every one takes their peculiar
Province to fleece, or exercise their Lordliness over, according as their
Estates or Interests are divided.

The Covetousness likewise of Senators is more devouring, because we may feed
one Fire with less Expense of Fuel than five Hundred.

A Princes profuse Largesses to his Favorites, is infinitely over-balanced, by
so many providing for their poor Kindred, and making Friends, and purchasing
Dependants. This very thing must likewise be practiced by Senators, for
underproping their several reputations, hiring Advocates to plead for them in
their absence; purchasing of Votes in their private concerns, and obtaining of
Offices, Places and Estates for themselves and their Relations: So that these
must require more considerable Supplies from the People (who must be squeezed
every time any single Grandee wants) than are necessary to nourish the
Liberality of a Prince, who has a large Patrimony, standing Revenue, and
places of Honor and Profit to gratify his Servants withal. The wisest States
having made ample allowances to their Princes, to enable them to bestow Favors
according to Merits or liking.

Some think that of Ecclesiastes (Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a
Child!) a strong Argument against Monarchy, Another Objection answered.
because this Calamity is not incident to a Senate, because they are not
subject to Nonage: But the place rightly understood (says a learned Idem, p.
23.
Writer, whom I have epitomized in the Parallel) is a very full Confirmation of
the happy Condition we have reason to expect under Monarchy, and of the
Calamities and Woes which probably attend an Aristocracy. For the cause of
those Miseries foretold is plainly thus: A King during his Infancy, being not
able personally to Rule, the Government is managed by the Nobles; and thence
come Factions, and all the Mischiefs that accompany them.

To close therefore this Chapter, we may consider, that Kings have no Rivals
whom they fear, and must keep under, as Governors of Commonwealths have; which
is no small Blessing to a People.

Kings, as Proprietors, take all the care possible (says a very Jus Regin^, p.
58.
Learned Author) to improve their Dominions; whereas Republicans are as
Tenants, mind nothing so much as their private Profit: and the very Pretenders
to Liberty and Property, in this and the last Age, have been the great Cheats
of the Nation. They, when raised to govern, grew insolent; whereas Princes are
still the same, and their Passions rise not, because their Fortunes do not.

The Prevailing Factions in Commonweals, spare none that oppose them, having no
consideration of them, but as Enemies: whereas Kings pity even Rebels, as
considering them still as their Subjects; and though I cannot say with my Idem.
Author, of one Year, yet I may say of the whole time of the Usurpation, That
more were murdered and ruined in that Reforming Age, than suffered by the
Great Mogul, and King of France, in that space of time; and more Severity was
exercised by those Reformers, than by all the Race of our Kings these Six
hundred years. And whatever Evil Ministers Kings are said to have, yet what
that Judicious Author notes of Scotland, we may say the like of England, That
after they had taken from the Blessed King his Prerogative of choosing Judges
and Counselors; the Parliament did the next year put in (I will not say with
him, the greatest Blockheads and Idiots in the Nation but) men of much meaner
Parts, and more corrupt and unfit, either for knowledge, or the upright
dispensing of the Laws, Justice and Equity, than any Age had known.

I have discoursed of this Head before, and so shall say no more, but that as
well as in Ancient times, the unequal Distribution of Justice has been noted;
so the Severity of the State of Venice against their Nobles, and the executing
Men without Citing or Hearing, upon mere Jealousies, induced a wise Spaniard
(who has collected the Arbitrary Courses practiced and allowed in that State)
to say, That there is less of Liberty there, than under the worst of
Monarchies. And for the State of Holland, it has been more than once observed,
how ungrateful they have been to all their Neighbors, who have assisted them
in their greatest need (and with what a Jealousy they treat the Prince of
Orange, whose Ancestors settled them in the Possession of what they have) as
well as to the Crown of England, is obvious to common Observation. By them
their Allies have been unworthily deserted; In the matter of Trade no Pact or
Faith has been kept. In their Country, Mint and Cummin, Coleworts and Herbs
are excised; nothing worn, nothing fed upon or necessary for Humane Life, but
pays something to their Exchequer: You pay a Tribute for the Ground you walk
on, for the Rivulets you pass on; only they have not yet found out a Tax upon
their Foggy Air.

CHAP. X. The Character of a good King in general.
BEfore I come to treat of the Sovereignty, I think it convenient to discourse
of the usefullest Qualifications of Monarchs, and the benefits that will
redound to themselves and their Subjects thereby.

The Ethic. 8. c. 10. Polit. lib. 3. and 5. c. 4.
Philosopher, in several places, compares a King to a Parent and Shepherd, but
a Tyrant to a Lord over Slaves, and a Wolf. Difference of a King and a Tyrant.
The One in his Government having a special Regard to the Peoples Benefit: the
Other governing without or against Law, pro nutu and arbitrio; reducing all
things under their absolute will and Power, in such a (...), as is unhappy to
their People, and in the Conclusion to themselves. The ancient Authors
Description of a Good King.


More particularly the same (...), etc. Polit. l. 5. c. 11.
Philosopher describes a good King to be one, that no ways governs
Tyrannically, but as the Master of a Family with a Royal mind, not challenging
or appropriating all to himself, but procuring good for, and defending, his
People and Subjects, in the course of his Life, using Moderation in all things:
Affable to his Nobles, and in Company desirous to show himself of easy Access,
sweetning his Government to his People, by his gracious Declarations. By these,
says he, (...). Ibid.
his Empire will not only be more Beautiful, more Esteemed, and more Fortunate,
but more Durable; being not dreaded or envied of his Subjects, but commanding
over the good, and not over broken and depressed Spirits.

Such Princes use a moderate just Government according to the Laws, ( more
Majorum) contented with Power sufficient to support the Government; no ways
injurious to their People, but willing that some things should not be in their
Power, that they may the more securely perpetuate, what they enjoy. For (...).
Ibid.
they that are Lords over fewer things, necessarily subsist the longer.

So it is recorded of Lamprid. in vita. Molliorem sibi potestatem and
contemptibiliorem, sed securiorem and diuturniorem.
Alex. Severus, that when his Wife Menemia, Daughter of the Consul Sulpitius,
and Niece of Catulus, told him, That he had made his Power gentler and more
despicable, by not taking State enough upon him, and Governing more gently. He
gravely answered, That it was more secure and durable. The very same, Aristotle
relates of Theopompus.

Therefore, says a grave Ille Reipublicae status optabilis and firmus est, in
quo and privatim sancte innoxieque vivitur, and publica Justitia and Clementia
vig^m. Polyb. lib. 6. Histor.
Author, That State of a Commonweal is to be desired, and is most firm, in
which private Persons live Holily and unoppressed, or Inoffensive, and Justice
and Clemency are in full Vigor by the Princes care.

Therefore Verendus potius subditis est, quam metuendus. Stobaeus.
Musonius in Stobaeus says, a Prince should so deport himself in his
Government, That he should rather be revered and honored, than feared by his
Subjects.

The excellent (...). Polyb. Hist. lib. 5.
Greek Historian tells us, That the Practice of Tyrants is to Lord it over the
Unwilling, by Terror and vicious Exorbitance, being always engaged in mutual
hatreds betwixt him and his Vassals: But on the contrary, Kings doing good to
all, with Liberality and Clemency, govern those that freely are subject to
them, living in a mutual Benevolence and Charity with his People.

It is by such a Deportment of a Prince to his Subjects, that a Prince receives
much inward Contentment. For as the Painter delights when he has finished a
curious Piece, and every Artist when he has showed great Mastership in his
work; so a Prince, when he has, by his prudent, wise and merciful Government,
made his Reign Prosperous and Happy to his Subjects, The Satisfaction and
content a good King takes in his Administration.
cannot but receive the greatest satisfaction to himself, and will thereby
acquire a most glorious and durable name.

It was a Kingly saying of Cum omnia possumus, sola credimus licere nobis
laudanda. Variarum lib. 50.
Theodahad in Cassiodorus, That whereas Kings can do all things, they think,
and believe those things only to be lawful for them to do, which are
Praiseworthy.

As the Pilot (says the Orator) designs a prosperous Voyage, The Subjects
Benefit the End of good Kings.
the Physician Health to his Patient; so the Supreme Magistrate should have
care of his Subjects, the Beata civium vita praeposita. Attic. l. 8. c. 11. and
5. de Repub.
Lives of them, and their Fortunes, for that End being committed to them.

Hence Tacitus commends that Prince, who lives with his People as a Parent with
his Children; when neither to his own Breast, Closet, or Nihil in penatibus
ejus vaenale aut Ambitioni pervium. 13. Annal. initio.
Family, any Access is made by Ambition, or in which any thing is Mercenary. So
we find in the same Judicious Historian, the advice of Galba to Piso, when he
had adopted him, was, That the surest and shortest Rule to sort good from evil,
was to weigh with himself Cogitare quid aut nolue (...) Principe, (...)
^olueris, 1 Histor.
what under another Prince he would have allowed or blamed. Therefore Nerva
gloried most, That he had done nothing in his Government, whereby he might not
safely live, although he should lay down his Empire, and live again a private
Life. So Trajan said, He would approve himself such an Emperor over his
Subjects, as He, being a private Man, would have wished the Emperor to have
been. Therefore Panegy.
Pliny so highly commends the Peoples Vows for him, quod been Rempublicam and
ex utilitate civium, rexerit. Thence the same Non minus hominem se, quam
hominibus praesse (...). Ib.
Panegyrist commends him, That he did not only consider himself to be mortal
Man, but that he was appointed to govern Men, not Brutes.

It was to the forementioned Nerva that Fronto said, (...). Dio. in Nerva.
It was a great Evil to have such a Prince under whom none can have Liberty;
but it is worse when every one has Liberty to do as he list, the one
discovering a very Tyrannical Disposition, and the other a great remissness and
negligence in Government. Therefore Nec tihi, quod rarissimum, aut facilitas
Auctoritatem, aut severitas Amorem diminuat. Vita Agricolae.
Tacitus advises that a Prince's Easiness, and too much Lenity weaken not his
Authority, or his too great Severity lessen the Love of his Subjects.

Lipsius O vere justum and legitimum illum Principem! qui in summo fastigio non
minus magnus quam bonus audire desiderat, and duas res diversissimas, potentiam
ac modestiam miscet! quem prodeuntem certatim velut beneficum quoddam Numen
aspi^nt inter amorem timoremque medium. Praefat. ad Imperator. Reg. etc.
gives us this noble Character of a good Prince, That being raised to the
highest Eminence, desires not to be accounted more great than good, and mingles
two the most different things, Power and Moderation; whom his Subjects in his
Progress look upon as a beneficial and comfortable Divinity, so that the People
attemper'd with Fear and Love, with interchangeable Sentiments, doubt whether
they shall salute him as their Lord or Parent.

All Princes must necessarily be most dear to their People (says the MS.
Speech, 1571. Such Princes dear to their People.
Chancellor to the Parliament, Anno 1571.) dearer than their own Lives, when
they by their Actions demonstrate that they make the whole Scope and design of
their Government the Prosperity of their People. Among the chiefest of which
Benefits, that of Peace is to be most valued, as being the end and mark that
all good Governors direct their Actions to. In another place he makes it a
sure sign of good Princes, when they wish themselves all the good
qualifications and fittedness for Government, and all the Virtues of the
greatest Princes for their Subjects good; this being a full Demonstration how
precious and valuable the safety and quietness of their Subjects are to them.

The learned Lord Chancellor Bacon marshals the degrees of Sovereign Honors
under five Heads, Degrees of Sovereign Honor.
every one of which are as so many Characteristicks of great and good Kings.
First the Essays of Honor and Reputation. 1. Conditores Imperiorum.
Layers of the foundations of Empires, as Romulus, Cyrus, Caesar, and^. 2.
Legislatores perpetui Principes.
Secondly the Founders of their Laws, or Lawmakers; who by constituting good
Laws, are as second Founders, perpetual Princes, because they govern by their
Ordinances after they are translated from this World. Such were Solon,
Lycurgus, Justinian, and others. 3. Liberatores and Salvatores.
Thirdly, such as have freed their People, and delivered their Country from
Servitude, or have put an end to, and composed long civil Wars, as Augustus,
Vespasian, our King Henry the Seventh, and the Fourth of France, and most
eminently our late Royal Sovereign. 4. Propagatores vel propugnatores.
Fourthly such as by honorable ways enlarge their Territories, or make a noble
Defense against Invaders. Lastly, such who reign justly, and make the Age good
wherein they live, therefore styled Fathers of their Country; such both was and
is our late and present Gracious Sovereigns.

So that such a Prince as others describe according to their Wish, or as an
Exemplar, the English Nation, Character of King Charl^s the Second.
and all his Majesty's Subjects, above all other Kingdoms in the World, have
been and are Blessed with, under the Reigns of two such unparalleled Royal
Brothers. We may justly give our late Sovevereign of immortal memory, that
Character which we find in Arnisaeas as the Idea of a good Prince, That leaving
entirely to his Subjects their Properties, governed according to God's,
Nature's and his own Laws founded upon Equity and Justice; or that of Rem
pepuli esse, non suam privatam. Dio. vita Hadriani.
Hadrian's, that so managed his Government, That all might know that he studied
the Peoples, not his own private Profit.

Surely we may hope for great happiness under our present Sovereign; Character
of King Jar^ the Second.
who has not only been a Copartner in his Royal Brother's sufferings, but a
Co-adjutor in the management of his great Empire; and has so signalized
himself in the hazard of his Life and glorious Achievements for his Country,
and is endowed with all the Heroic Accomplishments that ennoble Princes in the
Records of Fame: so that we have the greatest Moral assurances (if we disturb
not his Reign by Sedition and Rebellion) that he will out-go most of his
Ancestors in the prosperous Government of his People, as well for their Glory,
as their Peace and Tranquillity. Religion in a Prince, his Duty and Advantage.


CHAP. XI. The Care of Religion a duty incumbent upon Kings.
IT is not enough to give a Character of a good King in general; but we must
descend to Particulars, and first of his Care of Religion, according to that of
(...). Polit lib. 7. c. 8.
Aristotle, That in all Government the first and principal Concern of a Prince,
is to take care of things Divine. For according to the (...). Diog. ^pud.
Stohae^m.
Stoic, It becomes him that is the Best, to be worshipped by the Best; and
that the great Sovereign of the Universe be worshipped by his Earthly
Vicegerents.

For of old it has been noted, That many advantages both accru'd to the
Sovereign and People, when the Prince was truly Religious.

Therefore the (...). Polit. l. 5. c. 11.
Philosopher tells us, That it is the duty of the supreme Governor principally
to take care of those things which appertain to the Deity: for thereby the
People are more obedient to their Princes, as not fearing injustice from them.
For that it is to be supposed, that he that is Pious and Just, will not do an
Unjust and Impious Action; and by it he is more secure in the assurance of
Protection from the Deity, whereby he may hope for its Defense and Patrociny,
from the Seditions and Treacheries of his Subjects, having the Deity to fight
for him.

Consentaneous to which, is what Omnia prospere eveniunt sequentibus deos,
Adversa autem spernentibus. Lib. 5.
Livy observes, That all things happen to them prosperously that follow the
Gods, and as unprosperously to them that despise them.

Upon the same Ground it is that the Orator says, The Romans had not conquered
the Spaniards by their Numbers, or the French by their Strength, the
Carthaginians by their Stratagems, or Grecians by their Arts, nor the Italians
and Latins, and their Nation and Land, by their Native and Inbred Wisdom; but
by Piety and Religion, and Atque hac una sapientia, quod Deorum Immortalium
numine omnia regi, gubernarique perspeximus, gentes nationesque superavimus. De
Aruspic.
by that Wisdom alone, that they understood all things to be governed by the
Deity, they had overcome People and Nations.

Agreeable to this Affirmation, is what we find recorded of Numa, That his care
of Religion was the chief cause of the succeeding Felicity of Rome. For as the
Machiavel's Disc. lib. 1. c. 12.
Florentine Secretary observes, That Romulus exercising his People wholly in
Military Affairs, his Successor Numa, finding he had to deal with a Fierce,
Usefulness of Religion to civilize Subjects.
Rude, Cruel and Ungovernable people, thought the way to attemper and soften
their minds, was to devise some Religious Institutions; which being once given
credit to, might make them more pliable to Government. Therefore Omnium primum
ut rem ad multitudinem imperitam and illis seculis rudem essicacissimam, deorum
metum inji^iendum ratus est. Lib. 1.
Livy says, That of all things, he thought the fear of the Gods to be the most
efficacious means for the ordering the unskilful Multitude, rude in that Age.
And Numa Religionibus and divino jure populum devinxit. 3. Annal.
Tacitus tells us, That with Religions and Divine Laws he yoaked them in
obedience: and so intent he was in the Observance of the Service to the Gods he
had introduced, that Plutarch tells us, That he being one time Sacrificing, was
told that the Enemies were advancing against him, but he would not desist, but
returned At ego rem divinam facio. Plutarch. in vita Numae. Numa 's Fiction.
Answer, That he was performing a Divine Work, and he would not leave till he
had finished it.

It is by Qui cum descendere ad animos sine aliquo commento miraculi non
posset, simulat sibi cum Dea Aegeria cungressus nocturnos esse, ejus se monitu
quae acceptissima diis essent sacra instituere. Lib. 1.
Livy noted of this Numa, That he was forced to use some little Arts to possess
the People with some Awe and Reverence to the Religious Worship he appointed.
For he says, that finding, that without some show of a Miracle, these new
Religious Institutions would be difficultly embraced by such a sort of Rude
People, He pretended he received them from the Inspiration of the Nymph
Aegeria. In the like manner it is reported, that Sertorius (to establish his
manner of Religious Worship, and to obtain the firmer Obedience to his Command)
pretended he conversed with an Heart inspired. It is notoriously known,
Mahomet's Fictions, to gain Credit to his Imposture.
how the greatest of Impostors Mahomet palliated his Natural Infirmity of the
Falling Sickness, with the subtle Fiction that he was transported at such times
to Heaven, and received the Instructions for his Alcoran there: and having
taught a Pidgeon to pick Corn out of his Ear, he made use of that to delude the
wild Arabs, telling them, It was the Holy Ghost, which at such Seasons revealed
to him certain hidden Mysteries.

From hence we may learn how great Deference has been paid to Princes, who
have pretended Obedience to the Supreme Being, or had Conversation with
Celestial Ministers, Spirits or Angels; and how useful, true and untainted
Religion in a Prince must be, when the Umbrage of it is owned to make so
pleasant and beneficial a shade.

Before I leave this Head, I cannot but observe what Respect some Heathens paid
to the Religious Worship of the Gods, The Heathens Zeal for Religion.
and what Punishments have been recorded to be inflicted on those who have
profaned their Rites.

When the Gauls besieged the Capital, Valerius Maxim. lib. 1. c. 1.
Caius Fabius Druso would not omit the Customary Sacrifices, but carrying with
him in his Hands, the consecrated Vessels (contemning the Danger) passed to the
Quirinal Hill, and the Barbarians permitted him to solemnize his Worship, and
to return safely to the Capitol.

So Herodotus, lib. 9.
Pausanias, at the famous Battle of Platea, though the Enemy pressed sore,
would not fight till he had a lucky Omen by his Sacrificing.

Antiq. Judaic. lib. 14. c. 8.
Josephus tells us, That Pompey the Great, when he had taken Jerusalem, and
entered the Sanctum Sanctorum, although he found a Table of Gold, a Sacred
Candlestick, and many other Vessels, and two Thousand Talents of Silver; yet he
touched nothing thereof, but caused the Temple to be purged, and the Sacrifices
to be offered according to Law.

The Christians being about to build a Chapel at Rome, wherein to perform
Service to Almighty God, were hindered by some claiming the Ground. The matter
was brought before Alex. Severus the Emperor, who determined, That the things
which concern the Gods, should be preferred before things that concern Men; and
so allowed the building the Chapel, saying, That though their God was unknown
to them at Rome, yet he ought to have Honor done him, if but for that Respect
alone, that he bore the Name of a God.

All which, and many more Instances which may be given, ought to teach
Christian Princes to perform a greater Veneration to the true God, than the
Heathens did to their false and imaginary Idols. Disasters happening to such as
contemned the Heathen Gods.
As to the Examples of Signal Disasters that have happened to Princes and
others, who have sacrilegiously robbed the Shrines of the very Heathen Gods, or
used those feigned Deities contumeliously, discovering thereby an Atheistical
Temper; there are many Instances recorded in such Writers, as in other things
are generally credited.

It is reported of Diodorus Siculus, lib. 20. p. 698.
Agathocles, that exacting fifty Talents of Silver of the Liparenses (which
they could not pay without taking something consecrated to Aeolus and Vulcan)
in his return, the ten Ships which carried the Money, were dashed in Pieces by
Storm: by which it was said Aeolus had his revenge, and Vulcan's followed
after, for that Agathocles was burnt alive.

Herodor. lib. 3. p. 887.
Cambyses King of Persia, having conquered Egypt, smote the Ox that was
consecrated to Apis, in the Hip, that he died; but mounting his Horse to go
against the Counterfeit Smerdis, the same Sword he had slain the Ox with, fell
out of the Scabberd, by the prancing of the Horse, and he falling upon the
point of it, was wounded in the same place of the Hip, whereof he died shortly
after.

I might instance in Nero's contempt of the Roman Gods, and his sprinkling the
Face of the Syrian Goddess with Wine: and what an Exit he had we know: as also,
how Lampridi^s. Heredian.
Heliogabalus extinguished the Vestal Fire, would needs marry one of the Vestal
Virgins, and violated indifferently all the Rites and Ceremonies of Religion in
Rome; his End was violent, being slain by his own Soldiers. But I shall only
remember what is reported of Philomelus, Onomarchus and Phaillon; who having
spoiled the Temple of Delphos, one of them was burnt alive, another drowned, a
third thrown headlong from an high Place; being the three sorts of Death, the
Grecian Laws appointed them to undergo that were Sacrilegious. But I will refer
the Inquisitive Reader to Lipsius his Monita, Fulgosius, Dinoth's memorabilia,
and others; and only mark, That it seems not safe out of an Atheistical Humor,
to contemn even salse Deities; for that is seldom done without some Suspicion
that the Persons who do so, scarce reverence any Divinity. The sense of which
ought to make us resent the public stabbing, rending and burning of the
Prints, Pictures or Images of our Savior, and Saints; which some too
scornfully have done.

From these Remarks, I shall now come to consider some of Machiavel's Positions
about Religion: First he Of the Prince, cap. 18.
owns, That it is necessary that a Prince appear careful of Religion, and
appear himself Religious and Devout.

But he thinks, Machiavel would have his Prince only pretend Religion.
for a Prince to be truly conscientious, is not conducible, but rather
disadvantageous to their Designs if great, or the Art of Government. This
Principle must be owned to have been practiced to the highest Improvement by
Cromwell, whose Masterpiece lay in pretending extraordinary Sanctity, whereby
he won more to his Party, than by any other of his Arts, and out-did
Machiavel's Original Caesar Borgia.

In Answer to which, Answer to it.
I shall oppose first the Philosopher, who, in the place before cited by me in
the beginning of the Chapter, in commendation of the Prince's taking Care of
Religion, (...). Polit. lib. 5. c. 11.
says, It is not foolishly and impertinently to be pretended: whereby we may
infer, it is to be sincere and Cordial. So Pomponius In Philipp^.
Laetus tells us, That Philippus Arabs covered his Wickedness and Cruelties, by
feigning himself a Christian, and relaxing their Persecutions, and he reigned
but five Years, and He and his Sons were massacred by his Soldiers at Verona.
Indeed it cannot be expected otherwise, but that the Judgment of God, and the
Indignation of Men, should fall upon such Dissimulation and Hypocrisy: For
however Princes or private Persons may lacker over their specious
Religiousness, yet in some times or places it will appear so thin, that it will
be discovered, and at best it will bear no resemblance with pure Gold Foyl.

It must not be denied, That Princes have a larger Latitude than others, to
conceal their Sentiments of Religion, or to set the fairest Gloss upon it, as
being to guide their Actions in this matter, as well as in secular Affairs,
suitable to the Interests of State. But every one will likewise acknowledge,
that a Prince, The Credit a Prince gains that is truly Religious.
who uses in this as well as other matters, a generous plain dealing, is
valued more by this Standard Coin without Alloy, than those are, who make, as
the States of Holland do their Third in Silver, mixed with four parts of
adulterate Metal, pass for current Sterling Coin. Among just Men, such a Prince
that deals heartily with God and the World, will find infinite more credit than
any Tinsel heart will do.

But I must pass to another of the Florentine's Paradoxes; Discourse, lib. 1.
cap. 12. (...)'s Opinion of the Bencht of the Heathen Religion.
he says, The Pagan World was kept principally in Obedience by the belief they
had in the Responses of Oracles, as that of Jupiter Ammon at Delos, or Apollo's
at Delphos, etc. or by the Prognostics of the Augurs; and that, when once Men
began to slight these, they neither believed God nor the Devil, but became as
ungovernable as unchained Slaves: and in another Id. lib. 2. c. 5.
place adds, That the cause why the Force and Power of Christians is less than
that of the Grecians and Romans, was in the difference of their Religion: For
that the Christian Religion makes the Honor of the World contemptible, and of
little Estimation, whereas the Gentiles esteemed Honor to be the Sovereign
good, which to obtain, they had an exceeding great Fierceness and Hardiness in
all their Deeds and Enterprises; and that the Heathen Religion promises no
Happiness, but to such as having fought for their Prince, Country and
Commonweal, were loaded with Glory and worldly Honor: whereas the Christian
Religion promises blessings to such as are humble and contemplative, and to
those which despise most the Goods and Honors of this World: and further adds,
That the Christian Religion has conducted and brought the World into that
Weakness and Feebleness we see it in, delivering it as a Prey to the wicked and
barbarous People; because all Christians, to take the way to Paradise, dispose
and arm themselves, rather to receive Blows, than to give or take Vengeance. So
that to him it seems, That the thing which makes Christians so effeminate and
cowardly, proceeds only from this, That they esteem more of an Idle and
Contemplative, than an Active Life.

In answer to all which I do own, The Answer.
That the Oracles and Augurs had some Influence upon the People; but we must
likewise yield, That they were often Instruments and Tools fitted by Princes to
carry on some designs, to give Courage to their Soldiers, and disheartning to
their Enemies; and that God in the Machine was oftentimes a Prince's Spring
that lay there.

As to the Rites and Ceremonies, whatever Power they had to influence Men's
Minds to Obedience and Duty to Governors, and to stimulate and excite them to
great and glorious Actions; the same Motives and Inducements we may find in the
Christian Religion, and better bottomed.

That there is something else besides bare Forms, Modes, and Schemes of
Religion, that ought to be countenanced and cherished by Princes, and which is
very conducive (not to make any Comparisons) to the support of Government, I
will now endeavor to prove.

First therefore let us consider what is related of Numa. Concerning Numa
Pompilius.
It is said he appointed diverse Ordinances concerning Priests, and several
Ceremonies, whereof several Rolls were found in his Livius, lib. 40. Decad. 4.
Sepulcher Anno V. C. 574. in the Consulship of Lucius Manilius in a Stone
Coffin, one part Latin and the other Greek. These Books being seven in all, by
order from the Consuls and Senate, were perused by Quintus Petilius, who made
such a Report of them, that according to Livy, they were decreed to be burnt,
as of no great account; and besides, judged pernicious and damageable to the
Commonwealth, by bringing that Religion into Use, which was like to bring great
Cum animadvertisset pleraque dissolvendam Religionem esse. Ibid.
alterations in the present Rites.

Valerius Maximus gives something a different account; for he says the Greek
Books only De disciplina sapientiae, quia aliqua ex part ad solvendam
Religionem pertinere existimabantur: noluerunt enim prisei viri quicquam in hac
asservari civitate, quo animi hominum a deorum cultu avocarentur. Lib. 5. de
Religione, number. 12.
of the Discipline of Wisdom were burnt, for that they were judged in some
respects to dissolve Religion. For, says my Author, the Ancients would
preserve nothing in this City by which the Minds of Men might be withdrawn or
led aside from the Worship of the Gods.

From this Story I shall first mark, obiter, that it seems for want of the
engraving these Institutions of Numa concerning Religion, in Brass, as the
Roman Laws were, though the successive Priests had the ordering them ever
since; yet there was that alteration made in that long interval of time in the
Rites and Ceremonies, from what he had instituted, that to have reduced them to
their practice was like to un-hinge all their present Ecclesiastical Polity;
and so the Senate, Consuls and Priests thought it more advisable to burn and
annihilate them, than to disorder the present Establishment.

Secondly, We may note, that the Senate and Consuls took care that nothing
should be exposed to the People (how sacred a Relic soever) that might
enervate or debilitate Religion.

Now we may further note out of a judicious Dionys. Halicarnassaeus, lib. 11.
Historian, That Numa built a Temple to Faith, where he established many
Ceremonies to induce People to reverence Faith, The good things Numa
established in order to Government.
and to fear Perjury; and ordained likewise upon Controversies happening among
Parties, they should be bound to go to the same Temple, and there with certain
great Ceremonies swear the points of their Contests. He also further declared
that those who usurped upon the Limits of others Possessions, were not only to
be punished here, but were doomed to Torments in Hell; to the end that every
Man might be afraid to seize on the Goods of another Man's.

These therefore I look upon as the Fundamentals of civil Religion, in the
rendering so venerable the Faith by Oaths, whereby not only Allegiance to the
Prince, but Society was established upon that firm Basis of mutual Confidence:
and by the securing Propriety, the whole Compages of Government was preserved.

We ought likewise to consider that there are moral Virtues which conciliate
such a Reverence to the Practisers of them, Moral Virtues very useful to
Government.
that they are great helps to preserve and make flourishing every Kingdom and
Commonweal, and which constitute a considerable Religious Portion of civil
Government; and when Princes and People exercise them, both live happilier,
than when without them, great Sanctity and Devotion are only pretended.

The Virtues I put in the Balance against Bigotry in Religion, Better than
Hypocritical Holiness.
are Justice, Temperance, Charity, Fortitude, Magnanimity, which are branched
out into many flourishing Boughs, that bear the Golden Fruit upon them; such as
these, Not to do to another that which we would not have done to our selves; To
live contentedly in our Station; To be obedient to our Magistrates and
Superiors; To live in Charity with all Men; To be Compassionate to the Poor
and Needy; To give no evil Example in any sort of Debauchery; To consider that
we come into this World to live according to the rules of Life, the Sovereign
Being of all has pleased to reveal; That we do nothing here which may forfeit
our more durable Inheritance in the other World.

These were the Buttresses of Government in the Heathen World, when the whole
train of Moral Virtues without Hypocrisy and Dissimulation were practiced: and
can Machiavel or any of his Disciples find that the same things are not pressed
as a duty upon all in the Christian Religion; there seeming to me this only
advantageous difference, That the Foundation and Basis upon which these Moral
Virtues rest in the Christian Religion, is more firm, more regular, and more
curiously hewn and polished, and more consentaneous to the Dictates of right
Reason, in that they are implanted and promulged as standing Laws by one God
Omnipotent; than in the multiform, jarring Polytheism of the Heathens, who for
every different Species of things, or qualifications of Beings, introduced a
presiding Spirit.

In answer to the second Plea of the Secretary, That Religion does not
dis-spirit Men.
That our Religion has dis-spirited Christians; I think every one will be
furnished (out of the Armory of his own Experience, or the perusing of ancient
and modern Histories) with Shield and Buckler against such false Thrusts, and
will own that there have been as considerable and glorious Achievements
performed by Christians, as by Heathens: as may be instanced in Constantine the
Great, Theodosius, Valentinian, Justin, Charlemain, Scanderbeg, and infinite
more modern Christian Princes, who neither yield for Manhood, Valor, or
Conduct, to Turks or Pagans: and how Patient and Meek soever Christianity
teaches Men to be; yet it no ways hinders Subjects from using offensive or
defensive Arms, when commissioned by Lawful Authroity; nor discourageth
adventuring of Life for the defense of Kings, or their Countries; nor is it an
Extinguisher of Endeavors to serve God the Sovereign, or his People, in the
Honourablest Employments.

It must be confessed, True Piety lessened by subtle Disputes.
that since Religion has been reduced from Precepts and Axioms to Systems, and
that the practical part of Justice, Moral Virtues and Honesty, were no longer
in Esteem, than as they were found subservient to the promoting Speculations;
there has been a way found out to render these fundamental and substantial
Qualifications of less value in very good Men, unless withal they added some
quaint Notions that might sublime their Heathenish Moralities (as they call
them) into Elixirs and quintessences of Religion: as in our late Times, If one
could not give a certain Diagnostick when Grace was wrought in him, he was not
fit for reforming Employment; Men being more distinguished by Tests and Oaths,
than by good Manners.

By which we forgo the Substance of Moral Piety for a fleeting Shadow; and many
are so bigoted in their several Sentiments, that it is a more arduous task of
late, than formerly, for Princes to comport themselves in this particular, so
as to keep in one Uniformity, Subjects of so different Persuasions, whereby
they may command that obedience Subjects ought to pay to their Sovereigns.

To find Expedients, or offer any directions to Princes in this Case, were to
involve ones self in an endless Labyrinth, and discover an unpardonable
Presumption; the Difficulties being very great, if not insuperable, how to
frame Laws that should combine such varieties and diversities of Opinions in
one Yoke, Order or Rule, without such an universal and absolute Monarch, as
scarce in Idaea, much less in Practice can ever be.

I shall therefore concern my self no way in tugging at the end of that Saw of
Controversies, which (how pleasant soever it may be to such as have an
overweening Opinion of their Knowledge in such Subtilties) is very harsh and
ungrateful to my Temper.

This one Hypothesis or Postulatum, however, I hope few will deny, That since
Monarchy is the Established Government in his Majesty's Dominions, and however
maliciously and potently assaulted in our Memories; yet never can be altered
here. The Government of the Church of England agreeable to the English Monarchy.
Princes by small searches into the aptitude of the several Schemes of
religious Worship and Government, may soon find which is most agreeable to the
Constitution of the Monarchy, and will be most subservient to it. In which
particular, the Church of England, as established by Law, in its Doctrine and
Discipline, and all the true Members of it, and the Subjects of all Conditions,
who act according to the Principles of it; have obtained a Royal and Gracious
Character, founded upon the constant Experience the Kings of England have had,
That upon all the most critical trials, the Members of it have stood firm to
the Crown, even when worn by Princes of different Religion.

Therefore till other Forms, practiced in the late times, can give as
undeniable Proofs of their unconditionate Loyalties; I think it but reasonable
they should allow His Majesty liberty to consult his own, and the interest of
his Government, rather than their inconsistent Models.

One of the Principles of the Church of England (conformable to that of the
Christian Religion.) is, That it teaches Obedience to the Sovereign, not for
Fear only, but for Conscience sake; and all considerate (as well as Pious Men)
where they are convinced, That it is better to obey God than Man (if any thing
should be commanded that would put them upon that Dilemma) will choose to suffer
(if they cannot fly) rather than rebel.

Therefore since it pleased his Majesty at his first Step to the Royal Throne
(which was like that of the rising Sun dispensing innumerable Blessings to his
People) to express his Royal Favor to the Church of England, The King's
Commendation of the Principles of the Church of England, as to Monarchy.
with such an Encomium of its Members, in that most refreshing Declaration at
his first Council (which from so just a Prince carries the Force and Energy of
an Act of Parliament as well as of State in it) it ought to bow the Hearts of
all Men that design not to be Rebels, as one Man to him.

Since which, by the repeated solemnity of it to his two Houses of Parliament,
all suspicion of his Majesty's ever acting to the contrary, so long as the
Subjects keep their dutiful Station, is totally removed. His Majesty also has
laid a solid Foundation for true Piety in the discountenancing and discrediting
all forts of Vice and Debauchery: by which none can doubt, but himself as well
as his Subjects, will in short time reap happy Benefit according to that so the
excellent Diutius durant exempla quam mores. Tacitus, 4. Histor.
Historian, Examples have a more durable force than Laws.

I shall conclude this particular with the famous Story of the Zealots in
Josephus de Bello Judaico, lib. 4. c. 5. and lib. 7.
Judaea: Those being told by Vespasian (which Messages Josephus himself carried
to them) that he would change nothing of their Religion, but maintain them
therein, The Evils by Rebelling upon pretense of Religion.
and in all their Liberties and Franchises; yet under color, that they were
bound to sacrifice their Lives in the defense of the Temple, would never
hearken to Peace upon any condition what ever: but living upon Forraging,
Rapines, Free-booty, and committing most cruel Butcheries; Vespasian found
himself obliged to arm against them, and use them with all Extremity. In fine,
Those who pretended so much the Preservation of their Religion, committed a
Thousand sort of Impieties and Cruelties, and themselves set the Temple of
Jerusalem on Fire, and at last brought utter Ruin to their Country.

I shall make no further Application, but that from hence we may learn, First,
That it was agreeable to Principles of Government, that Vespasian (though a
Prince of a different Religion to the Jews) should not alter their Civil or
Religious Government: And, Secondly, That the utter Extermination of a People
and their Religion there, was the Consequence of the Zelots Rebellion, as to
the apparent procuring cause; for I enquire not here into the Original cause of
that Nations Destruction, viz. The crucifying of our Lord and Savior.

I come now to consider wherein a Sovereign's care of Religion consists,
Wherein the Sovereign's Care of Religion consists.
which would carry me into a dangerous Ocean, if I should survey all the Rocks,
Creeks and Quicksands to be avoided in this matter. At the best I shall find
an high rolling Sea, as that in the Bay of Biscay, if I escape the difficult
and dangerous passage betwixt Scylla and Charybdis.

First therefore, I shall consider the Obligation the Pagan Romans thought they
had, not to make any Innovation in matters of their Religion, with some
Reflections upon it. Secondly, Consider the Condition of People under Diversity
of Religions: Thirdly, The Roman Heathens not for change of Religion.
Speak something of the Diversities of Religion sprung up in the time of the
late War: And Lastly, Something concerning Toleration. But I must praemonish
the Reader, that I intend not to treat of these, either as Divine or Statesman,
but only as a Layman that loves Order and Peace, in transitu, as a Parergon.

First then as to the Heathens, we find that remarkable Advice of (...). Dio
Cassius, lib. 52.
Mecaenas to Augustus, That he ought to worship the Deity in all Methods, and
at all times himself, according to his Countries Laws, and cause others to do
so: and further adds, That he should restrain those that would innovate in
Divine things, not for the cause only of the Gods; but because those that bring
in new Deities, do drive men to make other dangerous Changes: and from thence,
Conspiracies, Sedition, Conventicles, Cabals, etc. which are things no ways
conducible to the benefit of Government.

In which we may consider Mecaenas to advise like a Statesman, considering,
that Augustus had but newly extricated himself from a great and dangerous War,
for no less than the Empire: Therefore it behoved him to make no Alterations in
Matters that might endanger the Settlement of his present Estate. Therefore we
find, That Augustus laid aside the name of Triumvir, contented with the
Consulship, and for defense of the People with the Tribunitian Authority; which
were old Offices the People were acquainted with: and that he attracted the
Soldiers good Will to him by Gifts, the Peoples by Provision of Food; and all
with the sweetness of Peace: arising by Paulatim insurgere, munia Senatus,
Magistratuum, (...) in se trabere, aullo adversante. Tacit. 1. Annal.
degrees, to draw to himself the Employment and Authority of the Senate, the
Magistrates and the Laws, none opposing him.

How far this is to be imitated by Princes, in the Circumstances of Augustus, I
leave to others to determine.

As to the general Sentiment, that the Heathen Roman Religion was not to be
changed: I shall content my self with two Authorities of the great Orator, who
in one place Majorum instituta tueri sacris caeremoniisque retinendis sapientis
est. Patrios ritus migrare aut violare, ubique gentium nefarium sir. Cic. de
Divinatione.
says, That it is the part of a wise Man to defend the Institutions of their
Ancestors, in retaining sacred Ceremonies; and that in all Nations, it is
reputed wicked to violate and banish our Countries Rites.

In another place Omnes Religione moventur, and deos patrios quos a majoribus
acceperunt, colendos sibi diligenter and retinendos arbitrantur. Cic. in Verrem.
he pronounces it absolutely, That all are moved with Religion, and judge
their Country Gods which they have received from their Ancestors, to be
worshipped and retained.

I am sensible, that if this were yielded to, Christianity would not have been
propagated in the World. For if it had not been lawful to alter the so long
established Idol Worship and Polytheism, the Doctrine of Christianity had been
shut out. But on the other side, when I consider how Christianity was
propagated by the working of Miracles, and by the Force and Energy of
Conviction upon the Minds of such as would admit the Explanation and
Dilucidation of the Doctrine, and the Christians patient sufferings under the
Heathen Persecutions, and peaceable awaiting till God Almighty disposed the
Emperor Constantine's Heart to embrace the saving Doctrine of our Lord Jesus
Christ; I cannot but conceive it fit (as a Primitive, so an imitable Example)
to follow the Method of persuading and convincing Reason and Judgment, before
Changes in Religion are to be attempted; especially since the Conversion is not
to be from Paganism, but concerns Modes of explaining Doctrines, Jurisdiction
of some Orders and Churches, and such Rites and Usages, as possibly enough Men
may be saved without arriving at the knowledge of the Essentialness of them.

The Religions of Mankind are extremely various, Concerning Diversity of
Religions.
diversifyed according to the Genius of the People, their Education and
Interests. For as Dominions are circumscribed, and bear one against another,
for the preserving of their respective Limits and Bounds, so that a kind of
Hereditary Hostility is continued betwixt them: So we find together with that
Native civil Enmity, there is also some disagreeing in such Points of Religion,
as is sufficient to keep up the Feud betwixt the Learned Part, as well as the
Common People; and the Earth is not more diversifyed by the large Tracts of
Sands in Arabia, Chains of Hills at Caucasus, the Alps, etc. or with the Ribs
of vast Rocks, or the Fertile Plains, Pools, Morasses and Seas, than it is
variegated with Religions; so that what is sacred in one Country, is even
piacular in another.

-- cum solos credit habendos
Esse Deos quos ipsa colit --
What Application is to be made of God Almightie's Methods of Providence in
this I leave to Divines, whose Province it is: Only we may observe, since the
Roman Church is obeyed in a large Portion of the World, and Ethnicism and
Turcism possess as great Territories, and the different Modes in all these
(some insisting on old Usage, others on Reformations and Refinings) are so
considerable, it is not to be hoped, there can be any Uniformity or Harmony of
Religions in the Universe.

Therefore it seems to be the great concern of Princes in their several
Dominions, to use their utmost Endeavors, that the great Fundamentals of
Religion (which consist in solid Piety, Justice, Temperance, etc.) should be
strictly observed, and the particular Forms, which, by the Wisdom of foregoing
Ages, have been adapted to the Genius of their People, should be protected and
defended, and no Innovations made in them upon private Men's Fancies of
Reformation, without a public Sanction.

As to the third Particular concerning the Diversities of Notions in Religion,
Fanaticalness in Religion dangerous to Government.
which have been spawned in our late Wars, during the Rebellion, when every one
pretended, that the Liberty of propagating their several new found Opinions,
was what they had fought for, and purchased with the expense of their Blood and
Treasure, we may consider these things following.

First, That when Religion is only seated in the Brain, it strangely
infatuates, and renders the possessed difficult to be cured: for it either
produces downright Hypocrisy (which has Millions of Subservient Wheedles to
accompany it) or the Imagination is heightened, That (as a learned Mr. Fr.
White's Sacred Laws.
Writer observes) they think Salvation is only ordained for those of their fine
Sculls; the very mossy Notions of which they think sufficient cure for the
falling Evil: Judging Mankind, till within a Century or so, to have been dull
indigested Masses of unthinking Animals; whereas in Truth and Reality, they are
the tubera Terrae, Insipid or Poisonous Fungs, which sprung up by the Showers
of Blood.

Under this Ecstasie of new Beams of Light, they are ravished with the Opinion
of their own Saintship, and they indulge themselves in all the sweet Appetites
of Spiritual Pride, affected Sanctity, and singularity of Persuasion; for
without some odd Notion (more subtle than others have or a Revelation, as if
dropped from St. Paul's third Heaven, they have no Hearts-ease; and having the
Maggot turned into a Butterfly, O how it flutters and mutes its Eggs upon
every fresh Colewort!

This kind of Brainsick Religion, is no sooner born, Idem.
but presently like Cadmus's issue, it falls to war under the Banner of
Reformation, which is that Fort Spiritual, that Palladium, they must defend;
and thereby promise to themselves Laurels and Palms, which shall cover and
protect them from all the bruta Fulmina, as they repute them, of the National
Church; thinking themselves above the Jurisdiction of any Ecclesiastical Court,
their Dominion being founded in Grace.

The pretense of maintaining Religion, or the sham-affrights such People
divulge they have of it, being altering, or taken from them, may, with the
least danger to the Designers of any Revolution, be used as a blind to carry on
any Intriegue; and the pretense of refining Religion, has powerful Philtres
and Fascinations, to bewitch the Unwary, and tickle the Hypocrite.

While such like Religious People, as I have been describing, in the late
miserable times (when there was neither Lawful, Civil, or Ecclesiastical
Authority) obtained Power, these Glowworms were as plentiful as Locusts,
filling every place with new, but not uniform Light; nothing was more common in
their Mouths, than that the Dispensation or Gospel of the Holy Ghost was to be
expected, that of God Almighty being passed away, at the coming of our Savior,
and His Sacred Establishments being to cease at the approach of this.

What wild fancies, What Heresies revived, were then in Vogue, I had rather
were forgot than shown upon the Stage: and only shall observe, that since
Religion is like the Heart in the Body, full of Vital Spirits, it increases
the care of a Sovereign, That neither the Divine Fire be sufflaminated or
extinguished by Irreligion or Atheism; nor by Enthusiasm so sublimed, as it
cause a Calenture.

As to the last Particular, it is so nice a point (now especially) that I had
once designed not to have touched upon it; Concerning Toleration of Religion.
but that I may not wholly frustrate Expectation in saying nothing, I shall
Content my self with summing up some few Authorities from Lipsius, and others
upon this Subject.

Polit. lib. 4. c. 3.
Lipsius says, it is his firm Opinion, That one Religion should be preferred
in one Kingdom, and bemoans the Condition of Europe, wherein Religion has
kindled such disagreeing Flambeaus, and endeavors to pour Water on that Sacred
Fire.

Public peccare dico, qui and ipsi de deo receptisque sacris sentiunt, and
alios ad sentiendum per turbas impellum: Priva^im, qui pariter male sentiunt,
sed sibi. Ibid.
He makes two kinds of those that sin in Religion; First, Those who have ill
Sentiments of God, and the received Holy Rites, and do endeavor to force
others by Riots and Tumults, to be of the same persuasion. Secondly, Those who
have as depraved opinions, but keep them to themselves, keeping this Fire on
their own Hearths, only to dress their own Viands with.

Concerning the first of these, he concludes, they ought to be punished; lest,
as St. Cyprian says, The Prince be punished for them; for with St. Austin
Melius est ut pereat unus quam ut pereat unitas.
he affirms, That it is better that one Scabbed Sheep be removed, than the
whole Flock be infected. Agreeable to which is that which Violatarum Religionum
aliubi atque aliubi diversa poena est, sed ubique aliqua. De Benef. l. 3. c. 6.
Seneca affirms, That in diverse places, the punishment may be diverse, of
Religions violated, but every where some Punishment is enjoined.

Quod in Religionem divinam committitur, in omnium fertur injuriam. Lib. 4.
Cod. de Haereticis.
Justinian gives the Reason, why some Punishment in such cases should be
inflicted; because the concern of Religion being of a great extent, the
Injuries committed against Divine Religion in some sort affects all.

There being so many Hot-spurs and Bigots in Religion, that are always busily
and pragmatically perplexing themselves and others with subtle Enquiries of
things under the Earth, and above the Heavens (as (...) Apol.
Plato phraseth it) that is, of things beyond the Ken of judicious Mortals;
either poring in St. Faith's under Paul's, or fluttering on the Fanes of some
Spires or Cupalo's, to the Disturbance of those that would be at their public
Devotion in the Quire. Such Turbones (as Lipsius calls them) should be
suppressed, if it can be without a greater Disturbance. So In morhis ni^il est
magis periculosum quam immatura medicina. Sen. Consol. ad Hill.
that the Application of the Remedy be rightly timed, that by unseasonable
Remedies the Distemper be not fired, as the Judicious Tacitus, 12. Annal.
Historian says, Intempestivis remediis delicta accendere.

As to those who have Souls tainted with Errors, yet endeavor to infect none,
but keep the Contagion within Doors, and propagate not their Errors: Lipsius
applies that of Quis impon it mibi necessitatem vel credendi quod nolim, vel
quod velim non credendi? Lib. 5. c. 4.
Lactantius, Who can impose a necessity upon me, either of believing or
disbelieving? And that of Docendo magis quam jubendo, monendo quam minando.
Epist. 65.
St. Austin, That such be wrought upon rather by Instruction than Injunction,
by admonishing than menacing. As when Strings are out of Tune, they are
leisurely to be screwed up to Concord, not hastily, lest they break; since they
desire Tacere liceat; nulla libertas minor a Rege petitur. Sen. Oedip.
no greater Liberty than to be silent. For as Curtius says, lib. 7. Nemo Rex
perinde animis imperare potest ac linguis: None can so well command the Mind as
the Tongue. So in matters of Faith, he commends Peccata sic compescas, ut sint
quos peccasse poenitea^. Ad Africanum Proconsulem.
St. Austin's Rule, so to suppress Errors, that there may remain such as may
repent they have sinned. Therefore he is not for using severity to such,
whereby some may be made Hypocrites, and few Converts, according to that of
Themistius, Purpurae tuae Cultores aliquos efficies, non Dei.

It is for such as these the Act of Uniformity provides, when it allows five
besides the Family; and those that cannot be content with that Indulgence, may
thank themselves, if they occasion severer Laws against them.

CHAP. XII. Of the Clemency of a Prince, and how far Beneficial.
THIS is the soft Ermin that lines the Royal Robes of Princes, this is the
orient Pearl which studs their Diadems. None ever wore a finer or gentler Furr
within his Imperial Vest; nor ever had more conspicuous, valuable, or more
genuine Jewels of this sort in his Crowns, than our late most Gracious and
Merciful Sovereign of Blessed Memory. Who, as a Learned Person most truly
observed long Character of King Charles the Second. Anno 1660. His Clemency.
since, had goodness of Nature, Humanity, and Charity (or by what divine
Attribute you will call it) as the master Ingredient in his Composition: of
whom most truly was verified, what out of Herodian, Pareus notes in his
Aphorisms of Pertinax succeeding Commodus, (as that most Gracious King did to
the Senate of Tyrants, and the wickedest Usurper Cromwell) Tyrannorum (...) and
dementis Principis saccedent is Imperio, ni^il ju^undius, nihil utilius
subditis accidere potuit.
That nothing more pleasant and profitable could happen to Subjects, than the
Death of Tyrants, and the Empire of a Clement or Merciful Prince succeeding. So
that whatever I can write in commendation mendation of this Royal
Qualification, and much more, is but a Dawb, and no Varnish to his Statua, who
in all our Annals will be styled the Clement, Merciful, and Restorer. But I
design not here his Apotheosis, yet could do no less than strew some Lillies on
his Grave upon this occasion. The Benefit of Moderate Government. (...).


Therefore to pass to the subject matter. The (...). Lib. 5. Polit. c. 11.
Philosopher observes, That the moderation of Theopompus much settled the
Spartan Government; and adds, that what lessens a Kingdom in Power, augments it
in Length and Duration. By which he can mean nothing else, but that mild, and
not austere or violent severe Government, is what gives a long continuance to
Principalities. However we may be sure a Prince's Mercifulness is one of those
Virtues which are echoed through the longest and loudest Speaking-Trumpet.

Qui benignitate a^ (...) Imperium temperavere, (...) candida and lata omnia
suisse: etiam ^ostes aquiores quam aliis ci^es. Ad Caesarem.
Sallust says, That those who have tempered their Empire with Benignity and
Clemency, have had all things Prosperous unto them, their very Enemies being
more just to them that use it, than some Subjects are to others who less
practice it. Therefore the Orator Nec ulla re propius homines ad deum accedunt,
quam salute hominibus danda. Cic. pro Ligat.
says, That Men (much more Princes) in nothing, make nearer approaches to the
Deity, than in giving that to Men which he calls Salus; Health, Prosperity, and
Benefit to a People: to produce all which a Prince's Clemency must concur.

The Divine Se^ales civibus prabeant, quales sibi dens esse volunt. 1. de Clem.
c. 5.
Seneca gives an excellent Rule for Princes to observe that they deport
themselves so to their People, as they would wish the Gods would do to them.

Such a Prince, the other In Octa^.
Seneca the Poet elegantly describes, which (if any other) our late King
deserves to have writ on his Tomb: Pulchrum eminere est inter illustres Viros:
Consulere Patriae, parcere afflictis, fera
Caede abstinere, tempus atque Irae dare,
Orbi quietem, saeculo pacem suo:
Haec summa Virtus, petitur hac Coelum Via.


Another famous Vim temperatam Dii provehunt in majut. Horat. Od. 3.
Poet tells us, That divine Power enlarges temperate Government; and a grave
Potentia mediocrit^ exer^ita omnia quaesi^a conservat. D. Cass. lib. 43.
Historian tells us, That moderately exercised Power conserves all that it has
acquired; for Mildness in all Affairs, and Remissius imperanti melius paretur.
Sen. de Clem.
Obedience, is better paid to gentler Commands, than to the more rigid and
austere.

A Prince, says Amorem apud populares, m^tum apud h^sies quara^. Annal. 11.
Tacitus, should endeavor to obtain Love among his Subjects, and fear among
his Enemies. For as the Claudianus ad Ho^or.
Poet says, Non sic excubiae, non circumstantia tela,
Quam tutatur Amor. --


That Love is a better defense than Halberts, Battle-Axes, and common Guards. A
Prince having the Love of his Subjects, yet must have Guards.
Yet we have known a Prince (who for this Virtue of Clemency, deserved as much
Love as any) designed to be assassinated, when wicked Conspirators hoped his
small Guards would be too weak to defend his Royal Person against their Force.

Therefore however commendable Clemency be in a Prince, yet it should not be
his constant wear; some Scarlet, with the fine Linen, makes not only a more
splendid, but an usefuller show. Though the Senec. Trag. Overmuch Clemency
dangerous.
Poet say true, Hoc Reges habent magnificum,
Et ingens, nullus quod capiet Dies,
Prodesse Miseris, supplices fido lare
Protegere. --
Yet the Rule of the Prince of Omnia s^ir^, non omnia prosequi, parvis pe^cat^s
veniam, magnis ^^^eritatem commodare. Tacitus vita Agric.
Historians, is to be observed, That a Sovereign know all the Stratagems of his
Enemies, but not to prosecute all; to pardon small faults, and accommodate
Severity to great Crimes. For as another Judicious Salutaris severitas vincere
inanem speciem clementix. Ci^ero ad Cl^^ent.
Author says, Healthful Severity should sometimes overcome the unprofitable
and ineffectual kind of Clemency; for it often happens, (...) ager crudelem
facit medicum. Publius.
That the unruly Patient makes the crueller Physician.

So Meus hic suror subditos sanos reddit. Stobaeus de Regno.
Cotys the Thracian King, answered some that taxed him with Severity in a
necessary Case, that it was to make his Subjects Healthful; for sometimes there
is no other way to save the sound Parts, but to separate the gangrene by a
total Abscission, though a gentler Hand is desired by ignorant Spectators.

Ingenia nostra, ut ^obiles and generesi equi, melius (...). Sen. 1. de ^^em.
In some Cases it is true, generous Souls as tender-mouthed Horses, are governed
by a gentler Bitt; and out of (...) de (...).
Pity to such as wander, ignorantly missing, rather than wilfully passing out
of the way, it is better with a gentle Hand to lead them into right Paths, than
to expel them.

All this Method our late King followed too long, till the cunning Designings
of the Achitophels, the Pride and Lust of pampered Men, the contempt of his
forgiving Temper, and the wilful Deviations from their Allegiance, of others,
had almost put it out of his Power to let the Dutiful and Just see that he had
a Care for himself and them.

I cannot here omit what King Basilicon Doron.
James the First, his Royal Grandfather, says of such a People; That he was
the Phrygian that too late, and at too great a price, was wise: For whereas by
all gentle means he endeavored to allure them to Obedience, the contrary
happened to him; so that all the return was, he lost his Endeavors upon an
ungrateful People, and unloosned the Government by his Lenity. This Age has
found this Remarque too true; and though I should be loath to excite his Royal
Grandson to any sort of Severity, yet I suppose it is a general Belief, That
His present Majesty will not suffer Himself to be imposed upon by a Party that
have so grossly abused the Lenity of His Royal Grandfather, Father, and Brother.
Who deserve not Clemency.


Nor can it be judged Severity in a Prince (who has seen so great and durable
Clemency contemned, and disposing men rather to the most cruel and wicked
Rebellions) to oblige these by the terror of his Laws to be kind to themselves,
as well as the Public, by creating no Disturbances, or publicly affronting
his Authority, as they did too lately in His Royal Brother's time. If there be
any such, who for sinister Ends are at this time of day pressing him with what
was urged to Plut, in Lacon.
Cleomenes, That it becomes good Magistrates to be mild to all: It is to be
presumed they may receive the like Answer, That it must not be to that degree,
as to bring Himself into contempt. Much less ought a Prince to use it to those
who have at any time heretofore joined in those Tumultuous Petitions in His
Royal Brothers Time, or in countenancing the Bill of Seclusion against His
Royal Person.

For although His Majesty may follow the Example of Panormitanus in vita
Alphonsi.
Alphonsus, who said, That private Offenses to his Person he could forgive; yet
he ought to be severe against those Offenses which concerned the Commonweal:
Phil. de Comines.
Or as Lewis the Twelfth of France, who being advised (after he came to the
Crown) to take some Revenge against that Great General Lewis de Tremoulie, that
had fought against him, replied, He would not punish the Affronts done to the
Duke of Orleance. Kings may forgive Offenses against them before they were
Kings.
And so His present Majesty may forgive the Injuries done to Him as Duke of
York; yet it is not reasonable to think, but that he will strenuously assert
and defend the Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown. So that it will be His
Majesty's Interest to trust none of those that would (contrary to the Laws of
God and Man) so wickedly have precluded him from his Right to the Crown: And it
will be advisable for all them to repent them of that unjust Act, and transmit
it as a Caution to their Posterity, never to attempt the like: Which will be
more honorable and advantageous for them to do, than the striving to set up a
spurious Title.

CHAP. XIII. Of Prudence requisite in a Prince.
IT is Prudence directs all the great Affairs of a Monarch to that Scope and
Terminus, The^se of Prudence in Government.
to which all must aim, who design an happy Reign over good Subjects. By it
they know when to relax, and when to straiten the Reins; where to place their
Favors, and whom to employ in every Administration; and by it they are guarded
from all the Vicious and Malevolent: For none dare disturb the Prudent, who
have no unarmed Parts, being all Head, all Eyes, all Hands: Inaccessible by the
Flatterers, inaccessible by the Vainglorious, the Ambitious, and Debauched.
Such a Prince is served by the Just, the Wise, the Prudent, and Skilful. Nullum
Numen abest, si sit Prudentia. Such a Prince is never short-sighted; he
foresees every thing in its Original Cause, fits every thing to its End.
Authors commending Prudence.


The (...) Po'^^. lib. 3.
Philosopher tells us, That it is the proper and peculiar Virtue of a King:
For, more things, says the Sententious Plura in summa fortuna auspi^^is and
consiliis quam telis and manibus geri. 13. Annal.
Historian, are done in great Empires, by Conduct and Counsels, than by Weapons
and Hands: Hence Flaccus in his Argonauticks -- non solis viribus aequum
Credere, semper acri potior prudentia dextra.


Hence it is that the great Proprium est prudentiae conci^are sibi animos
homi^um, and ad usus suns adjungere, cum virtutes spec^^ dispares prudentia
junguntur. 2. de Officiis ad Brutum.
Orator says, It is the Property of Prudence to attract and allure Men's Minds,
and render them useful. For, Virtues of different Classes by it are united;
there being nothing that destroys Authority, so much as the unequal and
untimely Interchange of Power, pressed too far, and relaxed too much; and
Hatred, Timorousness, and Temerity, Profuseness, and Parsimony: all which are
balanced, timed, and seasonably applied by Prudence.

What the Eye is to the Body, in discovering the various Figures, Dimensions,
and Distances of Bodies, whereby we may direct our Course to or from them; that
Light of the Soul (but much more pure) is Prudence, which sees not before only,
and one Hemisphere singly, but every where round; whereby the Soul forms (says
a subtle Jamblichus Epis^. ad Aphalum.
Philosopher) a most beautiful Model and Exemplar of all its Actions.

It is this Virtue (says another sage Damippus lib. 1. de Prudentia.
Author) which designs and disposes infinite Things, and so is the Parent and
Conductor of all other Virtues, by whose Prescript and Reason all things are
ordered.

To Exercise this useful Virtue, requires a Man not only of Ingenuity, The
Particulars wherein Prudence useful to a Prince consists.
Wisdom, Memory, disquisitive and speculative; but also conversant in great and
various Affairs, in Histories Ancient and Modern, whereby he may be able to
collate Matters, and adjust them to their proper Scope and Designs.

By this all Men (as well as Princes) take mature Counsel, consider things good
and evil, commodious and incommodious, examine all Instruments, as to their
fitness and unfitness, compare Circumstances, revise Examples, consider of
timing of Business, Places and Persons, natural tendencies, and where Authority
is to be used, and where Suasives; how to countermine, how to penetrate into
hidden Counsels of others, and to unmask their Disguises; to ruminate upon
things bypast, to order the present, and provide for the future.

It is Prudence teaches how to be skilful in knowing the Causes, Symptoms,
speediest and most effectual Cures of the Diseases of a State. For, as Prudence
is the very healthful constitution of a Soul, exerting no sickly or distempered
Actions; The Diseases of a State (...) by a Prudent Prince.
so a prudent Prince endeavors with all his Skill and Might to keep the
State in a most perfect temper of Health, vigor, beauty, and firmness: So that
under an old experienced Prince, there are no Symptoms of old and decrepit Age
in his Kingdom.

Archytas the Pythagorean says, As a General leads his Army, Sic^ipsam
soelicitatem, prasens vitae temperat regitque prudentia. Stobaeus.
the Admiral orders his Fleet, the Pilot his Ship, or God governs the World,
and the Soul the Body; so presentness of Prudence orders the Happiness of Life.

It were endless to remember all the Benefits that accrue to a Prince and his
People by this only Virtue, Prudence. Be the Body of the Commonwealth in a
Calenture by Factions and Seditions, a prudent Prince knows how to extinguish
the Fire, by substracting the Feeders, or breaking the Force of it, by
subdividing the complication of Causes, or diverting of it some other way. Does
it bleed by a Civil War? He can bind up the Wound. Does it suffer by want of
Nourishment? He can supply it with suitable Food, that will neither pamper it
to an unwieldy Sloth, or luxurious Licentiousness: He can by Bleeding or
Drenching clear it of all its superfluous Humors: He can assuage its Pains by
removing Grievances or Oppressions: He can invigorate every languid part, by
cordial Privileges and wholesome Laws; can set strait its dislocated or
distorted Joints, when any of the great Officers or Magistrates faulter, limp,
or halt in their Duties. Medaea never knew so many Balsamic Herbs to renew the
old Age of Jason, as a prudent Prince does Rules and Methods to cure all the
Distempers of his Kingdom, preserve it in a perfect Health, or restore it when
declining.

The Consideration of all which, made Quam multis virtutibus opus est, quibus
velut anchoris (...) navis firmatur? quam varia prudentia, qua velut clavo
gubernetur? Ep. ad Imp. Reg. etc.
Lipsius say, How many Virtues are necessary as Anchors to fasten the Ship of
the Commonwealth? how various Prudence, as a Rudder to govern it?

CHAP. XIV. Of a Prince's Courage and Conduct in Military Affairs.
IT is not only necessary that a Prince should know and exercise all those
Royal Virtues that make him adorable on the Throne, and in his Cabinet-Council,
when he is clothed with the Robes of Majesty: The Benefits to the Subjects
under a Martial Prince.
But he must likewise, for the preservation of his People from Foreign
Invasions, enlarging of his Empire, and keeping his Subjects in a profound
Peace at home, free from intestine Seditions and Rebellions, put on his Armor,
and act the Part of a Generalissimo.

This requires, according to the (...) Pol. lib. 2. c. 7.
Philosopher, many Virtues to establish it. Therefore in another place (...)
Id. l. 7. Pol. c. 2. Laws for encouraging Soldiers.
he says, In some Countries the Laws were framed toward the attaining of
particular Ends to the Governors and People: and in some the End of the Laws
were, that they might rule over their Neighbors; as he instanceth in the
Lacedaemonian and Cretan Government, where the greatest part of their Laws were
accommodated to Warfare; and concludes, That in all Nations which can hope to
be Superior to others, such Laws are in honor; as he instanceth in the
Scythians, Persians, Thracians, and Celtae. So in Carthage, to encourage
Military Service, so many Rings were given to the Soldiery, as they had served
in several Expeditions. In Macedonia it had been a Law, that he that had killed
no Enemy, was girt with an Halter: And among the Scythians, That such an one
should not drink of a Cup which at a certain Solemn Feast was to pass round.
Among the Spaniards there were as many Obelisks, or pointed Pillars, set about
their Graves, as they had killed Enemies. All which, and infinite more Places
in The necessity of having a Standing Force, is for preventing Rebellion, and
defending against Foreigners; as appears in Aristotle. (...) Lib. 7. c. 8.
him, and other Authors produceable, sufficiently clear the necessity of a
Prince's both having and encouraging Military Force: and all are as so many
Arguments, That it is very necessary, and conducible to the Prince's Glory and
Safety, as well as his Peoples, that he be not only valiant and courageous in
his own Person, but that he understand the Office of a great General. There are
none more famous in the World, than such Princes as have themselves led and
headed their own Armies; as is most eminently proved in Alexander the Great and
Julius Caesar. So in our King Richard the First, and Edward the First.

Hence it is that (...) Di^. l. 13.
Caesar was wont to say, There are two things which obtain, keep, and increase
the Princedom, viz. Soldiers and Money. For, as the great Non ignavia magna
imperia contin^ri, sed virorum armorumque faciendum certamen.
Historian observes, By Sloth no great Empires are held together, but it must
be done by Force of Men and Arms: It being Sua retinere, privatae domus; de
alienis certare, regi^m (...). 15. Annal.
the part of a Private Family to retain its own; but to carry Arms abroad, is a
Kingly Praise.

Such a Prince who has (when a Subject) hazzarded his Life for his King and
Country, shown his great skill in ordering and providing for his Army, in
disciplining it, How a Military Prince prevents Rebellious of his Subjects.
has been fortunate and successful, has a Genius to military Employment, a
brisk and vigorous Soul, not only (when he comes to be Sovereign himself) puts
a fresh Spirit into his People by raising their Hopes and Confidence that he
will increase the Glory of his Nation; but it makes him secure at home from
Seditions and Rebellions. For he is very foolhardy, or desperately Revengeful,
that will challenge a single Man who is experimented to have Valor and Skill
at his Weapon: much more is he who knowing his Prince such an one, and who has
the Power of his Kingdom to assist and defend him, will offer to molest his
peaceable Reign, unless he find some advantageous opportunity strangely
favorable to his Design, or take some Season before such a Prince be well
settled in his Throne (as despairing ever after to effect any thing) and be in
that desperate Condition, that if he then cannot push forward his Designs, he
must for ever live inglorious and miserable. Such was the Case of the rash,
ungrateful, and aspiring Duke of Monmouth, who to the eternal discredit of the
name of Protestant, so unpolitickly as well as maliciously raised the late
Rebellion against his Lawful Sovereign, pretending a Legitimacy, which his
Father (that the best of all Men living knew the falsehood of) disowned, and
more than once made public Declaration of it. How he prospered in this
attempt, the World knows; and if He and his Advisers had not been besotted,
they might have easily foreseen.

Besides this great and happy advantage to a valorous and Military Prince, How
a courageous Prince secures his Subjects from Foreign Enemies.
in the securing his own Country in Peace within themselves, the Benefit is
likewise great in the preventing of any affronts, injuries, or Indignities to
him or his People, from any of his Neighbors; for none dare N^m^ provocare au
let aut facere in juriam ei Regno aut populo, quem intelligit expeditum atque
promptum ad vindicandum. Vita Alex.
provoke or do Injury to a King, his Kingdom, or People, says Lampridius, that
knows the Prince prepared, forward, and ready to vindicate his People.

This military Genius in a Prince being supperadded to his other Royal Virtues
and Qualifications, furbisheth all their Arms, sets a fresh Gloss and Luster
upon them; and such a Prince being generally successful in his Attempts, (for
that commonly gives the first notice of his Courage and Conduct) will have
every one readily flock to his Standard, to Objicient se mucronibus
insidiantium, and se suaque jactabunt, quocun que desideraverit Imperantis
salus. Sen. 1. de Clem.
expose themselves betwixt him and the points of Traitors Swords, will have
them throw themselves and their Fortunes wherever the safety of their King
requires it. So Cicero notes, that Fabius Maximus, Marcellus, Scipio, Marius
and other great Generals, had the Emperors Office and Armies committed to them
not only for their Virtues, but also by reason of their fortunateness, to whom
Cic. pro Manilio. Quibus etiam venti tempeslatesque obsecundant.
the Winds and Tempests have been favorable. It greatly Vehementer enim
pertinet ad bella administranda, quid hos^es, quid socii, de Imperatoribus
existiment. Idem.
conducing to the management of War, what opinion the Enemies and Allies have
of such Generals, as the same Orator notes: and the like may be said of Warlike
Kings.

What immortal Glory is it to England, that it has had King Richard the First,
Of King Richard the First.
who carried his victorious Ensigns to the Holy Land! What a Memorial of his
Name, and of the Prowess of his People has King Edward the First left to all
Posterity, by the advancing his conquering Arms into the very High-Lands of
Scotland! Of King Edward the Third, and the Black Prince.
What renown did King Edward the Third, and the Black Prince his Son win in
France, when they not only won so great Victories, but brought the King
Prisoner, and (what no Nation else can boast of) had at the same time the King
of Scotland also Prisoner! It may be easily conceived that these two valiant
Princes, and the Sons of that great King, spirited the whole English Nation;
and in that Age the Renown of it equalled, what now the French ascribe to their
great King.

The Annals swell with the Achievements of Henry the Fifth, who in so few
Years, Of Henry the Fifth.
upon the matter, subdued all France. So that his Infant Son was Crowned King
at Paris.

It is not to be expected that many Ages can produce such Examples; but every
Reader of History may observe, That in every Age some one or two Crowned Heads
carry the Trophies from all the rest, fill their Countries with Triumphal
Arches, and raise pyramids of Glory to their own, and their Countries high
Renown.

A strange Factiousness in the Reigns of our three last Kings, and the dreadful
Rebellion, Why our three last Kings could not appear so Formidable abroad.
have deprived them of the opportunity of showing the English Prowess on the
public Theater, as it had been before. Yet when they were employed, they
showed they still retained the old English Valor; and now that God has sent
us a King who has aided both the French and Spanish Armies, What we may expect
under King James the Second.
more signally Triumphed at Sea over the Dutch, than any Admiral did before or
since: Who has a Soul and Genius inclined to Warlike and Heroic Actions, and
has with himself resolved, and publicly to his two Houses declared, by the
Assistance and Blessing of God, He will adventure his Person as far as any Man
in his Dominions for the Good of his People, and their safety; and endeavor to
raise the renown and repute of England as high as any of his Royal
Predecessors. I cannot see (if God prolong his Reign) why we should not hope to
reap all the advantages either England or any other Nation have enjoyed under
their most Victorious Princes: and though by so early a Rebellion he has been
necessitated to enter the Field so soon, to suppress his ungrateful Subjects;
it was but the giving him occasion to whet that Sword, and scour his Armor,
which had long been unexposed to the Sun; and by this Specimen of his Courage,
Conduct, and good Fortune, and his Subjects Valor, show to the World, that he
is able to secure his People from any Foreign Hostile Attacques: And if any of
his Neighbors be found to have furnished these Rebels with Arms and Money; no
doubt his Loyal Subjects will be very pressing to be employed to repay their
kindness: Character of a Martial Prince.
and they will find, that Tanti esse exercitum, quanti Imperatorem. Florus, l.
2. c. 18.
according to the Kings Warlike Spirit, so will his Armies be; it being true of
himself, what Nullum genus belli sit in quo illum non exercuerit fortuna.
Cicero pro lege Manil.
Cicero says of another, That there has been no kind of War in which Fortune
has not exercised him; so that his Armies may be secure both in his Discipline
and Example. The Qualifications of an Emperor (as Labor in negotio, industria
(...) agendo, celeritas (...) consiciendo, etc. Ibid.
Cicero describes them) all concurring in his Royal Person, (viz.) Labor in
Business, Fortitude in Danger, Industry in Action, and Swiftness in Execution,
joined with great Temperance, Faith and Humanity; to which I may adjoyn that of
Claudian, -- Ductorque placebit,
Qui non praecipiti rapiet simul omnia casu;
Sed qui maturo vel laeta, vel aspera rerum
Consilio momenta regens, nec tristibus impar,
Nec pro successu tumidus: spaciumque norandi,
Vincendique modum, mutatis noscet habenis.


CHAP. XV. Of the Burden and Care of Kings in Governing.
THere are as many other Virtues requisite in a good King, as there are in a
good Man; but I have only treated of those that are the Orientest of the Crown
Jewels.

I shall now consider two great advantages, that accrue to People by Kingly
Government: The first is the Burden and Care that Kings undergo in the
Government of their People; and the second, the benefit to the People in the
Hereditariness of Monarchy: and then pass to the King's Sovereignty, and the
principal Branches of it.

Nihil aliud est Imperium, nisi cura salutis alienae. Lib. 29.
Ammianus tells us, That Empire is nothing else but the Care of the safety of
others, which, according to the extent of their Dominions, the well or ill
Temperedness of their Subjects, are greater or less, as will be obvious to all
that will consider the continual Consultations and Directions, The Benefit of
Subjects by their Prince's Care.
necessary to be sedulously undergone and issued forth, the Dispatches,
Intelligences and regular ordering such an immense Body: Which made the great
Omnium otium illius labor, omnium delicias illius industria, omnium vacationem
illius occupatio. Vt remissam aliquando animam ^abe^it, nunquar^ solut^ (...)
Senec. Consol. ad Polyb.
Moralist and Courtier experimentally to assert, That the Sovereigns
Watchfulness makes our Sleep secure, his Labor procures our Holy Days, his
Industry our Delight, his continual Employment our Vacation; and that he may
enjoy sometimes a Relaxation, but never a Freedom from Cares. Which indeed can
be no otherwise, when we consider what he elsewhere Vnius curam excubare pro
sdute singulorum atque universorum.
says, That the Care of this one Sovereign watches for the Health of the
whole, and every particular. So that the immense Hae^ immensa multitudo, unius
Anima circundata, illius spiritu regitur, illius ratione flectitur. Id. de
Clem. c. 3.
Multitude (whether we take it for Men or Business) is encompassed with the
Soul of one, by his Spirit is governed, and by his Reason is bowed or inclined.

I find it reported of Pericles, That so often as he was made Commander in
Chief, he used at the putting on the Military Cloak, to excite himself to the
consideration of the Weight of his Employment, by observing that he was to
command over Freemen, Plut. in Apop.
Graecians and Athenians; upon which Reflection he was induced to approve
himself more Diligent, Careful and Industrious, The Weight of Government.
having the Burden of all their concerns upon him.

So a great and learned Non licet do^mitabundum esse qui clavo asside^^emper
itaque assidue Principi vigilandum est, ne quid erret, quia non nisi plurimorum
p^rnicie delinquit. Lipsius Epist.
Author tells us, He ought not to sleep who sits at the Helm, to pilot the
Ship, since no Sea has so great Tempests, as every Kingdom has. Therefore a
Prince is assiduously and constantly to watch, lest he err; because he cannot
do so, but it is with Mischief to many.

So the Alia ex aliis cura fatigat, Vexatque animos nov^ tempestas: Non sic
Libycis Syrtibus furit alternos volvere fluctus, Non curarum somnos domitor
p^ctora solvit.
Tragedian, not unelegantly according to his wont, describes the Cares of Kings
thus, -- One Care adds Fatigues to another, and new Tempests unquiet their
minds; so that the successive rolling Waves of the Sea, rage not so on the
Libyan Shelves or Quicksands, nor does sleep, the Subduer of Cares, unload
their Breasts.

Aelian. Variar. Histor. lib. 2. Lampridius in vita. Who not fit for Government.
Alexander Severus having Information, That Ovinius Camillus (a Senator of an
Ancient Family, but withal delicately effeminate) intended a Rebellion,
affecting the Government; sent for him to the Palace, and gave him thanks, that
he, when other good Men refused, did spontaneously offer himself to take care
of the Republic; carried him to the Senate, and called him his Companion in
the Empire; took him home, and made him wear the Imperial Robes; took him to
walk with him a five Miles march, allowing him, when tired, an Horse; and when
he was wearied of riding (being one not used to bodily Labor) he ordered him a
Chariot, and by other ways, letting him understand, that the weight of
Government was not to be sustained by such Shoulders as his, so wearied and
discouraged him, that he desired to be freed from the toylsomeness of it: and
when he understood the Emperors drift, and expected his severity, he only
recommended him to those Soldiers that were forward to elect him, and sent him
to his Village.

If therefore such little Trials discouraged Camillus, what must we think it
will do any Prince that has untractable Subjects, who force him to make Essays
of various Methods to reclaim them, and of a constant standing upon his Guard
to secure himself and the Government? Such are they who make many Princes
Reigns Calamitous, that might have been calm and peaceable.

Kingdoms, says my Lord St. Albans, represent our Bodies, Many Particulars
wherein the Burden of Government is discovered.
have their times of Health and Sickness, Seasons of Prosperity and Adversity,
flourish with Wealth, and languish in Poverty and Want, suffer Distempers,
Alterations and Changes. If therefore the Care and Concern of the Physician be
great, that has the Health of many Patients under his Cure: How much more must
this great Aesculapius's be, who has the superintending of infinite Numbers of
Subjects of all Degrees, to preserve them in their perfect State of Felicity
and Happiness, to watch over the growth of depraved Humors, and hinder their
Ferments from boiling into the Fevers and Calentures of Rebellion, to remove
all the Obstructions that may hinder the equal distribution of Nourishment in
Trade, Commerce, and the free Energy and Force of the Laws; so to order the
infinite Varieties of Tempers and Dispositions, that the very lucta and jarring
of them, may produce an Harmony in the whole. Besides these, there is a
Necessity to cherish the Virtuous and the Brave, to discountenance the Vicious
and Debauched, and keep them from infecting others; and finally so to manage
all things, as not only the present Age, but remote Posterity, may find the
happy Effects of his Reign. This is to undergo the nobilem Servitutem, as
Antigonus told his Son, Kingship was. Governors to be endowed with various
Qualifications.


Therefore Philo observes, That as the Pilot must change his Sails and Rudder;
and as the Physician uses not one kind of Remedy for all Diseases, but
observing the Increase or Remisness of Symptoms, the plenty or want of Humors,
and according to the changes of Causes, tries various Experiments: So a Supreme
Governor ought to be multiform, or endowed with variety of Qualifications; to
act one way in times of Peace, and another in War: being opposed by few, to act
resolutely and courageously; if by many, to add to these Authoritative
Suasives; in public Dangers to act himself, and to commit those Ministeries to
others which require Labor more than Conduct: In his Councils to be a Judge,
in his Exchequer an Accountant, in his Armies a General, in his Navies Admiral;
in his whole Dominions the prime Gentleman, Patriot, and Peer, in Virtue as
well as Place.

Besides all these foregoing Considerations, though a Prince by his own
Justice, Prudence and other Regal Virtues, and the well disposedness of his
People may keep his own Domimions in Peace: and though there were no
Whirlwinds, Earthquakes or Trepidations of Faction and Sedition in his own
Kingdom; yet a King's Care is no less in making diligent Observations upon the
Designs and Actions of all his Neighbour-Princes and States; to shelter his own
Subjects from Tempests and Hurricanes from abroad, to divert Storms, A Prince's
Care in preserving his People at home and abroad.
to mingle Interests, or divide, as shall be most for the advantage of his
Subjects; to assist his Allies, to countermine the Clandestine Designs of his
Enemies abroad.

These require an Atlas to support this immense Structure of Government: The
Employment of many under a Prince.
These require many Hands of the roughest, delicatest and strongest; many Feet
of the swiftest and steadiest; many strong Shoulders and brawny Arms; many
severe commanding or charming Eyes; many wise, subtle and toyling Brains;
infinite Varieties of Tempers and Dispositions, which must be directed, ordered
and employed by that presiding Soul, that every where, in every part, and in
all seasons, must give Life and Energy to all its Members, Faculties and
Employments.

Furthermore, A Prince much concerned for his Fame.
the Actions of Princes after their deaths, will be judged Suum cuique decus
pos^^^ it is rependit. Tacit. 4. Annal.
without Flattery and Varnish. As after Death and Corruption of parts, the
Virtues of Kings perfume their Graves, ennoble, and by Examples, refine
Posterity, and leave a taste of immortality behind, out-living their Marble. So
if they rule ill, they cannot think by their Praesenti potentia extingui posse
sequertis avi m^moriam. Id.
present Power, to extinguish the memory of the next Age, says the judicious
Historian. Therefore Lipsius says, Post fata nullus est locus, nullum tempus
quo funestorum Principum manes a posteris exe^rationibus conquiescent.
After their Deaths, there is no place then, or time, wherein the Ghosts of
detested Princes will be free from Execration.

Since therefore Kings are like heavenly bodies, cause good or evil times, have
much Veneration, but no rest; since their Examples are constantly imitated; so
that, as A^ virtutem ille praeit? sequimur: a^ vitia? inclinamus: been beateque
agit? slorem^s: improspere? labimur aut ruimus cum illo. Epist. ad Polit.
Flexibiles in quamcunque partem du^imur a Principe and sequaces. Panegyr.
Lipsius says, If a Prince lead to Virtue, we follow; if to Vice, we easily
bend to it; if he live happily, we flourish; if unfortunately, we fall into the
praecipice with him: Or that of Pliny be true, That Subjects are mostly plyant,
and easily handed into whatsoever way the Prince leads; it necessarily follows,
That this Consideration must bring a great Addition to their Cares. For such
elevated Souls must needs undergo great Anxiety, how to comport themselves so,
as being conspicuous in Virtue and Conduct, they may be secure of good Report.
For as Omnia facta dictaque Principis rumor excipit, nec magis ei quam Soli
latere contigit. 1. de Clem.
Seneca says, Fame wafts abroad all the Deeds and Works of Princes, that they
cannot more lay hid than the Sun. Hence Possibly we may conclude the Reason of
that Inscription on Constantine's and others Coin, Soli invicto Comiti: For as
the Sun, not only by his Light and enlivening Heat, brings that unspeakable
benefit to the whole Earth and living Creatures, as a King is to do to his
Subjects; so by its Diurnal Motion, we discover it never to be at rest.

Therefore it must be a great Care in a Prince (that is placed in his Kingdom,
as the Sun in our Vortex, whereby his Actions can never be long hid) that he
act nothing that Cordati and magni Principis est nihil committere quod ipsius
dignitati aut famae detrahit.
may detract from his Fame, and the Dignity of his Place. All the Actions of
Sovereigns, being not only Examples but Precepts; there being no such
Incentments to Virtue or Vice, as their Practices.

Besides, A Prince to be Exemplary in Virtue.
what I have hitherto delivered on this Head, there lies still an heavier
Burden upon a Prince, That for his Subjects sake, he be not only virtuous
himself, but by all his Industry, endeavor to take care that they be so
likewise. I know this is much facilitated by his own Example: For as Vita (...)
ad (...), ad (...) perio nobis (...) quam exemplo. Pane^^^.
Pliny says, The Life of the Prince is a standing Law of manners, to it we
direct our course, are all Heliotropes turning to it. For Subjects need not so
much command as Example: yet we find, that when some in the Senate moved (...)
suasurus (...) quibus (...) essemus. Lib 3. Annal.
Tiberius, that he would restrain the Roman Luxury; he writes to them, That he
knows not whether he should persuade them to pass by the strong and overgrown
Vices, rather than to discover how unable they were to suppress them; and so
tells them that he would not have the matter of envy to fall upon him, but
refers it to the proper Officers: There being Majus aliqued and excelsius a
(...). Ibid.
something greater and more sublime, required of a Prince, ( viz. the guarding
of Italy, the Sea and Provinces.

By this we may see how arduous a task it is to root out vicious Customs and
Habits, which by a short Intermission of Executing the Laws severely, will soon
be so overgrown, A Prince to (...) care that hi^ Subjects be Virtuous.
that it will be much Labor to dig up their Roots, and requires a long and
frequent weeding, 'till all the Young Plants, the Evil Plentiful Seed has
produced, be cleansed out of the Ground.

This Tiberius, that declined this task, was at that time in such esteem, that
some Provinces (as particularly the further Spain) would have built Temples to
him; and he denying that, yet could tell the Senate, That it was Majoribus meis
dignum, rerumque vestrarum providum, constable ant^^^ in periculis, offensionur^
pro utilitate publica non pavidum credant. Tacit. Annal. lib. 4.
enough to him that he possessed the Supreme place, and desired them to
witness, and Posterity to remember, That they believed he was worthy of his
Ancestors, was provident of their Affairs, constant in Danger, not fearful to
give Offense to any, for the profit of the Commonwealth. These things, to him,
should be Temples and the beautifulest Statues. In this we find a short
Description of the Burden of a Prince, and a shorter but comprehensive one in
Maximo Imperio maximam esse cur (...). Ad Caesarem.
Sallust, That the greatest Empires have the greatest Cares.

Sed (...) adstricti moris A^ctor fuit antiquo ipse cultu victuque; (...) inde
in (...) and aemulandi amor validior quam poena ex legibus. and met^^. 3. Annal.
Tacitus tells us of Vespasian. That he was Author of a stricter manner of
living than formerly, using the Ancient Frugal Diet, and plainer Cloths; which
had that effect, that the study to imitate the Prince, was more efficacious,
than the Fear and Punishment of the Laws.

If then, to be conspicuous in all sorts of Virtue, and the Actions (...) 5.
Polit. c. 10.
that flow from them, and the whole, higher and lower class of them, in the
most Comprehensive Qualifications, be no small Labor, and require no small
sedulous Care to effect in ones self; how much more must it be, to make so many
Millions more Virtuous by Example, Precept, strict Vigilance and Punishments?
Every one that attentively reflects on this, must needs own it an Herculean
Labor, and such as exceeds almost the Apprehension of the Subjects.

Since then, we are happy in such a King as has laid this as a Corner Stone
upon which his Throne is built, King James the Second's discouraging Vice.
by his own Example, to discountenance all Vice; and since so great and weighty
a Burden of the well-ordering and governing so great a People lies with great
pressure upon him, (for our ease and tranquillity) let us not be so impolitick,
unworthy, or ungrateful by Seditions, Factions, or Rebellions to cause him to
undergo more disquiets. For the result will be, Our own Miseries and Calamities
will sit close behind us, when we set our Faces against such a Prince, worthy
of the most Imperial of Diadems.

CHAP. XVI. Of the King's Authority and Sovereignty.
AN awful Reverence, The Sublimeness of The Subject.
Qualm, and Trembling, must necessarily surprise every one that considerately
raises his Thoughts to contemplate so sublime a Subject as the Sovereignty of
Princes; least what he delivers should appear too dis-spirited, and below the
dignity of the Theme; or he should be guilty of such Indiscretion, as to think
he could enrich the Crown and Scepter with Lacker of his own Composure.

Magnum propiusque noscendum id eruditissimo viro visum. Lib. 6. Epist. 16. Jam
navibus cinis inciderat, quo prepius accederet, calidior and densior. Jam
pumices nigrique and ambusti, fracti igne lapides. Ib.
Pliny the younger tells us, that the great Naturalist, his Uncle, was so
desirous to discover the true causes of the burning of Vesuvius, what materials
they were that afforded Fuel to so lasting a Fire, and by what imprisoned
Spirits, so violent eruptions of Flame and Cinders, were at times belched out
of the Caverns of that Mountain (though less stupendous than Aetna, Hecla, or
other Vulcano's) that his curiosity led him to climb so near the Eruptions of
those Flames, that Posterity lost the Benefit of his Observations, by his
untimely Death in the approaches he made.

We daily see the Pyralis not only singe her Wings, but often lose her Life by
her rash approaches to the Flame. It behooves me therefore, with all the
Circumspection I can, to endeavor to keep my self from such a Fate, as
Temerity, too prying or daring an Attempt, may bring upon me on the one hand;
or that I fall not into as unpitied a Destiny of being contemned and despised
for too gross and palpable Flattery, in equalling the Throne of Kings with that
of the Deity. The Flattery of some, especially of Valerius Maxim^^.


A bold stroke of this kind of Sycophantry we find in Penes quem hominum
deorumque consensus, maris ac terrae Regimen esse voluit: cujus coeles^i
providentia virtutes de quibus dicturus sum benignissime foventur, vitia
severissime vindicantur. Prologo.
Valerius Maximus his Epistle Dedicatory to Tiberius; wherein he tells him that
he invokes him as Patron of his Work, to whom, by the consent of Men and Gods,
the Government of Sea and Land was given; by whose Heavenly Providence, the
Virtues he was to treat of were most benignly cherished, and the Vices severely
Chastized: and in the same style (though otherwise reputed a grave Author) he
goes on, ascribing a Divinity to his Person; telling him, that if from Jove the
ancient Orators begun their Speeches, and the Poets invoked some Deity, He more
Mea parvitas eo justius ad favorem tuum decur^it, quod catera divia^^ (...)
opiaione c^lligitur tu^, prasenti side, paterno avitoque (...) par videtur.
Idem.
justly courted his Favor; other Divinities being founded upon Men's Opinions,
but that of Tiberius's, by the Testimony of the present Age, was equal to the
Deities of Julius or Augustus. Yet this Tiberius was not only a wicked Prince,
but one that rejected such Deifyings, as we find in Tacitus, that the farther
Spain having sent Ambassadors to the Senate, that according to the Example of
Asia, they might erect a Temple to Tiberius and his Mother; upon which
occasion, (says my Valid^s alioqui (...) ^onoribus, and re pond^^dum ratus iis
qu^rum rumore (...). 4. Annal. (...) ^enies Temples to be built to his Honor.
Author) being resolved to slight the Honor, and to stifle the Rumor, that he
inclined to Ambition, he tells the Senate, That he had not appeared averse to
the desires of those of Asia, because Augustus had not prohibited a Temple to
be built to him and Rome, at Pergamus; and he was resolved to observe all his
deeds and resolutions as a Law, and had yielded to the Erecting that Temple,
the rather, because to the Worship of himself, the Veneration Quia ^ultui meo
veneratio Senatus adj^ngebatur.
of the Senate was joined. But as it was pardonable once to have received that
honor. so to be made sacred with the Image of the Deity through all the
Caeterum ut seme^ recepiss^ veniam habuerit; Ita per omnes Provinci is effigy
numinum sa^^ari, ambitiosum and superbum; and van^scet Augusti honor si
promiscuis (...) vulgatur. Idem.
Provinces, was to be Ambitious and Proud, and the Honor of Augustus would be
lessened, if it were made common by promiscuous Adulations. Therefore he tells
the Senate that he knew himself to be a mortal Man, and to exercise the offices
of Men, and it was enough to him, if he filled the prime place, was worthy of
his Ancestors, etc. (as I have touched before.) Haemihi in (...), pro
sepu^^^ris ^pernuntur. Idem. Vainglorious Princes.
These in their Minds, should to him be Temples, and the most beautiful Images,
which should be durable; for those which are built of Stone, if the judgment of
Posterity be turned to Hatred, are despised as their Sepulchers.

Yet however this subtle Emperor managed this affair, Vainglorious Princes.
it must be acknowledged, that some Princes have been so Vainglorious, as to
deem themselves above the condition of Mortals; as we have Instances in Amulius
Zo^aras Annal. Tom. 2. fol. 54.
King of the Latins, and after him in Plutare. in Vita.
Heliogabalus, who endeavored to appear such by imitating Lightning. So it is
recorded of Se quidem Jovis silium di^i, sed corporis agri vitia sentire.
Curtius lib. 4.
Alexander, that he desired to be reputed the Son of Jupiter Ammon; and when he
was wounded at the assault of Mazaga, he said, though he was said to be
Jupiter's Son, yet he felt the smart, though his Flatterers told him it was not
Blood was spilt, but a more generous Ichor of the Gods that run in his Veins.
So Coelius Rhodig. lib. 3. c. 5.
Psaphon the Libyan, taught the Birds to style him a great God. So Pezell.
Mellif. Tom. 1. p. 228.
Lysander had Altars built to him, and Sacrifices appointed in Honor of him,
and had his Brass Statue erected at Delphos. Julius Suetonius, cap. 22.
Caesar likewise suffered such Honors to be decreed to him, as were the Badges
and peculiar Ensigns of a Divinity, as Temples and Altars, a Priest and Couch.
Of Augustus and Tiberius I have touched before. Caligula proceeded something
higher, for he took off the Heads of the Statues of Jupiter Olympius, and other
of their reputed Deities, and placed the figure of his own Head upon them, and
had his Temples, Priests and Sacrifices, and was desirous to be worshipped as a
Deity. The like Examples might be produced of Domitian, Dioclesian and others.

It is to be owned, That the longer space of time is measured, since these kind
of adorations were affected by these Heathen Emperors, How Princes may admit
Honors.
the less of esteem and value they obtain; yet it is worth observing likewise,
what the most judicious Optima quippe mortalium alti^ma cupere: sic Herculem
and Liberum apud Gracos; Quirinum apud nos deum numero additos -- unum
insatiabiliter parandum, prosperam sui memoriam: nam contemptu Famae contemni
Virtutes. Ibid.
Historian notes, upon the forecited occasion, That some ascribed the refusing
of these Divine Honors to Tiberius's modesty; others, to the distrust he might
have of the Senates relishing it well; others interpreted it a Token of a low
degenerate Spirit: for, as he observes, The best of all Mortals have coveted
the highest Honors; so Hercules and Bacchus, among the Greeks, and among the
Romans, Quirinus were added to the Number of the Gods! Therefore he commends
Augustus, that hoped for such Honors, and to such Princes all things else are
added. For that which he calls a prosperous Memory, he says is principally to
be obtained; and concludes, That Fame being contemned, so likewise are Virtues.

Although therefore the Vanity of such Emperors, as required this Superfetation
of Honor, Honor due to Sovereign Princes.
be justly censured; yet when we abstractedly consider the Sovereignty of
Princes, from their Personal lessening of their esteem, by unkingly Vices; we
must needs pay the greatest deference to it, as that which is a lively Shadow
of that Divinity, by which Kings Reign.

So Majestas Imperii salutis est tutela.
Curtius tells us, That the Sovereignty is the Defense of that Salus Populi;
which is the very Ground-Work-stone of Government: And Seneca truly observes,
That once Toll Majestatem. omnisque (...) Imperii contextus in multas parts
diss^^iet. 1. de Clem.
remove Majesty, that is, Sovereignty) and the whole Contexture of Government
flies into Splinters, or is disjoynted. For without a Sovereignty (beyond which
is no Appeal) be lodged somewhere, no People can be governed: That Tot
mortalium millibus una anima praesideat. Ille enim vinculum per quod Respublica
cobaeret; Ille spiritus vitalis quem haec tot millia trahunt; nihil ipfa per se
futura nisi onus and praeda, si men's illa Imperii subtrabatur. De Clem. lib. 1.
c. 3.
being that Soul, that Life which enlivens, directs and orders all the Subjects
in their several Capacities; more sensibly than the Philosophers Ether, or
Anima Mundi, does the Macrocosm or Sublunary World. Therefore Seneca says of
the Sovereign, That he is the Bond which holds fast the State together; he is
that vital Breath which so many Thousands draw in, which otherwise, as a
liveless and unwieldy Load, would prove a Booty, if that Soul of the Empire
were taken away.

Of this Sovereignty of Princes it is, that (...) phant. apud Stobaeum, Sermon.
46. Kings called Gods, as deriving Authority from God, or his Vicegerents.
Ecphantas the Pythagorean says, It is the Privilege first of God, and then
of the King, under him, not to be ruled by any: and it may be rationally
conceived, that it was from this sense of absolute Sovereignty, flowing from
the Divine Being that disposes of the great and weighty Affair of Government;
That Sovereigns are both ^n Scripture, and by Heathen and Christian Writers,
called Gods: The import of which Name being a Denomination of a Being,
Sovereign over other subjected Beings. In the Chapter of Monarchy I have
recited some of the expressions in Scripture; and for Heathen Writers, one can
scarce read any Historian, where their Emperors are not called Dii or Divi;
Contzen de Rep. lib. 7. c. 4.
and in Justinian, Divus Imperator is generally used for Emperor.

So the Majestic Pavillions, or Cloth of Estate, under which the Emperors
usually sat, were called (...), little Heavens, for such Gods to sit under:
and though some Sueton. in Domit. c. 13.
affected these too much, or had them given them by their Flatterers (as in
Martial of Domitian, -- Edictum Domini Deique nostri; and the Persian Monarchs,
more than any, affected such Titles, as A^^mian. Marcel. Hist. 17.
Rex Regum Sapor, particeps Syderum, Frater Solis and Lunae; Sapor King of
Kings, partaker of the Stars, or one endowed with the Heavenly Nature of the
Stars, Brother of the Sun and Moon;) yet if we take these Expressions in the
sense of the Emperor Cantacuzen, it may be allowed: For he says, (...). Apol.
6. adv. Mah^met.
That absolutely the Name of Lord, and so of God, is only due to God Almighty,
and that man has it, with some Addition of Person or Place. And we may
consider, that as the Supremacy of Princes and their Governments is delegate
from the highest (their Judgment being also called his) so in a general Name
they are titled Gods, even by God himself, Sthenid. Pythag^apad Stobaeum. Ser.
46. (...).
because here on Earth, they should, for their Power, be his Imitators; and we
find the Apostle Romans 13. calls Supreme Governors, Potestates supereminentes.

In the Codes we frequently read (long after Christianity was received) nostra
Divinitas, nostra Perennitas, nostra Aeternitas, Divinae Vocis Oraculum: Yet we
find the Christian Fathers refusing to give the Title of God to the Heathen
Emperors. So Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. in Pr^^^m. (...).
Socrates says, He doubts he shall be reprehended of some, because he did not
style the Emperors most Divine, and Lords, and by other Titles, which the use
of times had allowed: And (...) imperatorem qui d^um dici^; nisi homo sit, non
est Imperator. Apol. c. 33.
Tertullian says, That he cannot call the Emperor God, either because he
cannot lie, or dare not mock him; or because he will not be so styled, who is a
Man: For he denies him (says he) to be Emperor, who calls him a God; for
unless he be a Man, he is no Emperor.

This style of God, the Samaritans gave to Antiochus Joseph. Archaeol. 12. c. 7.
Epiphanes, stiling him in their Epistles, God, who had, to his utmost, defiled
the Temple of the true God: So the Jews in their Act. Apost. 12. v. 22.
Acclamations, styled Herod Agrippa, no longer Man but a Deity; and Cato in
Orig. apud Macrob.
Mezentius, commanding his Subjects to offer unto him all such Sacrifices as
they had Destinated to the Gods, professing withal, that no Deity was above
himself; justly deserved the Title of contemptor Divum.

The obsequious Impiety in the Elder times (says Titles of Honor, part 1. c.
4.
Mr. Seldom) of attributing the Name of God to the Emperors, was the Cause, it
seems, that, as well in the Christian as Heathenish Times and States, Swearing
by the Prince.
the Subjects of the Empire continued that ill Custom of swearing by their
Princes: So in Antoninus's and Commodus's time, it was usual to swear per
Genium Principis, and per Principis Venerationem, as it is in a Rescript of
Constable it. Alex. Sev. c. De rebus creditis.
Alexander Severus; under whom the learned Citius per omnes Deos, quam per unum
Genium Caesaris pejeratur. Apol. c. 28.
Tertullian upbraids the Romans, that they readilier forswore themselves by all
the Gods, than by the one Genius of Caesar. Horace speaking of Augustus, says,
Jurandasque tuum per Nomen ponimus Aras: and Nam Imperatori cum Augusti nomen
accepit, tanquam praesenti and corporali Deo sidelis prastanda est devotio, and
impendendus pervigil samulatus: Deo enim vel privatus, v^l militans servit, cum
sideliter eum diligit, qui Deo regnat autore. Veget. de Re milit. c. 5. The
Names of Heathen Deities in the Names of Kings.
Vegetius gives the Reason for it, because to the Emperor, when he takes the
Name of Augustus upon him, faithful Devotion is to be exhibited, and watchful
Service, as to a present and corporal God. For he that is a private, or a
military Person, serves God, when he faithfully loves him who governs by Gods
Authority: from whence and many other Authorities the great Seldom says it
appears, how, both among Christians, Mahometans and Heathens, a certain
Sanctitas Regum (as in Suetonius, Julius Caesar calls it) was specially
regarded; and he instanceth in many Nations who had a Deities Name in the
Kings; as from Baal and Astaroth, Beleastartus, Abdastartus, Ithobaal; so from
Nebo a Babylonian Idol, Nebuchodonezar, Nabopollassar; so from Belin or
Abellio, a British Deity, Cassebelin, Cynobelin. All which seem not only to be
the Affectation of the Princes, but to be intended to denote the Divine
Character that Princes bore. Titles of first Founders of Empires continued to
Successors. Caesar.


Hence we may Note, Titles of first Founders of Empires continued to
Successors. Caesar.
That the Name of (...) Czar is used by all the German and Muscovite Empero^s:
because the Roman Empire was founded by Julius Caesar; and this Custom was of
older Date: For in Holy Story, all the Egyptian Kings, 'till Solomon's time,
are called Pharaoh; which was not a proper Name or Surname of a Family, but
only a Title which every one had belonging to him, as he was King; which, as
Manetho says, begun in Pharaoh Narecho, and Josephus says in Menis, much
ancienter than Abraham; but Suidas is positive, That it was derived from the
first King, or him that first had that called Ptolomies: So the Parthian
Princes, from Arsaces (their first great Monarch) were called Arsaces;
according to whose Memory, says Cujus memoriae hunc honorem Parthi tribuerunt,
ut omnes exinde Reges suos Arsacis nomine nuncupent. Hist. lib. 41.
Justin, the Parthians attributed that Honor, that all their Kings, from
thence forward, were called Arsaces.

So the Title of Augustus was given to Octavius, next Successor to Julius, by
the Senate, as if he had been something more than Human, says (...) In vita.
Dio: And as Non tatum novo, sed etiam ampliore, cognomine, quod (...) quaeque
Religiosa and in quibus Augurato quid consecratur, Augusta dicuntur.
Suetonius says, not only by a new, but a more ample Surname, because, that
all Religious places, in which any thing Augurly was consecrated, were called
Augnsta; for which he cites Ennius, Augusto Augurio, postque inclyta condita
Roma est. This came from Augeo, which (besides the common sense of it) is a
proper word enough to sacrifice, as augere Hostias; and in Sextus Pompeius
Augustus is interpreted Sanctus; the Greeks interpret it by (...), or Venerable
or most honorable; and it seems to be translated from the holy Use of the
Word, whence it was derived: and as (...) In vita.
Dio says, a Designation of the splendour or greatness of their Dignity, the
Emperors after were styled Caesares Augusti; neither of the words denoting any
Power in them; but are now, and ever since the first Family ended, honorary.
According to this kind of continuance of Names in Succession, are those
Patronymics of Achemenidae in the Persian Kings, Alevadae in the Thessalian,
Cecropidae in the Athenian; from Achemenes, Alevas, Cecrops: So the Alban Kings
in Italy, had every of them the addition of Sylvius, most of the Bithynian
Kings were called Nicomedes.

In the latter times, the Constantinopolitan Emperors much affected to give
their Children and themselves, the great Name of Constantine. So were the
Danish Kings anciently titled Shieldungs from their King Shield: The French had
their Merovings, and the old Kentish Kingdom here its Oiscings from Merove and
Oisca. Concerning this successive assuming such honorary Names from the first
Families, the curious Reader may observe many more in the most disquisitive Mr.
Seldom.

The use I make of it is to show, That Sovereign Princes, The Reason of such
Titles.
as some of them affected to derive their Power and Authority from the Deity;
so others from such as had been more Signal and Eminent in their several
Reigns, that they might with the Title, seem to derive a Fame, Glory and
Authority from them, and in those Attributes, be judged their rightful
Successors. Of the first Kings from Adam.


Before I treat of some Attributes that are given to Sovereign Princes, I shall
take notice of some things I have either omitted, or less fully explained in
the Chapter of Monarchy; especially considering it will give some light to the
Authority and Sovereignty, many learned Men have ascribed to Princes in general.

(...). Cedrenus.
Cedrenus makes Adam the first King and Governor, when he says he governed or
commanded all mankind as long as he lived, and Seth succeeded him in the
Empire: and if we may believe the Letter of Alexander the Great to Aristotle,
mentioned by Lib. 2. c. 11.
Joseph Ben Gorion a Jew, and Rabbi Abraham, Zacuthius and others, Kenan the
Son of Enoch, Grandchild of Seth, was Emperor over all the World. In Berosus we
find the Kings of Chaldaea, that were before the Flood; were Alorus, Alasparns,
Amchon, Amenon, Metalarus, Daorus, Adorachus, Amphis, Ottartes and Xisuther;
which according to Cedrenus and others, was Noah: From him the Greek Authors
derive the supreme Monarchy of the Earth to Sem.

The first mention in Holy Writ of a Kingdom, is that of Nimrod's; The first
Kingdom from Nimrod.
of whom Moses says, The beginning of his Kingdom was in Babel, Erech, Acad,
and Calna, in the Land of Sinaar: and he is by most Writers judged the Founder
of the Assyrian Monarchy, which he had begun about the Forty fifth Year of
Abraham. Cedrenus says, The Assyrians made Nimrod a God, and placed him among
the Stars of Heaven, and called him Orion. In his Age (says the Judicious Tit.
Hon. ^. 1. p. 1^.
Seldom) there was so general a Propagation of this Title of King over the
Earth, that there is scarce a Nation whereof there is Memory in those Ages,
without a King, or Prince, or Monarch assigned to it. So, besides the Division
of the Earth among Noah's Posterity, (said in Scripture to be according to
their Language, and according to the Families in their Nations) we find in
Profane Histories, Kings first Governors in all Countries.
that the Kingdom of the Sicyonians began in Aegialeus, that of Tanaus in
Scythia, and of Vexoris in Egypt; and others are cast in, in the Age of
Nimrod. In the Holy Text also are frequent Occurrences of Kings to be referred
to that Age; as that of Abraham's Wars with Kedorlaomer King of Elam, and the
Kings of diverse other Nations are mentioned; whence it is, (...).
Cedrenus says, that about Serug's days (who was born about 170 Years after
the Flood) Men arrogating to themselves Power over each other, made themselves
Emperors and Kings, and did first use Arms, and made War on each other.

Afterward, the Course of the Holy Story shows us the same, not only naming
expressly the particular Kings (which had been made either by Sword or by
Choice), but says, The Israelites desired Samuel to give them a King, to judge
them, according as all other Nations had.

Although, says Mr. Seldom, diverse of the chiefest States of the old Grecians
(and I think (says he) only of the Grecians in the elder Ages) were in their
most flourishing Times Democracies, or Optimacies; yet the more ancient States
there, were in every place Monarchies, as is expressly noted by (...). In
Boeoticis.
Pausanias, That every where in Greece, in the ancient Times, their States were
Monarchical, and not Popular.

Having premised this, I come now to the Epithets given to such Sovereign
Princes, as Kings, Emperors, Lords, and the Attributes of Majesty, etc. in the
Abstract, or in the second or third Person, and other high and lofty Titles
given to them, either justly, The Title of Kings.
or by Flattery.

Concerning Kings, The Title of Kings.
the Account that I have given of them in the Chapter of Monarchy, may suffice.
I shall only add, That in the Assyrian Empire, Nebuchodonosor is styled King of
Kings; Daniel, c. 2.
and after the translation of this Empire to the Persians, Artaxerxes Mnemon,
in his Commission to Ezra for the Restitution of Jerusalem, and the Temple,
thus salutes him; Artaxerxes King of Kings, to Ezra the Priest: And on the
Great Cyrus his Tomb this Epitaph was written in Persian Characters, (if you
believe the Authors that have it), Eustach. ad Dionys. and Strab. Geog. 15.
(...).
Here I Cyrus lie, who was King of Kings.
And the bare Name of (...), the King, without addition, is especially used for
the Persian; whence the Nation is styled also, (...), The most Kingly Nation.
Diodor. bibl. (...).
Sesoosis, the same with Sesostris in Herodotus, King of Egypt, attributed to
himself the Title of King of Kings, in his erected Columns of Victory: And
(...). Earth and Water given as Tokens of Homage.
Plutarch reports, That Tigranes King of Armenia was angry, and would not
vouchsafe to answer Lucullus, because in his Letter he had styled him King
only, and not King of Kings.

The Acknowledgment of Regal Supremacy, paid by way of Homage, from Princes or
People, under the Subjection of such Kings, was the Acceptance, upon their
Demand, of Earth and Water: A special Example of which, is in (...) Her^dot. in
Melpom.
Darius's Letters to Indathyrsus King of the Scythians; where he first invites
him to the Field: but if he would not, then, bringing to the Sovereign as
Gifts, Water and Earth, come to a Parley; as the Words run. So in the Assyrian
Empire, the King commands (...) Lib. Judith.
Olophernes, That he should bid all the Western Nations prepare him Earth and
Water. By the yielding up of these two Elements, they acknowledged a giving up
to those Sovereigns their Jurisdiction over them.

When William the Conqueror landed at Malmesh. de Gestis Reg. lib. 3. Hist.
Norman. apud Camd.
Hastings in Sussex, as he came out of his Ship, he fell down; and one of his
Knights told him, Sir, you have possession of England, and shall be King: and
observing that he had took up Sand and Earth in his Hand, he added, And you
have taken Livery and Seisin of the Country. So when Land is sold in England,
the way of receiving Possession is by delivering a Clod of the Earth, and a
Twig of Wood, if any be growing on it.

To denote also the Sovereignty of such Princes, kissing of the Feet, or
embracing their Knees, or Adoration was used. Kissing the Teet, Knees, and
Hands of Princes.
(...)
Herodotus says, When the old Persians meet, you may know whether they be
equal or not: for in Salutation they kiss one another; but if one be something
inferior, they kiss only the Cheeks; and if one be far more ignoble, he falls
down, adoring the other. The manner of which Adoration is yet observed in the
Eastern Empires, as may be seen in the Prints of them in Mr. Ogilby's Asia,
especially in Japan. Thence we have Adorari more Persarum, and (...), which is
expressed by Euripides thus, personating Phrygius to Orestes, (...)
(...) --
Falling down, I adore thee, O King, after the Persian manner.
In Alexander's turning the Grecian Liberty into this Servitude, Q. Curtius
expresses it by Venerari, procumbere, and humi corpus prosternere; and thereof
Justin says, the Retentus est a Macedonibus mos salutandi Reges, explosa
adoratione. Jam coepisset Heliogabalus adorari Regum more Persarum.
Macedonians retained the manner of saluting their Kings, exploding the
Adoration. Lampridius, speaking of Alexander Severus, says, That he forbad
himself to be adored; but Heliogabalus began to be adored after the Persian
manner.

As to the Kissing, the Learned Tit. Hon. c. 3.
Seldom says, It was usual in Adoration among the Romans, either to kiss the
Images of their Gods, or adoring them, to stand somewhat off before them,
Cicero in Varr. Act. 5. Lucret. lib. 1. Sape salutantum, etc.
solemnly moving the Right Hand to the Lips, and then casting it, as if they
had cast Kisses, and turning the Body on the same Hand, (which was the right
Form of Adoration): and it grew by Custom, first, that the Emperors (being
next to Deities, and by some accounted as Deities) had the like done to them,
in acknowledgment of their Greatness. After some of the Roman Emperors would
be called Jupiter, be supposed carnally to lie with Venus and the Moon, and
(upon their infinite suchlike frantic Conceits) pretended themselves to be
Divine, they were not satisfied with Those usual Customs, but thought
themselves much wronged, and their Majesty impaired, if they who saluted them
Dio Cass. Hist 59.
presumed to kiss above the Knee. We find Examples of Kissing the Hands and
Feet in Caligula: Therefore Homo natus in hoc, ut mores liber^^ civitatis
Persica servitute mutaret. 2. de Benef. c. 5.
Seneca (speaking of his offering his Feet to kiss) says, He was a man born to
that, so as to change the Customs of a Free City into Persian Servitude.
Maximinus Junior allowed the kissing the Knees, Feet, and Hands; and Diocletian
(according to Pomponius Laetus) published an Vbi omnes sine generis discrimine
pro^^ rati pedes exos^ularentur, exornans calceamenta auro, gemmis and
margaritis.
Edict, That all without distinction, being prostrate, should kiss the Feet;
therefore he adorned his Shoes with Gold, Gems, and Pearl. Yet this was not
allowed by all: For Tiberius (as Suetonius tells us) oscula quotidiana
prohibuit edicto; and the elder Dii prohibeant ut quisquam ingenuorum pedibus
meis osculum figat. Capitolin.
Maximin (although a Tyrannical and most wicked Prince, yet) would suffer none
to kiss his Feet, saying, The Gods forbid that any Freeman kiss my Feet: And
Alexander Severus was only saluted by his Name, God save thee, Alexander; as
Lampridius tells us, who adds, That if any bowed the Head, or spoke any thing
like a Flatterer, if his Quality permitted, he was spurned away; or, if his
Dignity allowed not such an Injury to be done him, he was laughed at aloud. And
Lib. 10. Epig. 72.
Martial, in Trajan's time, rejects those base Flatteries that had been used to
Domitian, thus.

Ad Parthos procul ite Pileatos,
Inopes, humilesque, supplicesque,
Pictorum sola basiate Regum.
Princes use now only the kissing of the Hand (besides a profound Obeisance to
them) in stead of these forementioned Adorations; and the kissing of the Hand
is offered frequently as a Testimony of serviceable Love to other Great
Persons, according to that of Inest in aliis partibus quaedam Religio sicut
dextra osculis aversa appetitur, fide porrigitur. The Romans, after they were a
Commonwealth, hated the Name of King.
Pliny, As the Back of the Right Hand with a kind of Religiousness is desired,
so with an assurance of Faith it is stretched out.

This Name of King was among the Romans (after they settled themselves under the
Government of a Commonwealth) reputed so contrary to their Liberty, (as
implying in its Office too great an Absoluteness of Power) that in solemn
memory of its being cast out by Brutus, they yearly celebrated on the Seventh
of the Kalends of March (our Twenty third of February) their Feast Regifugium:
And lest the giddy Multitude might desire again to have a King, they prohibited
that no Concourse for Merchandise should ever happen upon the Nones of any
Month, (King Servius Tullius his Birthday, they knew, was in the Nones, but
not of what Month; therefore they provided it) fearing (says Veriti ne quid
nun^inis collecta universitas, ob Regis d^siderium, novaret. Saturnal. c. 13.
Macrobius) lest the Multitude, gathered together at such Fairs, should
innovate any thing by the desire of a King: And Regem Romae posthac nec Dii nec
homines esse patientur. De Divinatione, cap. 2.
Cicero, though he acknowledged that Caesar was revera Rex, fully a King in
Power, yet (upon hate that continued of that Title) tells us, That hereafter
neither Gods nor Men would permit any to be King of Rome. Therefore to palliate
(as Mr. Tit. Hon. cap. 2. Augustus denies the Title of King.
Seldom says) some part of his Ambitions, Caesar himself, being saluted King
by the Multitude, withal perceiving that it was very distasteful to the State,
(by the Tribunes pulling of the white Fillet from his Laurel) answered,
Caesarem se, non Regem esse; refusing it utterly, and consecrating the Diadem,
which Anthony would have often put upon his Head, to Jupiter. Yet the whole
People were sensible that his Authority differed only in Name from that of
King, as appeared by his Sentiment of it, who subscribed Julius his Statue
with, Brutus quia Reges ejecit, Consul primo factus est;
Hic, quia Consules ejecit, Rex postremo factus est.


Thus much may suffice to show, Because the Absoluteness of Kings was against
their Liberty.
That the Romans judged a King to have such Absoluteness, as in their
Free State was not to be endured; when as in the Change to Emperors they
underwent more (by some of their Arbitrary Rulings) than they did under Kings:
And though the Terms were milder, yet the Yoke of them was heavier. But such is
the Nature of the Multitude, that if their Governors keep but the old Name of
the Magistracy, they readilier yield Obedience to them; such power has Custom.
This Observation made Cromwell content himself with the Name of Protector, under
which, by his Arts and Army, he exercised more Arbitrariness than ever had been
by any King of England.

I come now to the Title of Emperor. This at the first only denoted a General,
or Leader of an Army. Title of Emperor first as General.
So Julius Caesar (having made himself Master of the Roman Free State) thought
it safer to retain than innovate his Title of Supremacy. Therefore having the
perpetual Office of Honores nimies recepit, ut continuum consulatum, perpetuam
Dictaturam, praefecturamque morum, insuper praenomen Imperatoris. Sueton. de
Jul. Caesare.
Dictator and Consulship, with the place of General or Imperator (as the word
had Relation to his Military Force) he took that also (being as willingly given
as the rest) for a perpetual Title; this Title of Imperator being assumed both
by Brutus and Cassius; as appears in their Coins, though they pretended to be
the greatest asserters of the Roman Liberty, and the like occurrs in the Coins
of Antonius, Lepidus, and the thirty Tyrants, and others.

This Title of Imperator is said to have been a Vita Jul. Cas. (...).
Praenomen, by Suetonius, but it was often used after it, which when it was, it
denoted either only, or chiefly, some great performance by Arms, in settling, or
increasing the Empire; but when a Surname, in those elder times, it signified
only the Emperor's Supremacy in the State; so in the Coin of Augustus, where
the Inscription is, IMP. CAES. AVG. IMP. IX. TR. P.V. The Fore-name Imperator,
signifies his Supremacy; and the latter signifies he had been General, and as
such, it may be, deserved a Triumph nine times. The TR. P. V. For Tribunitiae
potestatis quintum, shows how often he had been Tribune of the People, which
was every Year renewed; therefore in that the number of the Years of their
Empire was expressed, as Cassius, Hist. 53.
Dio observes. So that what Tacitus relates of Tiberius, was most true, that
eadem Magistratuum vocabula, he retained the old Names of the Magistrates; so
that the first Emperors Authority and Sovereignty consisted in the Power of the
Consuls, Dictator, Tribunes of the People, and the Title of Prince. Title of
Prince.


The Title of Princeps, Principatus and Principium, were proper Names also for
these Emperors, and their greatness; therefore Augusius cuncta discordiis
civilibusfessa, nomine Principis sub Imperium accepit.
Tacitus says, that Augustus took the Empire under the name of Prince, all
being wearied with civil Discords; though Suetonius says of Caligula, that
Title was wanting, but that he should suddenly take the Diadem, and change the
show of a Principality to the form of a Kingdom. Now it is to be observed as
the Title of Emperor was taken from the Military Employment of a General; so
this of Prince signified the Superiority of them in the Senate. For the Title
of Princeps Senatus was known familiarly in Rome, and so might upon that Ground
be used without Envy.

Concerning the Grecians using (...) for Emperor, the difference betwixt the
Eastern and Western Empire, about both their Titles, and the more modern use of
both, I must referr the Inquisitive Reader to the often, but never too much to
be commended Titles of Honor, par. 1. c. 2.
Mr. Seldom; and shall only note out of him, that diverse Civilians, especially
of Italy and Germany, which profess the old Laws of Rome, tell us, That the
Emperor is at this day of Right, Lord of the whole World, or Earth, as their
Text also (...) F. ad Leg. Rhod. The Roman Emperors not Lords of all.
affirms: besides diverse other flattering Passages in good Authors, of the
ancient Empire; as that of Corippus to the Emperor Justin, -- Deus omnia Regna
Sub pedibus debit esse suis.


And Julius Firmicus Totius orbis terrarum spacium Imperatoris subjacet
potestatibus, etiam ipsum eorum Deorum numero constitutum esse quem ad sacienda
and con^ervanda omnia, Divinitas statuit universalis. Mathes. lib. 2. c. 33.
has this courtly Expression, That the Compass of the whole Globe of the Earth
is subject to the Power of the Emperor, and he is constituted in the number of
those Deities whom the Principal Divinity has appointed to do and conserve all
things; grounded upon that Coin of Adolphus O^^a, p. 552.
Constantius, which has on the reverse VICTOR OMNIVM GENTIVM. But Mr. Seldom
has sufficiently confuted this, by showing that the Roman Empire had its
Limits (or as Tacitus calls it its Claustra) in Augustus, Trajan's, and
Hadrian's time, and that in the height of the Roman Empire there were Liberi
Populi, Regesque. So that after the perusal of the several Instances he
produces, none can be unsatisfied, but that many other Princes enjoy their
Supremacy as fully as the German Emperors, in acknowledging no Superior but
God, as particularly I shall show, in what relates to England, in the next
Chapter.

For the fuller Expression of Majesty, says Tit. Hon. cap. 4.
Mr. Seldom, other Attributes have been given to Supreme Princes, which be
Names as essential as those of Emperor and King; yet they are not so
convertible with them, nor so particularly designing them: These are chiefly
Domini and Dii, Lords and Gods. Of the one I have discoursed before, of the
other I shall now speak something.

This Title of Dominus, or Lord, Of the Title of Lord. How odious to the Romans.
(importing properly a Master or Lord over Slaves) was by the wisest of the
Roman Emperors rejected; though it be now grown Nedum sermo^um stet honos and
gratia vivax. Horat. de Art Poet.
so familiar, that we use it to Tradesmen: such a change being wrought by time
in the Usage, Emphasis or Signification of many other words.

Domini Appellationem ut maledictum and opprobrium semper exhorruit.
Suetonius tells us, that Augustus at a Play, hearing himself called Lord,
though with the Epithetes of Just and Good, and finding the Spectators
rejoicingly approve of it as applicable to him; with his Hand and Countenance
repressed the unbecoming Flatteries, and the next day by a severe Edict,
prohibited it to be given him; neither would he suffer his Children or Nephews
to use it in their Complements, or other Language, to each other. Neither would
Tiberius endure this Title so much as in common Salutation: whereupon the great
Tacitus 2. Annal.
Historian and Statesman observes, Vnde Augusta and lubrica oration, sub
Principe, qui libertatem metuebat and adulationem oderat. To which purpose
Sylvar. 1.
Statius speaks of Domitian.

Tollunt Innumeras ad astra Voces
Saturnalia Principis sonantes,
Et dulci DOMINVM favore clamant,
Hoc solum vetuit licere Caesar.
Yet either the Poet flattered or dissembled, or this was in the Infancy of the
Empire; for we find in In Domit. c. 13.
Suetonius, that by his express Command, the Titles of his Letters and other
matters, were Dominus and Deus noster sic sieri jubet; and Caligula before him,
endured it publicly, and Festus Act. Apost. c. 25. v. 26.
Lieutenant of Jewry in that of St. Paul's appeal, calls Claudius absolutely
Lord, (...), i. e. Lord Emperor; and the Emperor in his Petition to M^^t. F. ad
Leg. Rhod.
him (...), i. e. Lord Emperor; and the Emperor in his Answer calls himself
Lord of the World. Diocletianus se primus omnium, Caligulam post Domitianumque
Dominum palam ^ici passus, and adorari se, app^^arique uti Deum.
Victor says that Dioclesian, the first of all the Emperors after Caligula and
Domitian, suffered himself openly to be called Lord, to be adored and styled as
a God; which may be understood of public Salutations only. For in Claudius and
Antonine I have instanced to the contrary. Also in a Gold Coin of the great and
Religious Constantine, stamped with his effigies sitting, and his Court of Guard
about him; the A^olph. O^^a. p. 537.
Inscription is, FELICITAS PERPETVA AVGEAT REM DO MIN. NO ST.

The reason why some Emperors refused this Name (as Pliny in his Panegyric
makes Principis sedem obtines, ne sit Domino locus.
Trajan to do, when he says, Thou obtainest the place of the Prince, that
there may be no place for Lord,) was either because it seemed a Relative to
Servus, a Bondslave; or in respect that it supposed (if ill interpreted) the
Subject, and his Substance to be in the Property of the Emperor: For Domini
Appellatione continetur qui ^abet proprietatem, e^si usus fructus alienus sit.
Ulp. F. de Sc. Silaniano, l. 1. sect. 1.
Vlpian tells us, that in the Laws of the Empire, in the Appellation of Lord,
was signified he that had the Propriety, although another was Usufructuary. How
considerable a Name of Dominion this was, appears in Lucan (who being one of
the Pompeian Party, that stood much upon the ancient Liberty of Rome,) says
that that Age first found those Appellations, by which they lied to the Lords.

Lucan. Pharsal. lib. 5.
Namque omnes Voces, per quas jam tempore tanto
Mentimur Dominis, haec primum reperit Aetas.
That which I observe from hence is, That by this Title of Dominus, the
Sovereignty of Princes, and greater absoluteness was understood, than the first
Emperors were willing to seem to allow, that they might avoid Envy in the
Infancy of their Power: Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere, cadentque. Quae
nunc sunt in honor vocabula si vole^ usus. Horat^de Art Poet. v. 70.
and now so great a Power or Dignity is not so much understood by the Word,
either Latin or Greek, in the Person it is applied to, as when our Kings had
the Title of Lords only of Ireland, and yet had Kingly Supremacy; and now our
Nobility are called Lords, and Domine in the Latin is dwindled to signify any
Gentleman.

There are other Forms of Speech that either have been or are peculiar to
Kings, The Appellations in the Plural Number.
as the use of the Plural Number, as, We command, We ordain, Our Royal Favor,
Our Royal Care, Pleasure, etc. This seems derived from the Jews (says Tit.
Hon. par. 1. c. 7.
Mr. Seldom) who say that in their Language, by reason of the Plurality of
Virtues or Power (being the true Roots of Dignities) which are supposed in a
Superior, they use the Plural Number to or of one Man. So with their Elohim
Gods, joined to a Word of the Singular Number, is by their Grammarians, made an
Enallage of Number, chiefly to express Excellency in the Persons to whom it is
referred. But this has since been used by single Persons, as particularly by
Margaret Countess of Richmond, Mother to Henry the Seventh, thus, Nos Margareta
Comitissa Richmondiae, Matter excellentissimi Principis Domini Henrici, etc.
Inspeximus, etc.

Therefore I leave this as communicable to great and eminent Subjects, and
shall pass to the abstract of Majestas. Title of Majesty.
As Your Majesty, His Majesty, Imperial Majesty. The word it self denoting all
kind of special Dignity, as if we should say in English, Greatness, as well in
private Persons, as supreme Princes and Deities. Ovid Fastorum lib. 5.
elegantly describes Majesty to be born of Honor and Reverence, and he says
Majesty continued among the Gods, until the Rebellion of the Giants against
Jupiter, when she so daunted them, that afterward she was honored for it with
a place next to Jupiter, whose Kingdom she defends by the greatness only of her
Presence, and unarmed; and that she came down also among Men, since which, both
Supreme and Subordinate Princes, and some also of all Kinds have had their
special Dignity from her Presence with them; whence Majestas Pueri, Matronae,
Virginis, etc. and, as Valerius Maximus Quasi privata (...), clarerum virorum
sine Tribunalium fasiigio. Lib. 3. c. 10.
calls it, a private kind of Magistracy, a Majesty of eminent Men, without the
Honor of Tribunalship, or any other Office.

But it is not of this kind of Majesty I now treat; but as it is applicable to
the Sovereign. So in Cicero, Majestas Populi Romani denotes the Supreme Dignity
of the State of Rome, as (...). In legatione in Foed. Aetolorum.
Polybius calls it the Empire and Power of the People of Rome. Afterward this
Majesty of the People, or of the whole Empire and State was cast upon the
Emperors as a Characteristick of Sovereignty, and then it was Majestas
Imperatorum. Whence it grew into frequent use to write Gruteri Inscr. p. 246.
n. 3.
NVMINI MAJESTATIQVE EJVS DEVOTISS: or DIC ATISSIMVS, as in that Inscription in
Tarragona in St. Barbara's Church, of Septimius Acindynus to the Emperor Trajan.

From the use of Majesty thus applied, came the name of Crimen Majestatis, to
denote that offense which was committed against the Dignity of the State of
Rome, or against the Emperor. So Majestatis crimen illud est, quod adversus
Pop. Romans vel adversus securitatem ejus committitur. P. ad L^g. Jul. Majest.
lib. 5.
Vlpian says, It is that which is committed against the People of Rome, or
their Security. Majestatem minuisti quod Tribunum Plebis de Templo deduxisti.
De Invent. lib. 2.
And Cicero calls it a Diminution of Majesty, to draw a Tribune of the People
out of the Temple. And Justinian says, That the Lex Julia Majestatis in eos
qui contra Imperatorem vel Rempublicam aliquid moliti sunt, suum vigorem
extendit. Instit. Tit. de Publico Judicio.
Julian Law of Majesty, extends its Force against them who attempt any thing
against the Emperor, or the Commonwealth. And for this offense the word
Majestas is used singly by Hujus in metum penitus sustulisti, contentus
magnitudine, qua nulli magis caruere, quam qui sibi majestatem vindicabant.
Panegyr.
Pliny to Trajan, That he had wholly taken away the fear of too frequent
questiou upon that crime, being contented with the greatness of his Power or
Office, which none more wanted than those that challenged Majesty to
themselves; as if he had said, that his mild Empire and Greatness was better to
himself and his People, than theirs who had a more absolute Sovereignty.

This Expression of the Emperors by the abstract Majestas (wherewith Numen also
was commonly joined in Inscriptions) became, it seems, the Example by which the
ensuing times brought in the frequency of those other Abstracti, which designed
the Emperors, as well in the first as the second and third Person; as
Perennitas, Aeternitas, Tranquillitas, Serenitas, etc. which are most obvious
in the Rescripts of the old Emperors, that remain in the two Codes of
Theodosius and Justinian: And in the Greek Empire, this Attribute of Majesty
was denoted by the word (...), (...)
which the Emperor had, with the Addition of Sacred, and sometimes with Vide
Codin. (...). M^ursium in Glossar. Gra^o-Barb.
(...), serenissima jestas.

There are great Numbers of other Epithetes, that have been given to Sovereign
Princes; Other Attributes given to Princes.
as among the Romans, Pius, Foelix, Clemens, Tranquillus, Sanctissimus, Pater
Patriae. In the later times, both in the Empire and Kingdoms, Clementissimus,
Excellentissimus, Invictissimus, Illustrissimus, Serenissimus, Gloriosissimus,
Potentissimus, Sacratissimus, Celsissimus, Religiosissimus; and some have had
peculiar Attributes: The Emperor is styled Semper Augustus; the King of
England, Fidei Defensor; the King of France, Christianissimus; of Spain,
Catholicus.

Most of these Attributes were given to denote the Eminence of their place, or
the peculiar Virtues such Princes excelled in; and under the Greek Empire, the
Epithetes agreeable to their Language, and the Attributes of the Eastern
Monarchs, are to this Day more luxuriant: So we find Emanuel Comnenus, in his
Letter to Frederic Barbarossa, writes thus; Albertus Stadensis in Chron. Anno
1179.
Manuel in Christo Deo fidelis, Imperator Porphyrogennetus, Divinitus
Coronatus, Regnator potens, excelsus, and semper Augustus and Moderator
Romanorum magnificus: Nobilissimo and Gloriosissimo Regi Almanorum and
Imperatori ac dilecto Fratri Imperii nostri salutem. So Canis. Antiq. ^ect.
Tom. 5. p. 2.
Isaacus Angelus uses this insolent Title (as Mr. Seldom calls it) to the same
Barbarossa, Isachius a Deo constitutus, Imperator Sacratissimus,
Excellentissimus, Potentissimus, Sublimis, Moderator Romanorum, Angelus totius
Orbis; Haeres Coronae magnae Constantini, Dilecto Fratri Imperii sui Maximo
Principi Alemaniae, etc. So the Surnamed (...) Camerar. ad aure ^m And^onic.
Bullam, p. 9.
Emanuel styled himself, Governed by God, Heir of the Crown of Constantine the
Great, and observing of his Laws.

The Grand Seignior (besides the Enumeration of all his vast Dominions)
particularly styles himself, By the infinite Grace of the just, great, and most
puissant Creator, and by the abundance of the Miracles of the chief of his
Prophets, Emperor of Victorious Emperors, Distributer of the Crowns of the
greatest Princes of the Earth, etc. Lord of Europe, Asia and Africa, conquered
by his victorious Sword and powerful Lance, etc. and so after the recital of
the several Kingdoms, he says of many other Countries, Villages and
Seigneuries, Conquered by his Imperial Power and Justice, etc. By the Grace of
God, the resort of the great Princes of the World, and the refuge of Honorable
Emperors: This was from Achmet Son of Mahomet, to Hen. IV. of France.

A late Author, Treatise of Absolute Power, p. 32, 33.
who takes all the Advantages to depress Monarchy, out of a pretense of
declaring against the too great absoluteness of Princes; tells us, That as the
Majesty and real greatness of the Emperors declined; and as the Empire began to
sink, the Froth and Flattery came above: so that though Augustus and Tiberius
forbad any to call them by so proud a Title as Dominus; Objecti^^s against the
A^tributes given to Princes.
yet it was lawful to call Domitian Lord and God, and his Successors were not
satisfied, till complemented in the Abstract, with Your Everlastingness, Your
Eternity, Divinity, etc. and when the wooden Eagle was split in two, that Chip
of the Eastern Empire brake out into Blossoms to a Miracle; that with the
Porphyrogenneti and Despots, were blown about the Sebasto Cratori,
Pan-hypersebasti, protonobilissimi, etc. and that after these Titles among the
Romans (so pompous and glorious) had been worn a while at Court, they descended
to the City and Country: and further tells us, That in France, the word
Sovereign is commonly used for any Superior; as Sovereign of Accounts,
Treasure, Forest, Sovereign Judge, Sovereign Bailiff, etc.

To him we may add, what an older Marcus Antonius surgens Neapoli illustrata.
Lib. 1. c. 19. sect. 10.
Author objects; That it is an Usurpation of the Attribute only proper to God,
to give the Title of Majesty to Emperors or Kings; and another Jo. (...) de
Idololatr^a Politica, c. 1.
says, It is a piece of Idolatry to assume the Titles of nostra Divinitas,
nostrum numen, Coeleste Oraculum, adorandum Rescriptum, etc. Which were used by
Theodosius and Valentinian, and other Christian Emperors, in the first and
third Person, as I have before largely hinted.

To the first of these I shall answer, That the reason of Augustus and Tiberius
declining the Title of Dominus, was because in that Age it was understood as a
Lord over Slaves; Answer to the first Objector.
which in the first settling of the Empire, would have caused Heart burnings and
Rebellions against them, in that State, accustomed to Freedom. But as the usage
of the word came afterward to be liquified, and of a benign and softer
signification; so there was no reason to reject it, especially since the Author
himself (if no Quaker) would not think it unfit in Latin, to be used to him as
a Gentleman: and as to the invidious Expression of the wooden Eagle, he might
have known, that the Ancient Vexilla of the Emperors, which had the Eagle upon
them, as he may see the Figure of them in Antonius, and many other Coyns, were
not always of Wood; and if so gilt with Silver or Gold, but of Metal: But it
may be he calls it wooden, out of a slight to the Authority, or the better to
pursue his Allegory of a Chip blossoming. However it discovers the mean and low
opinion he has of such Supreme Powers. As to the Hyperbolical Epithetes of the
Grecian Emperors; something must be yielded to the luxurious exuberance of the
Grecian Language, and the usage of the Eastern Countries; and that Sovereign is
sunk so low in France, as to be the Epithete of a Baylive, it may be ascribed
to the Acceptance of the word, in signifying any Supreme Officer in his kind,
as we call Lord High Treasurer, Lord High Steward, to distinguish them from
inferior Treasurers and Stewards.

As to the two following Authors, it may be considered what the judicious Mr.
Answer to the other Objectors.
Seldom observes, That the Title of Majesty may as well be afforded to them, as
of Wisdom, Power, Clemency, or any other Quality; because those are, as all
else, which is great or good, principally in God: Therefore Divi Christiani
vocari possunt, eo modo quo Dii, quia Dei sunt vicarii, and Dei voce judicant.
Polit. lib. 7. c. 4. sect. 4.
Contzen, in the last Age, Professor of Divinity at Mentz, says, That
Christian Princes may be called Divi, or Gods, because they are Gods Vicars,
and do judge by Gods Voice: Yet he thinks that Divus Imperator, nostra
Divinitas, nostra Aeternitas, and such like, are not altogether so fit for
Christian Princes, for fear both of their arrogating more than they should,
when they are so magnified; as also lest too much offense be taken by such as
may miss in the Reason of the Application of those Titles to them.

We may further note, from the learned Seldom, That when the Lacedaemonians
admired a Man, they used proverbially to say, he is a Divine Man; and the
Philosopher (...) Ethic. 7. c. 1.
says, That Men became to be reputed or called Gods, from the excellence of
their Heroic Virtues; and these Virtues and themselves also, were (as he says)
called Divine, by way of some similitude, or by reason of Participation with
the Deity, being all goodness and excellency, as the contrary quality, that is,
Inhumanity or Barbarousness is named (...) or Feritas, because it is most like
to what is Bestial. So that as he who affirms, that a Barbarous or Inhuman
Fellow, is (...) or Bestial, makes but an high Expression of his ill nature,
not at all supposing him to be a Beast; so on the other side, Divinus or
Divinitas, or the like expresses only an Admiration of Excellency, which has
its highest and first Example in the Deity, and is by some Similitude or
Participation in the Person to whom it is attributed. Therefore Antiquitus
Rectores Reipublicae Divini vocabantur, quasi Divinae providentiae ministri 2a.
2ae. Quaest. 99. Art. 1.
Aquinas says. That anciently, Governors of Commonweals were called Divine,
because they were the Ministers of Divine Providence: They being here upon
Earth in their Dominions under God Supreme Governors, undisputably in Civils,
as Philip le Beau of France to Pope Boniface the Eighth, in his scornful
Letter, says, instead of sciat sanctitas tua, sciat tua maxima fatuitas nos in
temporalibus alicui non subesse: That in Temporals he was not subject to any.

Instead of these lofty Titles, the modern Sovereigns have contented themselves
with the Addition of Dei Gratia, Concerning the Style of Dei gratia.
which applied to Lay Princes, does always signify a Supremacy in their own
Dominions.

This Style begun about Charles the Vide Capitular. Aqu^^^ranens. p^. 30. Tom.
^. Council. (...).
Great's time, as in several of his Patents appears; neither did it continue in
use by his Successors, till about four Hundred years since: F^^ Otho the Third
titled himself sometimes nothing but (...) ^^octolorum; and Mr. Seldom has not
observed it to be (...) by the Greek Emperors, but that instead of it, they
used, Tit. Hon. par. 1. c. 7.
Crowned of God; the more ordinary and later Expression of them being trusting
(...) Vide Eginhard. Annal. Franciae, Anno Anon. vita Car. M.
in Christ, that is God, or in God Emperor of the Romans.

With us in England, Ine King of the West Saxons, that lived many years before
Charles the Great, uses it, IC INE MIDGODES GIFT WEST SEAXNA CYNING: I Ine by
the Grace of God, King of the West Saxons, in his preamble to his Laws: But
until about our Henry the Third, it was not of so constant use, as that the
Style of the King necessarily required it.

This Style of Dei Gratia is frequently given in old time, Given to Spiritual
Lords.
and yet in use, to Spiritual Lords, nothing being more common in the
Instruments of Bishops and Abbats, in the Chartularies of Monasteries; and it
is given from Kings to them in the Summons of Parliament, and Writs to Assemble
or Prorogue Convocations in this form, Jacobus, etc. Reverendissimo in Christo
^^tri, praedilectoque and fideli Consiliario nostro, Georgio eade^^ (...)
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, etc. But at this day, though it (...) ^^ven to
them, they use it not in the first Person, but De^ Rosula Novella, (...). cap.
111.
^^mentia, or Providentia Divina; and in older times, when they writ to the
Pope, Emperor or King, they were not to write Dei Gratia of themselves, but
only such or such, licet indignus, vel immerens, Bononiae Episcopus, etc.

By all these Titles we cannot but observe, that the dignity of Kings and
Sovereigns, was looked upon in all Ages, as deriving Authority from God
Almighty, and his Vicegerents here upon Earth; having the Attributes of God,
that as he was Supreme over all things in Heaven and Earth, so they within
their Districts upon Earth.

I shall end this Chapter with this Observation, That the Attribute of Dei
Gratia applied to Sovereigns and Bishops, might probably have Authority from
the Constitution of Justinian, (...), etc. Just. No^. 6. init. (...) Ibid.
which runs thus. The greatest Gifts which Gods goodness from above, has
conferred on Men, are the Priesthood and Empire, both of which proceed from one
and the same Principle, and are for the ordering and disposing of the Affairs
of Mankind.

Concerning the peculiar Title of our Kings of England, Defender of the Faith,
the learned Spelman having given us the Copy of the Bull, and discoursed so
fully of it, I shall (...) the curious Reader to him for satisfaction.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Sovereignty of the Kings of England, according to our
Histories and Laws.
THE Titles and Attributes which other Sovereign Princes have either assumed,
The Kings of England have used all the Titles proper to Sovereign Princes.
or have been given to them, our Kings of England have used, as might be made
appear by innumerable Examples: But I shall treat but of a few, and show
wherein the Sovereignty is discovered, and what ancient Prerogatives they have
by their acts of Grace quitted; and lastly, how the long Parliament of 1641.
would have cramped the King's Authority.

First as to the Title of King or Emperor promiscuously. So our Edgar
frequently in his Charters, calls himself Albionis and Anglorum Basileus; As
King, Emperor, Lord.
and I have noted before that the Grecians esteemed the word (...) to be of
full as eminent Signification as Emperor. So in a Charter Cod. Wigorn.
to Oswald, Bishop of Worcester, he is called Anglorum Basileus, omniumque
Regum, Insularum, Oceanique Britanniam circumjacentis, cunctarumque Nationum
quae infra eam includuntur, Imperator and Dominus. In which we may note that
one of our Kings of England writ himself not only Basileus, according to the
Grecian usage, which signified King and Emperor; but also Emperor and Lord,
three of the fullest Attributes, either the Grecian, or Roman Emperors ever
used; as also Lord of the British Sea, as Canutus his Successor challenged. So
in a Charter to Mon. Ang. par. 1. p. 64.
Peterburg, Ego Edgar sub ipso sidereo Rege praesidens Regno Magnae Britanniae.

I have seen another Lib. MS. Roberti de Swapham, etc. Fundationis Burgensis
Coenobii p. 38.
of his Charters prefaced thus, Gratia Domini nostri Jesu Christi omnium
seculorum omnia suo Intuitu distribuentis Regna terrarum, and moderantis
habenas rerum. Ego Edgar sub ipso eodem Rege praesidens Regno Britanniae, etc.

So King Id. p. 39.
Edward in the same Book styles himself, Ego Edwardus Rex Anglorum Monarchiam
Regiminis tenens, hoc decretum Patris mei per deprecationem Abbatis Aidulfi,
perhenniter affirmavi. In which we may note, that Edgar owns himself subject to
Jesus Christ, God. And King Edward says, he holds the single Command of
Government. So King Edward in a Coke Praefat. 4. Reports. Rex Anglorum and
totius Britanniae Telluris Gubernator and Rector. Angligenum Orcadarum, necnon
in Gyro jacentium Monarcha, and Anglorum Induperator.
Charter to Ramsey, styles himself Totius Albionis, Dei moderante Dominatione,
Basileus, King of all Albion: and King Edwin in a Charter to Crowland, calls
himself King of England, and Governor and Ruler of all the Land of Britain. So
Ethelred in his Charter to Canterbury, styles himself Of all the English born,
and the Oreades lying in Circuit about it, Monarch, and Emperor of the English.
So that by Orcades must be understood all the Isles about Britain.

So William Rufus dates his Charter to the Monastery of Shaftsbury, secundo
Anno Imperii mei. By all which it appears that the Kings of England have justly
assumed the Supreme Imperial Command in their own Dominions: and though the
Title of Emperor has been disused, Kings of England as much Sovereigns as
Emperors.
yet we shall find the substance of it sufficiently challenged in that of Ipse
omnes liberta^^s (...) R^gno habebat suo, quas Imperator vendicabat in Imperio.
Matt. Paris in vita Willielmi 2.
William Rufus to Archbishop Anselm, when he told him, That he had all the
Liberties in his Kingdom, which the Emperor challenged in the Empire. And in a
Constitution R^g^um Angliae ab om^i subjectione Imperiali liberrimum. Claus. 13
E. 2. m. 6. dorso.
of King Edward the Second, it is declared, That the Kingdom of England is most
free from all Imperial Subjection; which excluded all public Notaries, who were
made by the Emperor or Popes, and by this Constitution were utterly rejected.
The Statutes for it.


This further appears in the Stat. Anno 23 E. 3. c. 1. Vide Coke Instit. 2.
111. 4 part. 6. 8. 3. Instit. 120, 125.
Statute of Praemunire made 23 Ed. 3. which runs thus, That it being shown by
the grievous and clamorous Complaints of the great Men and Commons, how that
diverse of the People be, and been drawn out of the Realm to answer of things
whereof the Cognizance pertains to the King's Court; and also that the
Judgments given in the same Court be impeached in another Court in prejudice
and dis-inherison of our Lord the King, and of his Crown, etc. Therefore it was
enacted, That none of the King's Liege-People, of what condition soever, shall
draw any out of the Realm in Plea, whereof the Cognizance appertains to the
King's Court, or of things whereof Judgments be given in the King's Court, etc.

This Statute as well as that of Provisors 25 Ed. 3. was made to hinder the
Subjects Appeals to Rome, or to any other Court in such things whereby the
King's Sovereignty might be diminished, and this Statute relates to one made by
King Edward the First. Also in the Statute of Provisors, 25 Ed. 3. reference is
made to the Anno 35 Regni.
Statute made at Carlisle, by King Edward the First.

The Statute of 16 R. 2. c. 5.
Praemunire for purchasing Bulls from Rome, gives an account of the preceding
Statutes, and further says, Whereas our Lord the King, and all his
Liege-People ought of right, and of long time were wont to sue in the King's
Court, to receive their Presentiments to Churches, Prebends, and other Benefices
of Holy Church, which they had right to present to, the Conisance of Plea, of
which Presentment belongs unto the King's Court, of the old right of his
Crown used and approved, etc. then particularly enumerates the Encroachments of
the Bishop of Rome, by Processes, Excommunications of Bishops, for executing
Judgments given in the King's Courts, and the translating of Prelates out of
the Realm, or from one spiritual Living to another, against the King's Laws and
Regality, etc. The Statute expressly declares, That the Crown of England has
ever been so free, that it is in no Earthly Subjection, but immediately subject
to God in all things, touching the Regality of the Crown, and to no other.

Under King Henry the Eighth, 24 H. 8. c. 12.
the whole Parliament say, that by sundry old and authentic Histories and
Chronicles it is manifesty declared and expressed, that this Realm of England
is an Empire, and so has been accepted in the World, governed by one Supreme
Head, and King, having the Dignity and Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of
the same; unto whom a Body Politic, compact of all sorts and degrees of
People, divided in Terms by names of Spirituality, and Temporalty have bounden
and owen to bear, next to God, a natural and humble Obedience.

The next 25 H. 8. c. 21.
Year in another Statute, it is styled the Imperial Crown and Royal Authority,
recognizing no Superior, but only Your Grace: and in the Chapter following, the
Kings of England are styled Kings and Emperors of this Realm: and in 28 H. 8.
c. 7.
another of the same King, it is called, The most Royal Estate of the Imperial
Crown of this Realm. So in the same Stat. Hil^^^. (...) 8. c. 2.
Year (before the Title of Lord of Ireland was altered into King) the Style is
Kings and Emperors of the Realm of England, and of the Land of Ireland; and in
several other Statutes it is called the Imperial Crown.

I have inserted these to clear that by our Laws the Kings of England are under
no Subjectjon to any foreign Prince or Potentate whatsoever. And Mr. Tit. H^^.
p. 21, 22.
Seldom says, that the Supremacy is not only used by the English Sovereigns,
but has been challenged by the Kings of Spain, Denmark, Poland, the Czars of
Muscovy and other free Princes; over all within their own Dominions, exclusive
of all foreign Powers: and upon the like ground of Supremacy was that Law made
by King James the Third of Scotland, in these words, -- Our Sovereign Lord has
full Jurisdiction, and free Empire within this Realm, etc.

A Confirmation of this Supremacy of our Kings appears in what is reported of
our King Edward the Third, That when Lewis Quod R^x Anglix non se submisit ad
os^ula pedum suorum.
of Bavier the Emperor, had an Interview with him, the Emperor stomached that
the King of England submitted not himself to kiss his Feet. But the King
answered, That he was Rex inunctus and habet vitam and membrum in potes^ate
sua, and ideir^^ non debet se submittere tantum sicut Rex alius.
an anointed King, and had Life and Member in his Power, therefore he ought not
to submit himself to him as other Kings.

Whence it was that Alsonso the ninth King of Castile defining what Kings were,
(after he had dispatched the Particulars that belonged to the Emperor) says,
That they are every one in their Kingdoms, the Vicars or Vicegerents of God,
placed over the People to govern them, Bien assi come el Emperador en su
Imperio. Partid. 2. tit. 1. Ley 5. and 8.
no otherwise than as the Emperor is in his Empire. Whoever desires further
Satisfaction in this Point, may have recourse to the voluminous Collections of
Mr. Pryn, and other Authors that have treated of the Kings Supremacy.

Most of what I have hitherto discoursed, relates to the King's Supremacy, ab
extra, that he has no foreign Superior, that ought to impose any thing upon
him or his Subjects, contrary to his Pleasure and his Laws in his Dominions.

I shall now give a short Abridgement of what I find our learned Lawyers have
writ concerning the King's Authority and Sovereignty, in his Kingdom of
England, and how, Wherein the King's Sovereignty consists according to our Laws.
in former Ages, Kings have quitted some of their Royal Prerogatives. In our
Laws the King is styled in Ecclesiastical matters, the Supreme Ordinary; Cok^
11. 86. Calvin's Case, 215.
in Civil matters, caput Reipublicae, Pater Patriae, totius Regni
Pater-Familias, Chief Justice, etc. being furnished with plenary Power, to
render Justice and Right to every Member and part of the whole Body, Co^^ 2
part. 1, 2. 24 H. 8. c. 1. 24 Eliz. c. 1.
without the help of Foreign Jurisdiction. Some Attributes of God in a
similitudinary way (say (...) 8^. (...) 177.2^8, 212 (...)
the great Lawyers) are aseribed to him for the Excellency of his Person, and
the greatness of his Office, as Sovereignty and Power, Omnipresence, Majesty,
Immortality, etc. In his Political (...) Grand Ab^i^gment, part. 3. p. 44.
Capacity, not subject to the Infirmities of others, as Nonage, Death,
Attainder, etc. So no Laches, Negligences, Defects, or Stops of Blood, can be
imputed to, or fastened upon him, as is well known in the case of King Henry the
Seventh, St. Albans vita ^en. 7. p. 29.
wherein it was unanimously resolved by the Judges, That his Natural Capacity
does so far participate with the Politic (which is superadded to the Body
natural of the King) that these become consolidate, consubstantiate and
indivisible in one and the same Royal Person, and the Body Politic (which is
the more worthy, and of a sublimer Nature) is in no ways obnoxious to the
Humane Imbecility of Death, Infamy, Crime, or the like, but does draw from the
Natural Body, all Imperfections and Incapacities whatsoever.

So that there is, by the Law, said to be in the King, Sheppard ut supra.
a threefold greatness of Perfection; First of being freed from Infamy and all
kind of Imperfections common to Man: Secondly, of Power, in having the command
of all his People: Thirdly, of Majesty, being the Fountain of Honor, Justice,
and Mercy.

The King is Gods immediate Viceroy C^k 2.44.5.29.
within his Dominions Vicarius Dei: As his Protection and Government reaches
to all his People as Subjects; so the Allegiance and Obedience of them all, is
due to him as their Sovereign, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, and so he is
Persona mixta; his Prerogatives are called Jura Regalia, Insignia Coronae,
Ancient Prerogatives and Royal Flowers of the Crown, so inseparably annexed to
the Crown, that none but the King may have them, nor can they be communicated
to, or taken by any Subject.

Bracton lib. 1. c. 8. Stat. 25 H. 8. c. 21. Nemo terram nisi Authoritate R^gia
possi^et. Plowden 136. Jenkins Cent. 7. Case 77. and 2. Case 16.17 E. 2. c. 17.
Nevil 101.174.
All Lands are said to be held of him immediately or mediately, he can hold of
no Man, or any be equal to him, as to be joint Tenant of Land with him, and his
Jurisdiction is over all places within his Dominions, both on the dry Land and
on the Sea. The Judges are to observe it as a certain Rule, That whatever may
be for the benefit of the King, and his profit, shall be taken most largely for
him; and what against him, and for his disprofit, be taken strictly: neither is
it only the duty of Judges, but of all other his Subjects in their Stations, to
help the King to his Right.

The Perogatives are many and great, yet such as are his by the Ancient Law of
the Land, and what the Kings of England have, time out of mind, used, and are
such as are of absolute Come 12.8.30.2. part. Instit. 262.496.5. part. 11.2.8.
necessity, for the security of the Government, and the Public weals: As to
call and dissolve Parliaments, give his Royal Assent to Laws, command the
Militia, coin Moneys, grant Honors, make and dispose of the great Seal,
dispense with penal Laws, pardon Felonies and Treasons, make and appoint great
Officers, Justices of Air and Assize, of the Peace, Jail-deliver, and
Sheriffs, to grant Charters to Corporations and other Persons, or Fraternities:
He has the sole Power of appointing, ratifying and consummating all Treaties
with Foreign Princes, making War and Peace, granting Safe Conduct and
Protection; and all these and many other, are firmly ascertained Quod Rex est
(...), Lex est Regi; Rex est Amma (...), and Lex est Anima Regi.
by Laws, and have ever been, and still are, in the King alone, and at his own
Discretion.

Although there is no need in describing the Sovereignty of our Kings, to carry
it up to that absoluteness of Monarchy, where all things are appointed and
reversed by the Sovereigns fiat: yet Jus Regium p. 42.
we must on the other side consider, That the Monarchy, which is subject to the
impetuous Caprices of the Multitude, when giddy, or to the incorrigible
Factiousness of the Nobility, when interested, is, in effect, no Government at
all; it must be owned, That in all Governments a Sovereignty must reside some
where, and a Monarch can (...) no Participants. For then it would cease to be a
Monarchy, and in things that relate immediately to Government, the King has as
much right to regulate them (as to instance, to restrain the License of the
Press or secure Peace) as we have to regulate and dispose of our Property;
Government being the Kings Property: for with the Monarchy, the King must enjoy
all things that are necessary for the Administration of it, according to that
just Maxim Quando aliquid ^oneditur, omnia concessa videntur sine quibus
concessum explicari nequit.
of the Law, When any thing is granted, all things seem to be granted, without
which the thing granted cannot be explained: Which warrants the Kings Advocate
of Scotland, to lay that down as a general Jus Regium p. 77.
Rule, That their Kings can do every thing that relates to Government, and is
necessary for the Administration thereof, though there be no special Law or Act
of Parliament for it, if the same be not contrary to the Law of God, Nature or
Nations.

The Power and Authority of the Kings of England, have been much more unbounded
than they are at present. Part 1. c. 16. sol. 34.
Bracton speaking of his time, says, That neither the Justices or private
Persons might dispute the Kings Charter; but if there were a doubt of it, the
Resolution must come from the Kings own Interpretation. If Justice be demanded
of the King (says Idem, lib. 1. c. 8. p. 5.
he) seeing no Writ lies against him, one must petition that he would correct
and amend what he has done.

By the Condescensions of gracious Princes, such Restrictions have been made of
their Sovereign Absoluteness, By the Grants and Condescensions of our Kings,
their Absoluteness lessened.
that they have obliged themselves to govern their Kingdoms (transmitted to
them with such Limitations, by their numerous Ancestors) by Rules of Law,
Equity, Justice, and right Judgment, in Imitation of their Supreme Head and
Omnipotent Monarch.

That therefore it may demonstratively appear how happily the Government of
England is constituted for the Benefit of the Subjects (who under so benign a
Monarchy, enjoy more Advantages in the Security of their Persons and
Proprieties, than under the most free Commonwealth that ever we read of) I
shall lightly touch upon some of those Particulars, which the Kings of England
(by reason of several Acts of Parliament, they have given their Royal Assents
to) have precluded themselves from the single Disposal of, as in Absolute
Monarchies are used; yet I hope to make it clear in several Branches of this
Discourse, That there is no such thing as Co-ordinacy of any other Power, or
such a mixture as vitiates the Monarchy by a debasing Alloy; much less that the
Government can be Arbitrary or Tyrannical; which has sheathed the Sword of
Justice within the Velvet Scabbard of the Laws, and lined the Scarlet Robes of
Majesty with the softest Ermine of Indulgence to well deserving Subjects, who
by their Obedience and Considerateness, make their Princes and their own
Happiness most perfect. For it is equally unhappy to Princes and Subjects,
where Alii Principes Reges hominum, ipse Rex Regum.
Maximilian's Jest is true, That whereas other Princes were Kings of Men, he
was King of Kings, because his Subjects would do but only what they list.

But to come to the Particulars of Royal Abatements and Indulgences. The Kings
of England may not rule their People by their Will, or by Proclamation, as the
Roman Emperors by their (...), lib. 2. c. 8. The Particulars of Royal
Abatements.
Edicts; or make new Laws, or change any of the old standing Laws, without the
mutual Consent of the two Houses of Parliament: He may not oppress the People,
or in any Arbitrary way, take from them their Liberties or Estates, under any
pretense whatsoever, without due course of Law. Nor can he impose upon their
Stamford's Pleas of the Crown.
Persons, what Charges or Burdens he pleases, but according to, and by the
Laws of the Kingdom. He cannot do any thing against the Law of the Nation, or
against common Right; cannot change Ancient Customs: for a Legal H^ghs 's
Reports, 254.263. Cous^uetudo l^galis plus habet quam concessio Regalis.
Custom is more available than a Royal Concession; yet on the other side, that
Custom which advances against the Prerogative of the King, is void.

He cannot impose Arbitrary Petit. of Right, 3 Car. 1.7 Car. 1. c. 17.
payments, erect new Offices of Charge to the Subject; may not deny or delay
Justice, may not compel his People to make Gifts, Loan, Benevolence, or Tax,
without consent of the two Houses.

The King 2 Car. 1. c. 1. Coke 12.46.2 part. Brown lib. 2. c. 2. Coke Instit. 2
part. 47, 48. Petition of Right. Dyer 176.
may not imprison without just Cause, nor keep any Man's Cause from Trial; may
not send any man out of the Realm without his own Consent; may not, in time of
Peace, Billet or Quarter Soldiers or Mariners upon his People, against their
Wills; may not grant Commission to try Men by Martial Law in time of Peace, nor
to determine any matters of difference betwixt Subjects, other ways than by
ordinary 21 Jac. c. 31. Coke 11.87. Plowden 497.
course of Law and ordinary Courts; may not, by Patent or License, make a grant
of a Monopoly, or the benefit of a Penal Law, or give a Power to dispense with
Penal Laws in some Cases.

Coke 11.87.
He may not have, or take, that he has right to, which is in the Possession of
another, but by due course of Laws; and may not make new, or alter old Courts
of Justice, unless to be kept after the Course of the Law, and not in Course of
Equity; Nor Sheppard's Grand Abridgment, part 3. fol. 49.
alter the Courts of Westminster, that have been time out of mind, nor erect
new Courts of Chancery, King's Bench, Common Pleas, or Exchequer.

Fleetwood, lib. 1. c. 8.
He may not by his last Will and Testament, under the great Seal, or otherwise,
dispose of the Government, or of the Crown it self; nor give and grant away the
Crown Lands or Jewels, which he has in his Politic Capacity, nor give away any
of the incommunicable Prerogatives.

By these Abatements of Power and gracious Condescentions of the Kings of
England, for the Benefit and Security of the Subject; No Power coordinate with
the King's.
we are not to conclude, that there either is, or can be any Co-ordination or
Coaequality of any State, Order or Degree of the Subjects with the Sovereign,
nor any Competition of the Subjects Power (in his Concurrence) with the Vertual
and Primary Influence of the Sovereign; but a plain Subordination and subjected
Ministration of the one, under the Sovereignty of the other. For although there
is a Cooperation of the Members with the Head, for the performing some Acts of
State, and they may seem Orders or States coaequally Authorized in the Power of
Acting with the Sovereign, in Petitioning for, advising, or consulting about,
or consenting upon the Kings Summons to Laws. And although in judging and
determining matters of Private Interest, the King has not an Arbitrary
Judgment, but is restrained to the Judgment, to be administered by the proper
sworn Judges in his Courts, whom he appoints to judge according to his Laws;
and in the making of Laws, his Power and Judgment is restrained to the
Concurrence of the Nobles, and Commons in Parliament: yet in all other things
(wherein he is not expressly restricted by any Law of his own or Progenitors
granting) he retains the absolute Power, as in the particulars before
mentioned, and in the Chapters of Parliaments I shall further discourse.

In the Rebellion under King Charles the First, the Observations on His
Majesty's Messages, etc. The Rebels in 1641. would have lessened the King's
Sovereignty, and placed it in the People, or their Representatives.
Pencombatants for the Party (knowing they had the whole Current of the Laws
against them) made a great noise and bustle with Sophisms, and plausible
specious Pretenses, to captivate the Populace; and nothing was more frequent
than the Misapplication of that of the Philosopher, That the King was Singulis
major, but Vniversis minor: Inferring from thence, That the Collective Body of
the People, and their Representatives, were Greater in Authority than the King.

In answer to which, it may be observed, That the Aphorism, how true soever in
any other sense, is most false, in any sense, of Sovereignty. For, if it be
meant, That the King is a better Man only than any of us single, this does not
tell us he is better than Two; and this is no more than possibly he might be
before he was King: For we must needs look upon Princes, as Persons of Worth,
Honor, and Eminency, when taken from the People; which the superaddition of
Royalty did not destroy. Besides, any Lord of the Land may challenge such a
Supremacy over all the Knights, and any Knight over all the Esquires.
Furthermore, if Princes be Sovereigns to single Persons of Subjects only, and
not to the universality of them, then every single Subject by himself is a Body
Politic, whereof the King, as King, is Head; and so the Public Community is
out of the King's Protection, he being no King as to them in a complex Body.
Such impudent Falsities, and many more destructive Consequences, flow from such
absurd Principles: And if the Maxim were true, the People have placed a King
not over, but under themselves.

But they enforce the Argument still further, That the Fountain and efficient
Cause of Power is the People; and from hence, they say, the Inference is just,
That he is less than the Universe. But the Answer to Observations, p. 10.
Consequence is rather the contrary: For, suppose the People were the efficient
Cause of Power, it can be no otherwise than by translating, or deriving their
divided Power, and uniting it in him. Since then they cannot retain what they
have parted with, nor have what they gave away, it follows, That he who has
all their Power, and his own particular besides, must needs be greater, and
more powerful than they; it being a very great Truth, That he is the only
Fountain of Power and Justice.

Another of their Maxims was, That quicquid efficit tale, illud est magis tale:
And they assume, But the King was made by the People, therefore less than the
People. In answer to which, it is apparent, the Argument is Sophistical, as
being built on a Maxim in it self amphibolous, which is not simply true, but as
it is restricted: For it is true before the Effect produced, not after. So a
Spark firing a City, was once more Fire than the Houses; but not so after the
whole Town is become a Flame. It is true also in those Agents in whom the
Quality by which they operate is inherent; not true in those who by ways of
Donation divest themselves of Power or Wealth. For a thing cannot retain its
Fullness, after it has emptied it self. If the Objector have an Estate, which
he would willingly improve, let him bestow it on another, and he shall make him
rich, and, by his own Argument, himself richer: It is to be supposed, rather
than such an one will part with his Estate, he will find an Answer to his
Objection.

As to the minor Proposition, I have before cleared, I hope, That the People
are not the Original Cause of Government, But the Observer says, They are the
Final Cause; and the End is far more valuable in Nature and Policy, than that
which is the Means: therefore the Commons, whose Good is the final End of all
Government, are more Honorable than the Sovereign. But the Rule holds in such
Means only as are valuable by that relation they bear to their Ends, and have
no proper Goodness of their own. A King is not so to his People. If we look
back to his first Extraction, when he was first taken from the People to be set
over them, we must needs behold him as a Man of some Worth, Honor, and
Eminence; which the superaddition of Royalty did not destroy, but increase; and
to be a means of his Peoples Preservation, is very consistent with the Height
of Honor. Besides, they that would captivate the unthinking Multitude by such
Fallacies, must consider, that the Question is not, Who is Preferable, but, Who
is Superior. One good Christian is preferable to a thousand that are not so;
yet his Interest in the Commonwealth may not be preferable. A Shepherd is
ordained for his Flock; yet a Flock of Brutes is not preferable to any
Reasonable Creature. Further, the King's Interest and the Peoples are
inseparable in the Construction of the Law, which presumes, what the King does,
he does for the People. Whether therefore the King's Power be derived from God,
or the People, it is preferable. If from God, because his Ordinance: If from
the People, because the People have elected him, and consented it Jus Regium.
p. 68.
should be, and have trusted him with the Public Interest, which is still
preferable.

If this way of arguing were sound, Angels being Ministering Spirits for the
good of Men, it would follow, That Men should be more Honorable than Angels;
and the poor Client should be a better Man than his Learned Counselor; and the
simple Patient, than his Doctor.

As to Bracton's Authority, Rex habet superiorem Deum, legem item Curiam suam,
I must refer the scrupulous Reader to the Book called The Case of our Affairs,
p. 14.

CHAP. XVIII. That the Sovereign is unaccountable to any but God.
BEfore I come to treat of the several Branches of the Sovereignty of Kings in
the Executive parts of them, I shall from the general Idea of their Sovereignty
deduce three Corollaries, in this and the two following Chapters, which seem to
me to flow naturally from the Being of a Sovereign, viz. That such are
accountable to none but the Great Sovereign of the Universe: And secondly, may
dispense in some Cases with the Laws: And lastly, must not be resisted or
rebelled against. The necessary Motive to treat of the Unaccountableness of
Kings, the Murder of King Charles the First.


If there were no other Motive to induce me to treat of this Head, the
barbarous Murder of the Blessed Martyr King Charles the First, would have the
same power as the sense that Croesus's dumb Son had to see his Father's Life in
imminent danger, which made such a violent emotion of the Spirits, as unloosned
the stiff Ligaments by which his Tongue was contracted, or forced an Irruption
of Powerful Spirits to invigorate the paralytick Muscles of it, so that he
cried out, Spare my Father. So certainly the Consideration of such an High
Court of Justice, that arraigned and sentenced their Sovereign, should raise an
Indignation in any one that has sense of Allegiance, Duty, or Religion, to
defend that as a Fundamental Truth, That Sovereigns are subject to no Tribunal
but that of their Heavenly Sovereign.

In the handling this, I shall pick out some of the Assertions of Learned and
Judicious Authors, Heathens and Christians, and annex and intersperse such
Reasons as may evince it; and then show, That this does not leave Princes to a
Tyrannical Liberty; and lastly, give some short Remarks upon the unparalleled
Sentence of the Regicides of King Charles the First of Immortal Memory.

Usher's Power of Princes, part 4. page 196. Edit. Cracovian. Divine and Humane
Authorities to prove it.
Rabba bar Nachman, in his great Gloss upon Deuteronomy, says positively, No
Creature may judge the King, but the Holy and Blessed God alone: For the
Original Hebrew of which, and the place of Moses from whence he deduceth this
Assertion, I must refer the Reader to the Authors cited, having chosen this not
only for the fullness of the Expression, but for the Antiquity, though not of
the Comment, yet of the Text, before any other.

All those Places also in Holy Scripture which style Princes and Judges of the
Earth Psalm. 8. 5. with Heb. 2.7. and Psalm. 97.7. with Heb. 1.6. Exodus 21.6. and
22.8.
Gods, and the Sons of God, and Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye are Gods, and all
sons of the most High; which in the Chaldee Paraphrase is thus rendered, Behold,
ye are reputed as Angels, and all of you as it were Angels of the most High;
Job 1.6. and 2.1. and 38.7.
are sufficient Proofs of this Truth: As are likewise those Places that tell
us, It is the Will of God that we 1 Pet. 2.13, 15.
submit our selves to these Higher Powers, for his sake. Therefore (...). Orat.
3. de Regno.
St. Chrysostom calls Regality such a Government as is not subject to the
control of any. Sophocles calls it In Antiq. v. 11 27.
(...), a Free and Independent Regiment; and Xiphilin. (...).
Marcus Aurelius in Dio, an Absolute Kingdom, not subject to the Control of
any. To all which, agrees that of Horace, Lib. 3. Carm. Od. 1. Regum
timendorum, in proprios Greges,
Reges in ipsos Imperium est Jovis.
By which he fully expresses, That as Kings have Power over their Subjects, so
God has the Power over Kings.

All the vast Collections that may be made, of Emperors asserting, or Subjects
owning, that their Authorities are from God, that God gave them their Kingdoms,
they were Crowned of God, etc. of which there is a copious Collection in
Archbishop Power of Princes, a page 47 ad page 65.
Usher; are so many Arguments to prove this Assertion, That as they derive
their Authority from God, so they should only be accountable to him.

But I shall now proceed to more positive Authorities. Marcus Xiphilin.
excerpt. ex Dionys. M. Aureli^. (...).
Aurelius says, Of a Free Monarch none may judge but God alone; and (...).
Dion. Hist. Romans l. 53.
Dion Cassius tells us, That Kings are loosened from the Laws, that is, they
are freed from all coactive Obedience to them, and are held by none of the
written Ordinances. So Ereptumque Principi illud in Principatu beatissimum,
quod nihil cogitur. Panaeg.
Pliny tells us, That the happiest thing in a Princedom is, that the Prince may
be constrained to nothing. Therefore the most Judicious Usher's Power of
Princes, p. 73.
Primate says, In regard of themselves, Kings are said to be exempted from
Subjection to the Laws, because they are not tied (otherwise than for
Convenience, and good Example sake) to the observation of such as are more
positive and temporary Laws; and because they are not liable to the Civil
Punishment set down for the breach of any Law, as having no Superior upon
Earth, that may exercise such Power over them. For, as in another Idem, p. 96.
place he says, If the People may call him to an account for the Breach of the
Law, the State is plainly Democratical; if the Peers, it is Aristocratical; and
if either, or both, it cannot be accounted Monarchical.

To which we may add that of the Judicious Lord Clarendon's Survey, c. 29. p.
163.
Chancellor, That though a Prince's violating his Faith is against the Law of
Nature, yet the Obligation does not set any Judge over the Sovereign, nor does
any Civil Law pretend there is any Power to punish him. It is enough that in
Justice he ought to do it, and that there is a Sovereign in Heaven above him,
though not on Earth.

So Comment. in 12. Johannis.
Cyril of Alexandria says, Who dare violate the Decrees of the Kings o the
Earth, unless he himself be one that is invested with Regal Dignity, (and I may
add, his Superior:) For in such the Charge of transgressing the Law has no
place at all.

So Quando Rex delinquit, soli Deo reus est, (...) hominem non habet qui e^^s
facta dijudicet. In Psalm. 51.
Cassiodorus says, If any of the People transgress, he sins against God and
the King; but when the King offends, he stands guilty to God alone, because
he has no Man to be Judge of his Doings. So Nicephorus, Catena, Lyra, Didymus,
Arnobius Junior, and all the Commentators on the fifth Verse of the 51. Psalm,
on those Words, Against thee only have I offended, concur in the same
Assertion, That Kings are subordinate to none but God. Nor do any oppose it,
but such as would place a Mufti or Sanhedrim above Kings.

Consentaneous to which, was the Sentence of the Nesas est in dubium deducere
ejus potest ^em, cui omnium Gubernatio superno constat del^gata judicio. P. 514.
Council of Toledo, That it is unlawful to call his Power in question, to whom
the Government of all is known to be delegated by Judgment from above.

In cujus solius pctestate sunt, a quo sunt s^cundi, post quem primi. Apolog.
c. 3.
Tertullian speaking of the Prerogative of Kings, says, They are in his Power
alone, from whom they are second, and after whom the first; and in another
place Colimus Imperator^m ut hominem Deo secundum, solo Deo minorem. Ad Scap.
c. 2.
We worship the Emperor, as a Man next to God, and who has obtained of God
whatever he is, and is only less than God.

So Adversus Parm. l. 3.
Optatus says, Over the Emperor is none but he that made the Emperor.
Therefore St. Chrysostom (...). Hom. 2. ad Pop. Antioch.
says, The King is top and Head of all Men on Earth, having none upon Earth
higher than himself So V^pote constituti supra l^ges divino examini reservati,
seculi l^gibus non cohibentur. Praefat. Chron. Reasons to prove it.
Otto Frisingensis well notes, That Kings alone (as being placed above Laws)
are reserved to Gods Judgment, and are not restrained by any secular Laws.

There is good Reason for all this. For if the Sovereign were obliged, ex
officio, to give an account of his Administration to his Subjects, or had any
Superior upon Earth to exact a reason of his Actions (if he governed not
according to the Laws) and for Transgressions to inflict a Punishment upon him,
he should cease from being a Sovereign. As in the Chapter of Non-resistance I
shall further prove.

It is a Constitution grounded upon Necessity, to place Impunity somewhere, for
the avoiding Confusion: for a Circle in Government would be of most pernicious
Consequence; and infinitely absurd it must be (says a late D. Digs against
Resistance, p. 39, 40.
Author) that any should challenge a right to rule the Rulers, and be Superior
to the Supreme. Jus consistens in impunitate delictorum.
This Dernier resort, or last appeal must rest somewhere. It is a right
consisting in unpunishableness for Faults, which fences the Person or Persons
in whom is Supreme Domination, and secures them as strongly (as Laws can do)
from all Violence; and if it were otherwise a most large Inlet would be made
to overthrow all Authority: for every malicious Malecontent would be pretending
some Arbitrariness, or oppression in the Government; for which, if they had any
color of Authority, they would be calling him to an account. This
Unaccountableness to Men hinders not their Obligation ^o God's (...) makes
(...).


I foresee how solid, Judicious and Religious Authors soever have brought to
vouch this Assertion; yet Republican Libertines will be raising up their Crests
against me, and more moderate Persons will be pulling me by the Ear, and
admonishing me, lest hereby I should make the Sovereign lawless, and give him
liberty to do what he lists. Therefore no ways deserting the Principle of
unaccountableness (the Mischief of the contrary of which I think is
sufficiently discovered in the Chapter of Commonwealth-Government) I shall
endeavor out of good Authors, and the examples of great Princes, to lay down
some Rules, which Princes may think prudential for them to imitate.

First therefore I shall observe what the great (...). Lib. 3. Polit. c. 12.
Philosopher notes, That a King that governs by Law, makes no new Species of
Government, from that King that makes the Law his Standard. So that governing
by Laws, and according to them, in his Opinion, is very agreeable to Kingly
Government, and he every where commends it as most acceptable to the People,
and most safe for the Prince.

There is an excellent (...). De Creatione Princ.
Soliloquy that Philo brings in his King to make, and which may become the
potentest Monarch to imitate, That he writ the Laws himself into a Book, that
he might transcribe them into his Soul, and imprint into his Mind those divine
Characters, never to be washed out again: whereas other Kings therefore bear
Staves for their Scepter, the abridgment of the Law should be his Scepter, his
rejoicing and Glory uncontrollable, the Ensign of that unreproveable
Government, which is fashioned according to the Pattern of Gods own Kingdom.

Although according to Harmenopulus, (...), the King is not to be subject to
the Laws; because offending against them, he is not punished: and as St. Neque
ullis ad poenam legibus vo^antur, tuti Imperii potestate. Apol. pro Davide.
Ambrose speaking of David, says, He being a King, was tied to no Laws,
because Kings are freed from the Bonds or Punishments of Faults, being called
to Punishment by no Laws, being protected by the Power of their Empire; yet
(...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 27.
as a grave Father says, God's Word, and right Reason must give a Law to the
Lawgiver. Therefore that weighty and elegant Expression of Temperans
Majestatem Caesaris infra Deum, magis illum commendo Deo, cui soli subjicio.
Ideo magnus, quia coelo minor est. Apol. c. 35.
Tertullian deserves consideration by all Princes, which is this, While we
temper the Majesty of Caesar under God, we commend him the more to God, unto
whom alone we do subject him; therefore great, because he is less than Heaven.

To the voluntary submission of a Prince to his own, or the Laws of his
Progenitors, may be referred the memorable saying of Valentinian Revera majus
Imperio est submittere legibus Princip^tum. Lib. 4. c. de Leg. etc. Licet Lex
Imperii solennibus Juris Imperatorem solverit, nihil tamen tam proprium Imperii
est, quam legibus vivere. Lib. 3. c. de Testam.
the Younger, It is in truth a greater thing than Empire to submit the
Princedom it self to the Laws: and that other equally imitable by Princes,
Though the Laws of the Empire have freed the Emperor from the Solemnities of
the Laws, yet nothing is so proper for Empire, as to live by the Laws, or
according to them. So inthat commendation which Plutarch gives (...). Orat. 2.
de Fortuna Alex.
Alexander the Great, That he conceived he ought to be thought superior unto
all Men, yet subject to Justice.

Such a Prince we find Pliny fully describe in his Nec minus hominem se quam
hominibus praeesse meminit.
Panegyric of Trajan, That he thinks himself to be one of us, and so much the
more excellent and eminent he is, that he so thinks, and no less remembers
that he is a Man, than that he is a Ruler of Men. For he who has nothing left
to Cui nihil ad augendum fastigium superest, hic uno modo crescere potest, si
se ipse submittat securus magnitudinis suae.
increase his height, has but this one way to grow by, if he submit himself
(that is, to the governing by Laws, it may be presumed he means) being secure
of greatness: and in another place he calls him equal to all; in this only
greater than the rest, That he was better: and more nearly to our present
purpose, Thou have made Ipse te legibus subjecisti, Legibus, Caesar, quas (...)
Principi scrip. (...).
thy self subject to the Laws, O Caesar, which were not written to restrain the
Prince by.

So we find both Severus Licet legibus soluti simus, attamen legibus (...).
Instit quibus modis Testam. infirment. 8. Vet.
and Antonius often set down in their Rescripts, Although we be loosed from the
Laws, yet we live by the Laws.

These Laws are the Laws of God, of Nature, or those of the Kingdom; concerning
the first and last I shall not now discourse: concerning that of Nature the Non
scripta, sed nata lex, quam non didicimus, accepimus, legimus, verum ex natura
ipsa arripuimus, hausimus, expressimus, ad quam non docti sed facti, non
instituti sed imbuti sumus. Pro Milone.
Orator says, It is not writ, but born with us, which we have not learnt,
received, or read, but from Nature it self have powerfully attracted, drunk in,
and extracted; to which we are not taught, but made obedient, not instructed,
but imbued.

Concerning the original of which Law, he says, Vnus erit communis quasi
Magister and Imperator omnium Deus, ille legis hujus inventor, disceptator,
lator; ^ui qui non p^rebit, ip^e se fugiet, a^ naturam hominis spernabitur,
atque hoc ips^ luet maximas poenas, etiamsi caetera supplicia quae putantur
^ffugerit. Lib. 3. de Repub.
That God our common Master and Ruler of all, is the Inventer, Judge and
Lawgiver, which he who will not obey, must fly from himself, ( i. e. abandon
the Dictates of his own Reason and Conscience) and despise the Nature of Man;
and in himself ( i. e. in his Conscience) undergo the greatest Pains, although
he should escape all those other which commonly are accounted Punishments. It
is concerning this Law he says, That from it neither the Senate no^ the People
can exempt us, nor is it lawful to abrogate it in the whole, nor derogate from
it, Ibid.
Neque derogari ex hac aliquid licet, neque tota abrogari potest, nec vero aut
per Senatum, aut per populum solvi hac lege possumus.

The forementioned Archbishop Vs^er's Power of Princes. p. 70.
from hence concludes, That to this moral Law of God, whether by Nature, thus
written in the Hearts of Men, or more fully delivered by Gods own written word,
or by just consequence deduced from the grounds of either of them, the greatest
Monarch upon Earth owes as much obedience, as the lowest and meanest of all his
Subjects. And however the Prince is obliged to the directive force of the Law,
and so ought to be governed by it as his Director; and though it be most true
that Reges Jolo Dei timore metuque Gehennae coercentur. Isiodorus 3. Sent. c.
31.
Kings are restrained only by the fear of God and Hell, yet we may conclude
that these, together with the consideration of their Interests, will be
sufficient Incitements to them to govern according to such Laws.

Yet still it is to be owned, That when a King does not act according to such
Laws, he is not thereby capable of any Punishment for the transgressing of
them: and the reason (says the learned Power of the Prince, p. 81.
Primate) is obvious, because the inflicting of a punishment is an Act of a
Superior to an Inferior; and to make one upon Earth Superior to the Supreme
Governor, would employ an absolute contradiction: though a Father or Master
were never so faulty, none would be so absurd as to think, that their Servants
or Children might chastise them.

When I reflect on that dismal Day, when the wicked High Court of Justice
arraigned and sentenced the most Innocent, Just and Religious King, that
possibly has worn a Crown since our Saviors time; I always stand amazed, and
read, or meditate on that Tragical Act with a concern next to that of our
Savior's suffering: All that black and bloody Scene was acted by Men, of and
upon the Principles successful Rebels made use of, The Preamble to the
Treasonable Charge against King Charles the First.
That Kings are admitted and trusted with a limited Power to govern by, and
according to the Laws of the Land, and not otherwise; and by their Trust, Oath
and Office, are obliged to use the Power committed to them, for the Good and
Benefit of the People, and for the Preservation of their Rights and Liberties;
which they charged that Blessed King to have designedly violated.

To which I shall give only some (k) short Heads of his Majesty's Answer, His
Majesty's Speeches and Trial, p. 429.
which if they had been weighed, were enough to confound all their arguing. He
demanded by what lawful Authority he was seated there; he had a trust committed
to him by God, by old and lawful Descent, that he would not betray, Page 431.
to answer to a new unlawful Authority; That England was an Hereditary Kingdom:
He tells them how great a sin it is to withstand lawful Authority, and submit
to a Tyrannical or Unlawful: That Kings can be no Delinquents: That Obedience
unto Kings is strictly commanded in the old and new Testament, page 435.
particularizing that one place, Where the word of a King is, there is Power;
and who may say unto him, What do thou? Eccl. 8.4.
That no Impeachment can lie against him, all running in his Name: That the
King can do no wrong; the House of Commons never being a Court of Judicature,
can erect none. He owns an Obligation to God, to defend and maintain the
Liberties of his People, against all such Illegal and Arbitrary Proceedings.
Page 439.
But 'twas to no purpose to show such Crown-Jewels before such Wolves and
Bears, that were gaping for his Blood, and would not admit his only request to
them to be heard, for the Welfare of the Kingdom and Liberty of the Subject
(before they precipitated Sentence against him) before the Lords and Commons,
and pressed it, That it may be it was something he had to say, they had not
heard before Hand. But nothing his sacred Majesty could say, would move those,
who, under a vile and notorious Lie, in the Name of the People, the Supreme
Authority, as they called it, passed that barbarous Sentence against that
sacred Head, to the amazement of the whole World, sufficient to raise the
utmost Indignation of all good Men, against such barbarous Principles and
Proceedings.

CHAP. XIX. That the Sovereign may dispense with the Execution of the Laws of
his Country in several Cases.
HAving discoursed of the Kings being unaccountable to any but God Almighty,
when he governs not according to the Laws of God, Nature, or his Dominions; The
Connection of this with the foregoing Chapter.
upon that Foundation, That there cannot be two Supremes here upon Earth, in
one Kingdom: I come now to discover what Power Kings in general, and our Kings
in particular, have to dispense with the Execution of the Laws upon some cases;
for it is far from my thoughts, ever to suggest any such dangerous assertion,
That Princes in general may dispense with the Execution of the Laws.

Plutarch (...). Compar. Flaminii and Philopaemenis.
sets this down as a chief point of that natural skill which Philopoemen had
in Government, That he did not only rule according to the Laws, but overruled
the Laws themselves, when he found it conducing to the Weal public.

For as the (...). Justin. Jun. Imp. praef. Constit. 3.
Emperor says (whilst the Laws stand in force) it is fit that sometimes the
Kings Clemency should be mingled with the severity of them; especially when by
that means the Subject may be freed from much Detriment and Damage.

Princes, according to the Princeps est supra legem adeo quod secundum
conscientiam suam judicare potest. Cyrus in L. Rescript. etc.
Judgment of great Lawyers, have Power to judge according to their own
Conscience, and not according to the Letter of the Law: and no doubt it was
such written Laws as these that (...). Justinian. Novel 105.
Justinian the Emperor meant, when upon the enacting of a Constitution of this
kind, he added thereunto this Limitation, From all these things which have been
said by us, let the Emperors State be excepted, whereunto God has subjected
the very Laws themselves, sending him as a living Law unto Men; who therefore
in another place, assumeth to himself the Title of a Father of the Law.
Whereupon the Nota, Imperatorem vocari patrem Legis, under etc Leges sune ei
subjecte. Gloss. in Novel. 12. c. 4.
Glossator makes this Observation, Note, That the Emperor is the Father of the
Law, whereupon the Laws also are subject to him.

So the great Princeps est supra legem in quantum si expediens est, potest
legem mutare, and in ea dispensare pro loco and tempore. Vid. Thom. in 1.2. q.
96. Artic. 5. ad 3.
Schoolman says, The Prince is above the Law so far, that if it be expedient,
he may change the Law, and dispense with Time and Place; as when a Man is
condemned to banishment, the Prince, if he see cause, may revoke him from
thence; and therein, says Gloss. in lib. 4. de Poenis.
Accursius, his own Will is accounted a great and just cause, Magna and justa
Causa est ejus Voluntas.

The Reason of these Assertions is couched in what Aeneas Convenit Imperatori
Juris rigorem aequitatis fraeno temperare, cui soli inter aequitatem jusque
interpositam interpretationem licet and incumbit inspicere. De Ortu and
Authoribus Imperii.
Sylvius observes, That there is a certain other thing to which the Emperor is
more obnoxious than to the Law, and that is Equity, which is not always found
written: Now if the Law does command one thing, and Equity persuade another. It
is fit the Emperor should temper the Rigor of the Law with the Bridle of
Equity; as he, who alone may, and ought to look unto that Interpretation, which
lies interposed betwixt Law and Equity; since no Law can sufficiently answer
the Varieties and unthought on plottings of Man's Nature, and in Tract of Time,
Laws at first, just, or in terrorem, become unprofitable and harsh: and this
moderating of Laws (which is called, says he, (...), or Equity) is so annexed
to the Prince, that by no decree of Man it can be pulled from it.

This Absoluteness I have hitherto mentioned out of such great Authors, How far
the Kings of England may dispense with their Laws.
is not practiced by the English Sovereign; for he challenges no such Power to
make or abrogate Laws, without the Concurrence of the two Houes: But he has a
sufficient Prerogative by dispensing, conniving or putting some Laws more in
Execution than at other times, so to manage the Execution of the, as the
Government, and consequently the Peoples safety be not prejudiced. So though
there be a Law for Triennial Parliaments; yet when a Prince finds a Potent
Faction that may influence the Electors, so as the meeting of such a Parliament
at such a time, may be hazardous to the public, there being no Penalty can be
inflicted on a King for the Omission, and the Danger being visible, that such a
Factious Parliament was only wanting, to bring to perfection the Design of
Traitorous and Seditious Persons: It is very agreeable to Reason, that a
Prince, in such a juncture, should prefer the public Peace of his Kingdom, and
the security of his Crown (by the omitting such Summons) than to hazard all by
convening them. There are other Cases may intervene, wherein the Reason of
State, the Salus publica, may require the dispensing with, or suspension of the
Execution of some Laws: As in time of open Rebellion, the King's arming of such
as he may most surely confide in, though they take not such Oaths, or be so
qualified, as the Laws require, and as in several other Particulars, might be
instanced in.

I shall only add two Authorities of our own Country, who were well versed in
the matter; the one a great Divine, and the other as great a Lawyer and
Statesman: First, the learned Usher's Power of Princes, p. 76.
Primate says, Such positive Laws being (as other works of Men are) imperfect,
and not free from any Discommodities, if the strict Observation thereof should
be pursued in every particular: It is fit the Supreme Governor should not
himself only be exempted from Subjection thereunto, but also be so far Lord
over them, that where he sees cause he may abate, or totally remit the penalty
incurred by the breach of them; dispense with others for not observing of them
at all, yea generally suspend the Execution of them, when by experience he
shall find the Inconveniences to be greater than the profit that was expected
should redound thereby, to the Commonwealth.

The Second Authority shall be that of the Earl of Clarendon, Survey, p. 127.
who affirms, That by our Laws, the King has, in many Cases, the Power of
dispensing with the Execution of the Law, especially in granting pardon for the
transgressing of them, except in those Cases where the Offense is greater to
others than the King, as in murder of an Husband or Father: therefore upon an
Appeal by them, the Offender may suffer after the Kings pardon; which shows how
tender our Laws are of protecting the Lives of Subjects.

This Prerogative of Kings 3. Rep.
Bodin avouches among the Rights of Sovereignty, to pardon the Persons, the
forfeiture of their Goods; and to restore the attainted Honors of those
condemned by righteous or unrightcous Judgment; according to that of St. Q.
115. ex Veteri and Novo Testamento.
Hilary in St. Augustine, Imperatori soli licet revocare sententiam, and reum
mortis absolvere, and ei ignoscere: That it belongs only to the Emperor, to
revoke the Sentence or Judgment; and to absolve and pardon the guilty. For as
Themistius says, One thing becoms a Judge, and another thing a King; the one
is to observe the Law, the other has power to correct the Laws themselves, and
to qualify the severity and harshness of them, as being himself a living Law,
and not confined to the unchangeable and unalterable Letter. For that end,
says he, it seems, God did send from Heaven the Regal Power into the Earth,
that Men might have a refuge from that dead and immovable Law, to the living
one, as he instanceth in Capital Offenders. For we have seen (says he) Men
returned to life from the Gates of Death, whom the Law indeed sent thither, but
the Lord of the Law, (...), brought back from thence again.

As to the Power of Equity, claimed by the great Civilians, the Administration
of that is vested in the Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Kings appointment,
who is the Keeper of the Kings Conscience, or Dispenser of that reserved Power
in the King.

CHAP. XX. That the Sovereign is not to be resisted or rebelled against, upon
pretense of ill Government, Irreligion, or any such matter.
OUR Republicans of 1641. set themselves, with all their skill and cunning, The
Necessity of this Discourse.
as well as force, to overthrow the Doctrine of Non-resistance; and to
establish that of its being lawful, not only to rise in Arms, for the defense
of their Liberty, Property and Religion (the gilded pretenses of all
Rebellions) but to prosecute that blessed King and all his Loyal Subjects, in
the highest Degree of Cruelty and Revenge, that they could devise, or their
success embolden them to commit. Therefore it is a most necessary Duty of all
that wish well to themselves, as well as the Government, to oppose such
dangerous Positions and Practices.

The Authorities I have cited in the two Chapters of Sovereignty, are but the
gleanings of what may be found in learned Men on this Subject; and since I
shall have occasion hereafter (when I treat of the Subjects duty) to handle
this matter more particularly, I shall be the shorter in this, and refer the
curious Reader to the elaborate Treatise of Mr. Dudley Digs, Of the
unlawfulness of Subjects taking up Arms against their Sovereign; and to the
Glory of his Age, for Learning, Loyalty and Sanctity, the Lord Primate Usher's
Power of the Prince, and His Second Part of Obedience; to the judicious and
learned Sir George Mackenzie his Jus Regium, and Arnisaeus. Zeiglar de Jure
Majestatis c. 1. n. 12. Salmasii Defensio Regia. Grotius lib. 1. c. 4. de Jure
Belli. Dr. More 's Divine Dialogues. Dr. Mouliu 's Philanax Anglicus. Sam.
Petit 's Diatriba, etc.
others that treat of this Subject, ex instituto: desiring all those, who have
imbibed, or would avoid any of these dangerous Principles, that they will
seriously consult those Authors, out of whom I shall only hint some few of
their Reasons and Arguments, that may be as Antidotes against the most
destructive poison of resisting Sovereign Princes, or allowing any Order of
Subjects the Liberty upon any Pretense of Misgovernment, to call their
Sovereigns to an account.

In the first Place it ought to be considered, that by constituting any check
upon Sovereign Princes, all Decisions and Controversies must be writ in Blood;
and it would lay a fruitful Non tanti est civilia bella movere. Arguments
against Resisting of Princes.
Seed-Plot of civil Wars, by indulging the most pernicious Freedom of righting
our selves: for though the People, or some ambitious Malcontents, may not be
so happy as they could wish; yet to make use of Force, as a Remedy, will
certainly increase the Miseries.

If this Principle be granted, it will make Sovereigns always jealous, Would
make Princes always jealous.
and consequently studious to secure themselves against such opposition by
strong Hand, which will be very galling to the Subject.

Besides, upon all differences betwixt the King and People, No Judges can be
betwixt King and People.
no Judge can be found to determine the Matter; and to allow this Power to the
People, is to allow a Difference that can have no end, before one half of the
Nation have ruined another, as by sad Experience we found in our late Civil
Wars.

Further it ought to be considered, That this not only overthrows Monarchy, but
all Government; for who will obey, It overthrows all Government.
when they can resist? Under all Governments we should have one Rebellion Just
Right of Monarchy, p. 92.93.
rising out of the Ashes of another; for only those who prevailed should be
satisfied, and all the rest would certainly conclude, that they might more
justly oppose those Usurpers, than the first did their lawful Prince: and thus,
Government (which is designed for the Security, Peace and Tranquillity of the
State) should be perpetually embroyled, and by the cruel Hostilities of emulous
Factions, mastering one another; the common People, and those who would desire
to live peaceably, should be the continual Prey of Ravenous Harpyes and
Vultures.

If we allow Subjects to take Arms against their Prince; Not allowed in
Families.
we ought to allow Children the like Liberty against their Parents, Servants
against their Masters, Soldiers against their Officers, and the common Rabble
against their Magistrates: For the King in his Sovereignty, eminently
comprehends all these Relations.

Besides, what reasonable Man can think (much more ought to assert) that it is
fit to allow this Principle; when all Ages, Mischiess of the Peoples Liberties.
and daily Experience teach us, That the numerous Party of Mankind is
difficultly, by the most rational and strictest Laws, contained in their duty:
What might we therefore expect, if every Man should be invested with Power to
be his own Judge, and be loosed from all Laws, and encouraged to the Duty (as
it must be upon this Doctrine) of transgressing, disobeying, and breaking all
Laws that establish a Government uneasy to him.

It cannot but be observed, and by daily Experience is found, (...) in all
Popular Congresses, in all Elections, or public Votes of the Body of the
People, how violent they are, when opposed by some few: How Insolent when they
find their Strength, that nos numeri sumus: And how Cruel when enraged, as in
the History of Cardinal Bentivolio (to go no higher) in that of Naples, under
Masianello, and that of Amsterdam against the De Wits, and many more might be
instanced in. And it will certainly be allowed, that the Multitude (being
cajoled by Pretenders to be their Patriots, and the publickspirited maintainers
of their Liberties, Properties and Religion (the usual Shams and Wheedles,
ambitious and contriving Men make of to seduce them) find these very Men more
unjust, oppressive, exorbitant and Arbitrary than the worst of Princes.

Therefore since the multitude is no better qualified to judge, nor juster when
led by such Chieftains: Surely all prudent Men, and Lovers of their own and
their Countries Happiness, must conclude it much safer, and conducibler to the
Public Weal, to obey those whom God has set over them; and the Laws, their
Duties and Oaths oblige them to bear Faith and Allegiance to; than to subject
themselves to their Fellow Subjects, who can have no other Title but rebellious
Success to warrant them to harass, butcher, and ruin them. Whereas at the worst
in Kings, we have but an ill Master; but allowing Subjects to usurp, we may
fight our selves into slavery under hundreds of Tyrants, and those too fighting
one against another, so that we shall not know even which of those Devils to
obey.

Would we consult the Histories of preceding times, or our own Experiences, we
should find the Pretenders to reform Idem, p. 92. Pretenders to Reformation
greatest Oppressors.
Government, have proved the greatest Cheats to those they have seduced. They
in reality neither promoting Liberty or Religion, but under that Vizard-mask,
shrouded other black designs; and when they succeeded in their Attempts, they
became infinitely more oppressive to the People, than the lawful Powers ever
had or could be, they pretended to protect them from the Rigor of. And when
Idem, p. 90, 91.
others rose against them on the same pretense, they did in the severest manner
declare that Rebellion in others, which they contended to be lawful in
themselves. Whoever will not be convinced of this (if he by woeful Experience
knew it not) may read it in the Histories of our late Miseries; and if he have
any Spirit of Ingenuity or Christianity, will totally abandon such Principles,
as brought so wasting a Calamity on our Country.

In the Constitution of our English Government, we have but one Sovereign, The
Constitution of England's Government Monarchical.
to whom we owe Fealty, Homage, Allegiance, and Obedience by Oaths and Laws.
Even all the Acts of Parliament that acknowledge this a Monarchy, are so many
solid Arguments and Testimonies of the Kings Supremacy; and to set up any
coordinate Power whatsoever, would be to create Regnum in Regno in Temporals,
as the Phanatick Principle, That Dominium fundatur in Gratia, or in Orthodoxa
Religione, does in Spirituals: Than which no Sentiment was ever invented more
dangerous to overturn States, and bring all to Confusion.

If indeed we were to form the Government, under which we were to live, No new
Government now to be framed.
we might agree upon setting up Ephori, Tribunes of the People, Daemagogues,
Calvin's Three Estates, or a coordinate Power in the two Houses, as so many
checks upon the Supreme Governor. But we are born under a Monarchy fixed by
Law and Consent, time out of Mind; so that we may as well yield to the
Levellers reducing us to the pure pute State of Nature, as the forming such an
Idaea of a Commonwealth, wherein a Sovereign is to be resisted, if any factious
Party think themselves aggrieved.

It is to be well considered, that though William the Conqueror had little or
no Title of Right, yet his Conquest, with the Subjects submission, then, and in
after Ages to his Successors, and the Obligation of Oaths, and subsequent Acts
of Parliament, supplied all Defects; and all the Limitations of that absolute
Power which accrued by Conquest, being the free Concession of himself and his
Successors (which appears in their Grants by way of Charter, as I shall
hereafter have occasion to enlarge upon) it is most evident that the King's
Power is absolute, where no Law D. Digs Unlawfulness of Resisting.
can be produced to the contrary, and no special Case can be determined by the
Subject to the Kings disadvantage: and though the Kings succeeding the Conquest
(to sweeten Subjection,) quaedam jura pactis minuerunt, and these Acts of Grace
were confirmed by Promise and Oath; No Contract betwixt King and Subjects,
whereby they may exact an Account.
yet we find no Footsteps of any security given, that should endanger the
Person or Regal Authority, by giving to their Subjects any legal Power to
unking them if they should not perform Covenant. Nor could it be rational to
expect such; for they knew full well if they should not break such Promises,
yet a Pretense that they did so (as we have known it was alleged concerning
the Coronation Oath) might upon the first opportunity create a Civil War.

Therefore their Subjects had as little reason to accept, as the Kings had to
offer so pernicious a Security, as would bring both Parties into such a sad
Condition. For if Rebellion were to be allowed in any Case, that Case would be
always pretended: and though the Prince were Just, Wise, and Religious; yet
ambitious Men (to compass their own Ends) would impute to him Oppression,
Weakness, or Irreligion, as the World knows by too sad Experience was verified
in King Charles the Martyr; who taking his measures of others Sincerity, by the
rule of his own Heart, suffered pretenses of public Good to grow up to
insolent Tumults, and at last to Rebellion; and notwithstanding his Exemplary
Practice in his public Devotions, was traduced to have but handsomely
dissembled, and favored another Religion in his Heart; and at last brought
before a crew of Regicides, impeached of breach of Trust, Tyranny, and I know
not how many horrid Crimes against his Subjects; who yet died the Peoples
Martyr, and the Royal Asserter of their Liberties and Privileges, which all
his Subjects found to expire with him; the greatest Arbitrariness and cruellest
Tyranny, being, during their Power, exercised by the new Commonwealth Men, that
ever was read of in any History.

Those who read Books, among those of the Sect of Libertines in Politics, and
so much magnify the great name of Liberty of the Subject and coordinate
Powers, Writers who lived under Commonwealths, no Guides to us.
converse most in Greek and Latin Authors, who lived under Commonwealths, and
so were profuse in the commendation of their Country Government, against
Usurpers; or else these admired Authors were Jus Regium, p. 134.
Stoics, who out of a selfish Pride, equalled themselves not only to their
Kings, but to their own Gods; even as our Quakers who pretend a Light within
them a more sure guide to them than the Law.

Now the same reason they had to commend their form of Government, We have more
reason to comm^nd our Government, than the Romans or Grecians theirs.
(and so much more as Monarchy is preferrable to Aristocracy) we in England
have reason to commend our Constitution, where our Kings are truly the Fathers
of their Country; and if they would balance the convenience or inconvenience
of either Government, they would soon discover it. For whereas they say that
the Doctrine of Non-resistance is the readiest Motive to establish Tyranny: It
is much more certain and experimentally known that the Leaders of the Rabble
always prove such, and that the Distractions of a civil War (which ordinarily
are occasioned by the pretense of reforming something amiss in the Governors,
and Competitions betwixt Persons for Sovereignty) destroy more than the Lusts
of any one Tyrant can do; which made Lucan, a Republican, and of the Pompeian
Party, conclude, after a sad review of the continual Civil Wars betwixt Sylla
and Marius, Caesar and Pompey, without touching upon what followed under the
Triumvirs, Foelices Arabes, Medique, Eoaque tellus,
Qui sub perpetuis tenuerunt Regna Tyrannis.


And if he preferred even the Tyranny or absoluteness of those Kings, before
the State of Civil Wars; how much more have we reason to submit, and that
cheerfully, to the most easy Yoke of the Sovereignty of our Princes. We need
not be solicitous, that their unaccountableness to their Subjects shall prompt
them to Tyranny, because we have good Security (as strong as humane Wisdom ever
invented) that we shall live happily under that Constitution which our
Forefathers enjoyed the Benefit of in an high Degree, The Security we have,
that no Arbitrary Government can be exercised in England.
never distrusting the sound temper of the Policy.

For first our Kings swear at their Coronations to preserve the Laws,
Liberties, Properties and Religion. Secondly, If they should command illegal
things, the Executors of them are responsible to Parliamentary Inquisitions.
Lastly, the Interest of the King is the same with that of the Subject, as to
their Prosperity and Misery; so that a King will always consult the good of his
Subjects: which made Praeestis hominibus, sed hominum causa, nec domini modo
and Arbitri rerum, sed Tutores and Administratores estis. Collata est in sinum
vestrum a deo and hominibus Respublica. sed nempe in sinum and ut foveatur.
Epist. Dedicat. ad Imp. Reges and Principes.
Lipsius tell the Sovereigns, That they govern over Men but for their good, and
are not only Lords and Judges of Matters, but Tutors and Administrators; That
the Government of the Commonweal, by God and Men, is placed in their Bosoms or
Laps, but so as to be cherished and protected there.

To conclude this discourse, We have heard of, or seen, the sad Calamities the
Republican Rebellion brought upon all his Majesty's Dominions, when the mild
Government of King Charles the First was altered to the most Bloody and
Tyrannical one of his rebellious Subjects that any Age could parallel; and we
have had Experience of the merciful Government of his Royal Son and Successor,
and have lived to see all the Establishments of Usurpers brought to Confusion.

We have seen a formidable Rebellion burst forth in our Magnanimous King James
the Second's Reign (which had been forming seven Years before) utterly
overthrown in two Months; and we cannot peruse Histories, but we must meet with
infinite Examples of the sad devastations such Rebellions bring to their
Country, and the unsuccessfulness of them. Therefore I would earnestly advise
all Malcontents, never to make their Country's Ruin, and the slain Carcasses
of their Countrymen, the Steps by which they must ascend the Scaffolds, or the
Rounds of the Ladders they must mount the Gallows, which, without a Prince's
Clemency, are the sure Rewards of all Rebels, and their certain Fate.

CHAP. XXI. Of the King's Authority in making Laws.
HAving treated of the King's Sovereignty, I come now to treat of that
Top-branch of it, the Power and Authority of the King in giving Laws to his
Subjects. I must be shorter on this Head, because the following Chapters,
concerning the Great Councils, and those particularly concerning Parliaments,
will more fully illustrate and confirm this Particular.

In all Government, the Legislative Power must be fixed somewhere; and it is
the concurrent Opinion of all Ab eo, i. Principe, tanquam a font, Leges omnes
and Jura ^manant. Vinii Epist. Dedicat. Id. Comment. in Inst it. lib. 1. tit.
2. p. 13. a.
Civilians, That all Laws do flow from the Prince, as from a Fountain.

The Word Lex and Jus, by Cicero, and the Romans, were most-what used
promiscuously; though Lex, or Law, did frequently signify what was writ, and
enjoined to be observed. Therefore the Plebiscita of the Romans at first were
not called Laws, because they obliged only part of the Citizens, till the
Hortensian Law gave them the same force as those which were accorded in
Comitiis Centuriatis.

The Plebiscita were among the Romans, The Plebiscita of the Romans.
after the expulsion of their Kings, binding Laws; and they were made thus: The
Magistrates who had the greater Auspices in the Commonwealth (such were the
Consuls, Dictators, or Pretors) proposed the Laws to the Assemblies of the
People, and asked them by the Name of Quirites, Whether they willed or
commanded them? And they writ in the Table either A. for Antiquo, or V. R. for
Vti Rogas, As thou ask.

The Tribunes and Plebeian Aediles were the proper Magistrates of the Plebs;
but the Aediles were never known to demand the Peoples Suffrage to the Laws.
The Plebiscita at first were made in the Assemblies of the Tributis Comitiis,
Centuriatis, aut Curiatis.
Tribes, and the Laws in the Hundredary or Curiate Assemblies. But, to be
short, L. Valerius and M. Horatius being Consuls, it being a doubt whether the
Fathers were obliged by the Plebiscita, they passed a Law in the Centuriata
Anno v. C. 304, 305. Howel. In the Curiata Comitia, says Dionys.
Comitia, That whatever the Plebs should enjoin in the Convention of the
Tribes, should be binding to the People; which was confirmed by Anno v. C. 367.
Vinnius.
Q. Hortensius the Dictator, at the third Secession of the People to the
Janiculum; therefore Inter Legem and Plebiscitum sp^^ies interesset
constituendi; potestas autem ead^m esset. Sect. de Origin Juris. Id. p. 14.
Senatus consultum, and Power of the Roman Senate.
Pomponius says, That the manner of constituting a Law and Plebiscitum
differed, but the Power was the same.

That which the Senate commanded and constituted, was called a Senatus
consultum. Vinnius proves, That while the Roman Republic stood, the Laws were
made by the People alone, and not by the Senate: For they had permitted to
them, as the Public Council, to take cognizance and Decrees of things that
related to the constituting the Republic; but so, that all Matters of great
moment were not established, unless the Polyb. lib. 6. Dionys. Halic. lib. 4.
and 7. Senatus consulta nullam vim legis babehant nisi plebs ea probaret.
People confirmed them. So that by no Decree of the Senate, either any new Law
was introduced, or any old one abrogated. So that neither in Julius Caesar, or
Augustus's time, we find mention of their Decrees: And 1. de Repub. c. 10.
Bodin affirms, That from the time of the expulsion of the Kings, to the Empire
of Tiberius Caesar, the Senate had no power to make Laws, but certain Annual
Decrees, which yet did neither bind the People or Plebs.

During the Civil Wars, there was scarce any Authority but in the Emperors,
till Augustus in some measure restored the Power of the Comitia, as Suetonius
tells us, who says, That Julius Caesar Jus Comitiorum non in totum populo
ademerat, sed cum eo partitus est. Sueton. in Julio.
did not wholly abrogate the Power of the Comitia, but divided the Power
betwixt himself and them; and Augustus brought back the ancient Jus of the
Comitia: And Tacitus tells us of these times, Ad eam diem, etsi potissima
arbitrio Principis, quaedam tamen studiis Tribuum fiebant; That to that day,
although most things were done by the Will of the Prince, yet some things were
done by the Study of the Tribes.

Yet it is observed, That from what time the Laws and the Ex eo igitur tempore
legibus and plebiscitis quiescentibus Senatus jus facere coepit: quanquam non
tam propria Auctoritate quam conniventia quadam and indulgentia Principum.
Vinnius, p. 14.
Plebiscita were weakened, or less regarded, the Senate began to make Laws; but
it was by the Connivence and Indulgence of the Princes, as appears by the
Orations the Princes had in the Senates. Therefore Solus arbiter rerum Jure and
n mine Regio. 1. Annal.
Tacitus makes his Prince sole Arbiter of Affairs by Kingly Right and Name; and
gives the Reason for it; Because the nature of Commands consists not otherwise,
than that the last resort be to One: Ea est imperandi ratio, ut non aliter
constet quam si uni reddatur. So the Judicious Reges dom^ni rerum temporumque,
trahunt conciliis cuncta, non sequuntur. Lib. 8.
Livy says, Kings are Lords of Things and Times, attracting all things by
their Counsel, not following them. So Mecaenas's Advice was to Insurgere
paulatim munia legum, and magistratuum ad se trahere. Tacit. 1. Annal.
Augustus, insensibly and gradually to draw to himself the Appointment of Laws
and Magistrates. However, by Pliny it is recorded, to the Honor of Trajan,
That he would make no Laws without the Senate: as Alexander did nothing in
Military Affairs, without his Council of Officers; or in other Matters of
moment, without his Council of Prudent Men.

Thus the Senate had a shadow of Authority, and were something like the
Parliaments of France, to ratify the King's Edicts: And it was some advantage
to a Senate, that the Prince concurred with Senatus Potentiam augendo suae
serviebant. Suet. c. 29.
them, and e contra. So we read, That Theoderick the Goth passed that obliging
Complement upon them, Judicium vestrum (Patres Conscripti) noster comitatur
assensus.
Our Assent (Fathers of the Senate) accompanies your Judgment.

So Bodin observes, That whenever the Senate had any Authority, it was when it
was particula quaedam Majestatis, and had it not vi Senatus, sed quia simul
sustinet partem Majestatis: So he would ascribe to the Senate Jus decernendi,
and Sententiam pronunciandi; but to want the absolute Legislative Power. For if
the Senate had obtained that, the Government must have been Aristocratical.

How the Equites, by a Law of Caius Gracchus, Tribune of the People, were
brought in to be Judges, whereby they had the Lives and Fortunes of the
Senators and Nobles in their Power, is fully discoursed of in the Judicious
History of Lib. 3. c. 9. p. 722.
Dr. Howel, to whom I refer the Reader.

There were also Praetorian Laws, and the Responsa sapientum; but these seem to
be Judgments passed in Courts, rather than Laws, and are like our Precedents
and Reports: So I pass them, as also the Laws of the Twelve Tables, only
noting, Laws of the Twelve Tables.
That in the great Strife betwixt the Tribunes of the People and the Senate,
about the 298 of the City, Sp. Posthumous, and others, were sent to Greece, to
fetch a Transcript of their Laws; and they were proposed to the view of all Men
in Ten Tables, and a Senatus consultum passed for ratifying them; and the
Question being put to the People, in the Centuriata Comitia, they were
confirmed most religiously, in the presence of the Pontifices, Augurs, and
Priests, and were engraven in Brass: By which Account we have the true Method
of the Roman making of Laws.

The Power of the Senate, and all Magistrates Authorities, The Power of the
Senate and Magistrates were weakened in the Civil Wars.
being weakened in the Wars of Marius and Sylla, and still more in those betwixt
Pompey and Caesar, the prevailing Party still made the Senators and Tribunes,
Consuls, etc. of their Faction. The like was done in Augustus's time, after the
Defeat of Anthony: so that both Julius and Augustus got the Tribunitian Power
and Consularships, and Julius got himself made Dictator for ten Years, and had
Tribunitian Power for Life: By which means they got all the Powers of the
Commonweal, in effect, into their Hands; all which was confirmed by the Lex
Regia, of which I shall say something.

The Emperors, Julius and Augustus, Of the Lex Regia.
having as Conquerors (rather than by any other Right) got possession of the
Sovereign Power, after a quieter Settlement, obtained the Lex Regia to be
established; of which Lib. 1. tit. 2. Instit. Quod Principi placuit, legis
habet vigorem: quum lege Regia, quae de ejus Imperio lata est, populus ei, and
in eum, omne Imperium suum and potestatem concedat.
Justinian says, That what pleases the Prince, has the vigor of a Law:
Forasmuch as by the Lex Regia, which was made concerning his Power, the People
to him, and upon him, granted and conferred all its Command and Authority.
Therefore whatever the Emperor by his Epistle appoints, or knowing decrees, or
commands by Edict, that is a Law. In the Pandects he mentions it almost in
the same Words; and in Tit. De veteri Jure enucleando.
another place, That by an ancient Law, called Lex Regia, all the Right, and
all the Power of the Roman People was translated into the Emperor's Authority.

Some Civilians, that have lived in Commonwealths and mixed Governments, would
gladly evade the force of this, by making the Hortensian Law to give the People
and Senate equal Power and Authority, and by the Lex Regia the Prince came to
be joined to them as a third Party; so that the Powers of neither of the other
were by this Law extinguished. But Ad ostenden lam enixam suam voluntatem, omne
Imperium suum (...) transferendi. p. 15. a.
Vinnius says, The Words ei, and in eum, signify the People to have
endeavored to show their Will to transfer all their Power, Authority, or
Command, fully and completely on the Emperor. Otherwise, How can it be said
they grant omne Imperium and Potestatem, if they retained any of their old
Power? Though upon a prudential account, (that the first Emperors might not
endanger their own Interest by too universal a Change) they did leave some
Shadow of Authority to the Senate and People, which Tacitus elegantly calls,
Vestigia morientis Libertatis, some Footsteps of dying Liberty.

Lib. 4. Hist. c. 1.
Dr. Howel observes, That Justinian declares, That his Sentence stands for
Law, and binds all under his Command; which the very composing of the Body of
Law, as from him it is transmitted to us, The Roman Emperors absolute
Authority in making Laws.
sufficiently demonstrates: Wherein he by his sole Authority repealeth what he
pleases, and enacteth anew what seems good to him, without interposition of
any other Authority; which he could not have done (nor his Predecessors) as to
the Plebiscita, and Senatus Consulta, if he had wanted that Power which the
People and Senate had, and were divested of.

Juvenal speaking of the People of Rome, how they were fallen from their Power
and Authority, and were, under the Emperors, contented to have the Allowances
of Corn, and the Pleasure of Shows in the Cirques, expresses it thus: -- Qui
dabat olim
Imperium, Fasces, Legiones, omnia, nunc se
Continet, atque duas tantum res anxius optat,
Panem and Circenses.


In stead of all other Authors, (...) Lib. 53.
Dio Cassius may serve to clear this Point, whose Discourse on this Subject I
shall epitomize. He speaking of Augustus, says, All the Power of People and
Senate was transferred upon him, and that all things were managed merely as the
Prince pleased; though all other Magistrates, except the Censors, were
preserved: and they had not this Power by Force, but by Law; The Power of the
Roman Emperors.
taking upon them all things which were of greatest Force (and that by
universal consent) as well as the Names; as of Consuls, Imperator (not only as
General, but to signify their plenary and absolute Power) in the Room of King
and Dictator: They had the Power of raising Men and Money, making War and
Peace, commanding all things effectually, both at home and abroad; putting to
death Equites and Senators, and doing all other things, which a Consul and
other Magistrates, who had absolute Power, might do: They were Censors,
admitted Persons into Equestrian and Senatorian Ranks, and removed them at
their Pleasure; were inaugurate in all Priesthoods, and had all Religious and
Sacred things in their Hands.

As to the Tribunitian Power, it enabled them to interpose against any thing
that might be done contrary to their Pleasure, and thereby they were
Sacrosanct, or Inviolable; so that if any injured them in the least, by Word or
Deed, they might put him to death, as piacularly criminal.

They have another Privilege (says the same Author) which never was
universally granted to any Roman; for the Emperors are loosed from the Laws, by
which thing alone, Liberty is given them to do those things which he has
related, and all other things. (...) Idem.
He concludes thus, The Commonwealth was changed into a better Form and Order;
for it was utterly impossible ^^should subsist under the Power of the People.

From the Consideration of this State of the Empire, and of absolute Sovereign
Princes, Leges jubere, and universis and singulis civil^s dare. De Repub. lib.
1. c. 10. and lib. 3.
Bodin says, it is the first and principal part of Majesty, to command Laws,
and impose them on all and singular the Subjects: and he says, That in the
Emperors time, the name of the Senate was inscribed only to testify such Laws
were made, and to render them more acceptable to the People, by the opinion
they would then have, that they were made with Council and Prudence.

So Polit. c. 11. Law-making the Prerogative of Sovereign Princes.
Anisaeus ranks it among the first of the Jura Majestatis to make Laws: for
that the Government, says he, is for the most part by Laws; therefore they
should be in the hand of the Sovereign; for that they have no Power, but as
they are enforced by his Authority, who possesses the Plenitude of Empire.

I shall only note a few things of the absoluteness of the Roman Emperors, in
point of Law-making or abrogating, and so pass to the considerations of our
English Monarchy; referring the larger and more explicit treating of it, to the
Chapters of Parliaments.

In the Capitol, now Lateran Palace, is extant a Table of Gruteri Inscript. p.
142. A Fragment of the Lex Regia yet extant.
Brass, where is to be seen a fragment of the Lex Regia, renewed as to
Vespasian, confirming many things of Sovereign and sole Authority, as
descending upon him from his Predecessors; and enacting, That what he had done,
decreed, or commanded before his Ratification, should be held and taken for as
good Law, as if the People it self had done, decreed, or commanded it: So that
though he might make use of the Senate or Peoples Ratification; yet his Right was
as strong before.

So Tit. De Legibus, lib. 1.
Constantine challenges to himself alone, Authority to judge betwixt Law and
Equity; and so in point of Repeal of Laws, Non ab aliis, sed a sese leges
abrogatas suisse. Lib. 3.
Theodosius and Valentinian say, That the Laws were to be abrogated by no other
but themselves.

It is not to be doubted, but that great and vast Empires require for their
better Government, a more absolute Power in the Sovereign, to make Laws
suitable to Emergencies, for the Preservation of the whole. So the Ottoman
Empire, and those of China, Persia, and the Mogul, could not well be conserved
entire without it: Yet in these there are established Laws, agreeable to the
Laws of Nature and of Nations; whereby the Rights of meum and tuum to
Strangers, are adjusted; and the Subjects, though they have no Property like
the Europaeans, yet are kept in Order, and under Protection of the Laws; and
their Absoluteness consists principally in the ordering the Execution of any
Subject, without Juridical Process; in placing and displacing Governors, or
depriving Cities, Provinces and Kingdoms of Privileges.

I have enlarged upon this Head, to show how happy we are in England; The happy
State of England, in the disposing of the Legislative Power.
that though the Force and Vigor of all our Laws, flow from our Sovereigns
Paternal Care, ^^ace and Bounty; yet in the Point of making and abrogating
Laws, not only Consultation is had with so venerable a Body, as the two Houses
of Parliament are, but nothing is done by the Sovereign, without their own
Preparation of Bills, for his Royal Assent: A wise and wealthy part of which
are chosen by our selves, and by the Kings Permission, empowered in that
particular to act for us, in deliberating upon, and fashioning such Bills as
they petition the Sovereign to grant.

So that what the Judicious Preface to the Reader, Comp. History.
Dr. Brady (after many other learned Men) asserts, is most true, That by time
and the Concessions of our Kings, the Subjects of this Government have and may
enjoy all Freedom and Happiness, that sober rational Men can desire; and such
as is no where to be found, but in this Island, and the Dominions to it
belonging; nor can any Man that loves his Prince or Country, wish for other
than the present Constitution.

By the whole series of great Councils, in the Saxon times, until 49 Hen. 3.
and the Parliaments succeeding, I shall make it clear, That the Royal Assent is
that which forms the Preparatory Bills, presented by both Houses, into Laws;
and that in ancienter times the Laws were made by the Kings sole Grant, by way
of Charter.

I shall here only lay down some Preliminaries, to show in general what the
ancient Usage was, referring Particulars to the following Chapters.

First it appears, That there were no certain Sheringham's Supremacy, p. 51.
Anciently Kings called whom they pleased to advise them in making Laws.
Persons designed by Law, whose Concurrence was required to constitute a great
Council; but the Kings used the Advice only of those whom they pleased to call
unto themselves; who were always such as they thought most able to counsel and
direct them in the matters that were to be consulted of, and whose assent was
most likely to add most Credit and Estimation to the Laws that were to be
divulged. So we find in Chron. Sax. Anno 670. fol. 516. And tha haefde getheal
mid his witum, and freondam, and mid heora Teymenysse and fultum and
gethafunge, Christ's geleassan onfeng. Bed. Eccl. Hist. lib. 3. c. 22.
Bid, that Segebert or Sigbercht, who was King of the East Saxons, in the time
of Oswi King of Northumberland (who persuaded him to become a Christian) held a
Council with his Wites, i.e. Nobles and Wisemen, and his Friends; and by their
Advice, Aid and Consent, received the Christian Faith.

We find, that Offa King of the Mercians, made Laws without the Assent of his
Great Council; for he being at Rome, Mat. Paris vita Offae, p. 171. Hoc autem
per totam suam ditionem teneri in perpetuum constituit.
golng into the School of the English which was there; out of his Royal
Munificence, He gave to the support of the People of his Kingdom, that should
come thither, a Penny to be paid yearly for ever, out of every Family, by all,
whose Goods in the Fields exceeded the value of Thirty Pence; and this he made
a perpetual Constitution throughout all his Dominions, excepting the Lands
conferred upon the Monastery of St. Albans. This Imposition and Law continued a
long while in force; though we find it not confirmed by any great Council in
his own time, or his Successors; only in the Laws of King Edgar and King
Edward, it is enjoined to be paid as the Kings Alms; which implies it was the
Kings Gift solely, not by consent of a great Council.

So his Son Matt. Paris Auct. additam. fol. 239, 240.
Ecgfrid grants Thyreseld to St. Albans, with the Consent and Testimony of his
Magnates; which imports it to be granted by Consent of a Great Council, and the
Optimates witnessing are Cynedrid the Queen, three Bishops, one Abbot and
Brorda, Wiega, Cuthbert, Eobing, Esne, Cydda, Winbert, Heardbert and Brorda
Dukes; besides Ethelbeard Archbishop, Forthred Abbat, and Sighore Son of Siger.

But I shall hereafter more copiously give an Account of the constituent Parts
of the great Councils. The King the Fountain of Laws.


The Legislative Power (says a learned Sheringham's Supremacy, p. 34. Leges
vero Anglicanae and consuetudines, Regum Authoritate, jubent quandoque,
quandoque vetant, and quandoque vindicant, and puniunt transgressores. Bracton,
lib. 1. c. 2.
Author) belongs to the King alone by the Common Law; for though the two Houses
have Authority granted them by the King to assent or dissent; yet the Power
that makes it a Law, the Authority that animates it, and makes it differ from a
dead Letter, is in the King, who is the Life and Soul of the Law; by whose
Authority alone the Laws command, forbid, vindicate and punish Transgressors.

This was resolved by diverse Earls and Barons, and by all the Justices in the
Reign of King Edward the Third; for one Fuit dit que le Roy sist les Leis per
assent des Peers, and de la Commune, and non pas les Peers, and le Commune; and
qu'il ne avera null Pere en sa terre demesne, and que le Roy per eux ne doit
estre ajuge. 22 E. 3. c. 1.
Haedlow and his Wife, having a Controversy with the King, and desiring to
have it decided in Parliament: It was resolved, That the King makes Laws by the
Assent of the Lords and Commons; and not the Lords and Commons; and that he
could have no Peer in his own Land, and could not be judged by them.

This is further manifested, that the Laws are primarily and properly made by
the King; and the two Houses have a Cooperation, but no Co-ordination of Power:
for the breach of any Statute, whether it be by Treason, Murder, Felony,
Perjury, or by any other way, is an offense against the Encounter la Corone and
Dignity le Roy. Stanford 's Pleas of the Crown, lib. 1. c. 1.
Kings Authority alone; and Pleas made against such Offenses, are called, The
Pleas of the Crown; because they are done against the Crown and Dignity of the
King. So that it is not the Dignity and Authority of the Lords and Commons,
which is violated, but the Dignity and Authority of the King.

This appears also in the Power the Sheringham, p. 35. See Finch lib. 2. fol.
22. Coke 2 II. 7. lib. 7. fol. 14. Stanford lib. 2.101.
King has in dispensing with such Laws, as forbid a thing which is not malum
in se, and in pardoning the Transgression of others; as Treason, Felony, etc.
which in Reason he ought no more to do, than to dispense with the Laws of
Germany, Spain or France; or pardon the Transgressors thereof, if they were not
made by his Authority.

Furthermore it is a certain Maxim of the Law, Ejusdem est leges interpretari,
cujus est condere. The Amendment was sealed by the Great Seal. 2 May, 9 E. 1.
commanding the Justices to do and execute all and every thing contained in it,
though the same did not accord with the Statute of Gloucester in all things.
None can interpret the Laws, but the same Power that makes them: But the King
may do this, as appears by the Statute of Gloucester 6^^. where, immediately
after the Statute, are these words; After by the King and his Justices, certain
Expositions were made upon some of the Articles above mentioned: So the Judges
are appointed by the King, and they have from him a Power to interpret the Law
judicialiter; otherwise they could not proceed to Judgment; and being called by
the King, with him, and under him, they have a Power to interpret the Law
Authoritative.

But the two Houses (besides, that they can do nothing singly or jointly,
without the Kings Concurrence) in Sheringham ut supra.
their make and composition, are unfit to interpret Law: For such Power as
interprets Law, must be always existent, or in being, to act according to
emergent Occasions; which the two Houses are not: And if they were a permanent
Body, yet they having a Negative upon each other, the Interpretation of the Law
must be retarded, and all Controversies depending thereupon undecided: And this
Disagreement might perhaps endure for ever; and so, a final Determination in
such Suits would be impossible. Now these are Inconveniences which ought not to
be admitted in any Commonwealth; for it derogates both from the Honor and
Wisdom of a Nation, to be so molded and framed, that Justice cannot have a
free Passage in all Contingencies.

Not only the Legislative Power it self, but the very Hem, p. 36. The King may
provide for all things necessary for Government, where the Law has not
provided, or contradicts not.
Exercise of the Power also (so far as it is essential to Government) is in the
King alone; for he can by Edicts and Proclamations provide for all necessary
occasions, and special Emergencies, not provided for by fixed Laws, which is
one of the most excellent and eminent Acts of the Legislative Power, and a
sufficient Remedy against all Mischiefs, in case the two Houses should refuse
to concur with him in those things which concern the Benefit of the Kingdoms.

For as Ea quae Jurisdictio^is sunt, and pacis, and ea q^ae sunt Justitiae and
paci annexa, ad nullum pertinent nisi ad Coronam and Dignitatem Regi^m. Bracton
lib. 2. c. 24.
Bracton says, those things which belong to Jurisdiction and Peace, and those
which are annexed to Justice and Peace, appertain to none but the Crown,
neither can they be separated from it, because they make the Crown. If the King
should unwarily by Act of Parliament consent to any thing prejudicial and
derogatory to His Royal Prerogative, such Acts are void by the Common Law, and
the Judges are bound to declare them so; as that of 23. H. 6. about Sheriffs,
not to continue longer than one Year, was by the Judges declared void, and all
Kings since, might with a Clause of non obstante, against the manifest words of
the Statute, have granted that office for Life, in Tail, or in Fee.

But I need not enlarge upon this, for all the Acts for the King's Supremacy,
all the Laws and Statutes that over were made, put this beyond Dispute, that
the affirmative Voice is absolutely in the King; that no Laws can be binding,
or be Laws at all, without his special Consent: and this being one of the great
Rights of Sovereignty, cannot be separated from the Person of the King,
although he Suprema jurisdictio and potestas Regia etsi Princeps volet,
separari non pessunt; sunt enim ipsa sorma and substantialis essentia
Majestatis, ergo manente ipso Rege, ab eo abdicari non possunt. Cabedo Pract.
Obs. par. 2. decis. 40.
would himself: For it is essential to Majesty and Sovereignty, and cannot be
abdicated while he remains King, nor separated without the diminution or
destruction of Majesty. How both King and People are obliged to defend the
Rights of the Crown, will appear in the Laws ascribed to King Edward the
Confessor, in the 17.35. and 56.

As to the Particular, How absolutely necessary the Royal Assent is to all
Laws, in the Act of Recognition to King James the First, it is fully expressed
thus: Which if Your Majesty shall be pleased (as an Argument of your Gracious
acceptance) to adorn with Your Majesty's Royal Assent, without which it can
neither be Complete, and Perfect, nor remain to all Posterity according to our
Desire, as a Memorial of your Princely and tender Affection toward us, etc.

Against what I have laid down, those who were for coordinate Powers in the
two Houses, object many things; Answers to some Objections against the King's
sole establishing of Laws.
some I have answered in the Chapter of the King's Sovereignty, and I shall
meet with others in the Chapters of Parliaments: And shall here only take
notice of some omitted, or not fully answered there.

Against the assertion, That the Liberties granted by King Henry the Third,
were by way of Charter; they produce the Preamble Coke 2 Instit. fol. 525.
to the Confirmation of King Edward the First, of Magna Charta, La Charte des
Franchises, and la Charte de la Forest, les queux fuerent faitz per Commen de
tout Royalm, en le temps le Roy Henry pier, soient tenue, etc.
and Charta de Foresta, wherein he says that the Charter of Liberties, and the
Charter of the Forest, made by the Community of all the Realm, in the time of
King Henry our Father, shall be kept, etc.

To which, with the Judicious Doctor. General Preface to Complete History, p.
41. The ancient Kings sealing of Charters of Liberties, reputed Laws.
Brady, may be answered that these were the Petitions and Requests of the
Community of the Kingdom, and may be said to be made, that is, digested by them
into the form of a Charter. So the Barons offered King John's Magna Charta to
him ready drawn in a Schedule, and forced him to grant it, and cause his Seal
to be put to it; and the whole strength and validity of the Charter lay in his
Grant, and the Confirmation of it under his Seal. This was the only Security
they desired, and demanded no other, and the Tenor of all the Charters were
accordingly, We grant, We confirm, We give for us and our Heirs, to them and
their Heirs, etc. Which Grants and Concessious were always in these times
accepted, and acknowledged to be sufficient, without the least doubting or
scruple, There was no other Power or Authority that gave them being but the
King's; so that it seemed the great Councils or Parliaments of those times,
owned the Kings Charters under Seal, and the Grants made by them to the People,
to be of good force and effect, and that their Petitions, to which he gave his
assent, and caused to be put under his Seal, were by them accepted, and from
time to time acknowledged as firm and valid Laws.

The same learned Idem, p. 67. The Laws planted by Kings.
Doctor Brady observes that Sir Edward Coke has a formal way of speaking, The
Law does this, and, The Law does that, This is Law, That is by Common Law of
England, abstracting it from any dependence upon, or Creation by the
Government; as if it had been here before there was any, and had grown up with
the first Trees, Herbs, and Grass that grew upon English Ground, and had not
been of our ancient Kings and their Successors planting, by assistance and
advice of their great Councils in all Ages, as it was found expedient either by
them, or upon Petition and Request of their People; which is acknowledged by
all the Bishops, Earls, Barons, and People present at the Claus. 1 E. 2. m. 10.
dorso.
Coronation of King Edward the Second, in these words: Sir, Will you grant and
keep, and by your Oath confirm to the People of England, the Laws and Customs
granted to them by the ancient Kings of England, your Predecessors, true and
devout to God, and namely the Laws and Customs and Liberties granted to the
Clergy and People, by the glorious King Edward your Predecessor?

Another Objection some make against the Absoluteness of the King's Power,
Second Objection.
when it is said in ancient Statutes, The King ordains, The King wills, that it
has been resolved by many of the Judges, Coke 8. Report. s. 20. b.
that if these Statutes be entered in the Parliament Rolls, and allowed as acts
of Parliament, it shall be intended they were by Authority of Parliament.

With the Judicious Dr. Brady I shall not enquire how such Entry and such
Allowance (without any Words in the Statutes to that purpose) can make them to
be by Authority of Parliament. But we may he sure, those Words, The King
ordains, The King wills, being pronounced in Parliament, and recorded in the
Rolls thereof, do clearly prove the King's Authority and Power in making Laws,
to be far greater than many Men would allow him, or have him to enjoy.

Lib. 3. c. 9.
Bracton, and the Author of Lib. 1. c. 17.
^leta, applying the Passage of the Civil Law, Quod Principi placet, Legis
habet vigorem, to the King of England, say, That Clause ought not to be
understood of every thing that is rashly presumed to be his Will, but of that
which is justly determined upon good Advice and Deliberation, by the Counsel of
his Magistrates, R^ge Authoritatem prastante.
the King giving it Authority, and confirming it for a Law; and from hence Cum
ipse sit Author Juris, non debet inde Injuriarum nasci occasio, unde Jura
nascuntur.
infer, That when he himself is the Author of the Law, Injustice ought not to
spring from the same Fountain from whence the Law does spring.

It is no diminution of the Sovereignty of a Prince, in the matter of making
Laws, or repealing them, to have the Assent of the Nobles, and such a select
Body of Great and Wise Men as the House of Commons are. But when (as in the
Parliament 1641.) the Two Houses claim a Coordinate Power, and would make
their Advices be swallowed as Commands, it is this that all Loyal Persons
should oppose.

We generally understand, that the Persian Monarchy was as Absolute as any; yet
in it we have a manifest Discovery of the Concurrence of the Nobles in
preparing a Decree; The Persian manner of making Laws.
yet they wanted the King's establishing the Decree, by his signing it, whereby
it might not be changed: and Grotius thinks they signed it also. Dan. cap. 6.
v. 7, 8, 9.
The Words are, The Presidents and Princes assembled together to the King, and
told him, That all the Presidents of the Kingdom, the Governors and the
Princes, the Counselors and the Captains, have consulted together to establish
a Royal Statute, and to make a firm Decree, etc. Now, O King, establish the
Decree, and sign the Writing, that it be not changed, according to the Law of
the Medes and Persians, which alters not. Here the Presidents, etc.
assembled, consult about the Decree, they propose it as they had framed it; yet
they own, it was of no force without the King's establishing and signing it:
Which is exactly parallel with the Constitution of the Legislative in England,
if we join the Commoners to the Presidents, Princes, etc. No radical mixture of
Power in the two Houses with the King.


But the Writers for the Long Parliament, were so desirous to make the Two
Houses to have a Radical Mixture of the Legislative Power equal with the
King's, that they sought all the specious and plausible Arguments they could,
to enforce it, having little regard to what was Law it self, or ancient Usage.
Therefore one of them, in his Page 39.
Answer to Dr. Fern, says, A Legislative Power is not to be satisfied by a
bare powerless Consent; Third Objection.
and therefore deman^ Whether that Consent be causal and authoritative, or
merely consiliary and unauthoritative? That the Two Houses have an Enacting
Authority, he would prove from that Clause set in the beginning of Acts, Be it
Enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty, This will appear a Form of Words
lately made use of, in the Twenty fourth Chapter.
and the Authority of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament: For, he
says, this implies distinct Authorities; for the Addition of the Authority of
the Lords and Commons were superfluous, if Laws be enacted by the King's
Authority alone.

To which it may replied, according to King's Supremacy, p. 89.
Mr. Sheringham, That though it be granted, that they have an Enacting
Authority in this particular of Law-making, (which how step by step it has
been brought to the state it is now in, will be cleared in the following
Chapters) yet the Question is, first, Whether that be only a Power of
assenting, that such or such a Law shall be established; or a Power that
commands and gives life and vigor to the Laws? Secondly, Whether the Power
be radically in themselves, or derived from the King?

As to the first, It is agreed by the Judges, 2 H. 7.14.11 H. 7.25. Lambard
Archeion, fol. 271.
That the Words Assenteth and Enacteth are equivalent in this Case: For their
Power of preparing Materials for a Law, by framing Bills, sufficiently denotes
their Assent, because they are Bills of their own framing; and the Wisdom they
show in these, and the Care of the Government and People, will always make that
August Body of great use to the Government, and valuable by their
Fellow Subjects.

But secondly, In this Particular the Writ of Summons is that which gives them
all the Power, of which in the Chapter of Parliaments I shall enlarge.
It must be considered from whom they have this Authority. They have the Use
and Exercise of the Legislative Power, so far as is necessary for that Act,
although it be not radically in them: for although the King's Authority cannot
be separated from him privative, so as to deprive him of it; yet cumulative it
may be inherent in his own Person, and yet be in others too; as the Light of
the Sun is inherent in its own Body, and yet diffused through the whole World:
And so we call it Moonshine, and Starlight, when all their Lights are from
the Sun. And this Delegate Authority may be called theirs, because for the time
of their Sitting they are by the Sovereign and Constitution of Government so
capacitated to act: But since they are called by the King's Writ, and dissolved
at his Pleasure, they cannot be said to have the Power radically in themselves.

If this radical Power in the Two Houses were true, How could the 24 H. 8. 1 E.
6. c. 2.
Statutes declare the King to have entire, whole, and plenary Power, and to be
so Supreme, that all Authority is derived from him, and all Obedience and
Allegiance due to him, and him alone? An utmost Chiefty and Primity of Share
(as they used to speak in 1641.) will not make out the Force of the Statutes.

Because the Kings of England desiring to rule their People by Lenity, have out
of Princely Clemency condescended so far, as not to impose upon them (as
hereafter it will appear they anciently did) any new Law, or alter and repeal
the old, without their own Consents, by their Representatives: The Black
Parliament of 1641. would have the People believe, The Encroachments of the
Black Parliament.
that their Authority was equal with the Kings: But when Success had. hardened
them, they were not content with a share, they at first challenged, but laid
claim to all; wholly excluding the King, and denying him his Negative Voice;
usurping and taking upon them the whole Power of making Laws: So that this
Serpent of Coordinate Power is not to be suffered to wrigle in its Head, lest
the whole Body glide easily after.

But I leave the further discourse of this to its proper Place, Preface to the
following Chapters.
and shall now proceed to give some Light to the Government the Britans had
among them, by the Comparison is found betwixt them, the Gauls and Germans:
Being desirous, as much as I can, to show the Ancientest usages, and under the
several Conquests of England; how the Government has received Growth and
Alteration (sometimes the People being under the Slavery of absolute
Conquerors, and other times factious Nobles bearding their Kings) how the even
Thread of Regular Government has been carried on or interrupted; how from an
absolute Power of giving Law, and ruling in a Military way, by the Feudal Law,
and many other particulars, the Government is brought to that Temperament,
whereby the Subjects may, if they will be dutiful, live happilier than any
other do.

To illustrate all these, it will be necessary to represent the State of the
Britans under the Romans, and to discourse of the Germans, from whence our
Saxon Ancestors came; and of both of their Manners and Laws, and from thence to
proceed to illustrate the Legislative Power: In all which, if I carry my Reader
out of his Country, to view the State of our Ancient Neighbors; I hope he will
think it no ill spent time, to make that pleasing as well as profitable towr:
And though I represent him his Ancestors rude and barbarous in Comparison of
the Roman civilizedness; yet he will find they had some Religion, some Arts,
great and generous Souls, as well as strong Bodies; and their greatest mis-hap
seems to be, that those in Britan, Gaul or Germany, were not under one
Monarchy, Nec aliud adversus validissimas Gentes pro nobis utilius quam quod in
commune non consulunt. Vita Agricolae, p. 308.
but divided into Multitudes of little Kingdoms: which made Tacitus observe,
That there was nothing more profitable to the Romans, against the most puissant
and valiant Nations, than that they advised not in common.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Government of the Britans, and the Romans imposing their
Laws upon them. Antiquity of English Customs.

CHancellor Regnum illud eisdem quibus jam regitur consuetudinibus continue
regulatum suit. De laudibus LL. Angliae, c. 17.
Fortescue affirms, That in all the times of the Britans, Saxons, Danes and
Normans, and of their Kings, this Realm was ruled with the self same Customs,
that it is now governed withal; which, he says, if they had not been right
good, some of those Kings, moved either with Justice, with Reason or Affection,
would have changed them, or else altogether have abolished them, and especially
the Romans, who did judge all the rest of the World by their own Laws.

So Sir Edward Coke Epistle to the sixth Book of Reports.
says, the common Law of England was here before the Entry of the Romans,
Saxons, Danes and Normans; and it was never altered by any of them; and so he
Proem to 2. Instit. fol. 1. and 2. Instit. fol. 3.
makes Magna Charta Declaratory of the principal Grounds of the fundamental
Laws of England, and for the residue, that it is additional to supply some
Defects of the Common Law, and was no new Declaration.

So Sir John Davis, in his Preface to the Leges m^^ibus recept^^ majoris sunt
Autoritatis quam leges scriptae. Arist. Polit. lib. 3. c. 12.
Irish Reports, magnifies the Common Law as Jus non scriptum, better than all
the written Laws in the World; excelling Parliament Laws, which are written;
coming nearest to the Law of Nature, which is the Root and Touchstone of all
good Laws.

When I read these Assertions, I think it had been incumbent upon these learned
Men to have deduced (as far as they could by History) some Testimonies of
Ancient Writers, to have confirmed their Positions: But in none of them do we
find the least offer of a Proof for what they say.

I think it would be a very commendable Work, and very pleasant to all
ingenious Persons; The Benefit to have our Common Laws and Customs ascertained
and compared with all Ancient Laws.
if some of the Long Robe would digest into Heads, that which is owned as the
Common Law. For though Sir John Davis calls it unwritten, and which had its
beginning beyond the Memory of any Man living; and that a Custom tried and
approved, time out of mind, does become a Law to bind the People; yet nothing
can hinder, but whatever is preserved in the Memory of Men living, and owned as
custom, may be committed to writing: Now I would not only desire it might be so
written and published, but that some judicious Lawyer (who was likewise well
versed in History and Antiquities) would search out for some parallel written
Laws among the Graecians and Romans, as also compare all the Saxon Laws we
have, the Laws of the Lombards, Boiarian, Ripuarian, and other Laws, and then I
doubt not but they would acquire a greater Veneration in the World; and it
would be known whether the Opinions of the learned Chancellor and Lord Chief
Justice, were to be relied upon as to the Antiquity of them before the Roman
time.

The Glory of his Profession, and of our Nation (as to that learning he was
versed in, which was not small) I mean Notes upon Fortescue, p. 14. ad 22.
Mr. Seldom, has given the best Solution to this point of the Antiquity of our
Customs and Common Law, that I have yet met with; which I shall abstract in as
summary a way as I can.

First he says, The Opinion of the Antiquity of our Common Law, before the
Civil, is founded upon the Story of Brute (of which the Chancellor speaks in
his Thirteenth Chapter) and that Story supposing him to be here more than three
Hundred Years before Rome was built, makes the Chancellor conclude our Common
Law so Ancient; but supposing there were some Truth in that Fiction, how can
the Chancellor be certain, that the same kind of Law and Policy has ever since
continued; unless an Oral Tradition may here find as great respect, as it has
with some in spiritual matters. The Antiquity of all Laws.


Therefore with Mr. Seldom we may judge all Laws in general, originally to be
equally Ancient, as being grounded upon Nature, every Nation taking the grounds
of their Laws from it; and Nature being the same in all, the beginning of all
Laws must be the same: Even from the first Peopling of the Land, when Men (by
Nature, being civil and sociable Creatures) grew to plant common Society and, I
may add, when they being under the Government of a Prince, received Laws by his
Appointment, extracted out of the Laws of Nature, the Necessity of Government,
and the Conveniences of the People, we may date National Laws. Now though the
Law of Nature be truly said to be immutable, yet it is as true, that it is
limitable, and the limited Law of Nature is that now used in every State; for
the diverse Opinions of Interpreters, proceeding from the weakness of Man's
Reason, and the several conveniences of diverse States, have made those
different Limitations, which the Law of Nature has suffered: It falls out,
that in several Nations they are so disguised by the various Modifyings and
Repairs, that as to their first being, they are like Vbi nihil ex pristina
materia supersit.
Jason's Ship, that had nothing of the old Materials remaining.

Therefore the learned Seldom adds, That little follows in point of Honor or
Excellency, specially to be attributed to the Laws of a Nation in general, by
any Argument drawn from the difference of Antiquity, which in substance is
alike in all: for as soon as Italy was peopled, this beginning of Laws was
there; and so when there was first a State in that Land which the Common Law
now governs, there were natural Laws limited for the Convenience of civil
Society here.

Notwithstanding the Opinion of the De laudibus LL^ Angliae, c. 17.
Chancellor, that neither the Roman Civil Laws, nor the Laws of the Venetians,
which above all other, he says, are reported to be of most Antiquity, nor the
Laws of any Paynim Nation of the World, are of so old and ancient Years as the
Customs or Common Law of England, and that they have weathered out the changes
and overthrow of People by the Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans: Yet I cannot
believe but every of those Nations, when they obtained the Power of Government,
introduced their own Laws, and abolished what they found not agreeable to their
own Polity.

As to the British Laws, Whence to learn the Manners or Government of the
Britans.
before the Romans Arrival, we can find very little of them, but what is
related of the Druids. Peter Ramus in his Book de moribus Veterum Gallorum,
has Collected out of the antientest Authors, a parallel betwixt the Customs of
the Gauls, the Germans, and Britans, there being found in Caesar and Strabo's
description of their manner of Living, strength of Body, Temperance, Marriages,
Habitations, and many other Particulars, a great affinity, of which I shall
touch some Particulars hereafter. At present I shall speak of the original of
the Gauls, and of the Druids Discipline, and Government of the Gauls, and
Britans.

The fabulous Berosus, published by John Annius of Viterbium, a City in
Tuscany, says, that Dis or Pluto was the Founder of the Celtick Colonies.
Celto Gallatia comprehended what was within the River Rhine, the Alps, the
Mediterranean Sea, the Pyrenean Hills, Gascoign and the British Ocean, and
Ptolomy 2. Geog. and 2. Qu^drip. and Pausan. l. 1.
comprised all Europe under the name of Celtica. This Berosus calls this Dis
Samothes, and makes him Son of Japhet. Caesar countenanceth that of Dis, from
whence he says they reckon by Nights.

The best Authority we have for the Samnothei is that of Laertius, In vitis
Philos.
who says, that amongst the Celtae and Gauls the Semnothei (as says Aristotle
in his Book of Magic, and Sotion in his Twenty third Book of Succession) were.
But there is no mention of their being skilled in Laws, Divine and Humane, as
the fabulous Berosus says. Here Stephen in his notes upon Laertius thinks them
to be called Semnothei, for having the worshipful Gods, (...), in their Mouths,
or that they themselves were accounted amongst Men as a kind of worshipful
Gods. In Achaicis.
So in Pausanias we meet with the Chapels of the Goddesses, whom the Athenians
styled (...), that is Worshipful.

Ramus De moribus veterum Gallorum, p. 71, 72. De Gall. Imp. lib. 1.
out of Berosus, says, Philosophy proceeded in the beginning from the
Semnothei of the Gauls, and that Magus succeeded him, then Sarson their third
King, who, says Stephanus Forcatulus, reduced the Laws of his Grandfather and
Father into one Volume, and with severe Threats gave order for the keeping of
them: and Ramus says, he was the first that appointed the Study of Learning.
Their fourth King he makes Druis or Druidus, from whence the Druids (of whom I
shall hereafter discourse) and their fifth Bardus, whose Glory is celebrated by
the Bards, their Poets and Orators.

Lib. 15. De Oirgine Gallorum.
Marcellinus, out of Timagenes, makes the Aborigines of Gaul to be the Celtae,
and some part of them to be Peopled by the Dorienses, who followed the elder
Hercules, and possessed the Ocean Shore. So Marseilles a City of France, was a
Greek Colony of the Phocians. The Drasidae were another part of the Indigenae
or homebred People, and others, says he, Q. Whether he mean Britain and
Ireland.
have flowed hither from the remote Isles, and from the tract of Land beyond
the Rhine, and some few after the Destruction of Troy, flying from the
Grecians, being every where dispersed, seated themselves in the empty
Countries. Where we may note by the by, that then the Opinion of the Trojans
settling in several Countries, was believed. But Marcellinus says, Quod etiam
nos legimus in monumentis incisum.
the Inhabitants do affirm (which he had also seen cut in their Monuments) that
Hercules the Son of Amphitrio, having overcome Geryon the cruel Tyrant of
Spain, and Turiscus of the Gauls, begot upon their noble Women several Sons,
and called them by the names of the Countries they commanded. Also that some
came from Phocaea in Asia, flying the cruelty of Harpalus the President of
Cyrus.

I am larger upon this Matter, because the Britains had the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Druids in Perfection, as hereafter I shall show, and we find
in Caesar a great part of Britany, once under the Government of Divitiacus,
King of the Soissons, a People of France, and often the customs of the Gauls,
Britains, and Germans are compared, or their Manners are near akin, as appears
by Caesar, Tacitus, Strabo, and others.

Concerning the Laws of Samothes, we find nothing in ancient Authors; for that
of Basingstoke, Seldeni Janus Ang. c. 3.
Count Pal^^^n is but a very modern Authority, that Samothes defined the Spaces
or Intervals of all time, not by the number of Days, but of Nights, and he
observed Birth-days, and the Commencements of Months and Years in that order,
that the Day should come after the Night. Only I cannot but observe that both
Caesar says the same thing of the Gauls, and Tacitus, of the Germans, and the
Britains do yet observe it: So we call the seventh Night for the seventh Day in
our usual Speech, such or such a day Senight; which is agreeable to Nature and
Scripture, where we find the Evening and the Morning were the first Day: and so
Aristotle reckons Privation as the first of the three Principles.

I pass by the rest of the Story of Phranicus, who about nine hundred years
after Samothes (if we will believe Jeofrey of Monmouth) being to reside in
Pannonia, intrusts the Druids with the Government of Britain, and how Brutus
the Grandchild of Aeneas, got the Kingdom; and about six Hundred Years after,
Dunwallo Molmatius being King, made Laws, according to our Jeofery and Ralph
Monk of Chester, that their Ploughs, Temples, and Roads, that led to Cities,
should have Privilege to be places of Refuge, and many other things which
Gildas mentions, and Polydore Virgil has gathered, and how he was buried in
Troynovant, near the Temple of Concord, which Britanniae Speculum.
Norden will have to be the Temple of London. All these wanting the
Confirmation of sound Authority, as also does the whole Series of British
Kings, and the Title of the Trojan Laws that Brutus brought in; for there is
but one specially mentioned, that the Eldest Son should inherit the whole Right
and Estate of their deceased Father. This indeed might be taken from Herodotus
In Euterpe.
that writes it of Hector, Son and Heir of Priamus, and this (if we believe the
British Story) was sometimes broken, as when the three Brothers, Locrinus,
Camber, and Albanactus divided the Land betwixt them, as also the Shares that
Fenix, and Porrix, Brennus and Belinus had.

It is no wonder that we have no better account of those Ages, since we find in
Neque sas esse exis^^mant ea literis mandare, cum in reliquis sere rebus public
is privatisque rationibus Graecis literis utantur.
Caesar, That the Druids committed not their Learning to Writing, but taught a
certain number of Verses, and some spent twenty Years in the Discipline: and
Quamv^^ literarum secreta ignoraverint, attamen celebrabant carminibus Antiquos
suns Deos and Reges; ^^que unum apud illos memoriae and Annalium genus eral.
Tacitus notes of the German Priests, that though they were ignorant of the
secret of Letters, yet in ancient Verses, they celebrated their Gods and Kings,
and that alone was with them their Memorials and Annals.

It is true, Caesar Lib. 1. De Bello Galli^o.
says, that though the Gauls did not think meet to commit their Doctrine to
Writing, yet generally in all other things, whether public affairs, or private
accounts, they made use of Greek Letters: and he says, That there were Tablets
found in the Camp of the Switzers, made up of Greek Letters. Yet it does not
appear that the Greek Language was used by the People: for one and the same
Character of Letters may serve to express different Languages; so the Targum or
Chaldee Paraphrase, and the new Testament in Syriack are done in Hebrew
Letters, yet the Language very different.

That the Greek Language was not known among them, appears by what De Bello
Gallico, lib. 5.
Caesar says, That being to write to Quintus Cicero, who was then besieged in
Flanders; by great Rewards prevailed with an Horseman of Gaul, belonging to the
Nervians, to carry a Letter to him, which he writ in Greek, lest it being
intercepted, the Enemy should discover the design.

Peter Ramus De moribus veterum Gallorum, p. 74.
is so desirous to promote the Glory of his Country, that he offers
considerable Authority to prove, that the Grecians learnt their Letters from
the Gauls, affirming that the Learning of Semnothei, Saronidae, Druids and
Gauls flourished in Gaul many Ages before Cadmus came into Greece; and the
great Janus Angiorum, ^^p. 9.
Seldom seems to allow it, when he says, That Learned Men do think the Greeks
took the Gallick ones for their Copy, after the Phoenician Letters, which were
not altogether unlike the Hebrew, were grown out of use.

He further adds, That the rude Gothic Characters, which In Appendice ad
Jornandi Goth.
Bonaventure Vulcanius of Burges published, do very much resemble the Greek
ones, as also the present Russian Characters. As to the Latin Letters, they
were first brought over into Italy from Arcadia, with Nicostrata the Mother of
Evander, who was banished his Country.

As to the Druids we should have been at a great loss, both concerning their
Doctrines, and of the Manners and Customs of the Gauls, Britains and Germans,
if we had lost the Histories of Julius Caesar, Pliny, Strabo, and some more
after them, since the Memorials and Epinicia of the Bards, are so totally lost,
that we have nothing remains of the, but fuimus Troes, and that of 1. Pharsal.
Lucan. Laudibus in longum, Vates, demittitis Aevum,
Plurima securi fudistis Carmina Bardi.
The Welsh Bards glory, that they still retain the Memorials of their great
Men, and especially their Kings; but we may easily conceive, that the great
Mixture of Poetical fancy (as even in Homer and Virgil is found) must render
the whole very Romantic.

Caesar says, That in Gaul there are only two sorts of Men, who are in any
Honor or Account, viz. The Druids and the Equites, of whom I shall treat, and
first of the Druids; and having after occasion to mention several particulars,
upon emergent occasions, I shall in a summary way here collect what dispersedly
is recorded by him, not only concerning the Druids Doctrine, Religious and
Civil, but of the Government or Polity, and lastly of the manner of Living,
Customs and Usages of the Gauls, Germans and Britains: toward the better
understanding of which I think fit to note these things.

First, as to their Name, we may not rely upon the Authority of Berosus from
their King Druis: As to the word (...) an Oak, which was sacred to them, I
shall speak hereafter, only at present noting that Pliny says, They performed
none of their Devotions without Oaken Leaves. Goropius In Gall.
Becanus would have it from the Dutch True-wise, or from Trutin a word, which
with the Ancient Germans signified God, and sometimes Lord; as Cosmog. par. 2.
l. 3.
Merula notes out of the Gospel of Othfred. Now as to their learning I shall
say something; Caesar says, They were Professors of all learning; and De
moribus vet. Gallorum, p. 81. ad 95.
Ramus divides it into their sacred learning; their Philosophy, Astronomy,
Cosmography, Music, etc. who may be consulted by the curious Readers. As to
their Religious Doctrine and Concerns, what follows is observable.

First, They taught the Immortality of the Soul, as Hoc volunt persuadere non
interire animas, sed ab aliis post mortem ad alios transire. De Bello Gallico,
lib. 6.
Caesar tells us, by which they excited greatly all Persons to Virtue, and to
neglect the fear of Death. Since the learned Seldom will not undertake to
judge, whether the Druids had their Metempsychosis or Transmigration of Souls
from Pythagoras, or he from the, as Stoic. Physiologia. lib. 3. dissert. 12.
Lipsius also queries, I shall not enter into dispute: for some make Vide
Laert. lib. 8. Plut. Orat. 2. de esu Carnium. Reuchl. lib. 2. de Art
Cabalistica.
Pythagoras only in Tarquin's time; and those that speak of his greatest
Antiquity, place him with Numa; whereas most make the Druids of the Ancientest
standing among the Philosophers of the Gentiles.

Secondly, Multa praterea de sideribus atque little motu, de mundi and terrarum
magnitudine, de rerum natura, de Deorum Immortalium vi ac potestate disputant,
and in virtute tradunt. Lib. 7. de Bello Gallico.
Caesar further adds, That the Druids dispute many things of the Stars, and of
their Motion, and of the greatness of the World and the Earth, of the Nature of
things, of the Power of the Immortal Gods, and several things of Virtue: And so
Mela says, Druides motus Coeli and Siderum profitentur, They discoursed of the
Motions of Heaven and Stars.

Thirdly, They excommunicated those that stood not to their Sentence, that is,
they Sacrisiciis interdicunt; h^^^ p^^^^ apud (...) est gravissima. Id. lib. 6.
forbid them to come to sacrifice, which among them was the most grievous
punishment, and those who are thus excommunicated, are accounted wicked and
ungodly Wretches; every Body goes out of their way, and shuns their Company and
Conversation, for fear of getting harm by Contagion; neither have they the
benefit of the Law when they desire it, nor is any respect shown to them.

Fourthly, Druidibus praeest unus qui summam inter eos habet Authoritatem. Id.
Caesar says further, That they have one over them, who has the chiefest
Authority amongst them; and when he dies, if there be any one that is eminent
above the rest, he succeeds in place; but if there be several of equal merit,
one is chosen by Majority of Votes.

Fifthly, They were wont to be excused from personal Attendance in War, nor did
they pay Taxes with the rest. Such Privileges we find the Number. 1.48. Ezra 7.24.
^evites among the Hebrews enjoyed.

Sixthly, As to Civil matters, they were in such Honor as they determined
almost all public and private Controversies; and, as Magno praeterea apud omnes
Gali^s in honor sunt, nam fere de omnibus controversiis publicis priva^isque
constituunt; and si quod est admissum facinus, si caedes factae, si de
Haereditate, de sinibus controversia, iidem decernunt, praemia poenasque
constituunt. De Bello Gallico 1.7.
Caesar says, if any great Wickedness be done, any Murder be committed; if
there be any Controversy about Inheritance or Boundaries; they do judge and
appoint Rewards and Punishments. I sometimes think Facinus may be interpreted
any great or noble Enterprise done, because Caesar says, They appoint Rewards,
whereas to none of the other particulars Rewards are due. But this obiter.

Seventhly, These, says the same Caesar, at a certain time of the Year, in the
Confines of Carnutum ( Chartres according to Ortelius) which is esteemed the
middle of France, sit in a consecrated place, and thither, from every part,
those who have any Controversies, meet, and they obey their Judgment and
Decrees. From whence Ramus thinks, That the Druids were dispersed through
France, as the Priests are now; and the Principal of them carried the
Controversies of their Citizens to this general Council, where the High Priests
of the Druids presided; Pausanias in Phocicis. Druids in Britain.
and that this was like the Convention of the Amphictyons (f) of Delphos, when
Greece was at Freedom; and he thinks this Power of the Druids was Kingly, not
only over every private Person, but over the whole People.

I have enlarged thus far of the French Druids; which some may say, appertains
not to the Britans; but if we will believe Gallorum disciplina in Britannia
reperta, atque inde in Galliam translata esse existimatur. Et nunc qui
diligentius eam rem cognoscere volunt, plerumque illo discendi causa
proficiscuntur. Caesar, lib. 6.
Caesar, we shall find that the Discipline of the Druids came from Britain to
the Gauls: for speaking of them he says, That the French Discipline, i. e. the
Arts, etc. taught by the Druids, was found in Britain, and from thence is
believed to be transmitted into Gallia; and now, says he, those that will more
diligently know it, for the most part go thither, i. e. to Britain, to learn
it. I know Ramus faintly opposes this, because Caesar speaks elsewhere of the
Gauls making a part of Britain; and that of the Britans, the Gauls are the most
civil: all which may be true, and yet the Doctrine have its Original here; and
Ramus concludes from this, That the Discipline or Learning of the Britans and
Gauls were both one.

I shall refer the curious to what Pliny says of the Misleto, The Druids
Ceremony in cutting the Misleto from the Oak.
with how great Ceremony it was cut by the Druid Magicians, as he calls them,
there being present two white Bulls; the Priest climbing the Tree in a white
Garment, and cutting the Misleto from the Oak with a Golden Pruning-knife, and
receiving it in a white Cassock, and then the Bulls were sacrificed. Britain
being so famous for the best Oaks, and the word Druid coming from the Greek
word (...) an Oak, we may safely rely upon Caesar's Testimony for the bringing
the Learning of the Druids from Britain to France.

That which I infer from this Discourse is, that there were Laws in Britain,
and that the Druids were the Lawyers and Judges; but how the Laws were made, or
what they were among the Britains, is not in my reading to inform the curious;
how and for what cause the Druids were extirpated, I shall speak hereafter.

The other Member of the honorable part of the Gauls, Of the Equites, or
Nobility.
were the Equites, under which are to be comprehended the Princes and Soldiers.
Lib. 6. Fa^^ionum Principes sunt qui summam Authoritatem eorum judi^io habere
existimantur, quorum ad Arbitrium judiciumque summa omnium rerum conciliorumque
redeat.
Caesar tells us, That not only in every City and every Territory (for so I
interpret Pagus) but also almost in every Family there were Factions; and they
are the Princes of the Factions, who in their Judgment are esteemed to have
chief Authority; to whose Arbitriment and Judgment, the Supremacy of all
Matters and Councils are remitted. This, he says, was invented, that the
common People might not want some to defend them, for every one would hinder
his own People from being oppressed or circumvented; and if in that they failed
them, they lost their Authority over them; and this Caesar says was the manner
throughout all Gallia.

From hence (x) concludes the Government was a Timocratia, or the (...) of
Aristotle, De moribus vet. Gall. p. 116.
which he and Plato so commend, and which was used in Greece and Italy while
free, where there was a mixture of Kingly Government in Annual Magistrates, or
of longer Duration; and of Aristocracy in the Senate, and Democracy in the
Authority of the People, in choosing or abdicating their Authority; all which he
concludes from the last Clause, That if the Princes of the Factions did not
protect those under them, they lost their Authority.

I rather judge these Princes of Factions, The Princes Heads of Clans, or of
the Pagi.
to be the Heads of such as we call Clans, in the Highlands and Ireland; for I
see no shadow of that Polity, Ramus speaks of in this Description, and I
believe the Government both of Gaul, Germany and Britain, was rather in several
Circles and Destricts, than that any one Monarch was over all; only in time of
War one or more were chosen, by common consent, to be their Captain General; or
where the Romans could prevail, they established a Commonwealth Government.

As to the first and second we have the Authority of In pace nullus communis
Magistratus, sed Principes Regionum atque Pagorum inter suos Jus dicunt,
controversiasque minuunt.
Caesar speaking of the Germans (with whom the Gauls are all along compared by
Ramus) h^ says, In time of Peace, the Princes of the Country and of the Pagi
give Law among their own People, and take order to end their Controversies, and
then there is no common Magistrate; but when there is a War either made by, or
upon the City, Magistrates are chosen, who have the command of the War, and
have Power of Life and Death. Such a like choice we find, by a Common Council
of several Kings and Princes in Comment. lib. 5.
Britain, was made of Cassivillan, to manage the War against Julius Caesar.

That the Gauls, by a Common Council at Bibracte, chose Vercingetorix singly
for their General against Caesar, is well known; and when he was besieged in
Alexia, by another Council of the Princes, the Heduans and Avernois, with their
Client Towns or Cities, which were many, were to raise 35000. Men, and so
others proportionable, and their Forces were committed to four Generals: Now it
is said by Caesar, that when Vercingetorix had the sole command, that he placed
his Camp on an Hill, and at certain distances he disposed the forces of every
City several, and every day called to him the Princes of those Cities, either
to communicate something to them, or order them to do something.

The like manner of Clans and Families (of which he who was most able for
Military Service, at that time commanded) we have a plain proof in Quodque
praecipuum fortitudinis incitamentum est, non casus, non fortuita conglobatio
turmam aut cuneum facit, sed familiae and propinquitates. 1. Annal.
Tacitus, who says of the Germans, That the principal incitement of valor
was, that not chance or fortuitous meeting and embodying made a Wedge or Troop,
but Families and Kindred: So he says, That Ariovistus at equal Intervals,
placed the Marcomanni, Triboci, Vangiones, Nemetes, Sedusii and Suevae.

That both the Gauls, Germans and Britains had several Kings, Several Petit
Kings in Gaul.
Roylets or absolute Princes, who had some one or more City or Country under
his peculiar command, is very clear in Julius Caesar: so Galba the King of the
Suessiones, was chosen Commander in Chief against Caesar by the Belgians. The
opinion I have also, that such Princes were the Heads of Clans appears in that
of Orgetorix; who when the City of the Helvetians (which had under it fourteen
Towns, oppida, and forty Hamlets, Vicos, and four Pagi, Buroughs or Places of
Judicature, where were Senates) all met in Consultation about burning their
Country, and possessing the Empire of Gaul: This Orgetorix being elected; but
they having notice of his Conspiracy against them, seize on him, and condemn
him to be burnt: but upon the Day, Orgetorix summoned all his Family, or
Kindred, or those of his House or Clan, as by Familia must be understood. which
consisted of a Thousand Men, and all his Clients and Bonds-men or Debtors,
obaeratos, whereof he had a great number, and they rescued him.

Such as this Orgetorix was, I doubt not Cavarinus was, who and his Ancestors,
Caesar says, were Kings of Agendicum and Villannodunum: So Targetius of the
Carnuti, Vertiscus Prince of Rhemes, Divitiacus King of the Suessiones, Comius
King of the Atrebates or Artoys, and the two Kings of the Eburones, Ambiorix
and Cativulcus, Cingetorix of the Triveri: I shall add but one Testimony for
all, of Regna vulgo in Gallia a petentioribus atque iis qui ad conducendos
homines facultates ha^erent, vulgo comparabantur. Several Petit Kings in
Britain.
Caesar's, That Kingdoms were acquired in Gallia by those who were the most
Powerful, and those that have most Wealth to hire Men.

As to the affairs of Britain, recorded by Julius Caesar, Britanni olim Regibus
parebant, nunc per Principes factioni^us and studiis trabuntur. Tacit. vita
Agric. c. 12. Therefore he tells us, Their want of agreeing in Common Councils,
occasioned their certain Overthrow. Pro nobis nihil utilius quam quod
in^commune non consulunt: rarus ad propulsandum commune periculum conventus: it
a dum singuli pugnant, omnes vincuntur. Id.
we find Cassibilan, chosen to manage the War. In Kent, no great County, we
find Kings, viz. Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus and Sergonax, and it cannot
be doubted but there were many other petty Kings in the rest of the Country;
for we find that Mandubraces, Son of Imanventius King of the Trinobantes, i.e.
Middlesex and Essex, slain by Cassibilan, was restored by Julius Caesar; and
after we find in Octavius Caesar's time, Cunobelin King of the same, whose Son
Adminius fled to Caius Caligula, where he came to Belgia for Protection; so we
read of Caractacus who maintained War for nine Years with the Romans, and whose
magnanimous Speech to Claudius is Extant in Tacitus; so of Cartismandua, a
Queen of Brigantes that betrayed (...) actacus. I might give an account of
Prasulagus, King of the Icenians; the famous Boodicia his Queen, and of the
famous Caledonian Galgacus: but it is enough to my purpose, that among the
Britans we find Kings so styled by Julius Caesar, and other Writers, especially
by Tacitus, and Dion, (...) Hist. Romans lib. 60.
speaking of Aulus Plantius (sent General by order of Claudius Caesar with an
Army into Britain) says, That the Inhabitants at that time were subject to
diverse Kings of their own.

I shall now sum up the rest of the Laws, Customs, or Usages we find amongst
the Gauls or Britans; and first what concerns the public, out of Caesar.

The Magistrates Magistrdtus quae visa sunt, occultant, quaeque esse ex usu
judicaverint, multitudini produm.
conceal those things they think fit, and what they judge may be of use to the
Public, they discover to the Populace.

De Repub. nisi per (...) loqui (...) ur. De (...), l. 6.
No Body has leave to speak of the Commonwealths, or of public affairs, but in
Council.

They (...), ita mos gentis (...), in Concilium venerunt.
came Armed into the Council, as Livy says; and Tacitus speaks the like of the
Germans.

(...). lib. 21. Sancitum, si quis quid de Rep. a sinitimis rumore aut sama
acceperit uti ad Magistratum deferat, neve cum quo alio commanicet.
It was established, that if any received any Rumors from the Neighborhood, or
any report concerning the Republic, that he relate it to the Magistrate, and
none else.

They had something which our Hue Vbi major atque illustrior res incidit,
clamore per Agros and Regiones signisicant, banc alii deinceps excipiunt, and
proximis tradunt. De Bello Gallico, lib. 7.
and Cry resembles: when any great or famous thing happens, they give notice of
it by loud Cry through the Fields and Countries, and this others receive and
transmit it to the next, so that in a Day, as he observes, Intelligence is
given above an hundred Miles.

One thing more is remembered by Plutarch de virtutibus Mulierum, that it was
grown a Custom amongst them, that they treated of War and Peace with their
Women in Company; and if any question arose betwixt them and their Allies, they
left it to them to determine. On this Head the famous Seldom spends a whole
Chapter to reckon up the famous Princesses and Women; and Sexum in Imperiis non
discernunt. Tacit. vita Agric.
Tacitus says of the Germans, In Rule they made no difference in Sex: which
shows it was Hereditary.

In now come to the more private Usages in their Families and Servants.

Suos liberos, nisi cum adolever int, ut munus militiae sustinere possint,
palam ad se adire non patiuntur. De Bello Gallico. l. 6.
Caesar says, They do not permit their Children to come to them in open Sight,
but when they are grown up to that Age, that they may be able to undergo
Military Duty, and serve in War: And of the Britans he Vxores habent deni
duodenique inter se communes, and maxim fratres cum fratribus, and parents
cum liberis: sed si qui sunt ex his nati, eorum habentur liberi, a quthus
primum virgins quaeque ductae sunt. Idem.
says particularly, They have ten or twelve Wives in common amongst them, and
especially Brothers, and Fathers with their Children; but what Children were
born of such Mothers, were fathered on them by whom they were first lain with
when they were Maids.

This strange Confusion had some thing of the Primaeval Practice of Polygamy,
and some think helped to the multiplying of People; where it must be rare for
any Woman to be unfruitful, that had so many Gallants.

The Men (of Gaul Viri quantas pecunias ab uxoribus dotis nomine acceperunt,
tantas ex suis bonis, aestimatione facta, cum dotibus communicant, etc. Idem.
Caesar now speaks) what Money they receive with their Wives upon account of
Portion, they lay downv; much out of their own Estate, upon an Appraisement
made, to make a Joint Stock with the Portion. There is an account jointly kept
of the Product and the Profits reserved, and the longer Liver enjoys all.

The Men have Power Viri in uxores, sicuti in liberos vitae necisque habent
potestatem. Idem.
of Life and Death over their Wives as well as over their Children, says the
same Caesar. Whereupon Bodin Bodin. de Repub. lib. 1. c. 2.
charge Justinian with a falsehood, for affirming that other People had not
the same Fatherly Power as the Romans had.

When a Master of a Family, who is of higher Birth and Quality, dies, his
Kindred meet together, That if the manner of his Death were suspicious, they
may by Torture, as Servants were used, examine they Wife concerning the
Business, and if she be found Guilty, they Caesar de Bello Gallico, lib. 6.
Igni atque omnibus tormentis excruciatas intersiciunt.
torment her miserably, and burn her alive.

To this Sir Preface to the Sixth Book of Reports.
Edward Coke referrs the Antiquity of that Law, which we at this day use of
devoting to the Flames those wicked Baggages who stain their Hands with the
nefarious Murder of their Husbands.

Those Servants Servi and Clientes, quos ab iis dile^^os esse constabat, just
is funeribus confectis, una ^remabantur. De Bello Gallico, lib. 6.
and Dependants, who were known to have been beloved by their Masters in his
Lifetime, were when the Funeral Rites were prepared, burnt with him for
Company. This was used by many Nations.

Many when they are Plerique cum aut aere alieno aut magnitudine Tributorum aut
inju^ia potentiorum premuntur, sese in servi^utem dicant Nobilibus. In hos
eadem sunt Jura quae dominis in servos. Idem.
oppressed with Debt or great Taxes, or with the injurious Oppression of great
Men, put themselves out to Service to the Nobles: over such they have the same
Right or Authority, as Masters have over their Servants or Slaves.

Thus I have extracted the principal Laws, Usages, Customs and Powers of
Government, Civil and Religions, used by the Gauls and Britans, as they are
recorded by Julius Caesar and others: in which we find the Druids were their
Gownmen, and were the Guardians, and Interpreters of their Laws; the same
Caesar telling us positively, That the Discipline of these Druids was first
found in Britain.

I come now to the last Particular, That the Romans settled Commonwealths where
they conquered.
that where the Romans conquered, they established a form of Commonwealth in
such places as they thought most convenient for their Obedience to them, and in
other places they allowed Tributary Kings; which will appear by what follows.

Livius, lib. 61.
The Averni of the Gauls were a great People. Bituitus was their King, and
fought two bloody Battles with the Romans, the one against Domitius, and the
other against Fabius; he being taken Prisoner, and his Son Congentiatus, were
deprived of the Kingdom by the Senate, and the City set free: Afterward
Ciltilus Father of Caes. Comment. l. 7.
Vercingetorix, although he had by Battle got the principality of all Gaul; yet
aspiring to be King, was slain by the City, who had obtained this freedom from
the Roman Senate: So that it was a free City till Caesar's time, and is
reckoned so in Pliny's time; yet though there were some made so free by the
Romans, and others following the Example of the Romans, had cast off their
Princes and Kings; yet I cannot with Ramus, conclude so universally of the
Gauls, That every where the Government consisted of an elected or annual Prince
and Senate, and People that had free suffrages.

Having thus far given some short hints of the Government of the Britans, by
comparing them with the manner of the Government of the Gauls and Germans, as
supposing it might be made out from good Authority, that there was a great
Agreement in their Forms of Government: I come now more directly to prove, that
where the Romans conquered, they established their own Laws; and that the
unwritten Laws and Customs must be of little force, during the Peoples
Subjection to the Romans; and so by some Hundred of years disuse, were like to
be so far forgotten, as it cannot be said (as Chancellor Fortescue does) that
during the Britans, Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans, the Realm has been
ruled with the self same Customs.

First therefore we may consider, That the Druids (who if they had not the
Law-making Power, yet were the sole Judges, and decided all Controversies)
being so wholly abolished; and we finding no account of the Laws they judged
by, we may well conclude, That the British Laws (whatever they were) lost
their Esteem and Use. Where the Romans conquered they ^stablished their Laws.
Especially when we consider that the Roman Conquest broke and destroyed all
the Princely Families, especially the lineage of their Kings. So that now none
had any settled Authority, but as he could court the People, if he intended to
make a party against his Neighbor, or oppose the Romans: which might be the
true reason why Xiphilin Apud Britann^s populus magna ex part Principatum
tener. Vita Severi.
says, That with the Britans the People had a great share in the Government,
which might very well be after the Subversion of their Monarchies, and the
Commixture of the Roman Colonies with them.

De moribus vet. Gallorum, p. 77. The Romans introduced their Language where
they conquered.
Ramus complains, That the Roman Conquest made the Gauls lose their own Native
Language, while, not only the Roman Laws, but their Legions settling there,
compelled the Gauls to speak their Language; besides, he says, There were
public Stipends allowed by the Roman Emperors, to have the Language taught.
Therefore we in Britain may well presume the same befell us.

But the banishing and utter exterminating the Druids, is to me a strong
Argument, that the British Laws were also expunged; which I shall now give a
short Account of. Idem, p. 95, 96, 97. Why the Druids were abolished, with
their wicked Rites.
Diodorus tells us, of the Druids sacrificing Captives to the Gods; and Caesar
tells us, They used Human Sacrifices, without which they thought the immortal
Gods could not be appeased. Diodorus says, The Saronidae when they consulted
about great matters, they killed a Man with the Sword; and from the manner of
his falling, the flowing of his Blood, and other things, they prognosticated
future Events; and Lib. 5. Comment.
Caesar tells us, That he who comes last to the Council armed, in the view of
the Multitude, was put to death by Torments. Strabo says, That in their
Temples, they sometimes shot a Man to death with Arrows, as he hung upon a
Cross; and out of Artemidorus, That in Britain Sacrifices were made to Ceres
and Proserpina, after the manner of the Samothracians. Caesar and Strabo both
speak of their making great Figures, or Colossuses of Twigs and Wands, or Wood
covered over with Hay, which they filled with living Men and Beasts of several
sorts, and so burnt them together. Although Ramus, in extenuation of these,
brings some parallel Sacrifices done by the Romans, and ascribes them rather to
the influence the Gentile Devils had over People, in making those atrocia and
horrenda Sacrificia, than that it was peculiar to the Druids; yet I think there
is no Apology to be made for them: That of Lucan being true of them, Et vos
Barbaricos ritus, moremque sinistrum
Sacrorum, Druidae, positis repetistis ab armis,
Solis nosse Deos, and Coeli numina vobis,
Aut solis nescire datum --


Tiberii Caesaris Principatus sustulit Druidas Gallorum. Hist. Not. l. 30. c. 1.
Pliny tells us, That in the Princedom of Tiberius, the Druids of Gaul were
taken away, which Lipsius well notes, That it referred only to Rome, in such
sense as Suetonius speaks of forbidding it in the Cities: But in Claudins's
time, the Religion of the Druids was wholly abolished among the Gauls, by
reason of its cursed cruelty; which in Augustus's time, was only forbid to be
practiced in Cities: Druidarum Sueton. Claud. c. 25.
Religionem apud Gallos, dirae immanitatis, and tantum Civibus sub Augusto
interdictam, penitus abolevit. It may well be imagined, that the taking of it
away in Gaul, extended also to Britain, as far as the Romans were Masters of
it; which was both the Mother and Nursery of it.

This exterminating the Religion made Non jam illustres istas Druidum scholas,
sed clandestinas in specu and abditis saltibus efficit.
Mela (who lived under Claudius) say, That it made the Schools of the Druids,
not to be public, but secretly kept in Caves and obscure Groves; it being now
spoiled of its Honor, and as Lucan agrees with Pomponius, -- Nemora alta,
remotis
Incolitis Lucos --
No doubt this prohibiting of these Holy Rites of the Druids, made the Nations
governed by them in point of Law (as the Gauls and Britans were) not so
respectful of them as before they were, and so they became more prone to
receive the Laws of Rome, which had prohibited the Reverence before given to
them, and having conquered them, would enjoin them the observance of their Laws.

That the Romans imposed their Laws in such parts of Britain as they had
conquered, is manifest by sundry good Inferences from ancient and approved
Authors; The Romans imposed their Laws where they conquered.
which De magnitudine Romana, lib. 1. c. 6. p. 28. Vid. A. Gellium lib. 16. c.
13.
Lipsius has gathered, who positively affirm, That wherever the Romans
conquered, were it Town or Nation, they used to carry some part of the People
to Rome, and leave other parts behind; but so as they mixed the Romans with
them, to have the Custody and Government of them; and those so sent they called
Coloni, and the places Hic denique populus Colonias in omnes Provincias misit;
ubicunque vicit, Romanus habitat. Seneca ad Albinum, c. 7.
Colonies. The Triumviri divided to them their shares of Land, and ordered the
Laws and Government of the Town, which was head of the Colony, and the
Jurisdiction of it; so Sic tamen ut omnia Romam and urbem matrem referrent. Id.
Lipsius.
that all might resemble the Mother City Rome, even in Market places, and all
places of public Congress, Capitol, Temples, Courts, etc. the Duumviri being in
most places instead of Consuls, and the Aediles and Decurions for the Senate.

Colonia Camalodunum ducitur valida veteranorum manu in agros Captivos, ut
esset subsidium versus Rebels, and imbuendis sociis ad officia Legum. Lib.
12. Annal. Dio Hist. lib. 60.
Tacitus tells us, That at Camalodunum (now Maldon in Essex) there was a Colony
sent to be a Defense against Rebels, and to cultivate the conquered (admitted
now into Confederacy with Rome) in the Offices of the Laws, So that here we
find the Socii to be instructed in the Roman Laws, which evidently
demonstrates, That the British Laws were not allowed to be used: That Courts of
Judicature were also here, Tacitus confirms, when he tells us, that under 14.
Annal. Externos fremitus in Curia eorum auditos.
Suetonius Paulinus, strange noises were heard in the Courts of Judicature
there; Gruteri Inser. Lips. ad lib. 12. Tacit. number. 75. So we read of a Temple
built to Claudius, which was Art (or, as Lipsius, Arra) aeternae dominationis,
an Altar or Earnest eternal Command. The Officers sent abroad by the Remans
into the Provinces and Colonies.
so an old Inscription remembers one Aurelius Bassus Censitor civium Romanorum
Coloniae Victricensis, quae est in Britannia Camalodunum. This Censitor or
Censor (for they are promiscuously used by Vlpian) was one, who did not only
tax all to the public Contributions, but was a Judge in the Courts, corrected
all misdemeanors of manners, had Power over Senators, and in many other things
acted Juridically.

We find two alterations made in the Officers, sent abroad into the Provinces
and Colonies of the Romans, the one in Augustus his time, and the other by
Constantine the Great. Before Augustus his Reign, the greater Provinces were
ruled by Proconsuls, the lesser by Praetors and Questors, the Provincial
Praetors were Judges, gave Sentence according to Law, and we may be sure that
was the Roman Law.

In Augustus time those principal Magistrates, sent into the Provinces,
bordering on the Enemy, or Frontiers of the Empire, were called Legati, the
Magistrates or Officers in Italy were Praetorian and Consular, those abroad,
Propraetorian and Proconsular. Whoever desires to see more of this or what was
appointed under Constantine, may have recourse to Pancirollus de Magistratibus
Municipalibus, Alciatus de Magistratibus, and the Notitia Provinciarum; where
all the Officers are deseribed, with the several Provinces, and the Cities
contained in them, and the Ensigns or Symbols of the Officers. Then Britain was
divided into five parts; viz. Britannia prima, and secunda, Flavia
Caesariensis, Maxima Caesariensis, and Valentia, being all under the Vicar, or
Deputy of Britain, under the Viceroy or Praetorian Prefect of Gaul; we find in
the Roman Coins, exhibited by Camden, a Colony at York, Divana, or Chester, and
others. So that it cannot be thought that Britain was not as subject to the
Roman Laws, as other Conquered Countries. Whence Latias ab eo jurare Leges
compulsam. De Gestis Reg. l. 1. c. 1.
Malmsbury says, That Julius Caesar compelled the Britans to swear Obedience
to the Latin Laws. And Gildas Non Britannia sed Romania censebatur. Excid.
Britanniae. The Britans learn the Roman Arts and Language.
says, it was reckoned not Britannia, but Romania.

And more particularly, that Britain was subject to the Roman Law, these
Observations following will prove.

Linguam Romanam abnuere, postea eloquentiam concupiscere; inde etiam habilus
neslri honor and frequens toga, paulatimque discessum ad delinimenta vitiorum,
Balnea, Porticus and conviviorum elegantiam; idque apud imperitos humanitas
vocabatur, cum pars esset servitutis. Vita Agric. c. 21.
Tacitus tells us that in his time the Britans began to learn the Arts, and to
exceed the Gauls in Wit and Learning; and though they did at first reject the
Roman Speech, yet at length they did covet their Eloquence: from thence they
had in Esteem the Roman Habit, and their Gown was frequently worn, and by
little and little they descended to the fashionableness of their Vices, in
their Portico's, Baths, and Beauty or sumptuousness of their Banquets; which
among the ignorant was called Humanity or good Breeding, whereas it was a part
of their Servitude.

If we add to this the Consideration of what I have noted out of Ramus, of the
change of the Gallick Language and Laws, we may conclude that the ancient In
Catalect. vet. Poet. lib. 1. tit. 7.
Poet spoke Truth; who says, Cernitis ignotos Latia sub Lege Britannos.

All these things are to be understood of the natural Britans, who no doubt
were not backward in affecting the Roman Laws as well as the other things
mentioned by Tacitus. For which the Language and Rhetoric were most useful;
otherwise what need was there of having Lawyers from Gaul, which the Poet calls
Juvenalis Sat. 7.
Nutricula Causidicorum, and who tells us that Satyra 15.
Gallia Causidicos docuit facunda Britannos,
De conducendo loquitur jam Rhetore Thule.


So we find, That Severus left his Son Herodian. lib. 3. Juri dicendo rebusque
civilibus ut praeesset.
Geta (when he made his Northern Expedition) to be as Lord President of the
North; and Papinian the famous Civilian sat in the Tribunal at York, and from
thence, Severus and Antonius set forth the Imperial Edict, Cod. lib. 3. tit.
32. That Laws were not like to be made by the Britans, while under the Romans.
de rerum Venditione.

Hitherto we find no probability of any Laws amongst the Conquered Britans, but
such as the Romans imposed or allowed of. After the Britans embraced
Christianity, we have some imperfect accounts of King Lucius sending to Pope
Eleutherius to send him the Roman Laws, and of Caesar. But Sir Henry Spelman
Cum has domi a Roman^ Praeside (nec fugien^as quidem) obtineret. Council. Tom.
1. p. 35.
and others, do justly reject this as spurious, because he could not want
those, nor avoid the obedience to them in his own Country; for, as he says,
from the time of the Emperor Claudius, who subdued most of Britain, the Roman
Laws were published in Britain, and the Brigantes (the Inhabitants of
Yorkshire, and the Countries beyond Humber) according to Seneca In ludo de
morte Cl. Caes.
were subject to them, who speaking of Claudius Caesar, writes thus, Ille
Britannos ultra noti littora Ponti,
Et Coeruleos Vel Scoto-Brigantas. Senec. in Octav.
scuta Brigantas dare Romuleis
Colla catenis jussit, and ipsum nova Romanae
Jura securis tremere Oceanum.


So in another place, Cuique Britanni terga dedere,
Ducibus nostris ante ignoti,
Jurisque sui.


There being nothing to be found of secular Laws of the Britans, either before
their expulsion by the Saxons into Wales, Concerning the Laws of Hoel Dha, and
the Britans in Wales.
or after, (excepting some Ecclesiastical Constitutions in Synods) till the
Laws of Hoel Dha, i. e. the Good: I must refer the inquisitive Reader to Sir
Henry Spelman's first Volume of Councils, where he will find the first at
Verulam, or St. Albans, Anno Christi 446. that by St. German against the
Pelagian Heresy, Anno 449. that in Wales near the Mountain Erir, that under
Dubritius, and three at Landass, before the year 560. and others at Landass
after ann. 887.

Now as to the Laws of Hoel Dha, the Preface to his Laws says, That he seeing
his Welsh insolently to abuse the Laws, he called out of every Kemut or Hundred
of his Kingdom, six Laicos viros auctoritate and scientia pollentes and omnes
E^clesiasticos dignitate baculosos. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. fol. 408. Twy gwyn
ar Tass, the White House upon the River Tass.
Laymen, excelling in Authority and Wisdom, and all the Ecclesiastics
dignifyed with Pastoral Staves; as Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats and Priors, to
a place called Guin sup. Taff in Deved, which House he would have built with
white Wands, for an House to lodge in when he came to hunt in the parts of
Demetie; wherefore it was called Ty Gvyn; there they stayed all Lent, praying
and fasting, etc. of those the King chose Twelve Laymen, most learned, and one
Clergyman called Blangorid, to instruct him in the Laws, that they might come
nearest to Truth and Justice, and ordered them to be writ in three parts: Prima
Lex Curiae (...) quotidianae; secunda, Lex patria; tertia, usus utriusque.
One for his daily Court; another to be the Law of the Country; and a third to
be of use for both: The Laws printed are all Ecclesiastical; only in Cap. 25.
one of them it is said, that it is found in the Roman Laws, That where the
number of Witnesses are not determined, there two are sufficient. As to the
other Laws, I have not had the good Fortune to meet with any Transcript of
them, only in Glossar. p. 362. Leges pristinas longa receptas consuetudine
abolevit, Britannisque novas dedit.
Sir Henry Spelman's Glossary, I find that the Manuscript says, That he
abolished the old Laws, received by long Custom, and gave to his Britans new
ones; which, from the Makers Name, are called the Laws of Hoel Dha.

Who over reads these Laws, says a judicious Sacred Laws, p. 76.
Author, will have little reason to think our Common Law ran from any such
Fountain; and it seems the old Laws and Customs of this People were far worse
and more rude yet, as the Proem informs us.

I know some will be displeased that I take no notice of the Mulmutian, or of
the Mercian Laws, concerning which the Abbat Jo. Bromp. Coll. 956. number. 10.
of Jorval and the Monk Lib. 1. c. 50. Concerning the Mercian Laws, not
British. See for this, and against it, what the Judicious Seldom has writ in
his fourth, fifth, and sixth Chapters of his Janus Anglorum, in which the Story
of Brute is judiciously confuted.
of Chester give this account, That Dunwallo Mulmucius, a British King (who
lived 430 years before our Savior) made those Laws which continued in esteem
till Edward the Confessors days, by the Name of the Leges Molmucinae, in which
he appointed Cities, the Temples of the Gods, and the Ways leading to them, and
the Ploughs of the Country Men to be Sanctuaries; and after Mercia (a Queen of
the Britans) Wife of Gwithelin (whom Leland calls Mercia proba) in the Minority
of her Son, says the Monk of Chester, who ruled in the Country of the
Mercians, published a Law full of Discretion and Justice, called the Lex
Mercia; which two Laws Gildas the Historian translated out of the British
Language into Latin; and these in the Saxons time, were called Merchena Laga,
or the Law of the Mercians; which Alured the Saxon (says the Monk of Chester)
from the Latin turned into the Saxon Language, and added the West Saxon Law,
and Canutus added the Danelga or Danish Law; all which three being joined
together by Edward the Confessor, made those we call the Common Law or King
Edward's Laws.

To which I shall only give Sir Henry Spelman's answer in his Glossary, That it
is true that King Alfred did write the Mercian Laws into his own West Saxon
Laws; but (as appears by the Preface to his Laws) that he collected what ever
he found in the Laws of King Ina his Countryman, Offa King of the Mercians, or
Ethelbert, who was first baptized; and those that were just, he collected,
others being rejected. It is not probable that Offa a Saxon King, the cruellest
Enemy to the Britains, having driven them out of all the Confines of his
Kingdom into Wales, should carry back their Laws as his Spoils; especially the
Laws being so wicked, that in the next Age they should be expunged, and juster
Laws be chosen, as we see in the Preface to those of Hoel Dha.

I shall offer but one Argument more, and so conclude with Sir Henry Spelman's
opinion: When Ethelbert King of Kent made his Laws Anno 613. as in the next
Chapter I shall relate; Bid says, he framed them after the Roman Example,
after Romana Bisena; by which we may understand, either according to the Laws
then used by the Civil or Ecclesiastic State of the Romans.

As to Sir Henry Spelman Glossar. tit. Lex. Whence most Laws after the breaking
of the Roman Empire.
he says, when the Goths, Saxons, Longobards, Danes, Normans and other
Inhabitants about the Baltic Sea, and Northern parts of Germany, had made great
Conquests in Europe, they imposed their Laws every where upon the conquered,
and their Country Ri^^: hence the Agreement betwixt the Laws of the Germans,
French, Italians, Spaniards and Sicilians; and who ever boast of the Antiquity
of their Municipal Laws, can deduce them no higher. For Quis enim victor
populus sub victi legibus conquiniscet?
says he, What conquering People will bow the neck under the Laws of the
conquered, especially when they have ejected a great part of them out of the
Country? So that if the Britains had any Laws of their own, after the Roman
Conquest, they must be preserved in the remotest parts of Scotland, and after
in Wales: but England had other Laws, as I shall make appear hereafter.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the German Government, and Laws of several Countries; after
breaking of the Roman Empire, and an Introduction to understand the Saxon
Lawmakers.
HAving treated of the State of the Britans under the Romans, I now in order
should immediately treat of the Saxons great Councils, and discover by what
Authority Laws were made in their time, who made up the great Council, and
whose advice was implied in the framing of their Laws: But before I enter upon
Particulars, it may be needful to say something of the German Polity, a Member
of which most famous Country (though we find not them mentioned during the time
of the twelve Caesar's) no doubt the Saxons were.

Caesar tells us, The Gods the Germans worshipped.
The Germans had no Druids Germani neque Druidas habent qui rebus divinis
praesint, neque sacrisiciis student.
which attended Divine Matters, nor did they study Sacrifices, and that they
accounted among the Gods those they see, and from whom they are manifestly
helped in their works, as the Sun, Vulcan and the Moon; the rest they have not
received as much as by report: But Tacitus mentions their God Tuisto, born of
the Earth, and his Son Mannus, and that they worshipped Mercury most, to whom
they sacrificed Men; but to Hercules and Mars other Animals, Although the
Germans, Gauls, and Britans were Barbarous, yet they were Valiant, and capable
of great Improvement.
and that some worshipped Isis.

When I read in Caesar, Tacitus, Diodorus, Strabo and others, of the
Barbarousness of the Germans, Gauls and Britans, their homely Diet, poor
Cottages and Clothing, their Habitations dispersed according as there was
convenience of Water or Wood, and that uncultivated Disposition they describe;
I am ready to think, before the Roman Attacques upon them, they had lived
something like the Savage Indians, and had little of Arts or Industry among
them: but when I consider on the other side, their great Armies, their Weapons,
the Chariots of the Britans and Gauls, called Esseda, the Lanceo ferreo
cubitali longitudine, latitudine duorum palmorum, Aerea Galea caput muni^bant
paulatim eminentiore, in qua aut cornua impressa essent, aut avium vel
quadrupedum essigies sculptae. Caesar. l. 3.
Lances of the Gauls, with Heads of Iron a Cubit long, and two Palms broad,
their large Shields and Brass Helmets; the German Spears called Fram^^^, and
the Ornaments of their Shields and Helmets, with Figures of Birds or
four-footed Beasts in Brass, their orderly raising of such and such numbers of
Men, in such and such Circuits and Jurisdiction of Cities, and their training
up their Youth in Arms, and the Influence the Druids had in Gaul and Britain,
and the Priests in Germany (in all which Particulars I could give a large
account, but that Ramus has saved me the labor:) I say, when I consider this,
I look upon them as People of brave and Heroic minds, and such as were capable
of great Improvements, and who were People of Courage and Prowess. But I shall
leave these things, and only speak of their Polity or Government Ecclesiastic,
Military, The Religion of the Germans.
and Civil.

As to their Priests, Silentium per Sacerdotes, quibus tum coercendi Jus est
imperatum. Tacit. de Moribus Germ. 634.
Tacitus tells us, That in the great Confluxes of the People, they had some
kinds of Presidentship, and coercive Power in causing Silence. None were
permitted to Correct, Bind, or Punish any with Stripes, but the Priests, not
allowing them to be inflicted for Punishment, and at the Command of the
Captain, but as it were Velut Deo imperante quem adesse bellantibus credunt. Id.
God commanding, whom they believe to be present with their Armies. Therefore
he says, they carry some Effigies or Symbols of their Gods, taken from their
Graves, into their Battles. He Nec cohibere parietibus Deos, neque in ullam
humani oris speciem assimulare ex magnitudine coeles^ium arbitrantur. Id. 633.
says, the Germans do not confine their Gods to Walls, nor make them after the
similitude of Humane Shape, the greatness of Celestial Powers not allowing it:
they consecrate Groves and Woods, and call by the names of Gods that Secret,
which by Reverence alone they see. Lucos ac nemora Consecrant, Deorumque
nominibus appellant Secretum illud quod sola Reverentia vident.

As to civil affairs, Their Civil Government.
In their Councils (which Jura per Pagos Vicosque reddunt, centeni singulis ex
plebe comites, consilium simul and auctoritas adsunt. Idem
Tacitus before says, they ordinarily held about the New or Full Moon) their
Princes are chosen, who administer Justice by Villages, and Dorps, and Council
and Authority was in every Hundred. Such were our ancient Wapentakes, called
Hundreds where Conventus fiat in omni centena, coram Comite aut suo misso, and
coram Centenario ipsum placitum fiat. LL. Alaman.
the Hundredary, and others judged: and in this account we have a description
of our Fortnight and Monthly Courts in Wapentakes, and of the Courts of
Manors; but of this Sir William Dugdale is to be consulted in his Learned
Treatise called Origines Juridiciales.

I come therefore to their Princely and Military Government: For in so Warlike
a Nation, it is described by Reges ex Nobilitate, Duces ex virtute sumunt; nec
Regibus infinita and libera Potestas, and Duces exemplo potius quam Imperio. Si
prompti, si conspicui, si ante Aciem agunt, admiratione praesunt. Id. 634.
Tacitus, as fittest for that Service. He says they take their Kings by their
noble Extraction, and their Captains or Leaders by their Virtue or Prowess, nor
is the Power of their Kings free and absolute; and their Captains by Example
rather than Command, are obeyed. If they be ready handed, of a goodly Presence,
and signalize their Prowess in the Head of their Armies, this gives them
Command.

Further he Mox Rex vel Princeps, prout aetas cuique, prout Nobilitas, prout
decus Bellorum, prout facundia, audiuntur Auctoritate suadendi magis quam
jubendi potes^ate: si displicuit sententia, fremitu aspernantar; sin placuit,
frameas concutiunt. Honoratissimum assensus genus est armis laudari. Id. 636.
says, The King or Prince is heard (that is, valued, esteemed and obeyed)
according to his Age, his Nobility, his Warlike Achievements or Eloquence,
rather by the Authority of persuading, than by the Power of Commanding. If the
matter proposed displease, it is rejected with a fretting noise; if it please,
they clash together their Spears: the honourablest kind of assent being to
commend with their Weapons. All this seems to be fitted for Military Affairs;
and Tacitus having had occasion to treat of the Germans as they were engaged in
Wars against the Romans, must be thought to make his principal Remarks from the
Intelligence he had from the Romans that were employed against them: Therefore
little can be expected of their Government in Times of Peace; which, no doubt,
they rarely enjoyed after the Roman Ambition of subduing all their Neighbors,
and bringing them under their Subjection, was so much endeavored.

That the Germans were a Warlike Nation appears in all the accounts given of
them; Vita Germanorum omnis in venationibus, a^qu^ in studiis rei militaris
consumitur.
therefore Caesar tells us, That the whole life time of the Germans was spent
in Hunting and in Military Employments. So Tacitus relates, That in their
Councils, either one of the Princes, Scuto Frameaque juvenem ornant; hac apud
illos toga, hic primus juventae honos. De Moribus Germ.
or the Father, or Kinsman adorn the Youth with a Shield and Spear: This being
among them, as the Gown among the Romans, the first Honor of their Youth. So
he says, They divided the Inhabitants of the Pagi into Hundreds, of which one
was the chief, and these were the Footmen in their Armies. The German Comites.
Their Princes had always a great number of Companions in Arms, whom he calls
Comites and Comitatus; Magnaque and Comitum aemulatio quibus primus apud
Principem suum ^^^us: and Principum, cui plurimi and acerrimi Comites. Haec
dignit ^^, (...) vires, magno semper electorum juvenum globo circundati, in
pace decus, in bello praesidium. Id. p. 637. Cum ventum i^ Aciem, turpe
Principi virtute vinci, turpe comitatui virtutem Principis non adaequare.
among whom was great Emulation, who should obtain the prime place about the
Prince; and so among the Princes, who should have most, and the valiantest
Companions: where this number of Clients, Retainers or Companions is not only
glorious to them in their own Country, but among their neighbour-Cities where
they fight. It is shameful for the Prince, says he, to be overcome by force,
and as shameful for these Companions not to equal the valor of their Prince;
and it is an infamous disparagement to them, all their lives, to escape alive
out of the Fight, if their Prince be slain: for to defend him, and to ascribe
their own valiant Actions to his Glory, is their principal Oath, the Prince
fighting for Victory, and they for the Prince. If the City from whence they
sprung, has grown sluggish with long Peace and Idleness, the most of the Noble
Youth, of their own accord, seek those Nations where Wars are: Idleness being
ungrateful to them; and the Princes cannot maintain these numerous Companions,
but by Force and War: for these Comites require of the Prince's Liberality,
Exigunt enim Principis sui liberalitate illum bellatorem equum, illam cruentam
victricemque ^rameam. Id. 538. Sir Henry Spelman derives Vassal from the old
German Gessel, Comes, vel simpliciter, vel qui pro mercede servit. Glossar.
Fidelis.
the Warlike Horse, and the bloody and conquering Framea or Spear. For
plentiful Food, and Entertainments are to them in stead of Wages. Thus far
Tacitus.

Methinks in this description of the Comites and Comitatus, there appears
something like the Feudal dependence of the Milites upon the Prince; they are
bound by Oath to defend him, they have Horse, and Lance, or Spear, have liberal
entertainment both in constant Food and Banquets for Wages; and that they had
also Lands set out for the service, the following words seem to imply, viz.
That one cannot so Nec arare terram aut expectare Annum tam facile persuaseris,
quam locare hosts, and vulnera mereri; pigrum quinimo, and inters videtur
sudore acquirere quod possis sanguine parare. Id. P. 538.
easily persuade them to plough land, or expect the Fruits of the Year, as to
provoke the Enemy, and to deserve wounds; for it is sluggish to them and dull
to acquire that by Sweat, that they may obtain by Blood. Whether this implied a
Feudal Tenure or not, I will not determine; but it shows a rudiment of it: And
in Scotland not only in the Highlands but the Lowlands, that which they call
the Great-back, i.e. to be attended wherever they travel, when they please to
command it, with a great train of their Vassals and Tenants, especially in
military expeditions; is yet in use; and till the Law of H. 7. against
Retainers, this was as much used by the ancient English Nobility. Their Princes
presented with Gifts.


M^s est civitatibus ultro ac viritim confer Principibus vel armentorum vel
frugum, quod pro ^^nore acceptum etiam necessitatibus subvenit: public
mitt^^tur electi equi, magna arma, phalerae, torquesque. Idem.
Tacitus further says, concerning their Princes, That it was a custom for
their Cities, of their own accord, and Man by Man, to bestow upon their
Princes, Cattle and Corn, which is received as an Honorary Gift, and serves
them for their Housekeeping; and the Princes most rejoice in the Gifts of the
neighboring Nations, which are not sent by single persons, but as Public
Presents: viz. Chosen Horses, great Arms, Horse-trappings, and Collars or
Chains, and of late, Money. Here we may note, that where Tacitus mentions
Civitates he means some distinct Government or Country under one Government.
For he is positive that the Germans had not such places as were called Vrbes,
Cities; nor did they endure conjoined Seats of Habitation, but did inhabit
severally, as a Fountain, a Field, or Wood pleased them, their Cities being
only fenced Woods or Morasses. They went always armed.
I might note many other things in which the Saxons agreed with the description
Nihil neque publi^ ^ neque pr^va^^^ r^i nisi armati agunt, tum ad nego^^^, nec
minus sape ad convi^ia procedunt armati.
Tacitus gives of the Germans, and some usages we retain still; but I shall
only add two particulars more, and so conclude. He says, that they neither
went about public or private Affairs unarmed, not only where business
required, but to their Feasts they went armed; and to drink at them a Day and
Night was no disgrace: and often at these were quarrels, which seldom passed
without reproaches, but often with death and wounds. At these Feasts they
consult, says he, of reconciling Enemies, De reconciliandis invicem i^imicis,
and jungendis affinitatibus, and adsciscendis Principibus, de pace denique a^
b^^^, plerumque in conviviis consulcant, tanquam nullo magis tempore aut ad
simplices cogitationes pateat animus aut ad magnas incale cat. Deliberant dum
^ingere ne ciunt: constituunt dum errare non possunt. Id. 642. De minoribus
rebus Principes consultant, d^ majoribus omnes; ita tamen ut ea quoque quorum
p^nes plehem arbitrium est, apud Principes pertrectentur. Id. 636. Their
Consultations.
of joining Affinities, and choosing Princes, and for the most part, of Peace
and War, as if at no other time, either the Mind is more open to receive simple
thoughts, or is more warmed to great ones; yet, however, upon these occasions,
they unbosom themselves, the next day they treat again of these matters,
deliberating when they know not how to dissemble, and firmly resolve on a thing
when they cannot err.

As to their public Consultations, Tacitus observes further, That of lesser
matters (such as I suppose concerned not the Public State of Affairs in War or
Peace, but the particular ordering the matters of their private Jurisdictions)
the Princes consult: about greater business all, yet so as those things, of
which the lowest sort of the People are Judges, are first treated of by the
Princes. By which I understand, Tacitus means by greater matters, the
Consultations about the defending themselves against their Enemies, especially
against the Romans, where the unanimous suffrage of the greatest multitude was
requisite.

By all which, it is apparent that there were several Principalities in
Germany, and that the Soldiery made up a great part of the People: and where
we read of suffrages, it is to be understood of theirs; and whatever freedom of
Votes, etc. we read of, was principally in debating Military Affairs: and that
Germany does yet retain free Princes, and free Cities, though under one
Emperor, De Moribus Germanorum.
as ancient Germany did, is well known.

Another of their laudable Customs is thus remembered by Tacitus, Insignis
Nobilitas, aut magna Patrum merita, Principis dignationem etiam adolescentulis
assignant, which I render, Great Nobility, or, the great merits of their
Fathers, gives the dignity of Princes, even to their Youth. In this we may note
the propagation of Gentry, through true Virtue deserving Honor, to whose
Memory is dedicated that Worship which is often bestowed on unworthy Posterity.
Haec debeamus virtutibus ut non praesent^s solum illas, sed e^^am ablatas
e^conspectu colamus. Senec. lib. 4. de Benef. c. 30. Dotem non uxor marito, sed
uxori maritus affert, Idem. Tacitus (...) supra. Accisis cri^ibus nudatam
Adul^eram coram propinquis expellit d^mo maritus, ac p^r omnem vicum verbera
agit. Idem.
This, says Seneca, we owe to Virtues, that we do not only worship them
present, but worship them taken out of our sight.

Another of the German Laws or Usages was, as Tacitus mentions, That the Wife
does not bring the Husband a Portion, but the Husband gives the Wife a Dowry.

Yet we find the Husbands severity in case of abusing his Bed, thus: The
Husband, if the Wife prove an Adultress, cuts off her Hair, strips her naked,
and turns her out of doors in presence of her Kindred, and drives her through
the Streets, lashing or beating her as she goes along. This, as Juvenal says,
was -- Ipsis Marti Venerique timendum.

So Antinous in Homer threatens Irus with the chopping off his Nose, Ears, and
Privities; and Ulysses inflicts that very punishment upon his Goat-herd
Melanthius for his Pimping. So in Canutus his Law, the Wife who took other
Passengers aboard her, than her Husband, is doomed, she should have her Nose
and Ears cut off. J^^us Anglorum.
The curious may see more in Seldom.

Tacitus observes another Law, H^^redes successoresque sui cuique liberi, and
nullum testamentum. Si liberi non sunt p^^ximus gradus in poss^ss^o^e, sratres,
patrui, avunculi. Idem.
that every ones Children were their Heirs and Successors, and there was no
Will to be: If there be no Children, then the next of kin shall inherit;
Brethren, or Unkles by the Fathers or Mothers. This seems to point out
Gavil-kind, otherwise there had been need of a Testament to dispose of
something for younger Children. So Seldom observes, that till our Grandfathers
time it was not lawful to dispose of Land-Estates by Will, unless it were in
some Buroughs that had such privileges, but this hindered not but they might
dispose by Deeds.

Another Law he mentions, Suscipere inimicitias seu patris seu propi^qui quam
amicitias necesse est. Idem. Nec implacabiles durant, luitur enim etiam
homicidium certo Arm^ntorum ac pecorum numero, recipitque satisfactionem
universa dom^s. Idem.
which shows the use of those are called Deadly Feuds in the North, was that to
undertake the enmities rather than the friendships, whether of ones Father or
Kinsman, is more necessary.

Yet he says, those do not hold on, never to be appeased; for even Murder is
expiated by a certain number of Cattle, and the whole Family of the murdered
Person receives satisfaction. So we find in our English Saxon Laws, Murders
were formerly bought off with Head-money, which was called W^^gild, though one
had killed a Nobleman, yea, a King himself, which, as I remember, was valued
at 60000 Thrimsas or Groats, and so a Prince 30000, and others Proportionable.

Another Law we find thus, The Lord imposes upon his Tenant a certain quantity
of Corn, or Cattle, or Clothes. Frumenti modum Deminus aut pecoris aut vestis
col^no injungit. Idem.
Here we certainly find the usage of Country Farmholders. In ^^imitivo Regni
s^^tu p^st conquis ^^nem (...) (...) argenti (...), sed sola (...) solvebantur.
Dialog. Scaccar.
So yet in Scotland, a Gentleman of Quality, or Lords Estate is not computed by
Annual Rent, but by so many Bolls of Victual. So we find in Gervase of Tilbury,
that the Kings had payments made them out of their Lands, not in Sums of Gold
or Silver, but only in Victuals or Provisions, out of which the King's House
was supplied with necessaries for daily use, which the King's Officers
accounting with the Sheriffs, reduced into many payments, viz. a Measure of
Wheat to make Bread for 100 Men 1 s. the body of a Pasture-fed Beef, 1 s. a Ram
or Sheep 4 d. for Food for 20 Horses 4 d.

Thus far I have thought fit to pick out of Tacitus the manners of the Germans,
and compare some of them with the English, Saxon, or Norman Customs, to
discover their Conformity.

But since, in this account from Tacitus, we find no satisfactory testimony as
to the power of making Laws, but that in general they used to meet in
Consultation about the New or Full of the Moon, where 2 Alter and tertius dies
consultatione co^^ntium ab^umitur. Id. 636.
or 3 Days were usally spent, and the Turba, or Common Body of those that met,
(which elsewhere he says, was by hundreds) being Armed, the Priests commanded
silence, and had the power of keeping Matters in order, and the Princes
Authority was there, as I have noted besore: I say, considering these things, I
must seek otherwhere for clearer discovery; before which I will only note,
Judgments given in their Councils.
that at such Councils as Li^^^ apud concilium accusare quoque and discrimen
capitis intendere.
Tacitus describes, Judgments were given upon offenses: for he says here,
Accusations might be presented, and Capital Matters tried, the distinction of
punishment Distinctio paenarum ex (...), proditores and tran^fu^^^ ar^oribus
suspendunt, ignav^^ and im^e^^^ and ^^pore ( Lips. torp^^^) Infames (...) (...)
insup^r crate (...). ^acitus de moribus German. In some Places of Germany
Drowning is yet a Punishment, as Platerus gives an Account of a Woman tied in a
Sack, and cast into the River near Basil, who was found alive after being taken
up at the usual place, half a mile below where she was cast in. Observat.
being according to the Crime: Traitors and such as fled to the Enemy were hung
upon Trees, but the slothful, unfit for War, and such as are infamous for
sluggishness (as Lipsius will have it Torpore not Corpore infames) were drowned
in Morasses, an Hurdle being laid upon them, and the reason he gives of the
diverse punishments, is, that the first which he calls Scelera, are to be shown
while punished; but the other, which he calls Flagitia, wicked and heinous
crimes, (but particularizeth not what they were) should be hid and punished by
Drowning; then follows, Levioribus delictis pro modo poenarum, equorum,
pecorumque numero convicti mulct antur, pars mulctae Regi vel Civitati, pars
ipsi qui vindicatur, vel propinquis ejus exolvitur; and that for smaller
faults, the punishment was a Mulct of Horses or Cattle, whereof a great part
was paid to the King, or City, and part to him that was acquitted, or his
kindred. By which we may note a Sovereignty in the Kings, or Free Cities, or
People to whom these Mulcts were paid.

But I leave these obscurer times, and proceed to greater light. Therefore, for
the better clearing of the Authority of the Saxon Kings in giving Laws to their
Subjects, and the discovering who were the constituent parts of the great
Councils; I shall first note something of the several Laws made in Germany,
France, Several Laws made in several King loms after the declining of the Reman
Empire.
and the Northern Countries, and so proceed to some general observations of our
Saxon Laws; and lastly, to illustrate or expound by a short Glossary, the Saxon
Titles of Great Men found mentioned in the Councils.

First (as the Ancientest I meet with) I will begin with the Gothic Laws:
Gothic Laws.
These Goths overrun Europe, and did not only cause great Wars and
Destructions, but made great alterations in the Laws and Kingdoms. The Goths,
according to the custom of other Northern People, used not written Laws, but
their Country Customs; till Sub Erudi^^ Rege, Gothi Legum instituta scriptis
bahere c^^perunt; nam antea m^ribus and consuetudine tenebantur. Isidor. Chron.
Goth. Era 504.
Euridicus, Euric or Theodoric (for by those Names he is called) Anno Dom. 466.
made them be digested into writing: These Levigild ( Era 608) amended, and
they had their fullest Vigor from the Kings Chindaswind and Recaswind; and
these are used in Spain, and that part of France called Gallia Narbonensis,
anciently Braccata, containing Savoy, Dauphin, Province and Languedoc.

The next Laws for Antiquity are the Burgundian. Gundebald or Gundebaud, The
Burgundian Laws.
who was made tributary to Clouis King of France, Anno Dom. 501. having settled
Burgundy under his Jurisdiction, did appoint (says Lib. 2. c 33.
Gregory Turonensis) milder Laws for the Burgundians, lest he might oppress the
Romans: and Lindenbrogius notes, That his Laws agree with the Responses of
Papinian; though De Impietate Duellici examinis.
Agobard, in his Book to Lewis the Emperor, complains of the unjustness of one
branch of them, in admitting Duel, when Proof might otherwise be had: However
here it appears they were made by his Authority.

The next are the Laws of the Alemans, Baiuvarians and Francks, * all which
took their beginning from Theoderic the First, Spehaan 's Gloss. Lex
Baioriorum. Lex Baiuvariorum, Baioriorum, Boiorum, containing Franconia, now
Bavaria and Bohemia, according to some.
Son of Clouis the First, who founded the French Kingdom, Anno 511. having
triumphed over the Almains, and being converted to Christianity, he took the
Name of Lewis; when he was in Catalonia he called to him wise Men, skilled in
the Ancient Laws of his Kingdom; and he himself indicting, he commanded the
Laws of those Nations, according to every ones Customs, to be written; adding,
rescinding and changing them according as Christian Religion required, and
those which, for the ancient Pagan Rites, he could not alter himself,
Childebert the Second begun, and Clotharius the Second perfected, and Dagobert
the great made them better, and to every Nation concerned in them, Lex
Aalmannorum.
he gave them in writing.

As to that part which is called the Lex Alamannorum, they were amended by
Clotharius the Second, Son of Chilperic, and his Princes, viz. Thirty three
Bishops, Thirty four Dukes, Seventy two Earls, and the rest of the People, as
appears by the Title; so that this, by an Act of the King and great Council,
and the former by the Kings themselves, are recorded to be appointed or made.
Lex Francorum.


As to the Law of the Francs (not the Salic Law, which is of later date) we
find no more mention of them after they were digested by Theodoric the first,
till the time of Charles the Great; who and his Son, published Laws by the Name
of Capitularies, which Ann. 840. were writ by Ansegisus Abbas Lobiensis, and
Benedictus Levita; so that here is no mention but of the Kings and Emperors
sole establishing these Laws. Lex Longobardorum.


The Longobards, now Lombards, in Italy were a Colony of the Saxons, who were
removed into Pannonia or Hungary; and by Narses General to Justinian; about the
year 550, were called into Italy to assist the Emperor against Totila King of
the Goths; whom Narses totally routed in Italy: and these Longobards
Warnefridus Hist. Longobard. lib. 4. c. 44.
seated themselves there, and established a Kingdom, and Rotharis their King
reduced the Laws which they held only by Use and Memory (being mostly such as
the Saxons had used) into writing, and caused the Book of them to^be called an
Edict; which was about 70 years after their settling in Italy; the succeeding
Princes Grimoald, Luitprandus, Rachis and Aistulphus, and after Charles the
Great, Latharius and Pipin added and amended them. Sir Henry Spelman Glosser,
tit. LL. Longobard.
says, that betwixt our Laws and those of the Longobards, there is a great
Agreement in the Laws, Rites, Words, and other Particulars; but says, our
Ancestors brought out of Germany their Customs not written, but, according to
the custom of the Lacedaemonians, and the Ancient Nations of the North,
retained them in their memories only.

In the Laws of Henry the First, Lex Ripuariorum.
we find the Ripuarian Laws (which were made for those of Luxenburg, Gelderland
and Cleves) not only approved, but some of them are word for word in his Laws,
as Sir Henry Spelman notes.

As to the Salic Law, the Francs, a People of Germany, The Salick Law.
passing the Rhine, subdued a great part of Gaul; and in the third year of
Pharamond, four of the Nobles of the Nation reviewed all the Originals of
Causes, according to the Salic Law: There are two Prologues to these Laws; the
first names the four Noblemen that digested them; the second says names the
Anno Dom. 798. The Lord Charles, the Noble Anno Dom. 798. Dom. Carolus Rex
Francorum incli^^s hunc libellum tractat^s Legis Salicae seribere ordinavit.
King of the Francs, ordained the writing of that Book of the Salic Law.

In the Laws of King Henry the First, Sir Henry Spelman notes, That many things
are taken out of the Salic Laws, as he instanceth in the 87 and 89 Chapters,
where the Words are used, and Punishments are appointed secundum Legem Salicam,
according to the Salic Law.

I shall now set down something in general of our Country Law: Gl^sser. Lex
Anglorum. The English Saxon Laws from Germany.
Sir Henry Spelman observes, That the Laws of the English in Britain, seem to
take their Original from the German Manners or Customs, but he knows not who
first introduced them. It is known, that there came into England upon the
Invitation of Vortigern, the Jutes or Goths, Angela is a Town near Flemshurg, a
City of Sleswick; perhaps our Flamburgh in York^^ire had its Name from some
that inhabited that City.
the Angli or English, and the Saxons; tho all here obtained the Names of
Saxons. The Jutes settled in Kent, and the Isle of Wight: The Saxons in Essex,
Middlesex and Sussex, and so on the Sea Coast to Cornwall, and were called the
West Saxons: The Angli possessed the East and North parts, which were called
Mercia.

Those of Kent had their Laws, The tripartite Division of the Saxon Laws.
but after being swallowed up in the West Saxon Kingdom, they were subject to
their Laws; The Angli used the Mercian Laws, till the Danes overrunning the
Provinces of East-England, and of the North Humbers, brought in their Customs,
not differing very much from the Laws they had before; from hence sprung the
threefold Division of Laws, viz. the West-Seaxna Laga, Myrcna Laga, Dene Laga.
West Saxon Laws, the Mercian Laws, and the Danish Laws.

The first Laws we have an account of, were made by Ethelbert King of Kent Anno
561. and the next by Ina King of the West- Saxons, who began to Reign Anno 712.
and the next by Offa King of the Mercians, of which Laws I have spoke before:
The Danish Laws were such as were not only used in Denmark, but in Normandy,
Danish Laws.
as well as Norway: which was the reason why William the Conqueror
understanding that the Danish Law was used in that part where the Danes had
settled themselves, he preferred them before other Laws; because his Country of
Normandy was sprung from the Danes, and Norwegians: and it was with much
difficulty that he was persuaded against imposing them upon the whole Kingdom;
saying, the Danes and Norwegians were as sworn Brothers with the Normans. These
Danes entered about the year 790. and were at last overcome by King Alfred, and
by agreement betwixt him and Guthrun King of the Danes (who governed the
Kingdom of the East Angles and Northumbrians,) Guthruns People enjoyed the
Danish Laws, which differed from the other in nothing so much as the proportion
of the Mulcts: King Edward the Elder, Aethelstan, Edmund, and Edgar made Laws;
but from the time of Edgar to Edward the Confessor, the Danes having the
principal Command, the Danish Laws mostly prevailed. But Edward the Confessor,
of these three Laws, composed one, which, says the Monk of Lib. 1. c. 50.
Edward the Confessor 's Laws composed of all.
Chester, are called the Common Laws, and to his Days were called the Laws of
King Edward.

By all I have hitherto noted concerning the Laws either made in Germany,
France, Lombardy, Burgundy, Bavaria, or other Countries (after they came to
have any established Government of their own) or in England during the
Heptarchy; It is apparent, whoever was Sovereign, imposed the Laws, which as to
the Saxons in the next Chapter I shall make particularly appear. When the Roman
Imperial Law began to be disused.


That the Roman Laws begun to be disused as soon as their Empire declined and
was broken, is as manifest; for these several Nations by the appointment of
their Sovereigns had their unwritten Customs and Laws revised, and according to
the suitableness of them to the Government of their People, had them writ into
Books, and enjoined them to be observed by their Subjects.

To make it evident that the Imperial Roman Law was much disused after
Justinian's time, (upon the account of other Soveraignties being established,
which acknowledged not that dependence upon the Empire as formerly) I shall
offer something from Mr. Notes upon Fortescue, p. 20.
Seldom (who, if any other, is to be credited in this kind of reading) after I
have said something of Justinian.

The Emperor Justinian Proaem. de Consirmatione Institutionum. Of Justinian 's
Laws.
in the year of our Lord 565, by the help of Tribonian, Master, and Exquaestor
of the Sacred Palace, and Exconsul, and of Theophilus and Dorotheus Illustrious
Men, of whose Skill and Knowledge in the Laws and their Fidelity in observing
his Commands, the Emperor had manifold experience of: Although he had
commanded them by his Authority and Persuasions to compose those Institutions,
that the Subjects might not learn the Law from Non ab Antiquis Fabulis discere,
sed ab Imperiali splendore appetere. Breviter expositum quod antea obtinebat,
and quod postea desuetudine inumbratum, Imperiali remedio illuminatum est.
Legimus and recognovimus, and plenissimum nostrarum constitutionum robur eis
accommodavimus.
Ancient Fables, but from the Imperial Splendour, as he calls it, desire them:
and after fifty Books of Digests or Pandects, and four Books of Institutions
were made, in which were expounded whatever beforetime was used, and what by
disuse was obscured, by the Imperial Remedy was Illuminated; and he had
accomodated to them his fullest Authority, and had appointed them to be read
and taught at Rome, Berytus, and Constantinople, and no where else: Yet the
body of the Civil Law was so neglected, that till Lothar the Second, about the
year 1125. took Amalsi, and there found an old Copy of the Pandects or Digests;
it was in a manner wholly disused. Under that Lothar the Civil Law began to be
professed at Bologna, and one Irner or Werner made the first Glosses upon it,
about the beginning of Frederick Barbarossas's time, in Anno 1150. and Bologna
was by Lothar constituted to be Legum and Juris Schola una and sola. Sigon. de
Regno Italiae, lib. 11. and 7.


This Book Lothar gave to the Pisans (by reason whereof, says Mr. Seldom, it
is called Litera Pisana) and from thence it is now removed to Florence, where
in the Dukes Palace it is never brought forth but with Torch-light, and other
Reverence.

By this account we may note, That even before Justinian's time, some Laws had
been rather by old Traditions, which he calls old Fables, than by certain
Authority received; others were by long disuse forgot: and after they were thus
established by Imperial Authority, yet the succeeding Barbarity of the Ages,
and the new Kingdoms erected, caused other Laws to obtain Force, the first of
which we find very rude. All the first Laws, we read of in any Nation, seem
either so, comparatively to the refinedness of the Laws in these Ages; or else
the Digesters and Authorizers of them complain how obscure, rude, or indigested
those were, out of which they extracted theirs. The great Subversion the Saxons
made by their Conquest.


The Saxons made so great and universal a Subversion in the State, that scarce
any City, Dwelling, River, Hill or Mountain retained its former Roman or
British name; so that we have less reason to expect any satisfactory account
either of British History, Polity, or Laws, when we only know where they had
Camps, Stations, or Cities, Palaces or Fortifications, or Temples, by the
Coyns, Brick, tessellated Pavements, Glass, Earthen, or Jett Fragments of Cups,
and other Household Stuff; or Urns and Sacrificing Dishes, which by chance have
been found in the Rubbish of many Towns that have been certainly fired, and
totally demolished; which sufficiently dis^^ver the noble Structures and rich
Furniture the Romens and Britans had before the Saxon Invasions: Besides which,
we may consider, not only, the continual Wars and Depredations the Saxons made
one upon another; but that the Daves, like a fatal Hurricane or Whirlwind, tore
up Root and Branch, every where overturning, ransacking, burning, and
destroying all that they could not peaceably possess.

Having thus far treated of the State of the Britans, and something of the Laws
in general; A short Glossary of the Names or Titles of the Constituent Parts of
Great Councils.
as a Praeliminary to the better understanding, who are meant by the Persons,
who we find do constitute the great Councils, I shall out of Sir Henry Spelman,
Somner, and Doctor Brady, give a very short Glossary, referring the curious
Reader to the Books themselves.

The most common Words in the Saxon Laws that are used, besides the Bishops,
The Witan or Wites. Einhard divides the Germans into four sorts of Degrees, the
Noble, Freemen, those made free, and Servants: his words are, Quatuor
differentiis gens illa consisti^, Nobilium s^ili^et, Liberorum, Libertorum,
atque Servorum. Adam Brem. H^^t. Eccles. c. 5.
to express the Persons by, (whose Council and Advice the Kings used in the
making Laws) are the Witan, Wites: From Wita, which Womner renders Optimas,
Princeps, and Sapiens, a Nobleman, Prince, or Wiseman, from witan to know and
understand. So in the Laws of King Ina we read Gethungenes Witan, a famous,
noble, or renowned Wite; from Gethungen. So in the version of Bid by King
Alfred, Witum is rendered Counselors; so by Sapientes (when we meet with it in
any Authors that render Witan by it,) we are to understand not only Judges, but
sometimes Dukes, Earls, Prapositi Provosts, Thegns, the King's Officers or
Ministers: So in the Charter Histor. and Privileg. Eccl. Eliensis, fol. 117. b.
of King Edgar to the Church of Ely, Anno 970. Alferre, Egelwinc, and Brithnoth
are called Dukes, and Hringulph, Thurferth, and Alfric, are called Ministri:
The first of which in another Charter, is called Alderman, and the other by the
name of Sapientes.

Upon perusal and collating several Transcripts of Deeds and Councils, I am of
opinion, that where Wites or Sapientes are used for Princes, Noblemen, and
great Personages, those are to be understood that were called to the Kings
Council, had command over Countries, as Lord Lieutenants, or were Members of
the great Councils: So that they were of the most wise and knowing of the great
Princes, Dukes, Earls and Barons; and where it does not seem to import such
great Men of Birth, then it signifies Judges. Which as to the first, seems to
be clear, by what is said in the Auctuary Lamb. fol. 147. tit. de Heretochiis.
Qui Heretoches ^pud Anglo^vo^abantur, se. Barons, Nobiles and insignes
sapientes, vocati ductores excercituum, etc.
to the 35 Law of Edward the Confessor, where it is said, There were other
Powers and Dignities appointed, through the Provinces, and all the Countries,
and several Shires, which are called by the English, Heretoches (in King Ina's
Laws, Here Thegne i. e. Noble Ministers or Officers) and when he reckons up
those who were to be understood by this name Heretoges, he calls them Barons,
Nobles, and famous Wisemen called Generals, or great Officers in the Army; and
as to the latter Signification, Doctor Brady has sufficiently cleared it in
Adelnoth's Plea against the Monks of Malmsbury, where it is said, that in the
Presence of the King, subtili disceptatione a Sapientibus suis, i. e. Regis,
audita, where by Sapientes must be understood the King's Judges. Alderman.


Alderman or Ealderman, was both a general Name Spelman 's Glossary.
given to Princes, Dukes, Governors of Provinces, Presidents, Senators, and
even to Viceroys, as also to particular Officers: hence Aldermannus totius
Angliae, like my Lord Chief Justice; Aldermannus Regis, Comitatus, Civitatis,
Burgi, Castelli, Hundredi, etc. of whose Offices it is not easy particularly to
define. This being so copiously discoursed of by Sir Henry Spelman, I shall
refer the Reader to him.

The word Thane or Thegen was used by the Saxons in their Books variously,
sometimes it signified a stout Man, Thane.
Soldier or Knight; other times Thanus Cyninges Thegen. Med mera Thegen. Woruld
Thegen. Maesse Thegen. Somner. Dial.
Regius signified the Kings great Officer, a Nobleman or Peer of the Realm;
other times a Thane or Nobleman of lower degree; sometimes we meet with secular
or Lay Thanes, other times Spiritual Thanes or Priests. Some Thanes were as the
King's Bailiffs, Praefects, Reeves, of which Doctor Brady gives account in his
Argum. Antinorm. Page 283.

In several of the Councils we find no particular orders denominated, but only
a division of the whole into the Clergy, Clergy and Laity.
and Laity. So in the Council that Sir H. Spelman Spelm. 1. Tom. Council.
tells us, Ethelbert King of Kent, held 685. with Bertha his Queen, and Eadbald
his Son, and the Reverend Bishop Austine, Communi concilio tam Cleri quam
Populi.
and the rest of the Optimates Terrae at Christmas, having called a
Common Council of the Clergy and People: by which it is apparent that both the
Clergy ( o) and Laity there understood, are comprehended under the name
Optimates Terrae, the Nobility of Land. So in King Ina's Laws (as I shall
hereafter particularize,) the command is given to Gods Theowas, Gods Servant,
and eales folces, all People.

So King Edmund held a great Council at Easter in London, of Gods Egther ge
godcundra hada, ge woruld cundra.
Order, and the Secular Order, or Worlds Order, which Brompton Mandavit omnibus
Majoribus Regnorum, and veniunt Wintoniam Clerus, and Populus.
renders Laici, in another part of King Edward's Laws. So the Majores Regnorum
of King Edgar are commanded to come, and then it is said, There came to
Winchester the Clergy and People: those were the Majores Regnorum.

The like was frequently used after the Conquest; so at the Coronation of Henry
the First, Matthew Paris speaks of the gathering of the Clergy and all the
People, and then says, Clero Angliae and Populo universo.
The Clergy answering him, and all the Magnates; and in another place, Clero
and Populo favente, the Clergy and People favoring. Further we find in a great
Council, held by the King Anno 1102. 2 H. 2. Omnes Principes Regni sui
Ecclesiastici and secularis ordinis. Flo. Wigor. fol. 651. lin. 21.
all the chief Men of his Kingdom, of the Ecclesiastic and secular Order. So
that Plebs, Populus, Vulgus and Incola, where by way of Antithesis or
contra-Opposition they are used, do signify the Clergy and Laity, or
Lay-Princes, not the common People.

After the Conquest, we meet with the Word Regnum sometimes, and other times
Regnum and Sacerdotium. As to the first, the Sense is to be understood best in
the Quadripartite History Quadrilog. lib. 1. c. 26.
of the Life of Thomas Becket, where it is said, the King called to Clarendon,
Regnum universum, all the Kingdom; and then says, To whom came the dignified
Clergy and the Nobles: which Matt. Paris puts out of all doubt by the
enumeration that he makes of all that appertained to the Kingdom, to be the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, and Priors Installed, and the Earls and Barons.

So the meaning is best understood of the words in the last Chapter of Magna
Charta, that the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights,
and free Tenants, and all of the Kingdom gave a fifteenth part of their
Movables: and in other places, after the Barons, it is said, Omnes alii de
Regno nostro qui de nobis tenent in Capite, concerning which the most Learned
Doctor Brady has given plentiful Proofs.

Magnates and Proceres.
By the words Magnates and Proceres (frequently found in the Councils after the
Conquest) are to be understood the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, and Priors
for the Clergy; and the Earls and Barons for the Laity only; unless afterward
that Dukes were included. However they were used always to contra-distinguish
that order from the Inferior Tenants in Capite.

The Fideles and Liberi homines, Fideles and Liberi homines.
are to be understood to signify those which were the King's Tenants in Capite.
So we find it in a Precept of H. 3. Rex omnibus Cl. 42 H. 3. m. 10. in dorso.
So Nithard, lib. 4. speaking of his own time, divides the Germans into
Ethelings, i. e. Nobles; Frilings, Freemen; and Lazzos, Servants or Slaves.
Thence our Lazy Fellow, which we now understand Idle.
Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus and aliis Fidelibus suis: And when we meet in
any Charter or History with Fideles or Liberi homines, the meaning will be best
known from the subject Matter where they are used, and the words with which
they are joined in Construction, as Doctor Brady observes.

We meet with Liberi homines frequently in the Laws of the Conqueror, as Liberi
homines totius Monarchiae Regni nostri -- ut nihil ab iis capiatur nisi
servitium suum Liberum, and in another, Vt omnes Liberi homines totius Regni
sint fratres conjurati ad Monarchiam nostram defendendam; that all the Freemen
of the Kingdom be sworn Brethren, to defend our Monarchy: and these were to be
ready with Horse and Arms to do the King Service according to what they ought
by their Fees. And this was called free Service in respect of other base
Services; for they were the Tenants in Capite, who were the freest of any other
Subjects, though that Tenure was at last most cried out against.

By the Communitas Regni, Communitas Regni.
Vniversitas Regni or totae Terrae, or Regni totius Communitas, Communitas
Regni.
anciently were only understood the Barons, and Tenants in Capite, or Military
Men, though now it is taken for the ordinary People and Freeholders, or at best
for Knights and Gentlemen under the degree of Barons: So besides other pregnant
proofs brought by Doctor Brady, that one Record of the 30 of E. 1. is
sufficient to clear it; where the King says, That the Prelates, Earls, Barons,
and the other Magnates for Pro se and tota Communitate ejusdem Regni.
themselves, and the whole Community of the same Kingdom, gave Forty Shillings
of every Knights Fee; so that it is clear, that the tota Communitas Regni were
such as paid Scutage, that is, Forty Shillings for a Knights Fee, and no
others. Of these the Tenants in Capite granted and paid it first for
themselves and Tenants, and then their Tenants in Military Service, by Virtue
of the Kings Precept, paid it to them, for so many Fees as they held of them.

As to the probi and legales Milites, probi and legales Homines; Probi and
legales homines.
the words did not signify an honest, though inconsiderable Countryman; but
the probi Homines were famous, stout noted Men of Renown, of great Report and
Integrity. They were the best, chief, most knowing, and of the greatest
Integrity of those Orders and Degrees of Men, the word was applied to. In a
Precept 7 H 3. Scire facient 12 tam Cl. 7 H. 3. m. 14. dorso.
Milites, quam alios liberos and legales Homines; So that these were Tenants in
Military Service, otherwise what needed the words to run, Twelve as well
Knights as other Free and Legal Men.

Therefore in the Writs for Elections of Knights for Counties, the Persons to
be chosen, are two de discretioribus and legalioribus Militibus, that is, the
most discreet, just, knowing and resolute Men in the Country, who (as the Law,
by constant usage, then required) served on Inquests and Juries: And the Writ
for Citizens and Burgesses, was de discretioribus, legalioribus and
probioribus. Whoever desires further Satisfaction, may find it in Doctor
Brady's Introduction to the English History, and his Glossary.

I now come to give an account seriatim, from all the Great Councils before the
Conqueror and after, to the 49 of H. 3. who were the Members of them; and what
Concurrence in Law-making, those Members had with the Sovereign; and after the
Representatives of the People were brought in, what alteration it produced.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Saxon Great Councils, of whom they consisted, and how,
during their Government, the Laws were established by the respective Kings.
AeThelbert King of Kent (who died 24 Feb. Ann. Christi 613. Of King
Aethelbert's Laws.
Twenty one years after Augustine the English Apostle was sent to preach the
Gospel to the English) is said by venerable Eccl. Hist, lib. 2. c. 5. Tha othre
god the He his Leodum thurh getheaht gefremede, ea^ sivylcere rightra doma
gesetnesse, mid snotera getheabte geset^e after Romana bysena, and tha het on
Englis^ awritan, tha nu oath this gehaldene synd.
Bid, among other good things which he did for this Nation or People
throughout, of his counsel or purpose, to have framed, settled or established,
Right Judgment or Decrees with the Council of his Wise Men, after the Roman
Example, and writ them in the English Tongue, which were holden of his Nation
since; which in the Original of Bid is thus expressed: Qui inter caetera bona
quae genti suae consulendo conferebat, etiam decreta illa Judiciorum, juxta
exempla Romanorum cum consilio sapientum constituit; quae conscripta Anglorum
sermon habentur and observantur in ea, and by K. Alfred, are turned into the
Saxon Language, as in the Margent: In which we may observe, That it was the
King that gefremede framed or established gesette, with the Council of his wise
Men; which word Council, discovers where the Sovereignty lodged; and the words,
By the Example of the Romans, do not so much imply that they were according to
the Caesarean Law, but that they might be according, or consentaneous to the
Ecclesiastical Laws of Rome, or at least may comprehend both.

The Dugdale Orig. Jurid. c. 4.
Textus Roffensis mentions Laws made by Hlothere, Eadric and Withred, all Kings
of Kent, which were recorded by Ernulph the Bishop of that place, about Anno
760. but I have not seen the Manuscript, and so can give no account how the
Legislative is declared.

The next Laws we find, are those of Ina King of the West Saxons, King In^'s
Laws. Lambard's (...), Editionis Wheeloch, p. 1.
who according to the Saxon Chronology lived Anno 681. and according to
Lambard, begun his Reign Anno 712. and ended 727. In the Preface to his Laws we
find it expressed, as in the Margent, which I render thus in English, I^ Ine
mid Gods gyfe West Seaxna Cyning, mid getheaht and mid Laere, Cenredes mines
Faeder, and Heddes mines Bisceopes, and Ercenwoldes mines Bisceopes, and mid
eallum minum Eal^ormanum, and tham Yldes^an Witan minre theode and eac mycelre.
I Ine, by or with Gods gift, King of the West Saxons, with the persuasion
suasu (as Lambard renders the word Laere, but more properly as Somner renders
it) with the Advice, Counsel, Instruction or Exhortation (as our modern word
Lore imports) of Cenred my Father, and Heddes my Bishop, and Ercenwold my
Bishop; and with all my Aldermen ( i. e. Princes, Dukes, Earls, Viceroys,
Military Officers, Senators or Ministers of State, as the word then signified)
those old Wites ( i. e. principal or chief Noble Men, Chieftains, Governors or
Wisemen) of my Kingdom, do command, and likewise with mycelre somnug Gods
Theowena, The great Assembly, Congregation or Synagogue of Gods Servants, i.e.
the Clergy, Waes (...) thaere haele (...) and be them st^^h^le ures rices.
meditating or studying the Health of our Souls, and upon the Estate or
establishing of our Kingdom.

That ryht AE, Not Aew, Nupti^e (...) observes, and appears in the (...).
Gefas^ined^.
and ryhte cynedomas thurh ure Folc Gefaestenode and getrymmed waeron, That
right Laws and right or just Judgment, or Dooms of the King (or Office and
Dignity of Magistrates, and Somner) be fastened or established, and trimmed,
perfected or accomplished: That no Alderman, or under our Jurisdiction (or as
probably the Compound word may be rendered, any Prince under us; Theoden
signifying a Lord, Prince or Ruler; or as in the Saxon Chronology a King) after
them, shall turn from, break, corrupt or change, Awendan.
these ure domas, these our Decrees, Sentences or Ordinances.

Then in the First Chapter it follows, We beodaeth, that ealles Folces AE and
domas thus synd gehealden, We bid or command, that all our People, shall after
hold fast, or observe these Laws and Dooms.

From this Preface the candid Reader may observe, First, Observations on this
Preface.
That Kings are the gift of God, and that Gods Gyffe signifies the same with
Dei Gratia, they are not the Creature of the People. Secondly, That Princes,
for the better Government of their People, in the settling of Laws in Church and
State, consult, deliberate and advise with their Bishops, Noblemen, and
eminently Wise men of their Kingdoms, whom for their Wisdom, they honor with
public Employments in their Dominions. Thirdly, That after such Consultation,
Deliberation and Advice, the Sovereign establisheth^ and instituteth the Laws.
And Lastly, That such Laws are not to be broken or infringed by the Judges or
supremest Officers under the King, much less by the Subjects.

The next Spelman. C^ncil. vol. 1. p. 313. Other Great Councils in the Saxon
times of Offa.
Council I find is that of Colchyth in the Kingdom of Mercia, Anno 793. wherein
are said to be Nine Kings present, viz. Offa, and Egferd his Son, and seven
more numbered by Sir Henry Spelman, Fifteen Bishops and Twenty Dukes; and so in
another at Id. p. 314.
Verulam, it is said to be under Offa, who called together his Bishops and
Optimates; but these are only about Religious matters.

So Id. p. 3^0. Ad A^^um 8^^. Kenulph.
Kenulph King of Mercia, writing to Pope Leo the III. begins, Kenulphus Gratia
Dei Rex Merciorum cum Episcopis, Ducibus and omni sub nostra ditione dignitatis
gradu.

So at the Synod at Idem, f^^. 328.
Colichyth, 6 Kal. Aug. Ann. Dom. 8^6. Wulfred the Archbishop being Praesident,
it is expressed that Caenulf the King of the Mercians was present, cum suis
Principibus, Ducibus and Optimatibus.

So we find a Synodal Council at Clovesho, I^em, fol. ^32. (...) rum.
praesidente Beorn^lpho Rege Merciorum, and Wulfrid the Archbishop, the other
Bishops, Abbats, and the Nobility of all Dignities, treating concerning the
profit of Ecclesiastical and Secular Persons, and the stability of the Kingdom.

That which I shall note from these is this, That in these Synodal Councils,
sometimes it is said the King praesided, other times the Archbishop; but mostly
all the Persons that constitute such Councils are, the King, the Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and the Optimates.

The next Council I find is called Idem, page 336. Anno 833. Withlasius.
Concilium Pananglicum held at London, 26 May Anno 833. wherein Withlasius King
of the Mercians, gives several immunities to the Abbey of Croyland, and more
than once he says, volo and praecipio, and this he says he does in the In
praesentia Dominorum meorum Egberti Regis West-Saxoniae, and Aethelwulphi filii
ejus coram Pontificibus, and Proceribus.
presence of his Lords, Egbert King of the West Saxons, and Aethelwulph his
Son; and before the Bishops and the greater Noblemen of all England in the City
of Majoribus totius Angliae in Civitate Londonia, ubi omnes congregati sumus
pro consilio capiendo contra Danicos Piratas litora Angliae assidus infesta^tes.
London, where they were all gathered to take Counsel against the Danish
Pirates, daily infesting the Coast of England. Therefore Sir Henry Spelman
judges this Council properly to be called for secular Affairs, and to be such
as we now call our Parliaments: The Witnesses to it are the said Withlase the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Celnoth, and Eadbald Archbishop of York; and after
nine more Bishops and three Abbats, Egbert and his Son Adelwulph sign; and
after them Wulhard, Athelm and Herenbrith Dukes, Swithin the Kings Presbyter,
and Bosa his Secretary.

But I shall leave these and come to more direct secular great Councils, The
Laws of King Alfred. Regnare coepit 871. desiit 900.


as that of King Alfred; who in the first part of his Laws recites the
Commandments and Laws by Gods appointment delivered by Moses to the Children of
Israel, to be observed; and some of the New Testament, and from that of our
Savior, quod vobis fieri non velitis, id aliis non faciatis, concludes that
J^Plgment of Right ought to be given to every one, and that on On thissum anum
Dome, mon maege gethencean, that he aeghwel^re on riht gedemeth. LL. Alured, p.
21.
this one Sentence, That Man must bethink him much, that judges Right to every
one: and he adds, That after the propagating of the Gospel in England, as well
as in other places, were gathered (for making of Laws, both for Church and
State, it is to be supposed he means) Holy Haligra Bisceopa and eac othera
gethungenra Witena. Ibid.
Bishops and other famous wise Men or Wites.

Then in the Conclusion of the Laws about Religion, and Prefatory to the
secular Laws, he says, I Alfred King have gathered Thaes togaeder gegaderod
and awritan het.
these (Sanctions) together, and caused them to be written, many of them being
observed by his Ancestors: Those that he liked Tha the me ne licodon Ic awearp
mid minra witena getheat, and on othre wifan behead to heoldanne. Ib. p. 22.
not, with the Council of his Wites, he rejected; and those he liked, he bid or
commanded to be holden; and concludes, Ic tha Aelfred West-Seaxna Cyning,
eallum minum Witun thaes geeowde, and hi tha cwaethon that him that licode
eallum to healdenne; which thus I render: I Aelfred King of the West Saxons,
showed these to all my Wites, i.e. Nobility or wise Men; and they said they
liked them to be holden.

In this we may observe, That the King speaks in the single Person,
Observations on these Laws.
that he collected, chose and rejected, and (as in the same place he adds)
since it would be rashness to appoint all his own Laws, it being uncertain what
credit those might find with Posterity, which he liked: Therefore whatever in
the Laws of Ines his Maeges i.e. Kinsman, or of Offa King of the Mercians; or
of Aethelbyrhtes, who was the The aerest fulwil^^ underfeng on Angel cynne.
Ibid.
first King of the English that was baptized: Those that he Tha the me rihtost
thuhton, Ic tha her on gegaderod.
thought righteous, he those here gathered, and the other he rejected, passed
by, or pretermitted, forlaete. It may be also noted, That he calls the
Noblemen, whose Advice and Assent he used, his Wites, minum Witum.

The next material Illustration of the Constituent Parts of the Legislative
Power, is found in the Idem, p. 36.
League betwixt Alfrid and Guthrun, King of the Danes; which, though not
properly a great Council, yet at least much resembled it; since it says, This
is the League of Peace which Aelfred and Guthrun Kings, and all the English
Wites, and also those which inhabited East England, have declared or Ge^weden
habbath and mid Athum gefaestnod. p. 36.
established, and with Oath fastened or confirmed; For hi sylfe and for heora
gingran, for themselves and for their Offspring; ge for geborene, ge for
ungeborene, born and unborn, that care (says he) for Gods Mercy or ours. The
Gods miltse recce, oth-the ure.

In this it is to be noted, Observations on this League.
That Alfred having so beat the Danes, that they gave him Hostages, either to
go out of the Kingdom, Jo. Pi^us qui vixit temp. H. 1.
or turn Christian: This Guthrun (otherwise Gurmund) with Thirty of his Nobles,
and almost all of his People were baptized; and Alfred received him at the Font
as his Son, and called him Ethelstan: Also the Subjects of Guthrun are called
the East-English Nation, and the Nobility are called the Wites of the English
King, Angel cynnes witan: And Lastly, that the Oath or firm Contract was
Obligatory to the present Age, and to Posterity; if they expected the Mercy or
Compassion of God or the King; by which we may judge what value they had then
for an Oath; so that this might be in the nature of a great Council of the King
and the Wites, convened for the surer Stability of this Peace, to take the Oath.

In the Laws of King Edward the Elder, The Laws of Edward the Elder. Regn.
coepit 900. desiit 924.


after the Charge given to the Judges; the first Law begins, Ic will, I will,
and so in others; in the fourth it is thus expressed, That Eadweard the King,
with his Wites Myd his witan tha hi Eaxanceastre waron. Id. p. 39.
that were at Exeter, strictly enquiring, by what means it might be better
provided for Peace and Tranquillity, which he perceived was less studiously
preserved than it ought to be, or it should, which he had before commanded,
That no Man That he aer beboden haefde. That nan mon othrum rihtes ne wyrne; as
Lambard translates it, ne quent injuria affi^iant.
deny, stop or hinder others Rights. In the Second and Third Chapter it is eac
we cwaedon, also we declare, pronounce or sentence; and in the Seventh, Eac ic
will, and I will.

In which Laws we have none mentioned with the King but his Wites; and his
commanding, willing, or pronouncing in the Imperative Mood, is observeable.

The next Laws I find are those of King Athelstan, The Laws of King Athelstan.
Regn. coepit 922. desiit 940.

Ibid. p. 45.
which begin thus, Ic Aethelstane cyning mid getheahte Wulshelmes mines
Hihbisceopes and othra mina bisceopa bebeode eallum minum Gereafum thurh ealle
mine rice; I Athelstan King, with the advice of Wulfelm, my High-Bishop, and
other my Bishops, command or bid all my Rieves, i. e. Praefects, of what
degrees soever, to pay Tithes, etc. And this he commands Et that ^^e g^do ea^
tha Bis^eop is ^ecra gewhylera and eac mine Ealdormanna and Gereafa. Ibid. p.
45.
his Bishops, his Aldermen, and Praepositi (who were the Judges in the
County-Courts) to do the same.

Although in this Preface there be no mention that he used any advice but of
the Bishops, yet the Conclusion of Twenty six Chapters of Laws, is in these
words, Ealle this waer gesetted on tham miclan Synoth aet Greatanleage; on tham
waer se Aercebisceop Wulfhelme, mid eallum thaem Aethelum mannum and Wiotan de
Ethelstan Cyning gegadrian. Which I render thus into English, All these were
settled, or done, in the great Synod or Council at Greatanlea, in which was the
Archbishop Wulfhelm, with all the Noblemen, Somner Verb.
( Ethelum mannum, must properly signify those of the highest Quality, such as
were Princes of the Blood, and Dukes, because it is distinct from VViotan, or
the Wites, by which usually Earls, and those of lower Nobility, and great
Officers were understood) which Athelstan the King gathered.

In these Laws We cwaedon is used, which I suppose is something more than
Somner understands by his Cuide, a Saying, Speech, or Sentence; and properly
is, we will. But the absoluteness of the King appears most in the Twenty sixth
Chapter, wherein it is expressed Gif minra Gerefena gehwylce this don nylle,
etc. Gylde min oferhyrnysse and Ic find otherne we will and se Bisceope
amanige tha offer oferhyrnyss aet tham Gerefan the on his folgothe sy. P. 53.
, That if any of his Graeves do not perform these Commands, or be more remiss
in the Execution of those he has enjoined, he shall be punished for his excess
of Contumacy, and the Bishop shall punish the Contumacy of the Graeve or
Praepositus; and his Sequel, the Punishment for the first fault shall be five
Pounds, and the other fault his were, that is, the value of his Head, and the
third the loss of all his Goods, and the King's Friendship, ura ealra
Freondscipes. King Edmund was the next of our Kings, King Edward's Laws, p. 57.
Regn. coepit 940. desiit 948.


whose Laws are transmitted to us, and they begin thus, Eadmund cyning
gesommnade mycelne synoth to Lundenbyrig, on tha Halgan Easterlicon tid; Edmund
the King assembled a great Synod or Council to London, on the Holy Eastertide,
and the persons summoned are styled, aegther ge Godcundra hada, ge worulcundra,
both Gods-kind, and World-kind, i. e. Clergy and Laics.

After Six Chapters of Laws, the King signifies to all, old and young, That he
had That Ic ^meade mid minra Witena getheaht gegodra hada gelaewedra. Id. p. 58.
considered with his Wites, Consultation being had with Ecclesiastics and
Laics: and in the Laws it is often said, Thonne cwaedon; these we pronounce,
or appoint; and sometimes the single person is used, and in other places, us
betweonan heoldan, it is holden betwixt us.

Here we find the Great Council summoned by the King, and the constituent parts
of it to be the Clergy and Laity, and that the Laity were only the Princes,
Dukes, Earls, great Officers, Military Commanders, the Kings Ministers,
Graeves, Praepositi, Thanes, sometimes denoted by the general names of Wites
translated Sapientes, Magnates, Optimates, etc. as is every where beyond all
possible doubt cleared by the most Judicious Dr. Brady, in his Answer to Mr.
Petyt, to whose great collection for the proof of this point, before I proceed
further, I shall only, in transitu, instance in a few.

The Title of the Council of Berghamsted Spelman. Council. vol. 1. fol. 194.
Anno 697. Withrad.
5 of Withred King of Kent, is, This Synd Wightraedes domas Cantuara Cyninges;
Saxon Great Councils.
These are the Judgments of Withred King of Kent: and the persons mentioned
particularly, are the King that convened them, and Birthwald, Bretone,
Heahbisceop, High or Archbishop of Britain, Gibmund Bishop of Rochester, and
the rest of the Ecclesiastic Aelc had ciricean thaere maegthe acmodlice.
Order of that Nation, mid thy Hersuman Folcy with the Military Persons, such
as in after times were called, Here-Thegni in King Ina's Laws, and Heretoches
in the Auctuary Lamb. tit. Heretoch. fol. 147.
to the 35 Laws of King Edward the Confessor, which are there interpreted
Barons, Nobiles, Insignes, Sapientes, Ductores Excercitus.

So in the Council at Clovesho, 3. Call. Nov. Anno Dom. 824. under Spelm. Conc.
vol. 1. fol. 333. Beornwulph.
Beornwulph King of the Mercians, besides the Archbishop VVulfred, and several
Bishops and Abbats, are enumerated only Beornoth, Eadberht, Sigered, Egberht,
Eadwulf Alheard, Mucel, Vhtred and Ludica, under the style of Duces, Bynna
Frater Regis, Aldred Thelonius.

So in the Great Council at London, Idem, fol. 336. Egbert.
26, May Anno 833. the Title is, Presidentibus Egberto Rege West-Saxoniae,
Withlasio Rege Merciorum, utroque Archiepiscopo, caeterisque Angliae Episcopis,
and Magnatibus; and besides the Bishops and Abbats that subscribe, we find
these, Adelwulphus filius Regis West-Saxoniae, Wulhardus Dux, Athelmus Dux,
Herenbrithus Dux.

So in the Council at Kingsburie, Anno 851. Bertulph. Idem, fol. 344.
under Bertulph King of the Mercians, it is said to be, praesentibus Ceolnotho
Dorobernensi Archiepiscopo, caeterisque Regni Merciae Episcopis, and
Magnatibus, and the Subscribers are besides the Bishops and Abbats, Ernulphus
Dux, Osrithus Dux, Serlo Comes, Elbertus Comes, Huda Comes, Oflat Pincerna
Regis.

I have upon this occasion instanced in these few of the Ancientest, to clear
who the Persons were, according to their Orders, Ranks, and Degrees, that
constituted these Great Councils, and shall now proceed to other Saxon Councils
succeeding.

Eldred King of all England gave the Monastery Ingulphi Hist, fol. 477. King
Eldred's Great Council.
of Croyland to Abbat Turketul, and his Monks, by his Charter dated in Festo
Nativitatis B. M. Virginis Anno Dom. 948. cum universi Magnates Regni per
Regium edictum summoniti, when all the great Men of the Kingdom were summoned
by the Kings command, and then more particularly he divides them into the two
Orders of Ecclesiastics and Laics thus: Tam Archiepescopi and Episcopi and
Abbates, quam caeteri totius Regni Proceres and Optimates Londoniis
convenissent, ad tractandum de negotiis publicis totius Regni.

Some may object, That Ingulphus giving this account, may rather express the
Members, and the occasion of it to treat of the Public Affairs of the whole
Kingdom, according to the usage of the Age he lived in, than of the Age the
Great Council was held in; which is well to be observed in many cases: But in
the Laws of King Edgar I shall show it was then used in such manner, to give
account of the great Councils, as both his Laws, and those I have hitherto
mentioned of the oldest Date, manifest.

The Preface to King Edgar's Laws is thus: This is seo geraednysse the Eadgar
Cyng mid his Witena getheahte geraed; King Edgar's Laws. Lamb. Conc. fol. 62.
Regn. coepit 959. desiit 975.


This is the Constitution, Act, or Decree which King Edgar with his Wisemen, or
Great-men has made ready, trimmed or enacted. Then follow the three great Ends
for which such Councils are called, viz. God to lofe, to the Love, Glory, or
Praise of God in appointing Religious Laws, and him Sylfum to Cynescipe,
rendered by Lambard, ad Regiae Majestatis ornamentum, or according to the
significancy of the Words, himself to make Kingly, or his own Kingship or
Sovereignty to manifest; and thirdly, eallum his leodscip to thearf; all his
People or Nation to profit, or according to Lambard, ad totius Reipublicae
utilitatem.

The same King Edgar, Spelman^ Council. Tom. 1. fol. 4^5.
in his Charter to Glastonbury, concludes it thus, Hanc privilegii paginam Rex
Edgarus XII. Regni sui Sacro Scripto apud Londoniam communi Concilio Optimatum
suorum confirmavit. So that it appears, this was in the presence of a great
Council, and the Witnesses named are Elfgina Regis matter, Edward Clito filius,
Kinedius Rex Albaniae, Mareusius Archiparata, Admiral.

Then follow both the Archbishops, and several Bishops, and Abbats, after whom
the secular Optimates; viz. Elpher, Oslac, Ethelwine, by the Title of Duces,
Oswold, Eufward, Ethelsic, Ellshie, by the Title of Ministri, which were
Officers under the King, as Thegns, praepositi.

In the account given of a Council held at Idem 490.
Winchester in this Kings Reign, those present at it are reckoned thus,
Praesentibus Edgaro Rege cum Conjuge, Dunstano Archiepiscopo, Elfero Principe
Merciorum, Ethelwino Duce Orientalium Anglorum; and the same persons called
Duces in the foregoing Charter, Elfwoldo suo Germano, Brithnotho Comiti, cum
Nobilitate totius Regni. So that none but the Nobility were present.

The Witnesses to a Charter of the same King to the Monastery of Hyde, in
Winchester, are the King, Archbishop Dunstan, Eadmund Clito, legitimus praefati
Regis filius, Edward eodem Rege Clito procreatus, Aelftheyth Regina, Eadgita
Regis avia; the present Queen has the precedence of the Queen Dowager: Then
follow several Bishops and Abbats, after whom the Lay-Peers, viz. Odgar,
Athelstan, Athelwin, Dukes, Aethelweard, Aelfweard, and Walston, Ministri.

It is to be noted, That most do make the Laws of King Edward the Confesson, to
be principally a revival of King Edgar's Laws, mixing such as Canutus had
adjoined to them.

The Preamble to the Laws of King Ethelred runs thus; The Laws of Ethelred,
fol. 88. Regn. coepit A. 979. desiit 1016.


This is tha geraednyss the Ethelred Cyning and his Witan geraeddon, eallum
Folc to fritherbote; These are the Constitutions King Ethelred and his Wites
have enacted, all his People to mulct for the breach of Peace. These were
enacted at Woodstock in Mercia after the English Laws.

Tho general Council of Sp^lman. Council. vol. 1. fol. 510. The Council of
Aenham under King Aethelred.
Aenham, called Pananglicum, is said to be Hortatu Aelfeagi Dorobernensis and
Wulstani Eboracensis Archipraesulum ab Aethelredo Rege edictum, accersitisque
Episcopis and universis Anglorum Optimatibus in dic Pentecostes celebratum; and
the Saxon Title of it is, Be witena geraednessa, rendered Sapientum decreta; In
the conclusion of the Latin Copy of them, this is added, Haec itaque legalia
statuta, vel decreta in nostro Synodali Conventu a Rege Idem, fol. 529.
magnopere edict a cuncti tunc temporis Optimates se observaturos fideliter
spondebant.

Sir Henry Spelman gives several reasons why this may be called a General
Council, because it contains Secular Laws as well as Divine; and here we have
expressly said, it was at Pentecost, one of the set times for such Councils; and
it was by the King's Summons, and the Clergy and Optimates consented.

In the Charter of the Privileges, granted by King Spelman. Council. vol. 1.
fol. 507, 508. Anno 1006.
Ethelred to the Church of Canterbury, after the Subscription of the King, the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbats, these are subscribed, Aelfric, Elfhelm,
Leoffwin, Leoffig Ealderman, which in the Latin version are styled Duces.
Aethelmer mines Alaffordes discthen, translated Domini mei dapifer, verbatim,
Dish Thegne or Thane. Byrhtric Cynges Thegen, Minister Regis, Leofric Hraegel
Thein, rei vestiariae Minister, Master of the Wardrobe, Aet suman is added, but
neither Lambard nor Somner interpret it.
Syward Cynges Thegen aet Raede, Minister Regis and a Conciliis, Secretary or
Counselor, the rest only mentioned Gewitnys, and in the Latin Charter of the
same (which we may imagine was the Original) these Thegnes are called Ministri,
and so are these following, Ordulf, Eadric, Ethelric, Leofric, Sigeraed,
VVulstan Senex, and Juvenis, Lysing, Leof^tan.

The Preface to the Laws of Canutus is conceived in the same Words, as that of
King Edgar's, The Laws of Canutus, fol. 97. Regn. coepit A. 1016 desiit 1035


only he is styled Cnut Cyning ealles Englandes Cyninge and Dena Cyning, and
Northrigena Cyning; King of all England, King of Denmark, and Norway, they were
Established at Winchester on thaem Halgan Mid-winter Tide, i. e. at Christmas.

The Preface to his Laws in Sir Henry Council. Tom. 1.552.
Spelman is conceived in these words. This is thonne seo worldcunde geraedness,
the Ic will midminan VVitenan roede, the man heald ofer eall Englaland; These
are the Worldly Constitutions, that I will with my Wites Advice, that Men hold
all over England. In most of the Chapters it is said, we laeroth, we teach, we
beodath, we bid or command, we forbeodath, we forbid; and in the Conclusion, it
is in the single Person of the King; nu bid Ic georne and on Gods naman
beode manna gehwylcne; Now I command all, and bid every Man in God's Name.

The Preface to the Latin version of them says, Haec Idem, fol. 562.
sunt Instituta Cnudi Regis Anglorum, Dacorum, Norwegarum, venerando sapientum
Concilio ejus, ad laudem and gloriam Dei and suam Regalitatem, and commune
commodum habita in sancto natali Domini apud Wintoniam.

So we find that Anno 1024. When Monast. Aug. vol. 1. fol. 295. col. 1. number. 30.
Canutus drove the Clerks living dishonestly from the Church of St. Edmund, and
placed Monks there; it is said he did it cum consilio Archiepiscoporum,
Episcoporum and Optimatum. So in another Council it is thus, Ego Cnut Rex
totius Albionis, cum Concilio Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Abbatum, Comitum,
omniumque fidelium elegi sanciendum. By the word fidelium here, is meant the
Thegne or lesser Nobility, as Doctor Brady fully proves in his Glossary, and
elsewhere, Anno 1032. He grants Privileges to Glastenbury, Spelman. vol. 1.
Council. fol. 537.
which he does consensu Optimatum meorum, with the consent of his Nobles; yet
he uses the words concedo and prohibeo in the single Person, to denote from
whose single Authority all concessions flowed.

Of this Canutus, Gest. Regum, lib. 2. c. 11.
Malmsbury says, that he commanded to be observed for ever all the Laws of
ancient Kings, especially those made by King Ethelred his Predecessor, under
Sub interminatione Regiae mulctae perpetuis temporibus observari praecepit.
the penalty of the Kings Fine, to the observing of which, he says in his time
it was sworn under the name of King Edwards Laws, not that he had appointed
them, but had observed them.

It is of latter time MS. Burgi Sancti Edmundi; Spelman. Conc. vol. 1. fol. 534.
recorded, that Canutus in the fifth Year of his Reign, calling together all
the Prelates of his Kingdom, Proceresque ac Magnates, Wulstan and Adelwode, the
Archbishops, and other Bishops, seven Dukes, and seven Earls, and diverse Abbats
of Monasteries, cum quamplurimis gregariis Militibus ac cum populi multitudine
copiosa, who were personally present, Votis Regiis unanimiter consentientibus
praeceptum and decretum fuit.

Sir Henry Spelman says, That this Manuscript must be writ toward the latter
end of Henry the Third's Reign, if not after, because it uses the word
Parliament, and discourses of the Constitution of Parliament, as in that Age,
not as the great Councils in Canutus time were; which I note that it may be
observed upon how slender Antiquities Sir Edward Praefat. 4. Report. King
Edward the Confessor 's Laws.
Coke relied.

From what Malmsbury observes of these Laws of Canutus, we may conclude, that
wherever the Laws of King Edward the Confessor are mentioned in after Ages,
these Laws of Canutus must be understood; and that it is a fruitless Enquiry to
search for any other than those which Hoveden and Ingulphus give us, as
confirmed by William the Conqueror: therefore I shall referr the Inquisitive
Reader to the Authors, and Sir Council. vol. 1.619, 625.
Henry Spelman, and Mr. Seldom.

I shall therefore only note who were the constituent Parts of the great
Councils in his time. That convention at Christmas the Twenty fifth of his
Reign, as Sir Henry Spelman I^em, fol. 627.
has published it, was, Praesentibus Edwardo Rege and Conf^ssore, Edgitha
Regina, Stigando Archiep. Cant. Eldredo Archiep. Ebor. caeterisque Angliae
Aepiscopis, Abbatibus, Capellanis, Regis Comitibus, Ministris (seu Thanis
Regis) and Militibus qui in Chartarum sequentium subscriptionibus nominantur.
Then follows the second Charter to Id. 631.
St. Peter's of Westminster, where after the Bishops and Abbats we find the
Subscriptions of Raynbaldus the Chancellor, and Harold, Edwin, Leofdwyn and
Guden are titled Dukes. Ergar, Kendus, Wygodus, Robertus, Ednothus are called
Ministri, then I suppose according to the Title, the Knights, Agelnodus,
Walfricus, Sywardus, Godricus.

To the third Charter, Id. 636.
when he dedicated St. Peter's Church, Anno 1066. there are these more added to
the Lay-Nobility, (besides Osbern, Peter, and Robert the King's Chaplain, who
are placed next after the Chancellor, As to King Edward's Laws and their
Confirmation by the Conqueror, and the Add^^ions and Amendments, see Dr. Brady,
fol. 254. A^gum. A^tinorm. 296, 298, 299. As to the ^arallel betwixt the Saxon
and Norman Laws, see his Preface to the Norman Story.
before the Dukes) Good Comes, Marhe^^s Comes, Radulphus Minister, Agelnodus
Minister, and besides that, Wulfric, Syward and Godrich in the aforesaid
Charter, are called here, Knights, there are added Colo and Wulsward, Knights;
and the Conclusion of all is, Omnes consentientes subscripsimus. So that here
may be noted the use of the Subscriptions of the Noblemen to the King's
Charters, which then were only by the mark of a Cross, and in after times by
their Seals, to those we call Acts of Parliament, as hereafter will be shown.

Having thus treated of the General Councils, and such like Conventions, under
the Saxon and Danish Kings, I shall pass to the Norman Kings, and so descending
to the present Age, show the constituent Parts of the great Councils and
Parliaments, and by what variety of Expressions in the gradual Progress of the
respective Kings Reigns, the Sovereigns enacting of Laws was exhibited: only
before I enter, I cannot but take notice that Mr. Seldom (by what compliance I
know not, Ab his vix alios, ante Saxones, comperio Custodes, sub eis vary
partitos, etc. Explent numerum Rex, Con^^^^^ularius, Cancellarius.
Thesaurarius, Angliae Aldermannus, Aldermannus Provin^^arum and Gravii. Janus
Angl. p. 40.
with the mode of his time) calls those which we make constituent Parts of the
great Councils of the Saxon times, Custodes, and says, he scarce meets with
any of these Guardians of the Laws, different from these Lawmakers. Yet he
brings no Representatives of the Commons; for he makes them the King, the Lord
High-Constable, the Chancellor, the Treasurer, the Alderman of England, the
Aldermen of Provinces, and the Graves. I cannot but wonder that he should not
at least give some hint what difference there was betwixt the King and his
Graeve, in the point of Law-making. Surely he knew the Constitution of the
great Councils as well as any, but being a Sitting Member in that long
Parliament, was in that Particular tainted, per contagionem uvaque livorem
deducet ab uva.

CHAP. XXV. Of the great Councils of the Norman Kings, 'till the end of the
Reign of King John.
WHAT Changes William the Conqueror made in the Government, how he brought in
the Feudal Laws of Normandy, and many other Alterations, Doctor Brady has
proved at large in his Argumentum Anti-Normanicum, and the Preface to his
Complete History; so that I shall touch very little upon that Subject.

The Conqueror (says the learned Sir Praef^tio ad LL. Willielmi primi, page
155. Edit. Wheeloch. Three things the Conqueror designed.
Roger Twysden) having obtained the Kingdom by dint of Sword, and knowing that
no Empire is firmly established by Arms without Justice, applied his mind to
three things: First, That he might have a sufficient Military Force: Secondly,
That he might gratify his French and Norman Adventurers; yet so as the English
might not by over much severity, be instigated to rebel: And Thirdly, That the
Husbandmen might live as Servants, and to perform the Drudgery, but not to be
wholly extirpated.

As to the First, He disposed the Militia so as Lib. 4. p. 523. About his
Militia and Revenue.
Ordericus Vitalis tells us it was reported, That he could expend 1600 l. and
30 s. three Halfpence, Sterling Money, every day, besides the Presents, Fines
for remitting of Punishments upon Transgressions of the Laws, and many other
ways whereby his Treasury was increased; and he made the Kingdom be surveyed,
and all his Tributes or Revenues, Piscos.
as in the time of King Edward, he made be truly described: His Lands he so
distributed to his Soldiers, Disposed the Lands in Military Service.
and disposed them so, that in the Kingdom of England he had 60000 Horsemen,
which he could with great readiness call together; therefore in the 58 Law
ascribed to him, and which is in the Red Book of the Exchequer, it is thus
expressed; We Statuimus etiam and sirmiter praecipimus, ut omnes liberi homines
totius Regni nostri sint fratres cenjurati ad Monarchi^m nostram and ad Regnum
nostrum pro viribus suis and facultatihus contra inimicos pro posse suo
defendendum and viriliter servandum, and Pacem and Dignitatem Coronae nostrae
integram observand^m and judicium rectum and justitiam constanter and omnibus
modis pro posse suo and sine delatione ^aciendam. Fol. 171.
appoint and firmly command, that all the Liberi Homines (such as held in
Military Service, to whom he had distributed all the Lands of the English,
except what he kept in his own Possession; as in all Authors that treat of such
matters is most evident) of his whole Kingdom, should be sworn Brothers to
defend and manfully preserve his Monarchy and the Kingdom, according to their
Power, against all Enemies, and keeping entire the Peace and Dignity of his
Crown, and for the executing of right Judgment and Justice constantly, in all
ways according to their Power, without Deceit or Delay. I have inserted this at
large, because it seems the Primary Law, upon which his Government was
established; and it seems to me to be the Substance of the Oath of Fealty,
that all the Subjects which held. in Capite, were to take; or that the same
Oath was to the same ends and purpose. This Law is said to be made in the City
of London.

But without doubt it was much according to the Monsieur Berault. Custom.
Norman. fol. 86.
usage of Normandy, established by Rollo; and what had been practiced by the
Francks, when they conquered the Gauls in the declining of the Roman Empire,
who distributed their Lands among their Soldiers, to whom was reserved the
Dignity of Gentlemen, and the Management of Arms; and the use of them taken
from the Ancient Gauls, who were called Roturiers; and they were only permitted
to manage the matters of Husbandry and Merchandice.

So the Conqueror gave to some of his Followers Brady's Preface Norm. History,
p. 159.
whole Counties, to some two or three or more Counties, with a great Portion of
Land; to others, Hundreds, Manors or Towns; who parcelled them out to their
Dependants and Friends, 'till at last (though the Saxons most frequently held
their own Estates of those new Lords, and by new Titles from them) some
Soldiers and ordinary Men had some proportionable Shares for their Services,
though upon hard Conditions; possessing them for the most part, as Feudatories,
Of the Feudal Law, and its Mitigation. So Matt. Paris says, Episcopatus and
Abbatias omnes quae Baronias tenebant, and eatenus ab omni servitute s^^ulari
libertatem habuerant, sub servitute statuit militar^.
and according to the Rules of the Feudal Law, which, as it was the Law for the
most part in Normandy, as to Possession and Tenure; so was it in England, until
by the Indulgence of Usurpers, as well as of lawful Sovereigns, to the great
Men, and of them to their Tenants and Followers, their Tenures became more
easy, and were changed into Inheritances, both Free and Bond. So by Compact or
Agreement, betwixt kind and favorable, as well as indigent Lords and
serviceable Tenants, as also by the Introduction of the use of the Canon or
Imperial Law; the Rigor of the Feudal Law was abated, and received several
Alterations and Amendments, by flux of Time, and especially by Acts of great
Councils or Parliaments, and the Necessities or Indulgence of Princes: So that
instead of more rigid Tenures, the soft ones of Fee-simple, in all its kinds,
by Deed, or Feofment, or inheritable and qualified Copyholds, were introduced.

As to the second Particular concerning William the Conqueror's settling Laws
for the equal Government, Of the Conqueror's Laws.
both of the Normans and English; I shall first give an account out of Part
posteriori, fol. 346.
Hoveden, what these were and how they were procured: He says, That the Danish
Laws being understood by the Conqueror to be used in Norfolk, Suffolk and
Cambridg-shire (others Chron. Li^^f. See for the Conqueror's Charter and Laws,
Dr. Brady, fol. 17, 252, 254, 258, 298, 249.
add the Deirans and the Isles) concerning Forfeitures, he preferred them
before the other Laws of the Kingdom, and commanded they should be observed;
and gives the reason for it, that his and the Ancestors of most of the Barons
of Normandy, were come from Norway, therefore the Laws of the Danes ought to be
preferred before those of the Britains, viz. of the English and Picts: Which,
says my Quo audito mox universi compatriota, qui leg^s edixerant, trist^s
essec^i, unanimiter deprecati sunt quatenus permit^eret l^ges sibi pr^prias and
consue^udines ^^iqua halere. Id. number. 10. Hoveden, fol. 347, number. 1.
Author, being heard by the great Men of the Country (who had, as hereafter I
shall show, been appointed to revize the Laws) they all were very sorrowful,
and unanimously entreated him, that he would permit them to have the Laws
proper to themselves, and their ancient Customs, under which their Fathers
lived, and they were born and bred under; for that it would be very hard for
them to receive unknown Laws, and to judge of those things they understood not.
See Brady's Answer to Argum. A^ti^o^^. p. 298, 299.
But finding the King unwilling to be drawn to consent, they follow on their
suit, praying for the Soul of King Edward, who bequeathed him his Crown and
Kingdom, whose Laws they were, that they might not have the Laws of strange
Nations imposed on them; but he would grant them the Continuance of their
Countries Laws: To which entreaty of his Barons (after Counsel taken) my Author
says, I cannot conceive but here were many of the Saxon Nobility, and Men of
best Account; otherwise they could not call them the Laws their Fathers had
lived under: and the Normans could not then know much of our Laws or Speech;
but this was before he had subdued all fully.
he acquiesced; and from that day the Laws of King Edward were of great
Authority and Esteem throughout England, and were confirmed and observed before
other Laws of the Country.

Our Author further notes, That these were not the proper Laws of King Edward,
but of Edgar his Grandfather, which had been little observed for 68 years, as
in one place, and 48 years in another; he says, by reason of the Danish
Invasions, etc. and being revived, repaired and confirmed by King Edward, were
called his Laws.

The Account the Chronicle Anglos Nobiles Sapientes and sua^^ge eruditos. Id.
fol. 348. Spelm. Council. tom. 1. fol. 619.
of Lichfield gives, is this, That King William, in the fourth year of his
Reign at London, by the Counsel of his Barons, made to be summoned through all
the Counties of England, all the Noble Wisemen, and such as were skilled in
their Law, that he might hear their Laws and Customs; and then gives an account
how he approved of the Danish Laws used in Norfolk, etc. Concerning the
Kindness the Conqueror pretended in his first four Years, and his Rigor after,
see at large. Dr. Brady, in his Answer to the Argumentum Antinormanicum,
especially p. 260. and 299.
But afterward, at the Entreaty of the Community of the English, he yielded to
grant them King Edward's Laws. Before I proceed any further, I cannot but note,
that what Hoveden calls Compatriotae here, is called Communitas Anglorum; and
in both of them afterward it is called Concilio Baronum; by which we may know
who these Compatriotae and this Communitas were, viz. the Barons or great Men.
Our Author proceeds, That by the King's Precept, out of every County of
England, Twelve Wisemen were chosen, who were enjoined an Oath before the King,
that according to their utmost they should discover the establishments of their
Laws and Customs Vt quoad possent recto tramite incedentes, nec ad dextram nec
ad sinistram divertentes, nihil addentes, nihil praevarieando mutantes. Omnia
quae praedicti ^urati dixerunt.
going in a strait Path, neither declining to the right or left Hand, omitting,
adding, or prevaricating nothing; and Aldred Archbishop of York, who crowned
King William, and Hugh Bishop of London, by the King's command, writ the Laws
which the said sworn Persons did produce: But it is to be noted, that this
Chronicle of Lichfield is of a later Date than other Writers; and the Laws in
it differ from those in Ingulphus.

The next Testimony is that of Circa sinem Hist. fol. 519. number. 36. Leges
aqui^^mi Regis Edwardi quas Dom. meus inclitus Rex W. authenticas esse and
perpetuas, etc. proclamarat.
Ingulphus, who tells us, That he brought from London to his Monastery, i.e.
Croyland, the Laws of the most just King Edward, which his Lord, the famous
King William, willed to be Authentic and Perpetual, and had proclaimed under
the severest Penalties, to be inviolably kept through the whole Kingdom of
England, and commended them to his Justiciaries, in the same Language they were
set forth in, etc. of which I shall say something below.

The Author of Jus Anglorum ab Antiquo, and the Argumentum Anti-Normanicum, and
Mr. Petyt, in his Rights of the Commons asserted, have writ largely, to prove,
That the Conqueror made little Innovation in our Laws; and on the contrary, the
profoundly learned Answer to Petyt, p. 14. Great Officers Normans.
Doctor Brady has from undeniable Records proved, that he brought in the
Feudal Law of Tenures, and much of the Norman Laws; and that in his time, and
for an Hundred years after, the Justiciaries or Chief Justices, the
Chancellors, Lawyers, Ministerial Officers, and under-Judges, Earls, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Hundredaries, etc. were all Normans: likewise the Military Men and
Lords of Manors mostly were such; and in his Preface to the Norman History,
and his Answers to the forementioned Authors, every where clears it, and
proves, That though the Conqueror, See for proof of the whole, Eadmer. Hist.
Novel. fol. 6. number. 10, 20, 30. Ingulph. fol. 512. a. number. 50. That these Great
Barons, as Tenants in Capite, had power to make Laws and Constitutions to bind
their Sub-Feudataries, is apparent by what Malmsbury de (...) Reg. lib. 3.
says, That the Laws of W. Fitz-Ozborn Earl of Hereford remained still in
force, That no Soldier for any Offense should pay above 7 s. The Conqueror's
Liberality to the Normans.
in the first beginning of his Reign, promised fair Matters, yet he observed no
more of those Laws, than served for his own interest: Yet he also says, That
where any Relaxation of the Rigor of the Feudal Laws was, the benefit
principally accrued to the Norman English, who indeed were as active as could
be expected, to obtain ease to themselves, and claim the Advantage of all the
favorable Laws had been used in the Saxon times; but they themselves were
great Oppressors of those under them.

These Matters therefore being so copiously discoursed of by the learned
Doctor, I shall pass that whole matter by, and come to the third Particular,
Sir Roger Twysden notes in the Conquerors Policy, and so directly speak to the
Constitutions of his Great Councils, and his Sovereignty in making or
confirming Laws.

As to the third Particular; First it is clear that the Conqueror divided the
Land among his great Men, the Officers and Soldiers: for proof of which we need
no more, but the Testimony of Gervase of Black Book of the Exchequer. Post
regni conquisitionem, post justam Rebellium subversionem, -- facta est
inquisitio diligens qui fuerint qui contra Regem in bello dimicantes per fugam
se salvaverint; hiis omnibus and haeredibus eorum qui in bello occubuerunt,
spes omnis, etc. praeclusa.
Tilbury, who says, That after the Conquest of the Kingdom, and just
subversion of the Rebels, when the King himself and his great Men had viewed
and surveyed their new Acquists, there was a strict enquiry made, who there
were, that fighting against the King, had saved themselves by flight: From
these and the Heirs of such as were slain in Fight, all hopes of possessing
either Lands or Rents, were cut off: But such as were called and urged to fight
against King William, and did not, if in Process of time they could obtain the
favor of their Lords and Masters, by an humble Obedience, and Obsequiousness,
they might possess something in their own Persons, without hopes of Succession,
their Children only enjoying it afterward at the will of their Lords, to whom
when they became odious, they were every where forced from their Possessions.

Because some are prejudiced against the judicious Doctor Brady, for asserting
the Conquerours changes that he made, I hope they will give ear to what the
learned Seldom affirms thus, Ex quo cis Normannorum adventum praeter ipsum
Regem non fuit in Anglia is qui Allodii, ut lequantur, Jure sundum possederit,
cum scilicet aliis ad unum omnes siduciarios pro^e dixeris Dominos, superiorem
investi^urae Anct^rem interpesita side perpetuo agn^sc^ntes. Lib. 2. Jan. Ang.
That some while since the coming in of the Normans, there was not in England,
except the King himself, any one who held Land in right of Freehold (as they
term it) since, in truth, one may call all others, to a Man, only Lords in
trust of what they had; as those, who by swearing Fealty, and doing Homage, did
perpetually own and acknowledge a Superior Lord of whom they held, and by whom
they were invested in their Estates. So he. Now this Fealty and Homage is now
held no kind of Slavery, but then it was, as I have elsewhere noted. Let us
hear what the same Mr. Seldom a little below says, That the Conqueror did not
totally change the Constitution of the Laws, Probe tametsi dixeris eversum,
secundum quod disputant Jurisconsulti, Anglicum Imperium. Id. Gervas. Til^. c.
23. Oblatis vomeribus in signum desicientis Agriculturae.
although we may truly say, according to what Lawyers dispute, That the English
Empire and Government was overthrown by him. Thus far that learned Man.

Let us now return to the Exchequer-book, where we find, That when a common
miserable Complaint of the Natives came to the King, that they thus exposed and
spoiled of all things, should be compelled to pass into other Countries: At
length, after Consultation upon these things, it was decreed, That what they
could by their deserts and lawful Bargain, obtain from their Lords, The English
compound with their Lords.
they should hold by unviolable Right; but should not claim any thing from the
time the Nation was conquered, under the Title of Succession or Descent.
Therefore, he says, they were obliged, by studied Compliance and Obedience, to
purchase their Lords Favor.

It is true, that in the 55th. Law of LL. Gulielm. primi, Edit. Twysden, p. 170.
William the Conqueror, it is said, That he wills and firmly commands and
grants, that all Freemen, liberi Homines, of the whole Monarchy of his Kingdom,
may have and hold their Lands and Possessions well, and in In pace libere ab
omni exactione injus^a and ab omni tallagio.
Peace, free from all unjust Exactions and Tallage, that is, extraordinary
Impositions and Taxes; so as nothing be exacted or taken, unless their free
services, which of Right they ought and are bound to perform to us; and as it
was appointed to them, and given and granted to them by us, as a perpetual
Right of Inheritance, by the Common Council of the whole Kingdom.

In which we may observe, The English have little Benefit by his Relaxation of
the Feudal Law.
that this was no Magna Charta made to English Men; these liberi Homines were
such as held in Military Service, as appears by the 58th. Law following; and
those then were Normans, and the Relaxations to them were, that these Fees were
made Hereditary, which was not frequent among Feudataries in those days; and
the Complaints that were made after, and the amendments that Hen. 1. promised,
were mostly about the hard Taxes and Exactions.

Therefore I may conclude, That the ordinary English, though many of them might
live upon the Lands they and their Ancestors had enjoyed, yet their Tenure was
changed, and they were but Vassals to other Lords; 'till by little and little,
by the ways I have mentioned under the first Heads, they acquired a Soccage
Tenure, and Fee-simple Estate. Therefore the foresaid Praefat. Reger Twysden,
fol. 155. The English possess their Lands by ^avour, not otherwise
Hereditarily. So Mut. Paris says, Commilitonibus terras Anglorum and
possessiones affluentiori manu contulit; illud parvum quod remans^rat, sub jugo
posuit perpetuae servitutis.
Gervase of Tilbury concludes this Observation, thus, Sic igitur quisquis de
gente subacta, fundos vel aliquid hujusmodi possidet, non quod ratione
successionis debere sibi videatur, adeptus est, sed quod solummodo meritis suis
exigentibus vel aliqua pactione interveniente, obtinuit, viz. So every one of
the conquered Nation possessed their Lands or any thing else; not that he should
seem to get it by way of Succession, but by his deserts, or by some Compact or
Covenant made with his Lord: as it must be understood.

The most industrious Doctor Brady, having on purpose writ so much of this
Argument in his Answer to the Argumentum Anti-Normanicum, and, out of so many
Historians, confirmed it in the Answer to the Appendix; Brady, p. 313.314.
I must refer the Reader that desires satisfaction, to his Book, being loath to
crowd those matters which are not directly to my purpose: Only I cannot but
note, that the reason why we so often find the same Lands that have been
granted by a Father, for him and his Heirs, required, and had a Confirmation by
the Son; was because the Tenure was so fickle, for want of Homage or Omission
of Service, whereby they might be forfeited.

I now proceed to the great Councils that I have found in the Reign of William
the Conqueror; and shall begin with that wherein the Laws I have spoken before
of, out of Hoveden, were made, which are agreed by all to be in the Fourth year
of his Reign.

In general, we find Gervase of Tilbury telling us, The Conqueror makes written
Laws.
That when the famous Subduer of England, King William, had subjected to his
Empire the utmost parts of the Island, and by terrible examples had brought to
perfect obedience the Minds of Rebels; that they might not have liberty to fall
into the same errors for the future, he Decrevit subjectum sibi populum Juri
scripto legibusque sabjicere. Quasdam reprobavit, quasdam autem approbans
Transmari^^s Neustriae leges, quae ad Regni p^^^m tuendam effic^teissionae
videbantur, adjecit. Gerv. Tilb. lib. 1. c. 29.
resolved to govern the People subjected to him by written Right and Law:
therefore the English Law being propounded according to their threefold
distinction, that is, the Mercian Law, Dane Law, and West Saxon Law, he
rejected some, and approved others, and added such Transmarine Norman Laws, as
seemed most efficacious to defend the Peace of the Kingdom.

In this account we may observe, That the King solely is said to reject and
approve, and to add such of the Norman Laws as he thought fit for securing the
Peace of the Kingdom; and the Ingenious Dr. Brady thinks the 52, 55, 56, 58,
59, 62, 63, 64. are those Norman Laws intimated.

Concerning the Oath which Frederick Abbat of St. Albans, administered to the
King on the Holy Gospel, and the Relics of the Church of St. Albans, whereby
he swore, That for the good of Peace, he would observe the good and approved
ancient Laws of the Kingdom, which the pious Kings of England, and especially
King Edward had inviolably observed; I must refer the Reader to Fol. 48. number.
20, 30, 40.
Matthew Paris, to understand the occasion of it; and Dr. Argum. Antinorm. p.
261.
Brady's Exposition or Commentary upon it, and how little he observed it.

What the Laws were that King William the First confirmed, Authors agree not
about, as may be seen by comparing Fol. 343.
Hoveden, Fol. 138, 149
Knighton Collect. 2354. N. 61. Lambard of Wheelocks Edition, and Spelman in
the First Tome of his Councils, Fol. 624. Seldom In Eadmerum, fol. 172. number. 20.
in his Notes upon Eadmerus, writes very suspiciously of all the Laws that are
attributed to King Edward, except the Crowland Copy; judging neither Hoveden,
Knighton, or the Author of the Lichfield Chronicle well versed in Law matters,
and who writ long after Ingulphus, of whom he gives this Character, Qui in hac
re testium non tam facile Princeps merito dicendus est, quam solus forsan cui
ut par fit credamus.

The Title of the Laws properly ascribed to William the Conqueror, The Title
of the Conqueror's Laws.
are in the Latin thus,

Ces sont le Leis and les Custumes que le Reis William grantut tut le peuple de
Engleterre ^pres le Conquest de la Terre. Ice les meismes que le Reis Edward
sun C^sin tent devant luy. LL. W. fol. 159.
Hae sunt leges and consuetudines quas Will. Rex concessit universo Populo
Angliae, post subactam terram. Eaedem sunt quas Edwardus Rex, cognatus ejus,
observavit ante eum. In English thus, These are the Laws and Customs LL. W. 1.
p. 170.
which William the King granted to all his People of England after the subduing
of the Land. They are the same which Edward the King his Kinsman before him
observed.

In this Preface we have only to note, that the Laws are expressly said to be
the Kings Grant, and the Supplemental Laws (after the 50th. which were found in
the Croyland Copy) being writ in the Red Book of LL. W. 1. p. 170.
the Exchequer, are by way of Charter or Grant, thus, Will. Rex Anglorum, etc.
omnibus hominibus suis Francis and Anglis salutem, and all along the
Authoritative parts expressed by statuimus, volumus, interdicimus, prohibemus,
praecipimus, decretum est. The Terms used by the Conqueror in Law-giving.


The expressions Authors use concerning his Laws, whereby the absolute
Sovereignty of the Conqueror in the point of Lawgiving is manifested, are to
be found in all those who have writ of his Life; I shall content my self with a
few. Ordericus Fol. 853.
Vitalis says, eamque, i. e. England, Gulielmus Rex suis Legibus commode
subegit; that he subdued, or rather subjected England profitably to his Laws.

Eadmer Hist, Nov. fol. 6. number. 10, 20, 30. Vsus atque leges quas patres sui
and ipse in Normannia solehant, in Anglia scrib^re volens -- Cuncta divina
simul and humana ejus nutum expectabant. Edit. Gal. de Moulins.
says, That King William designing to establish in England those Usages, and
Laws, which his Ancestors, and he observed in Normandy, etc. all Divine and
Humane Things he ordered at his pleasure.

The Chronology of Rouen says, Leges quas in hunc diem Angli observant,
idiomate Normanico promulgavit, The Laws which at this day the English observe,
he published in the Norman Language.

Mr. Camden says, Britan. fol. 109.
That William the Conqueror, as a token of his Victory, laid aside the
greatest part of the English Laws, and brought in the customs of Normandy, and
commanded Pleadings to be in French.

Jo. Brompton Abbat of Jorval gives us an account of the proper Laws of William
the Conqueror, Brompton's Account of the proper Laws of the Conqueror.
which he recites under four Heads, and they are only concerning Pleas de
examine Forensi; and Mr. Seldom gives this Character of him, that he was
Diligentissimus rerum nostrarum, maxim autem Legum vetustiorum Indagator.
These are by way of Mandate, thus, W. Dei gratia Rex Anglorum, omnibus ad quos
scriptum hoc perveniat, salutem, Mando, and Praecipio per totam Anglicam
Nationem custodiri.

As to the constituent Parts of the Great Councils in the Conquerour's time, in
many of them we have many Bishops names, The Members of the Great Councils in
the Conqueror's time.
and no others, not so much as the Principes, Primates, or Magnates in general.

Anno 1071. 5 W. 1. the Plaint of Rad. de Diceto, col. 483. number. 30. Council.
tom. 2. fol. 4.
Wulstan Bishop of Worcester is said to be ended in Concilio celebrato in loco
qui vocatur Pedreda coram Rege and Doroberniae Archiepiscopo, and Primatibus
totius Regni; before the King, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Nobility
or Prime Persons of the whole Kingdom.

The Election of Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1653. lin. 5.
Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury, about this time, or the year before, is
said to be thus, the Seniors of the said Church electing him, cum Episcopis ac
Principibus, Clero and Populo Angliae, in Curia Regis in Assumptione Sanctae
Mariae. Here the Episcopi and Principes, Bishops and Princes, the Cleri and
Populus, the Clergy and People or Laity were the same persons, and only
expressive of one another.

In the Charter MS. in Bibl. Cotton. sub essigie Vespas. A. 19. e Chron. Rad.
de Diceto. Spelm. Council. Tom. 2. fol. 14.
of William the Conqueror, Anno 1077. 11 Regni, after the Names of several
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and other Seniors, Robert de Oyley, Hamo dapifer
signed it, many illustrious Persons and Princes of diverse Orders, says the
Author, being omitted: Then is added, His etiam illo tempore a Regia potestate
e diversis Provinciis and Vrbibus, to this Universal Synod at Westminster were
called.

In this the Fol. 651. lin. 22.
Principes diversi Ordinis, were the great dignified Clergy, and the Temporal
Nobility, which is explained by Florence of Worcester, speaking of such a like
Convention. 3 H. 1. Rex fuit apud Westmonasterium and eo omnes Principes Regni
Ecclesiastici and secularis Ordinis: and Fol. 67. B. 20. Anno 1102. 3 H. 1.
Eadmer, of this very great Council, 3 H. 1. says, Primates Regni utriusque
Ordinis huic conventui affuerunt; that is, The Princes or great Men of the
Clergy and Laity, which were no other but the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats and
Priors of the one Order, and the Dukes, Earls, Barons, and greater Tenants in
Capite of the other; and for the expression, e diversis Provinciis and Vrbibus,
Fol. 302.
Doctor Brady has sufficiently explained it in his Answer to the Argumentum
Anti-Normanicum.

In a Charter of this King, for changing the Monast. vol. 1. fol. 44. Anno
1084. 18 W. Conqu.
Canons of Duresm into Monks, it is said, Haec Charta confirmata est apud
Westmonasterium in Concilio meo, Anno Regni 18. praesentibus omnibus Episcopis
and Baronibus meis.

In the Charter of the same Spelm. Council. tom. 2. fol. 14. e MS. penes Dec.
and Capit. B. Pauli Land. A. fol. 1, 2.
King about separating of Ecclesiastic Pleas from Civil, it is thus expressed,
William by the Grace of God, King of England, to R. Bainard, G. de Magnavilla,
and P. de Valoines, and all his Fideles of Essex, Hereford-shire and Middlesex:
Know they and all other his Fideles which remain in England; that he has Leges
quae non been, etc. Communt Concilio and Concilio Ar^^iepisct porum and Epi
coporum, and Abbatum, and omnium Principum R^gni mei emendand is judi^avi,
propterea mando and Regia Au^loritate ^racipio, etc.
thought fit, with his Common Council, and the Council of Archbishops, Bishops
and Abbats, and of all the Princes of his Kingdom to amend the Episcopal Laws,
which were neither well nor according to the command of the Holy Canons before
his time, observed in his Kingdom. Therefore he says, he commands, and by his
Royal Authority enjoins, that no Bishop or Archdeacon hold their Pleas any
longer in the Hundred.

From all which we may observe, Remarks upon what before is laid down.
First, That the Conqueror introduced the Feudal Laws of the Normans, and
according to them disposed of the Lands of the conquered Saxons, to be held of
his Norman Followers, and that he brought in several others of the Laws and
Customs of his Country.

Secondly, That he difficultly granted to his People the Laws of King Edward,
and those he amended at his pleasure; and all that he either confirmed or
established, he did by his Royal Prerogative, using the single Person in the
Sanction of them; and the Imperative in the commanding or forbiding: and those
Laws which properly may be called his own, were by way of Charter or Mandate;
and in the Councils purely Ecclesiastical, the King summoned them, as is
apparent in Annal. Binaiae, tom. 3. part. 2. fol. 249.
Hoveden, where he says, eodem Anno, i. e. 10703 Regni Concilium magnum in
Octavis Paschae Wintoniae celebratum est, jubente and praesente Rege W. etc. of
which more below. The great Seldom notes as the Members of the Great Council in
the time of the Norman Kings, for the Barons, such as had 13 Knights Fees and a
third part: His words are, Interfuere Parliamentis sub Normannorum tempora
quotquot 13 Feudis Militaribus and 3 unius part investiti Barons, ab amplis
praediis ita dicti. Jan. Ang. p. 139.


Thirdly, There are no Members of these great Councils mentioned, but the
Archbishops, Bishops and Abbats, for the Clergy, and the Optimates and
Principes for the Laity.

Fourthly, That though the sole Power of enacting Laws was in himself, yet he
used the Advice of his Common Council of his Kingdom; as is expressed in the
55th. Law, thus, Prout statutum est eis and illis a nobis datum and concessum
jure haereditario in perpetuum, per Commune Concilium totius Regni nostri
praedicti; which Commune Concilium consisted of the Bishops, Abbats, Earls,
Barons and principal Tenants in Capite, as is every where clear, no Commons
having Vote, or otherwise represented.

Lastly, Hist. Novel. p. 6. number. 30. Non sinebat quicquam statuere ant
prohibere nisi quae suae voluntati accommoda and a se primo essent ordinata.
Eadmer tells us, That when the Archbishop of Canterbury presided in a general
Council of the Bishops, the King permitted him not to appoint or forbid any
thing, but such things as were agreeable to his will, and by himself were first
ordained. Also he says in all his Dominions, he would allow no Bishop of Rome
to be accounted Apostolic, but whom he commanded to be received; nor any to
receive his Bulls or Breves, unless they were first shown to him.

I have in the beginning of this Chapter spoken something of the Mutations that
William the Conqueror made in the Constitution of the Government of England;
concerning which I shall only note, That the Conqueror took all the care (that
a great Commander and Conqueror of a great Nation could do) for securing his
Conqests Pictav. fol. 197. C. Ingulph. 512. a lin. 7. What the Conqueror did to
secure his Conquest.
by building Fortresses and Castles within the City of London, and placing
Norman Garrisons and French Governors or Castellanes in the Castles in the
Country, and giving them great Estates, and carrying the chief of the English
Nobility with him as Hostages into Normandy, and imposed his Laws, as
Pictavensis relates; Id. fol. 2^6 a. 207 c. 2^8 a. b.
and though he, who was Chaplain to the Conqueror, speak of the Conqueror's
smooth behavior to the English, ordering things as he says, prudently, justly
and mildly; some to the Profit and Dignity of the City; some to the advantage
of the whole Nation; and other some to the benefit of the Churches of the Land:
and whatever Laws he dictated, he established with excellent reason; and adds,
That no Frenchman Nulli tamen Gallo datum est quod Anglo ^uiquam injuste
fuecit ablatum. Idem, fol. 208. c.
had any thing given him, which was unjustly taken from any Englishman, (which
last, Ordericus Vitalis omits, though in other things he follows Pictavensis
exactly) yet Pictavensis writing but to the Fourth of his Reign, Anno 1070. as
is noted by Ordericus, we must look upon them as incompetent Witnesses of the
severity the Conqueror after used, when he had secured his Conquest. So that
what is urged by some, of the Conqueror's lenity, and his little change of Laws
and Government, is to be understood of those times while he was unsafe in his
Conquests, and does not so interfere, as they would make the World believe, How
he comported himself after he had secured his Conquest.
with the assertion of those, who from credible Authors speak of his treating
the English as a Conquered People. For Pictavensis Jure Belli possedit. fol.
206. a.
says, that he possessed the Country by the rights of War. Ordericus
Adjutoribus suis inclytas Angliae Regiones distribuit, and ex insimis
Normannorum Clientibus Tribunos and Centuriones ditissimos erexit. Orderic.
Vit. 251.
Vitalis says, That having circumvented the two great Earls of Mercia, and
slain Edwin, and imprisoned Morcas, then he began to show himself, and gave the
best Counties of England to his Assistants; and of the lowest of the Norman
Clients, or very mean People, he made very rich Colonels and Captains, as he
particularizes there; and in another Fundos eorum cum omnibus divitiis
obtin^imus. Id. fol. 853.
place, That having overthrown by Force and Arms the English Saxons, they
obtained their Lands and all their Riches.

Malmsbury Malmsb. fol. 52. a. number. 40. Vix aliquis Princeps de progeny
Anglorum esset in Anglia, sed omnes ad servitutem and moerorem redacti essent,
ita ut Anglieum vocari opprobrjum.
says, That there was no Englishman Duke, or Bishop, or Abbat, but Strangers
do gnaw the Riches, and very Bowels of England. So Hen. Hunt. fol. 210 b. number.
10. About the continuing the English Saxons, but changing their Tenures,
Services, etc.
Hen. of Huntingdon says, there was scarce any Prince of the Progeny of the
English, but all are reduced to Servitude and Sorrow; so that it is a disgrace
to be called an Englishman: and Gervase of Canterbury says, That he used both
Ecclesiastic and Secular Rights or Laws as he pleased, tam Ecclesiastica Jura
quam secularia sibi usurpavit.

As to King William's displacing of the Saxons, I find in the Transcript of
Doomsday-Book that I have for Yorkshire, that very many enjoyed the same Lands
they did in Edward the Confessors time; but I remember no where that I do not
find them hold of some Norman Lords, which is agreeable to what Dr. Brady
writes; but I refer the Discourse of those to my Antiquities of Yorkshire, if
God give me life and ability to publish them.

As to the Conqueror's changing the holding of Lands here, to the Spelman.
Gloss. Feodam.
Feudal Tenure used in Normandy (begun by the Germans, Longobards, Francks and
others, and of which something seems to be hinted in the English Saxon Laws)
all Authors do conclude, that the Conqueror brought the exacter use, at least,
of them into England, and divided the whole Land into several Knights-fees,
whereof there are reckoned 700 Tenants in Capite, besides Bishops, Abbats,
Priors and great Churchmen; and the Laws of King Edward that the Conqueror
permitted to be used, were either most of them Penal Laws, from which he got
profit, or such as are properly his own, and were efficacious for the
preservation of the Peace, and establishment of Government, as the 52, 55, 56,
58, 59, 64. whereof the 55, 58, and 59. are Feudal.

How William the Conqueror brought in his other Norman Laws, Dr. Brady in his
Preface to the Norman Story, has at large discoursed; so that in Justice I
must refer the Curious Reader to his elaborate work, and to Mr. Seldom in his
Second Book of his Janus Anglorum.

Of the Great Councils in William the Second's time.
IN the Reign of William Rufus we find few Great Councils. So that Anselm
Archbishop of Canterbury complains Eadmer. Hist. Nov. lib. 1. fol. 24. lin. 8.
to him (when he was preparing to pass into Normandy) that since he was King,
there had been no General Council of the Bishops, nor of several years before,
so that Christianity was much decayed.

The first great Council I have met with, is that of Winchester. Idem, fol. 20.
number. 30. Anno D. 1093. 5 W. Rusi. The Contest betwixt William the Second and
Anselm.
This Council is only thus expressed, Rex adunato Wintoniae conventu Nobilium,
without specifying either Ecclesiastics or Laics. In this Council the King
declared Anselm Archbishop, and he did Homage to him.

Idem, p. 26. number. 10.6 Gul. 2.
This Anselm sought leave of the King that he might go to Rome, to receive the
Pall from Pope Urban, whom the King did not own for Pope, but Clement. This and
some other Matters occasioned sharp words and unkindness from the King to
Anselm; the King absolutely denying him liberty to go, telling him, that he
owned not Urban pro Apostolico, and that it had neither been his, nor his
Fathers custom, that any should own Paternae consuetudinis eatenus extitisse,
ut praeter suam licentiam, aut electionem aliquis in Regno Angliae Papam
nominaret, and quicunque sibi hujus dignitatis potestatem vellet praeripere,
unum foret ac si coronam suam sibi conaretur auferre. Idem number. 50.
any Pope in the Kingdom of England, without his License or Election; and
whoever would take from him this Power of his Dignity, did the same as if he
endeavored to despoil him of his Crown. But Anselm persisted, that he had
declared (before he would consent to be Bishop, while he was Abbat of Becc)
that he received Urban for Pope, neither that he would in any manner depart
from his Obedience and Subjection. At which the King was very angry,
protesting, that Anselm could not against the Kings good pleasure keep his
Faith which he owed to him, and his Obedience to the Apostolic See. So Anselm
(saving his Reason or Argument which he declared concerning his Subjection and
Obedience to the Roman Church) desired Respite for the examining the Matter in
Question, till it might be defined by common consent (the Bishops, Abbats, and
all the Princes of the Kingdom meeting together) whether (saving his Reverence
and Obedience to the Apostolic See) he could keep his Faith to his Earthly
Prince; The Question moved, Whether Archbishop Anselm could keep his ^aith to
the King. saving his Obedience to the Apostolic See?
and if it be proved that both of them could not be done, he had rather depart
the Kings Land, till the Pope was owned, than for an Hour deny Obedience to St.
Peter and his Vicar.

Then it follows, Idem, number. 10.
Dantur ergo Induciae, atque ex Regia Sanctione ferme totius Regni Nobilitas 5.
Id. Martii pro ventilatione istius causae in unum apud Rochingheham exit.

The Convention was on Sunday in the Church of the Castle, The King, and those
Rege and suis secretius in Anselmum Concilium stu^iese texentibus; Anselmus
autem, Episcopis, Abbatibus, and Principibus ad se a Regio secreto vocatis.
that were of the Kings part, secretly and studiously contriving their Councils
against Anselm; then follows a plain description, who they were that
constituted this Great Council, Anselmus autem Episcopis, Abbatibus and
Principibus ad se a Regio, secreto vocatis, Anselm calling the Bishops, Abbats
and Princes to himself from the Kings Secret Council, or from the Consultation
they had with the King. By these I conceive we may understand the constituent
Parts of this Great Council.

Then follows, eos and assistentem Monachorum, Clericorum, Laicorum numerosam
multitudinem hac voce alloquitur; Anselm makes his Speech to those, that is, to
the Bishops, Abbats and Princes, and likewise to the numerous multitude of
Monks, Clerks and Laics there present, standing or sitting there as Auditors,
not Assessors, as the sequel will show.

Id. number. 30, 40, 50.
He tells them how he was forced to leave his Country, by reason of the Kings
desire, that Council being taken, it pleased the King and them to choose him,
and that then he declared for Pope Vrbane, and then tells them the straits he
was in, as before related, and so desired their Counsel, and prays them all,
especially, his Brethren and Co-Bishops to give him advice.

The Id. fol. 27. number. 10.
Bishops tell him, They would advise him to submit to the King in all things as
they were ready to do; but if he commanded, they would acquaint the King with
his Discourse, and return his Answer; and the King Anselmus ad hospitium suum,
Curiam manner petiturus, reverteretur.
ordered, that all things should be deferred till the next day, because that
was Sunday, and Anselm should return to his Lodging, he being about to petition
that the Court might remain; unless the words are to be read, curiam mane
repetiturus, he to return to the Court in the Morning; because the following
words are, Factum est ita, and mane juxta condictum reversi sumus, It was so
done, and in the Morning according to agreement we returned.

Then it follows, Anselmus in medio Procerum and conglobatae multitudinis
sedens, ita orsus est, Si juxta quod a vobis Domini Fratres hesterno die
consilium de praesenti causa petivi, vel nunc dare velletis, acciperem; Anselm
sitting in the midst of the Nobles, and the encompassing multitude, begun thus,
If you my Lords and Brothers will give me counsel about the present Cause, as I
Yesterday desired or petitioned, I will receive it. In which we may observe,
that he applies himself principally to the Clergy, unless we read the words
disjunctively, Domini, Fratres, as we shall presently find he does.

They give him the same Answer they did the day before, That he should submit
to the Pleasure of the King: but if he, according to God, expected Counsel from
them, which might in any thing gainsay the Kings Will, it would be labor in
vain; for they would not assist him in it.

Then Anselm lifting up his Eyes aloft, with a lively Countenance, and a
reverend Voice, speaks to them thus; Cum nos qui Christianae Plebis Pastores,
and vos qui Populorum Principes vocamini: When we that are the Pastors of the
Christian People, and you that are called the Princes of the People will give
me Counsel, not otherwise than according to the Will of one Man, your Prince; I
will run to the chief Pastor and Prince of all, to the Angel of the Great
Council, etc.

In which we may observe, to my purpose, In this Contest is discovered who were
the Members of the Great Councils.
that he divides this Curia, or Great Council, into two parts, the Pastors of
the People, or the Bishops and Abbats, and the Princes of the People: so as
here are no Commons, as in the acceptance of the word in this and later Ages
they are understood. For the Multitudo here mentioned, are to be taken to be
Spectators, who flocked to hear the Cause, as in other Courts; and even at this
day, upon the hearing of Appeals at the Bar of the House of Lords, it is usual
for many to crowd in as far as the Bar.

That these Great Councils met where the King kept his Court at Christmas,
Easter and Whitsontide, by custom, often is mentioned in our Histories, and
needs no further Proof than what Doctor Brady has produced; therefore upon
this occasion of Archbishop Anselm, I shall only relate what Eadmerus says,
Great Council at Pentecost de more.
That he attended the King at Pentecost, sometimes at Dinnertime, when he made
his great Feasts, and other times during the Holidays, to try if the King's
Mind was altered, but found no change. Peractis igitur Festivioribus di^bus
diversorum negotiorum causae in medium duci ex more coeperunt. Id. p. 37. number.
40. Ann. 1096. vel 1097.
Therefore the Festival-days being passed, the causes of diverse affairs
according to custom, began to be transacted, says my Author, among which that
that of Anselm's was one.

But to draw to a Conclusion of this King's Reign, my Author clears who were
the Members of the Great Councils, and that they were convened at the King's
Pleasure, in the relating that in the following Mense Augusto cum de statu
Regni acturus Rex, Episcopos, Abbates, and quosque Regni Proceres in unum
praecepti sui sanctione egisset, etc. Id. p. 38. number. 10.
Month of August, when the King being to transact things concerning the State
of the Kingdom, by his Summons had convened the Bishops, Abbats, and all the
Noblemen of his Kingdom. The affairs for which they were assembled being
dispatched, and every one prepared to return home; Anselm moves again his
Petition, and in October, when the Convention was dissolved, he applied himself
again to the King at Winchester.

Here we may observe that it was the King, The King solely summons the Great
Councils, and dismisseth them.
who being to transact things about the State of the Kingdom, by the Authority
of his Precept or Summons, called together the Members of the Great Council,
who are expressly mentioned to be the Bishops, Abbats, and all the Noblemen of
the Kingdom. Since therefore we find no other kinds of Great Councils in any
Authors that write of this King, we may conclude, the Commons were no ways
represented in any of them.

Most Authors mention this King with no good Character. One old Writer says,
Omnis jam legum sil^it Justitia, causisque sub justitio positis, sola in
Principibus imperabat pecunia. Florent. Wigorn.
That all Justice of Laws was in his time hushed in silence, and Causes being
put in a Vacation without hearing, Money alone bore sway among the great ones.

Polydore Virgil will have the right or duty of First Fruits, called Annats,
which our Kings claimed for vacant Abbeys, and Bishoprics, to have had their
Original from King William Rufus. However that be, it is certainly true, that
at his Death the Bishoprics of Canterbury, Winchester, and Salisbury, and
twelve Monasteries besides, being without Prelates and Abbats, paid in their
Revenues to the Exchequer.

We may judge likewise of his burdensome Exactions, Matt. Paris fol. 74. Edit.
penult.
by what we find in his Brother King Henry the First's Charter: Wherein he
says, because the Kingdom was oppressed with unjust Exactions, he makes the
Holy Church free; and all evil Customs, wherewith the Kingdom of England was
unjustly oppressed, he does henceforth take away, and they are all in a manner,
mitigations of the Severity of the feudal Tenor, as any one may see in Matthew
Paris, Mr. Seldom, and Dr. Brady, and is plain by the very first concerning the
Laity, That if any one of my Barons, Counts, or others that hold of me, shall
dye, his Heirs shall not redeem his Lands, as he was wont to do in the time of
my Father, etc. And in another, Praecipio ut homines mei similiter se
contineant erga silios, and silias, and uxores hominum suorum.
That according to the relaxation he had made to his Homagers, they should
regulate themselves toward the Sons, Daughters, and Wives of their Homagers.

Of the Great Councils in King Henry the First's time.
COncerning the Great Councils in King Henry the First's time, as also till
Edward the First's time, I must refer the inquisitive Reader to Dr. Brady's
answer to Mr. Petyt in the respective Kings Reigns, and to his Appendix, in
which he has amassed out of Eadmerus, Simeon Dunelmensis, Florentius
Wigornensis; Hoveden, Gervasius Dorobernensis, Matt. Paris, Malmsbury, and
other Authentic Writers, the Emphatical Expressions, by which the constituent
Parts of the Great Councils are fully proved to be only the Bishops, Abbats,
and Priors for the Clergy: or the great Nobility, or prime Tenants in Capite,
such as the King pleased to summon under the names of Magnates, Comites,
Proceres, Principes, Optimates, Barons, or Sapientiores Regni, expressly used
for Barons.

Where the Populus is used by way of Antithesis, as contradistinct from the
Clerus, and where Regni Communitas, or Ingenuitas is used; the same Doctor
Brady by pregnant Proof, puts it beyond dispute, that none of the Commons, as
now we understand them, could be meant as Representatives.

So that though I had collected a considerable number of such Proofs, e're I
saw the Learned Doctor's Book, I shall now wave them all, and only add in every
King's Reign some few that he has omitted, or wherein something remarkable,
relating to the King's Sovereignty, or the manner of constituting Laws, is
found by him noted, or as I have met with them in my Reading.

In the third of Henry the First, in the Feast of St. Omnes Princip^s Regni sui
Ecclesiastici and Secularis Ordinis. Flor. Wigorn. Anno 1102. 3 H. 1.
Michael (says the Monk of Worcester) the King was at London, and with him all
the Princes of his Kingdom of the Ecclesiastic and Secular Order: and of the
same Council Malmsbury says, The King bidding Ipso Rege annuente communi
consensu Episcoporum, Abbatum and Principum totius Regni adunatum est
Conciltum. De Gest. Pontif. Anno 1102.
or willing with the common Consent of the Bishops, and Abbats, and Princes of
the whole Kingdom, the Council was united: and this being mostly about
Ecclesiastic affairs, it is added that in this Council the Optimates Regni, at
the Petition of Anselm were present; and gives the reason, For that whatever
might be decreed by Authority of the Council, might be maintained firmly by the
mutual care of both orders. Whereby we may note the Obligation upon Subjects of
both Orders, to observe the Laws once enacted by the King and Council. Anno
1107. 7 H. 1. Matthew. Paris says, Factus est conventus Episcoporum and Abbatum
pariter and Magnatum ad Ann. etc.
there was a convention of the Bishops and Abbats, as likewise of the Magnates,
i. e. Noblemen, at London in the King's Palace, Archbishop Anselm being
President. To which the King assented, and speaking of what was established, he
says, Rex statuit. To him Hoveden agrees; only what the one calls Magnates,
the other calls Proceres.

The Manuscript of Croyland Tum Episcoporum and Abbatum totius Cleri Angliae;
by which must be understood the great dignified Clergy. Sub Wifrido Abbate, p.
104.
says, The same Year the King giving manifold thanks to God for the Victory he
had given him over his Brother Robert, and other Adversaries, appointed a
famous Council at London, as well of the Bishops and Abbats of the whole Clergy
of England, as of the Earls, Barons, Optimatum and Procerum totius Regni. In
this Council the King Remisit, libere concessit, integre promisi^.
remitted, freely granted, and fully promised, the Investiture by Ring and
Staff, and freely left the Election of the Prelates to their respective
Churches. By which we may not only note who made up this Great Council, but
that the enacting part was solely the King's Grant.

The Charter Lib. rub. Scaccar. Twysden LL. Id. 1. p. 175.
of Henry the First was made before the Eighteenth of his Reign, in which he
says, because his Kingdom was oppressed with unjust Exactions; in Ego respectu
Dei and amore quem erg^ vos habeo. Matt. Paris fol. 292. number. 10. See the
Explanation of this Charter, Brady's Argum. fol. 265. and Selden's Epinomis.
respect of God, and the Love which he has to his Subjects, he makes the Holy
Church free, and so proceeds in the rest of his Laws, by way of single Grant,
and Prohibition.

Anno 1127. 28 H. 1. Rex -- auditis Concilii gestis consensum praebuit.
Authoritate Regia and potestate concessit, and consirmavit statuta Concilii.
Continuat. Florent. Wigorn. p. 503.
W. Archbishop of Canterbury gathered a General Council of all the Bishops,
Abbats, and Religious Persons, and at the close of the Acts it is said, That
the King being at London, having heard the Acts of the Council, gave his
consent to them, and by his Kingly Authority and Power, granted and confirmed
the Statutes of the Council. By which we may see that even the Constitutions of
Ecclesiastical Councils required the Sovereign's Confirmation.

Of the Great Councils in King Stephen's time.
THat he was an Usurper, is notoriously known. His first great Council is only
said by Malmsbury to be gathered at London, Coacto magno Episcoporum, Procerum,
and Abbatum concilio. Fol. 92. b. number. 4.
consisting of Bishops, Nobles, and Abbats, in which many Ecclesiastical and
Secular Matters were ordained. Matthew Paris says, That he having gathered at
London the Magnates Regni, he promised the bettering of the Laws according to
the will Juxta voluntatem and arbi^rium singulorum. Fol. 62. number. 40.
and pleasure of all. The reason of which compliance of this King was, for that
he was set up and Crowned by a Faction, there being reckoned by Authors none of
Eminence present at his Coronation, but the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Bishop of Winchester, and Roger of Salisbury his Brother, no Abbats, and but
few of the Nobility, they having all sworn Malmsb. Hist. Novel. fol. 101. b.
number. 16.
Fealty to Maud the Empress in Henry the first's life time, though he in the
following Charter says, That he was elected King, Assensu Cleri and Populi.
But to proceed,

King Stephen primo Regni at Oxford, Anno 1136. grants the Liberties to his
Subjects by way of Charter, Ego Stephanus Dei gratia assensu Cleri, etc. omnes
exactiones, meschenningas, and injustitias sive per Vicecomites vel per alios
quoslibet male inductas funditus extirpo, bonas leges and antiquas and justas
consuetudines, etc. observabo, and observari praecipio and constituo. Malmsb.
Hist. Novel. p. 101. b. number. 20.
that the Church be free, and he confirms due Reverence to it, and so proceeds
to recite many particular Privileges to it: and as to his Lay-Subjects, he
does utterly root out all exactions, misdeeds, and injustices evilly brought in
by Sheriffs or any others; That he will observe himself, and appoints and
constitutes to be observed the good Laws, and ancient and just Customs in
Hundreds Pleas, or other matters. This was by Charter, and my Author says, he
disdains to set to the names of the Witnesses which were many, because he so
lightly or foolishly changed all.

But Richard Prior of Hexham closes the Charter thus, Ric. Prior H^gustald.
col. 314. number. 6. Anno 1136. 1 Regni. The King grants his Charter with a Salvo.
Haec omnia concedo and confirmo salva Regia and justa Dignitate mea. By which
Conclusion it is apparent, the King reserved to himself a Latitude to use his
Prerogative, and some are of opinion, Kings cannot by any Concessions divest
themselves of that; but I want Mittans to handle such noli me tangere's of the
Crown.

What I have further to add concerning this Charter is, That the Prior of
Hexham makes it granted after the Popes Confirmation Id. 313. number. 30. Note,
That all Authors think strange the Pope should ^^^firm and so countenance King
Stephen, an Usurper.
of him (in which, if ever that See consulted its private Interest, it was
then; and in my poor Opinion nothing has more discovered the Personal failures
of Popes, than such countenancing of Usurpers) my Author I say makes it to be
passed at his Parliament at Oxford, where he says, he celebrated a general
Council, and Episcopos and Proceres sui Regni regali edicto in unum convenire
praecepit.

The Witnesses this Author sets down, makes it Id. 315. number. 10.
appear there were none besides the Clergy and Barons present; for after
fourteen Bishops named, the rest of the Witnesses are, Roger the Chancellor,
Henry Nephew of the King, Robert Earl of Gloucester, William Earl Warren, Ralph
Earl of Chester, Roger Earl of Warwick, Rob. de Vere, Miles de Gloucester, Rob.
de Olli Briano Filio Comitis Constab. Robert de Martel, Hugh Bigot, Humfrid de
Bohun, Simon de Bellocampo, Dapif. Rob. de Ferrers, William Petrus, Simon de
Silban^et, William de Albania, Hugh de Sancto Claro, Ilbert de Lecsio. All
which were very great Barons, the last of them being Heir to 150 Knights Fees;
at least his Grandfather had so many: So that we cannot judge the Commons by
any Representation were present.

The other great Councils of this King are to be found in the Authors Flor
Wigorn. Anno 1138. fol. 668.
cited in the Margent; That at Northampton had Turstin Archbishop of York
president, and the rest enumerated are Episcopi, Abbates, Comites, Barons,
Nobiles quique per Angliam* That of the sixteenth Hen. Hunt. Anno 1151. fol.
226.
mentions only the Archbishop of Canterbury, Eustachius the King's Son, and
Angliae Proceres; in the Chron. Norm. Anno 1152.
Agreement 17 Regni, the Conventus was Episcoporum, Comitum, and aliorum
Optimatum; and the last I find Anno 1154. ultimo Regni (e) is cum Episcopis and
Optimatibus; Jo. Brompton, col. 1000. number. 50.
never any Commons represented being to be met with.

Of the Great Council in King Henry the Second's Reign.
THE first considerable Act of State that I find Henry the Second did, was Anno
1154. 1 Reg. That he gathered his General Council to London in Lent, Spelman.
Council. Tom. 2. fol. 54. Congregavit Concilium generale, and renovavit pacem
and leges and consuetudines per Angliam ab antiquis temporibus constitutas.
he renewed Peace and the Laws and Customs of ancient times appointed through
England, and by his writing and Seal confirmed to Bishops and Abbats, Charters
of Privileges; whose Charter runs thus, Hen. etc. Baronibus and fidelibus suis
Francis, and Anglis salutem. Sciatis me ad Honorem Dei and Sanctae Ecclesiae,
and pro communi emendatione Regni mei concessisse and reddidisse, and praesenti
Charta mea confirmasse, etc. and so confirms the Charter of King Henry the
First his Grandfather.

As to the Council of Clarendon, about Answer to Petyt, fol. 31. ult. Edit. See
Selden's Correction of Matt. Paris, in his Epinomis.
Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, after he had once promised, and his
after refusing to set to his Seal in Confirmation of the Ancient Laws; I must
refer the Reader to what Doctor Brady has collected, and shall only touch upon
that of Matt. Paris, fol. 84. number. 20. ult. Edit.
Clarendon Anno 1164. 10 Hen. 2. where those present by the King's Mandate,
were the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons and Noblemen of
the Kingdom; and there was a Recognition of parts of the Customs and Liberties
of King Henry the King's Grandfather, and of other Kings, which were comprised
in sixteen Chapters. Concerning the Laws of this King, see Selden's Epinomis.
These Matthew Paris calls wicked Customs and Liberties; because they subjected
the Clergymen more to the Crown, than he and others would have had them; yet he
says, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Clergy, with the Earls, Barons
and Nobility, swore to them all, Proceres.
and promised firmly in the word of Truth, to hold and observe them to the King
and his Heirs, in good Faith, and without Evil, and then adds, decrevit etiam
Rex: by which it appears, that the Members of the Great Council did not only
assent, but did bind themselves by Oath and solemn Promise, obligatory to
themselves and their Posterity, to keep and observe them; and upon the whole it
is the King that decrees, appoints and constitutes.

In all the great Councils of this King, it is manifest that the Members were
only such as in former Kings Reigns; only in that of the 22 H. 2. Ben. Abb. p.
77. Anno Dom. 1176.
it is said, Rex congregatis in urbe Londoniarum, Archipraesulibus, and
Episcopis, and Comitibus, and Sapientioribus Regni sui; where Sapientiores are
instead of Barons, and for the Kings Summons it is always said, Rex convocat,
congregavit, praecepit convenire or mandavit, as is most expressly said in that
great Council, Anno 1177. 23 H. 2. Ben. Abbas, p. 86.
That the King sent Messengers through the whole Isle of England, and commanded
the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons of all England, that they should be
with him at London, the next Sunday after the beginning of Lent.

Of the Great Councils in King Richard the First's time.
THere are few great Councils met withal in his short Reign, he being so great
a part of it out of the Kingdom: The first I find is in Fol. 129. number. 16
Matthew Paris Anno 1189. 1 Reg. That in the day following the Exaltation of
the Holy Cross at Pipewel, Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, and aliorum Magnatum
suorum fretus Concilio, He supplied the Vacances of several Bishops Sees.

The Second I find is Hoved. fol. 376. a. number. 30.
when he and the King of France agreed to go to the Holy Land, where it is
said, that his Earls and Barons, who took the Crusado in the General Council at
London, swore, etc. of which it is that Fol. 155. number. 50.
Matthew Paris says, That the King of England, convocatis Episcopis and Regni
Proceribus, received the Oath from the Messengers of the King of France.

In the Fifth of King Richard Hoved. fol, 418. b. number. 20.
we have a full Example of the holding a Great Council by Commission; for
during the Imprisonment of King Richard, Adam de Sancto Edmundo Clerk, was sent
from Earl John the Kings Brother, to his Friends in England, to defend his
Castles against the King, and dined with Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury,
boasting much of the French Kings assisting Earl John: After Dinner the Mayor
of London seized on him in his Lodgings, and upon all his Breves and Mandates,
who delivered them to the Archbishop.

This occasioned the Archbishop (being the Kings Commissioner) to convene a
great Council the next day; A Great Council called on a Days warning.
but surely Summons had issued out before, or else it is a great Instance, that
the great Councils might be called of such of the Clergy and Nobility as were
nearest at Hand; for my Author expressly says, Qui i^ crastino convocatis coram
co Episcopis, Comitibus, and Baronibus Regni, ostendit eis literas Comitis
Johannis and earum tenuras, and statim per commune concilium Regni desinitum
est quod Comes Johannes dissaisiretur. Idem.
That the Archbishop the next day, called before him the Bishops, Earls and
Barons of the Kingdom, and showed to them the Letters of Earl John, and the
Tenor of them; and adds, that instantly by the Common Council of the Kingdom,
it was defined that Earl John should be disseised. This Adam, says Hoveden,
came into England not long before King Richard's release from his Imprisonment.

The next great. Idem, 419. ^. 30. A Great Council of four Days.
Council I find, was upon the Thirtieth of March, summoned to meet the King at
Nottingham, and at this were present Alienor the Kings Mother, Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury, Geoffery Archbishop of York, and seven Bishops more,
Earl David brother to the King of Scots, Hamelin Earl Warren, Ralph Earl of
Chester, William Earl Ferrers, William Earl of Salisbury, and Roger Bigot, and
names no more; but says the same day, the King disseized Rex dissaisivit
Gerardum de Canvil de Comitatu Linc. and Hug. Bardolf de Castro and Comitat.
Ebor.
Gerard de Canvil, and others. It appears, that this Council sat but four days,
on the second day the King required Judgment against Earl John his Brother; on
the third day the King Rex constituit sibi dari, etc. deinde praecepit --
exigit. Concerning the Form of Proceeding in the Pleas of the Crown, the Assize
of the Forest, wherein the Laws made in this King's time are set down, see
Selden's Epinomis.
appointed to be given him 2 s. of every Carucate of Land through England, and
that every one should perform the third part of Military Service, according to
their respective Knights Fees, to pass over Sea with him into Normandy, and
then exacted of the Cestertian Monks, all their Wool of that year, for which
they compounded; and the fourth and last day, Complaints were heard against the
Archbishop of York, and further Prosecution of Gerard de Canvil.

Hoveden gives an account of the King's Progress, till the 11th. of the same
Month, to which time the great Council was adjourned to meet at Northampton;
where the King of Scots made his demands of the Counties of Northumberland,
Cumberland, Westmorland and Lancashire; Id. Hoved.
and my Author says, That the King having taken advice with the Bishops, Earls
and Barons (no orders of Men more are mentioned) he gave answer to the King of
Scots: but it seems he had no mind to part with those Frontier Counties, but by
Charter, in the presence of his Mother Alienor, the Archbishop and other
Bishops and many others, as well Clerks as Laics of either Kingdom, he granted
the King and his Heirs certain Allowances, Safe Conduct, etc. when he should
come to the King's Court upon Summons.

The most remarkable things in these Councils to be considered, Remarks upon
these Great Councils.
are the quick dispatch of Business in them, the small Numbers they consisted
of; and that there appears no Footstep of any Commoners by Representation; and
by the Words, Rex praecepit, constituit, etc. it shows, that the King had
solely the Authoritative Power of passing the Consultations into binding Laws,
even where Money was to be levied of the Subject, and disseisure was to be made,
which was then practiced, but by an happy ease to the Subject, is since by King
Edward the First abrogated; for which as we ought all to be thankful, so to
make use of this great Liberty, that we may not abuse it to the damage of the
Crown, that bestowed the Largess, and not so much boast our selves that we are
freemen, as to remember gratefully whence our Freedom came.

Of the Great Councils in King John's time.
THE first great Council that I have met with in King John's time is that held
at Oxford, Matt. Paris, fol. 176. number. 30. ult. edit.
Anno Dom. 1204. 6 Regni, the Morrow after the Circumcision, where, as Matthew
Paris says, convenerunt ad colloquium Rex and Magnates, and there were granted
to the King two Marks and an half out of every Knights Fee. Yet though all the
Members are included under the name of Magnates, yet my Author Nec etiam
Episcopi et Abbates sive Ecclesiasticae personae sine promissione recesserunt.
Idem.
says, that neither the Bishops, Abbats, or Ecclesiastic Persons passed away
without a promise (of supply, I suppose.)

So that I conceive the Clergy undertook for their Order to contribute
something apart, as it has been since in use for the Convocation, to give a
distinct Tax imposed by themselves on the Clergy: some evident Footsteps of
which usage we find in that Council of Hoveden, fol. 282. b. number. 10. Praecepit
Rex Archiepiscopis and Episcopis, ut Si^illa sua appone^en^, and cum cateri
proni essent ad id saeciendum, Archiepise. Cant. juravit quod nunquam scripto
illi apponeret, nec leges consirmaret.
Clarendon, wherein Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury was required by the
King that he and the Bishops should set to their Seals in Confirmation of the
ancient Laws the King enjoined to be observed; which when the Bishops were
willing to do, the Archbishop swore he would never do.

The Members of the Great Council, and the absoluteness of King John in
imposing Taxes is fully discovered in what Matthew Fol. 180. number. 30.
Paris writes, that Anno 1207. 9 Regni, the King kept his Christmas at
Winchester, the Magnates Regni being present; and on the Purification of the
Virgin Mary, he took through England the Thirteenth of Movables, The King
imposes Taxes.
and other things, both of the Laics and Ecclesiastics, all murmuring, Cunctis
murmurantibus, sed contradicere non audentibus. A Great Council held in the
King's absence.
but none daring to contradict him.

Anno 1213. 15 Joh. the King intending an expedition into Normandy, left
Geofrey Fitz-Peter, and the Bishop of Winchester Commissioners in his absence,
who at St. Albans held a Council with the Archbishop, the Bishops, and the
Magnates Regni, where on the part of the King it was firmly Mat. Paris, fol.
201. number. 30. Ex part Regis firmiter est praeceptum, sicut vitam and membra
sua diligunt, ne a quoquam aliquid violenter extorqueant, vel ali^ui injuriam
irrogare praesumant.
enjoined, that the Laws of King Henry his Grandfather should be kept by all in
his Kingdom, and all evil Laws should be totally disannulled, and all Sheriffs,
Foresters, and other Ministers of the King, under the severest Penalties of
Life and Limb, should not violently extort any thing from any Person, or
presume to offer Injury to any.

In which we may observe the Conventions of great Councils in the Kings
absence, and that the Laws have force only by the King's Authority, as appears
by the expressions, ex part Regis firmiter est praeceptum.

In the same Year the Eighth of the Calends of September, Stephen, A Convention
or Conspiracy against the King.
Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Deans and Barons
of the Kingdom, met at London, at St. Paul's, in a Conspiracy against King John;
and as Fol. 201. number. 50, 60.
Matthew Paris says, the Fame was, that the Archbishop calling to himself a
Club of the Nobles, told them secretly, that they had heard how he had absolved
the King, and compelled him to swear that he should destroy evil Laws, and
should recall the good Laws, viz, those of King Edward, and make them to be
observed in his Kingdom; and that now there was found a Charter of King Henry
the First, by which if they would, they might recall to the Pristine State,
their long-lost Liberties, which Charter he produced, and it was that made to
Hugh de Bocland his Justiciary, and so they made a Confederacy among
themselves, and broke up their Assembly.

We may note, Observations on the foregoing Councils.
that this Convention at London was a Conspiracy, yet it had the Face of a
great Council, as to the constituent Parts of it, and no Representatives of the
People, and they grounded their Confederacy upon the regaining their lost
Liberties, and had recourse to King Edward's Laws, and their Confirmation by
King Henry the First. So that even such Rebels owned Kings the Fountains,
Authors, and Establishers of their Liberties, as well knowing they were born
Subjects, and whatever was remitted of the absolute Power of Princes, was by
their own Grants; though they might be induced to those Concessions from
several causes, but whenever threats, force, or other necessities for supplies,
or such like, extorted these, they were very ill kept. Anno 1215. 17 Joh. the
Barons pressing the King to confirm the Charter of Privileges, the Archbishop
with his Associates read over each Chapter. But the King understanding the
Tenor of them, with indignation and scorn said, Quare cum istis iniquis
exactionibus Barons non postulant Regnum? Nunquam tales illis concederet
libertates, unde ipse efficeretur servus. Matt. Paris, fol. 213. number. 60.
Why with these unjust exactions do not the Barons require the Kingdom? and
swore he would never grant such Liberties, whereby he should be made a Servant.

However he was afterward at Runing-mede, compelled to sign the Charter, there
being with him but eight or nine Bishops, four Earls, and some twelve Barons,
as Matthew Paris numbers them; but he says, as to those present on the behalf
of the Barons, the Company was innumerable, as being tota Angliae Nobilitas in
unum collecta.

Therefore the King grants them the Liberties by way of Charter Idem, fol. 215.
number. 13.
per consilium venerabilium Patrum nostrorum, etc. and so recounts those that
were present with him, not mentioning any of those that were against him as I
remember.

This was the Charter which Henry the third Idem, fol, 216. number. 30.
confirmed, and is called Magna Charta, the principal matter in it, which
relates to my purpose, was, that he made some alteration in the manner of
Summoning Members to the Great Council, viz. The alteration of the Summoning
the Members to the Great Council. Note. In this Charter the King grants, he
will raise no Money on the Subject, without Consent, but in three Cases; to
redeem his Body, make his eldest Son Knight, and marry his eldest Daughter: And
the like Power others ^ had over their Liberi homines.
That the Archbishop, Bishops, Abbats, Earls, and greater Barons of the
Kingdom, should be summoned by special Writs, and that he would cause to be
summoned by the Sheriffs and his Bailiffs, those which held in Capite of him,
to a certain day by general Summons. So that it is apparent, that the Great
Councils heretofore had only consisted of such Earls and great Barons and
Tenants in Capite, as the King by special Writ pleased to Summon; and this new
way brought in a greater number of the Tenants in Capite: but still here were
no Representatives of the Commons.

In the Charta de Foresta, the King says, Dei intuitu, etc. ad emendationem
Regni nostri, spontanea and bona voluntate nostra dedimus, concessimus pro
nobis and haeredibus nostris, has libertates subscriptas.

The King was sore vexed, He repents his granting the Charter.
that these Liberties had been extorted from him, and sent to Pope Idem, 224.
Innocent, who also absolved him from the Obligation, upon the ground that he
had given Id. 227. number. 20. The Pope absolves him.
the Kingdom to St. Peter, and the Church of Rome, and so could make no such
Charter without his leave, and after he Excommunicated the Rebellious Barons.

In this Charter, as in all the rest of the Charters of Liberties, we Animad.
on Jan. Augl. fol. 167. The King's Grant by Charter, a good Law then.
may observe, that the Petitions of the People were drawn into the form of a
Charter, and passed under the Kings Seal, as his mere voluntary free Grants,
and Concessions, without any Votes, Suffrages, or Authority of the People. So
Matt. Paris says of this Charter, that when King John saw the Barons too
powerful for him Fol. 255. number. 30, 50.
gratanter eis concederet Leges and Libertates quas petebant; he willingly
granted the Laws and Liberties which they asked, or petitioned for.

So in the Charter it self, Ibid. fol. 256. lin. 18.
Concessimus etiam, and omnibus liberis hominibus nostri Regni Angliae pro
nobis and haeredibus nostris in perpetuum omnes libertates subscriptas
habendas, and tenendas eis, and haeredibus suis de nobis, and haeredibus
nostris: that is, And we have also granted to all our Freemen of the Kingdom
of England, for us and our Heirs for ever, By Freemen here to be understood the
Tenants in Capite.
all the underwritten Liberties, to have and to hold to them and their Heirs
of us and our Heirs, etc.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Great Councils and Parliaments during the Reign of King
Henry the Third, to the end of the Reign of King Edward the Third.
THE first great Council I find in this Kings Reign was on the Eighth of the
Octaves of Matt. Paris fol. 266. number. 60.
Epiphany, Anno 1223. 7 H. 3. The King having kept his Christmas at Oxford,
came to London, to have a Colloquium with his Barons, and the Archbishop and
other Magnates pressed the King to confirm the Liberties and Free customs, for
which Wars had been moved against his Father, and which he had confirmed by
Oath, upon the recess of Lewis of France; to which also he said, the Juravit
and tota Nobilitas cum eo, quod libertates praescriptas omnes observarent, and
omnibus traderent observandas. Ibid.
whole Nobility had sworn that they would observe them, and deliver them to all
others to observe. To which William Briwere, one of the Kings Council,
answering for the King, said, The Liberties they desired being violently
extorted from the King, they ought not of right to be observed.

From whence we may observe, Liberties violently extorted from the King, not
binding.
that whatever claims were made for Liberties, still they were grounded on the
Monarch^ Concessions, and such as were by any violence wrested from the Kings,
were not reputed binding to the Crown.

In the Octaves of the Holy Trinity, the Eighth of Henry the Third, there met
at a Colloquium at Northampton, the King with Rex cum Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus, and aliis multis de Regni negotiis
tractaturus. Idem, fol. 269. number. 60. and 270.
the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and Barons, and many other, to treat of the
Affairs of the Kingdom. By these, alii multi, the Tenants in Capite are to be
understood, which more numerously appeared since King John's Charter. This
Great Council was intended for the relief of Poicton; but Falcacius de Brent
having seized on Bedford Castle, and taken Henry de Berybroke, one of the Kings
Itinerant Justices; obliged the King to prosecute him. At this Idem, fol. 271.
number. 20.
Council, the Prelates and Laics gave the King for his great Labors and
Expenses 2 s. upon every Plough, The King grants the Tenants in Capite Scutage
upon their Tenants.
and the King granted to the Magnates 2 m. out of every Knights Fee. This was
to be levied by the Magnates, such as held of the King in Capite, of their
Tenants, to reimburse them what they had expended in aiding the King. And so
the Council broke up.

But the King 9 Regni, Anno 1225. Idem, fol. 272. number. 20.
keeping his Court at Christmas at Westminster, praesentibus Clero, and Populo,
cum Magnatibus Regionis. After the Solemnity was passed, Hubert de Burgo the
Kings Justiciary, on the part of the King, proposed to the Archbishops, Et
al^^t universis.
Bishops, Earls, Barons, and all the Universe (that is the Tenent in Capite)
the damages and injuries which were brought upon the King beyond Sea; by which,
not only the King, but many of the Earls and Barons were disinherited:
therefore the King required Counsel and Aid of them of a Fifteenth.

Upon this the Archbishop, and the whole number of Bishops, Magna Charta
granted.
Earls, Barons, Abbats and Priors, having had deliberation, answered the King,
That they would willingly yield to the Kings desire, if he would grant them the
long desired Liberties. The King, says my Author, being led by Covetousness,
or as he means, being desirous of a supply, yielded to what the Magnates
desired; so he granted that which is called Magna Charta, so deservedly prized
by all Englishmen ever since, and the Idem, number. 30.
Charta de Foresta, and presently Charters were got drawn, and the King sealed
them, and they were sent into all Counties two; one of the Liberties, and the
other of the Forests.

Matthew. Paris says expressly, That they Ita quod chartae utrorumque Requm in
nullo inv^niuntur dissimiles.
were the same that King John had granted, and so refers the Reader to peruse
them in what he had writ on his Reign. It is to me very strange, that since so
many Original Grants of the Kings of England, and other ancienter Deeds, being
every where to be found among the ancient Evidences of many Noble and
Gentlemen's Families; yet no where that I can learn, any of these Original
Charters are to be found, except one at Lambeth, as Mr. Pryn has observed;
That upon Record being only an Exemplification in King Edward the First's time

Anno 1232. on the Nones of March, the King called a Great Council to Idem,
fol. 314. number. 20.17 H. 3.
Westminster, where there met Magnates Angliae tam Laici quam Praelati; The
King required an Aid for the payment of his Debts, contracted by his
Expeditions beyond Sea. To which Ralph Earl of Chester on behalf of the
Nobility, answered, That the Earls, Barons, and Knights that held of the King
in Capite, being with the King personally in that Expedition, and having
fruitlesly spent their Money, were poor; so that of Vnde Regi de Jure auxilium
non debebant. Idem, number. 30. The Tenants in Capite having personally served
according to the Tenure of their Service, deny the King Aid.
right they owed not Aid to the King. And so my Author says, the Laics having
asked leave, all departed, and the Prelates answered, That many Bishops and
Abbats being absent, they desired respite till some other meeting, which was
appointed fifteen days after Easter.

By this we may observe, who they were that had the power of giving consent, or
granting aid; for if there had been any other Members of the Lay Order, besides
Earls, Barons, and Knights, that held in Capite, the Earls of Chester's
Argument had been of no validity.

In the Statute of Merton, Pul^on. Stat. p. 1. In one part it is said, Our Lord
the King granted by the Consent of his Magnates.
20 H. 3. it is thus expressed, Before William Archbishop of Canterbury, and
other his Bishops and Suffragans, and before the greater part of the Earls and
Barons of England there being assembled, for the Coronation of the said King,
and Helioner the Queen, about which they were called; thus it was provided and
granted, as well of the foresaid Archbishop, Bishops, Earls and Barons, as of
the King himself and others.

I shall only cull out some few of the Great Councils in this Kings Reign,
wherein most fully are expressed the true Members of them, or such wherein
something remarkable was transacted.

Anno 1237. 21 H. 3. The King keeping his Christmas at Winchester, sent his
Matt. Paris, fol. 367. number. 30. Misu, etc. scripta R^galia, pracipiens omnibus
ad Regnum Angliae spectantibus, etc. ut omnes sine omissi^ne -- conveairent
Regni negotia tractaturt totum Regnum contingentia.
Royal Writs through all England, commanding all that appertained to the
Kingdom of England, that is, all who were to be Members of the great Council,
which my Author explains particularly thus, viz. Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats,
Priors installed, Earls and Barons, that without failure they should meet at
London on the Octaves of the Epiphany, to treat of the Affairs of the Kingdom,
concerning the whole Kingdom; then he adds, That on the day of St. Hilary,
there met at London an Insinita Nobilium multitudo, viz. Regni totalis
universitas.
infinite Multitude of the Nobles, viz. The whole University of the Kingdom,
which were the Persons of those Orders before particularized.

Anno 1246. 30 H. 3. By the Kings Edicto Regio convocata convenit ad
Parliamentum generali ^^mum ^otius Regni Anglicani totalis Nobilitas. Idem, p.
609. number. 10.
Edict was called to the most general Parliament (says Matthew Paris) all the
Nobility of the whole Kingdom of England, viz. of the Prelates as well Abbats
and Priors as Bishops, also Earls and Barons; and a few Pages after, concerning
the same Parliament, he says, All the Magnates of the Kingdom met, and the
King himself first spoke to the Bishops apart, then to the Earls and Barons,
and last to the Abbats and Priors.

In this, The word Parliament now used.
that which frequently in Matthew Paris is called Colloquium, now he gives the
Title of Parliament to, from the French word parler, to confer or speak
together; and we find what is meant also by totalis Nobilitas.

Anno 1253. 37 H. 3. By the Tota edicto Regio convocata Angliae Nobilitas
convenit de arduis Regni Negotiis simul cum R^ge tractatura. Idem. fol. 745.
number. 40.
Kings Edict the Nobility of England being summoned, met at London to treat
together with the King, of the arduous Affairs of the Kingdom; and there were
present with most of the Earls and Barons, the Archbishop Boniface, and almost
all the Bishops of England. In this great Council were the Tenants in Capite,
according to King John's Charter. The King in this Parliament or Colloquium,
requires Money for an Expedition into the Holy Land; but for fifteen days there
were great Contests about it, till the King de novo confirmed King John's
Charters, and a solemn Excommunication was agreed upon, to be pronounced
against the Infringers of it; and my Author says, Rex, Magnates, and
Communitas Populi protestantur, in the Presence of the Venerable Fathers, etc.
That they never consented, or do consent that any thing be added or altered in
the Charters, but plainly contradict it; so 3 May Pat. 37 H. 3. m. 13. Anno
1253.
in Westminster Hall, the Exemplification passed the Seal of the King and other
great Men.

But it is principally to be considered what is expressed in the Patent,
Praefatus Dominus Rex in prolatione praefatae sententiae, omnes libertates,
consuetudines Regni sui Angliae and usitatas dignitates and Jura Coronae suae
^re proprio specialiter sibi and Regno suo salvavit and excepit.
That the King in the Declaration of the said Sentence, did, by his own Mouth
specially save and except to himself and his Kingdom, all the Liberties,
ancient Customs of his Kingdom, and Usages, Dignities and Rights of his Crown.

By which it is apparent how cautious the King was in these liberal
Concessions, not to prejudice his Prerogative. They are neither few in Number,
nor of mean repute for judgment and learning in our Laws, who assert, Such like
Protestation King Richard the Second made, 10 Reg. Rot. Parl. 10 R. 2. number. 32.
See in King Stephen.
that as Acts of Parliament made contrary to Magna Charta, are void; so
likewise are all such as diminish the Prerogative in any part of it, which is
necessary for the support of the Government: So upon the passing the Petition
His Majesty's Speeches, fol. 368. of the Basilica.
of Right, King Charles the First, the King said, The King wills that Right
be done according to the Laws and Customs of the Land, and that the Statutes be
put in due Execution, that the Subjects may have no cause to complain of any
Wrong or Oppression, contrary to their Just, Rights and Liberties, to the
Preservation whereof he holds himself obliged, as well as of his Prerogative:
But this would not please, and so he pronounced, Le droit soit fait comme il
est desire, and adds, that, he is sure, is full, but no more than he granted in
his first Answer; his meaning in that being to confirm all their Liberties,
knowing according to their Protestations, they neither meant nor can hurt his
Prerogative. The Peoples Liberty strengthens the Kings Prerogative, and the
Kings Prerogative is to defend the Peoples Liberties.

The rest of the Parliaments of this Kings Reign, are said to be called Id.
435. number. 10.21 H. 3. Id. 693. number. 20.26 H. 3. Id. fol. 579. number. 40. Id. fol.
696. number. 30. Id. fol. 698. number. 40. Vide Brady's Appendix, fol. 59, 60.
per scripta Regalia, submonitione Regia, or that, scripsit Rex praecipiens, or
missis literis convocavit, Anno 1246. 30 H. 3. or Edicto Regio convocat, etc.
which denotes the Authority convening them; and for the Members, they are
either styled Magnates, omnis Regni Nobilitas, or Clerus and Populus cum
Magnatibus, Magnates tam Laici, quam Praelati, Episcopi, and alii Ecclesiarum
Praelati, cum Proceribus Regni, or else they are particularly numbered to be
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, for the Clergy, and the Comites and
Barons for the Laity. In one I find Archiepiscopus cum Suffraganeis suis for
the rest of the Bishops, and M. Paris, fol. 397. number. 10.10 H. 3.
another runs thus, Anno 1247. 31 H. 3. fecit Dominus Rex Magnates suos nec-non
and Angliae Archidiaconos per scripta sua Regia Londinum convocari. Yet though
Matt. Paris only mention the Magnates and Archidiaconi; yet he says, when the
prefixed day was come, the Bishops all willingly absented themselves, and he
gives the Reason, ne viderentur prop^iis factis eminus adversari, sciebant enim
corda omnium, usque ad animae amaritudinem, non immerito sauciari.

Then when he Id. 629. Edit. ult number. 10. Archdeacons summoned to Parliament.
gives an Account of the business of this great Council, he says that the
Archdeacons of England, as also not the least part of the whole Clergy of the
Kingdom, with the Magnates complained of the Popes exaction; and so Letters
were writ to the Pope and Cardinals.

It may be noted also, That in those Days the Kings summoned other dignified
Clergy besides Bishops, Abbats and Priors.

I shall insist no longer upon these Matters, The new Constitution of
Parliament by Representatives.
but pass to the great Mutation which was made in the Constitution of our
English Parliaments: It seems to be clear, that before King John's time, the
Members of the Great Councils were summoned by special Writ, and they were only
the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats and Priors for the Clergy, and the Earls and
Barons, and such of the Tenants in Capite as were of greatest quality, as the
King pleased: But in King John's Charter, all the Tenants in Capite were
convened by a General Summons, which did much increase the number of the
Members of these great Councils; and by so much as they were more numerous, it
is likely the Popular Barons hoped to make their Party the stronger against the
King; for we find it introduced when the Barons were propense to rebel.

So the Second great Alteration on the Constitution of Parliament was
introduced, Montfort's Rebellion.
when Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, and the Rebellious Barons had the King
and the Prince Prisoners. Simon Montford, to strengthen his Interest, first, in
the Kings Name, summons the Earls and Barons which were in Arms against the
King; also at other times summoned more Abbats and Priors than had been used,
for that the Clergy at that time had a great Opinion of him, and he was their
Minion, as is apparent in Matthew Paris, and fully in the judicious Answer to
Petyt, fol. 137, 138, 139.
Doctor Brady, to whom I must specially refer the curious Reader in this
particular.

The 14th. The Form of the Writ of Summons.
of Dec. 48 H. 3. the first Writ issued out thus, Item mandatum est singulis
Vicecomitibus per Angliam, quod venire faciant, duos Milites de legalioribus
and discretioribus Militibus singulorum Comitatuum, It is commanded to all the
Sheriffs of England, that they make, or cause to come, two Knights of the more
Legal and Discreet Knights of every County, to be at London on the Octaves of
St. Hilary next.

So in the like manner Cl. 49 H. 3. m. 11. dorso schedulae.
Writs were directed to Cities and Buroughs, to send two of the more Discreet,
Legal and Honest Citizens and Burgesses. This is without Date; that to the
Barons of the Cinque Ports is Jan. 20. It does not appear by the Writ to the
Sheriffs, whether they or the Counties were to elect and send those Knights, or
who were Electors.

It is the Opinion of most learned Brady against Petyt, fol. 143. Dugdale's
Baronage, fol. 759. col. 3.
Men, that Simon Montfort apprehended (from the Concourse of the Nobility, and
their great Retinues, and the Example of his and the Barons Practices at
Oxford) some danger to himself and his Affairs, and so altered the ancient
Usage.

Upon the 5th. of August 49 H. 3. Simon Montfort was slain at Evesham, and all
his Party routed; and the 8th. of September following, the King convened his
Parliament at Winchester, which according to the old form, The old Form again
used.
consisted only of the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons and Great Men:
nor did he continue Montfort's Method after, as appears by that Parliament he
called 50 Regni.

By the Statute of Marleburgh 52 H. 3. it is evident, All the Barons not
summoned, but the more discreet, and so of the lesser Barons.
That even all the great Barons were not summoned, but only the more Discreet,
and such as the King thought fit to call; and the like is observed of the
lesser Barons or Tenants in Capite: For if it had been by General Summons, that
Restriction of the more Discreet had been useless; so that it appears, that
what Britannia, fol. 122. Quibus ip^^ Rex digna^us est brevia summonitionis
dirigere, venirent, etc. and non alii.
Mr. Camden's ancient Author observes, is true, That after the horrid
Confusions and Troubles of the Barons Wars, those Earls and Barons, whom the
King thought worthy to summon by his Writ to meet, came to his Parliaments, and
no other.

The Preamble to this Statute of Stat. Edit. 1576. p. 15.
Marlebridge runs thus in Tottel, Providente ipso Domino Rege, ad Regni sui
Angliae meliorationem and exhibitionem Justitiae (prout Regalis Officii poscit
Vtilitas) pleniorem, convocatis discretioribus ejusdem Regni tam majoribus quam
minoribus, provisum est and statutum, ac concordatum and ordinatum.

According to Pulton the Fol. 14.
Preamble is thus, That whereas the Realm of England, of late, had been
disquieted, with manifold Troubles and Dissentions, for Reformation whereof
Statutes and Laws be right necessary, The Use and Benefit of Laws.
whereby the Peace and Tranquillity of the People must be observed; wherein the
King intending to devise convenient Remedy, has made these Acts, Ordinances
and Statutes underwritten, which he wills to be observed for ever firmly and
inviolably of all his Subjects, as well high as low.

Thus we see in the whole Reign of H. 3. (excepting in that Parliament of
Montfort's Faction) the Bishops and dignified Clergy, Earls, Barons and Tenants
in Capite, were only summoned as Members of the great Councils; and there were
no Representatives of the Commons; and the Kings Authority in summoning,
dissolving and making Laws is most manifest.

Of Parliaments in King Edward the First 's Reign.
I Shall now glean out of Tottel and Pulton's Editions of the Statutes, the
most material Preambles, which give light to the constituent Parts of
Parliaments, to the Legislative Power in the King, with the Concurrence of the
two Houses, and how that in the Series of the Kings Reign has been expressed,
and such other matters relating to the Parliament, as may show the gradual
Progress of their Constitution, to the usage of this present Age; leaving the
Reader to make his own remarques from the matters of Fact, and the expressions
used by my Authors, and explaining some.

The Preface to the Statute of Ceux sont les establishments le Roy Ed. fitz Roy
Hen. fait a Westminst. etc. par son Council, and par Passentments des
Archevesques, Evesques, Abbes, Priores, Countes, Barons, and tout le Commonalty
de la terre illonques summons. Tottel. Stat. fol. 24. Pulton, p. 19.
Westminster begins thus, These are the Establishments of King Edward, Son to
King Henry, made at Westminster, at his first General Parliament after his
Coronation, etc. by his Council, and by the Assent of the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, and the whole Commonalty of the Land thither
summoned.

This Parliament was prorogued before it met, and the Writ of Prorogation
mentions only, Quia generale Parliamentum nostrum, quod cum Praelatis and
Magnatibus Regni nostri proposuimus habere, etc. Therefore having prorogued it,
mandamus, etc. Intersitis ad tractandum and ordinandum una cum Praelatis and
Magnatibus Regni nostri, Brady against Pety^, fol. 147.
etc. So that all the Members are included in the two general Terms of Praelati
and Magnates, which great Men very frequently comprehended as well the Barons
Majores, as Minores, the Earls, Barons and greater Tenants in Capite, and the
less, which then were called the Community of the Kingdom.

The rest of the Preamble of the Statutes made at Pulton's Stat. An. 1275.3 E.
1. f. 19.
Westminster runs thus, Because our Lord the King has great Zeal, and desire
to redress the State of the Realm, etc. the King has ordained and established
these Acts under written.

The Preface to the Statute de Bigamis, 4 Oct. 4 Ed. 1. is thus In prasentia
venerabilium purum qu^ru^dam Episcoporum Angliae and aliorum de Concilio R^gis
^^citatae s^^erunt constitutiones ^ub ^riptae, and postmod^^m coram Domino Rege
and Concilio s^o auditae and publicatae: Quia omnes de consili^ ^am ^us^^^^arii
quam alii concordaverunt, etc. Tottel. p. 39. b.
expressed, In the Presence of certain Reverend Fathers, Bishops of England,
and others of the Kings Council, the constitutions under written were recited,
and after heard and published before the King and his Council; for as much as
all the King's Council, as well Justices as others did agree, that they should
be put in writing, for a perpetual memory, and that they should be steadfastly
observed.

In the First Chapter it is said, Concordatum est per Justiciarios and alios
sapientes de Concilio Regni Domini Regis, It was agreed by the Justices and
other wise or sage Men, of the Council of the Kingdom of the Lord the King.

Perhaps (says the judicious Doctor Brady) the best understanding of the
preamble and first Chapter, may be, that the Laws and Constitutions were
prepared by the King and his Answer to P^tyt, fol. 148.
Council, with the Assistance of the Justices and Lawyers that were of it, or
called to assist in it, and declared afterward in Parliament: Prae^i^^ae autem
constitutiones e^i^^ suerunt, etc. and ex^une l^^um habean^. Tottel. fol. 40.
for it is said in the close of the Statute, The aforesaid Constitutions were
published at Westminster in the Parliament, after the Feast of St. Michael, the
4th. of the Kings Reign, and thence forward to take place.

The Preamble to the Statute of Gloucester, Anno 1278. 6 E. 1. is thus, Pour
amendment de son Roialm, and pur plus pleinir exhibition de droit si com^^^^
pr^sit d^ Office deman^, app^lles le plues discretes de son Roialme, au^^ bien
des Granders com^ des Meindres, establie est and concordantment ordine. Tottel.
fol. 50.
The King, for the amendment of the Realm, and for the more full Exhibition of
Justice, according as the benefit of his Office requires, having called the
most discreet of his Realm, as well the greater as the smaller; It is
established and unanimously ordained, as Pulton adds, after by the King and his
Justices certain Expositions were made.

The Statute of Mortmain is thus prefaced, Nos pro Tottel. p. 48.
Vtilitate Regni volentes providere, Remedium de Concilio Praelatorum, Comitum,
Baronum and aliorum fidelium Regni nostri de Concilio nostro existentium,
providimus, statuimus and ordinavimus, which Pulton, fol. 35. Anno 1279. 14.
Nov. 7 E. 1.
Pulton renders by the Advice of our Prelates, Earls, Barons and Subjects of
our Kingdom, being of our Council, the King has provided, made and ordained;
whereas by Fideles is to be understood the Tenants in Capite.

The Statute of Acton Burnel, or Statute Merchant 11 E. 1. according to Tottel,
was made by the Ce Roy per luy and per tout son Counsel ad ordain and establ^e.
Tottel, fol. 49. and 82.
King himself and his whole Council: That this was done in Parliament, appears
by the Statute of Merchants, made in the 13th. of the same King, wherein it is
said, Our Lord the King, by himself and by his Council, at his A son Parliament
qu^il ^^^^t a Acton-Burnel, etc.
Parliament, which he held at Acton Burnel, 11 Regni, made and ordained these
Establishments; or as Pulton, fol. 36.
Pulton has it, The King caused the Statute made by the King and his Council
at Acton Burnel to be rehearsed, and has ordained and established.

Since the 49 of H. 3. to the 18 of Ed. 1. we find R^t. Pat. 20 E. 1. m. 15.
no Writs for summoning of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses; but the 14 of June
18 Ed. 1. The King issued out the following Summons, Rex, etc. The Form of
Summons of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, renewed at the Petition of the
Nobles. Two or three Knights to be chosen.
cum per Comites, Barons and quosdam alios de Proceribus Regni nostri nuper
fuissemus super quibusdam specialiter requisiti, tam cum ipsis quam cum aliis
de communitatibus Regni illius colloquium habere, volumus and tractatum, etc.
Tibi praecipimus quod duos vel tres de discretioribus, and ad laborandum
potentioribus Militibus de Comitatu praedicto, sine dilatione eligi, and eos ad
nos, etc. venire facias, etc. cum plena potestate pro se and communitate
Comitatus praedicti, ad consulendum, and consentiendum pro se and communitate
illa, hiis quae Comites, Barons and Proceres praedicti, tum duxerint
concordanda, vel concorditer ordinaverint in praemissis. The English of which
is, Whereas we have been especially petitioned and requested by the Earls,
Barons and others of the great Men of our Kingdom, concerning certain matters,
upon which we will have Conference and treat, as well with themselves as with
others of the Counties of that Kingdom: We command thee, that without delay
thou make to be chosen, two or three of the most discreet and ablest Knights,
for dispatch of business of the Counties aforesaid, and cause them to come to
us, etc. with full Power for themselves, and the whole Community of the County
aforesaid, to consult and consent for themselves and that Community, to such
things which the Earls, Barons and great Men aforesaid, shall think fit to
agree upon.

From this we may observe, That by Virtue of this Writ, No Citizens and
Burgesses, but only Knights for Counties.
no Citizens or Burgesses could be chosen or sent to Parliament; But only
Knights for Counties: Secondly, The Scutage was granted in this Parliament, as
Doctor Brady has noted, fourteen days before the Writ for Election of Knights
issued out; and it is Tottel's Stat. p. 85.
apparent, That the Statute of Westminster the Third was made the Eighth of
July, which was a week before they were to appear, and consequently was made
without them; for the Preamble runs, Dominus Rex in Parliamento suo apud
Westmonasterium post Pascham Anno Regni sui 18. viz. in quindena S. Johannis
Baptistae ( i.e. 8 July) ad instantium Magnatum Regni sui concessit, providit
and statuit.

From this Writ and the Variation of the following Writs, and other Records,
the judicious Doctor Brady Answer to Petyt, fol. 151.
notes, That it was from the Kings Authority, and at this time, that the House
of Commons came to be fixed and established, in the present constant form it
now is and has been for many Kings Reigns, and it does appear that King Edward
the First was not altogether confined to any certain number of Knights,
Citizens, or Burgesses, nor were several strict forms and usages now practiced,
ever then thought of, or some legal Niceties or Punctilioes now in use, then
judged of absolute Necessity.

The Statute of Quo Pulton, An. 1290. fol. 58.
Warranto in the Eighteenth Year of Edward the First, says that the King of
his special Grace, and for the affection he bears to his Prelates, Earls and
Barons, and others of his Realm has granted, etc.

The Statute de Idem, Anno 1293. fol. 61.
Malefactoribus in Parcis in the Twenty first Year of Edward the First, says,
Our Lord the King at his Parliament, etc. at the instance of the Nobles of the
Realm has granted, etc.

Anno 1294. the King issues out his Cl. 22 E. 1. m. 6. dorso. Four Knights for
a County.
Writs to cause two Knights out of every County to be chosen, etc. Dated the
Eighteenth of October, and the next day issues out Writs for other two to be
chosen to meet at the same time and place.

Out of Mr. Ryley's Fol. 241.
Placita Parliamentorum it is clear, that the Parliament which met on the
Octaves of St. Claus. 28 E. 1. m. 3. dorso.
Hilary or the Twentieth of January, in the Twenty eighth Year of Edward the
First, sat but eight days, the Writ for the Commons Expenses, bearing date,
January the Thirtieth of the same Year; and the Letter to the Pope, signed by
the Temporal Lords for themselves, and the whole Community of the Kingdom of
England; is dated February the twelfth next following, after the Commons had
been dismissed fourteen days: so that the Barons still continued to style
themselves the Community of England, The Barons stay after the Commons
dismissed.
and both Spiritual and Temporal Barons, and others of the King's Council did
stay and dispatch much Business after all others were dismissed, as further
appears in a See Brady's Answer to Petyt, fol. 152.
Proclamation 21 March, 33 Ed. 1. Wherein the King gives the Archbishops,
Bishops, and other Prelates, Earls and Barons, Knights of Counties, Citizens
and Burgesses, and other Persons of the Commons, which by our Lord the King's
Command came to this Parliament, many Thanks for their coming, and wills that
at present they return into their Counties, so as they readily, and without
delay do come again at the time when they shall be remanded; except the
Bishops, Sauve les Evesques, Countes, and Barons, Justices, and autres qui sont
du Conseil nostre Seigneur le Roy, que ceux ne sen allient saunz especial conge
du Roy. The King's Council prepare Laws.
Earls and Barons, Justices and others, which are of the King's Council, who
may not depart without special leave of the King.

I shall not here enter into the enquiry how far the extent of the Power of the
King's Council was in those days; but it is very apparent that the King with
advice of his Council, proposed Laws, and that others proposed by the Houses,
were considered by the King and Council, as no doubt they are now considered
before the King gives his Assent to Bills.

So in the Statute of the Definition of Pulton, An. 1304. fol. 72.
Conspirators in the three and Thirtieth Year of King Edward the First, it is
said, This Ordinance was accorded by the King, and his Council in his
Parliament.

Also in the Ordinance of Idem, Anno 1305.
Enquests, the Eighteenth of Sept. in the thirty third Year of Ed. the First,
It is said it is agreed and ordained by the King and all his Council, that is,
his Parliament.

As to the special Prerogative of the King in giving the ultimate Character and
fiat to the Laws, every Act expresses it; so the Statute of 18 Sept. 33 E. 1.
Champerty, the Statutes are called by the King, Our Statutes, and, Our Lord
the King has commanded; and in the Statute de Conjunctim feoffat. it is said,
It is no new thing that among diverse Establishments of Laws, which we have
ordained in our time; so in the Ordinatio Forestae, 34 Ed. 1. The King Ordains.
Id. Anno 1306. fol. 73.
We have ordained for our selves, and our Heirs. So in the Statute De asportatu
Religiosorum, 35 Ed. 1. it is said by the Council of his Earls, Barons, great
Men, and other Nobles of his Kingdom, at his Parliament, Our Lord the King has
Ordained and Enacted.

I shall only note first, That in the Twenty eighth of this King those the Cl.
28 E. 1. m. 3. dorso.
King had appointed being ready to give an account of the Perambulation of the
Forests, the King put a present stop to their report, and his determination;
because the Prelates, Earls, Barons, The Reason the King will determine nothing
without advice in Parliament.
and the rest of the Magnates of the Kingdom, in whose Presence his own, and
others Reasons should be propounded, and heard, and by whose Councils he
intended to work (especially seeing they were bound by Oath as well as himself,
to observe and maintain the Rights of the Kingdom and Crown) were not then
present, and those were not summoned who should propound their Reasons, so far
as the matters concerned them, and the King was not willing without their
advice to put an end to the matters, therefore he orders the Sheriffs to cause
the two Knights that came to the last Parliament, by his Precept, now to come,
and the like for the Cities and Buroughs, and if any were dead, or infirm, so
that he could not come, then to cause another to be chosen.

By which it appears that it was only from the King's Indulgence, and that he
might more deliberately resolve, for the best advantage of his Subjects, and
for their satisfaction, that he would have the advice of a fuller Assembly.

We may also further note from hence, that it was in the King's Power to summon
the same Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses without a new Choice, except the
Persons were dead or infirm.

Of the Parliaments in King Edward the Second's time.
IN this King's Reign, these following Particulars are most observable: In the
Statute for Pulton, An. 1307. fol. 79.
Knights, 1 Regni, it is said Our Lord the King has granted.

In the Summons, 5 Ed. 2. the Precept to the Sheriff, The same Knights, etc. to
come that were before.
is to cause to come to the Parliament, to be held at Westminster, those
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in his Bailiwick, which he caused to come
lately to the present Parliament at London, and which for certain causes went
from the said Parliament, Cl. 5 E. 2. m. 26. dorso. Vel alios ad h^^ idoneos
loco ipsorum si ad hoc vacare non possunt.
or others fit for the Employment, if they cannot be at leisure. Dated October.
11.

In the sixth of Ed. 2. we have an example of the King's Cl. 6 E. 2. m. 27.
dorso. A Form of Prorogation.
proroguing the House of Commons in these Words, Dominus Rex praecepit quod
Milites, Cives and Burgenses qui ad Parliamentum Regis ibidem summonitum,
convenerunt pro Comitatibus, Civitatibus, and Burgis Angliae, ad propria
remearent, ita quod reverterentur ibidem in crastino S. Mich. prox. futuro sub
poena qua decet. So that as they were commanded to return home, so they were
appointed a time to return under the Intimation of a Punishment.

The Preamble to the Pulton, An. 1315. fol. 80. The King with his Council
revise Articles after the Parliament ended.
Articuli Cleri runs thus, That by the Kings Progrenitors and himself, at the
Instance of the Prelates, certain Articles were made, and in the Parliament at
Lincoln, 9 Regni, he caused them to be rehearsed before his Council, and made
certain answers to be corrected; and to the residue of the Articles, answers
were made by him and his Council, and so by way of Charter they are published
at York, 24 Nov. 10 Regni.

The Statute of Id. 1316. fol. 83.
Gavelet at London says, It is provided by our Lord the King, and his Justices.

In the Statute de Terris Id. Anno 1323. 17 E. 2. fol. 91.
Templariorum, it is said, Great conference was had before the King himself, in
the presence of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Nobles, and great Men of the
Realm, and others present; whereupon the Greater part of the King's Council,
The King's Council and Justices affirm.
as well the Justices as other Laymen, being assembled, the Justices affirmed
precisely, etc. After the recital of Particulars, the words are, It is ordained
and agreed in the same Parliament.

Anno 1326. the last of Ed. 2. There is a Prorogation of the Claus. 20 E. 2. m.
4. dorso. A Prorogation before Meeting.
Parliament, before meeting, which runs thus, That though the King had intended
Colloquium and Tractatum, Conference and Treaty in the Quindene of St. Andrew,
by Isabel the Queen, and Edward his eldest Son, Custos of the Kingdom (the King
then being beyond Sea,) and the Prelates, Proceres, and Magnates Regni, and so
had commanded two Knights of the Community of the County, two Burgesses of
every Borough; Quia tamen quibusdam de causis necessariis and utilibus
praedict. Parliamentum and Tractatum usque in crast inum Epiphaniae prox. jam
futur. etc. duximus prorogandum.
yet for certain causes necessary and profitable, he has prorogued the said
Parliament and Treaty unto the day after Epiphany, etc.

Of the Parliaments in King Edward the Third's time.
THE Preface to the Statutes at Pulton, An. 1327. fol. 93.
Westminster, 1 Ed. 3. is thus: To the Honor of God, etc. King Ed. 3, at his
Parliament held at Westminster, etc. Petition made by the Commonalty to the
King and his Council.
at the request of the Commonalty of his Realm, by the Petition made before him
and his Council in the Parliament, by assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons,
and other great Men assembled at the said Parliament, has granted for him and
his Heirs for ever, these Articles.

The title of the Statute made at Idem, Anno 1329. fol. 97.
Westminster, 27 Nov. 4 Ed. 3. is thus. At the request of the Commons these
things be Established, and Enacted by our Lord the King, his Prelates,
Established and enacted by the King, Prelates, etc.
Earls, and Barons, and other of the same Parliament.

So that at Westminster Idem, Anno 1331. fol. 100.
5 Ed. 3. Our Lord the King by the Assent of the Prelates, etc. and other Great
Men, and at the request of his People, has granted and established.

The Preamble to the Statutes at York Idem, Anno 1335. fol. 103. Showed by the
Knights^ etc. for the Commons; assented to by the Lords, with the Advice of the
King's Council.
9 E. 3. runs thus, It was showed to our Lord the King, by the Knights of the
Shires, Citizens of the Cities, and Burgesses of Buroughs which come for the
Commons of the said Shires, Cities and Buroughs, Our Lord the King, etc. by
the Assent of his Prelates, etc. and other Nobles of this Realm summoned at
this Parliament, and by the Advice of his Council, being there; Upon the said
things disclosed to him, Ordains, etc.

So the Statute at Idem, Anno 1336. p. 105.
Westminster 10 E. 3. is, Our Lord the King by the Assent of the Prelates, etc.
and at the Request of the Knights of Shires, and his Commons by their Petition,
has Ordained, Established, etc.

The Preamble to the Statute for the Clergy, 16 Apr. 14 E. 3. runs thus, At the
Petition of John Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Prelates, upon
deliberation had with the Peers of our Realm, and other of our Council, and of
the Realm summoned to our said Parliament.

Thus far we find the King Establishing and Ordaining upon the Petition of the
Commons, as also of the Prelates, with the Assent of the Prelates and Nobility
and his Council. Before I proceed to those Statutes which mention the assent or
advice of the whole Parliament, I think fit to insert at large, the Repeal of
an imperfect Statute made 15 E. 3.

There having been Idem, Anno 1541. 15 E. 3. fol. 115.
a Statute made, That Ministers of the Church should not answer before the
Kings Justices for things done touching the Jurisdiction of the Church: For
what reasons, and in what manner this was repealed, Repeal of Law unduely
pr^cured.
will best appear by the Kings Precept to the Sheriff of Lincoln, which runs
thus:

Whereas at our Parliament, summoned at Westminster, in the Quindene of Easter
last past, certain Articles, expressly contrary to the Laws and Customs of our
Realm of England, and to our Prerogatives, and Rights Royal, were pretended to
be granted by us in the manner of a Statute. And considering, how by the Bond
of our Oath we be tied to the observance and defense of such Laws, Customs,
Rights, and Prerogatives; and providently willing to revoke such things to
their own State which be so improvidently done. Upon Conference and Treatise
thereupon, with the Earls, Barons and other Wise Men of our said Realm; and
because we never consented to the making of the said Statute, but as it then
behoved us, we dissimuled in the Premises, by Protestations of Revocation of
the said Statute, if indeed it should proceed, to eschew the danger, which by
denying the same we feared to come, for as much as the said Parliament
otherwise had been, without dispatching any thing, in discord dissolved, and so
our earnest business had likely been ruinated, which God prohibit, and the said
pretended Statute we promised then to have sealed.

It seemed to the said Earls, Barons, and other Wise Men, that sithence the
Statute did not of our Free Will proceed, the same be void, and ought not to
have the name or strength of a Statute, and therefore by their counsel and
assent we have decreed the said Statute to be void, and the same as much as it
proceeded of Dread we have agreed to be adnulled.

Nevertheless, that the Articles contained in the said pretended Statute, which
by other of our Statutes, or of our Progenitors Kings of England, have been
approved, shall according to the form of the said Statute, in every point, as
convenient is, be observed, and the same we do only for the Conservation and
Redintegration of the Rights of our Crown, as we be bound, and not that we
should in any wise grieve or oppress our Subjects, whom we desire to rule in
lenity and gentleness. So the King commands all these things to be openly
Proclaimed, 1 Oct. 15. Regni.

From this Statute we may 1st. Observations upon i^^^
observe, That without the Kings free and express consent, there can be no Law
passed. 2ly. The Bishops are not mentioned in this, it being contrary to some
Liberties Churchmen claimed by the Canons. 3ly. The Kings assent was not
complete, but only a temporary one, like a Salvo Jure, lest his earnest
business for which he called them should miscarry for want of a seeming
compliance; therefore he is said to promise the Sealing of it (which was in
that Age the Characteristick of Confirmation) but never did it, but rather made
some kind of Protestation in the presence of some, that what he did was
unwillingly. 4ly. That seeing it did not proceed of his Free Will, therefore by
the advice and consent of the Earls, Barons, and other Wise Men, it is declared
void: Lastly, The principal reason why he gave not his free consent to it, was
because it was against his Coronation Oath, whereby he was tied to the
observance, and defense of the Laws, Customs, Kings not bound to consent to
what Bills the Houses propose.
Rights, and Prerogatives: So that upon the whole, they that would advise their
Princes to consent to whatever Bills the Houses should tender (as in the
Chapter of Factious Members of Parliament I shall have occasion to discourse)
may learn from hence, That the King found himself obliged to consent to no
Bills contrary to the Law, Customs, Rights and Prerogatives: such were those
the unhappy Parliament of 41 in the point of the Militia, and their other
dethroning Bills; and of late, another Parliament in the Bill of Seclusion,
endeavored to impose upon their Sovereigns, contrary to the fundamental Laws
and Prerogatives of the Crown.

To proceed, The Preface of the Statute at Id. 1346. fol. 118.
Westminster, 7th. May 20 E. 3. runs thus, Because that by diverse complaints
made to us, we have perceived, that the Law of the Land (which we by our Oath
are bound to maintain) is the less well kept, etc. we greatly moved of
Conscience in this matter, etc. by the assent of the great Men, and other Wise
Men of our Council, We have ordained, etc.

The Preamble to the Statute of Laborers Idem, Anno 1349. fol. 120.
repealed 23 E. 3. was thus, Upon deliberation, and treaty with the Prelates,
and the Nobles, and learned Men assisting us, of their mutual assent ordained;
and that Statute for Laborers which remains in force, 25 E. 3. says, Whereas
it was ordained by our Lord the King, and by assent of the Prelates, Earls,
Barons, and others of his Council, etc.

It is apparent by several Records, So one Knight for a County, when two
Burgesses, 27 E. 3. So the King names one Knight, one Citizen, and one Burgess
to be sent, 43 E. 3. m. 2.
That the Kings of England have not been tied to the certain number of Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses, though for a long while, two only have been chosen of
each; but heretofore, sometimes but one, other times two or three, as that 18
E. 1. and 4 Knights 22 E. 1.

Besides which liberty there is a Cl. 24 E. 3. p. 2. m. 3.
memorable Record in this Kings Reign, wherein the King appointed the
qualifications of such as were to be chosen Members of the House of Commons.

The Writ is directed to all the Sheriffs of England, Quod de Comitatu tuo duos
Milites, etc. de discretioribus and probioribus Militibus, Civibus, and
Burgensibus, and ad laborandum potentioribus, qui non sint Placitatores,
querelarum manutentores, aut ex hujusmodi quaestu viventes, etc. sed homines
valentes, and bonae sidei, and publicum commodum diligentes, eligi.
Qualification of Members to be elected.


Pleading Lawyers, Maintainers of Plaints, and such as lived of such like gain
were forbid to be chosen upon some particular Reason of State then inducing it,
of which I shall write something in the Chapter of Parliaments.

The other Preambles most Pulton, An. 1350. fol. 121.25 E. 3. Idem, Anno 1350.
fol. 125. Assent of the Commonalty.
remarkable in this Kings Reign, are mostly, By the assent of the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, and other great men, and all the Commons, or of all the
Commonalty of the Kings Realm. The King has Granted, Ordained, Established,
etc.

The Statute for the Clergy Idem, Anno 1350. fol. 122.
25 Regni, says, Our Lord the King seeing and examining by good deliberation,
the Petitions and Articles delivered to him in his Parliament, etc. by Simon
Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops of his Province, upon certain
Grievances, etc. By the Assent of his Parliament.
by the assent of his Parliament, for him and his Heirs, wills and grants
the Points underwritten.

The Statute of Provisors, 25 E. 3. is Id. 1350. fol. 129.25 E. 3. The King
bound by his Oath to remedy Mischiefs and Damage^ to his Realm, by accord of
his People in Parliament.
singular in its Preamble, That whereas, in the Parliament 15 E. 1. at
Carlisle, the Petition heard, put before the said King and his Council in his
said Parliament, by the Commonalty of the said Realm, containing, etc.
whereupon the said Commons have prayed our Lord the King, that since the right
of the Crown of England, and the Law of the said Realm, is such, That upon the
Mischiefs and Damages which happen to his Realm, he ought, and is bound by his
Oath, with the accord of his People in his Parliament, thereof to make Remedy
and Law, and remove the Mischiefs and Damages, which thereof ensue, so pray the
King thereupon to ordain Remedy.

The Statute of Provisors Id. 135^. fol. 131.
27 E. 3. runs, Our Lord the King, by the Assent, and Prayers of the Great Men,
and Commons of this Realm, etc. has ordained.

The Statute of Idem, Anno 1353. fol. 133.
Staple 27 E. 3. has a singular Preface whereas good deliberation had with the
Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons and Great Men of the Counties, that is to say,
of every County one, One Knight for a County, and so for Cities and Buroughs.
for all the Counties; and so of Cities and Buroughs, etc. by the Council and
common consent of the said Prelates, etc. Knights and Commons, the King has
ordained, etc. In the 28. Princes are named after Prelates.

The Preamble of the Statute at Idem, Anno 1362. fol. 152. The Request of the
Commons.
Westminster 36 E. 3. runs thus, The King at the request of the Commons, by
their Petition delivered to him in the said Parliament, by the Assent of the
Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men in the Parliament
assembled, have granted for him and his Heirs for ever, the Articles
underwritten.

In the Second Chapter, of which it is said, The King of his own Will, without
motion of the Great Men, or Commons, has granted in ease of his People.

The Statutes made Idem, Anno 1368. fol. 159.
42 E. 3. have only, At the Parliament of our Lord the King, it is assented and
accorded. So in Idem, Anno 1369. fol. 190.
43 E. 3. The Prelates, Great Men, and Commons seeing the Mischiefs, pray the
King in this present Parliament thereupon to ordain Remedy.

The Preamble to the Statutes Idem, Anno 1376. fol. 191.
50 E. 3. runs thus, The Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and others assembled
at the Parliament, etc. Our Lord the King desiring much, that the Peace of his
Land be well kept, and his faithful Subjects in quietness and tranquillity
maintained, has therefore made and ordained certain Ordinances, and also
granted certain Graces and Pardons to his Commons of England.

In all which, it is evident, the Two Houses had no more but an Advising, or
Petitioning and Assenting Power. It is every where expressed that the King
solely Ordains, Establishes, Grants. However he owns an obligation by his
Coronation Oath to make good Laws for his Subjects.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Parliaments of England, during the Reigns of King Richard
the Second, to the First Year of King James the Second.
THE Preface to the Statutes at Pulton, An. 1377. fol. 163.
Westminster, 10 R. 2. is thus, Richard by the Grace of God, etc. to the
Sheriff of Nottingham, Greeting; Know you, That to the Honor of God, etc. by
the whole Assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls and Barons of this our Realm,
Special Instance and Request of the Commons.
at the instance and special Request of the Commons of our Realm, assembled at
our Parliament, We have ordained and established certain Statutes in amendment
and relief of this our said Realm.

That at Idem, Anno 1378. fol. 165.
Gloucester, 2 R. 2. is thus, Our Lord the King at his Parliament, etc. amongst
other things there assented and accorded, has made certain Statutes and
Ordinances.

The Preface to the Statutes at Anno 1379. fol. 167.
Westminster, the same year, runs thus, Our Lord the King, etc. of the Assent
of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons and other great Men, and of the Commons
of this Realm summoned, etc. has ordained.

In the first Chapter of the Statutes at Idem, Anno 1380. fol. 169.
Northampton, 4 R. 2. it is thus, The Commons of our Parliament have prayed us,
by their Petition delivered to us, at our present Parliament, etc. We
considering the said Supplication, will and grant by the Assent of the Prelates
and Lords aforesaid.

In the Fourth Chapter of the Statutes at Idem, Anno 1382. fol. 175.
Westminster^ 5 R. 2. The Members accustomed to be summoned to Parliament, are
particularly by their Degree distinguished, viz. Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats,
Priors, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Bannerets, Knights of the Shires, Citizens and
Burgesses, which last are frequently comprehended by the words Others or
Commonalty.

The Preamble to the Statutes 8 R. 2. at Idem, An. 1384. fol. 179.
Westminster, is to the Honor of God, and at the Request of the Commonalty, of
the Assent of the Prelates, Great Men and Commons aforesaid, Assent of Commons.
Our Lord the King has caused to be made.

The Statutes 9 R. 2. at Idem, Anno 1385. fol. 179.
Westminster, are thus prefaced, Our Lord the King of the Assent of the
Prelates, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons and Commons, has ordained and
established.

The Idem, Anno 1386. fol. 180.
Preface to the Statute 10 R. 2. is very full in the Expressions of the
kindness of the King to his Subjects in this Form, Know ye for the Reverence of
God, and to nourish Peace, Unity and good Accord, in all Parties within the
Realm, and especially for the common Profit and Ease of our People, and good
Government of the same (which we chiefly desire) of the Assent of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, Assent of the Lords and Commons.
we have caused to be made a Statute. So in the 11th. Regni Idem, Anno 1387.
fol. 181.
the King heartily desiring, That the Peace of the Land, be well holden and
kept, and his faithful Subjects nourished and governed in Quietness and
Tranquillity; and in that at Westminster Idem, Anno 1388. fol. 182.
13 Regni, For the Honor of God and Holy Church, and for the common profit of
his Liege People.

In the First Chapter of the Statute at Anno 1389. fol. 189.
Westminster, 13 R. 2. it is thus expressed, That our Lord the King, at his
Parliament holden at Westminster, etc. Grievous Complaints of the Commons.
hearing the grievous Complaints of his said Commons, etc. the more because
Charters of Pardons have been easily granted in such Cases; the Commons
requested, that such Charters might not be granted. To whom the King answered,
The King will save his Liberty and Regality.
That he will save his Liberty and Regality as his Progenitors have done
heretofore: But to nourish the more Quietness and Peace within this Realm, by
the Assent of the Great Men and Nobles he has granted, etc.

In the Idem, Anno 1396. fol. 199.
Statute 20 R. 2. By the Assent of the Prelates, Lords and Commons, The Title
of the Statutes at Idem, Anno 1397. fol. 200.
Westminster 21 R. 2. is thus, It is to be understood, that our Lord the King,
etc. of the Assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons and Commons of his
Realm there assembled, has made certain Statutes and Ordinances. Repeal of
Statutes made by Threats.
Amongst the rest is a Repeal of the Statutes made 10 R. 2. For that they were
made by Threats given to the King, and by constraint.

So it may be noted, That Henry the Fourth repealed all the Statutes made in
the last Parliament, 21 R. 2.

Of the Parliaments in King Henry the Fourth's time.
THE Preamble to the Statute at Idem, Anno 1399. fol. 200.
Westminster 1 H. 4, runs thus, Henry by the Grace of God, etc. to the Laud and
Honor of God, and Reverence of Holy Church, for to nourish Unity, Peace and
Concord, of all Parties within the Realm of England, and for redress and
recovery of the same Realm of England, which now of late has been dangerously
put to great Ruin, Mischief and Desolation, of the Assent of the Prelates,
Instance and special Request of the Commons.
Dukes, Earls, Barons; and at the Instance and special Request of the Commons
of the same Realm assembled, etc. has made, ordained and established, certain
Ordinances and Statutes. Throughout all this Kings Reign, most of the Prefaces
are much the same, By the Assent, or Advice and Assent of the Prelates, etc. At
the Request or special Instance and Request of the Commons.

Only in the Preface to some, Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal.
it is, By the Assent and Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal: this
Distinction being mostly brought into use in his time, as may be seen in the
4th. 6th. and 9th. of his Reign.

Of the Parliaments in King Henry the Fifth 's time.
THE Preamble to the Statutes at Idem, Anno 1413. fol. 224.
Westminster 1 H. 5. runs thus, Our Lord the King at his Parliament, etc. by
the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the special
Instance and Request of the Commons of this Realm, has ordained, established,
etc. and so much like all the rest, except the Statutes 4 H. 5. Idem, Anno
1416. fol. 234.
which has, Our Lord the King, with the Assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, and at the special Instance and Request of the Commons.

Of the Parliaments in King Henry the Sixth 's time.
THE Preamble to the First Statute of Idem, Anno 1422. fol. 239.
Westminster, 1 H. 6. is thus, At the Parliament held at Westminster, etc. Our
Sovereign Lord the King, Sovereign Lord the King.
by the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the
special Instance and Request of the Commons of the Realm, etc. has caused to
be ordained and established, etc. The 2d. 3d. 4th. and 6th. of H. 6. are the
same.

As the first Statutes, call him Our Sovereign Lord, which was not used
formerly; so in that of the 8th. of H. 6. he is styled Our most Noble Christian
Lord Henry, etc.

11 Regni Idem, Anno 1433. fol. 261.
part of a new Phrase was used, By Authority of Parliament, which after some
while is now familiarly used; that Preface runs thus, By the Assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the special Request of the Commons in his
said Parliament assembled, By Authority of the said Parliament.
by Authority of the same Parliament, Our Sovereign Lord the King has ordained
and established diverse Statutes, Declarations and Ordinances.

The Preface to the Statutes at Idem, Anno 1452. fol. 286.
Reading, 31 Regni has these words, Our Lord the King, by Assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons, being in the said Parliament, and by
Authority of the same Parliament, has made, ordained and established diverse
Acts and Statutes. Here the Commons Assent is joined with the Lords, whereas in
most others of his Reign it is, At the special request of the Commons.

So it is in that at Westminster, which is like the first; only it says, Our
Sovereign Lord, etc. the Thirty ninth of his Noble and Gracious Reign.

Of the Parliaments in King Edward the Fourth 's Reign.
THE Preamble to the Statutes of Idem, Anno 1461. fol. 291. King Edward by the
Grace of God.
Westminster, 1 Regni, is Edward by the Grace of God, etc. to the Honor of God
and Holy Church, to nourish Peace, Unity and Concord within his Realm (which he
much desires) by the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of
the same Realm, and at the special Request of the Commons of his said Realm
assembled, by Authority of the same Parliament, has ordained.

The rest of the Prefaces vary very little, except that in the 3 E. 4. it is,
By the Advice and Assent of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons,
etc.

Of the Parliament in King Richard the Third's time.
THE Preamble to the Statutes at Idem, Anno 1483. fol. 315.
Westminster, 1 R. 3. runs thus, Richard by the Grace of God, etc. to the
Honor of God and of Holy Church, and for the Commonwealth of his Realm of
England, Advice and Assent of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Request of the
Commons.
etc. By the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the
Request of the Commons of the said Realm, summoned to the said Parliament, by
the Authority of the same Parliament, has ordained and established, for the
Quietness of his People, certain Statutes.

Of the Parliaments in King Henry the Seventh 's time.
THE Prefaces to all the Acts in his Idem, Anno 1485. fol. 324.
Reign, are much alike, thus, The King our Sovereign Lord Henry, etc. To the
Honor of God, etc. By the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in the said Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the said
Parliament, has done to be made certain Statutes and Ordinances.

Of the Parliaments in King Henry the Eighth 's time.
MOST of the Prefaces to the 20th. of his Reign are the same as in King H. the
7th. mutatis mutandis.

The Title of the 21 H. 8. Id. fol. 392.
only is, Statuta ad Rempublicam spectantia edita in 1 Sessione Parliamenti,
etc. Anno Regni invictissimi Principis Henrici, etc.

In the 5th. Chapter of the Acts of the Id. fol. 435.
24th. of his Reign, The King our Sovereign Lord.
it is thus, Be it enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the Assent of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of this present Parliament
assembled, and by Authority of the same: So most of the rest are, excepting
that in the second Chapter of the 26. of Id. fol. 465.
his Reign, it is said, Therefore be it enacted by Authority of this present
Parliament.

So in the first Chapter of the Id. fol. 485.
28 Regni, it is said, For the Remedy whereof, May it please the King, etc. it
be enacted.
may it please the King our Sovereign Lord, by the Assent, etc. it may be
enacted.

The Title of the Acts 31 H. 8. Id. fol. 537. H. 8. Defender of the Faith, and
in Earth Supreme Head, etc.
runs thus, Henry the 8th. etc. Defender of the Faith, and in Earth supreme
Head immediately under Christ, of the Church of England, to the Honor of
Almighty God, Conservation of the true Doctrine of Christian Religion, and for
the Concord, Quiet, and Wealth of this his Realm, and Subjects of the same,
held his most high Court of Parliament, etc. wherein were established these
Acts following: and in the first Chapter it is said, Be it enacted, etc.
Be it enacted by the King, our dread Sovereign Lord, and by the assent of the
Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, and by the Commons of this present Parliament
assembled.

The Thirty second of H. 8. has these Expressions, which day the said
Parliament continued by diverse Prorogations, was by His Graces Authority
finished and dissolved, amongst many other the Acts following, By his Highness,
with the assent of the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons assembled
in the said Parliament, have been Established, Ordained, and Enacted.

Of the Parliaments in King Edward the Sixth 's Reign.
IN the first Chapter of the first Id. fol. 687.
Statutes made 1. Regni, it is said, The Kings most Excellent Majesty, King's
Excellent Majesty -- Princely Serenity -- Highness.
minding the Governance and Order of his most loving Subjects to be in most
perfect Unity and Concord in all things, etc. as his most Princely Serenity and
Majesty, has already declared by evident Proofs. Be it enacted by the Kings
Highness, with the assent of the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, and of the
Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

In the second and third Year of Ed. 6. they are called Id. fol. 712.
Acts in the Session, etc. humbly prayen, That it may be Ordained, and Enacted
by His Majesty, with the assent of the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

The rest are much, what like these foregoing.

Of the Parliaments in Queen Mary's Reign.
IN the Title of her first Id. fol. 817.
Acts, she is styled, Ordained and enacted by the Queen our Sovereign Lady, and
Assent of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons.
Defender of the Faith, and Supreme Head of the Church etc. Be it therefore
ordained and enacted by the Queen our Sovereign Lady, with the assent of the
Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

After the Marriage of Id. fol. 831.
Queen Mary, with King Philip of Spain, the title is only, Acts made in the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, Philip and Mary, Defenders of the Faith,
leaving out Supreme Head, etc.

In the fourth and Id. fol. 863.
fifth of Philip and Mary, in the Body of the Acts, it is thus, Be it Enacted,
Ordained, and Established by the King and Queens Majesty, the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same.

Of the Parliaments in Queen Elizabeth's time.
WE may observe something new in the Acts of this Queen; we have noted once in
Henry the Eighth's time, the two Houses pray that it may be enacted, and so in
Edward the Sixth: but in the first Id. fol. 873.
Chapter of the Acts of this Queen, it is more full thus, Most humbly beseech
Your most Excellent Majesty.
Most humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty, your faithful and obedient
Subjects, the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of this your
present Parliament assembled; and in another Id. fol. 874.
Paragraph, That it may please your Highness that it may be further enacted;
and in another place, If some redress (by Authority of this your High Court of
Parliament, High Court of Parliament.
with the assent of your Highness) be not had and provided.

5 Eliz. Cap. 1. it is thus expressed, Be it therefore Enacted, Ordained, and
Established by the Queen our Sovereign Lady, and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
Authority of the same. And in the Eighth, Be it now Declared and Enated by the
Authority of this present Parliament.

Most of all the rest of the Acts of her Reign are expressed after some of
these forms.

The 43 of her Reign, in the First Chapter it is thus, In most humble wise
beseechen your most excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons of your Highness's Parliament assembled.

Of the Parliaments in King James the First's Reign.
THE Title of his first Id. fol. 1085.
Acts is at the Parliament begun, etc. To the pleasure of Almighty God, the
Weal public of this Realm, were Enacted, etc.

In the First Chapter, We therefore, your most Humble and Loyal Subjects, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, In most humble and lowly manner do beseech.
in most humble and lowly manner, do beseech your most excellent Majesty, that
it may be published and declared in this High Court of Parliament, and Enacted
by Authority of the same.

In the Second Chapter it is said, Be it further Id. fol. 1086.
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Assent and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same.

In the Seventh of King James, is only expressed, Be it Enacted by the
Authority of this present Parliament, etc. The rest agrees with some of these.

Of the Parliaments in King Charles the First's Reign.
THE Preface of his First Id. fol. 1226.
Parliament, is, At the Parliament, etc. To the high pleasure of Almighty God,
and to the weal public of this Realm were enacted, etc.

In the First Chapter Id. fol. 1227. Be it enacted by the King, etc.
it is said, Be it Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by the Authority of the same.

In the beginning of the Petition Id. fol. 1229. Petition of Right.
of Right it is thus worded, Humbly show unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled, etc. and the
close of it is, All which they most humbly pray your most excellent Majesty, as
their Rights and Liberties according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
etc and that your Majesty would be graciously pleased.

In the Seventeenth of the said King, Id. fol. 1237.
Chap. 6. it is thus expressed, Therefore the Kings most excellent Majesty, out
of his Princely care, etc. by the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, Ordains, Enacteth, and Establishes.

Of the Parliaments in King Charles the Seconds Reign.
THE Preface to the Acts of the two Houses Id. fol. 1249.
begun 25 Apr. 1660. not summoned by the Kings Writ, is much the same with that
of King Charles the First, and King James, mutatis mutandis. In the Third
Chapter it is said, Be it Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. In the Fourth Chapter, Id. fol. 1251.
The Commons do by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords in this present
Parliament, and by Authority of the same, give and grant unto you our Supreme
Liege Lord and Sovereign one Subsidy, etc. Supreme Liege-lord and Sovereign.


In the First Chapter 13 Car. 2. the Id. fol. 1300.
enacting part is thus worded, Do most humbly beseech your most Excellent
Majesty, Most humbly beseech Your most Excellent Majesty, etc.
that it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same. The rest of the Acts in
King Charles the Second's Reign, are continued in the same form.

The Titles of the Acts of Parliament, 1 Jac. 2. our most Gracious Sovereign,
are, At the Parliament begun at Westminster the 19th. Day of May, Anno Dom.
1685. in the First Year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord James,
etc.

The Enacting part of the granting an Imposition, etc. thus, Most Gracious
Sovereign, We your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons
Assembled in Parliament, toward a Supply, etc. and with an humble and thankful
acknowledgment of your Majesty's favorable and tender regard to us your
Commons, have cheerfully and unanimously given and granted unto your Majesty,
an Aid and Assistance -- and we do humbly beseech your Majesty, that it may be
Enacted, and be it Enacted by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and
by the Authority of the same.

All the other Acts which are not Grants of Aid, Assistance, or Supply, are
conceived in the latter words.

By this full enumeration of the most considerable Expressions, either of
Records or Historians, relating to the Great Councils or Parliaments from
William the Conqueror's time to this present Age, (which in a continued series
of time I have deduced, it appears, that till King John's time, only the
Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and such of the great Tenants in Capite as were
not Barons, were summoned, and at the Kings pleasure by special Writ; and after
King John's Charter, the lesser Tenants in Capite by General Summons. Also,
that the Charters of Kings wherein they granted Liberties to their Subjects
were received as Laws, and gave as ample Satisfaction as now The King wills,
does to pass a Bill tendered for his Royal Assent by both Houses; and there was
good reason, because it passed under his Broad Seal.

Likewise, when the Constitution of Parliament was altered, 49 H. 3. whereby in
place of the Tenants in Capite, which were numerous, two Knights were chosen,
probably by the rest of the Tenants in Capite for the Shires, and two Citizens,
and two Burgesses for Buroughs, to represent all those that held in Capite,
and it is likely all other their Subfeudatary Tenants; yet the number was not
constantly observed, there being sometimes Knights, and no Citizens or
Burgesses, sometimes one Knight, one Citizen, and one Burgess, other times two
or three Knights, left as it seems to the Sheriffs, or the Chusers Election,
till after it was fixed as it now is, for two Knights, two Citizens, and two
Burgesses, unless in some places of Wales, where to this Day, some two or three
Buroughs choose but one or two Burgesses.

Likewise it is worth the observing how gradually the Advice and Assent has
passed from the Advice of the Bishops and Nobles to the Assent likewise, and
sometimes at their request, only the King ordains; and then from the Potition
of the Commons to their joining in Advice, and after to their Assent, and many
other material progressive alterations, which in this recapitulation I cannot
insist upon, till it has come to that constitution so much to be valued by all
wise Englishmen, as it is the product of the generous condescensions of
Gracious Kings, and the wise contrivance of our considerate Ancestors.
Therefore I shall now pass to consider our present Constitution of Parliaments.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the modern rightly constituted Parliaments.
SECT. 1. Of the General Use of Parliaments.
I Have before given an account how the Persian Laws, were made by the Daniel,
cap. 6. v. 7, 8.
King, his Princes, Governors, Nobles, and Captains, as in a great Council of
several Orders with the Sovereign; but we have an older example in Scripture,
Great Councils in Scripture.
that seems to be the Pattern of all great Councils, such as we call
Parliaments, under a Monarchy. For it is said, Legem praecepit nobis Moses
haereditatem multitudinis Jacob. Erit apud rectiss^^um Rex, congregatis
Principibus populi cum Tribubus Israel. De^^. cap. 33. v. 4, 5.
Moses commanded us a Law, even the Inheritance of the Congregation of Jacob,
and he was King in Jesurun; when the Heads of the People, and Tribes of Israel
were gathered together. Here is the King, Moses, commanding a Law, and the
Heads of the People, the Princes, or House of Lords, and the Tribes; that is,
some to represent the chief of the Tribes, like our House of Commons.

The Roman Senate, under the Emperors, resembled our ancient Great Councils
that consisted of such as the King convened, and of the Patrician and
Equestrian Order. The Comitia bore no resemblance with our Commons, and the
Amphictyonican (...).
Assemblies, the Achaian, Boo^^an, and Pan Aetolian, were Assemblies of
Deputies, as the States General of Holland.

Such Assemblies, in all sorts of Governments are necessary; Necessary in all
Governments.
for be the Empire never so vast, and the Sovereigns Power never so great and
uncontrollable; yet without Consultation had with the Princes and wise Men, for
the constituting Laws, and modelling the frame and methods of his Government,
it would soon without such Vis consilii expers mole ruit sua. Horat. lib. 3.
Od. 4.
Buttresses and Undersetters, sinking in its Foundation by its own weight, with
an hideous rush be crushed into an heap of Rubbish.

In Democracy Great Councils are needful, that thereby the Plato de LL. In
Democracy. Male cuncta ministrat impetus. Statius.
Precipitancy and fury of the Common People, by their gravity may be
attempered, the common sort being apt to do every thing with a willful
Violence, which never succeeds well, when not directed to a right end. If their
public affairs were not committed to a select number of Trustees, nothing
would be brought to any Issue, since none can be heard, where all speak, nor
any good Product be from a jumble of those Atoms.

Aristocracy it self consists in a select number of the wisest and ablest to
govern; In Aristocracy.
who in public Consultations have no private ends: Yet in the great Councils,
of neither of these forms of Government, is there to be found that stayedness,
orderliness, or resolution for the public good, as in Monarchy.

Why such Assemblies are not only convenient, In Monarchy.
but necessary under Monarchy, there are many weighty Reasons. (...). Xenoph.
Cyropaed. 8. Satisfactory to the Subject.
Xenophon observes that a single Person sees or hears but little, and Princes
must have many Eyes and Ears, which in a special manner these Great Councils
are; from all parts of the Dominions bringing notice of what is amiss, and
wants redress, as well as what is orderly, and wants encouragement.

Besides, Princes thereby have the opportunity to give their Subjects
satisfaction in their Administration, preventing the surmises and jealousies of
the Nobility, Gentry, and common People, that he sleights them in not calling
them sometimes to consult about affairs of Moment.

Furthermore the Prince by such congress, The Prince thereby knows the Worthy
Subjects.
consults his own Interest, in coming to the Knowledge of the most able, active,
and popular Subjects, whereby he may single out such as are most fitted for
public Employments, to serve him in the several offices of Government, and all
(who thus have a share in the debating, and consulting about Laws) will not
only be witnesses of the Prince's Grace and Favor, in granting such as they
have desired, and assented to; but will be so many Heralds of his Wisdom, and
care of his Peoples good Government, and so many vigorous enforcers of the
Execution of those Laws they have so lately assisted to prepare.

Likewise, The Prince is skreened from Obloquy.
as Privy-Counsellors, and other Officers, are sometime as Skreens to Princes,
to ward off the Obloquy of the Mobile, when something is imposed that may be
wholesome, though something bitter to their Palates: So especially are these
great Conventions necessary, where useful Laws, though severe, are to be
enacted, Money to be raised, or other Impositions laid upon the People, who do
much more cheerfully, and less repiningly obey, when they know -- Tum caetera
parit, Turba libens subit, propriis quia legibus acta.
the Nobility, and their own Representatives, have judged them convenient. All
Men naturally loving that such Impositions may immediately result from
themselves, rather than they should be enjoined by the Princes Arbitrary power,
according to that of Claudian, -- Observantior aequi
Fit Populus, nec far negat, cum viderit ipsum
Auctorem parere sibi.


The General use of good Parliaments is summed up in the MS. Speech, An. 1562.
The general Benefits of Parliaments.
. Chancellors Speech, 2 Eliz. thus: That the principal cause of their Assembly
was, that things there proposed, may be orderly, and diligently debated, deeply
considered, and thereupon wisely concluded. To examine whether any Law, already
made, be too sharp and sore, and so over-burthensome to the Subject, or
over-loose and soft, and so over-dangerous to the State: For that acriores sunt
morsus intermisseae Libertatis, quam retentae. He further adds, The use of them
is to consider the want and superfluities of Laws, whether Graft, Malice or
Covetousness has devised any ways or means to defraud the Benefit and Force of
Laws; and in matter of Policy, for the more perfect upholding and establishing
the Sovereigns Royal State, and the Preservation of the Commonweal committed to
the Princes care.

Bodin Lib. 3. de Repub^ p. 350.
commends the Constitution of the Government in England and Spain, that they
have Parliaments once in three Years; whereby Princes upon any imminent danger,
may have recourse to their Council and Assistance, to defend their Countries
from Hostile Attempts, to raise Money for public Necessity, cure the Diseases
of the Commonweal, confirm the State, appoint Laws, hear the Complaints of the
grieved, amend Maladministration, by calling ill Mannagers to account,
understand what the Prince otherwise may be ignorant of, and generally to have
counsel in all things, which in Prudence are necessary for the happy Government
of the Commonweal.

Sir Commonwealth, part 1. c. 2. p. 37.
Tho. Smith says, As in War, where the King himself is in Person, with the
Nobility, Gentry and Yeomanry, the Power and Force of England is: So in Peace
and Consultation, where the Prince is to give Life, and the last and highest
Commandment, the Nobility for the higher, the Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen
for the lower part of the Commonwealth, and the Bishops for the Clergy, be
present to advertise and consult, and show what is necessary for the
Commonwealth; every thing being advised with mature Deliberation, every Bill
being thrice read and disputed upon, in either House apart, and after the
Prince himself does consent thereto, that is the Prince's and whole Kingdoms
Deed: whereupon no Man can justly complain, but must accommodate himself to
find it just, See Prynne, part 1. Brief Register, p. 447.
good, and obey it; and concludes, that whatever the People of Rome might do,
either in Centuriatis, or Tribunitiis Comitiis, the same may be done by the
Parliament of England, which represents, and has the Power of the whole
Kingdom. Thus far of the general use, now to the Constitution.

Concerning the word Parliament, it is concluded by most, Of the word
Parliament.
to come from the French word parler, to speak; therefore before the word was
used by our Historians, as appliable to this great Convention, the Latin word
Colloquium was frequently used, to signify a Conference betwixt the King and
the great Men summoned to consult, advise, and take Counsel with the King, and
among themselves.

Yet before the word was used to signify these great Assemblies, we find it
applied to other Meetings in William Rufus's time; For Ingulphus, Abbat of
Croyland (speaking of private Consultations in that Abbey) says, That Semannus
de Lek, Veniens coram conventu, in nostro publico Parliamento, etc.
coming before the Convention in their public Parliament, took his Oath of
Fidelity to them, as Sergeant of their Church.

The First that is noted to use this word among all our Historians, is Convenit
ad Parliamentum Generalissimum totius Regni Angliae, etc. p. 674.
Matthew Paris, Anno 1246. 30 H. 3. where he says, There came to the most
general Parliament to London, the whole Nobility of all the Kingdom of England.

The first Mention of it on Record, is in the Cl. 49 E. 3. d. 11.
Writ of Summons to the Cinque Ports, summoning them ad instans Parliamentum
nostrum: and the next is in the Writ of Prorogation of the Cl. 3 E. 1.20. dorso.
Parliament, 3 E. 1. where it is twice mentioned in the Writ, generale
Parliamentum nostrum, and eodem Parliamento.

Having premised thus much concerning the Name and first usage, I shall now
discourse of it in particular.

SECT. 2. Of the Summons of the Prelates.
THAT the King is Caput, Principium, and Finis Parliamenti, as Sir Edward Coke
notes, is obvious to all. The Summons have been constantly from the King, The
Summons only from the King.
or in his Name.

In the former Chapters I have discoursed out of our Historians, that the Great
Councils were always convened by the Kings: Now I come to prove it by Records,
and shall note, first the Summons to the Prelates, then of the Nobles, and
thirdly, of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses; only noting some of the
remarkablest of them from Mr. Prynn, who has so fully writ of them in his
brief Register of Parliamentary Writs, in four parts, and his Brevia
Parliamentaria Rediviva, to whose indefatigable pains in transcribing such an
infinite of Records, all Antiquaries, Lawyers, and Statesmen will be always
beholding; though in the use he made of such, before the late King's
Restoration, or at least, while he sat in the long Parliament, few Loyal Men
can follow his Doctrines.

All the Writs before the Sixth of King John, whereby any were summoned to
great Councils, are utterly lost: that runs Claus. 6 Joh. m. 3. dorso. The
Summons in King John's time.
thus, Mandamus vobis, rogantes, quatenus omni occasion and dilatione
postposita, sicut nos, and honorem nostrum diligitis, sitis ad nos apud London,
etc. nobiscum tractaturi de magnis and arduis negotiis nostris, and communi
Regni Vtilitate -- vestrum habere consilium and aliorum Magnatum Terraendstrae
-- Abbates and Priores conventuales toti Diuoecesis citari fa^iatis.

The second Record is Claus. 26 H. 3. m. 13. dorso.
26 H. 3. directed to Walter Archbishop of York; differing from the former in
these particulars: Sicut nos and honorem nostrum; here is added, Pariter and
vestrum diligitis, in fide qua nobis tenemini.

Anno 38 H. 3. the Writ is directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury --
Paternitatem vestram omni qua possumus affectione rogamus, quaten^s nos, and
Jura nostra totaliter inde^ensa non deserentes, cum omni celeritate convocetis
coram vobis Capitulum vestrum Cathedrale, Archidiaconos, Viros Religiosos, and
Clerum vobis subjectum, inducentes eos omnibus modis quibus poteritis quod
nobis in tanta necessitate liberaliter subveniant.

I do not bring in this as a Writ of Summons to a Parliament, These Summons for
Military Aid.
out only as a special Writ to excite the Clergy, to a free, voluntary and
liberal Contribution for defense of Gascoign, and so to show the Customs of
Benevolences in that Age, out of Parliament.

The next Claus. 49 H. 3. dorso 11. in schedula. The first Summons to the
Lords, when the Commons also were summoned.
Writ of Summons of the Prelates to a Parliament, was that of 49 H. 3. directed
to the Bishop of Duresm, wherein the occasions of summoning are reckoned to be
after the great Troubles, being quieted by giving the Prince Hostage, for
establishing the Peace; therefore to provide with wholesome Deliberation, and
to establish, and totally to complete with full Security a Peace, etc. Et super
quibusdam aliis Regni nostri negotiis quae sine consilio vestro and aliorum
Praelatorum and Magnatum nostrorum, nolumus expediri, cum eisdem tractatum
habere nos oporteat, vobis mandamus, Rogantes in Fide and Dilectione quibus
nobis tenemini, etc. 14 Nov.

The next 23 E. 1. m. 9. dorso.
Writ is that of 23 E. 1. to the Archbishop of Canterbury, thus, Quia super
quibusdam arduis negotiis, nos and Regnum nostrum, ac vos, caeterosque
Praelatos de eodem Regno tangentibus, quae sine vestra aceorum praesentia
nolumus expediri, Parliamentum nostrum tenere ac vobiscum super hiis colloquium
habere volumus and tractatum, 24 July.

The same Year 23 E. 1. there was another Cl. 24 E. 1. m. 4. dorso.
Parliament summoned by this memorable Writ, directed to the Archbishop of
Canterbury: Sicut Lex justissima provida circumspectione sacrorum Principum
stabilita hortatur, ut quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus approbetur, sic and innuit
evidenter, ut communibus periculis per remediae provisa communiter obvietur:
Then reciting the King of France his frauds concerning Gascoign and his Hostile
preparations, adds, provisa jaculaminus laedunt; so commands him in fide and
dilectione, to be personally present, etc. Praemunientes Priorem and Capitulum
vestrae Ecclesiae, Archidiaconos, totumque Clerum vestrae Dioecesis, facientes
quod iidem Prior and Archidiaconus in propriis personis and dictum Capitulum
per unum, idemque Clerus per duos Procuratores idoneos plenam and sufficientem
potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo and Clero habentes, una vobiscum intersint modis
omnibus tunc ibidem ad tractandum, ordinandum, and faciendum nobiscum, and cum
caeteris Praelatis and Proceribus and aliis Incolis Regni nostri, etc. 30 Sept.

The Variations of the Writs are mostly these, The commanding part of the
Summons to appear.
That the cause of the Summons is diversely expressed, according to the present
emergence. Sometimes the word is Mandamus rogantes, otherwhile as 27 E. 1. m.
16. Effect^ose requirimus, and rogamus, Rogamus specialius, Nihilominus
injungendo mandamus, as the same years m. 9 dorso. Injungentes the same year:
firmiter injungendo, 30 E. 1. m. 9. dorso: Iterato mandamus, Cl. 33 E. 1. m. 8.
dorso, Firmiter injungendo mandamus, Claus. 11 E. 3. part 2. m. 10. dorso,
Rogantes mandamus, Cl. 38 H. 6. m. 29. dorso, Rogando mandamus, Cl. 22, 23 E.
4. m. 11 dorso. and so 15 Caroli 1. fol. 20.

These are the greatest variations in the Mandatory part, which was mostly to
be personally present themselves, the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Deans, and
Archdeacons, and one Proctor for the Chapter, and two for the Clergy of the
Diocese. Sometimes the word is, Sitis apud nos omnibus praetermissis, as 27 E.
1. m. 16. dorso, or, Personaliter intersitis, the same Year, m. 9. dorso, and
30 E. 1. m. 7, 9. dorso, and several other, or, Sitis in propria persona
vestra, vel per sufficientem procuratorem a vobis plenam potestatem habentem,
as Cl. 6 E. 2. m. 2. dorso, or, quatenus omni excusatione voluntaria cessante,
as 4 E. 3. m. 13. dorso, or, propter arduitatem and magnitudinem negotiorum
absentiam vestram n^quimus nec volumus aliqualiter excusare: other times,
especially Sede vacant, to send a Proctor, or Proxy, thus, Sufficientem
Procuratorem plenam a vobis potestatem habentem, mittatis, as 27 E. 1. m. 9.
dorso. But Claus. 6 E. 3. m. 36. dorso.
other times thus, Scientes pro certo, quod nisi evidens and manifesta
necessitas id exposcat, non intendemus Procuratores se^ excusatores pro vobis
admittere; and gives the reason why, as they loved the King, and his Honor,
and the tranquillity and the quiet of the Kingdom, they would be present,
because of the Propter ardui^atem negotiorum praed^ctorum.
arduity, or difficultness of the business.

Another reason is given, Claus. 11 E. 3. part 1. m. 15. lest by their absence
the expedition of the Kings Affairs should be retarded or deferred; and in
another, because of the absence of them, oftentimes Fuerunt non absque nostri,
and Regni nostri incommodo, saepius retardata.
the great Affairs have been retarded, to the disprofit of the King and his
Kingdom.

In the 12th of E. 3. it is very strict thus, Claus. 12 E. 3. part 2. m. 32.
dorso. and 13 E. 3. part 2. m. 1. dorso.
Attentis praemissorum arduitate, and imminentibus periculis, quacunque
excusatione cessante, personaliter intersitis. And 14 E. 3. after the King had
taken upon him the Title of King of France, the charge for their appearance was
very strict -- Nos sicut honorem nostrum, and salvationem ejusdem Regni nostri
Angliae, caeterarumque terrarum, ac jurium nostrorum praedictorum, ac
negotiorum expeditionem diligitis, nullatenus omittatis; and so in many others.

There is a prevalent Argument used in the Claus. 16 E. 3. part 1. m. 39.
dorso. Scituri quod gratitudinem, and ingratitudin^m, quas nobis in absentia
nostra jam os^endi contigerit, plus ponderabimus quam si ^^crant, dum
praesentes essemus, and ea curabimus juxta merita, seu demerita compensare.
16 E. 3. when he summoned a Parliament in his absence, to induce the Prelates,
and other Members to appear personally, That the King lets them know, that he
will more weigh the Gratitude or Ingratitude, which they show him in his
absence, than if he were present, and he will take care to reward them
according to their merit.

Another, the Cl. 2 R. 2. m. 3. dorso, That the King would in no wise have them
excused, unless they were detained with such an Infirmity as they could not
labor. The words are, nisi tanta infirmitate tunc detenti fueritis, quod
aliqualiter illuc laborare non poteritis, nullo modo excusatos habere volumus.

The ends of these Summons were sometimes general, and sometimes special. The
general Causes were expressed by the common Communi Regni u^ili^at^. Cl. 6 Jo.
m. 33. dorso. The Causes of Summoning.
Profit of the Kingdom, the Ardua negotia nos and statum Regni tangentia. Other
times, as 25 E. 1. M. 6. dorso, Arduis and urgentibus negotiis nos, and vos,
and totum Regnum nostrum tangentibus. Other times, Cl. 27 E. 1. m. 9. dorso.
ad salvationem Coronae nostrae Regiae, and communem utilitatem populi Regni
nostri.

The Preamble to the Writ of Summons 4 E. 3. is very Cl. 4 E. 3. m. 13. dorso.
General Causes of Summons.
remarkable. Rex, etc. Qualiter negotia, nos and statum Regni nostri
contingentia, postquam suscepimus gubernacula Regni nostri hucusque in nostri
dampnum, and dedecus, ac depauperationem populi nostri deducta erant, vestram
credimus prudentiam non latere: propter quod, non volentes hoc, urgente
conscientia, ulterius sustinere, ac desiderantes toto cord, statum and Regimen
Regni nostri, secundum juris ac rationis exigentiam, ad honorem Dei and
tranquillitatem, and pacem Sanctae Ecclesiae, ac totius populi ejusdem Regni
reformari; Ordinavimus, etc. Parliamentum, etc.

The 22 of E. 3. has a peculiar Cl. 22 E. 3. part 2. m. 9. dorso.
Clause, Quod dictum Parliamentum non ad Auxilia seu Tallagia a populo dicti
Regni nostri petenda, vel alia onera eidem populo imponenda, sed duntaxat pro
justitia ipsi populo nostro, super dampnis and gravaminibus sibi illatis
facienda.

Another considerable Cl. 31 E. 3. m. 21. dorso.
Clause is to be found 31 E. 3. Et quum praedicta negotia perquam ardua sine
maxima deliberatione tam Praelatorum and Cleri, quam Magnatum, and Communitatis
ejusdem Regni, nullo modo expediri poterunt; ad quorum expeditionem Auxilium
and Consilium tam a vobis, etc. habere necessario oportet.

The Cl. 3 H. 6. m. 9. dorso.
Preamble 3 H. 6. is to enquire how Justice has been done, etc. Quia nos jam
dum in Annis degimus teneris, an pax and justitia ubilibet inter Ligeos nostros
Regni nostri Angliae ( sine quarum observatione Regnum aliquod prospicere non
potest) debite conserventur, and exhibeantur necne, etc. Therefore he summons a
Parliament.

The cause Cl. 22 and 23 E. 4. m. 11. dorso.
of the Summons 22 E. 4. is thus expressed, Quibusdam arduis and urgentibus
negotiis, nos, securitatem, and defens^onem Ecclesiae Anglicanae ac pacem,
tranquillitatem, bonum publicum, and defensionem Regni nostri, and Subditorum
nostrorum ejusdem concernentibus. Therefore he summons them.

The special causes are mostwhat to have supply against the Kings Enemies,
Special Causes of Summons.
the French or Scotch Kings: and it is to be noted, that in the Summons of King
E. 2. mostly the S^otis Inimi^is, and Rebellibus nos^ris, Claus. 2. E. 2. m.
20. dorso.
Scots are not only called the Kings Enemies but his Rebels, which implies them
Subjects by virtue of the Homage done to his Father, and so 8 E. 2. M. 24.
dorso, it is called, Terra nostra Scotiae, though he was the most unfortunate
of all our Kings in his Expeditions against that Kingdom.

The first Cl. 14 E. 3. part 2. m. 28. dorso. With the Advice of the King's
Council.
Writ I have found, wherein it is said, the King called his Parliament with the
Advice of his Council, was 14 E. 3. quia de avisamento Concilii nostri
ordinavimus, and so in 46 E. 3. and afterward sometimes used, and often
omitted, but in later times generally used.

The last considerable thing in their Writs, is what the Prelates, etc.
summoned, were to do at these Parliaments, which mostwhat is comprehended in
these Words, That it is Vestrum expedit habere consilium. Cl. 6 Jo. m. 3.
dorso. What the Summoned were to do.
expedient to have their Counsel, or nobiscum super dictis negotiis tractaturi,
vestrumque consilium impensuri, 23 E. 1. m. 9. dorso; or, ad tractandum,
ordinandum, and faciendum nobiscum, Cl. 24 E. 1. m. 4. dorso; Ad ordinandum de
quantitate and modo subsidii, Ibid. m. 7. dorso; habere colloquium and
tractatum, Claus. 2 E. 2. m. 20. dorso, and ad tractandum and consentiendum,
Cl. 6 E. 2. m. 2. dorso. So in Cl. 14 E. 3 par. 1. m. 33. dorso.
another, Ordinabimus quod juxta consilium vestrum, and aliorum Praelatorum,
Magnatum, caeterorumque ibidem convocatorum viderimus opportunum. In the Cl. 20
E. 3. par. 2. m. 22. dorso.
20 of E. 3. it is thus expressed, Ad consentiendum hiis quae tunc praedictos
Praelatos, Comites and alios Proceres ordinari contigerit super negotiis
antedictis, and the like. 46 E. 3. m. 11. dorso. In the Writ, 38 H. 6. m. 29.
dorso, it is, Ad tractandum, consentiendum and praecludendum super praemissis
and aliis, and 23 E. 4. Et concludendum; and so in the 15th. of K. Chapter the
First, Ad tractandum, consentiendum, and concludendum.

SECT. 3. Of the Summons of the Temporal Lords.
I Have been the longer upon these Writs of Summons to the Clergy, Summons to
the Lords Temporal like those to the Prelates, excepting in some few
Particulars.
because those to the Nobles differed not much, and the material differences
will be all I need note in their Writs, and in these we may find the gradual
alteration; from giving Counsel and Advice only, it came to Treaty, Ordaining,
Consenting, Doing, and Concluding. I shall refer the curious Reader for the
remarks that may be made from all these Writs, to Mr. Prynn's Part 1. Bri^f
Register, p. 1^2, etc.
Collection of them, and only note some few, most to my purpose, of the Earls,
Barons, and the greater Tenants in Capite's Writs, and then proceed to the
Writs of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses.

The first Writ of Summons to a Parliament, now left upon Record, as Ibid. p.
160.
Mr. Prynn notes, is that of 49. H. 3. those of the Cl. 45 H. 3. m. 3. dorso.
45th. being only Summons to assist the King, cum Equis and Armis, and cum
Posse vestro (as that to W. de Bello Campo de Aumel, and others show) being
only to afford him aid against his Enemies and Rebels.

In most of the Writs to the Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Peers, In Fide
and Homagio vel Ligean^ia, proper to Temporal Lords.
we find the Mandamus is, Vobis in fide and homagio quibus nobis tenemini. But
sometimes, as to Edmund Earl of Cl. 25 E. 1. m. 25. dorso.
Cornwall, it is, Mandamus in homagio, fide and dilectione, and that to Thomas
de Cl. 36 E. 3. m. 42. dorso.
Furnival 36 E. 3. is fide and ligeancia quibus nobis tenemini. That to Edward,
Prince of Wales, 49 E. 3. 6 m. dorso is directed Carissimo primogenito suo Ed.
Principi Walliae, and the Mandamus neither has adjoined to it, fide, homagio,
or any other Word, See Prynne's Brief Register, part 1. p. 207.
but only commands him to be present, in propria persona, though others have
fide and homagio or ligeancea.

It is to be noted; that the clause in Homagio and Ligeancia quibus nobis
tenemini, is peculiar to the Temporal Lords. But that in fide and dilectione is
not so peculiar to the Ecclesiastical Lords, but is inserted into the Lay Lords
Writs sometimes. The reason why Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Parsons, Prebends,
and other Ecclesiastic Bodies Politic, when they do Homage (says Littleton,
Cap. de Homagio, ^ect. 86.
Littleton) do not say Jeo deveign vostre Home, I become your Man (from whence
Homagium or Hominium comes) is Par estre tant solement le home de Dieu.
because he is solely the Homager of God, and so Glanvil, Lib. 9. c. 1, 2.
Bracton, fol. 78. F. Britton, c. 68. lesta, L. 3. c. 16. resolve that no Man,
Post consecrationem hom ^gium non faciunt, quiequid fecerunt ante, sed tantum
^idelitat^m.
elected Bishop, after Consecration does Homage, whatever he has done before,
but only Fealty, and no Convent, or Abbat, or Pri^r ought to do Homage, because
they hold in another name, viz. the name of the Churches. But that these
Ecclesiastics swore Fealty, appears by many examples produced by Mr. Prynn,
Brief Register, part 1. fol. 196. to 206. p. 427, 657, 663.
and what Oaths they took, in his abridgment of the Records of the Tower. But
this is now of little use, and so I leave it and shall observe some Particulars
which Mr. Prynn and others have noted from the several Writs of Summons to
Temporal Lords.

First it may be observed, 1. Observations upon the Writs to Temporal Lords.
That it alone did not ennoble.
that a Summons by Writ, though for two or three Generations, from Father to
Son, did not ennoble the Blood to make them Barons. So Ralph de Camois 49 H. 3.
was summoned by Writ, and ranked in the Roll above all Barons, and Ralph his
Son, Anno 7 E. 2. But Claus. 7 R. 2. m. 32. dorso.
Thomas the Grandchild, being chosen one of the Knights for Surry, was
discharged by the King's Writ, because he and many of his Ancestors were
Bannerets, and King Richard the Second summoned him to that very Parliament,
and he was summoned ever after during Life; yet his Posterity, as others, were
omitted, which if they had been Barons properly, (as those by Creation and
Tenure of Lands) had not been omitted, but might have challenged Summons ex
debito Justiciae. But I cannot enter into this long Controversy, First and
second^ Brief Register.
the curious may peruse Mr. Prynn, and Elsyng's ancient method of holding
Parliaments, Page 33. who is of opinion that every degree of Baron passed with
actual Ceremony, and those Patents some had (whereof the first upon Record he
says, was 11 R. 2. to the Lord John Beauchamp of Rolt) was an entailing of the
Honor, rather than the Creation, because the words are, ipsum Johannem in unum
Parium and Baronum Regni praeficimus; whereas if he had been then created, the
words should have been, per praesentes praefecimus. Besides, we find Henry
Bromflet Knight, was created by special Writ, and his Heirs Males, Barons de
Vescy, 27 H. 6. Claus. 27 H. 6. m. 26. dorso.
^ntred after the names of the Temporal Lords, in the very Summons in common
Form, to which is added, Volumus enim vos and haeredes vestros masculos de
Corpore vestro legitime exeuntes Barons de Vescy. Now this special Writ and
Clause of Creation had been merely void and nugatory, had the general Writ
alone ennobled him and his Posterity. Yet in all the Prynne, part 1. Brief
Register, p. 228.
subsequent Summons, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38 H. 6. He is only called Dominus, not
Baro de Vescy, as also may be noted of Beauchamp.

Secondly, 2. The use of Bar^ in Writs, how rare.
It may be observed, that the word Baro and Barons are frequently met withal
in Histories, the Clause-Rolls of King John, and H. 3. and in the Preface of
Magna Charta, and several Statutes applied to all the Ibid. p. 218.
Temporal Lords of Parliament; yet in all the Clause-Rolls, and Writs of
Summons, Mr. Prynn hat not observed any particular Persons amongst them,
summoned by the Title of Barons, but only the Barons of Graystock, and
Stafford, from Ed. 1. to H. 6. as Johanni, Willielmo, Rad^^pho Baroni de
Graystock, and so in Ed. 1. and 3. Edmundo and Radulpho Baroni de Stafford.

Thirdly, 3. Title of Dominus in Writs of Summons.
as to the Title of Dominus, Mr. Prynn says, It is not to be found given to
any but two before the time of H. 6. The first is John de Cl. 16 E. 3. par. 2.
m. 13. dorso.
Moubray, styled Dominus Insulae de Axholm, none else having this title till
after the Reign of Richard the Second. The next so styled, is 11 H. 4. Cl. 11
H. 4. m. 32. dorso.
where a Writ issued, Johanni Talbot Domino de Furnival, which though omitted
in some Summons after, was again used in the Summons to him, Cl. 4 H. 5. m. 16.
dorso.
4 H. 5. and H. 5. after which, none is found styled Dominus till Cl. 22 H. 6.
m. 21. dorso.
22 H. 6. that Robert Hungerford Chevalier, is styled Dom. de Mollins, as he is
in 25 H. 6. which gave the Title of Dom. de Poynings to Henry Percy, and in Cl.
27 H. 6. m. 21. dorso, this Title Dominus is given to Hungerford Percy, and
four more, after which it grew more common to them, and others summoned, as may
be seen in Sir William Dugdale's Summons lately Printed, who Cl. 49 H. 3. m. 5.
49 H. 3. reckons Dom. Hugo, Dom. Humet, and Dom. Stanford.

Fourthly, 4. Title of Chevalier.
Another Title given to Barons of the upper House is that of Chevalier, which
was not given to any Temporal Lords or Barons, in any Writs, or Lists of
Summons to Parliament, before 49 Ed. 3. Cl. 49 E. 3. n. 4.6. dorso. 50 E. 3.
part 2. m. 6. dorso.
wherein Summons issued, Willielmo de Morle Chevalier, Willielmo de Aldburgh
Chevalier, Joh. de Well Chevalier, Hugoni de Dacre Chevalier. After which it
grew more common under King Richard the Second, Henry the Fourth and Fifth.

After the beginning of H. 6. and during the Reign of H. 6. and Ed. 4. there
was scarce any Temporal Lord in the lists of Summons, but was styled Chevalier
or Miles, and so it continues to this day, though not as Mr. Prynn says,
because they were all generally Knighted for their greater Honor; for it is
apparent in the Lists exhibited by Sir William Dugdale, that most of the Barons
by descent, though never Knighted, had the Title.

Fifthly, 5. Of Councils that were not Parliaments.
There is great difference betwixt Writs of Summons to general Parliaments, and
particular Councils upon emergent occasions, which are not properly
Parliaments. All Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Lords, Barons, together with
Judges, and King's Council, Citizens, Burgesses of Parliament, and Barons of
the Cinque Ports being usually summoned to the one; but to the other, some few
Spiritual and Temporal Lords only, without Brief Register, part 1. page 187. to
192.
any Judges, Assistants, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or Barons of the
Cinque Ports, or some few of them only, and diverse who were no usual Lords, or
Barons of Parliament, as Mr. Prynn has made evident, and the Rolls themselves
in the Margin notes them by de Concilio summonito, or deveniendo ad Concilium:
which some Antiquaries having not noted, have confounded them.

SECT. 4. Of the Judicature of the House of Lords.
IT is evident that the Lords in Parliament have ever been the usual Judges,
not only in all criminal and civil causes, 6. The Lords Judicature.
proper for Parliaments to judge or punish, and Writs of Errors, but likewise in
all cases of Precedencies, and Controversies concerning Peers and Peerage,
which Power was in them as the King's Supreme Court, before there were any
Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses summoned to our Parliaments. So Hoveden Annal.
pars poster. p. 561. ad 566.
is express in the case of Sanctius, King of Navar, and Alphonsus, King of
Castile: Comites and Barons Regalis Curiae Angliae adjudicaverunt, Anno 1177.
23 H. 2. So Fleta in Ed. the First's time, writes Habet enim Rex Curiam suam in
Concilio suo in Parliamentis suis, praesentibus Pralatis, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Proceribus, and aliis viris peritis, ubi terminatae sunt dubitationes
judiciorum. Lib. 2. c. 2. p. 66.
thus; The King has his Court in his Council, in his Parliaments, there being
present the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Nobles, and other skillful Men ( viz. the
Judges Assistants) where are ended the doubts of Judgments.

This Particular of the Jurisdiction of the House of Lords, is so fully in
every Branch of it proved by Mr. Prynn in his Plea for the Lords House, that it
were an Injury to the inquisitive Reader, not to referr him to that Treatise
for full Satisfaction; therefore I shall only pick out a very few out of a
Manuscript I have of the Privileges belonging to the Baronage of England, and
Mr. Prynn.

In the fourth of King Ro^. Parl. 4 E. 3. m. 7. number 3. Judgment of Lords on
John Mautravers.
Edward the Third, the Peers, Earls and Barons assembled at Westminster, says
the Record, have strictly examined, and thereupon assented and agreed, that
John Mautravers is guilty of the death of Esmon Earl of Kent, Uncle of our Lord
the King that now is: wherefore the said Peers of the Land, and Judges of
Parliament, judged and awarded, that he the said John should be drawn, hanged,
and beheaded.

In the first of R. 2. John Lord of Rot. Par. 1 R. 2. m. 6. number. 38, 39.
Gomenys, and William de Weston, were brought before the Lords, sitting in the
white Chamber, On John Lord of G^menys, and William Weston, for delivering up
Forts to the Enemy.
and were severally charged at the Commandment of the Lords, by Sir Richard
Scroop Knight, Steward of the Kings House: William Weston being accused for
rendering the Castle of Outhrewike, and John Lord of Gomenys for rendering the
Castle of Ards. They both made plausible defenses, and Sir Rich. Scroop
Steward, tells William, that the Lords sitting in full Parliament do adjudge
him to death. But because our Lord the King is not yet informed of the manner
of this Judgment, the execution thereof shall be respited till the King be
informed thereof; and the like Sentence he passed upon John Lord of Gomenies,
only adding, that he being a Gentleman, and Banneret should be beheaded.

There are many more Examples of Judgments given in Capital matters upon Bergo
de Bayons, 4 E. 3. m. 7. number. 4. Thomas de Gurny eadem membrana number. 5. and
others; and for Offenses not Capital, of Richard Lions, 59 E. 3. m. 7. William
le Latymer, 42 E. 3. m. 2. William Ellis, ibid number. 31; John Chichester and
Botesha, 1 R. 2. number. 32. Alice Piers, Ibid. number. 41.

Mr. Antiquity of Judgment by Pee^s.
Prynn Plea for Lords, p. 203. Hist, lib. 4.
shows this Jurisdiction out of Historians, even from Cassibellan, out of
Geoffrey of Monmouth. Also, Anno 924. of Elfred a Nobleman, who opposed King
Aethelstan's Title, and had his Lands adjudged by the Peers forfeit to him; the
Words of the King are, Et eas accepi Malmsb. de Gest is Reg. lib. 2. c. 6. p.
62. Spelman. Conc. Tom. 1. p. 407, 408. Anno 1043.
quemadmodum judicaverunt omnes ^ptimates Regni Anglorum.

So Earl Godwin having murdered Prince Alfred, Brother to King Edward the
Confessor, being fled into Denmark, and hearing of King Edward's Piety and
Mercy, returned, and came to London to the King, who then held a Great Council,
and denied the Fact, and put himself upon the vnde super hoc, pono me in
consideratione Curiae vestrae. Chron. Brompton. col. 937, 938.
consideration of the Kings Court, and the King speaks to the Earls and Barons
thus, Volo quod inter nos in illa appellatione rectum judicium decernatis, and
debitam justiciam faciatis, and after it is said, Quicquid judicaverint per
omnia ratificavit.

So in the Constitutions of An. 1164. M. Paris 94. Sicut Barons caeteri debent
interesse judiciis Curiae Regis cum Baronibus quousque perveniatur in judicio
ad diminutionem membrorum, vel ad mortem. The House of Lords the King's Court
of Barons.
Clarendon, it is appointed, That the Archbishop, Bishops, and those Clergy
that held in Capite, as by Barony, should be Parties in the Judgments of the
Kings Court as other Barons ought, with the other Barons, till it come in
Judgment to the loss of Member, or to Death.

So in the Case of Tho. Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno 1165. 11 H. 2. we
find in Hoveden, part post, p. 494, 495. that, Barons Curiae Regis
judicaverunt eum esse in misericordia Regis: and afterward, when he would not
yield to the Kings Will, he Dixit Baronibus su^s, Cito facite mihi judicium de
illo, qui homo meus Ligeus est, and stare Juri in Curia mea recusat.
says to his Barons, Quickly make to me Judgment of him who is my Liege Man,
and refuses to stand to the Law in my Court: The Barons going out judged him
fit to be seized on, and sent to Prison, and the Historian says, tunc misit
Rex Reginaldum Comitem Cornubiae and Robertum Comitem Leicestriae ad indicandum
ei judicium de illo factum.

Anno 1208. King Anno 10 Johan. Mat. Paris, p. 218.
John exacted Pledges of his Subjects; and amongst others of William de
Breause, who said, If he had offended the King, he would be ready to answer his
Lord, and that without Hostages, secundum judicium Curiae suae and Baronum
Parium suorum.

So Anno 1240. 24 H. 3. Graviter accusatus coram Rege, and Curia tota. Land.
Mat. Westminster. 153.
Matthew Paris says, That Hubert de Burgo, Earl of Kent, was grievously
accused before the King and his whole Court, and it was adjudged he should
resign to the King four of his Castles.

I cannot omit one memorable passage, that, Mat. Westminster. Anno 1260. p. 295, 296.
Anno 1260. 44 H. 3. there falling out a difference betwixt King Hen. 3. Prince
Edward his Son, Simon Montfort, and other Nobles, the King called his Baronage
to St. Paul's, and there it being urged, that Prince Edward had done some
injuries to the King, he offered to prove himself innocent before the King and
his Uncle, who was King of the Romans; saying, Who are Peers of Prince Edward.
That none of Omnes alios Barons and Comites, sibi de ^ure non esse Pares, nec
s^^s in eum excercer^ dis^ussiones.
the rest of the Barons and Earls were by right his Peers, nor ought to
exercise upon him their Discussions of the matter. By which it appears, that he
judged himself to be something more than a Peer of the Realm, being the Heir
apparent of the Crown.

I might fill a large Volum with the Histories and Records, to prove this; but
since Levellers, and the House of Commons that voted the House of Lords
dangerous and useless, have received such deadly wounds by Mr. Prynne in his
Plea for the Lords, who was once one of their own Champions, I think it
needless to whet those Weapons again, since they always will be in readiness
for any one to make use of if need require; and shall only obviate one
objection that may be urged, That whatever the usage was before the
Representatives of the Commons, An Objection, That after the House of Commons
were admitted, the Jurisdiction of the Lords House was lessened; Answered.
yet the Commons after were often admitted to a share of Judicature in some
cases: But I shall give a few Instances, how, after this change of the
Constitution of Parliament, still this power of Judicature remained in the King
and House of Lords.

Roger de 4 E. 3. number. 11.28 E. 3. number. 9, 10.
Mortimer being accused of High Treason, 4 E. 3. for the Murder of King Edward
2. after his resignation and unlawful deposition; Knighton De Event. Angliae,
lib. 3. c. 16. col. 1556, 1557.
giving an account of the proceedings agreeable to the Parliament Roll, says,
Rex praecepit Comitibus, Baronibus, and caeteris Magnatibus Regni justum
judicium far super praedicto Rogero de Mortimer: So at the Parliament held at
Salisbury, 7 R. 2. W. de Zouch is said to be called to the Parliament, to stand
to the Judgment Ad standum judicio Regis, and Domincrum. Wal^ingham, p. 334.
Hist. Ang. and Hypodig. Neust. p. 141.
of the King, and the Lords: So Michael de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk, and
Chancellor of England, 10 R. 2. Rot. Parl. 10 R. 2. number. 6. ad 18.
was accused by the Commons in full Parliament, before the King, Bishops and
Lords; and at last it is said, The Lords in full Parliament gave judgment
against him.

In the Parliament 11 R. 2. Thomas Duke of Gloucester offered to put himself
upon his Trial as the Lords of the Parliament would award, etc. After which the
Lords, as well Spiritual as Temporal, claimed their Liberties and Franchises,
namely, That all weighty matters in the same Parliament which should be after
moved touching the Peers of the Land, should be judged and determined by them
by the course of Parliament, and not by the Civil Law, nor yet by the Common
Law of the Land, used in other Courts of the Realm.

Yet this seems a very high Demand; for they have not Juris dandi but dati
Jurisdictionem, as they are a Court of Ministerial Jurisdiction, being the
Court of the King's Barons in Parliament. And though, when upon Writ of Error
Egerton, sect. 4.22, 23.
any Judgment in the King's Bench is examined in the House of Lords, and there
affirmed or reversed, the Judgment is said to be affirmed or reversed in
Parliament; yet we cannot conclude, they have the Power of the High Court of
Parliament, that their Decrees (if against the Law) should be as binding as
Acts of Parliament. How the Lords judge ministerially.
And though the same House, in the same Session, may not have Power to review
again their own Judgment, nor to restore again any Judgment they have reversed,
because they judge ministerially, and not sovereignly, and so bind their own
Hands, as well as their Inferiors; whereas an Absolute Supreme Court is never
at the last Period of Jurisdiction: yet we see Attainders in one Parliament
reversed in another; and so may their Judgments be. But this obiter.

I shall but add one proof more, being full and express to the purpose, to
prove the House of Lords sole Jurisdiction with the King, (who must always be
understood to give Judgment by them:) The Record is 1 H. 4. Rot. Par. 1 H. 4.
number. 79. Exact Abridgment, p. 392.
where it is said, That 3 Nov. the Commons in this Parliament showed to the
King, Come les joggements du Parliament apperteignent soulement au Roy and
Seignieurs, and nient aus Communes, etc. That the Judgments of Parliament
appertained only to the King, and to the Lords, and not unto the Commons:
Thereupon they prayed the King, out of his special Grace, to show unto them the
said Judgments, and the cause of them; that so no Record might be made in
Parliament against the said Commons, which are or shall be parties to any
Judgment given, or hereafter to be given in Parliament, without their Privity.
Whereunto the Archbishop of Canterbury gave them this Answer by the Kings
Commandment, That the Commons themselves are Petitioners and Demanders, and
that the King Et que le Roy, and les Seigniours de tout temps, ont eues, and
averont de droit, les Juggement in Parliament, en manner come mesmes les
Communes so^t monstres.
and Lords from all times have had, and shall have of right the Judgments in
Parliaments in manner as the Commons have showed.

How far the King and House of Lords have been Judges of the Privileges of the
House of Commons, I shall declare in that part of this Chapter wherein I treat
of that House.

SECT. 5. Of the Assistants to the House of Lords.
HAving thus far treated of the Constituent Parts of the House of Lords, I come
now to the Assistants to this most Honorable House; which were mostly the
Prynne's Brief Register, part 1. sect. 3. p. 240. The Judges and other
Assistants of the House of Lords.
King's Great Officers, as well Clergymen as Secular Persons, who were no
Lords or Barons of the Realm, as, namely, his Treasurer, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Judges of his Courts at Westminster, Justices in Air, Justices
Assigns, Barons of his Exchequer, Clerks, Secretaries of his Council, and
sometimes his Sergeants at Law, with such other Officers and Persons whom our
Kings thought meet to summon.

The first Writ that Mr. Prynne finds extant in our Records, and which Sir
William Dugdale mentions, is entered in the Clause-Roll 23 E. 1. dorso 9.
directed to Gilbert de Thornton, and thirty eight more, whose Names are in Sir
William Dugdale; whereof there are eleven by the name of Magistri, three Deans,
and two Archdeacons: only I find them differently ranked in Mr. Prynne, to what
they are in Sir William Dugdale.

The Writ runs thus: Rex dilecto and fide^i suo Gilberto de Thornton, salutem.
Quia super quibusdam arduis negotiis, nos and Regnum nostrum, ac vos
caeterosque de Concilio nostro tangentibus, quae sine vestra, and eorum
praesentia nolumus expediri, etc. Vobis mandamus in fide and dilectione, etc.
as in the usual Summons to the Bishops.

Sometimes, as 25 E. 1. there Cl. 25 E. 1. m. 25. dorso.
was no Writ directed to them; but we find under the Name of Milites, with a
Lines space betwixt them and the Barons, thirteen named, which by other Records
are known to be the King's Justices.

The differences in their Writs are mostly these: Sometimes, The difference in
their Writs.
as in 27 E. 1. it is, Cum caeteris de Concilio nostro habere volumus
colloquium and tractatum; or, as in 28 E. 1. Cl. 28 E. 1. m. 3. dorso.
showing the special Cause, Quia super Jure and Dominio quae nobis in Regno
Scotiae competit, etc. cum Juris peritis, and cum caeteris de Concilio nostro
speciale colloquium habere volumus and tractatum, vobis mandamus, etc. cum
caeteris de Concilio nostro super praemissis tractaturis vestrumque consilium
impensuris.

At the same time there are Writs to the Chancellor of the University of
Oxford, to send four or five, Persons skilful in the Law summoned from the
Universities.
de discretioribus, and in Jure scripto magis expertis; and to the Chancellor
of the University of Cambridge, to send two or three in the like manner
qualified: and then follow Writs to several Abbats, Priors, Deans and Chapters;
and all these Writs mentioned the Business of the King's Claim to the
Jurisdiction of Scotland: and in the Writs of Summons to the Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Temporal Lords, Justices, and Sheriffs of Counties,
that Particular is not mentioned: which shows, that the King summoned these
particular Persons, as most fit to search and ^ send their Chronicles to the
Parliament: The Occasion and Result whereof, and of sending these Lawyers from
the Universities, you may read at large in An. 13^2. p. 419. to p. 438.
Matthew. Westminster, and Hist. Ang. p. 32. to 58.
Walsingham.

In some Writs, as that of 9 E. 2. Cl. 9 E. 2. m. 20. dorso.
the Justices are appointed to expedite their Assizes, that they may not fail
to be present at the Parliament, or to leave two to attend the Business of the
King's Bench: And the 7 of E. 2. Cl. 7 E. 2. m. 25^ dorso. Justices to leave
the Ass^zes to attend the Parliament.
That whereas they had appointed the Assizes at Duresm, and other Parts in the
Northern Circuit, at certain days after the time the Parliament was to convene,
at which he wondered; he orders them to put off the Assizes, and attend. By
which two Writs it appears, their Summons by Writ to attend and counsel the
King in Parliament, was a Supersedeas to them to take Assizes during the
Parliament; and that the Assizes and Suits of private Persons ought to give
place to the public Affairs of the King and Kingdom in Parliament. Whoever
desires to know who were summoned in this manner, and the further variety of
Summons, may consult Mr. Prynne, and Sir William Dugdale's Summons.

From these Writs we may observe, Observations from these Writs.
first, That sometimes the Persons summoned were many in number, sometimes very
few, and always Brief Register, part 1. a p. 366. ad p. 394.
more or less at the King's Pleasure. Secondly, in latter times the Clergymen
were wholly omitted. Thirdly, That they were never licensed to appear by
Proxies. Mr. Prynne has collected a great many Precedents to prove, that these
Persons thus summoned, together with the King's ordinary Council, had a very
great Hand, Power, and Authority, not only in making Ordinances, Proclamations,
deciding all weighty Controversies, regulating most public Abuses, and
punishing all exorbitant Offenses out of Parliament, in the Star Chamber, and
elsewhere; The Employment of these Assistants.
but likewise in receiving and answering all sorts of Petitions, determining
and adjudging all weighty doubtful Cases and Pleas, yea, in making or compiling
Acts, Ordinances, Statutes, and transacting all weighty Affairs concerning the
King or Kingdom, even in Parliaments themselves, when summoned to them. Yet
these have no Vote, but only are to speak to such Matters as their Opinions are
required in, and sit uncovered, unless the Chancellor or Lord Keeper give leave
to the Judges to be covered.

SECT. 6. Concerning the House of Commons.
I Now come to consider the Honorable House of Commons, and the Use, The
Summons of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses.
Constitution, and Privileges of it, and shall first consider the Summons by
which they have their Power to act as an House, and third Estate in Parliament.

Mr. Second Part of Brief Register, a p. 1. ad 29.
Prynn has cleared, that all the Writs of Summons directed to Sheriffs (in
King John, and Henry the Third's time before 49 H. 3.) to send Knights to the
King at set times, were either for Information of the Council what voluntary
aid each particular County would grant the King in his great necessity, or to
assist with Men and Arms, and were not elected as Representatives of the
Commons, till 49 H. 3. To whom I shall refer the curious for Satisfaction, as
also to Dr. Brady, who has by his own Inspection, as well as the considerate
application of what Mr. Prynn has amassed (in his Books since his late
Majesty's Restoration, and after 1648) composed many most useful Observations
for the understanding of the ancient customs, usages, and practices relating to
Parliaments. Therefore I shall endeavor to be as short as possibly I can, and
without obscurity contract what they and most others that treat of the House of
Commons, have at large filled Volumes with.

The form of the Writ, 49 H. 3. to the Sheriffs is not Cl. 49 H. 3. m. 11^
dorso.
expressed, but after the recital of the Writ to the Bishop of Duresm and
Norwich, and the eodem modo to the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Deans, Earls,
Lords, and Barons, there follows this entry in the Record, Item mandatum est
sing^lis Vicecomitibus per Angliam quod venire faciant duos Milites
delegalioribus, probioribus, and discretioribus Militibus singulorum
Comitatuum, ad Regem London, in forma praedicta.

Item in forma praedicta scribitur Civibus Ebor. Lincoln. and caeteris Burgis
Angliae, quod mittant in forma praedicta duos de discretioribus, legalioribus,
and probioribus tam Civibus quam Burgensibus suis: and so to the Barons of the
Cinque Ports, which runs thus; Rex Baronibus and Ballivis Portus sui de
Sandwico. Cum Praelati and Nobiles Regni nostri tam pro negotio Liberationis
Edwardi Primogeniti nostri, quam pro aliis Communitatem Regni nostri
tangentibus, ad instans Parliamentum, etc. Vobis mandamus in fide and
dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter injungentes, omnibus aliis
praetermissis mittatis ad nos ibidem, 4 de legalioribus and discertioribus
Portus vestri, etc. Nobiscum and cum praefatis Magnatibus Regni nostri
tractatum and super praemissis consilium impensuri.

From all which, it is observable, first, Observations on the first Writ to the
Barons of the Cinque Ports.
that in all probability the Writs then issued to the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, were the same in form and substance, with those to the Spiritual and
Temporal Lords, and in those to the Sheriffs, etc. Secondly, the Qualifications
of those to be elected are limited: Thirdly, It does not appear whether the
Counties themselves, or the Sheriffs alone were to elect. Fourthly, The Writs
for electing Citizens and Burgesses were directed immediately to the Citizens
and Burgesses themselves, not to the Sheriffs of the Counties. Lastly, that no
Writ issued to the Citizens of London, their Liberties then being seized into
the King's Hand, and that York and Lincoln are the only Cities mentioned
particularly in the Roll.

The first Writs, entered at large in the Rolls, are those Cl. 22 E. 1. m. 6.
dorso.
22 E. 1. wherein is expressed, that the King intending a Colloquium and
Tractatum with his Barons, and great Men, he commands that the Sheriffs cause
to be elected two Knights, De di^^retioribus and ad laborandum potentioribus --
cum plena potestate pro se and tota communitate Com. praedicti, ad consulendum,
and cons^ntiendum pro se and communitate illa, Hiis quae Comites, Barons, and
Proceres prae^icti concorditer ordinaverint in praemissis, etc.
of the more discreet and more able to take Pains, etc. to come to Westminster,
etc. with full Power for themselves, and the whole Community of the said
County, to consult and consent each for himself and the said Community, to
those things, which the Earls, Barons, and Nobles aforesaid unanimously ordain
in the Premises; so that for want of such like Power, the Business remain not
undone.

I shall now insert what Variations I find in the Writs of Summons,
promiscuosly, whether to Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses, unless there be some
remarkable difference to be observed.

First, The Qualifications in the Writs.
As to their Qualifications, generally, both Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
are to be de legalioribus and discretioribus, and ad laborandum potentioribus.
In the Writ 25 E. 1. Cl. 25 E. 1. m. 6. dorso.
it is probioribus and legalioribus; and some two, or all of these Epithetes
are generally used, till Cl. 22 E. 3. m. 7. dorso.
22 E. 3. m. 7. dorso, where it is expressed, that the Knights be gladio
cinctos and ordinem militarem habentes and non alios, and de qualibet Civitate,
and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgos de aptioribus, discretioribus, probioribus,
and fide dignis Militibus, Civibus and Burgensibus, Cl. 24 E. 3. par. 2. m. 3.
dorso.
and in the Twenty fourth of E. 3. there is an addition and limitation, No
Maintainers of S^its, etc. to be cho^^n.
Qui non sunt Placitorum, aut querelarum manutentores, aut ex hujusmodi quaestu
viventes, sed homines valentes, and bonae fidei, and publicum commodum
diligentes eligi: and the self-same Limitations are in the 25, 28, and 29 E. 3.
So that it was used so long as the King thought fit. In Cl. 26 E. 3. m. 14.
dorso.
26 Ed. 3. it is unum Militem de provectioribus, discretioribus, and magis
expertis Militibus, and so for Citizens and Burgesses: by which it appears the
King desired not any under Age (as now is allowed) to be chosen. In 31 Ed. 3.
besides Cl. 31 E. 3. m. 2. dorso.
the usual words de discretioribus and probioribus, there is added de
elegantioribus personis eligi. Which in no Writ else before or after is to be
found. In the 36 E. 3. Cl. 36 E. 3. m. 16. dorso.
it is de melioribus and validioribus Militibus, etc. That of the Forty fourth
of Cl. 44 E. 3. m. 12. dorso.
E. 3. runs, Duos Milites gladiis cinctos and in Armis and Actibus Armorum
magis probatos and circumspectos and discretos.

It appears by the Parliament Roll, 46 Null home de Ley pursuont busoignes en la
Court de Roy, ne Viscount pur le Temps que il est Viscount, soient retournez,
ne acceptez Chevalers des Countees, neque ves qui sont Gentz de Ley, and
Vis^ounts ore retournez au Parliament eient Gages. Rot. Parl. 46 E. 3. cum. 13.
E. 3. That it was accorded, and assented to in that Parliament, and an
Ordinance made, That no Lawyer pursuing Business in the Court of the King, nor
any Sheriff while he was Sheriff, should be returned, or accepted Knights of
the Counties; and if any were so returned, they should have no wages. Therefore
in the fourteenth Number of the said Roll, it is thus expressed, Mes voyet le
Roy, que Chevalers and Serjaunts, ( i. e. Esquires, not Sergeants at Law) des
meulieur valeurs du paiis soiz retornez desore Chevalers en Parliament, and
quils sount esluz en plein Counts. That Knights and Esquires of greatest value
in their Country should be chosen in the full County.

The very next Writ 47 E. 3. Cl. 47 E. 3 m. 13 dorso. To be Knights gi^t with
Swords, and skilful in Arms.
runs thus, Duos Milites gladiis cinctos se^ Armigeros, (which explains the
word Serjaunts before, as in that Age being reputed Servants to Knights, as
holding Lands in such a Tenure of them) de dicto Com. digniores and probiores,
and in Actibus Armorum magis expertos, and discretos, and non alterius
conditionis, and duos Cives and Burgenses, qui in navigo and exercitio
mercandisarum notitiam habeant meliorem, eligi; and then in the Close, follows,
Nolumus autem quod tu seu aliquis alius Vicecomes Regni praedicti, aut aliquis
alteri^s conditionis quam superius specificatur, aliqualiter sit electus; and
the last Clause, till the 11 Rich. 2. was used, and from the 12th. to the last
of Rich. 2. the words alterius conditionis are omitted, and so in Ed. Fourth's
time; but the Clause, that the Sheriff be not chosen, is retained.

To these we may add, That Bannerets were not to be chosen Members of the House
of Commons, Cl. 7 R. 2. m. 32. dorso. No Banneret to be chosen.
7 R. 2. in the case of Thomas Camoys thus, Nos advertentes quod hujusmodi
Banneretti ante haec tempora Milites Comitatuum ratione alicujus Parliamenti
eligi minime consueverunt; ipsum de Officio Militis ad dictum Parliamentum pro
Communitate Com. praedicti venturi, exonerari volumus, and so commands the
Sheriff to choose another.

In the 11 R. 2. we find a Cl. 11 R. 2. m. 24. dorso.
new qualification in the Writ, That the Knights, etc. should be Gladio
cinctos, idoneos and discretos, and in Debatis modernis magis indifferentes; A
new Clause recalled.
but the King being informed, that this new Clause, indifferent in the modern
Debates (which only was to the Knights, not to the Citizens or Burgesses) was
contrary to the forms of Elections anciently used, and against the Liberty of
the Commons, he superseded, and revoked that Clause by another Writ.

In the 5 H. 4. an unusual new Cl. 5 H. 4. par. 2. m. 4. dorso. No Lawyers to
be chosen.
Clause was added to the prohibition of Sheriffs, Nolumus, etc. nec
Apprenticius a^t aliquis alius homo ad Legem aliqualiter sit electus:
Concerning this and that in the 46 Ed. 3. the curious Reader may peruse Sir Ed.
4 Instit. p. 10.
Coke, whose opinion Mr. Prynne Second Part of Brief Register, 124. Hist. Ang.
p. 414.
from the Roll, and from Walsingham, clearly confutes, however that Parliament
is since called indoctum.

After this, upon making the Statutes 7 H. 4. c. 15.11 H. 4. c. 1. upon the
Commons Petition, the ancient form for the Writs was somewhat altered and
enlarged, though little as to the qualifications, but as to the manner of
Elections, etc. of which I shall discourse by it self.

23 H. 6. c. 15. Cl. 25 H. 6. m. 24. dorso. Only Knights, Esquires, or
Gentlemen to be Knights of Shires.
a Statute was made concerning Elections of Knights, therefore in the Writs of
Summons 25 H. 6. it runs thus, Milites notabiles, seu saltem notabiles
Armigeri, hominesve generosi de natu eorundem Com. qui habiles sunt Milites
fieri, and nullus homo de gradu valettae, and gradu inseriori de essendo
Milites hujusmodi existant.

Having thus treated of the Ancient Qualifications, The Modern Qualifications.
I shall subjoin the modern, which are comprised in short, To cause Du^s
milit^s gladiis cinctos m^gis idoneos, and discretos -- Cives and Burgen^es^de
discretiorthus and magis sufficientibus. The Electors.
two Knights girt with Swords, the most fit and discreet of the County
aforesaid, and of every City of that Country two Citizens, of every Borough
two Burgesses of the discreeter and most sufficient to be freely and
indifferently chosen, etc.

Having thus discoursed of the Qualifications of the Persons elected; before I
make any remarks upon the whole, it is fit to note the Electors and manner of
Election. Some are of opinion, that, as the greater and lesser Tenants in
Capite, after King John's Charter, were the only Lay constituent Members of
Parliament, so the still smaller Tenants to those that held in Capite, and the
smaller Tenants in Capite, if not they only, did elect the Knights of Shires.

But I shall, as fair as Records will give me light, by particulars clear this,
and the power that was given them by the Community of the County to the Knights.

The first Cl. 22 E. 1. m. 6. dorso.
Writ hitherto found, is only, That the Sheriff shall cause to be chosen two
Knights, and that they have power, etc. as I have before related in the Writ to
the Sheriff of Northumberland; See below the Choice in Yorkshire.
it is to cause two Knights to come, chosen by the consent of the County, and
to have full power for themselves singly, and the Community of the County; and
so likewise, two Citizens and two Burgesses with the Assent of the Community of
the City or Borough. The Knights were elected by the Community of the County,
that is, as Dr. Brady makes it clear in his P. 33^34.
Glossary, the greater and less Tenants in Capite; and as for Cities and
Buroughs, such were the chusers as held Lands in Free Burgage of the King, or
some great Lords who held in Capite.

Ann. 26 E. 1. Bundel number. 1.
expresses no more but the Election in general, and the power to be given the
Elected, Ita quod dicti Milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and
Communitate Com. praedict. and dicti Cives and Burgenses pro se and Comunitate
Civitatum and Burgorum praedictorum divisim ab ipsis tunc ibidem habeant, etc.

Before I proceed any further, Manucaptors or Pledges, that Knights elected
should meet in Parliament.
we must note, that in the Returns made by the Sheriffs to these Writs, there
are found 26 E. 1. four Manucaptors for every person elected, and in others
two: these did engage themselves, that the Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses so
elected should appear at the Parliament according to the time appointed.

In the County of Bedford, I find Rich. de Rous Knight elected, and no
Manucaptors returned, but that the Sheriff distrained eight Oxen, and four
Horses of him, that he should come at the Day, etc. This was done by virtue of
that Clause in the Writ, and eos ad nos ad praedictos diem and locum venire
facias; and this way of having Manucaptors, continued till the 12 E. 4. Brief
Register, part 2. p. 50.
though many had none in latter times. Mr. Prynne observes, That the Knights in
every Shire were elected in the full County, by and for the whole County, and
that the Citizens and Burgesses were then also elected per totam Communitatem.
In all the Writs of Richard the Second, there is this Clause more fully
inserted than in any before, That the Election be in pleno Comitatu tuo de
communi assensu ejusdem Comitatus.

Upon the making the Statutes 7 H. 4. c. 15. and 11 H. 4. c. 1. The Statutes
for ordering Elections.
for regulating abuses in Elections, the Writs of Summons 8 H. 4. and all his
time, and so Cl. 1 H. 5. m. 9. and 37.
1 H. 5. were accordingly altered, that Proclamation should be made by the
Sheriff, in the next County day after the receipt of the Writ, and the Knights
to be chosen libere and indifferenter, Free Choice.
free and indifferently by those that were present at the Proclamation; and
shall return the names of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, Return of
Indentures.
in certain Indentures betwixt the Sheriff, and those that were present at the
Election, whether the persons elected were present or not, etc.

The Returns to the Writs 1 H. 5. Who were Chusers of Burgesses.
show the Election to be by common assent and consent of those present, as that
for Lestwythiel, where 32 Electors are named, and that for Surry has only
four, but adds, and omnium aliorum fidelium ibidem existentium. The Indenture
for Sussex is in French, and says, Les Gentilles homes and Communes, the
Gentlemen and Commons had chosen Richard Sayvile, etc.

The Sheriff of Bristol says, Coadunatis discretioribus and magis
sufficientibus Burgensibus, ex assensu Johannis Clive Majoris Villae
praedictae, and aliorum plurimorum existentium eligimus, etc. The elected were
two Burgesses of Bristol, Thomas Norton and John Leycester, both for Knights
for the County of Bristol, and Burgesses for the Villa of Bristol; and in
another these are called Burgenses and Mercatores.

The next alteration that I find, is after the Statute of the Cl. 23 H. 6. m.
21. dorso. The Knights to be resident in the County, and the Electors to have
at least 40 s. a year Lands.
8 H. 6. c. 7. which agrees with that of 23 H. 6. that every Knight to be
chosen within the Kingdom of England to come to the Parliament, shall be chosen
by such as live in the County; whereof every one have a free Tenement to the
value of Forty Shillings per annum, beyond all Reprizes; and that those who are
elected be abiding, and resident in the said County, and the Sheriff have power
upon Oath to examine the Electors, what yearly Estate they have, and that the
Sheriff incur the penalty of 100 Marks for his false return, and the Knights so
returned lose their Wages.

There are several Precepts that command, that at such Elections Proclamari and
inhiberi facias, ne aliqua persona tunc ibidem armata, seu modo guerrino
arraiata, ad electionem illam accedat. Rot. Parl. 8 H. 6. m. 13. number. 18. None
to come in an Hostile manner to elect.
no person come there Armed, or arrayed in Warlike manner, or do, nor attempt
any thing that may be in disturbance of the Kings Peace, or the Election; as
particularly is expressed in the Writs, 2 E. 3. m. 31. dorso, and several
others to be perused in the first part of Prynne's Brief Register, a p. 27. ad
28, 177, 214. Cl. 5 E. 2. m. 22. dorso, 18 H. 6. and several other places which
were prohibited, that Elections thereby might be made free.

That it may appear, that the Elections in ancient times were not made by such
as we now call Freeholders of forty Shillings a Year (which now is established
by Statute Law) I think it not amiss to insert what I find of a particular
usage in Yorkshire; Prynne's Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva, p. 152, 153, 154.
Atturneys of Noblemen and Ladies in Yorkshire Electors.
where^^ it appears by the first Indentures of the Elections and Returns of
Knights for the County of York, that the Atturnies of the Archbishop of York,
and of sundry Earls, Lords, Nobles, and some Ladies, who were annual Suitors to
the County Court of Yorkshire, were sole Electors of the Knights, as appears by
the Return 13 H. 4. upon the Writ of 12 H. 4. betwixt Edm. Sandford Sheriff on
the one part, and Will. Holgate Attorney of Ralph Earl of Westmorland, Will^ de
Kyllington Attorney of Lucy Countess of Kent, Will. Hesham Attorney of Pet.
Lord de M^lolacu, William de Burton Attorney of William Lord de Roos, Rob.
Evedal Attorney of Ralph Baron of Graystock, William do Heston Attorney of
Alex. de Metham Knight, Henry de Preston Attorney of Henry de Percy Knight,
choose John de Ever Knight, and Robert de Plompton Knight.

Also 2 H. 5. The Indenture is betwixt William de Harrington Knight, Sheriff of
Yorkshire, and Robert Maulevere^ Attorney of Henry Archbishop of York, William
Fencotes Attorney of Ralph Earl of Westmorland, William Archer Attorney of John
Earl Marshal, and so the Atturnies of Hen. le Scrop Knight Lord of Masham, of
Peter de Mulolacu, Alexander de Metham. Robert Roos, of Margaret, which was
Wife of Henry Vavasor Knight, and of Henry Percy.

The like are found in the Eighth and Ninth of H. 5. and the 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 H 6.
in all which the Atturnies only of Nobles, Barons, Lords, Ladies, and Knights,
who were Suitors, made the Elections of the Knights of Yorkshire, in the County
Court, and sealed the Indenture. I have a French Letter of Attorney from the
Lady Ross, to that purpose; concerning which, if God give me Life, I shall give
an account in my Antiquities of Yorkshire,

This Method ceased before 25 H. 6. at which time the Return made by Robert
Vghtred Sheriff of Yorkshire, has the Names of Forty two Gentlemen, most of
which are of very ancient Families, and such as had great Estates then, and so
continue to have; though I doubt not but (as it is the Custom now) the much
lesser part of those present were only inserted as Parties to the Indentures.
However by the Community we may understand, who elected were not like the
Freeholders now.

The next thing we are to consider in the Writs of Summons to Parliament, What
the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses were summoned for.
is what the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses so elected, were by the Writ
authorized to do.

The first Writ Ad consulendum, and consentiendum, pro se, and communitate
illa, hiis quae Comites, Barons, and Proceres praedicti concorditer
ordinaverint in praemissis. Cl. 22. E. 1. m. 6. dorso.
that we find for Election of Knights of Shires, expresses their convening to
be, To consult, and consent for themselves, and the Community, to those things
which the Earls, Barons, and foresaid Nobles unanimously should ordain in the
premises; and the Writ to the Sheriff of Northumberland is ad a^diendum and
faciendum quod and tunc ibidem before injungemus, to hear and do what we shall
then and there fullier enjoin.

In the Writ 25 Cl. 25 e. 1. m. 6. dorso.
E. 1. the King intending to confirm the great Charter, and Charter of the
Forest; that he might levy the eighth part of all the Goods of his Lieges, for
his most urgent necessity against the French; convenes the Parliament before
Prince Edward his Son, and the Knights are to meet to receive the said
Charters, and facturi ulterius quod per dictum Filium nostrum ibidem fuerit
ordinatum; to do further what should be ordained by the Prince.

The Writ 25 E. 1. Bundel. number. 1. Ad faci^ndum, quod tunc de Communi Concili^
ordinabitur in praemissis.
expresses that the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are to do what then
shall be ordained in the Premises by the Common Council; and so the Returns
are ad faciendum quod tunc ibidem ordinabitur.

In 17 E. 2. Cl. 17 E. 2. m. 27. dorso.
it is enjoined, that the Knights, etc. be there, ad faciendum and
consentiendum hiis quae in dicto Parliamento ordinari contigerit super negotiis
antedictis.

Anno 21 E. 3. Cl. 21 E. 3. m. 12. dorso.
there is some more Power granted to the Knights, etc. ad tractandum,
consulendum, and consentiendum hiis quae tunc favente divina Clementia
contigerit ordinari. Whereas before it was only to hear and do what was
ordained by the King, the Prince, or the great Council; here it is to treat,
consult and consent to what then should be ordained. But the Writ Anno 36. Cl.
36 E. 3. m. 16. dorso.
explains who had the ordaining Power, for it runs, ad consentiendum hiis quae
per nos, ac dictos Praelatos, Magnates and Proceres ordinari contigerit. So
here the King, the Bishops, and the Nobles ordain, and the House of Commons are
to assent. Anno 47 E. 3. Cl. 47 E. 3. m. 13. dorso.
the words are, ad faciendum, and consentiendum eis quae tunc de Communi
Concilio Regni nostri favente Domino contingant ordinari; which Form is
continued to this day: so that according to the import of the Writ, the Commons
are to do and assent to what shall be ordained in Parliament; by which two
words I suppose they have the full Power to frame Bills, and to assent, which
also implies a Power of Dissent to the Bills sent to them by the House of Lords.

Having thus drawn into one Scheme, the most material Alterations, and variety
of Expressions, from all the Writs of Summons, of Mr. Prynne and others, that
fill so great Volumes, and truly (as I hope) quoted all the Records, which
illustrate these Particulars, and in a very clear Landscape represented the
most material Parts of the two so noble and wisely constituted Houses; from
whose great Wisdom (with the Sovereigns Authority and Fiat) all those wholesome
and necessary Laws are derived, that establish this great Monarchy: I shall now
pass to some general Remarques, and from thence to the ancient and modern
Privileges of the House of Commons.

First it is very obvious, Kings not confined to two Knights, etc.
that the Kings of England formerly were not confined to summon only two
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses as now; for Anno 22 Cl. 22 E. 1. m. 6. dorso.
E. 1. the King issued out his Writs of Summons for two Knights of every
County, after which, follows a second Writ, entered immediately after in the
same Dorse, for other two Knights in these words, Praeter illos duos Milites
eligi facias alios duos Milites legales, etc. So 28 E. 1. three Knights, or
other three de probioribus, legalioribus, and discretioribus Liberis Hominibus,
etc. eligi. These probi and legales homines were such as held in Capite. So in
the Cl. 26 E. 3. m 14. dorso. V^ h^mines ab ista occupa^^one autump^alibus quo
minus possumus retrahamus.
26 of E. 3. the King considering that it was Harvest time, that he might not
withdraw Men from that Employment, unum tantum Militem de quolibet Comitatu ad
dictum Concilium mittendum habere volumus ista vice. So Cl. 45 E. 3. m. 21.
dorso. Ordinavimus ut laboribus par^atur, and expensis.
45 E. 3. the King in his Writ says, That he might spare the Labors and
Expenses, he will have treaty with some only of the Magnates, (by which the
Knights of Shires here are to be understood) Citizens and Burgesses, One
Citizen, and one Burgess.
therefore appoints one Knight for the County of Kent, one Citizen for
Canterbury, and one for Rochester, whom he names, if they be alive, otherwise
the Companion of him that was before.

In 18 E. 3. the Writs issued only for two Brevia Parl. rediviva, p. 144. ad
147.
Knights in every County, and no Writ for Electing Citizens or Burgesses; and
26 E. 3. the Writs are for one Knight in every County, and no Citizens or
Burgesses: yet in These things are now reduced to a certainty by the Statutes 5
R. 2. c. 4. and others. Prynne's Brief Regis^. par. 2 p. 32.
this the King issued out particular Writs to Mayors and Bailiffs o^ Cities and
Buroughs, to elect, and return one Citizen for every City, and one Burgess for
every Borough.

Secondly, That the Kings of England had a Power to supersede particular
Persons being chosen, to resummon those that returned without leave, or appoint
others in their places, and omit sending Writs to some Cities and Buroughs
that had formerly sent, and to create new Buroughs.

So the Lord Camoys, See Brief Regist. p. 118. ad 123.
as I have instanced before, being elected by the King's first Writ, the King
by new Writ declared it null, and ordered to proceed to a new Election, and the
King appears in that Age to be the sole Judge of void, and double Elections. So
in the Cl. 28 E. 1. m. 7. dorso.
28 Ed. 1. Phillip de Geyton, being chosen one of the Knights for the County of
Northampton, and could not attend, the King orders another to be chosen. So 5
Cl. 5 E. 2. m. 26. dorso.
E. 2. because the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of Yorkshire, went away for
certain causes not there expressed (it is probable without the Kings Leave)
therefore he sends his Precept to the Sheriff, to cause them to return, vel
alios ad hoc idoneos loco eorum si ad hoc vacare non possint. But this more
especially is to be taken notice of when I come to discouse of Privileges of
Parliament.

As to the last particular of the King's appointing new Buroughs, The King
makes new Buroughs.
impowering them by special Charters to send Citizens and Burgesses to all
Parliaments to be afterward held by the King, his Heirs, and Successors, Judge
Reports, p. 14, 15.
Hobarts has cleared it, and Brief Register, par. 2. p. 170.
Mr. Prynne has reduce them all into Chronological Tables, and he makes it a
certain Note, that where the Sheriff makes his Return, nulli sunt Cives nec
Burgenses in Com. praedict. or non est alia Civitas vel Burgus, or non sunt
alii Burgi, we may certainly conclude that every City or Borough omitted then
out of those ancient Returns, and since returned for Cities or Buroughs, were
made Cities and Buroughs since that time, as the curious may see at large in
his P. 223. ad 297.
Brevia Parliamenta Rediviva.

But on the other side, Old Buroughs discontinued, for what reason.
we find many Buroughs who elected Burgesses in 26 E. 1. (as particularly
Pontefract and Malton in Yorkshire) had no Summons that are yet found, from 26
E. 1. to 12 E. 4. Now whether this were by the King's special Directions, the
Desire of the Places, (as not being willing to be at the Charge of paying their
Burgesses Wages, which were in that Age exacted) or the Carelessness of the
Sheriffs, is a Question not easily to be determined; though it is certain, it
might be by any of these Causes. That Poverty was a principal Cause, appears in
the numerous Returns of the Sheriffs of Lancashire, Id. p. 236.
when Lancaster and Preston before 33 E. 3. used to return Burgesses; but from
thence, till after the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, we find the Return to
be, Non est aliqua Civitas neque Burgus in Balliva mea: And the Reason is given
in the Return 38 E. 3. Propter eorum debilitatem seu paupertatem, inopiam and
paupertatem, or paupertatem and debilitatem, throughout the whole. For it was
anciently really reputed a great Burden for poor and small Buroughs to send
Burgesses to Parliament, they being bound to defray their Charges. Pat. 42 E.
3. par. 1. m. 8.
So the Bailiffs and Commonalty of Toriton did repute it, and petitioned the
King in Parliament to free them from this Burden; as likewise did the Abbat of
Leicester, Anno 14 E. 3. the Prior of St. James without Northampton, Anno 12 E.
2. by reason Selden's Titles of Honor, p. 730. ad 734. Coke 4. Instit. p. 44,
45.
of their Poverty, and extraordinary Expenses in repairing to Parliaments, to
be exempted from all future Parliaments, they not holding by Barony; and
obtained their Request. So the Abbat of St. Augustine in Bristol, Pat. 15 E. 3.
p. 1. m. 13.

Mr. Prynne Brev. Parl. rediviva, p. 240.
owns, That the King by his Letters Patents may exempt a Borough unduely
charged by the Practice of Sheriffs or others to send Men to Parliament against
Right and common Usage; but not 15 E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 6.
such as by Duty and Custom ought to send and find Burgesses. Under this Head
we may consider the Temporary 5 R. 2. c. 4.23 H. 6. c. 15. See more at large
for this, Prynne's Animadversions on Sir E. Coke's Instit. p. 32.
Exemption of R. 2. 6 Regni, to the Burgesses of Colchester, for five years, in
consideration of the new building and fortifying their Walls: yet this did not
exempt them; for it was against the Statute made 5 Ric. 2. 5 R. 2. Parl. 2. c.
5.
wherein it is expressly provided, That all Persons and Commonalties which shall
from henceforth have Summons to the Parliament, shall come in the manner as
they be bound to do, and have been accustomed, within this Realm of England, of
old time: And the Sheriffs are punishable who leave out of the said Returns any
Cities or Buroughs which be bound, Sheriffs punishable that om^t summoning.
and of old times were wont to come to the Parliament. And in C. 15.
23 H. 6. it is said, That diverse Sheriffs of the Counties have sometimes
returned none of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, lawfully chosen, but
such which were never duly chosen, and other Citizens and Burgesses than those
which by the Mayors and Bailiffs were to the said Sheriffs returned; and
moreover made no Precepts to the Mayors or Bailiffs for the Electing of
Citizens and Burgesses to come to Parliament. Which makes Mr. Prynne Brev.
Parl. rediv. p. 241. Sheriffs formerly took liberty what Places to send Writs
to.
infallibly resolve, that Sheriffs did before these Acts, arbitrarily issue out
their Precepts to what Cities and Buroughs they pleased, which they might the
more freely do, because the Precept to them was indefinite de qualibet Civitate
and quolibet Burgo, used in all Writs since the 23 Membr. 4. dorso.
E. 1. without designing the particular Cities or Buroughs by name. By which
means Sheriffs might use a kind of Arbitrary Power according as their Judgment
directed them, or their affections of favor, partiality, malice, or the
solicitations of any private Borough to them, or of Competitors for Citizens
or Burgesses places within their County, swayed them; which opinion of Mr.
Prynn's, as also that no new Buroughs by the Kings mere Grant, or the House of
Commons Order, can be legally created, or old long discontinued Buroughs be
enabled by Vote of the House of Commons to choose and return Burgesses to our
English Parliaments, I shall leave to the discussionof those it may concern.

There was one Custom anciently used (which was taken away by the Statute of
the 36 H. 6. Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses elected at the County Court the
same day.
) that in many Counties, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses were elected on
the same day in their County Courts, by the Suitors or others resorting to it;
or by four or five Citizens and Burgesses only (whereof the Mayor, Bailiffs or
chief Officer was usually one) sent from every City and Borough to the County
Court, there to elect their Citizens and Burgesses, so soon as the Knights were
chosen, returning them often in one Brev. Parl. rediv. p. 176.
Indenture, or the Knights alone, and the Citizens and Burgesses in another,
under the Seals of the Citizens and Burgesses electing them, as appears by the
Indenture for Cumberland 2 H 5. and that of Kent 12 H. 4. of Wilts 1 H. 5. and
Bedford 2 H. 5. Before I dismiss this head, I shall note out of the great Ibid.
p. 223.
Collections of Mr. Prynne, How many Cities and Buroughs anciently.
that the total number of the Cities, Buroughs and Ports, either summoned by
the Sheriffs Precepts or Writs to Elect and Return, or actually electing and
returning Citizens, Burgesses or Barons of the Cinque Ports, from King Edward
the First's Reign, to the end of Edward the Fourth, were but a Hundred and
Seventy, and no more, whereof Seven never sent after E. 1st's. time, and Twenty
of them but once during these Kings Reigns, and Thirteen of our Abbats, and
Twenty Seven of our Priors were summoned to our Parliaments but once, and
several Buroughs but twice, thrice, four or five or six times, all the whole
time else being omitted: and as some were thus neglected, New Buroughs erected
in several Kings Reigns.
so new ones supplied the number. In Edward the Second's time Nineteen new
Buroughs being added, and as many in Edward the Third's time. During the
Reign^ of Richard the Second, Henry the Fourth and Fifth, no new Buroughs
created at all; and during the Forty Nine Years Reign of Henry the Sixth, but
Five new Buroughs; and in Edward the Fourth's time but one. He says, that
Fourteen new Buroughs have been made in Cornwall since K. Ed. 4. Idem, 230.


By which is discovered the Error of the Compiler of the absurd gross late
Imposture, Entitled, Modus tenendi Parliamentum, so magnified by Sir Edward
Coke, 4. Instit. p. 12.1. Inst. p. 69.2. Inst. 7, 8. Preface to ninth Report.
beyond all bounds of Truth and Modesty; as also the great mistake of our
learned judicious Antiquary Archaion, p. 257.
Mr. Lambard and Doderidge of the Antiquity of Parliaments.
others of great note, who affirm that the true original Title and Right of all
our ancient Cities and Buroughs, electing and sending Burgesses and Citizens
to our Parliaments, is Prescription time out of mind, long before the Conquest;
it being a Privilege they actually, and of right enjoyed in Edward the
Confessor's time or before, and exercised ever since: Indeed the whole series
of the great Councils in the Saxon, Danish and Norman Kings Reigns to the Forty
Ninth of Henry the Third, evince the contrary.

As to the Wages of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, The Wages of Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses.
it being a thing now obsolete (though not out of force by those that would
claim them) I shall only note, that the first Writ for them, is coeval with our
Kings first Writs of Summons; and the reason given in the Writ is, That whereas
the King had summoned two Knights, etc. and they had stayed Ac iidem Milites
moram diuturniorem quam credebant traxerint ibidem, propter quod non modicas
fecerint expensas. Cl. 49 H. 3. m. 10. dorso.
longer than they believed they should do, by reason of which they had been at
no small Expense: therefore the King appoints the Sheriff by the counsel of
Four lawful Knights, to provide for the Two Knights of the Shire their
reasonable Expenses.

The Writ of the 28 Ed. 1. Rot. Claus. 28 E. 1. m. 12. dorso.
commands that they have rationabiles expensas suas, in veniendo ad nos, ibidem
morando, and inde ad propria redeundo; their reasonable Expenses in coming to
the King, staying there, and returning to their homes. The like we find for the
Citizens and Burgesses in the 1 Ed. 2. there was Four Shillings a day allowed
for every Knight, and Two Shillings for every Citizen and Burgess.

Mr. Prynne Brief Parliamentary Writs, part 4. p. 4.
gives many good reasons why these Wages were allowed, some of which I shall
recite: As first, that all Laws allow Sallaries for Services, and those being
public Servants and Representatives or Atturneys for the Counties, Cities,
Buroughs, to consult about the great and arduous Affairs, necessary Defense,
Preservation and Welfare of the King and Kingdom, and theirs, for and by whom
they were entrusted; it is reason (as they receive the benefit of their good
Service, in giving their good Advice toward the redressing of Grievances, and
making wholesome Laws) that they should have allowed their necessary Expenses.
Secondly, It appears in ancient times, there was no such ambition to be
Parliamentmen as of late, but the Persons elected thought it a burden;
therefore lest being elected they should neglect to repair to the Convention,
they had Sureties called Manucaptors for their Appearance. Thirdly, This
obliged the Counties, Cities and Buroughs to be carefuller in electing the
discreetest, ablest, fittest and most laborious persons, who would speediest
and best dispatch all Public business, which occasioned the shortness of
Sessions. Fourthly, It begat a greater confidence, correspondence and
dependence betwixt the Electors and Elected. Fifthly, It kept poor petty
Buroughs (unable to defray the Expenses of their Burgesses) from electing or
sending Members to our Parliaments, and obliged some to Petition to be eased of
the Charge; whereby the number of Burgesses was scarce half so many, and
Parliaments were more expeditious in Councils, Aids, Motions and their Acts and
Debates, and so the Sessions were much shortened, the Elections were then
fairer, and for the most part unquestionable, the Commons House less unwieldy,
Privileges of Parliament less enlarged beyond the ancient Standard, abuses in
Elections, Returns and Contests about them (by reason of the Mercenary and
Precarious Voices) less troublesome: whereas now in every new Parliament a great
part of the time is spent in the regulating Elections. But Mr. Prynne hints
little upon one great cause of that usage, which was that in Buroughs as well
as Cities, most what the persons elected were the Inhabitants in the Cities and
Buroughs, Merchants, Tradesmen, or the most popular Burghers; as will appear
to whoever peruseth the Chronological Catalogue Mr. Prynne P. 900. to 1072.
with no small pains has collected into his Fourth Part of his Brief Register,
where I believe one can pitch upon no City of Borough from the time of Ed. 1.
to the 12 Ed. 4. but he will find by the very names, that they were such as I
have mentioned. I am well assured of it for Yorkshire, and particularly for the
City of York, they being generally such as we find in the List of their Mayors.

Beverly has Four of the Sirnames of good Families, and Kingstone upon Hull
has 8 E. 3.
William a S. Pole, from whom the great Family of Suffolk sprung, but it is
well known he was a Merchant there.

Now since every part of the Country abounds with Gentlemen of Plentiful
Fortunes, Why wages not now paid to Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses.
Generous Education, such as are versed in Affairs of their Country, as
Justices of the Peace, Deputy Lieutenants, and have been Sheriffs, Members of
Parliament, and born Public Offices; there can be no expectation or Fear, that
those that are Candidates for Parliament Men for Buroughs, will expect any
Sallary or Reward, so long as they choose them. There being generally
Competitors, who instead of expecting Wages, are generally obliged now to vast
expenses to purchase the Votes^ of the Electors; so that now the Honorable
House of Commons is quite another thing, than what it was wont to be in elder
Ages, when they were summoned principally to give Assent to what the King and
the Lords did, to assent to Aids, and Taxes, and apportion their own Taxes,
bring up their Petitions concerning Grievances to be redressed by the King and
his Council, or the King and Lords, and draw up Impeachments against great
Offenders, and such like.

Having thus considered the Writs of Summons to the Members of the House of
Commons before Henry the Seventh's time in all its branches, Copy of Writs of
Summons now used to the Sheriffs.
I shall give a Transcript of the Writ of Summons used at this day; whereby may
be seen how much of the old form is continued, which I shall insert in Latin
and English, that the Emphasis of the Original may not be lost.

REX
Vicecomiti Salutem, etc.
Quia de advisamento, and assensu Concilii nostri, pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, concernentibus; quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud, etc.
die, etc. proxime futuro, teneri ordinavimus; and ibidem cum Praelatis,
Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti Regni nostri colloquium habere and tractatum.
Tibi praecipimus, firmiter injungentes, quod facta Proclamatione in proximo
Comitatu tuo post receptionem hujus Brevis nostri, tenendo die and loco
praedicto, duos Milites gladiis cinctos, magis idoneos, and discretos Comitatus
praedicti, and de qualibet Civitate Comitatus illius, duos Cives, and de
quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses, de discretioribus and magis sufficientibus,
libere and indifferenter per illos qui Proclamationi hujusmodi interfuerint,
juxta formam Statutorum inde editorum and provisorum eligi, and nomina eorundem
Militum, Civium, and Burgensium, sic electorum, in quibusdam Indenturis inter
te and illos qui hujusmodi Electioni interfuerint, inde conficiendis, sive
hujusmodi electi praesentes fuerint, vel absentes, inseri; eosque ad dictum
diem and locum venire facias; ita quod iidem Milites, plenam and sufficientem
potestatem pro se, and Communitate Comitatus praedicti; Cives and Burgenses pro
se, and Communitate Civitatum and Burgorum praedictorum, divisim ab ipsis
habeant, ad faciendum and consentiendum his quae tunc ibidem de communi
Concilio dicti Regni nostri (favente Deo) contigerint ordinari, super negotiis
ante dictis: Ita quod pro defectu potestatis hujusmodi, seu propter improvidam
Electionem Militum, Civium aut Burgensium praedictorum, dicta negotia infecta
non remaneant quovis modo. Nolumus autem quod tu nec aliquis alius Vicecomes
dicti Regni nostri aliqualiter sit electus. Et Electionem illam in pleno
Comitatu factam distinct and aperte sub Sigillo tuo and Sigillis eorum qui
Electioni illae interfuerint, nobis in Cancellariam nostram ad dictum d^em and
locum certifices, indilate remittens nobis alteram partem Indenturarum
praedictarum praesentibus consutam una cum hoc Brevi. Test meipso apud
Westmonast --

THE King
to the Sheriff, Greeting.
Whereas by the Advice and Consent of our Council, Advice of Privy Council.
for certain difficult and urgent business concerning us and the State and
defense of our Kingdom of England, and the English Church, we have ordained a
certain Parliament of ours to be held at our City, of etc. the day, etc. next
ensuing, and there to have conference, Conference with Prelates, etc.
and to treat with the Prelates, Great Men, and Peers of our said Kingdom. We
command and straightly enjoin you, Proclamation at County Court.
that making Proclamation at the next County Court after receipt of this our
Writ, to be holden the day and place aforesaid; Two Knights girt with Swords,
etc.
you cause two Knights girt with Swords, the most fit and discreet of the
County aforesaid; and of every City of that County two Citizens; Two Citizens.
and of every Borough, Two Burgesses.
two Burgesses of the discreeter, and most sufficient, Indifferently chosen by
those present at the Proclamation, according to Statutes.
to be freely and indifferently chosen by them who shall be present at such
Proclamation according to the tenure of the Statutes in that case made and
provided, Their Names inserted in Indentures betwixt the Sheriff and the
Electors.
and the names of the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses so chosen, to be
inserted in certain Indentures, to be then made between you and those that
shall be present at such Election, whether the parties so elected be present or
absent; and shall make them to come at the said day and place; To cause them to
come at the Day and Place. The Knights from the County, the Citizens and
Burgesses from their Cities and Buroughs, to have full power to do and consent.
so that the said Knights for themselves, and for the County aforesaid, and the
said Citizens and Burgesses for themselves and the Commonalty of the aforesaid
Cities and Buroughs, may have severally for them full and sufficient power to
perform and to consent to those things which (by the favor of God) shall there
happen to be ordained by the Common Council of our said Kingdom concerning the
businesses aforesaid; Lest for want of that Power, or improvident Election, the
Business be undon^.
so that the business may not by any means remain undone for want of such
power, No Sheriff to be chosen.
or by reason of the improvident Election of the aforesaid Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses. Election to be in full County.
But we will not in any case, you or any other Sheriff of our said Kingdom
shall be elected. The Indentures to be sealed by the Sheriff and Electors.
And at the day and the place aforesaid the said Election made in the full
County Court, A Counterpart tacked to the Writ, returned into the Chancery.
you shall certify without delay to us in our Chancery, under your Seal, and
the Seals of them which shall be present at that Election, sending back unto us
the other part of the Indenture aforesaid, affiled to these Presents, together
with this Writ. Witness our self at Westminster --

SECT. 7. Concerning the Speaker, and the Privileges of the House of Commons.
IT is not my design to treat of all things relating to the Constitution, My
Design not to controvert the Privileges of the House of Commons, but to show
the gradual Alterations.
Laws, and Customs of the House of Commons: there are several useful Books
extant which are fit for the Honorable Members of the House, to consult. What
I most aim at, is to show what the Ancient Usage has been, and how from time
to time things have been refined to the Mode and State they are now in: and I
hope those great Spirits that honor their Countries with their Service, will
pardon one that designs nothing more than to give them a Profile of the whole
Model, both in the days of our remotest Ancestors, and what it was in more
Modern times, under just and undoubted Sovereigns; as also how much it was
transformed when the pretended House of Commons being confederated with a
successful Army, murdered their Sovereign, voted away the House of Lords, and
assumed the Title of the Supreme Authority of the Nation; of which last I shall
treat in the next Chapter.

The Members being according to the Kings Command come to the place appointed;
sometimes the Sovereign with the Lords in their Robes have rid in State to the
Parliament, which is generally yet observed in Scotland and Ireland. The
Solemnity at the Opening of the Parliament.
However at the opening of the Parliament the King is seated on his Throne
under the Canopy with his Royal Crown on his Head, the Chancellor standing
something backward on his Right Hand, and the great Officers, as Lord
Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Council, Lord Privy Seal, Great
Chamberlain, the Lord Constable, Marshal, Lord Admiral, Lord Steward and Kings
Chamberlain attend on either side the State, or in their Seats with the Ensigns
of their Offices, some of the Nobles being appointed to carry the Sword and the
Cap of Maintenance. Three great Gilt Maces are carried, See for this more
fully, Elsyng's Method of holding Parliaments, p. 86.
and all the Heralds attend in their Cloth of Gold Coats. The two Archbishops,
and Bishops in their Robes sit upon Benches next the Wall on the Right Hand,
and the rest of the Great Officers that stand not by the State, and all the
Nobility in order upon the Bench on the Left Hand, or on the Forms that stand
in the middle, where also sit the Judges, Master of the Rolls, Secretaries of
State, twelve Masters of Chancery, Attorney General, Solicitor General, and
Clerk of the Crown, and the other Clerks Assistants; which it is not my
business exactly to describe.

The King being Seated, when it is his pleasure, Leave given to the Commons to
choose their Speaker.
the House of Commons are sent for, who standing bare at the Lords Bar, attend
the King's Speech, and the Chancellor's; and then have leave to choose their
Speaker, whom commonly some of the Members of the House that are of the King's
Privy Council, propose; and if any one oppose it, Hackwel, p. 127.
he is to name another. But I shall refer the curious to Mr. Elsyng, and others
that treat of this at large.

Sir Edward Coke 4. Instit. p. 8.
says, That though the Commons are to choose their Speaker, yet seeing that
after their choice, the King may refuse him, for avoiding expense of time, and
contestating about it, the use is (as in the Conge de eslier of a Bishop) that
the King (by some of his Privy Council) (as in this present Parliament was done
by the Earl of Middleton, on of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries) does name
a discreet and learned Man, whom the Commons elect; for without their Election
no Speaker can be appointed for them, because he is their Mouth, and trusted by
them, and so necessary, as the House of Commons cannot sit without him: So that
if he be totally disabled by grievous Sickness, another must be chosen in his
place, as he instanceth in Sir John Cheney, 1 H. 4. and Sir John Tirrel,
Whether the two Houses sat together.
15 H. 6. But whereas 4. Instit. c. 1. sect. 2.
he affirms, that in ancient time the two Houses sat together, and the surest
mark of the time of the division of them was, when the House of Commons had a
continual Speaker: Mr. Prynne P. 8, 9.
in his Animadversions has made the contrary very clear by several Records,
wherein it is expressly said, they consulted apart; as particularly in 6 E. 3. Et
les Chivalers des Countez, and Gents du Communs, par eux mesmes. Rot. Parl. 6
E. 3. number. 6.
at York, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and great Men by themselves, and the
Knights of the Counties, and the People of the Commons by themselves, treated
of the Business propounded to them. Another Freeholders Grand Inquest, p. 19.
says, That if Sir Edward means the Lords and Commons did sit and vote
together in one Body, few will believe it; because the Commons never were wont
to lose, or forgo any of their Liberties or Privileges: and for them to stand
now bare, where they were used to sit and vote, (upon this Supposal) is an
alteration not imaginable to be endured by them: and when we consider the sole
Power of Judicature in the Lords, and who the Burgesses were in old times, it
still makes it more improbable, and it is to me a very remarkable thing, that
neither in History or Record, any thing is to be found that will clear this
doubt. However it is certain that Rot. Parl. 50 E. 3. number. 8.
50, and 51 E. 3. the Commons had a Speaker, and Sir Edward Coke Coke Instit.
4. p. 255.
says, that the accustomed Ancient Place, says Elsyng, p. 84.
place of that thrice worthy Assembly of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of
Parliament (when held in Westminster) was in the Chapter House of the Abbat of
Westminster, and it continued so till the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. c. 14. which gave
the King Colleges, free Chapels, etc. whereby the King enjoyed the beautiful
free Chapel of St. Stephen, founded by King Stephen, (which had Lands and
Revenues of the old yearly value of 1089 Pound, ten Shillings five Pence) since
which time the Chapel thereof has served for the House of Commons, when
Parliaments have been held at Westminster.

As Sir Edward Coke (because he believed the two Houses sat together) will not
allow them to have had a Speaker before 50 E. 3. so on the other hand Mr. Id.
p. 123.
Elsyng says, That the Commons ever had a Speaker, none will doubt, for their
Consultation apart from the Lords; though, he thinks, they often met, and did
sit together in one Room, and then a Speaker was necessary to avoid Confusion
of Speech and Argument. But he brings no better Argument for it Lib. Sti.
Albani Bibl. Cotton. fol. 207.
than that Petrus de Mountfort, It should be 42 H. 3. That Peter Mountfort was
not Speaker of the Commons House.
44 H. 3. signed the Letter to Pope Alexander, touching the recalling of Adomar
elect Bishop of Winchester from Banishment: Wherein they say, if the King, and
the Regni Majores hoc volent, Communitas tam^n ipsius, in Angliam jam
nullatenus sustineret: and this was sealed by all the Lords, and by Peter de
Mountford vice totius Communitatis; which, he says, shows plainly they had a
Speaker.

In answer to which, I suppose it a great mistake to say that Petrus de
Mountfort signed the Letter vice Communitatis (which either ignorantly, or
wilfully, is Printed in Mr. Elsyng, Comitatus) for Additament. Math. Paris,
1132, 1133. Anno Dom. 1258. 42 H. 3. ult. Edit.
Matthew Paris, who relates the whole Story, says it was signed by ten
Persons, who were all great Barons, vice totius Communitatis, and the Preface
of the Letter shows it was Communitas Comitum, Procerum, Magnatum, aliorumque
Regni Angliae: and this aliorum can mean only the Milites, which held by
Military Service of the great Barons, and the lesser Tenants in Capite, which
were no Representatives of the Commons, as our Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
at this day are; and the Inscription of the Popes Letter shows, who he
understood this Communitas to be, when he superscribes it dilectis Filiis
Nobilibus viris, Consiliariis clarissimi in Christo Filii nostri illustris
Regis Angliae, ac caeteris Proceribus and Magnatibus Regni Angliae.

Now the Persons that subscribed this, are thus ranked by Matthew Paris, R. de
Clare, Gloverniae and Herefordiae, S. de Monteforti Legriae, E. Bigod
Marescallus Angliae, H. de Bohun Hertfordiae, and Essex, W. Albemarle, J. de
Placeto Warewici Comitis, H. Bigod Justiciarius Angliae, P. de Sabaudia, J.
Filius Galfridi, Jacobus de Audel, and Petrus de Monteforti, vice totius
Communitatis praesentibus Literis sigilla nostra apposuimus in Testimonium
praedictorum. So that it is plain it was not Peter de Montefort that signed
vice Communitatis, but they all did it, and he was a great Baron himself, the
Head of whose Barony was Beldesent Castle in Warwickshire.

I think it not amiss here to offer my Opinion concerning this Question, and
the great Controversy betwixt Dr. Concerning the Commons first summoning to
Parliament.
Brady and Mr. Petyt, and those that are so earnest to find the Commons
summoned to Parliament before the 49 H. 3. before King John granted his Charter
(wherein he grants that he will cause to be summoned the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbats, Earls and greater Barons of his Kingdom singly by his Letters, and
besides Et Praeterea faciemus submoneri in generali per Vi^ecomites and
Ballivos nostros, omnes alios qui in Capite tenent de nobis. Matt. Paris fol.
216. Edit. ult. number. 20.
will cause to be summoned in general by his Sheriffs, The Tenants in Capite in
stead of the Representative Commons, as now.
and Bailiffs, all others which hold of him in Capite at a certain day) there
is no doubt but the Tenants in Capite (such of them at least as were eminent
for Parts, or as the King pleased) were summoned to the great Councils; and it
being in that Charter said, that the cause of the Meeting should be expressed
in the Summons, and that Forty days warning should be given; and in the same
Charter, that the City of London should have all its ancient Liberties and free
Customs, and that all other Cities, Burghs and Villa's (which was of the same
import as a Free Borough, as we find in Pontefract, which is always styled
Villa, Some summoned from Cities and Buroughs before King John's time, but not
as our Citizens and Burgesses now, by Representation.
and the Inhabitants Burgenses, who held a certain Land called Burgage Land)
and the Barons of the Cinque Ports, and all the Ports should have all their
Liberties and their Free Customs, and ad habendum commune concilium Regni de
Auxiliis, etc. that is as I suppose, to have some of their Members at the great
Councils, where Aids were to be granted to the King, other ways than in three
cases before excepted, that is, to redeem the Kings body, to make his Eldest
Son a Knight, and to marry once his Eldest Daughter; excepting which three
Particulars (reserved before) in his Charter, he had granted that no Scutage
nor Aid should be laid on his Kingdom unless by the Common Council of his
Kingdom.

From whence I think may be inferred, that such Cities, Buroughs and Villa's,
which held in Capite, or the Lord that was principal owner of them, by his
Praepositus Ballivus, or some that held immediately under him, and so some for
the Dominicae Civitates and Burgi Regis, might be summoned, with the lesser
Barons, or the other Tenants inc Capite. But this does not prove them to come
by way of Representatives, nor that they had any more Power than the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses had in aftertimes, which (as I have made it apparent
by the several expressions in the Summons) was only to hear, and assent to what
the King and Magnates ordained.

Since there are now extant no Summons in King John's time, or before the 49 H.
3. (except some few that are about the Tenants in Capite aiding the King in his
Wars) the subsequent Practices are the best Expounders of ancient Usages.

Upon the whole I do judge, that before King John's Charter, there were many of
the Tenants in Capite summoned to the great Councils, but so as the King had
his liberty to summon whom he pleased; and that some from Cities, Burghs,
Villa's and other Ports did come to the great Council, but still at the Kings
pleasure, and that in King John's time, the body of the Kingdom siding with the
Lords (that so often rebelled against him) the Lords thinking to make their
Party stronger, got the Clause for other Tenants in Capite to be summoned by
general Summons. After King John's Charter, the Tenants in Capite so numerous,
as might be reputed an House of Commons.


Now whatever number were convened, before King John's Charter, this general
Summons must greatly increase the House of Commons, as I may call it; and there
needs no such strife about the want of Freemen in these Councils; for after
this Charter all who were properly Freemen, were capable, the other were
generally Tenants to them, and Homagers, (which was a Tenure that though it
might free their Persons, yet their Lands were obnoxious to forfeiture upon
every breach of Homage; and their Lords had the power of taxing them) so that
in some sense they were their Tenants Representatives: and as long as they were
Freeholders themselves, and were a more numerous body (if they all appeared, as
for any thing I see they might do, if not hindered by Impotence, Nonage, or the
Kings service) they far exceeded the number of Representatives in the Reigns of
King H. 3. E. 1. and E. 2. So that it amounts to the same thing, as to the
general Freedom of the Nation, when all these were Members of the Great
Councils, Who properly Freeholders in K^ John's time.
whether the common Freeholder were represented or not, as now (which Dr. Brady
has so nervously confuted every where in his Introduction, that they were not)
that I think the Freedom Mr. Petyt, Mr. Pen, and others make so great a coyl
about, no ways impaired by Dr. Brady; who like a judicious Person, would have
us use propriety of Speech, and rather be thankful for the Freedom we now
enjoy, and our Ancestors have from time to time obtained, by the grant of
Kings, than to make such Claims to native Freedoms and Liberties (as Mr. Pen
would have it, that our Ancestors contended for) as if their Ancestors had
enjoyed them before we had any Kings, and stipulated with their Kings for them,
before they admitted them to Sovereignty; which no considering person that will
impartially read ancient History, either of our Country or others, can find any
certain footsteps of.

To return now to the business (which the foregoing observation gives some
light to) I conceive as the Thegns (the Kings Prepositi and Reeves, As the
Thegns in the Saxon-times, so the Praepositi, Reeves, etc. of Buroughs after.
by reason of their Employments about the Kings Demesne Lands, governing of
Buroughs, Stewards of Hundreds, Wapentakes, and men employed in other civil
Affairs of the Kingdom) did meet in the Saxon Councils: so from Cities and
Buroughs, where great Lords had Fees (as most, if not all of them may be
easily proved to have been held immediately of the King, or of some of the very
great Barons) there might come before King John's time, some Members to the
great Council, being in the Charter, to my judgment, reckoned as one of their
Franchises, or rather something exceeding their municipal Liberties and Free
Customs, being coupled to them with an and to have a Privilege to have some of
them Members of the great Council of the Kingdom; What the Tenants in Capite
were summoned for.
for so I think the words and ad habendum commune Concilium Regni de Auxiliis
must be understood: But then when it is restricted there with de Auxiliis only;
it may very well give a ground to their opinion that think the principal use
was to proportion the Aid or Tax, and assent to what the King, the Bishops,
Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons and Peers did ordain.

However this was, That such great Numbers sat not with the Lords.
it seems clear to me, that this numerous body of so different an Order from
the Barons majores, must have a distinct Place for consulting apart, and must
select Committees to transact with the King and Lords, and must for order sake
appoint some to speak for them, what they petitioned for or assented to, and
could not constantly sit with the Prelates and Lords; and do rather believe
that the Prelates had one place where they sat, and the Barons another, and
these Tenants in Capite a third, at least for their usual Consultations among
their own Order, and met in the public place when there was occasion, or might
have access by Committees: which certainly was the practice in aftertimes, as
appears in that Parliament of 6 E. 3. Rot. Parl. 6 E. 3. number. 2. Cest assavoir,
les Prel^^z par eux me^mes, and les ditz Countes, Barouns, and autres Grantz,
par eux mesmes, and auxint les Chivalers des Countes par eux mesmes. No mention
of Citizens or Burgesses.
the morrow after the Nativity of our Lady, the King requiring the advice of
his Parliament, touching his French Affairs, and Voyage thither. It is said
they thereupon treated and deliberated, that is to say, the Prelates by
themselves, and the said Earls, Barons and other great men by themselves, and
also the Knights of the Counties by themselves, and then gave their advice.
From whence by the way we may observe the true ground of calling our Parliament
Houses, without the King, the three Estates.

Having dispatched this, I come now to consider the Speakers of the House of
Commons. Hackwel Mod^^ tenendi, p. 200. Method of Parl. 124. The first Speaker
upon Record.
and Elsyng name the first that is found upon Record, to be Sir William Trussel
13 E. 3. Number. 9. where it is said, Les Chivalers des Countes and les Commons
responderent per Monsieur William Trussel, but the Record names him not
Speaker, however he performed that Office then. Hackwel names Scroope before
him 6 E. 3. and Sir Peter de la Mare after him; but the first that Mr. Elsyng
or Mr. Prynne Prynne's Abridgment, p. 151.
finds upon Record, and by the name of Speaker, is Sir Thomas Hungerford, 51 E.
3. for it is said that the last day of the Parliament, he declared, that during
the Parliament he had generally moved the King to pardon all such as were in
the last Parliament unjustly convicted: which imports that this was a Petition
of the Commons, presented by him their Speaker.

Anno 1 R. 2. Sir Peter de la Mare, being Speaker, made his Protestation, that
what he had to say, was from the whole House, therefore required if he should
speak any thing happily without their consents, that the same ought to be amended
before his departure from the said place.

The first Petition we meet with, that a Speaker Abridgment of Records, p. 174.
Petition for Freedom of Speech.
made to the King from the Commons, was 2 R. 2. by Sir James Pickering their
Speaker, that if he should speak any thing that happily might be ill taken, it
might be as nothing, so as the Commons might at any time amend the same, and
the like he petitioned for himself: which is the first Petition as to Liberty
of Speech, we meet with.

The first Speaker presented to the King in full Id. p. 360.
Parliament by the Commons, 20 Ric. 2. was Sir John Bushey the King's great
Favorite. In this Parliament the Houses sat together in a long Hackwel Mo^us
p. 202.
House built of Timber in the Palace-Yard, at the Impeachment of the Duke of
Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel and Warwick. Sir Arnold Savage was Speaker, 2
H. 4. who is the first upon Record that the Commons were required by the King
to choose as Speaker; and he was again in 5 H. 4. who desired the King in the
name of the Commons, that they might freely make complaint of any thing amiss
in Government; which was yielded to by the King.

Anno 7 H. 4. Sir John Tiptost was chosen Speaker, who desired to be
discharged, because of his Youth; but he was allowed: he forgot to make the
usual Protestation, but came up the next day, and made it with this Addition,
Rot. Parl. 7 H. 4. number. 6.
That if any Writing were delivered by the Commons in this Parliament, and they
should desire to have it again to amend any thing therein, it might be restored
to them; which was granted. While he was Speaker, he Signed and Sealed the
Deeds of the entailing of the Crown on H. 4. 7 H. 4.
with these words, Nomine totius Communitatis. He was a Person of extraordinary
Parts, Son of John Lord Tiptost, and for all the Apology for his young Age, he
was within three Years after made Lord Treasurer of Enggland, and by H. 6. made
Marquess of Worcester.

Anno 1 H. 5. William Sturton Esquire, was chosen Speaker, who without the
assent of his Companions, did agree before the King to deliver in Parliament
certain Articles; but three days after the Commons sent Sir John Doreword 7 H.
4.
with several of their Members to the House of Lords, to declare to the King,
that their Speaker had no Authority from them to yield thereto, and the King
was pleased to accept of it.

There are three Petitions the approved Speaker makes to the King: First, That
the Commons may have freedom of Speech, as of 25 H. 1. number. 10. The Speakers of
latter Times express the particular Privilege of Freedom from Arrest.
right and custom they have had, and all their ancient and just Privileges and
Liberties allowed them. In Sir Thomas Moor's Speech 14 H. 8. it was thus
worded, That if in communication and reasoning, any man in the Commons House,
should speak more largely than of duty they ought to do, that all such offenses
should be pardoned, and to be entered upon Record; which was granted: only I
find that H. 4. Rot. Parl. H. 4. number. 10.
said that the hoped, or doubted not, that the Members of Parliament would not
speak any unfitting thing, or abuse this Freedom and Privilege.

The second is, Sir Tho. Smith says, The Speaker used to add a Promise in the
Commons Names, That they shall not abuse these Privileges, but have such
regard, as most faithful, true, and loving Subjects ought to have to their
Prince. Commonwealth, p. 41.
That if he shall commit any Error in any thing he shall deliver in the name of
the Commons, no fault may be imputed to the Commons, and that he may resort
again to them, for Declaration of his good Intent, and that his Error may be
pardoned. The third is, That as often as necessity for his Majesty's Service,
and the good of the Commonwealth shall require, he may by direction of the
House of Commons have access to His Majesty.

SECT. 8. Of Privileges of the House of Commons concerning Liberty of Speech.
HAving thus brought this Honorable Assembly together, and their Speaker
placed in his Chair, I shall touch something of their Privileges, which since
the days of Sir Edward Coke, and much by his Influence, have been enlarged
beyond what was used in ancient times. I shall begin with that of Freedom of
Speech in their Debates.

It cannot be conceived in so great a Body as the House of Commons, Why Liberty
of Speech necessary to be allowed.
that what is proposed by one, and seconded by others, shall not admit of
Debate: Though all may aim at the same end, the good of the King and People;
yet they may differ in the ways and methods of attaining it, and whoever would
straighten a crooked Rod, must bend it as far on the contrary side. I doubt not
but the nemine contradicente was put into the Printed Votes, when Mr. Williams
had the Chair, rather ad faciendum populum, than that there was such an
Harmonious Concurrence, as then was blazed abroad.

Anno 4 Stat. 4 H. 8. c. 8. Strowde's Case.
H. 8. An Act was made concerning Richard Strowde, Esquire, which declares
that all Suits, Accusements, Condemnations, etc. to be put or had upon any
Member of that or succeeding Parliaments, for any Bill, speaking, reasoning, or
declaring of any matter or matters concerning the Parliament, to be communed or
treated of, be utterly void and of none effect. This by Lords Journal.
the Lords, 11 December. 1667. was declared a d^claratory Law of the ancient and
necessary Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and so the Judgment against
Denzil, late Lord Hollis, was nulled, and against others in King Charles the
First's time.

Yet it is manifest that Queen Elizabeth in two Cases showed how far, even
motions in Parliament, contrary to her Laws, Prerogative, and Pleasure
expressed, were to be treated. The Prynne's Plea for the Lords. Sir Sym. D'
Ewe's Journ^l. How Queen Elizabeth curbed and punished those that made Motions
in the House contrary to her Prohibitions, in Mr. Paul and Mr. Pet. Wentworth's
Case.
first was a motion by Mr. Paul Wentworth, 23 Eliz. for a public set Fast, and
for a Preaching every Morning at Seven of the Clock, before the House sat, and
the Preachers to be appointed by the Privy Council that were of the House; but
the Queen sent them a Message by the Vice-Chamberlain, that she had in great
admiration, the rashness of the House, in committing such an apparent contempt
of her express Command, and to put in Execution such an Innovation, without her
Privity and Pleasure first known; so that by Mr. Vice-Chamberlain they sent
their Submission to her. Anno 35 Eliz. Mr. Peter Wentworth, and Sir Henry
Bromley delivered a Petition to the Lord Keeper, desiring the Lords of the
upper House to be suppliants with them of the lower House to her Majesty, for
entailing the Succession of the Crown, whereof a Bill was ready drawn by them.
The Queen was highly displeased, as being against her express Order, and
charged the Lords of her Council to call the parties before them, and Mr.
Wentworth was by them committed to the Tower, and others, with Sir Hen. Bromley
to the Fleet; the Parliament then sitting: and when Mr. Wroth moved, That the
House might be humble Suitors to the Queen for their Liberty, it was answered
by the Privy Counselors in the House, that the causes of Commitment were best
known to her self, and the House must not call the Queen to account for what
she does of her Royal Authority; for her Majesty liked no such Questions,
neither did it become the House to search into those matters. So Mr. In Mr.
Morrice's Case.
Morris Attorney of the Court of Wards, was taken out of the House, Feb. 28.
and committed to Prison, for delivering in a Bill against the abuses of the
Bishops; the Queen sending for Sir Edward Coke then Speaker, and charging him
upon his Allegiance, if any such Bill were exhibited, not to read it.

At another time, long before this, she told the Speaker, and the body of the
House of Commons, moving her to Marriage, That if it had been with limitation
of place, or person, she must needs have misliked it, and thought it a great
presumption in those to take it upon them to bind and limit, whose duty it was
to Obey.

King Charles the First was very unfortunate to have so many Firebrands in
some, if not all, of his Parliaments; Liberty of Speech in King Charles the
First's time abused.
which if the rest of the Houses had been pleased to have extinguished by
timely and nipping reprehensions, we had never seen the Government of Church
and State so reduced into Ashes, that there was nothing remained of the
beautiful Pile. In some of his Speeches he calls those evil Members, Vipers;
but it was his misfortune to anger and exasperate them rather than suppress
them; so that at last, they stung him to Death. It is a very ill condition,
when a Prince has such Wolves by the Ears, that he is in danger whether he
hold them or let them go. The Attacque upon the five Members, and letting fall
the pursuit, was one of the false thrusts that left him unguarded.

In the Close of one of the Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, the MS. Speeches,
13 Eliz. 1571. Queen Elizabeth's Reprehension of some Members, for moving
things she had forbid.
Chancellor tells them, There be certain of the House of Commons (though not
many) who have showed themselves Audacious, Arrogant and Presumptuous, calling
her Majesty's Grants, and Prerogatives into question, contrary to the express
admonition given in her Majesty's name in the beginning of the Parliament,
which it might very well have become them to have regard to; but her Majesty
says, That seeing they thus wilfully forget themselves, they are otherwise to
be remembered.

Indeed there seems good reason, that such, who make advantage of their being
Members of Parliament, to sow their Seditious Discourses; and under the
Protection of being Members, take the boldness to calumniate the Government,
and raise Jealousies betwixt the King and his People, to alienate their
Affections, and Allegiance from him, after the expiration of their Protection
(if the House will not call them to an account) should not only lose the Favor
of their Prince, but should be punished for Sedition as far as by Law is
allowed, as well as they are liable to other proceedings in Law.

It becomes therefore all lovers of the excellent Constitution of Parliaments
to be very wary in this point, lest, as Mr. Justice Hutton said in another
Case, Things being carried disastrously by some Members Ambition, may bring
such a distaste against the course of Parliaments, as we, and all that love the
Commonwealth, have just cause to be sorry for it.

SECT. 9. Of the Privilege from Arrests.
ALthough the Speakers formerly petitioned only, That all their Ancient, and
Just Privileges, and Liberties be allowed them; yet we Hackwell. Catal. 213,
215. Elsyng, p. 137, 138. This Privilege petitioned for by the Speaker.
find that Sir Tho. Gargrave, Sir Tho. Richardson, Sir Thomas Crew, Sir Heneage
Finch, and all later Speakers have expressed this Privilege particularly, that
for better attending the Public and Importunate Service of the House,
themselves, and their necessary Attendants, may be free both in Person and
Goods from all Arrests and trouble, according to our Ancient Privileges and
Immunities, which Sir Tho. Gargrave 1 Eliz. is said first to make the first of
any.

This indeed is one of the ancientest Privileges the House of Commons may
claim, and Mr. Prynne labors to prove it the only Privilege properly so to be
called, and Sir Edward 4. Instit. p. 24.
Coke mentions no other.

The first thing that appears upon Record, is, the Petition of Petitiones coram
Domino Rege ad Parliam. etc. 18 E. 1. Rot. 7. Thesaur. Recept. S^accarii. The
first Grant of Freedom from Arrest.
the Master of the Temple, in which he desires, Quod habeat licentiam
distringendi tempore Parliamenti; to which the King answers thus, Non videtur
honestum quod Rex concedat quod illi de Concilio suo distringantur tempore
Parliamenti, set alio tempore distringat per hostia and fenestras, ut moris
est; that is, The Master petitions, that he may have power to distrein for Rent
in time of Parliament; to which the King answers, That it seems not honest,
that the King should grant, that they of his Council should be distrained in
time of Parliament, but that he may distrain at another time by the Door and
Windows, as the Custom was.

Mr. P. 478. ad 483.625. to 699.817. to 869.989.1213. to 1220. How Mr. Prynne
qualifies this Privilege.
Prynne in his Fourth Part of his brief Register would have the Privilege to be
Personal, and so to necessary Servants attending, and but to take place the
first day he is a Member, after he has taken the Oath, and not to extend to
Chancery Suits, and I know not how many diminutions of this Privilege; so I
shall only recommend the Inquisitive Reader to his Collections, and for the
full enumeration of all Cases that have been determined by the House of
Commons, to Memorial, p. 88. ad 116.
Mr. Hackwel, who has collected all Modern Precedents; it being a Book very
useful to understand the modern usage of the House of Commons in passing Bills,
and other necessary points, that such as are not versed in the practice of, may
find very beneficial to them; and shall add upon this Head, the Summary of King
Edward the Second's Writ to the Sheriff of Yorkshire, to take Pledges of Walter
Fleming of York, and three others, to appear the next Easter Term, to show why
they Arrested the Prior Malton, returning from the Parliament at Lincoln to his
Priory, How the King is obliged to protect the Members from Arrests.
whenas the King ought to protect and defend the Members of Parliament in their
coming to, staying there, and returning from the Parliament; the words are, Cum
ad Parliamenta in quibus tam nostri, quam Regni nostri negotia debent
pertractari, Praelatos, Comites, Barons, and alios tam Clericos quam Laicos,
per quorum industriam super negotio hujusmodi, Consilium salubrius poterit
adhiberi, ad mandata nostra vocatos, and comparentes, in veniendo ad eadem
Parliamenta, ibidem morando, and exinde redeundo, ab omnimodis inju^iis,
oppressionibus and gravaminibus nos oportet protegere and tueri. How grounded
upon Edward the Confessor's Law.


This Privilege seems to be grounded upon King Hoveden. Annal. pars poster. p.
601. Lambard. Archaion. Spelman. Conc. tom. 1. p. 689.
Edward the Confessor's Laws, properly applicable to Liberty, to attend Divine
Worship, Synods, and Chapter-meetings: the words are, Si quispiam devote ad
celebrationem Sancti, pacem habeat eundo, subsistendo, redeundo, item omnibus
ad Ecclesiam causa Orationis euntibus, pax in eundo, and redeundo sit eis;
similiter ad Synodum, ad Capitula venientibus. The curious may see more in the
Leges Saxonicae, Sect. 9. and in Frederick Cod. ex Legum Antiq. p. 475.
Lindebrogus.

It is to be noted, that this, as all other Privileges, in from the Kings
Grant, Fol. 60. This Privilege of the King's Grant.
as Dyer is express in his Argument on this Case, That the person of every such
Member ought to be privileged from Arrest at the Suit of any private Person
during the time that he is busied about the Affairs of the King and the Realm;
and this Et ti^l Privilege ad estre touts foits grant per le Roy, a ses
Commoners, al Request del Prolocutor del Parliament, le primer jour.
Privilege is always granted by the King to his Commons at the Request of the
Speaker of Parliament the first day; and those that had the benefit of this
Privilege, obtained it by a Writ of Privilege issuing out of Chancery; but of
late, it is done by the Houses verbal Order, Sergeant or Mace, without any Writ
of Privilege, Habeas Corpus, previous complaint, Petition to, or Order from the
King and Lords, as in former times; against which usage Mr. Prynne makes loud
Complaints.

The first Precedent Mr. Prynne or others can discover, being that of Mr.
Ferrers recited at large in Hist. p. 1584.33 H. 8. Mr. Ferrers Case the first,
when the Commons had liberty to punish the Breakers of this Privilege.
Holingshed, which in short is this: Mr. George Ferrers being the Kings Servant
and Burgess for Plymouth, was Arrested by a Process out of the Kings Bench,
carried to the Counter: Byorder of the House the Sergeant of the Parliament was
sent to demand delivery, but was forceably resisted, and the Crown of the Mace
of Arms was beaten off in defending the Sergeant. This being declared to the
House (of whom there were not a few, as well of the Kings Privy Council, as
also of his Privy Chamber) they would sit no longer without their Burgess, but
retired to the Upper House, where the whole Case was declared by Sir Thomas
Moile their Speaker, before Sir Thomas Audley Lord Chancellor; and all the
Lords and Judges there assembled, judging the contempt to be very great,
referred the punishment thereof to the Order of the Commons House. The Lord
Chancellor offered to grant them a Writ to the Sheriffs of London to require
delivery; which the House refused, being clear in opinion, that all
Commandments, and other Acts proceeding from the nether House were to be done
and executed by their Sergeant, without Writ, only by show of his Mace which
was his Warrant.

The House applying it self to the Lords, (who were, says Mr. Prynne, Brief
Register, part 4. p. 860.
the ancient proper Judges of the Violations and Violators of the Commons
Privileges) was the right Parliamentary way for their Members Release; and if
they had applied themselves to them at first, they had prevented all Affronts
to Id. p. 862, 863.
themselves and Officers, and met with no opposition. And Mr. Prynne humbly
apprehends that this Precedent will not warrant an absolute Jurisdiction in the
House of Commons without any antecedent Complaint or See Freeholders Grand
Inquest, from p. 50. to 64.
Petition to the King or Lords in Parliament, to punish any breach of their
Members Privileges, not first complained of to, Application to be made to the
King and Lords, for punishment of Violators of this Privilege.
and adjudged by the King or Lords to be an actual breach, or referred to
themselves by the Lords or King, to punish, or without their subsequent
Ratification; or that it will justify the Enlargement of any of their Members
or menial Servants out of Execution by their Mace alone, without an Habeas
Corpus, Writ of Privilege, or special Act of Parliament, or matter of Record
for the Sheriff or Officers Indemnity against Actions of Escape, or for the
Plaintiffs relief to recover his Debt by a second Execution: for the proof of
all this I must refer the inquisitive Reader to Mr. Prynne's Sect. 10. a p.
622. ad 870.
Fourth Part of his Brief Register, wherein he has largely examined most of
the then claimed Privileges of the House of Commons, and disallows of them,
when not judged by the King and Lords. In which Controversy I shall not
presume to write any thing, because it will be more pleasant and satisfactory
to have recourse to himself.

SECT. 10. Concerning Regulating Elections.
THE first thing I find concerning new Elections, in the place of Absents and
Defaulters, is in the 5 E. 2. Cl. 5 E. 2. m. 26. dorso.
as I have touched before; diverse Knights, Citizens and Burgesses departing
from the Parliament, the King thereupon issued out Writs to several Sheriffs,
to summon them to return to the Parliament, Vel alios, ad hoc idoneos, loco
ipsorum, s^ ad hoc v^care non possunt, eligere.
or to choose other fit persons in their places, if they cannot be at leisure to
come up.

The Commons in this Age meddled not with the re-summoning, or causing new ones
to be Elected, in the rooms of those that could not come.

I have before instanced in several Summons, The King anciently only ordered
new Elections.
wherein the Kings ordain the Sheriffs to re-summon the Members of former
Parliaments, or others, for those who were dead, or unable, and sometimes but
one of those: By which it appears, that in those days the King solely
Authorized new Elections, where any were dead or disabled.

The first Petition against an undue Election, First Petition against undue
Elections. Prynne 's Brevia Parl. r^^iviva, p. 286. A nos^re tres excell^nt,
and tres gracious Seignior, nostre Seignior le Roy, and les ^res nobles
Seigniors, and S^ges Comuns, etc. pleignont les Major, etc.
that I have met with, is Anno 7 R. 2. from the Mayor, Bailiffs, and Commons of
Shaftsbury: To our thrice Excellent and thrice Gracious Lord, our Lord the
King, and the thrice noble Lords, and sage Commons of this present Parliament,
That whereas they had chosen Walter Henly, and Thomas Steward, the Sheriff of
Dorsetshire, for the last had returned Thomas Camel, to the great damage of
our Lord the King, and contrary to the Will of the Mayor, etc. So that here the
Complaint is to the King, the Lords, and Commons jointly, and the name of this
Camel is not endorsed returned in the Writ, but the other two.

In all the Statutes made for regulating Elections, they run, See Freeholders
Grand Inquest, p. 15, 16.
The King wills and commands, 5 Ric. 2. c. 4. Our Lord the King at the
grievous complaint of the Commons, has ordained, 7 H. 4. c. 15. and so, Our
Lord the King ordained, 11 H. 4. c. 1.5 H. 5. and such like in all the Statutes
to 8 H. 6.

So in the Statute, 5 R. 2. Par. 2. c. 4. All Persons which shall from
henceforth receive the Summons of Parliament, Prynne's Plea for Lords, p. 393.
and come not at the said Summons (except he may reasonably and honestly excuse
himself to our Sovereign Lord the King) shall be amerced, and otherwise
punished, as of old time, etc. So that here the Excuse is to be made to the
King; so that it was not then in use for the Commons to fine and tax their
Members.

In the Parliament holden at Westminster, 5 H. 4. Id. 391. Rot. Parl. 5 H. 4.
number. 38.
because.the Writ of Summons of Parliament, returned by the Sheriff of Rutland,
was not sufficiently or duly returned, as the Commons conceived, the said
Commons prayed our Lord the King, The Commons petition the King and Lords to
examine and order undue Returns.
and the Lords in Parliament, that this matter may be duly examined in
Parliament, etc. Whereupon our Lord the King in full Parliament commanded the
Lords in Parliament to examine the said matter, and to do thereupon as to them
should seem best in their Discretions. So the Lords called before them the
Sheriffs, and Parties, and it was agreed by the said Lords, that the Sheriff
should amend his Return, and the Sheriff for his default should be discharged
of his Office, and committed Prisoner to the Fleet, and make Fine and Ransom at
the King's pleasure.

Upon this and other Precedents Mr. Id. p. 364, 365. Mr. Prynne's Opinion.
Prynne says, That no Statute does give the Commons House the least Power or
Authority to judge or determine the Legality or Illegality of any Elections, but
leaves this to the King and Lords to redress, as at first before their making,
and gives the Knights duly chosen, but not returned, a hundred Pound Damages
against the Sheriffs, and Citizens and Burgesses forty Pound against Mayors and
Bailiffs, who make false Returns, by way of Action of Debt in the Kings Courts
at Westminster, or in the Star Chamber, when in being, or before the King,
Lords, and Council, as in Bronker's case, Dyer, fol. 113, 168. Plowden, fol.
118. to 131. Old Book of Entries, fol. 446, 447.
Trin. 1 Eliz. not in the Commons House, as the Statutes and Precedents in the
Law Books resolve. So that he says, how the Commons are now become sole Judges
of all false Returns, and Elections, and that perlegem and consuetudinem
Parliamenti, against all these Acts and Precedents, let Sir Edward Coke and
others resolve him, and the Intelligent when they are able; for late and
arbitrary Privileges are of no value, but ancient usage, and Law of our
Parliaments, and solid Reason, which cannot be produced to justify these late
Innovations and Extravagances.

The Statute of 8 H. 6. Rot. Parl. 8 H. 6. number. 391. Petitions from the Commons
to the King and Lords, about Elections.
to prevent Tumults, Uproars, and Disorders in the Elections, is grounded upon
a Petition from the Commons, that the King by advice and assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, would seclude all but Freeholders of forty Shillings a
Year Lands above all Reprizals: which was more than forty Pound a Year now,
being the twentieth part of a Knights Fee.

In 18 H. 6. Rot. Parl. 18 H. 6. m. 13. number. 18.
it was showed to the King and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, That Gilbert
Hoar, Sheriff of the County of Cambridge, made no Return of Knights upon the
King's Writ: Whereupon the King, by Advice and Assent of the Lord Spiritual and
Temporal, ordered a new Writ. So that then there were no other but the King
that had the Power to cause new Elections, with Advice and Consent of the
Lords; and so the King issued out new Writs.

Anno 29 H. 6. Nicholas Stynecle Knight, Richard Bevel, etc. and other notable
Esquires, Gentlemen, and other Men holding Fees, who may expend 40 s. per
Annum, beyond Reprizes, chose Robert Stonham and John Stynecle, notable
Esquires.

To this is annexed a Petition to the King our Gracious and Sovereign Lord,
Petition of Subjects to the King about Elections.
signed by 140 Gentlemen and Freeholders, in behalf of those against one Henry
Gimber, who was not of Gentile Birth, chosen by the number of 70. and the
Undersheriff countenanced him and his Party, and would not suffer these 140 to
be examined about their Estates, and give Voice, thoue he might clearly yarely
expend 20 Mark, without that we should have offended the Peace of You, our most
doutye Sovereign Lord, and so we departed, for dread of the said
Inconveniences, that was likely to be done of Manslaughter; and what the
Sheriff will return in this behalf we can have no notice. For which Causes, we
your true humble Suggets and Liegemen, in our most lowly Wise, beseeching you
our most douty Sovereign Lord and King, these Premises may be considered for
Your most Aid, and our Freedom; that the said Sheriff may be by Your great
Highness straightly charged to return the said Robert Stoneham, etc. Thus far
the Petition.

From this memorable Petition Mr. Prynne makes many observations; the principal
of which are, that the King himself was to redress and rectify all false and
undue Returns. Secondly, That this is the only clear Declaration and Record, he
has met with, complaining against a Sheriff giving of an Oath, A Sheriffs
denying the Poll, petitioned against.
and Poll to some Freeholders, and denying it to others. Thirdly, That when
legal Electors cannot be sworn or polled, without breach of the Peace, or
Manslaughter; they may justly depart, and ought to make such a complaint and
declaration, under their hands and Seals. Fourthly, That Ignoble persons, who
are not of Gentile birth, ought not to be elected Knights of Shires. Whoever
desires to peruse more concerning the ancient usage in Elections, may peruse
Mr. Prynne's Plea for the Lords, from page 371. to 416. his Second Part of
Brief Register, p. 118, 119, 139, 140. and several other places.

I shall only add what Queen Eliz. Freeholders Grand Inquest, p. 60. D' Ewes's
Journal, fol. 393.
18 Regni said in this case, That she was sorry the Commons meddled with choosing
and returning Knights of the Shire for Norfolk (it is to be presumed, the like
she might have said of any other County, if there had been occasion) a thing
impertinent for the House to deal with, and only belonging to the Office and
Charge of the Lord Chancellor; from whom the Writs issue, and are returned.

Having thus given a brief account of the ancient Usage, I come to the modern
way, which, according to Mr. Hackwell, Memorials, c. 6. p. 20. The modern Use
of Regulating Elections.
is that a general order has usually been made in the beginning of the
Session, to Authorize the Speaker to give Warrant for new Writs, in case of
Death of any Member; or of double Returns, where the Party makes his choice
openly in the House, during that Session, as it was ordered in the beginning of
the Parliament, 18, and 21 Jacobi primi: and where such general Order is not
made, Writs have issued by Warrant of the Speaker, by Virtue of special Order,
upon motion in the House; and this Warrant is to be directed to the Clerk of
the Crown in Chancery, by order of Parliament, 13 Nov. 1601.

The Committee of Privileges, 24 March, 21 Jacobi making their Report, a
question was put, Whether Sir Thomas Holland, and Sir John Corbet, were well
elected Knights for Norfolk; the House were divided, and it was overruled by
the House, that the No's should go forth. So that now the House of Commons are
the sole Judges of the validity or invalidity of Elections; and I suppose the
King and Lords, judging the House the competentest Persons to make enquiry, and
being willing to be eased of the trouble of such Matters as relate only to the
Members of the House of Commons, have rather by connivence, than by any
positive Ordinance in the House of Lords, dismissed this to the House of
Commons: against which, Mr. Prynne sadly complains, Plea for the Lords, p. 413.
saying, That since the Committees of Privileges have interposed in them, their
Proceedings have been very irregular, and illegal, in respect all the Witnesses
they examine touching them, are unsworn, and give their Testimonies without
Oath, upon which they ground their Vote; and for the most part very partially,
for which cause it is usually styled the Committee of Affection.

In 35 Eliz. Sir Simon D' Ewes's Journal, p. 494. In Queen Elizabeth's time
Application made to the Chancellor or L. Keeper.
Sir Edward Coke being then Speaker, he was ordered to attend the Lord Keeper,
to move his Lordship to direct a new Writ for choosing a Burgess for Southwark,
instead of Richard Hutton, supposed to be unduly elected, and another for
allowing Sir George Carew, who was duly elected, but not returned to be Burgess
of Gamelsford in Cornwall, and a third for changing the name of John Dudley,
returned Burgess for New Town in the County of Southampton, into the name of
Thomas Dudley, the Christened Name being mistaken: But the L. Keeper would
allow no alteration, but in that of Dudley. Which makes some observe, Lawyer
outlawed, p. 12.
That if the House of Commons had then known they had any Power to mend the
said Returns, or punish the Offenders; or Sir Edward Coke had known it had been
Law, he had never been sent on that Message. So that what Authority the House
has, it has accrued since.

SECT. 11. Concerning the House of Commons Censuring, Imprisoning, and
Expelling their own Members.
AS to the Commons Imprisoning and Punishing their own Members, The Reasons for
this Privilege.
for words by them spoken, or Misdemeanors committed in the House, there may be
some reason for it: First, Stat. 4. H. 8. c. 8. Coke 4. Instit. p. 25. 31 H. 6.
c. 26, 27.
because by Law they are not Punishable elsewhere, for any rash, indeliberate,
and inordinate Speeches in Parliament, which do not amount to Treason, Felony,
or Breach of the Peace; which it is supposed none in that rightly constituted
House will protect, though done in the House of Commons, begun in 1641.
Secondly, It is to be supposed that the Members upon their entering into that
House, unanimously agree for order sake, that the lesser number should always
submit to the greater. So by such Consent and original Compact, every single
Member submitting himself to the rest, he has no such reason to complain,
although they had no such Authority; for scienti and volenti non fit Injuria;
provided that they exceed not the common Rules of Justice, nor the Bounds of
Established Laws: for then no private Act can bind a Subject, though made with
his own free Consent, as appears in Clark's Case against the Mayor and
Burgesses of St. Albans. Coke, lib. 5. p. 64.


The first Precedent I find that any Member of the House of Commons was
complained, and Petitioned against for Misdemeanors, and put to answer before
the King and Lords in Parliament, Rot. Parl. 16. R. 2. number. 6.
and there judged, and fined, was 16 R. 2. the Wednesday after the Parliament
began; when Sir Philip Courtney, Members of the House of Commons punished for
Misdemeanour by the King and Lords.
returned one of the Knights for Devonshire, came before the King in full
Parliament, and said that he understood how certain people had accused, and
slandered him to the King and Lords; therefore prayed to be discharged of the
said Employment, until the accusations, etc. were tried: and because his said
Prayer seemed honest to the King and the Lords, the King granted him his
Request, and discharged him in full Parliament; Exact Abridgment, p. 417.
and the Monday following, at the Instance and Prayer of the Commons, the King
granted that he should be restored, and remitted to his Place. In the
Parliament, 4 H. 4. the accusations against him being reinforced, the King and
Lords adjudged, that he should be bound to his good Behavior, and committed to
the Tower for his Contempt.

By which, says Mr. Prynne, it appears, Plea for the Lords, p. 386, 387.
That only the King and Lords in full Parliament can suspend or discharge any
Knights or Commoners sitting in Parliament, and have Power of restoring and
re-admitting a suspended Member of the Commons House: and he answers the
Precedents that Sir Edward Coke brings, 4 Instit. p. 23, and 3 Inst. p. 22.
Vide page 296, 297, 299, 344, 371, 372, 373.
and many others which would be tedious here to insert.

The first Precedent he finds, The first Precedent of the House of Commons
secluding their Members.
that the Commons began to seclude one another, upon Pretense of undue
Elections, and Returns, was in Queen Elizabeth's time, when Thomas Lucy, 8
Eliz. was removed out of the House for giving four Pound to the Mayor of
Westbury to be chosen a Burgess, and the Mayor fined and imprisoned; and 23
Eliz. Mr. A. H^ll for publishing the Conferences of the House, and writing a
Book to the dishonor of the House, was committed to the Tower for six Months,
and fined five hundred Mark, and expelled the House; and in King Charles the
First's time, this Power over their Fellow Members was greatly improved; in
which how far Mr. Prynne then concurred I know not, but after he was secluded,
he every where writes with great earnestness against this usage; but whether
with Judgment, Law, and Reason, I shall leave others to judge, only I think fit
to insert some of his Invectives against the Proceedings of that unparalleled
house of Commons.

First, he says, There can be no legal Trial or Judgment given in Parliament,
in Criminal Causes or others, Id. p. 309. Mr. Prynne's Reasons against this
Usage.
without Examination of Witnesses upon Oath, as in all other Courts of Justice,
which the House of Commons cannot do. Littleton, sect. 212. Coke, ibid.
Secondly, That it is a Rule, both of Law and Justice, That no Man can be an
Informer, Prosecutor, and Judge too, of the persons prosecuted and informed
against: the Commons being in the nature of the Grand Inquest, Coke 4. Inst. p.
24.
being summoned from all parts of the Kingdom, to present Public Grievances,
and Delinquents to the King and Peers for their Redress. Plea for the Lords, p.
373.
Thirdly, That all the objected Precedents are of very puny date within time of
memory, therefore unable to create a Law, or Custom of Parliament, or any right
of sole Judicature in the House of Commons. Fourthly, Id. p. 387.
That all these Precedents were made by the Commons themselves, unfit Judges in
their own Cases, much less over one another, being all of equal Authority: so
that, in his opinion, they could no more expel or eject any of their Members by
their own Authority, without the King and Lords concurrent consent, See Legal
Vindication, p. 10.
than one Justice of Peace, Committeeman, or Militia-man can unjustice, or
remove another; since par in parem non habet potestatem, neither in
Ecclesiastical, Civil, Id. p. 373.
Military or Domestic Affairs. Fifthly, That they are all against Law, because
coram non Judice; he having throughout the whole Discourse, endeavored to
prove, That the Commons have no right or power of Judicature, much less of sole
Judicature in our Parliaments, but only the King and Lords. Sixthly, That these
Precedents are but few, never judicially argued, and rather connived at, than
approved by the King and Lords, taken up with other more public business;
therefore passing sub silentio, they can make no Law or Right, as is resolved
in Long, 5 E. 4. fol. 110. Cook's four Rep. fol. 93, 94. Slade's Case, and six
Rep. fol. 75. Drurie's Case. Seventhly, In the long Parliament of King Charles
the First, they began to seclude Projectors, Exact Collections of Ordinances,
p. 541. to 558.
Monopolists, etc. though duly elected; then suspended and ejected such who
were Royalists, and adhered to the King; then they proceeded to imprison and
eject those Members, Plea for the Lords, p. 414, 415. How the House of Commons
of the Parliament 1641. seduded their Members, till there were not above 70
left.
whom the Army Officers impeached or disliked, as a corrupt Party, or corrupt
Majority: and so fifty or sixty, by the power of the Army, secured, secluded,
and expelled near 400 Members; and made themselves the Commons House, without
them, and so proceeded to vote down, and seclude both King and House of Lords,
and voted themselves to be the Parliament of England, and sole Legislators, and
Supreme Authority of the Nation. The consequences of all which are too well
known to the whole Kingdom, whose Calamity of Civil War, and all the
unspeakable Tragedies of it, flowed from the packing of Members in the Commons
House, and the Assistance the People (relying upon their Sageness, and
Authority) afforded them. How this revived against Abhorrers.


We had of later Years a fresh revival of the same method in the House of
Commons, expelling those they called Abhorrers: which is so well known, that I
need say nothing of it; yet I would recommend to all interessed Persons, the
perusal of two Treatises, which though they pass for Pamphlets, yet have been
writ by Judicious Authors, and those are, The Lawyer outlawed, and the Three
parts of the Addresses, which are Books very fit for Gentlemen to peruse.

How full and unquestioned a power the Commons have to represent Grievances to
the King, and petition for Redress; The unquestioned Rights of the Commons.
to impeach any Person of the highest Quality that is a Subject, for Treason,
or high Misdemeanors; to have the sole Power in having all Bills, for
Subsidies, Aids and Supplies, to begin, and, I think, be perfected in their
House; and the Privileges they petition for by their Speaker] are so well
known, that they need no Discourse upon.

But I find several Judicious Persons will not allow the House of Commons to be
a Court; which Sir Edward Coke affirms, 4. Instit. p. 28. Whether the House of
Commons be properly a Court.
and uses this only one Argument for it, Because it is not Prorogued or
Adjourned, by the Prorogation or Adjournment of the Lords House; but the
Speaker upon signification of the Kings Pleasure, by the Assent of the House of
Commons, does say, This Court does Prorogue or Adjourn it self. But to this it
is answered, Lawyer outlawed. p. 18.
That if this were sufficient to denominate a Court, every Committee of Lords
and Commons, though never so few in number, must upon this account be a
distinct Court; because they may thus adjourn and prorogue themselves without
their respective Houses. In another place, 4. Instit. p. 23.
the same Chief Justice offers to prove the House of Commons not only a Court,
but a Court of Judicature and Record; for that the Clerks Book of the House of
Commons is a Record, and so declared by Act of Parliament 6 H. 8. c. 16. But
this House had no such Book as a Journal, much less any Authentic Record, When
the House of Commons had a Journal first.
before the first Year of Ed. the Sixth; all their material proceedings till
then, being drawn in Minutes, by a Clerk appointed to attend them, for that
purpose; and by him entered of Record in the House of Lords. Therefore the Words
of the Statute are, That the Speakers License for Members going into the
Country, be entered of Record, in the Book of the Clerk of the Parliament,
appointed for the Commons House: and this Journal is rather a Register of what
passes, than such a Record as denotes a Court of Judicature, as the Author of
The Lawyer outlawed endeavors to prove; P. 17, 18, 19. Plowd. Com. fol. 319.
Coke 1. Inst. fol. 260.
because there is no Court but what is established by the Kings Patent, by Act
of Parliament, or by the Common Law, i. e. the constant immemorial Custom of
former Ages: for by that the House of Lords is the sole supreme Court of
Judicature; it having never been heard of before Sir Edward Coke's fancy, That
there were two distinct Courts in the same Parliament. Also there is no Court
without a power of trial; but the House of Commons have no power to try any
Crime or Offense, because they cannot examine upon Oath: and there can be no
legal Trial without Witnesses, nor are any Witnesses of any force in Law,
unless examined upon Oath.

But I shall not enter into these Controversies, Some Observations on the
Privileges of the House of Commons in general.
but shall now lay down some general Observations and Rules, which Judicious
Persons have noted as worthy the consideration of the Honorable House in point
of their claims of Privileges and Judicature.

First, King James the First in his Declaration, touching his proceedings in
Parliament, 1621. resolves, That most Privileges of Parliament grew from
Precedents, which rather show a Toleration than an Inheritance: therefore he
could not allow of the Style; calling it their Ancient and undoubted Right and
inheritance; but could rather have wished, that they had said, All Privileges
from the Crown.
Their Privileges were derived from the Grace and permission of his Ancestors
and him; and thereupon concludes, That he cannot with patience endure his
Subjects to use such Antimonarchical Words, concerning their Liberties, except
they had subjoyned, That they were granted unto them by the Grace and Favor of
his Predecessors: yet he promises to be careful of whatsoever Privileges they
enjoy by long Custom, and uncontrolled and lawful Precedents.

Secondly, C. 29. None to be punished but by Legal Trial.
It is to be considered, That by the Great Charter it is declared, That no
Freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, or diseised of his Freehold, or
Liberties, or his Free Customs, or be Outlawed, or Exiled, or in any manner
destroyed, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.
Stat. 28 E. 3. c. 3.
So 28 E. 3. it is Enacted, That no Man, of what estate or condition he be,
shall be put out of his Land, or Tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor
dis-inherited, nor put to death without being brought to answer by due Process
of Law. So 42 E. 3. c. 3. it is assented and accorded for the good Government
of the Commons, that no Man be put to answer without presentment before
Justices, or matter of Record, or by due course of Law, or Writ Original,
according to the Old Laws of the Land. Nulla Curia quae Recordum non habet,
potest imponere finem, neque aliquem mandare carceri, quia isla tantummodo
spectant ad Curias de Recordo. Mar. Sess. 3.
So Sir Edward Coke says, Courts which are not of Record, cannot impose a
Fine, or commit any to Prison, because these only belong to Courts of Record;
for which see Beecher's Case, fol. 60. 120. Bonham's Case, and lib. 11 fol. 43.
Godfrey's Case: So in the First Parliament of Q. Mary it is declared, That the
most Ancient Statutes of this Kingdom do give, assign, and appoint, the
correction and punishment of all Offenders against the Regality and Dignity of
the Crown, and the Laws of this Realm, unto the King; which manifests, P. 23
that all such things are to be tried in his Courts. So that surely the Commons
Privileges must be included; for to trouble any (says the Author of The Lawyer
outlawed) that does not offend against the Crown, or Laws of the Land, is very
Illegal and Arbitrary, Id. p. 16.
and an high breach of the Liberty of the Subject. It would therefore be
considered, how improbable it is, that after our Ancestors have struggled for
many Ages, Infoeliciter aegrotat, cui plus mali venit a Medico quam a Morbo.
to preserve themselves and posterity, from the unbounded Rule of Arbitrary
Pleasure; and having obtained that from their Sovereigns, in so much, that they
can neither be fined or imprisoned by their Sovereign (unless for transgressing
some known Penal Law of the Land) should leave any Arbitrariness in the House
of Commons, who are but the Peoples honorable Deputies, Trustees, and
Atturneys.

Thirdly, The Law has provided where the Breach of the greatest Privileges are
to be tried.
It is to be considered that the Law has expressly provided, where and how
Breaches of Privilege ought to be punished, 5 H. 4. c. 6. and 11 H. 6. c. 11.
about any Assault upon a Parliament man, or his menial Servant, to be in the
Kings Bench. Since therefore such Assaults are far more Criminal than Arrests
of them, or words spoken against them, or inferior misdemeanors (to argue a
majori ad minus) it should seem rational that in the Courts of Justice (being
open to redress all sorts of Illegalities) matters should be rather tried, than
that persons should be punished by Imprisonments of the House of Commons alone.
For if this Arbitrariness were allowed, it would argue a great defect in our
Laws, that they are not the entire Rule of the Subjects Civil Obedience; and if
the ordinary Courts of Justice can try the greater, they may certainly try the
lesser Crime, as they have done in the Case of Done against Welsh, River
against Cosyn, Shewish against Trewynnard. Mich. 12. E. 4. Rot. 20. Excheq.
Hill. 14. E. 4. Rot. 7. Dyer, fol. 59.
But I have sufficiently showed before, that in old time the determination and
knowledge of the Privileges did belong to the Lords.

How agreeable these ways of Proceedings were to the Usage of the House of
Commons in 1640. and 1680. The Proceeding of the Houses in Anno 1640. and 1680.
are fresh in every ones memory, when not only they ejected and imprisoned
their own Members, but by Messengers sent for several Gentlemen, and others, no
Members, for acting according to the known Laws, and King's Proclamations; and
often for Persons having spoke angrily or slightingly of some Member, as in the
Case of Abhorrers.

It is to be hoped those very Gentlemen now wish it might be forgot, as I hope
it will never be put in practice again; when, after a chargeable sending for up
by the terrible Messengers, after being detained in Custody during the Pleasure
of the House, and brought to receive their Sentence on their Knees at the House
of Commons Bar, they were dismissed: So that I knew one who principally to
avoid the Charge (his Crime being for speaking Words against a Member, in his
Cups) was forced, upon notice of the Messenger's coming for him, to fly into
Ireland.

Fourthly, That the Law and Custom of Parliament may be declared.
It is worthy great Consideration by all the Members of the Honorable House of
Commons, that it is an undoubted Maxim both in Law and Reason, and is necessary
to the Obligation of all positive Constitutions, That they should be published
in express Words: The immediate Laws, even of God Almighty, in the Opinion of
Learned Men, being not obligatory where they were never promulged. Now since it
has not been hitherto published to the People, what this Lex and Consuetudo
Parliamenti is, 4. Inst it. p. 15. Illa lex ab omnibus quarenda, a multis
ignorata, a paucis cognita. Fleta, l. 2. c. 2.
(which Sir Edward Coke says out of Fleta, is to be enquired into of all, is
understood by many, and known to few) it would not only be obliging, but most
necessary, that the Honorable House would give a true and full Description of
this Law and Custom of Parliament, and an exact Account of their Privileges,
that People might in some measure, for the future, shun those dangerous Rocks,
and not be surprised or shipwrack'd on such hidden Shelfs.

I shall close this long Chapter (wherein, according to my Talent, I have
endeavored to comprise what has been voluminously treated of by all the
Authors I am furnished withal, and digested things into an easy Method) with
some Assertions of Mr. Prynne, whose Writings in this Particular are better
esteemed than many others.

He says, Brief Register, part 4. p. 685. Mr. Prynne's Opinion concerning the
great Privilege the Commons.
The Parliament being the Supremest Court of Law and Justice, ought to proceed
legally, according to the Course of Law, and not to enlarge or extend the
Privileges of Parliament beyond their Ancient, Just, and Legal Bounds, nor
alter the Law therein by their absolute Power: Much more ought the House of
Commons themselves to follow their Precedent, and not to extend their old, or
vote up new Privilege, to the delay, Ibid. p. 1210.
retarding, or deluding of Common Right and Justice. Therefore he condemns the
writing of Letters by the Speaker, 18 Jacobi 1. 14 Feb. 18 Jac. fol. 24. b.
to stay a Trial betwixt Sir William Coxe and Mr. Humphrey Aylworth; as
likewise in other Cases, the same Year, Ibid. fol. 51. b. and fol. 137.
3 March, and 20 April: which, he says, is diametrically opposite to the
Judges Oath, and against the Great Charter, which says, See Stat. 2 E. 3. c.
6. 14 E. 3. c. 14.20 E. 3. c. 1, 2.
Nulli negabimus, nulli differemus Justitiam and Rectum: To which I may add the
Hardship used to Mr. Sherridon, Lawyer outlawed, p. 28.
who being in the Custody of the Sergeant at Arms, the Warrant of Commitment
being during the Pleasure of the House of Commons, Mr. Sherridon's Case, who
was denied the Benefit of the Habeas Corpus Act.
without any Cause shown; now the Habeas Corpus Act is express, That all
Persons are Bailable, by what Person soever committed, not excepting the King
and Council, much less the House of Commons, unless for Treason or Felony: One
of the Judges made application to the House of Commons, to know whether he
might grant the Writ of Habeas Corpus to him. The Debate lasted three days, by
reason of the Difficulty of the Cause: For if they openly declared against the
Habeas Corpus, the Nation would be much alarmed, and suspect these Gentlemen,
instead of securing, intended to invade the Subjects Liberties; but if they
allowed the Writ, the delicious Power of Imprisoning such as they had a Pique
to, was utterly lost, and all Persons referred to the ordinary Courts of
Justice, or, upon their failure, to the House of Lords, Sir William Jones
against any ones Release by Habeas Corpus, if they were imprisoned by the House
of Commons.
the Supreme Tribunal of England.

Sir William Jones insisted much upon the Power of the House, and that they did
not intend by that Act to bind themselves, (which yet must bind the King)
though it might as well be alleged, That he did not intend to bind himself by
it. However, Sir William persisted, urging, See Debates of the House, p. 217.
That whatever Reasons may be given for discharging such as are not committed
for Breach of Privilege, (if grounded on the Act for the Habeas Corpus) will
hold as strong for discharging of Persons for Breach of Privilege, and so
consequently deprive the House of all its Power and Dignity, and so make it
insignificant; and said, That was so plain and obvious, that all the Judges
ought to take notice of it: and so judged it below the House to make any
Resolution therein, but rather to leave the Judges to do otherwise at their
peril, and let the Debate fall without any Question. But Baron Weston had the
Courage to grant the Habeas Corpus, Baron Weston grants the Habeas Corpus.
as rather willing to expose himself to the Displeasure of the House, than deny
or delay Justice contrary to his Oath.

I could not omit this remarkable Passage, as a Specimen of the Arbitrariness
of the Leading Party in that House; Brief Register, part 4. p. 846.
and now shall proceed to Mr. Prynne's Remarks upon the Proceedings of the long
House of Commons.

He observes, Privilegia omnino amittere meretur qui sibi abutitur concessa
penestate. Ejus est interpretari cujus concedere. Summa Rosella. Privilegium 3.
That Privileges may be lost by the abuse of the Power; and that whatever
Privilege the House has, is from the King's Grant, or Toleration. Therefore,
according to the Canonists Rule, If the Privilege granted be expressed in
general, dubious, or obscure Words, then it is in the power of him to
interpret, who has the power to grant. Now the Petition of the Speaker is,
That the Commons in this Parliament may, and shall have all their Ancient and
Just Privileges allowed them. Therefore the King, Nemini liceat Chartas Regias
nisi ipsis Regibus judicare. Placita Parl. 18 E. 1. number. 19. p. 20.
being the sole Granter of these Privileges, must be the only proper
Interpreter and Judge of them, as he is of all his other Charters of
Privileges, Liberties, Franchises, and Acts of Parliament themselves, after his
Regal Assent thereto; not the Commons, or Persons to whom they are granted; and
that both in and out of Parliament, by Advice of his Nobles, or Judges of the
Common Law.

Therefore he says, first, How the Breach of Privilege to be punished,
according to Mr. Prynne. See the Authority, Brief Regist. part 2. p. 847.
That if the Commons by Petition to the King and Lords in Parliament, complain
of the Breach of their ancient Privileges and Liberties, as they ever did in
the Cases of Lark, Thorp, Hyde, Clerk, Atwyll, and others; the King, by Advice
of his Lords in Parliament, assisted with his Judges, has been, and (as he
humbly conceives) is the sole proper Judge of them and their violations; not
the Commons, who being Parties, Prosecutors, and Complainants, are no legal
indifferent Judges in their own or Menial Servants cases, if they will avoid
partiality, which is the reason the Law allows Challenges to Jurors in Civil
and Criminal causes. Therefore he observes, Ibid. p. 1206.
that the House of Commons, taking Informations without Oath, may be easilier
abused by misinformation, and sometimes thereby are put upon over hasty Votes,
which, upon finding out evil Combinations, they are forced to retract.

Secondly, The Chancellor or Lord Keeper to grant the Writ.
If the complaint of the breach of Privilege be made in the Commons House, and
thereupon an Habeas Corpus, Writ of Privilege, or Supersedeas prayed under the
great Seal, for the Members or menial Servants release, whose Privilege is
infringed; the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the great Seal, representing the
Kings person in Chancery (the Court for relief in cases of Privilege) is the
properest Judge, and Examiner of the claimed Privilege, and its violations upon
Oath, and other sufficient Evidence, assisted by all the Kings Judges in cases
of difficulty, who thereupon will grant or deny the Writs.

Thirdly, The Judges of the Courts to which the Writ is directed, to judge of
the validity of the Privilege.
When these Writs of Privilege, Supersedeas, or Habeas Corpus, are granted to
any Member, or menial Servants, and directed to any of the Kings Courts to
enlarge their restrained Persons, or stay any Arrests, Process or Judgments
against them; the Kings own Judges in his respective Courts, to which they are
directed, are then the proper Judges of the Privileges of Parliament, and of
their breaches suggested in these Writs; who may examine, not only all matters
of Law or Fact comprised in them, which are Traversable; but likewise adjudge,
allow, or disallow the very Privilege it self, if no real ancient Parliamentary
Privilege allowed by the Laws and Customs of the Realm.

How far he is in the right, I will not undertake to judge; but I remember,
somewhere he wishes an Act of Parliament to pass to adjust these matters:
which possibly would prevent many of those chargeable attendances about false
Returns, and save much expense of time in the discussing of them, and enable
the Subjects to pay a right and due obedience to them.

SECT. 12. Concerning the Royal Assent to Bills.
I Have treated so much of this elsewhere, as to the sole Power in the King,
the ancient Custom of Sealing the Acts with the Kings Seal, and of some of the
Prelates and Nobles, as Witnesses of their Assents; that I shall only now speak
as to the usual formality of passing the Bills into Acts by the Kings last Act.
See also his Memorials.
For Mr. Hackwell has given a full account of the manner how Statutes are
enacted in Parliament by passing of Bills; to which Book I refer the curious
Reader that would understand the order that is used in the debating and passing
of them.

When Bills are passed by both Houses, upon three several Readings in either
House, Hackwell of Passing of Bills, p. 179. ad 182.
they ought for their last approbation, to have the Royal Assent, whereby every
Statute is, as Mr. Hackwell observes, like Silver seven times tried.

The Royal Assent is usually deferred to the last day of the Session: and
because some have been of opinion, that the passing of Bills, The Royal Assent
determines not the Session.
puts an end to the Sessions, so that what ever Bills are ready, and pass not
the Royal Assent, must be again read three times in either House; for the more
security, it is usual to insert a Proviso, That the Session is not thereby
concluded.

The Royal Assent is given two ways: First, Royal Assent by Patent.
by Commission since the Statute of the 33 H. 8. c. 21. wherein it is
expressed, That the Kings Royal Assent by his Letters Patents under the Great
Seal, Signed by his hand, and declared and notified in his absence to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and to the Commons Assembled in the higher House; is
and ever was of as good strengh and force, as if the King had been there
personally present, and assented openly and publicly to the same.

The manner of the King's giving his Public Assent is in this manner. The King
comes in Person, in his Parliament-Robes, Royal Assent when the King present.
and sits in his State, and the Upper House sit in their Robes: The Speaker,
with all the Commons House, comes to the Bar of the Lords House; and in Sir
Thomas Smith's time, Sir Th. Smith's Commonwealth, p. 45. Speeches used to be
made there.
the Chancellor for the Lords, and the Speaker for the Commons, in set
Speeches, returned the Prince Thanks, for that he has so great Care of the
good Government of his People, and for calling them together to advise of such
things as should be for the Reformation, Establishing, and Ornament of the
Commonweal. After which, the Chancellor, in the Prince's Name, gives Thanks to
the Lords and Commons, for their Pains and Travel taken, which he says the
Prince will remember, and recompense when Time and Occasion shall serve; and
that the Prince is ready to declare his Pleasure concerning their Proceedings,
whereby the same may have perfect Life and Accomplishment by his Princely
Authority.

I think now, mostly, Hackwell of Passing of Bills, p. 181, 182.
the Speaker of the House of Commons makes a Speech, acquainting the King with
the purport of the Bills. Then the Clerk of the Crown reads the Title of the
Bills, in such Order as they are in Consequence. After the Title of every Bill
is read singly, The Clerk of the Crown pronounces the Royal Assent or Dissent.
the Clerk of the Parliament pronounces the Royal Assent, according to certain
Instructions given from his Majesty in that behalf.

If it be a Public Bill to which the King assenteth, the Answer is, Le Roy le
veult, The King wills. If a Private Bill, allowed by the King, the Answer is,
Soit fait, comme il est desire, Let it be done as it is desired. And upon a
Petitionary Bill the like is used.

If it be a Public Bill (which the King forbeareth to allow) he says, Le Roy
se avisera, The King will advise.

To a Subsidy Bill the Clerk pronounces, Le Roy remercie, ses loyaux Subjects,
accept leur Benevolence, and aussi le veult, The King thanks his Loyal
Subjects, accepts their Benevolence, and also wills.

To a general Pardon is pronounced, Les Prelates, Seigneurs, and Communs, en
cest Parliament assembles, au nom de touts vous autres Subjects, remercient tres
humblement vostre Majesty, and prient Dieu vous donner en sante, bone vie and
long: The Prelates, Lords, and Commons, in this Parliament assembled, in the
name of all your other Subjects, thrice humbly give thanks to your Majesty, and
pray God to give you in health, a good Life, and long.

These, P. 46.
says Sir Thomas Smith, be taken now as perfect Laws and Ordinances of the
Realm of England, and none other, and as shortly as may be, are printed, except
it be some Private Acts, made for the Benefit or Prejudice of some Private Man;
these be only exemplified under the Seal of the Parliament.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Factious Combinations in Parliaments.
I Hope in the foregoing Chapters, I have so explained the Constitution of
Parliaments, and the Legislative Power, that unbiassed and unprejudiced Persons
will no more be misled by the Sophisms, and plausible pretenses, which to
aggrandize the Power of the two Houses at first, and after of the Commons House
only, the Penmen of the long Parliament made use of; yet because many of late
were furbishing the rusty Armor of their Demagogues, and trimming their
Helmets with fresh Plumes, I conceive it necessary to take notice of some of
their chiefest Arguments, and examine those which had greatest Influence upon
the People.

The great and venerable name of Parliament, and its Authority, was constantly
used as Shield and Buckler, to ward off all the Force of the Loyal Assaults;
and Mr. Prynne writ a large Volume, which he styled, The Sovereign Power of
Parliaments: and when the very Lees and Dregs of the Commons House was put in
Ferment, that very Kilderkin would admit no lower Style, than the supreme
Authority of the Nation to be pearched on its Bunghole.

Therefore to disabuse the less considerate, The various Acceptance of the
word Parliament.
and to detect the Frauds of those, which under that great Name applied
whatever they met with in the Laws, or History, to the House of Commons; I
think it necessary in the first place to clear the acceptance of the Word.
Appropriated to the Lords House.


Sometimes the word Parliament is used for the House of Egerton, sect. 4. 22,
23.
Lords only; as when upon Writ of Error, any Judgment in the King's Bench is
examined in the House of Lords, the Judgment is said to be affirmed or reversed
by Parliament.

The Appellation of Parliament is likewise used for the two Houses, To both the
Houses.
in regard they are the gross Body, whereof the Parliament consists, there only
wanting the Sovereign Head to complete it. But they are so far from being the
High Court of Parliament, that they cannot co-unite to be an entire Court,
either of Sovereign or Ministerial Justice, but only in concurring in Votes in
their several Houses, for preparing of matters, in order to an act of all the
Body; which when they have done, their Votes are so far from having any legal
Authority in the State, as in Law there is no Style or Form of their joint
Acts, further than Bills, nor does the Law so much as take notice of them, till
they have Royal Assent; without which, the Votes of the two Houses dye in the
Womb, like an Embryo.

So that the proper use of the word Parliament, How properly the High Court of
Parliament.
(as Authority of Law-making is annexed to the name) is only when the King and
the two Houses concur in one Act, and in that sense only is the Parliament the
Supreme Court, the highest Judicatory, and the most Sovereign Power: Not for
any Sovereignty in the two Houses, and from them transferred to the King by
their joining and consenting with him; but because every complete and perfect
Act of it, is the Act of the personal Will and Power of the Sovereign himself,
standing in his highest Estate Royal.

Therefore whoever reads the Authors that writ in defense of the Parliament,
must consider this Fallacy they frequently used, that he do not apply the
Authoritative Act of the King, with the Consent of the two Houses, to the
Houses without the King.

From the Cooperation of the two Houses in preparing Laws, Freeholder's Grand
Inquest, p. 34.
the late (...) (since King Charles the First's time) of the words, The King is
not one of the Three Estates.
Be it end^ed by the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons (as if
they were all Fellow-Commissioners) and the unwariness of some of the Penners
of the King's Answers to some of the Papers of the two Houses, wherein they
styled the King the third Estate; the Commonwealths-Men have taken the
advantage to reckon the King but as a third Legislator.

Therefore I think it necessary to remove this Rub e're I proceed further.
Although the Author of the Imposture, The Modus makes the Parliament to consist
of six Parts.
called the modus tenendi Parliamentum, makes six degrees of constituent
Members of the Parliament, viz. The King first, then Secondly, the Archbishops;
Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and other Clerks, who held Baronies. Thirdly, the
Proctors of the Clergy. Fourthly, the Earls, Barons, and other great Men, who
held to the value of a County or Barony. Fifthly, the Knights of Shires.
Sixthly, the Citizens and Burgesses, to which he might have added the Barons of
the Cinque Ports; yet he says the King is the Head, Beginning and End of the
Parliament, and so has no Ita non habet Parem in suo gradu.
Peer in his degree. Yet it plainly appears, that these we now call the two
Houses, were by reason of their distinct Orders, most frequently divided into
three. For in As queux Prelates, ou la Clargie par eux mesmes; and les Countes
and Barons par eux mesmes; Chevalers and Gentz de Countez, and Gentz de la
Commune par eux mesmes entreteront. Prynne Animadv. p. 10.
6 E. 3. at his Parliament at York, the Record says, That on the Friday before
the Feast of St. Michael, the Prelates, or the Clergy by themselves; the Earls
and Barons by themselves; the Knights of the Counties, and the Commons by
themselves treated, etc. Othertimes we find the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and
great Men, and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, to have separate
Consultations by themselves; and to give their several answers to Articles, and
business propounded to them in Parliament, as Mr. Prynne out of the Abridgment
of the Records of the Tower, has given us above twenty instances.

At the making of the Statute of Praemunire, 16 R. 2. the Commons pray, The
Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and Commons make the Three Estates.
That the Lords, as well Spiritual as Temporal, severally, and all the Estates
of Parliament might be examined, how they thought of that matter; and the Lords
Spiritual answered by themselves, and the Lords Temporal by themselves; and the
King was Petitioned to make this Examination. So in 40 E. 3. the King asking
the Houses, Whether King John could have subjected the Realm, as he did; the
Prelates by themselves, and the Dukes, Earls, and Barons by themselves, gave
their Answer. Besides, we find (as at large I have before instanced in the last
Chapter) the Writs of Summons of the Bishops and Clergy, were only, in side and
dilectione; and the Barons generally, Stat. 18. ^. 6. c. 1.
in fide and homagio, or Ligeancia; and the Clergy granted their Subsidies
apart, and distinct from the Nobles.

Besides, that the Bishops are to be esteemed the Third Estate, is clear by Act
of Parliament: for it being questioned 8 Eliz. c. 1.
, whether the making Bishops had been duly and orderly done according to Law;
the Statute says, That the questioning of it is much tending to the slander of
all the Clergy, being (...) of the greatest States of the Realm.

So Sir P. 36.
Thomas Smith (as in the last Chapter I have noted) distinguishes the two
Houses into three Estates, and Sir Edward 4. Instr. p. 1.
Coke says expressly, That the High Court of Parliament consists of the Kings
Majesty sitting in his Royal Politic Capacity, and the three States of the
Realm, viz. the Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and Commons; the like the
learned Interpreter, tit. Parliament.
Cowel affirms.

Sir Henry Spelman Solenne collequium omnium Ordinum Regni, Authoritate solius
Regis, ad consulendum, statuendumque de negotiis Regni indictum. Gloss. p. 449.
calls it a Colloquy of all the Orders of the Kingdom, convened by the sole
Authority of the King, to consult and appoint in the Affairs of the Kingdom.

This was also known to Foreigners, uninteressed Persons; for the Lord Argenton
speaking how Subsidies were granted in England, says Lib. 5. p. 253.
, Convocatis primis Ordinibus, Clericis and Laicis, and assentiente Populo: And
Bodin De Repul. lib. 6.
whenever he speaks of the Constitution of our Parliament, calls it the King
and the three Estates of the Realm.

But to put all out of doubt, in King Charles the Second's Reign, it is
determined in the Act for the Form of Prayers for the Fifth of November, For
the Preservation of the King, and the Three Estates.

Now the reason why in King Charles the First's answer, Why in some of King
Charles the First's Writings the King was called the Third Estate.
we meet with the expressions of making the King the third Estate, was, because
at that time, the Bishops being voted out of the House of Lords, and the two
Houses setting themselves in all the points of Controversy in opposition to
the King, the notion of a Triumvirate was more intelligible (as it may be
thought) to the People, and those who were so bitter Enemies to the King, and
had such a Rebellious force, would have still increased the Peoples aversion,
if the King had asserted his Royal Prerogative otherwise. Whether this were the
true reason, or the oversight of the Penners of his Majesty's Answers, I will
not undertake to determine; but I am induced to believe the first, because, I
find the King, and those that writ in defense of his Cause, using frequently
this way of Argument.

In every State there are three Parts (says Review of Observations.
one, the King ordered to write for him) capable of just or unjust Sovereignty,
viz. the Prince, Nobles and People. Now through the Piety of our Lawgiving
Princes, a just and regular course of Government being obtained, the stability
of which being found to be more concerned in the Power of making Laws, than in
any other Power belonging to the Sovereign; for preventing of Innovations, that
might subvert that settled regularity, the frame and state of Government was in
such a sort established, as that the Prince should be limited from using the
legislative Power, without concurrent assent of the Peers and Commons. By which
means the constitution of our Parliaments, is so equal and geometrical, and all
parts so equally contribute their Offices, that no part can have an extreme
predominance over other: Therefore to prevent any evil that might come by the
admission of two such Bodies, to a participation of Power, in this particular
of making Laws (if they should combine against the Sovereign) the Law gives
them an equal Power to assent or dissent; The Ballancing of the Powers in
Parliament.
so that opposing the single Power of every one of them, to the Votes of every
other two, there might be so secure a balancing of the Power of one against the
other, that no practice of any two of them, should do any prejudice and
diminution to the third, without the third Party it self did give consent unto
it: otherwise the King and Peers might oppress the Commons, the King and
Commons oppress the Peers, or the Peers and Commons oppose the King; and the
Peers being easily oppressed by the Commons (as we saw in our late calamitous
Times) an Appian Decemvirate, or the 30 or 300 Tyrants might get the Power into
their own hands.

In another place he says, Though properly Laws be the Acts of the King in
Parliament, yet are they also truly the Acts of the whole Parliament; because
every of the Estates contribute their Power according to the diversity of their
Office and Interest, and so as from a sacred Tripos, the civil Oracles of the
Law are delivered.

It is therefore to be considered (says a Judicious King's Supremacy asserted,
c. 9. p. 96. where the Reader may find a full Answer to the Deductions they
make from the King's way of arguing.
Author, in answer to some other passages of his Majesty that the
Parliamentarians wrested) That if his Majesty, out of a desire to save the
effusion of Blood, used such gracious Expressions as were most likely to
prevail with the People, and consolidate their Minds, they ought not in Equity
to prejudice the Rights of the Crown, although he had abdicated therein, some
parts of his Authority, and granted things destructive to his own Prerogative.
From his Majesty's saying, That the Power, legally placed in both Houses, is
more than sufficient to prevent, and restrain the Power of Tyranny, they infer,
This cannot be made good without a Power of Resistance; for that Tyranny cannot
otherwise be restrained. Which is easily answered. For it cannot be understood,
that the King means by this, a forceable resistance or restraint, Id possit
quisquam quod jure possit.
but a legal one, so far as Humane Prudence can by lawful and just ways
provide. The Power they have by Law, being to inflict punishments on evil
Instruments, whereby others may be afraid to take upon them such Employments;
and they may refuse to give the King Subsidies, and other necessary Assistance,
if he refuses to moderate excesses, which are Powers more efficacious than
resistance; the success of the one being more probable and likely than the
other.

However, The not asserting of King Charles the First's Prerogative,
disadvantagious.
in my poor opinion, it had been more honorable, and probably more
efficacious, to have spent less time in this kind of defending the Kings
Interest by the Pen, and have employed it in asserting the true Prerogative of
the King, and his undoubted Rights, to have let the People, as well as the
Houses know, what he would reform, and out of Princely Clemency grant, for his
Peoples ease, and at their earnest Petition; but neither to have depreciated,
or descended so much below the Majesty and Dignity of his place, to enter into
Reply and Duply, Altercation, and Apologies with his Subjects. But that King,
composed all of Mercy, Justice, and Tenderness to his Subjects, judging others
by his own Royal Standard of Integrity, let the Houses seize his Ships,
Magazines, and left them the City of London's Purse, while he retired to the
North, and plied the Houses with Declarations and Messages, to have reduced
them to their Duties: and though his condescensions were great, and the way of
Argument such as before I have instanced in; yet I cannot find (except in that
particular of making himself one of the three Estates) that he yielded any part
of his Royal Prerogative, till he was made Prisoner; that in his restraint he
condescended to a temporary divesting himself of the Militia, and other things,
which all sorts of Subjects (except the very chief of those in Rebellion
against him) found infinitely more tending to the enslaving, and utter ruin of
the People, than ever they could have been, if the King had managed all by his
absolute Will, and the direction of those they accounted his worst Instruments.

I having in several places cleared the Kings Sovereignty, shall only on this
Head endeavor to answer the principal of those popular Reasons the Writers for
the Parliament used, not grounded upon any Law or Constitution of the
Government, but only upon the false supposition, That the Wisdom of the two
Houses was to be valued above the Wisdom of the King and Council, in proposing
matters for the Royal Assent, which were conducible to the Liberty of the
Subject, which they pretended was their whole design, and that they would
establish the Kings Throne in more Glory and Splendour than had ever been in any
Ages.

The first and principal Topic they used, was, The Monarchy of England not
mixed.
That the Monarchy of England was in its Constitution allayed, and the Power of
the two Houses, in making Laws, had such a Copartnership, and radical mixture,
that they had something more than a Consultive and Assenting part; and that the
King was obliged in the duty of his Office, and by his Coronation Oath, to
grant what they desired.

Mr. Sherringham King's Supremacy asserted, p. 74.
has culled out the prime Arguments of the Author of the Treatise of Monarchy,
The fuller Answerer, and others upon this Head, and so fully answered them,
that I must refer the Reader to him for satisfaction, and shall only select
some of the chiefest of these Arguments, more for the orderly continuance of
this Discourse, than for any need of repeating them.

First, They say, That King Charles the First owned the Law Declaration from
N^wmarket, 9 March 1641.
to be the Measure of his Power, and if so, it is limited. But this concludes
no more, than that his Power is of such a size and bigness as the Law has
ordained; and if the Law give the King absolute, full, and entire Power, and
limits him only in the exercise of it, this is a restraint, and limitation
according to such Laws as the Sovereign has established in that particular
alone, and is the happiness of the English Subject, that Kings act not
Arbitrarily: but this gives no Power to the two Houses, to be any checks upon
the King, who by the same Laws has the Power of putting in execution, and
suspending the execution of the Laws in many Cases; or that Aristocracy, or
Democracy have any such mixture with the Monarchy, as they can impose their
Laws upon him. For to suppose a mixed Monarchy, consisting of Three Estates,
independent for their Authority upon one another, and to have several shares in
the Rights of Sovereignty, and to say, The Government of three Estates, is the
Government of one Monarch, is perfect nonsense: for when Besold. Synopsis
Polit. Doct. l. 1. c. 6.
Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy are melted and allayed together, that
which resulteth can take its name from none of the simple species, or kinds of
Government, but must have some other Appellation.

Whoever will consider aright of the concurrence of the two Houses, in
preparing Bills, will find, How the two Houses concur in making Laws.
That though the Houses be as the Causa sine qua non; yet the efficient,
procatarctick Cause, and the Authoritative Power in passing these into Laws, is
the King only; and what the two Houses do without his Assent, is but as the
Counselor at Law's framing a Deed, and the Clerks Engrossing the Indenture of
Conveyance; but till the Seal be set to it, and delivery made, as the Act and
Deed of Donor or Conveyor, it is of no force and virtue; neither do we call it
the Act and Deed of the Counselor or Clerk, but of the Person that seals it.

Another Objection those Champions for the two Houses made great noise with,
was, King's Supremacy, p. 84. Objection, That the Mixture is in the Supremacy
of Power.
That the Power where the Legislative is in all Three, is in the very Root and
Essence of it compounded and mixed of those three: so that where this height of
Power resideth in a mixed Subject, that is, in three concurrent Estates, the
consent and concursus of all being most free, and none depending on the Will of
the other, that Monarchy is in the most proper sense, and in the very model of
it, a mixed Constitution. And that such is the State of the Monarchy of
England, the Objector thinks clear, because the House of Peers are an
Aristocracy, and the Commons a Democracy; and this mixture of Interests and
Powers being in the very Legislative Power, he concludes the mixture is in the
Root and Supremacy of Power, and not in the exercise alone.

In answer to which it must be considered, Answer, That is only in the Exercise
of the Power.
That though the concurrence of both the Estates with the Monarch in the making
and promulgation of Laws, be such as our Laws describe; yet it is no otherwise
than in the precedent Chapters, by undeniable proofs, I have made it out, That
what participation soever the two Houses have with the King in the Legislature,
it is only derivative from the Crown by the King's Summons, and the restriction
of those Summons to do and consent.

It is known to be the common Assertion of Panorm. cap. Gravem de Sent. Excom.
Canonists, Bertol. in Lomnes Populi, sect. de Justitia and Jure, q. 2.
Civilians, and Suarez, lib. 1. de Leg. c. 8. n. 9.
Schoolmen, That the Legislative Power is communicable by the Princes
allowance, and that such a concurrence as our Kings have allowed, is no
Argument of Supremacy; such a mixture of the three Estates has been in other
Monarchies, Besold. de Juribus Magist. c. 2.
which every where are owned to be absolute in respect of Power. For as they
are summoned by the Princes single Authority, and dissolved at his own
pleasure, they can claim no sort of Right, during their Session, further than
to consult about, and prepare Bills for the Royal Assent. Therefore De Imperio
Summarum Potestatum circa sacra, c. 8. number. 11.
Grotius says, Istam Legislationem, quae aliis quam Summae Potestati competit,
nihil imminuere de jure Summae Potestatis, quod in Scholis dicunt, cumulative
datum censeri non privative. So in our Kingdom, every Corporation has
Authority to make Ordinances and Constitutions within their own Liberties, for
the good Order and Government of the Body; and the Inhabitants Coke 5. part,
tit. Cases de Bylaws and Ordinances.
of every Parish, to make Bylaws and Ordinances among themselves for their own
profit, where they have Custom for it, and for the Public Good, where they
have no Custom: Surely this is a sort of Legislative Power; yet thereby it
cannot be inferred, that they have any Coordinate Power with the King in the
Rights of Sovereignty.

So that allowing the Power of the two Houses as large as can be proved by the
Laws (for the stretch that the Parliamentarians would make, is by the Tenters
they only have set up,) the whole latitude of the Nomothetical Power is not
jointly in the two Houses; for none but Strangers to our Laws can deny, That
the King has sole Power to dispense with the Statutes, and abate their Rigor,
where a mischief would otherwise ensue, he alone has Power by Edicts and
Proclamations, to order all Affairs for which there is no order taken by
certain and perpetual Laws.

The Legislative Power is either King's Supremacy, p. 88. Of Architectonical
and Preceptive Power.
Architectonical, or Preceptive. The Architectonical is that which lays
Materials of Law, and consists in two things; First, in determining what is
just, convenient, or necessary: Secondly, in declaring, and promulgating that
to be actually made a Law, and Enacted, which upon consultation is thought to
be just, convenient, or necessary. The first shows no Jurisdiction in the
Persons who have it, but only an Office and Employment to deliberate and
consult. But whoever has the Second Power, has a Jurisdiction to define
Authoritatively what shall be Law; and this Preceptive Power is that which
makes the Law sacred and inviolable, and which gives it force to oblige the
Conscience.

Now it is evident by undeniable Testimony and Authority, that the exercise of
the Architectonical Power is only committed to the two Houses, who have votum
consultivum and decisivum, but it is derived from the King, who has only the
Preceptive Power. So that the Writers for the two Houses, generally did use a
Sophistical way of arguing, not discovering what they could not but know, the
difference betwixt the King's, and the two Houses Powers in the making of Laws.
For subordinate Agents, that are but Instruments of another, and work by a
derived Power, when they concur with the Principal and supreme Agent, have
their causality in producing the Effect; yet this does not prove the Authority
to be radically in them. As in an Estate of Lands (says Idem, p. 91.
Mr. Sherringham,) wherein a Man has a perpetual Right in Fee, his Right is
distinguished from the King's Right, of whom he holds; the King having the
demean of the Land, and the other the demean of the Fee.

So it is in an Estate of Power and Authority; If the King grants an Estate
of Power, Authority and Jurisdiction in Fee-simple, or in Fee-tail, for term,
longer or shorter, the King has the demean of Power, and the other the demean
of Use; the King has Dominium directum, the other Dominium utile; which he
applies to the two Houses: but it must be likewise considered, that this
distinct Authority they have, is wholly derivative, and so much the more
depending on the Sovereign, as he can at his Pleasure totally deprive them of
the Exercise of it by Prorogation, or totally annihilate it by Dissolution.

Another Objection they made, Objection, The Three Estates to restrain the
Excess of each other.
was from the Answer the King authorized a Gentleman to make to the Observer,
That the three Estates are constituted to the End that the Power of the one
should moderate and restrain the excess of the Power in the other. From which
he infers, That this is an Allay and mixture in the Root and essence of the
Constitution.

To this it may be answered, Answer to it.
That there is no such Power in the two Houses; they are called to consult, and
to consent. All they can do is, that they have the opportunity of having
grievances redressed, because they may otherwise deny the King the assistance
he desires. But they have no Authority of themselves, to redress them, or to
restrain and moderate his Excesses by Force, nor can they moderate the Excesses
of one another by any Act of their own singly, further than the exorbitant
Estate shall be willing to be moderated.

It is a most absurd thing to imagine, that when the Law has placed the
Sovereign Power in the King, it should again for a space of time, during the
Session of Parliament, unsovereign Him, and place in the two Houses the same
Sovereign Trust, and with a second absurdity, leave in the King's Hands the
summoning and dissolving, the Power by which himself should be constrained; and
to make up all, should by Authority of that Power constrain all the Heads of
the People, and even the Representative Body of that Power, by Solemn Oath, to
declare that the King is not only supreme Governor, but that he is only
supreme Governor.

Besides the Arguments they sued upon this Head of a debased Monarch, that was
not only to admit some of his Subjects into the Participation of his Burden,
but of his Sovereignty (whereby they pleaded for both the Houses being
joynt-Sovereigns for the time) they used other Arguments singly for the House
of Commons, which they endeavored to aggrandize, and raise to a strange
over-towring height, above both King and Lords; and they grounded all their
Arguments upon the immense Power of their being the Peoples Representatives.

The Observer says, Objection concerning the Power of Representatives.
That the virtue of Representation, is the great Privilege of Privileges, that
unalterable Basis of all Honor and Power, whereby the House of Commons claims
the entire Right of all the Gentry and People; and that there can be nothing
under Heaven next to renouncing of God, which can be more perfidious, and more
pernicious to the People, than the withdrawing from them; and does acknowledge
that the Arbitrary Rule was once most safe for the World: But now, since most
Countries have found out an Art, and peaceable Order for public Assemblies (he
means by Representatives) whereby the People may assume its own Power, and do
it self Right, without the disturbance of it self, or injury to Princes, he is
very unjust that will oppose this Art and Order.

In answer to which it ought to be considered, That the Representative Body
deserves the highest Honor and Observance that can be given to the Body
Represented; Answer, What Honor is due to Representatives of the Subjects.
but this Honor will depend upon two things: First the quality and condition
of the Body represented, and Secondly, on the quality of the Representative it
self. If therefore the Body at large were an absolute Sovereign (as in
Republics,) the true Representative of that Body were to be observed with all
Sovereign Honor, and due Subjection: But when the Body at large it self is but
a Subject (as it is in Monarchy) the Honor and Authority of the
Representative, cannot exceed the Honor and Authority of a Subject; for none
can make the Image more than the Original, or, without Adulterating Arts,
appear so. Therefore however abhorrent a Crime he makes it, in such as concur
not in their Judgment with their Representatives that exceed their Authority
and Commission: yet all sober and just Persons ought to consider that the
Subjects by giving Authority to some of their own Order, to represent them, and
advise, and consent for them, gave them no such Power above that of Subjects;
yea so much above the condition of their Sovereigns, that neither breach of
Faith, nor the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy (which they never took to
them) or any other Duty to their King, was comparable to the withdrawing from
the Vote, or Act of their Representators: as if the Rights of the Crown and
Kingdom, and the Laws made by the King, with the assent of the three Estates in
Parliament, did not so much concern the Commons of the Land; but that against
all these they stood solely bound to the Representatives, as the only Sovereign
of their Obedience. I shall now offer some Reasons against this dangerous
Opinion.

First, It is to be considered, Reasons against the Power of Representatives.
That in our Kingdom the Representors are not equally chosen (as in the united
Provinces, and other Commonwealths) but it lies in the Power of the Sovereign
here to make a Town equal in number of Burgesses to a County: which does
vehemently demonstrate, That the first Institution and end of such
Representatives was rather to minister Information of the State and Condition
of that particular place, and advise and assist the Sovereign, and to consent
with him, and not to determine Sovereignly.

Secondly, The cockering the People in that Opinion, that the Sovereignty lies
in Materia prima in them, and by their Representatives, that they may exert it,
is the certain way to ruin not only Monarchy, but all government: as was
evident in the case of the Rebellious House of Commons, in King Charles the
First's time, who prided themselves so much with the Title of Representatives;
and by pretext of that and the Assistance of their Army, having unyoked
themselves from all Subjection to their Lawful King, and disengaged themselves
from their dangerous and useless Colleagues, the Lords (as they then voted them)
after some while they lost their Honor and Reverence with their own Army, who
then would be the People, and pulled them out of their House; justly charging
them with a design to perpetuate themselves. And so the Tyrannical Supremacy
was exercised by Cromwell, and his Council of Officers a while, and after by
himself, and his mock-Representatives, by Councils of State and Safety, and
such new Names and Powers, as our Laws never heard of; and all this under
pretense that they Acted by the Peoples Authority and suffrage; and all the sad
Devastations of that Age resulted from the confiding so much in the pretended
Representatives of the People. Which England's Universal Distraction, p. 4.
one some Years before the sad Catastrophe, plainly foretold; though like belief
was given to him, as of old to Cassandra. His Words are, That the so much
exalting the Power of the Representatives, was first to destroy the King by the
Parliament, and next the Parliament and Kingdom by the People. Thus ignorant
Politicians that build upon such Quicksands, soon live to see their Insanae
Structurae ruinously fall about their Ears.

Thirdly, Whereas the Advocates for the Representatives, would gladly have
possessed the People that they could rely upon none so securely and safely, as
upon those they had themselves chosen; they being less subject to private ends
and affections, than any particular man, such a Body being not likely to
counsel or consent to any thing, but what is publicly advantageous.

It is to be considered, that it is a false Postulatum: Such a Body being but
an Aggregate of particulars, may have as many private ends as any other number
of Subjects; it being well known, that Communities themselves are subject to
dangerous Inclinations from private Incitements; and I the Representatives
subject to misleading Factions, and Ambitions of private Men; and by coalition
of Parties (when they fall into designs) they are most dangerous and fatally
violent: and though it may, at first View, seem to be repugnant, that an
Universality should have private ends; yet seeing it is not the number of
Agents, but the capacity in which they act, and the quality of the Actors, and
the coherence or incoherence of what they pursue (with the public end and
weal) which makes the Actions of men public or private: It must needs follow,
That if without Authority, or out of the way of Public Ordinances, men pursue
any thing, though the whole Community concur in the pursuit; yet it is all of
the nature of a private Action, and done to a corrupt and private end.

Because the Author of some Observations upon some of K. Charles the 1st.
Messages, was reputed the great Champion of the two Houses, I shall content my
self with culling out some of the daringest assertions, Why Reason and Law were
not hearkened to by the Advocates of the Long Parliament.
he and some other of their Triarii used, and apply such of those Answers and
Reasonings, as the Learned and Loyal offered then against them, though they
could not be heard, while the Torrent bore all down the stream. The hideous
noise of Tumults, and after of Drums, Trumpets, Cannons and Firearms hushed
and silenced all the still voice of Law and Reason: But now it is to be hoped,
when Men's Eyes are unsealed, the Mask and Vizard dropped or pulled off, the
fatal Consequences of such pernicious Principles thoroughly manifested, and the
loud Thunder of the Two Houses Ordinance allayed, men's Spirits will be better
fitted to hear them refuted.

Besides what I have endeavored to answer before, concerning the Authority of
the Representative, which they would make an Assembly; in which the People, in
underived Majesty, are by these Proxies convened to affirm an Imaginary Power,
supposed to be theirs originally, and in such a convention to be put in
execution: I say besides this, which in several places I have refuted, That
filled all their Declarations, Messages and Treatises, when they were
contriving the setting up the Commons House Topmost, to prove, That they were a
Body that was not easily corrupted, biased, tempted, or prevailed upon, to Act
any thing but what was the best for the Peoples advantage. Therefore I think
fit in many particulars to show, how such Bodies may be warped to sinister
ends, and especially how that House not only deceived, but tyrannized over, the
whole Nation.

Private Answer to Observer, p. 130, 131. How Passions, Affections, Interests,
and Factions may sway Representatives.
Quarrels and the memory of former Sufferings may work upon some; discontent
and envy at other men's preferment may transport others; the fear of the lash,
and desire to secure themselves have forced some to personate a part; great
Offices and Honors have been a Pearl in some Men's Eyes to hinder their Fight;
others have been like Organ Pipes, to whom the wind of popular Applause has
only given a sound; others who have premeditated their Parts before their
design was discovered, have upon some pretenses or other (suppose of an
unlawful Election, being Monopolists, Abhorrers, or such like) got those
excluded by Vote, whom they conceived to be likely to oppose their designs. The
bewitching Power of Oratory prevails upon many. In others there is a Speechless
Humor of following the Drove. The Ambition and Covetousness of Representatives.
Can we not easily conceive several of this Body may be ambitious, which would
prompt them to alter the old way of bestowing Offices, and collating of
Honors? so by disservice as well as service in Parliaments, some Men have
obtained Honors, Offices and Estates, finding it a good way to get preferment,
by putting the King upon necessity of granting. Good Woodmen say, That some
have used Deer-stealing as an Introduction to a Keepers place. So we have seen
a Non-conformist's mouth stopped (I might instance in other Professions) with a
good Benefice; whereas, before he was satisfied, he could gape as wide as his
Neighbors. Others by more only ways slip into Preferment; for Covetousness and
Ambition will sail with any Wind. The Covetousness of the Members of the long
Parliament by woeful experience was found insatiable; witness their Voting for
one another Offices, Governments, satisfaction for their losses out of
Delinquents Estates, sharing the Kings Lands and Revenue, the Bishops, Deans
and Chapters Lands, and the Estates of the Royal Party: hence together with the
itch of Arbitrary rule, they drew the determination of Causes out of the
ordinary Courts of Justice, before their Houses and Committees of them, and in
every County had their Sub-committees to Tyrannize over the People and fleece
them.

Their cruelty appeared in their erecting High Courts of Justice, Major
Generals, and other Arbitrary Courts, The Cruelty of the Long Parliament.
where many a Loyal and brave man, for serving his King, against such Rebels,
either lost his Life or his Liberty and Estate; and when they were the
gentlest, yet they could show hatred enough, by Imprisoning, upon I know not
what suspicion, and at leisure prosecuting such as they had a pique against.

The partiality of Members in such Conventions are very frequent, The
Partiality.
in shielding their friends from being questioned, though their Corruptions
were notorious to all the World. So in the fatal Parliament of 1641. A
Monopolist, if a Loyal man, was sure to be expelled the House; but if a
favourer of the Cause, he was never recriminated with that or any other bypast
or present ill disposition.

In such Assemblies there often happen one sort of People, who are always
representing grievances, complaining of Maladministration, troubling the
Church and State, shaking up the Lees and Dregs in the richest Vessel of Wine,
these have learned to catch Eels.

Tacitus notes the corruptions of the Roman Senate, The Corruptness of the
Roman Senate.
which necessitated the change of that State into a Monarchy under Augustus,
fully, significantly, and concisely after his manner, Suspecto Senatus
Populique imperio ob certamen Potentium, avaritiam Magistratuum, invalido legum
auxilio, qua vi, ambitu, postremo pecuniaturbabantur. The Provinces observing
in this Supremacy of the Senate and People, the contests of the most Powerful,
the Covetousness of the Magistrates, the feeble help the Laws afforded (by the
Arbitrariness of the Senate, we may presume) by what force and moyen; and
lastly, how all things were distracted by Bribery, they were the more easily
induced to admit of one Sovereign. These particulars were most obvious in the
fatal House of Commons.

Besides these things I have hinted at, Of cunning and designing Men.
in such a body as we are speaking of (where there cannot want men designing
some dangerous Revolutions, for the establishing their own greatness) though
some few wise men may be apprehensive of their designs, yet we know maxima est
pars artis celare artem. Such contrivers will be sure by all imaginable Arts to
conceal their intentions, and obtain an Ascendent over the Judgment of the
gross Body, who either are not so quick-sighted, or aiming at no such things
themselves, judge others candor by their own, and so by their helps the
designers may carry the Vote against even such as penetrate further into the
aims of the Contrivers, than the Majority do; so that those that have good ends
may be hood winked by others whose ends are worse, Fallit enim vitium specie
virturis and umbra.
and private ends will steal upon well affected: for all grand Conspiracies are
veiled under the Mask of Reformation, of removing Grievances and evil
Counselors. Gallant and virtuous actions do not more often ingratiate men with
such a mixed body, than a rolling Tongue, a precipitate Head, vainglorious
profusion, oily insinuations, feigned devotions, sufferings (though deserved)
from Superiors, and above all, opposition to the present State.

So the memorable long Parliament of 1641. by the specious pretenses of
redressing Grievances, The specious Pretenses of the Long Parliament.
taking care of the Public, and particularly of the Liberty of the Subject and
their Privileges, together with vehement Expressions of their Resolutions of
Establishing the Kings Throne, upon more firm foundations of the peoples Hearts
and Affections; by insensible Screws wound themselves into the credit of
Patriots, and being thereby able to carry a numerous party with them in all
their Votes, by little and little made such encroachments upon the Sovereignty,
that having undermined it, past support, they took the advantage of its fall
and ruin (out of the same specious pretense, that the Commonwealth might
suffer no detriment) to propose their long designed Model of Government, not as
by them forethought on, but as a necessary expedient to accomplish the end (as
they pretended) they had all this while been aiming at, viz. the Peoples
prosperity, which (...) they endeavored to make the World believe they were
most Zealous for: when God knows, the upshot of all was the total dissolution
of the best constituted Government, and the Establishing themselves a fattened
Commonwealth out of the rich spoils of Monarchy.

Yet these very men were they who some years before possessed as many as they
could delude, with an opinion, Their Hypocritical Promises.
that none knew better, nor affected more the sweetness of so well balanced a
Monarchy, than they; and that the Kings just Authority was Sacred to them that
they would make him more rich and glorious than any of his Predecessors. The
Observer told the World, That it had been often in the Power of former
Parliaments, to load the Government with greater Fetters and Clogs, but they
would not; and that change of Government could not be in their desires, because
the advantage of the Lords and Commons in the State was so great, that no
change of Government could better them, except each one could obtain an
hereditary Crown. But these were but vain flourishes and empty aerie offers:
success altered their Principles, and they were ill troubled to find out
excuses and evasions after the Murder of the Blessed King, and change of
Government, for these their so hypocritical Declarations. From all which I
shall only desire that Posterity may be cautious how they credit the truth of
those, who in such Conventions are the most active for any Innovation, if they
see that they zealousliest pretend some greater happiness to the People, by
lessening the Authority of the Crown. It is reported of Frederick the Emperor,
Aeneas Sylvius de diaetis Fred. Imp.
that in the Speech to the Senators, he desired them before they entered into
the House of their Assembly, they would leave two things behind them, and then
they would give right Judgment; and being asked what those were, he told them,
Simulatio and dissimulatio.
Counterfeiting and Dissembling.

Another of their Arguments, How many Counselors may mislead.
for the preference of the Houses Counsel before all other Councils, was, that
many Eyes of so many choice Gentlemen from all parts, see more than fewer;
which Sophism easily midwived in the conclusion, that then the two Houses
judgment of Affairs was to be preferred before the King and his Privy Councils,
and the Commons before the Peers; and by a parity of Reason (though they
desired not it should be urged so far home) that the body of the People was to
be preferred before the Commons House, which might be urged upon as common a
Proverb, That Bystanders see more than Gamesters.

But who are so blind as those that will not see? Those very Seers if they
would have made use of their Eyes, to have perused the Histories of former
Ages, on what specious pretensions Rebellions had begun, and how the Laws had
settled the Government in an unparalled security of the Peoples Rights, as
well as the Prerogative of the Crown, or by serious consideration foreseen the
certain and inevitable miseries that would follow the weakening of the Crown,
and the necessitating the King for his defense to take up Arms: these
quick-sighted Commoners might have prevented all those Calamities that ensued.
The Elected like the Electors.


Whoever considers how easy it is to possess a People with prejudices against
the Government (of which elsewhere I must enlarge) will soon find that it is no
difficult matter to have such Elections of Members as were like to be of the
same persuasion with the Electors; So that in such cases, it is not to be
wondered at, that a majority of Votes might be opposite to more judicious and
foreseeing Members judgments; neither is the Maxim universally true, for it
must be caeteris paribus, if all things be alike. For it is not sufficient for
an Adviser to see, unless he can let another see by the light of Reason. A man
ought not implicitly to ground his Actions upon the Authority of other men's
Eyes, whether many or few, but of his own. One Physician may see more into the
state of a man's body than many Empiricks. One experienced Commander may know
more in Military Affairs than ten fresh water Soldiers. One old Statesman in
his own Element is worth many new Practitioners. One man upon a Hill may see
more than an Hundred in a Valley. And who will deny but among an Hundred, one
of them may have a stronger Eye, and see clearer and further than all the
Ninety Nine? So one Paphnutius in the Council of Nice, saw more than many
greater Clerks. And it is no new thing to find one or two men in the Parliament
change the Votes of the House. Therefore nothing is got by this way of arguing,
though it be one of the plausiblest, and most improveable of any of the Topics
they choose. And if we could be sure that all the Members of such Assemblies
were free from all the imperfections such are liable to, much might be yielded
to it.

All these Arguments were used for that sole end, that they might possess their
Party with the reasonableness of their desires to the King, that he would
implicitly yield up his reason to the guidance of their Councils.

They were not so frontless at first, Concerning the Negative Voice.
as positively to deny the Kings negative Vote in Parliament, that had never
been doubted, and there is good reason it should be a most sure Fundamental of
the Government, since nothing can be Statutelaw but that to which the King
assents, Le Roy le veult. For who can be said to will that has not the Power
to deny? Si vult is scire an velim, efficite us possim nolle. Seneca.
But they affirmed that in Cases extraordinary, when the Kingdom was to be
saved from ruin, the King seduced, and preferring dangerous men, it was
necessary for them to take care of the Public. And then the Kings denying to
pass their Bills, was a deserting of them; Objection, That in Cases of
Extraordinary necessity, the Houses to have Power to secure the People from
Tyranny.
Otherwise they alleged Parliaments had not sufficient Power to restrain
Tyranny, and so they boldly affirmed they had an absolute indisputable Power in
declaring Law; and (as their Observer words it) they are not bound to
Precedents, since Statutes cannot bind them, there being no obligation stronger
than the Justice and Honor of Parliaments. And to sum up all, he tells us, if
the Parliament (meaning the two Houses) be not vertually the whole Kingdom it
self; if it be not the supreme Judicature, as well in matters of State as
matters of Law; if it be not the great Council of the Kingdom as well as of the
King to whom it belongs, by the consent of all Nations, to provide in all
extraordinary cases, ne quid detrimenti capiat Respublica: let the brand of
Treason, says he, stick upon it. Indeed because by all these most false, and
impious assertions, and those horrid Acts built upon them, they brought so
great a ruin to the Kingdom, they are and ever will be (u^less a Platonic
year return again) branded with Rebellion in the highest degree.

To answer this Accumulation of Treasonable Positions (for such I hope I may
call, in some sense, Answer.
what is against the Kings Crown and Dignity) is no ways difficult from the
discourse of right constituted Parliaments: For those of them that carry any
show of Reason, are such only as may be understood of Acts of Parliament
completed by the Royal Assent; but being spoken of either or both Houses in
opposition to the King, they are most false, as I shall show in particular.

For First, If the two Houses are not bound to keep any Law, no man can accuse
them of breach of any: What obligation can Justice lay on them who by a strange
virtue of Representation are not capable of doing wrong? But it is well known
that Statutes stand in full force to the two Houses, as being not void till
repealed by a joint consent of the King and the two Houses. It would be much
for the credit of the Observers desperate Cause, if he were able to show one
such Precedent of an Ordinance made by Parliament without the Kings assent,
that was binding to the Kingdom in nature of a Law. Our Kings can repeal no
Laws by their own Prerogative, though they may suspend the Execution. It seems
the Houses would have Power to do both; and our Author in another place, thinks
it strange that the King should assume or challenge such a share in the
Legislative Power to himself, as without his concurrence the Lords and Commons
should have no right to make Temporary Orders, for putting the Kingdom into a
Posture of Defense. These were strange Phrases never heard before by English
Ears. Our Laws give this Honor to the King, That he can join or be sharer with
no man. The King like Solomon's true Mother, challenges the whole Child, not a
divisible share, but the very life of the Legislative Power. The Commons
present and pray, the Lords advise and consent, the King Enacts.

Secondly, The Houses have no Power to declare Law.
As to their claiming an absolute Power in declaring Law, it is as bold and
false an Assertion as the other, when spoken of the two Houses. They may vote
in order to a new Bill, the explaining or repeal of any Law formerly made, or
prepare a Bill for any New Law, and that is all they can do; but
authoritatively to declare any Law, is most contrary to the Constitution of the
Houses, and never was adjudged one of their Privileges.

Thirdly, As to the Justice and Honor of a Parliament, when the State is in
quiet, and the Conventions only for making wholesome Laws for the Public weal,
there are no Factions in Court or Country, no private Intriegues to be managed,
the People neither uneasy nor discontented; then it is to be expected, That
none but the wisest, and wealthiest of the Gentry will be chosen Members of
that August Assembly, and their Justice and Honor will be conspicuous in all
their Actions. But have we not known Houses of Commons composed of other kinds
of Persons, who have voted their own Justice and Honor to be, to imprison
their fellow Members, and fellow Subjects in an Arbitrary way? How Address,
part 3. p. 121.
could a generous Soul, conscious to himself he had transgressed no Law, kneel
at the Bar of such a House with the same submission, as if he believed the
Speaker infallible, and every Member an Angel!

But the Observer, Objection, That if the King have a Negative Voice, there
will be no need of Parliaments.
and his Pewfellows urge, That if the Houses can do no Act for public good
without the King's consent, and if the King may reject their Counsels and
Advice; it were needless to put the Country to the charge of choosing Members
of Parliament. And if the King may prefer other opinions before Parliamentary
Motives, then Parliaments are vain and useless helps, Princes are unlimited,
and the People miserable.

These Objections are of such an odious nature, Answer.
That no good Subject can take delight in them, whose duty is to pray for the
like consent among the several Orders of the Kingdom, as is supposed to be
among the several Orbs of Heaven: The King undoubtedly the Primum movens; the
Great and Privy Council the lower Spheres.

The usual (but not the only) form of the Kings Answers to such Bills as they
were not willing to pass, Le Roy s'avisera, proves, Answer to Observations, p.
56.
That after the advice of this his Great Council, he is yet at liberty to
advise further with persons or occasions, as his own Wisdom shall think meet.
But these Authors will by no means take notice, That the use of Council is to
persuade, not to compel; as if a Man in business of great concernment might not
very prudently consult with many Friends, and yet at last follow the advice
perhaps of one, if it appear more proportionable to the end he aims at.

If it were because they are a more numerous body, therefore their Counsel is
upon that account to be yielded to; then the liberty of dissenting may be
denied to the House of Peers, in comparison of the House of Commons; and to
that House too in comparison of the People: and so both King, Lords and Commons
are voted out of Parliament.

Besides Natural Wisdom and Fidelity, there is a thing called Experience, of
high concernment in the managery of Public Affairs. He that will steer one
Kingdom aright, must know the right Constitution of all others, their Strength,
their Affections, their Counsels and Resolutions, that upon each different Face
of the Sky, he may alter his Rudder. The best Governments have more Councils
than one: One for the Public Interest of the Kingdom, another for the Affairs
of State, a Council for War, and a Council for Peace.

Let them be as wise and faithful Counselors as the Observer pleases, only
let them be but Counselors. Necesse est us Lancea in libra ponderibus
impositis deprimi, sic animum perspicuis cedere.
Let their conlusions have as much credit as the premises deserve; and if they
can necessitate the Prince by weight of Reason, and convincing Evidence of
experience, let them do it on Gods name. But it is not to be done upon the
Authority of a bare Vote, as I think all uninterested persons are satisfied in
the Votes of the Houses in 1641. about the Militia, Church Government, and the
voted Nineteen Propositions, or the late Votes about the Bill of Seclusion, the
Repealing of the branch of the Statute of Queen Elizabeth against Protestant
Dissenters, and the Loans upon the Kings Revenue. There are other ends besides
Counsel, for which Parliaments are called, as consenting to new Laws,
furnishing the Public with Moneys, and maintaining the Interest of the
Government and liberty of the Subject: from the removing one social end, to
infer that an Action is superfluous, deserves no answer but silence and
contempt.

This should teach the Electors Wisdom not to choose such as have Factious
Bents, or are not truly qualified in their Allegiance to their Prince; or
Malcontents, who render such Conventions useless to the Public Ends of
Government, and the Peace, Tranquillity, and Prosperity of both Prince and
People.

Because the Long Parliament Writers would have no Stone unturned, nor any
specious Argument uninforced, Concerning the Coronation-Oaths of the King of
England.
that might bring the King to their Lure, to consent to what they proposed;
they endeavored to make the World believe, that the King was bound by his
Coronation Oath to pass all such Bills as they presented, or tendered to him,
grounding, as Mr. Prynne, and others alleged, on a promise of the Kings at his
Coronation, to grant and keep the Laws and Customs which the Commonalty shall
choose. Before I come to give the particular Answer, I think it not unfit to
take this opportunity to give a full account of the Coronation Oaths of our
Kings, and how the same from Age to Age were varied, by which the Ingenious
Reader will find, what the respective Kings by their Oaths did promise.

That I may deduce, as high as I have yet found, the Original of Sovereign
Princes taking Oaths at their Coronations; it may be noted, that the first
Emperor that was Crowned, and had any Coronation Oath prescribed, was Evagrius
His^. Eccles. lib. 3. c. 32. Who first took a Coronation Oath.
Anastasius the Greek Emperor, who being elected by the Senate and Soldiers
about Ann. 486. Euphemius, Patriarch of Constantinople, (suspecting him to be
addicted to the Heresy of Eutychius and the Manichees,) would not consent to
his Coronation, till he should deliver him a Writing under his Hand, ratified
with his Oath, wherein he should plainly declare, That if he were Crowned
Emperor, he would maintain the true Faith, and Synod of Chalcedon during his
Reign, and bring in no Novelty to the Church of God. This Writing, ratified
with his Oath, Macedonius the Treasurer was to keep; and after he was made
Patriarch, the Emperor demanded it, and said, It was a great discredit unto his
Subjects, that his Handwriting should be kept to testify against him, or that
he should be tied to Pen and Paper.

There is no mention of any Coronation Oath used from thence, to the Year 804.
that Eutrop. lib. 24. p. 145, 146. Zonar. Annal. tom. 3. fol. 142, 143.
Imperatorio Diademate est ornatus, postulato prius scripto quo promitteret se
nulla Ecclesiae statuta violaturum.
Stauratius, (Son to Nicephorus, slain in his Wars against the Bulgarians)
being declared Emperor by some: Michael Curopolata was adorned by the
Patriarch, with the Diadem, a Writing before being desired, in which he
promised to violate none of the Statutes of the Church, etc. Which is the first
Precedent of a Promise, not an Oath, demanded from, or given by any Roman King
for confirming the Laws of the Church, etc.

The first Emperor Crowned at Rome by any Pope, Onuphr.
was Charles the Great, Anno 800. but without an Oath; and Henry the Fifth
Dicens Imperatorem nemini jurari debere, cum juramentorum sacramenta ab omnibus
sint sibi adhibenda. Hermold. Chron. Scl. l. 1. c. 40. Sim. Dunelm. 232, 237.
refused to take any Corporal Oath, saying, That an Emperor ought to Swear to
none: for that Oath, i. e. of Fealty, ought to be made to him from all.

I shall not with Mr. Prynne (in his Epistle Dedicatory to his third Tome of
Chronological Vindication,) meddle with the dispute, how the Canonists argue
from the Popes Crowning of Emperors and Kings, that they acquire a Spiritual
and Temporal Monarchy over them, as their Sovereign Lords. For that however
some may hold the Doctrine, yet it is exploded by most.

As to the Crowning and Anointing of some British and Saxon Kings, I must refer
the Reader to Mr. Seldom Tit. Hon. part 1. c. 8. fol. 149.
, and Mr. Prynne in the forecited Epistle.

The first of our Kings that is recorded in History to have taken an Oath at
his Coronation, was Can^tus; of whom Sim. De Gestis Regum Agg. col. 173.
Wigorn. Chro. 384.
Dunelmensis, and others give this account, That after the death of Aethelred,
the Bishops, Abbats, Dukes, and the Nobles of England, and the most part of the
men of the Kingdom, as well of the Clergy as Laity, met together with one
consent at Southampton, and chose Canutus for their King, and swore Fealty to
him: to whom he also swore, Quibus ille juravit, quod and secundum Deum and
secundum seculum, fidelis esse vellet eis Dominus. King Canutus his Oath.
that according to God and the World, (that is the Laws of God and the Kingdom)
he would be a faithful Lord unto them. Mr. Prynne here no^es, that Usurpers
more frequently used to take such Oaths than lawful hereditary Kings. So when
the Citizens of London, and some few Noblemen, with unanimous consent, chose
Clitonem Eadmundum unanimo consensu in Reg^m levavere. Matt. Westminster. p. 410. 411.
Edmond, called Ironside, the eldest Son of Aethelred, who was right Heir,
there is no mention of an Oath. So when Harold reputed Son of Cnute was
Crowned, there is no Oath recorded, nor of any taken by Hardicnute, right Heir
of Cnute.

So, Anno 1041. Flor. Wigorn. Chro. p. 404. Edward the Confessor 's Oath.
Edward the Confessor, annuente Cleno and Populo, Londoniis in Regem eligitur,
and was Crowned, Anointed, and Consecrated; yet not any of our Historians,
besides William of Malmsbury de gestis Regum, Lib. 2. c. 13. p. 80. speaks of
an Oath, who says, that he being sent for by the Nobles, upon terms proposed
to him by Earl Godwyn, there was Nihil erat quod Edwardus pro necessilate
temporis non polliceretur. Ita utrinque fide datae quicquid petebatur,
sacramento sirmavit.
nothing that King Edward did not promise, by reason of the necessity of the
time; so that Faith was given by either Party, and what was desired, he
confirmed by Oath: but this was in their private Consultation. Yet Archbishop
In Regem Angliae sublimatus prius juravit se Leges Canuti inviolabiliter
servaturum. Spelm. Conc. tom. 2. p. 342.
Stratford in his Epistle to King Edward the First, says, that St. Edward
being raised to be King of England, first Swore inviolably to keep the Laws of
Canutus.

We find no Coronation Oath of Harold mentioned. Matt. Westminster. Flor. Hist. p.
433 says, that extorta fide a Majoribus, Capiti proprio imposuit Diadema; that
having exacted Fealty of the great Men, he put the Crown on his own Head: and
after when Crowned by Archbishop Alfred, William the Conqueror 's Oath.
he took no Coronation Oath; but as my Author says, Leges aequas coepit
condere. Elo. Wigorn. Chro. p. 412. Hoveden part. Annal. prior. p. 450. Stubs
Acta Pontif. col. 1702. Coram Clero and Populo jurando promittere se velle
sanctas Ecclesias and Rectores earum defendere, necnon and cunctum populum sibi
subjectum justa and Regali providentia regere, rectam Legem statuere and
tenere, Rapinas injustaque judicia penitus amovere and interdicere. Sim.
Dunelm. col. 195. number. 43.


As to King (q) William the Conqueror; Aldred Archbishop of York Crowned him,
and imposed on him an Oath. The words of the Authors are, Ipsa nativitatis die
ab Aldredo Ebor. Archiepiscopo, apud Westmon. in Regem totius Angliae
sublimiter Coron^um inunxit, and consecravit honorifice: Having before (as
(...) Archbishop required from him) before the Altar of St. Peter the Apostle,
before the Clergy and People, by Oath promised, That he would defend Holy
Church, and the Governors of it (which Clause occurs not before) and likewise
govern all the People subjected to him, with a Just and Regal Providence, and
appoint and hold right Law, and wholly remove and interdict all Rapines, and
unjust Judgments.

The Oath which he took to observe St. Edward's Laws, was afterward, Anno
1072. when he entering into a Parley with the English Nobility (who intended to
have set up Edgar Atheling, because King William had violated their ancient
Laws, and introduced new ones) he, by the Advice of Archbishop Man. Paris vita
Fritherici Abbatis 13. St. Albani, p. 30.
Lanfrank, Swore that bonas and antiquas Leges Regni, sc. Leges quas Sancti and
pii Angliae Reges, and maxim Rex Edwardus statuit, inviolabiliter observare.
Only William of Malmsbury Modeste erga subjectos ageret, and aequo jur^ Anglos
quo Francos tractaret. De Gestis Pontif. lib. 3. fol. 154.
says, that Aldred the Archbishop would not consecrate him, before he had
exacted from him, before all the People, this Oath, That he would modestly
deport himself toward all his Subjects, and with an equal Law treat the
English as he did the French.

William Rufus promised to Lanfranck, Justitiam, aequitatem, and misericordiam
se per totum Regnum, si Rex foret, in omni negotio servaturum, pace libertatem
and securitatem Ecclesiae contra omnes defensurum. Eadmerus Hist. Novel. lib.
1. p. 13, 14.
If he were King, King William Rufus's Oath.
in all his Affairs, through all his Kingdom, to preserve Justice, Equity, and
Mercy, and to defend the Liberty and Security of the Church in Peace, against
all. H. Huntingdon, Lib. 7. fol. 213. b. and Hoveden, Anno 1088. fol. 264. b.
say, That when he needed the help of the English, he promised them such
desirable Laws, or better than they would choose. But Malmsbury and others say,
he kept them not; for Usurpers (such as he was) rarely observe the Laws, or
their Promises, further than they serve their own Interest. Therefore Mr.
Prynne notes that the Promise Eadmerus, and Col. 214.
Simeom Dunelm. mention, was before he was King; and the other Promise was,
when most of the Norman Nobility, except the Archbishop Lanfranck, designed to
make Robert his Brother King; and then he called them together, and then told
them, If they would be Faithful to him, R. Hoveden, part. 1. Annal. p. 264. b.
number. 20.
Meliorem Legem quam vellent eligere, eis concederet, and omne injustum Scottum
interdixit. Lib. 7. fol. 213. b.
Huntingdon says the promised them exoptabiles leges, and that they should
have their Woods and Hunting free.

It is recorded of Henry the First, King Henry the First's Oath.
that having gathered to London the Clergy of England and all the People, he
promised them an amendment of the Laws, with which they were oppressed in the
time of his Father, and his Brother lately deceased, that he might obtain their
Vt animos little in sui promotionem accenderet.
good Wills to his Promotion, and that they might receive him for their King
and Father: to which the Clergy and all the Nobility answered, Si animo volenti
ipsis vellet concedere, and charta sua communire illas libertates and antiquas
consuetudines quae floruerunt in Regno tempore Sancti Regis Edwardi. Mat. Paris
250. n. 53. Hist. Novel. lob. 3. p. 55.
That if with a willing Mind he would grant them, and with his Charter confirm
all the Liberties, and ancient Customs, which fl^rished in the Kingdom, in the
time of the Holy King Edward, they would consent to him, and unanimously
consecrate him King; and he freely yielding to his, and affirming by his Oath
that he would do it, he was consecrated King, the Clergy and People favoring
it.

Eadmerus says, That in ipso consecrationis die, bonas and Sanctas omni Populo
Leges se servaturum, and omnes oppressiones and iniquitates, quae sub fratre
suo emerserunt, in omni sua dominatione tam Dei Lege, quam in secularibus
negotiis prohibiturum, and subversurum, sposponderat; and haec omnia
Jurisjurandi Interjectione formula per totum Regnum divulgata ire praeceperat,
and when he was Crowned, he granted the Laws recited by Diademate insi^nitas
has libertates subscriptas in Regno ad exaltationem Sanctae Ecclesiae and pacem
Populo tenendam concelsit. Mat. Paris Hist. p. 46. number. 40. ult. Edit.
Matthew Paris, to be held in his Kingdom, for the exalting of the Holy Church,
and Peace of his People: which Laws being at large recited by Matt. Paris, may
be perused by the Inquisitive, wherein he will find how far the old Laws were
confirmed, and what a Foundation there was laid for Magna Charta.

Concerning King Stephen, Histor. Novel. p. 101. b. number. 40. Vide Mat. Paris.
p. 62. number. 35.
Malmsbury says, King Stephen's Oath.
That Henry his Brother, Bishop of Winchester, was a great help to his
obtaining the Crown, having great hopes that he would follow his Grandfather,
King William's Steps, in the Government of his Kingdom, especially in matters
of Ecclesiastical Discipline; therefore he says, William, Archbishop of
Canterbury, (...) exacted a solemn Oath from him, of granting and preserving
the Liberty of the Church: the Oath it self is long, and the Immunities to the
Church many; those to the Laity are conceived in these words, Omnes Exactiones,
and Mescheningas, and Injustitias, sive per Vicecomites, vel per alios
quoslibet male inductas, funditus extirpo. Bonas Leges, and Antiquas, and
justas Consuetudines, in Murdris, and Placitis, and aliis Causis observabo, and
observari praecipio and constituo. Malmsbury says, That the King swore
according to the tenor of the Writing he there produces, Dated at Oxford, Anno
Dom. 1136. 1 Regni.

I find no mention of an Oath taken by K. H. 2. at his Coronation; but Chron.
col. 1043. number. 67.
Brompton says, that he confirmed the Charter of his Grandfather King Henry
the First, King Henry the Second's Oath.
and that he was sollicitous, ut Lex quae extincta videbatur, paulatim
exsurgeret: and Matt. Paris Hist. 1080, 1081.
says, That Anno 1172. he swore before the Cardinals, that he would abrogate
all the evil Customs introduced in his time against the Church.

We find that Pope Alexander Gul. Newbrigensis lib. 4. c. 25. Gerv. Dorob.
Chron. col. 1413. Matt. Paris, p. 117.
the Third Excommunicated several Bishops, and suspended the Archbishop of
York, for his rash Presumption in the Coronation of a new King, in contempt of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, to whose Office of ancient Right it was known to
belong; and for that in the Coronation, according to Custom, there was no sworn
Caution offered or exacted by them for the keeping of the Liberties of the
Church: but afterward Vt Regni consuetudines antiquas sub quibus dignitas
pericli^bitur Ecclesiae, illibatae debeant omni tempore observari. Hoveden.
Annal. pars poster. p. 518, 519.
it is said to be confirmed by Oath, that the ancient Customs of the Kingdom
(from which the dignity of the Church was in danger) should inviolably be kept
in all time to come.

The Solemnities of King Richard the First's Coronation are fully described by
the Abbat of Jorval: Rectam Justitiam exercebit in populo sibi commisso, leges
malas and consuetudines perversas si aliqua sint in Regno suo delebit, and
bonas custodies. Brompton, col 1158. number. 60.
and as to his Oath, King Richard the First's Oath.
he says that he swore and vowed (the Holy Evangelists, and the Relics of
many Saints being set before him) that he would bear Peace, Honor, and
Reverence, all his Life, to God and the Holy Church, and its Ministers; and
then he swore that he would exercise right Justice to the People committed to
him: and after he swore that he would blot out, or abolish evil Laws, and
perverse Customs, if any were in his Kingdom, and he would keep good Laws.

I find that King John took an Oath as Duke of Normandy, King John's Oaths.
that he would defend Holy Church and its Dignities in good Faith, without evil
Intention, and would honor all the Ordained, and that he would destroy all
evil Laws, if any were, and substitute good ones; the words Matt. Paris, fol.
165. ult. Edit. number. 27.
are, quod ipse Sanctam Ecclesiam and ejus dignitates bona fide, and sine malo
Ingenio defenderet, and ordinatos honoraret, and quod Leges iniquas, si quae
essent, destrueret, and bonas surrogaret.

At his Coronation Quod sanctam Ecclesiam and ejus ordinatos diligeret, and eam
ab incursione malignantium indemnem conservaret; and quod perversis legibus
destructis, bonas substitueret, and rectam Justitiam in Regno Augliae
exerceret. Idem, p. 166. number. 4. Promisit se per anxilium Dei bona side ea quae
juraverat servaturum.
he took another Oath, that he would love Holy Church, and the ordained of it,
and would preserve it indempnified from the Incursions of the Malignant; and
that the perverse Laws being destroyed, he would substi^ good ones, and would
exercise right Justice in England. Besides these, Matthew. Paris, p. 189. of the
Old Edition, says, That he was sworn by the said Archbishop ex part Dei and
districte prohibitus, ne honorem hunc accipere praesumeret, nisi in mente
habeat opere quod juraverat adimplere; that is, On the part of God, by the
Archbishop, he was strictly forbid, that he presume not to take this Honor,
unless he had a resolution to fulfill in work, what he had sworn: To which the
King promised, That, by the help of God, he would in good faith observe what he
had sworn.

In the Fifteenth of his Reign he was forced by the Barons to take another
Oath, Mat. Paris, Hist. p. 229, 230.
Quod sanctam Ecclesiam ejusque ordinatos diligeret and manuteneret, contra
omnes adversarios suos pro posse suo: quodque bonas Leges Antecessorum suorum,
and praecipue Leges Edwardi Regis revocaret, and iniquas destrueret, and omnes
homines suos, secundum justa Curiae suae judicia, judicaret: quodque singulis
redderet jura sua. Juravit praeterea Innocentio Papae, ejusque Catholicis
Successoribus, fidelitatem and obedientiam: And that he would make restitution
of those things he had taken away by reason of the Interdict. This Clause of
restoring King Edward's Laws (which had been disused from the time of the
Conquest) being thus inserted in King John's Oath, was after inserted into the
Coronation Oath of Edward the Third, and so continued.

The best Account of the Coronation Oath of King Henry the Third, is in Idem,
p. 243. number. 26.
Matthew Paris, That he swore before the Clergy and People, The Oath of King
Henry the Third.
the Holy Evangelists and the Relics of several Saints being laid before him,
and Joceline Bishop of Bath reading the Oath, which was very little different
from that which King John took, Quod honorem, pacem and reverentiam praestabit
Deo, and sanctae Ecclesiae, and ejus ordinatis omnibus diebus vitae suae; and
so word for word as in King John's: only for perversas consuetudines, here is
iniquas consuetudines.

It was in relation to the preceding Oaths, that 1. I Vt Ecclesia Dei, and omni
populo Christiano vera pax omni suo tempore observetur. 2. Vt rapacitatem and
omnes iniquitates omnibus gradibus interdicat. 3. Vt in omnibus judiciis
aequitatem praecipiat and misericordiam. Bract. lib. 3. de Actionibus, c. 9.
fol. 107.
Bracton says, The King ought at his Coronation, in the Name of Jesus Christ
being sworn, to promise these three things to the People being his Subjects:
First, To command, and to his power see it performed, that the Peace shall be
kept to the Church, and all Christian People in all his time. Secondly, That
all Ravages and all Iniquities, in all degrees, shall be by him forbidden.
Thirdly, That in all his Judgments he shall command Equity and Mercy, and that
by his Justice all may enjoy firm Peace, and per Justitiam suam firma gaudeant
Pace universi.

None of our Historians mention the Oath of Edward the First, that I have met
with, King Edward the First's Oath not recorded.
nor Mr. Prynne: Therefore I think it very probable that it was conceived in
the same Form, as that of his Fathers and Grandfathers; That he took an Oath.
for it is most certain that he took one, by the Expressions in sundry of his
Prohibitions, to the Legates of Popes, to Bishops, and others in these Words:
Torpescere non possumus, quia exhaeredationem quae statum Coronae nostrae
contigit, sicut ex Sacramenti vinculo adstringimur, pro viribus evitemus, ne
Coronae and dignitatis nostrae Jura depereant, studiosam Prynne's Epist.
Dedicat. to the chird Vol. of Legal Vindication.
nos debet operam adbibere; and ad ea manutenenda and conservanda, eo potius
debemus esse solliciti, quoad hoc vinculo juramenti teneri dignoscimus and
adstringi; that is, We cannot be slothful, because we should avoid to our
power, our dis-inheriting, which appertains to the State of our Crown, as we
are tied by the Bond of our Oath; which to maintain and preserve, we ought to
afford our studious help, lest the Rights of our Crown and Dignity perish; and
we ought the more to be solicitous in this, as that we know our selves to be
held and bound by the bond of the Oath.

Hitherto we find nothing of the Vulgus elegerit, besides what is mentioned in
King William Rufus his promise, That he would grant his Subjects a more
desirable Law, and better than they could choose; which is no ways to be
interpreted of such a choice as the Republicans would have understood.

Our Historians are generally silent what the Oath was that Edward the Second
took, The Oaths of King Edward the Second, and King Edward the Third.
but it is to be found in the Clause Rolls of the Tower Cl. 1. E. 2. number. 10.
, 1 E. 2. in French thus, which I shall render into English as well as I can.
Also Cl. 1 E. 3. m. 24. dorso.


SIRE, Volez vous granter, and garder, and per vestre serement confirmer, au
People d' Engleter, les Leys, and les Custumes a eux grantes per les Anciens
Rois d' Engleter, voz Predecessors droitas, and devotz a Dieu; and nomement,
les Leys, les Custumes, and Franchises grantz au Clergy, and au People, par le
glorieus Roy Seint Edward, votre Predecessure?

Respons.
Jeo les grants and prometts.

Sire, Garderez vous a Dieu and a Seint Eglise, and au Clergy, and au Poeple,
Piece, and accord en Dieu entirement selons vostre Poair?

Respons.
Jeo les garderez.

Sire, Freez ( or perhaps feres) vous fair, en tous voz Jugements, ovels and
droit Justice, and discretion en misericorde, and verite a vostre Poair?

Respons.
Jeo les fray.

Sire, Grantez vous a tenir and garder des Leys and les Custumes droitureles,
le quels la Communate de votre Roiaume auras eslu, and les defenderz and
inforciers al honeur de Dieu, a votre Poair?

Respons.
Jeo les grants and prometts.

SIR, Will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm, to your People of
England, the Laws and Customs granted to them by the Ancient Kings of England,
your predecessors righteous, and devout to God, and namely, the Laws, and
Customs, and Franchises granted to the Clergy, and the People, by the glorious
King St. Edward your Predecessor?

Answer.
I do grant and promise this.

Sir, Do you keep to God, and his Holy Church, and to the Clergy, and to the
People Peace, and accord in God entirely, according to your Power?

Answer.
I shall keep these.

Sir, Will you suffer to be done in all your Judgments, equal and right
Justice, and Discretion, with Mercy and Truth according to your Power?

Answer.
I will do it.

Sir, Do you grant to hold, and keep the Laws, and the Customs that are lawful,
which the Community of your Realm shall have chosen, and defend, and enforce
these to the Honor of God, to your Power?

Answer.
I grant and promise them.

Several Answers have been given to the Objection raised from this last Clause,
The Oath of King Richard the Second.
as they found it in the Latin Cl. 1. R. 2. m. 44.
Records; therefore, before I apply those, it is needful to note the Latin,
which, as we find it 1 R. 2. was this, Capto per Archiepiscopum Cantuar.
Sacramento Dom. Regis Corporali, de concedendo, and servando cum sucra
confirmatione, Leges and consuetudines ab antiquis, justis, and Deo devotis
Regibus Angliae, Progenitoribus, Plebi Regni Angliae concessas, and praesortim
leges and consuetudines, and libertates a gloriosissimo and sanctissimo Rege
Edwardo, Clero Populoque Regni praedicti concessas, and servando Deo and
Ecclesiae Sanctae Domini, Cleroque and Populo pacem, and concordiam integre in
Deo juxta vires suas, and de faciendo fieri in omnibus judiciis suis, aequam
and rectam Justitiam and discretionem in misericordia, and veritate; and otiam
de tenendo and custodiendo justas Leges and Consuetudines Ecclesiae, and de
faciendo per ipsum Dom. Regem, eas esse protegendas, and ad honorem Dei
corroborandas, quas vulgus just and rationabiliter elegerit juxta vires
ejusdem Dom. Regis. This is an additional Clause.


This is verbatim the Latin for the preceding French, except in the additional
Clause, and the Conclusion which makes the just Laws and Customs both to relate
to those of the Church, and those that the Vulgar shall have justly and
reasonably chosen.

The like we find, Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. number 16, and 17.
1 H. 4. and in the Pontificale of the Archbishops and Bishops; and it is
added, after the King has, King Henry the Fourth's Oath.
as before expressed, answered to the Proposals, Pronunciatis omnibus,
confirmat Rex se omnia servaturum, Sacramento super Attari praestito coram
cunctis; i. e. that the King by his Oath, taken upon the Altar before all
present, to observe these, confirms them.

The Solemnities and Ceremonies used at the Coronation of King Richard the
Second, may be perused at large in Tho. Hist. Aug. fol. 194, 195. Juravit
coraem Archiepiscopo and Proceribus qui ibi aderant, quoniam ipsi solum ejus
Juramentum audire potuerunt.
Walsingham, and he says, he swore before the Bishops and Nobles there
present, for they only could hear his Oath, that he would permit the Church to
enjoy its Liberties, and would honor it and its Ministers, that he would hold
right Faith, and would forbid Rapines, and all Iniquities in all their Degrees.
2ly. That he would make to be kept, every where, the good Laws of the Land, and
especially, the Laws of St. Edward King and Confessor, who was buried in that
Church, and would make all evil Laws to be abrogated. 3ly. That he would not be
an accepter of Persons, but would make right Judgment betwixt man and man, that
especially he Praecipue misericordiam observaret, sicut sibi suam indulgeat
misericordiam clemens and misericors Deus.
would observe Mercy, as the Clement and Merciful God might grant Mercy to him.

Having thus given an account of these Coronation Oaths, I come to the
Objections. First, They Prynne's Treachery and Disloyalty. Answer to the
Objections about the Words Quas vulgus elegerit.
say, that the word Vulgus does signify the two Houses, and the word elegerit
is to be taken in the Future Tense; so that the King is obliged to consent to
such Laws as the two Houses, especially the Commons do choose.

It is a wonder to me, how men that pretended to any reading or learning in
Antiquities, or in the Constitution of the Government, could defend their Cause
with such pitiful Reasonings, especially against King Charles the First, who
neither had taken such an Oath, nor many of his Predecessors before him.

The Latin Translation of two French words gave all the occasion of dispute;
for that which is called Communate, is rendered Plebs and Vulgus, and aura eslu
is translated elegerit; whereas, were it to have been understood in the Future
Tense, it should have been eslira: and agreeable to that in all the Authentic
Records of the Exchequer, the word elegerit is Englished in the Preterperfect
Tense. Thus much may suffice as to the word elegerit. Dr. Brady's Glossary will
satisfy the Curious about the import of the word it self.

Concerning the word Vulgus, one solid Freeholders Grand Inquest, b. 46. What
meant by Vulgus. according to the Opinion of some.
Author says, That we may be confident, that neither the Bishops, Privy
Council, Parliament, or any other whosoever they were, that framed or penned
this Oath, ever intended in this word the Commons in Parliament, much less the
Lords: they would never so much disparage the Members of Parliament, as to
disgrace them with a Title both base and false. It had been enough, if not too
much, to have called them Populus, the People; but Vulgus, the Vulgar, the rude
multitude (which has the Epithete of ignobile vulgus) is a word as
dishonorable to the Composers of the Oath to give, or for the King to use, as
for the Members of the Parliament to receive; therefore he judges, that by
Vulgus must be meant the Common People, not the Lords and Commons.

But then, says the same Author, the doubt will be, what the Common People, or
Vulgus, out of Parliament have to do to choose Laws. In answer to which, the
preceding word is to be considered; Consuetudines quas Vulgus elegerit, the
Customs which the Common People have chosen. If we observe the nature of
Custom, Customs chosen by the Vulgar, or Common People.
it is the Vulgus, or Common People only who choose Customs. Common usage, time
out of mind, creates a Custom; and the commoner the usage is, the stronger and
the better is the Custom. No where can so common an usage be found, as among
the Vulgar, who are still the far greatest part of every multitude. If a Custom
be common through the whole Kingdom with us, it is all one with the Common Law
of England, which is often called Common Custom; so that to protect the Customs
which the Vulgar choose, is to swear to protect the Common Laws of England.

Agreeable to this, is what the learned Dr. Brady Glossary, p. 36.
notes, That upon the whole, it signifies no more than that the Community had
chosen, that is owned, submitted to, and desired still to use their Old
Customs, which by use, time out of mind, they had enjoyed for the better
management of Affairs, and Convenience betwixt Man and Man, all the Nation
over, or in any particular County, Hundred, Town, City or Borough, such long
practices being the foundation of all Customs: but these are to be just, which
entrench not upon the Government or Laws, and by permission and sufferance only
become Laws.

But the same Id. p. 35.
Author judiciously affirms, That the Community here intended was the Community
of the Bishops, What meant by the Community.
Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, Great Men, and the whole body of the Tenants in
Capite, expressed by those words, in the former Questions, Clergy and People;
for by them these demands were made, and no doubt they would first ask for
themselves, for the Vulgar or Rabble could not come near to make their Demands
at such a Solemnity as this was, so Walsingham, fol. 95. number. 20.
great and splendid; there being at it, Charles and Lewis, Earls of Clermont,
two of the King of France's Brothers, the D. of Brabant, the Earl of Fens, and
the other great Men, both of France and England, with the Countess of Artois.

Whoever desires further satisfaction, may consult the same learned Elossary,
p. 24.
Author, who makes it clear, That the word Plebs, Vulgus and Populus in the
Writers of that Age was used for the Laity in way of contradistinction from the
Clergy.

I shall at present leave this, and note, that for any thing appears to the
contrary, the same Interrogations, Oath, etc. presented to Edward the Second
and Third, (without the additions of King Richard's) continued without any
alteration to Henry the Eighth's Book of Oaths, fol. 1.
time, and in that we find the King promises he shall keep and maintain the
Liberties of the Holy Church of old time granted by their Righteous Kings of
England; The Oath of King Henry the Eighth. I find in the Heralds Office the
words thus: Do ye grant the rightful Laws and Cusioms to be holden, and permit
ye, after your Strength and Power, such Laws as to the Honor of God shall be
chosen to the People, by you to be strengthened and desensed? Vid in Coll. Arm.
p. 60.
and that he shall keep all the Lands, Honors, and Dignities righteous and
free of the Church of England, in all manner Holy, without any manner of
minishments; and the rights of the Crown hurt, decay, or loss, to his Power
shall call again into the ancient estate; and that he shall keep the Peace of
Holy Church, and of the Clergy, and of the People with good accord; and that he
shall do in his Judgment, Equity and right Justice, with Discretion and Mercy;
and that he shall grant to hold the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and to his
Power keep them, and affirm them, which the People and Flock have chosen; and
the evil Laws and Customs wholly to put out, and steadfast and stable Peace to
the People of this Realm keep, and cause to be kept to his Power. In this Oath
King Henry the Eighth interlined, for the right explication of it, instead of
People and Flock, these Words, which the Nobles and People have chosen with my
Consent.

The Oath of King Edward the Sixth, Oath of Edward the Sixth.
so far as relates to my purpose was this, Do you grant to make no new Laws,
but such as shall be to the honor and glory of God, and to the good of the
Commonwealth, and that the same shall be made by the consent of the People as
has been accustomed? Oaths of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth not seen by the
Author. The Oaths of King James the First, and King Charles the First. The Oath
of King Charles the Second, Hist. Coronationis Caroli 2. in Colleg. Arm.


I have not seen any Transcripts of the Oaths of Queen Mary or Queen Elizabeth,
those which King James and King Charles the First took, run thus; Will you
grant to hold and keep the Laws and Rightful Customs which the Commonalty of
this Kingdom have; and will you defend and uphold them to the Honor of God, so
much as in you lies?

That Branch of the Oath which relates to my purpose, taken by King Charles the
Second, runs thus: Sir, Will you grant to keep the rightful Customs which the
Commonalty of your Kingdom have, etc.

The Oath that our present King James the Second took at his Coronation, The
Oath of King James the Second.
was in the same Words as that of his Royal Brother; wherein the Word Customs
is to be taken in the largest extent, to include Laws also.

Now upon the whole we must consider First, Considerations upon this Discourse
of the Coronation Oaths.
That in the Eye of the Law the King never dies, so that he is King before any
Solemnity of Coronation. Secondly, The variety of Forms and Precedents, seem to
prove that one precise form is not simply necessary; so the interlining of
Henry the Eighth upon Record also shows. And if it had been of consequence to
have retained the old form, we should have heard of it either then or in some
succeeding Parliaments. Lastly, it cannot be denied, that if the King be bound
by a lawful Oath to pass all Bills, it is not the form of denying it, but the
not doing of it which makes the Perjury. And so when the King is tender of a
flat denial, and attributing so much to the judgment of his great Council, that
he only uses the words avisera; it would be a strange Doctrine, that all the
Kings of England who have given this Answer, have been forsworn, and neither
Parliament nor Convocation taken notice of it in so many Ages.

But when by dint of Argument the Parliament Champions were driven from these
Holds, they fled to their last Burrow. So one of them confesses, that in Acts
of Grace the King is not bound to assent, nor in Acts wherein he is to depart
from the particular right and interest of his Crown; and lastly that if he do
not consent (however bound by Oath) yet they are not binding Laws to the
Subject. How the Long Parliament Writers would have the King part with his
Prerogative in Cases of necessity only.
But then comes the handful of Gourds which spoils the Pottage: Except in cases
of necessity; If the safety of the People be concerned; If it may prove
dangerous or inconvenient to them, then an extraordinary course may be taken.

This was the plausible Plea of 1641. to get the Militia into their hands: for
they urged that in case of apparent and imminent danger, the Peoples safety was
not to be neglected; They might not be exposed as a prey to their Enemies,
therefore must be put into a posture of defense. This was grateful to the
People, out of that real love they bare to themselves, they must favor that
side which pretends to take care of their safety. Give to any Person or Society
a Legislative Power without the King in case of necessity, Answer to Observe. b.
76.
permit them withal to be sole Judges of necessity, when it is, and how long it
lasts: and then it is more than probable, the necessity will not determine,
till they have their utmost desires, which is the same in effect as if they had
the Legislative Power.

Further it must be considered that necessity upon that supposition must be
very evident, there needs no such great stir who shall be Judge of it; when it
comes indeed, it will show it self; when extreme necessity is disputable, it is
a sign it is not real. Secondly, The Agent must be proper, otherwise it cuts in
sunder the very Sinews of Government, to make two supremes in a Society, and to
subject the People to contrary commands.

But to claim such a Power over the King in extraordinary cases alone, That the
Houses should be Judges of this Necessity.
does not much vary the case: for at the same time they voted themselves the
proper Judges of such necessities, and the erecting of any superintending Power
in the circumstances of those times, and in all parallel cases, would not only
unsoveraign the King (by making this Power the Sovereign) but the exercise of
it would be subject to more dangerous extravagances than Regal Power is, and
yet less capable of Regulation than it. For the Law knowing there is none but
God, qui custodiat ipsos custodes, concludes from the weakness and imperfection
of every other form of Government, that the Sovereignty of Law-making was
better placed in the hands of a sole Prince, than in a Popular or
Aristocratical hand; and that a positive known Law without any coercive
Superintendent was a sufficient, and the best boundary of Regal Power: For the
Law and the Transgression of it, being both at once made manifest and
notorious, it will be so sufficient Review of Observations.
security of the future observance of the Law, that Princes will not offer to
violate it. Now if such a Supreme Power, as these would have in the two Houses,
in what case soever, be once enacted, that must either be boundless or
circumscribed by a Laws; and if that be circumscribed with a Law, then must
that Law also have a Superior Power to enforce it: and so there must be a
Superior Power over Superior Power in infinitum, and yet at last leave the
most Superior Power in that liberty which the Observer calls boundless,
Arbitrary and Tyrannical.

If this Principle were true, By the Arguments of the Parliamentary Writers,
the Sovereignty is not in the King, but in the People.
all is but misleading formality of Law, the Sovereignty is not in the King but
in the People; the King is the only Subject and but a common Voucher, whose
concurrence is unavoidably implied; his Will, his Understanding and his Power
are all subject to the Body of the very Subject that in Parliament does swear
subjection to him: and these pretended Rights being hid ever since the
beginning of the Kingdom, the whole generation of the Subject ever since, has
by the injury of our Laws been most impiously mis-sworn in their Allegiance.
And whereas the trust is irrevocably committed to the King and his Heirs for
ever, how can it be conceived it should sleep during the sitting of a
Parliament, unless that jocular saying of King James were to be understood
really, That during the Sessions of a House of Commons there were five hundred
Kings? And if any such Power were in the Houses, it was a strange oversight to
leave it to the Kings disposal, when to call the Body together, and when to
dissolve it (as before I have touched) whereby the King might solely determine
where, and how long he would be overruled, and when King again: whereas by the
false suggestion of the Observer (that it was fit the Houses should have a
Superintendent Power, in case of extraordinary danger, and they only to be
Judges of that danger) he cunningly turns the Tables, and makes the Houses to
be Sovereigns as long as they pleased; and when they were weary of reigning,
the Kingdom should be out of danger, and then it should be the Kings turn to
command again.

But to draw to a conclusion on this subject, which cost so much Blood and
Treasure: There Answ. to Observe. p. 72, 73.
neither is nor can be the same necessity of observing an old Law, to which a
King is obliged by his Charter and his Oath, and of a new Law to which he has
not given his Royal Assent. If Magna Charta extended to this, it were Charta
Maxima, the greatest Charter that ever was granted. To be be denied nothing, is
a Privilege indeed as good as Fortunatus his Purse; or as that old Law which
one found out for the Kings of Persia, That he might do what he would. The
King's Negative Voice Necessary.
The taking away the Kings Negative Voice, may indeed secure us against
Tyranny, which never can come in upon us, as long as the two Houses Idem, p.
136.
Negatives balance it; but it leaves us open and stark naked to all those
Popular evils and Epidemical diseases, which flow from Popular Government, as
Tumults, Seditions, Civil Wars, and the Ilias of Evils which attends them; the
Negative Voice being the Soveraignest remedy against such great Mischiefs.

One Wheedle I find more they used, since the King was so tender of violating
his Coronation Oath, in giving Assent to their new Bills, which were
diametrically opposite to the old fundamental Laws, made in defense of
Episcopacy, and the Kings Prerogative in the Militia, etc. they quit their
Title of Parliament men, That the King is not bound to consent, where what is
desired is more inconvenient to the People than himself.
and would be Casuists to resolve his Conscience, telling him that where the
People by Public Authority, will seek inconvenience to themselves, and the
King is not so much interested as themselves, it was more inconvenience and
injustice in the King to deny than to grant it.

Thus the Houses would have granted the King a Dispensation to have acted
against the dictates of his Reason, Conscience, and the fundamental Laws. And
because he would not own their Commission for it, they persecuted him to the
Scaffold. This was an unheard of Villainy to be offered to so Pious and
Religious a Prince, that as Father of his People, would not give them a Stone
instead of Bread, or a Scorpion instead of a Fish. The Heathen was much
honester, who prayed Jupiter to give him good things, though he never opened
his Mouth for them; and to withhold bad and prejudicial things, though he
petitioned never so earnestly for them. This was a strange Principle, that the
King should be bound by Law to destroy his People, or not preserve their Right,
unless he not only violate his own Conscience, but their very Liberties. Can a
man imagine those People, of whom Juvenal speaks, -- evertere domos totas
optantibus ipsis
Dii faciles --
if they had understood their own Prayers, would have accused the Gods for
denying them.

As they thus sought to hush the Kings Conscience, so that endeavored to find
a quaint salvo for their own more brawny ones: For when it was urged, that to
deny the Kings Negative Voice, was to dissolve the excellent constitution of
Parliaments, and was directly against the settlement of it upon the true basis
of the Balance, and the mutual stipulation of the King and his People, as they
loved to phrase it they answer by their Prolocutor, that those who contract to
their own ruin, or esteem such Contracts before their own preservation, are
felonious to themselves, and rebellious to Nature. Inferring from thence, That
if the legal Constitution of Government, The Writers for the Parliament affirm,
That where the Houses think the Constitution of the Government is not agreeable
to the Liberty of the People, they may alter it.
be not agreeable to the Liberties the House conceives needful for them, they
are obliged to contend to alter them: which is no more nor less, than if a
Criminal being condemned to be hanged, should be guilty of another Felony and
Treason against Nature to yield to the Sentence, but that he ought in his own
defense to kill as many as he could, that he might thereby save his life by
escape.

Thus I hope I have made apparent the falsehood of the Positions ranged in
defense of that dismal Parliament, How the Long Parliament voted all the Power
into their own Hands.
who made use of them as Platforms upon which to plant the Artillery of their
Acts and Ordinances. For under the pretext of their obligation to preserve the
Kingdom, they voted to put it in a posture of defense; and they voted from the
King his Navies, Officers, Privy Counselors, and Revenues, pretending the
Navies were still reserved for the King, in better hands than he would put
them, and for the other they would furnish him with better principled
Ministers. Whereas by the same Precedent, the Subjects were bound to give up
their Estates to their ordering, as often as they pretended they could dispose
of them more wisely. For they might allege, the State (which they reputed
themselves) had an interest paramount in them in case of public extremity: so
that as they pretended the Head without the Body was the State before, so now
it was fit the Body should be without the Head; whereas the Law has provided
against either exorbitances: and if there was necessity we must fall into one,
we ought in reason to choose the former, because being better acquainted with
that, we could better digest it; and it would be less burthensom to our Estates
to satisfy one than five hundred, nay ten thousand, as it appeared when the
greedy Commonwealths men with their Committees, Armies, etc. was that flat
Vermin in the Bowels, which (how true soever it is of the lumbricus latus) was
certainly true of this Monster, That it was every where Head and Mouth.

It is to be well weighed, When Parliaments beneficial, when not.
that as Parliaments are in the highest degree beneficial, when they keep
within the bounds of duty and sobriety; so when they will have their Ordinances
to have the force of Laws, and not govern themselves by known Laws, they are
the cause of many Distempers in a Kingdom, and the Subjects condition is most
unhappy in the Multitude of Physicians: for extraordinary Remedies, such as
they always pretend to use, are, says Sir Henry Wotton, like hot Waters which
may help at a pang, but being too often used spoil the Stomach.

A Complete Parliament is that Answer to Observe. p. 150.
Panchreston or Sovereign Salve for all Sores; but some would make the name of
Parliament a Medusa's Head to transform reasonable men into Stones, and
subordinate Monarchy to the two Houses, who must be denied nothing; but with
their good will would claim for them a paramount interest with the Sovereign,
whom they would advance only to the height and mighty Dignity of a Doge of
Venice, or a Roman Consul, whilst they must be the Tribunes of the People
their Supervisors. So that we cannot be content to gather the blessed fruits
right constituted Parliaments would afford us, but we must rend away the top
Branch, yea stub up the Tree that we may scramble for the Fruit.

Tacitus 10 Annal.
gives a Caution how a Prince may support his Authority, that he do not vim
Principatus resolvere, cuncta ad Senatum revocando. Kings not to grant away
their Prerogatives at the Importunity of Parliaments.
It is fit a Prince should have the Glory of performing those things himself
which are his Prerogatives, and not to refer such things to Conventions of
Parliament, which properly belong not to their Cognizance. Since therefore by
the condescensions of our Wise and Gracious Princes, there are several things
in England, the King cannot by Law do alone, it is a most requisite Wisdom in
Princes, that as they observe the Laws in securing the Peoples Liberties and
Privileges; so by no Arbitrary Assumption of either or both Houses, to let
their Prerogatives be invaded: for those are now no more than are rationally
and politically necessary for orderly and established Government.

The Encroachments of the never to be forgotten long Parliament, (several of
which I have in this and the foregoing Chapter hinted) may be sufficient
documents to Princes, not to yield such a body too much Power: for if the
balance once decline, a little weight will sink it.

Therefore though Princes are not to enlarge their Prerogatives, nova siti ad
alia aliaque properare; yet they ought to preserve those that remain. For any
Raveling once yielded, will make the Royal Citadel defenseless. Testudo ubi
collecta est in suum tegmen, tuta est ad omnes ictus; ubi exerit parts
aliquas, quodcunque nudavit, obnoxium and infirmum est: The Tortoise as long as
it keeps within its shell and coverture is safe; but if it unbare any part, it
is obnoxious to danger.

Above all things a Prince should he careful never to part with the Prerogative
of Summoning and Dissolving Parliaments. For we cannot forget that the Houses
of 1641. not content with a Bill for Triennial Parliaments, got an Act for
perpetuating themselves; and that would not satisfy, but they prepared a Bill
for the certainty of future Parliaments, whether the King had occasion for them
or not: so that if the King omitted the sending out of Writs and Summons, the
Chancellor might, and for failure the Sheriff, and I know not what inferior
Officers; of which the Blessed King complains.

I cannot dismiss this Subject without taking notice of the Fundamental cause
of Factious Members of Parliament. The fundamental Cause of Factious Members in
Parliament.
In England there is no such powerful Engine to make Faction and Sedition
formidable and dangerous to Government, as when the Majority of the Freeholders
are wrought upon (by the Arts I have in some measure hinted before, and shall
more largely in the Chapter of Faction) to choose Members of the House of
Commons of their own Temper: for such a Number being imbodied in that House,
give and receive mutual strength from one another. For when such are met, they
do not take care to unite the minds of the Subjects to their Prince, or one to
another, or employ their time upon the great concerns of the Nation; but are
drawn to promote private Animosities under King's Speech, 6 March, 1678.
pretense of the Public; and are so far from proceeding calmly and peaceably
to curb the motions of unruly Spirits that endeavor to disturb them, that they
expose the King to the Calumny and danger of those worst of men, who endeavor
to render him and his Government odious to the People. I shall now touch upon
some of the Artifices used to bring in such Members in the Parliament of 1678.
and some succeeding ones whereby their Conventions were rendered useless for the
King and People, and inglorious to themselves, though they pretended to as much
Loyalty and Public good as those in 1641. did at their first sitting.

The King having dissolved the long Parliament and summoned this to sit the 6th
of March, 1678. The Artifices used by designing People, to get such as they
desired, to be elect ed.
the industry of the Dissenters, Malcontents, and we may suppose
Commonwealths men, was extraordinary great, as now hoping they should be able
to choose such Members as would be more favorable to them.

They had been long instilling into the Peoples Heads, The Characters they gave
Men of the Court-party.
that in the former House there had been a Court and Country Party, the former
were for Arbitrary Government, fleecing the People, Persecution, and such as
gave no great credit to the Tragical representation of the Popish Plot: The
latter were moderate men, and not so much for Ceremonies as the purity of
Religion, would stand for the Peoples Liberties and Properties, by riding night
and day about the Villages, and trudging about Corporations, and the weekly
Conventicles, they spread this Character abroad, and with all the Arts
imaginable, endeavored to proselyte Address, part 2. p. 2, 3.
all that were not sharp-sighted enough to pierce into their designs. If any
seemed not to believe those Characters, or declared himself for the Government,
Civil or Ecclesiastical, established by Law, and neither for Popery or
Arbitrary Government, nor yet for a Commonwealth or Dissenters, they run them
down with noise, traduced them behind their backs as Papists in Masquerade and
men of Arbitrary Principles. Papists in Masquerade.
And if any were so bold as to scruple the coherence of the Narratives of the
Popish Plot, he was vilified as a Defamer of the Kings Evidence, as stifler of
the Plot; and from hence they concluded to insinuate into the Populace, that
those Loyal Gentlemen who had been Members of the late long Parliament, had
joined with the Court to hinder the Discovery of the Plot; and if any gainsaid
them, they used such questions, What, Are you for Popery? Will you give your
Voice for a Papist? Are you willing to have your Throat cut? Are you for
Arbitrary Government? By which means they won over too many to join with them,
Excluding Loyal and Orthodox Gentlemen.
to exclude many Loyal and Orthodox Gentlemen from being chosen Members of
Parliament.

Their design was advantaged because some were their friends of old, others had
come the half way over to gain the reputation of moderate men, others had been
disgusted by the Government. The Conventicle Teachers rallied up their Flocks,
and they all joined to slander the Clergy as if they had a kindness for Popery
in their hearts, though they durst not discover it for the present: And
generally blasted all the Loyal Gentry as Popishly affected, the Court-Party
Pensioners, etc. So that if any one bore any Public Office Military or Civil,
he was eo nomine to be rejected. The Persons they recommended to the People to
be chosen, were first all those Gentlemen, who called themselves the Country
Idem, p. 5.
Party, who had appeared most zealous against his present Majesty, the Queen
Dowager, and Ministers of State. To these they added as many as they could of
the relics of the old Rebellion, or their Children, and made up the number
out of the moderate and discontented Gentlemen, Burgesses and Tradesmen. It was
sufficient recommendation if the Government had displaced any, for these were
looked upon as not to be corrupted or bought off: and here and there they took
in an honest Gentleman, in hopes to win him to their side by this kindness.

After the dissolution of this Parliament, when his late Majesty issued out his
Writs for another to convene, 17 Oct. 1679. they added to their former Arts the
loud clamours against French Pensioners, French Pensioners.
Popery, Arbitrariness, and all those who voted against the Bill of Exclusion,
as Popishly affected, or downright Papists; traducing his Majesty, the Court,
the Ministers of State, and almost all the Loyal Gentry and Clergy for
endeavoring to have those men chosen. The second advantage they made was the
pretended discovery of Address, part 3. p. 5.
Sir Stephen Fox of the Pensioners of the late long Parliament: which discovery
being hastily made, and no Record of it being entered, Pensioners to the King.
they took the confidence to add to it whomsoever they pleased to have so
thought; They made the People believe they knew who would be Pensioners
likewise, and led the diffidence to that height, as to exclude as far as they
could possibly, not only all the Courtiers and other Persons who had any places
of profit and advantage under his Majesty, but their Relations too, and wanted
not much that they had excluded all those who bore any Honorary Employment. So
that nothing recommended a man so effectually for a Parliament man, as that he
had not been thought fit to be trusted in the least by his then Majesty, or
their Neighbor Gentry, these they cried up as true Friends to the Protestant
Religion, and the Country; and he was an hardhearted Man in their Dialect, who
called the Sincerity of their Loyal Intentions in question: However by their
Actings, many of them have been discovered to be but cold Friends to the
Government.

But Intending to discourse more fully of the several Arts used by designing
Men in the Chapter of Factions, I shall at present quit this Subject, and only
desire Kings to consider, that they can condescend no lower to gratify
Importunities of Parliament or People, in yielding up any of their Privileges.

The Philosopher of old has noted, how Kingly Authority was lessened among the
Grecians, which was no ways profitable to them. He speaking of Kings. in the
Heroic times, (...). Polit. l. 3. c. 14.
That then they had the Government and Administration of Matters in the Cities,
and the adjoining Territories within their Dominions, and what extended without
the Limits of the Empire ( viz. to preserve and protect their Subjects against
their Enemies, make War and Peace, etc.) But after, partly by the spontaneous
Concessions of the Princes, and partly by the Encroachment of the People, they
came to be lessened in Power, and in some Cities had only the Power of
Sacrificing left, in others the Command of their Armies. This, as well as other
Reasons, must needs demonstrate, That if ever any two Houses of Parliament
should by Arts of Insinuation (as that of 1641. did, That unless the King would
grant they might not be dissolved without their Consents, Kings never to yield
what the Long Parliament were so earnest for.
they could not have time to settle his Throne, and redress Grievances) or by
denying necessary Supplies, force a King to grant them a Power of prolonging
their own Sitting, or meeting at stated times without his Writ, or yielding to
their Bills implicitly, (as the Black Parliament of 41. endeavored) and then
to have the Power of nominating the Great Ministers of State, and the Officers
of the Militia, an end would be soon put to Monarchy.

Therefore every one that loves their Country, The Care to be had in Elections.
the continuance of that most excellent Frame of Government, for the Subjects
security, as no other Country enjoys; those who would avoid the sad Ravages of
Civil War, who would make their Prince Glorious, their Country Renowned,
themselves and their Posterities Happy: let them be careful to elect Loyal and
Judicious Members, neither tainted with Faction, Ambition, or Self Ends; and if
any such be elected, let the Wise and Loyal, when they meet in that Great
Assembly, watch over the Designs of such ill Members, discover their
Intriegues, be careful not to be circumvented by their Artifices, stick close
to the Fundamentals of Government; and then all things will be prosperous, and
they will have the honor of being styled True Patriots of their Country.

Sir 4. Instit. p. 35.
Edward Coke has noted, That Parliaments succeed not well in five Cases.
Several Cases where Parliaments succeed not well, when the King is displeased
with the Two Houses.
First, when the King has been in displeasure with his Lords or Commons;
therefore it was one of the Petitions of the Commons to Edw. 3. That he would
require the Archbishop, and all other of the Clergy, to pray for his Estate,
for the Peace and good Government of the Land, and for the continuance of the
King's Good Will toward the Commons; to which the Rot. Parl. 25 E. 3. number. 15.
43 E. 3. number. 1. 50 E. 3. number. 2.
King replied, The same prays the King. The like Petition he says, many
times the Lords have made, and further adds, That the King in all his weighty
affairs, had used the advice of his Lords and Commons, always provided, that
both Lords and Commons keep within the Circle of the Law, and Custom of
Parliament.

The second is when any of the great Lords are at variance among themselves, as
he instanceth in the third Rot. Parl. 3 H. 6. number. 18. When Variance among the
Lords.
of H. 6. in the Controversy betwixt John Earl Marshal, and Richard Earl of
Warwick, and 4 H. 6. betwixt the Duke of Gloucester and Bishop of Winchester,
whereby little was done in any Parliamentary Court, and that little of no
moment.

The third, When no good Correspondence betwixt the Lords and Commons.
when there is no good Correspondence betwixt the Lords and Commons; which
happens, when some People out of design to render the meeting of the two Houses
ineffectual, do project some matters, whereby the Houses may clash about
Privileges, as was lately in Shirley's Case, about the Mony-Bill from the House
of Lords, and many other Particulars might be instanced in; therefore Sir
Edward Coke says, That when it was demanded by the Lords and Commons, what
might be a principal Motive for them to have good success in Parliaments, Sitis
insuperabiles, si fuertis inseparabiles.
it was answered, They should be insuperable, if inseparable, Cum radix and
vertex Imperii in Obedientium consensu rata sunt. The very root and top of
Government consists in the consent of the Obedient, and the Subjects Happiness
is in that Harmony, when it is betwixt the two Houses, and among themselves:
but much more happy, when it is likewise betwixt the Sovereign, and the two
Houses. It is that which compleats their own, and the Peoples Felicity. But
when the two Houses, or one of them, are for wresting the Sovereigns
Prerogative from him, as in Forty one, then it is the most fatal and ill-boding
sign of any other.

The fourth is, When Disagreement in the House of Commons.
when there wants Unity in the House of Commons, as we had not long since
Experience, when within those Walls (from whence wholesome Counsels are
expected, and all things tending to the preservation of the King's Peace,
Crown, and Dignity;) such Heats were amongst the Members, that if one Sword,
that was half drawn, had been wholly unsheathed, it was thought a very bloody
Battle had been fought.

The last he makes, When no Preparation for the Parliament.
is when there is no preparation for the Parliament before it begin; for which
purpose the Summons of Parliament is forty Days or more before the Sitting, to
the end that Preparations might be had for the considering the arduous and
urgent affairs of the Realm. And Sir Edward says it was an ancient custom in
Parliament, in the beginning thereof, to appoint a select Committee to consider
of the Bills in the two preceding last Parliaments that passed both Houses, or
either of them, and such as had been preferred, read, or committed, and to take
out of them such as were most profitable for the Commonwealth.

To these may be added a most material one, When Redress of Grievances are
preferred to the Supply of the King.
that makes unfortunate Congresses of Parliaments, viz. When the Members come
up, with strong Resolutions to provide Remedies for some Grievances, either
real or surmised, and at the same time the Sovereign is in great Straights, for
supplies for the safety, repute, or necessary occasions of the Government; for
then (as in most of the Parliaments of King Charles the First) the Houses are
for redress of Grievances, before supply, how pressing and urgent soever, and
do not credit the King that he will give them time to redress them, after he is
supplied; and they from design, rather than this diffidence, will not suffer
supply and grievances to go pari passu, Hand in Hand, as we may remember in
those Parliaments, wherein the popular Men made such Harangues, that they would
know whether they were Freemen, or Slaves, or had any thing to give before they
entered upon the giving part: The like we saw in King Charles the Second's
Reign, in some of his last Parliaments, whereby all their Consultations were
abortive; and both the Kings had no other Expedient but Prorogation, or
Dissolution; and disuse of Parliaments for some Years followed.

How much happier have we been in the last Session of the Parliament, under our
most Wise, The happy Harmony in the last Session of Parliament, June 1685.
Magnanimous and Gracious King, wherein no strife or contention was, but who
should be forwardest to supply the necessities of the Crown, to show all Loyal
Dutifulness to their Sovereign, whereby a most dangerous Rebellion in both
Kingdoms was the easilier crushed; and which endears them to the King, that
there can be no danger, but whatever good and wholesome Laws they shall propose
for the general good of the Kingdom, will find a cheerful allowance by him.

How happy had our Forefathers been if King Charles the First had met with such
considerate Parliaments, who by a seasonable supply and compliance, might have
had (without that vast effusion of Blood and Treasure) all their Grievances
redressed, and the flourishing State of the Kingdom preserved, and the Memories
of a great many Noblemen and Gentlemen had been transmitted without stain to
their remote Nephews.

But to draw toward a Conclusion of this Discourse, Some not willing to hear
of the Miscarriages of Parliaments, think this Discourse needless.
Some that may not be willing to hear of the Miscarriages of some Parliaments,
wherein probably they were concerned, may say, what need is there now, to bring
again upon the Stage the rigorous Proceedings of the two Houses of Parliament,
or more properly of the leading and designing Men in the House of Commons, in
the Years 1640, and 1680. since we are now happily past these Rocks,
Quicksands, and treacherous Shores.

All the World indeed must acknowledge we have a Royal, wise Pilot, Because we
have a most wise King, and good Parliament.
who knows full well to steer the Sovereignty of the Commonweal. He has
weathered out high going Seas; so that neither their overwhelming liquid
Mountains, nor the terrible Shot from the floating Castles have daunted him;
magnanimity, unparalled Courage, and an Experience beyond most Crowned Heads,
have raised him great Trophies of his Victorious toils: He is served with sage
Councils, both private and National. So that all must confess we have less
cause to fear any more dangers of Hurricanes and Shipwracks.

But though we now enjoy Halcyon days, Yet we are not secure but that in
after-Ages evil Members of Parliament may be.
under a Sovereign, enriched with Royal abilities to the height of our Wishes;
though he is blessed with a Parliament, as Loyal as can be desired, betwixt
whom there is no other Strife, but who shall out-pass the other in mutual
Obligations: Yet are we secure, that no ill Exhalations may be gathered in
after-Ages?

Can we expect always temperate Weather, pleasing Sunshine, and fruitful
Showers? No, in small revolutions of Years we find Epidemical Diseases return;
excesses of Drought, Rains, or Frosts, are often marked in our Annals, even
after promising Configurations of the Celestial Bodies.

I write not an Almanac for a Year, The Design of the Author in writing
against the Exorbitances of some.
or Pamphlet for a time, my Design is not Infandum renovare Dolorem out of any
Pique; but as much as in me lies to show from the bypast Irregularities, and
Exorbitances of some Men, how Loyal, good, and Just Men may measure things by
the Golden Standard of the Laws; how mischievous Practices and Principles may
be obviated; how every one may see what the upshot of rebellious Principles
will be; how to detect, and how to avoid the same kind of Rocks and Sands in
after-Ages.

I know some Persons recovered from a valitudinary Condition, Some love not to
hear of their Distempers.
love not to hear of the Torments they have undergone, nor of the Extravagances
of their delirous State: Yet this should not hinder but the Healthful, and
those that would avoid the Calenture, should patiently endure to hear a
Description of the Causes and Symptoms.

In this Discourse I have only culled out such Particulars, The Author's
Apology for himself.
as I find Judicious Authors have insisted upon, against the unprecedented
Proceedings of some late Houses of Commons; which I think all Loyal Persons
disapprove; and I believe a great many as well as my self, have heard many of
the then sitting Members dislike, when things were carried with an impetuous
Torrent, that it was more dangerous to speak against their proceedings, or
question the unlimited Power assumed by that House, than it was to speak
Seditious (I had almost said Treasonable) Words against the King.

Therefore I hope none of this present Honorable House of Commons (who have so
signalized their Loyalty in the last Session) will take offense at what, from
such judicious Persons as I have met with, I have delivered the Sentiments of.
My intention is no ways to lessen the Rights, or necessary Privileges of that
venerable Assembly; which never can be unbeneficial to the King, or People, but
when Discontent, Faction, and Sedition has too spreadingly infected the
Electors.

The continuance of that worst of Parliaments of 1641. What evil Principles
taught during the Long Parliament.
in their disloyal Practices so long, by the overgrowing of the Tares, which
were only suffered to thrive, occasioned so much corrupt seed to be sown, as in
twenty years there was no wholesome grain left. We saw too late, how by some
evil Seedsmen, a fertile, but dangerous Crop was shooting up apace. It is not a
little Labor, nor small diligence, will how and weed out the Briars,
Thistles, and destructive Shrubs, and poisonous Weeds, that shoot their
spreading Roots so far: But I hope the great Wisdom of this Loyal Parliament,
will find out ways and methods to prevent the danger of their thriving in a
Soil, worthy of better Plants, than any will be set by Republican Hands.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Kings most Honorable Privy Council.
I Find by several Authors, Four kinds of the King's Councils. The First.
that there are reckoned Four Councils of the King. First, The Magnum
Concilium, consisting of the Prelates and Nobles in Parliament; of which
Bracton Lib. 1. c. 2.
may be consulted, and what I have writ in the Chapter of Parliaments.

Secondly, A Convention of the Peers of the Realm, The Second.
Lords of Parliament, yet not meeting as a Parliament, which appears manifestly
in the Record, 25 Aug. 5 H. 7. upon an exchange made of some Lands betwixt the
King and the Earl of Northumberland; the King promises to deliver the Earl
Lands to the value, etc. by Per advice and assent du Estates de son Realm de
son Parliament (parensi que Parliament soit devant le Feast de St. Lucy) ou
autrement, per advice de son Grand Council, and autres Estates de son Realm que
le Roy serra assemblez, devant le dit Feast, in case que le Parliament ne soit.
Coke 1. Instit. lib. 2. c. 10. sect. 164.
the Advice of the Estates of his Realm of his Parliament (if the Parliament be
convened before the Feast of St. Lucy) or otherwise, by the Advice of his Great
Council, and other Estates of his Realm, which the King shall Assemble before
the said Feast, in case the Parliament be not called: which well agrees with
the Act of Parliament, 37 E. 3. c. 18. where it is said, before the Chancellor,
Treasurer, and Great Council.

Thirdly, The Kings Privy Council, which appears to be different from the last
Great Council, by many Records, and particularly, by that of Rot. Claus. 16 E.
2. m. 5. dorso.
16 E. 2. where it is said, Hen. de Bellomont Baron of the Kings Great and
Private Council was sworn.

This Council is called Concilium Privatum, secretum and continuum Regis. The
Privy Council properly so called. Lord President.
The First Member of this Council, is the Lord President, who was anciently
called Principalis Consiliarius, and sometimes Capitalis Consiliarius. The
first Lord President Sir Edward Coke 4. Instit. c. 2. fol. 55. 1. par. Pat.
number. 22. John Bishop of Norwich is mentioned 7 Jo. by Matt. Paris, fol. 205.
mentions, was the Earl of Lancaster 50 E. 3. 1 R. 2. then he reckons these in
order, the Duke of Bedford, 1 H. 6. the Duke of Gloucester, 10 H. 6. the Duke
of York 11 and 22 H. 6. John Russel Bishop of Rochester, and after of Lincoln
is called President 13 E. 4. John Fisher Bishop of Rochester 12 H. 7. Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk from the 25th. to the 37th. of H. 8. the Lord Pawlet 1
E. 6. the Duke of Northumberland 5 and 7 of E. 6. the Earl of Arundel 1 and 2
Ph. and M. in Q. Elizabeth's time we find none; but in this Catalogue Mr.
Prynne Animadv. p. 45. Pat. 13 E. 4. part 1. m. 3.
has truly noted, That the Bishop of Rochester was not made President of the
Kings Council, but of the Prince's, and was his Tutor, as appears by the Patent
it self there cited, dated the 10th. of Nov.

This Office of Lord President was never granted but by Letters Patents under
the Great Seal, durante beneplacito. In the Statute of 21 H. 8. c. 2. he is
said to be attendant on the Kings most Royal Person; the reason of which, says
Sir Ed. Coke, is, That of latter times he has used to report to the King the
Passages, and the State of the business at the Council Table.

The Lord Privy Seal is the next Principal Person that has Precedence in the
Kings Council, Lord Privy Seal.
concerning whose Office my Lord 4. Instit. c. 2. fol. 56.
Coke has discoursed at large, to whom I must refer the Curious Reader, as
also to him for the Acts of Parliament, Orders of the same, and Acts of Council
(together with Mr. Prynne's P. 45.
Animadversions) whereby the Privy Council was to be regulated; and concerning
the Jurisdiction, and Proceedings of the Kings Council, Mr. Lambard's P. 108.
to 116. fol. 29.
Archaion, and Mr. Crompton's Jurisdiction of Courts may be consulted; the
several Bundels of Petitions to the King and his Council in the Tower of
London, and the Answers to them, the Placita Parliamentaria coram Rege and
Concilio, in the Tally Office of the Exchequer, and in the Parchment Book of
them in the Tower under King Edward the First, printed by Mr. In Placit. Parl.
and Append. Those summoned to Parliaments as Assistants, called the King's
Council and in Parliament-time joined with the King's Council in several Cases.
Ryley.

Of this Privy Council there seems to me to be two sorts, one constantly
attending the King, and his Affairs, the other in Parliament time only; which
had their particular Summons, as I have before at full discoursed of: and these
two I find so obscurely distinguished, that it is difficult in some places to
understand which are meant; but I think in time of Parliament these were joined
to the Kings Council; for besides that they had a distinct Summons, and in them
(as a specifical distinction) the word caeteris was omitted, in that part of
the Summons which runs, dictis die and loco personalitor intersitis nobiscum,
ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus, etc. because they were not Parliamentary
Barons, there was also added in proceedings and judgments upon them, these
words, coram ipso Domino Rege and ejus concilio ad Parliamenta sua, or, ad
Parliamentum suum, or coram Concilio nostro in praesenti Parliamento.

For the particular Instances of which, being they are very numerous, Mr.
Prynn's A page 363. ad page 393.
brief Register may be consulted, wherein it seems to me upon the perusal of
the several Records, that these Assistants to the House of Lords were likewise
joined to the rest of the Kings standing Council in Parliament time: so it is
expressed in the Case of Idem, page 378.
John Sal^eyn and Margaret his Wife, and Isabel her Sister, Daughters and Heirs
of Robert de Ross de Work, thus, Habito super praemissis diligenti tractatu,
per ipsum Dom. Regem, and totum Concilium: and in the same it is thus also
worded, videtur Dom. Regi, and Concilio suo, and concordatum est, and
consideratum per ipsum Dom. Regem and Concilium suum. So in others, per
Concilium Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum, and Baronum, caeterorumque
Idem, page 380.
de Concilio suo existentium, and singulis de Concilio suo, and totius Concilii
Domini Regis. So in 21 E. 1. the Archbishop of York's Case: videtur Domino Regi
in pleno Parliamento praedicto, Comitibus, Baronibus, Justiciariis and
similiter toti Concilio ipsius Dom. Regis; and so it is said, Magnates and
alios de Concilio ipsius Domini Regis rogavit.

This is further cleared by sundry Idem, page 383. The Court of Starchamber was
said to be coram Rege and Concilio suo. See Coke Inst. 4. c. 5.
Prefaces to, and passages in our Printed Statutes, as formerly I have noted;
So the Statute of Bigamy 4 Oct. 4 E. 1. says, In the presence of certain
Reverend Fathers, Bishops of England, and others of the Kings Council, the
constitutions under written were recited, after heard and published before the
King and his Council; for as much as all the Kings Council, Justices, and
others did agree. So the Statute of Quo Warranto, 30 E. 1. Cum apud
Westminster, per nos and Concilium nostrum provisum. So 33 E. 1. it is agreed,
and ordained by the King, and all his Council. So 42 E. 3. c. 3. the Statute
made on Petition of the Commons in Parliament begins, Plese a nostre Seigneur
le Roy, and son bon Counsel, pur droyt Government de son Peuple, ordeigner.
Pleases it our Lord the King, and his good Council, for the better Government
of his People, to ordain.

By great store of Records it is apparent, that in old times, the Kings and
their Councils gave Judgment in diverse Cases of difficulty; and other Common
Cases, concerning the Law of the Realm, See 11 H. 4. number. 28. and 63.
Respectuatur per Dom. Principem and Concilium. Pryn. Animadv. p. 39. 264, 265,
267, 296.
calling those who were learned in the Laws, for Assistants therein, as Mich.
53 and 54 H. 3. rot. 37. in the Case of Assise of Mort d'auncester brought by
Alexander King of Scots, against John de Burgo. But as hereafter I shall show,
much of the Power of the Kings Council is now taken away.

The Fourth Council of the King, The King's Council at Law.
are the Kings Judges at Law, who are his Council at Law in all Cases wherein
he has occasion to consult them, as appears in the Law Books, and particularly
may be found in 1. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 10. sect. 164.
Sir Edward Coke, of which I may have occasion to speak in the Chapter of
Judges.

I thought to premise these things for the better understanding of the
differences of the Kings several Councils, and shall now proceed to discourse
of the most Honorable Privy Council in general, as Counsel is necessary for
Princes to have, and as they ought to be qualified, what their Office and
Employment is, and ought to be, both in Relation to all Princes Secret
Councils, and particularly, according to the constitution of England, according
to my poor Abilities.

The most Honorable Privy Council consists of Noble and Wise Persons, chosen
by the Prince to assist him with their sage and faithful Advice, in the weighty
Affairs of Government.

Kings cannot by their own personal knowledge comprehend Nec unilts me ^^em,
tant^e molis esse capacem, Tacit. 1. Annal.
all things, therefore it is needful for them to assume others in
participationem curarum; especially great and weighty Affairs need great
Coadjutors, as Paterculus magna negotia magnis egere adminiculis. Velleius, l.
2.
well notes; and the Principis labores queis orbem terrae capessit, egere
adminicu lis, ut domestica cura vacuus, in commune consular. Tacitus 12. Annal.
grave Historian tells us, That Labors of Princes, by which they manage their
vast Countries, need helps; that being free from Domestic Cares, they may
consult for the Public. Whoever looks only upon the Port and Grandeur of
Princes, their soft Raiment, and feeding delicately, may think it a pleasing
and desirable State; but they never reflect on the anxious Cares, the
difficulties of managing Matters, upon which great and momentous events, and
ordering of vast bodies, of different Interests, depend. Therefore the Rhetor.
ad Alex.
Philosopher well noted, That to give give good Counsel is one of the Divinest
things among Men. Whereas on the other Hand, when Counsel is supine, Government
must be tottering; but a Mind Animus qui verum seit, scit tuto aggredi. Thucyd
l. 1.
settled in Resolves, safely attempts any thing. That Reason being the soundest,
which uses Cunctation and Deliberation, and forefears as well as foresees,
what will happen; because in acting, it will produce Confidence. For they must
be a great Defect, where Counsel is not taken before Action; It being for
Sword-Players, not those that bear the Sword of Magistracy, In arena Consilium
capere.

As to the use of Counselors, Quod fieri debet tractato cum multis: quod
facturus es, cum paucissimis and fidelissimis. Lib. 3. de Re militari.
Vegetius tells us it becomes a Prince to treat of those things which ought to
be considered with many; but those which are to be executed, with few, or
rather by himself: agreeable to which, is what the learned Lord St. Alban's
Essays, p. 88.
Chancellor notes, That some Affairs require extreme Secrecy, which will hardly
allow to go beyond one or two Persons, besides the King; neither are those
Councils unprosperous: for besides the Secrecy, they commonly go on constantly
in one Spirit of Direction, without Distraction; but such are only to be used
by a prudent King, who can grind with an Handmill.

A great part part of the Idem, p. 87.
Skill of a Prince is discovered in the choice of wise Counselors; and the
managing of their Counsels, require the greatest Address, Ability, and
Dexterity of Sovereigns.

Therefore the Ancients feigned Jupiter to marry Idem. Wisdom of the Ancients.
Princes to have the Honor of Councils.
Metis, viz. Counsel, and she being with Child by him, he eat her up, and was
delivered of Pallas out of his own Head: The Moral of which is, That Princes
refer matters to Council; and when the Council grows ripe, they are not to
suffer their Council to go through with the resolution and direction, as if it
depended on them; but to take matters back again into their own Hands, and so
make them appear to issue from themselves, with Prudence and Power, as from
their own Head and Advice, as Pallas came forth armed, fitted for present
Action.

It is in vain for Princes to take Counsel concerning matters, Choice of
Persons.
if they take not Counsel likewise concerning Persons; for the greatest Errors
are committed, and the most Judgment shown in Individuals.

There was never King bereaved of the Benefit of Counsel, except when there
has been an over greatness in one Counselor, or an over-strict Combination in
diverse: which are things soon found out, and helped; therefore Principis maxima
est virtus nosse suos.

In Council the King presiding, Princes not to open their Inclinations too much.
should not open his own Inclination too much in that which he propounds, if
he desire sincere delivery of the Counselors Judgments, lest his Authority
sway too much. Therefore Princes should take the Opinion of their Council, both
separate, and together; private Opinion being more free, and Opinion before
others more reverend.

It is therefore a Prince's greatest Interest to be unprejudicate, and to keep
an open Ear to all wholesome Counsel; for as Capitolinus In Gordiano Juniore.
says, Miser est Imperator apud quem vera reticentur, That prince is in a very
bad Condition, from whom the true Estate of his Affairs is concealed.

Several wise Princes have with an even Hand distributed their regards to
Counselors that have mortally hated one another, Making use of Counselors of
different Persuasions or Interests.
as some observed in Louvoy and Colbert; and it is a certain sign of a good
Workman, that can work with any Tool. The advantage a Prince has, is that they
are Spies one upon another, and will be both aemulous, who can do their Masters
Services best; but if they grow to be the Heads of different Factions, they
will prove most dangerous.

Having thus far proceeded as to the Interest of a Prince, in his Counselors,
and their advice, I shall speak to the Qualifications of Counselors.

In Leo Imp. de Belli apparatu.
secret affairs, faithful, temperate and close Persons, are most fit
Counselors, and who have no private Interest; The Qualifications of
Counselors.
for Secrecy is that invisible Clasp that buckles great Affairs, the hidden
hinge, upon which they are moved, according to Taciturnitas optimum ac
tutissimum rerum administrandarum vinculum. Lib. 2. c. 21. 1. Secrecy. 2.
Ability.
Valerius. For he can never atchieve great matters, to whom it is irksome to
retain Secrets. So Aemilius Probus, amongst the praises of Epaminondas,
relates, that he was Commissi celans: and Albertus King of Poland said he would
change his Shirt, if he thought it were privy to his Counsels.

He is a leading eminent Man (says Eum primum esse virum qui ipse consulit
quod in rem sit; secundum eum qui been monenti obediat; qui nec ipse consulere,
nec alteri parere scit, eum extremi esse ingenii. Lib. 2.
Livy) who is able to give Counsel; and Second unto him, is he that yields to
good Counsel; but he is in the lowest form of Wit, who neither can give good
Counsel, nor obey it.

The true Composition of a Counselor, 3. Skill in a Prince's Affairs.
(says my Lord St. Albans) is rather to be skilled in his Masters Business
than his Nature; for then he is like to advise him, and not to flatter him, and
find his Humor. For knowledge and Prudence in affairs, are principally
requisite in Counselors, who should be well acquainted with the Ad concilium
in Republica dandum caput est nosse Rempublicam. Cic. de Orat.
Constitution of the Government, the Laws, Rules, and Policy of it; both to be
able to advise in all things relating to his Princes managment of matters at
home and abroad: Tacitus vita Agricolae.
Mores animosque Provinciae quaerere, To be curious to dive into the Spirits,
manners, and Dispositions of all those his Prince has to deal with; whereby he
may the better suit his Masters occasions, by humouring and timing every thing
with a quiet Industry, and making every matter be adapted to his end, without
tumultuation, and rude Shocks, but rather by insensible Screws.

The noblest design and endeavor any Privy-Counsellor can have, 4. Not to aim
at Private Profit.
is to serve his King and Country upon Principles of public advantage; for it
is the worst of Poisons to the Judgment, and regards to Truth in all
Consultations, to aim at private Profit, according to that Excellent remarque
of Pessimum very affectus and judicii venenum sua cuique utilitas. 1. Hist.
Tacitus, That private design of Profit is the worst Poison of Judgment, and
attaining Truth. For when private Prosit holds the Balance, the Princes
Standard is little regarded; there being no weight so deadly heavy, as when a
Man's self, and his private Interest are cast into one Scale.

Uprightness and Faithfulness are two Master Ingredients in all Counselors. 5.
Uprightness and Faithfulness requisite.
So Pliny Optimum eum quemque, sideliss^mum. Panaegyr.
tells Trajan, That he is the best Man that is most faithful to his Trust; for
by the Eyes of Counselors, Princes see, by their Ears they hear, and if those
Organs be depraved: the Princes Apprehensions of things must be adulterated;
and the King passing his Judgment according to their Representation, may
proceed upon very uncertain or false Grounds. Counselors indeed are the
Speculators of Princes, they have therefore need of the clearest Sight, not to
be tainted with false Colors; they are to be quick-sighted, to pry into the
Consequences of Things while in the obscure Shop of the First Causes: they are
the Pilots that are appointed to steer the Ship of the Commonwealth, and so
must be skilled in the Chart, to know to veer and change with Emergencies; to
know the rolling Sands, and under Sea-Rocks; to know the Coast and Creeks, the
Measure of all things relating to the Government, both preceding, bypast, and
to come.

The Sapiens Non semper in uno gradu, sed in una via, nec se in aliquibus
mutat, sed potius aptat. 3. Histor.
most politic Historian notes, 6. To pursue the Design of the Prince by
several ways. That a wise Counselor, though he may pass in several Tracts, yet
must never be out of that Path which will lead him to the accomplishment of his
Designs; and in the necessary Traverses he must make, not to be found so much
to change, as to suit himself to the Work he is about.

It is a great piece of self-denying Wisdom in a Counselor that desires to
keep his Station, 7. To leave the Prince the Honor of Counsels.
to leave to his Master the Honor of the contrivance of those advantageous
things he suggests: -- Aliis Guntherus.
magni reputantibus, ipse
Negligit, and modico factum metitur honor.


So Agrippa admonishes those that would be safe in Courts, to eschew the
difficulties of things, and leave the glory of the accomplishment of them to
those that have the Supremacy.

It is too hazardous a curiosity in some Princes Counselors to enquire into
the hidden sense of their Masters, 8. Not to be too curious in prying into
their Master's Secrets.
or what they reserve in their own dark thoughts: It being difficult to attain
the meaning of what they leave doubtful, according to that of the curious
Author, Abditos Principis sensus, and si quid excultius parat, exquirere
inlicitum anceps. Tacit. lib. 6. Annal. c. 2.
It is doubtful and unlawful to enquire into the hidden Sense of a Prince, or
what he more curiously designs.

But this falls out only under a Tiberius, or some Mysterious Prince; though it
may happen under a Good and Wise Prince, who to leave the greater liberty of
Debate, discovers not his own inclinations: and under such an one Counselors
are safe, especially when by conjectual Inferences they promote the end, though
they may differ in the Medium.

Pliny says, In Consiliario Principis tria maxim requiruntur, libertas,
fides, and veritas: libertas consilii est ejus vita, and essentia; qua erepta,
consilium evanescit. Panaegyr.
three things are required in a Counselor, 9. Liberty, Faith, and Truth
requisite in a Privy-Counsellor.
Liberty, Faith, and Truth.

Liberty is the Life and Essence of Council, which being taken away, all
Counsel vanishes; for as good Counsel is the Soul of the State, so he that
has not a Liberty (being bound by private Interest) is but a Palsied Member;
and if Counselors want Faith and Verity, they hide and disguise the Truth,
which is full of danger both to the King and Malum consilium consultori
pessimum.
themselves.

Such fear as does not fall in constantem virum, is a great enemy to good
Counsel; for fear is a betraying of such succors as Reason and Counsel should
afford.

King Coke 4. Instit. c. 2. Four Properties of Counselors.
Edward the Third would have his Counselor to have four Properties: 1. To be
Parcus sui, knowing he would never be provident for Him, that would not be a
good Husband for himself. 2ly. That he should not be Cupidus rei alienae, no
covetous or greedy man; for ei nihil turpe, cui nihil satis. 3ly. That he
should be Avarus Rei Publicae, covetous for the Kings Treasure and
Commonwealth. 4ly. That he super omnia sit expertus, that he be expert in what
place the King shall employ him; for great Offices are never well managed by a
Deputy, When quick, and when deliberate Counsels are best.
where the Officer himself is but a Cipher.

As to Counsels themselves, Livy In rebus asperis, and tenuis spei, fortissima
quaeque consilia tutissima sunt. Lib. 22.
excellently notes, That in matters that are ground to an edge, or drawn to a
sharp point, and where hope is only left in the bottom, the boldest and
quickest Counsels are safest; yet it must be with great circumspection well
considered, when, and upon what occasions such Counsels must be taken: for the
same Consilia calida and audacia prima specie laeta sunt, tractatu dura, eventu
tristia. Idem, lib. 31.
Author notes elsewhere, That subtle and bold Counsels on the first view may
be pleasing, but are difficult in handling, and in the event often Calamitous:
therefore rashness can never consist with Counsel; duo adversissima rectae
menti (says Lib. 3. Male cuncta ministrat impetus. Statius.
Thucydides) Celeritas and Ira, Haste and Passion are of all things most
opposite to Right Counsel: therefore Curtius Novan^is quam gerendis rebus
aptiora ingenia illa ignca.
speaking of such, says, Fiery and furious Spirits are more fit to innovate
things, and create Factions, than to manage Affairs steddily. Praepropera
consilia sunt raro prospera.
So hasty Counsels are rarely Prosperous, because Resolution should never go
before Deliberation, nor Execution before Resolution.

When Prinsquam incipias consuli o, and ubi consulueris, mature fado opus est.
Sallust.
upon Debate and Deliberation it is by the Council Table well resolved, the
change thereof upon some private information, is neither safe nor honorable,
nor that after timely Resolution timely Execution be delayed.

Violent Coke Inst. 4. p. 57.
courses are like to hot Waters that may do good in an extremity; but the use
of them does spoil the Stomach, and it will require them stronger and stronger,
and by little and little they will lessen their own operation.

To leave this great Theme as too illustrious and sublime a Subject for one to
treat of that has lived in the Shade: I shall now proceed to make some other
remarks why our Laws give our Kings the sole power of choosing to themselves a
Privy Council, and how the designers of 41. would have wrested that Power from
the King.

Besides Review of Observations, p. 10. The King's Prerogative to choose his
Privy Council
what is common to all men to have a free liberty to whom they will impart
their private Affairs, and desire Counsel upon them; our Laws being built upon
firm foundations of reason, considering, that in the power of making of Laws,
the power of two numerous bodies were opposed against the Person of the single
Sovereign: it foresaw, and found, that by the Sovereigns consenting to Laws,
for the ease and benefit of the Subject, things might pass to the prejudice,
and diminution of the Sovereignty. If his single Person (surcharged with the
care of the manifold Affairs of the Kingdom) should be left all alone to
advise, and dispute his right, against all the Wisdom and Solicitation of the
Representative Body of the Subject. See Prynne's Brief Register, sect. 3. from
p. 341. to the end, concerning the King's Council in Parliament, and out of it.
Therefore, to prevent that, it ordered, That the King should at his discretion
swear to himself a Body of Council (sometimes in our Laws called his Grand
Council) to advise him in matters of State, and concernments of his Sovereign
Right and safety; and a Body of Council at Law to advise him in matters of
Justice, that he might neither do, or suffer contrary to the Rule of Laws;
especially sitting the two Houses, when the wrong might be perpetual: and
seeing the Government must be continually upon its Guard and Watch, without
intermission, molding, and forming all things for its safety and prosperity,
and consequently of the Peoples; this Council must be constantly attending upon
the Kings pleasure, and daily and hourly considering the best ways and methods
of promoting the Kings and Commonweals advantage.

As to the Pulton, 37, and 56. 72.
first particular, we find it frequently in several Statutes expressed, That
the King by himself and by his Council, at his Parliament, made and ordained.
The necessity of a Privy Council.
That this was not the great Council of Parliament appears by that of Edward
the First, Idem, p. 80.
These are the Establishments of the King by his council, and by the Assent of
the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, and the whole
Commonalty of the Land thither summoned: and Edward the Second says, he caused
the Articuli Cleri to be rehearsed before his Council, and Answer given, etc.
and much more may be observed in the Acts of the great Councils, not fit here
to be repeated. From hence it is that the Law defines, The King can do no
wrong; Privy-Counsellors responsible.
for if any evil be committed in matter of State, the Privy Council, and if in
matters of Law, the Justices and Judges must answer for it.

As to the second particular, the Parliament of 1641. cast the odium of most of
the management of Affairs of State, The Votes of the Long Parliament to traduce
the King, under the pretense of using Evil Counselors.
that were ungrateful to them, upon the Kings evil Counselors, as they called
them: which was a great artifice of the designers of that Rebellion; for
thereby (being then not hardened enough to caluminate the King openly) they
would make the World believe they paid a just deference to his Majesty: yet
slily wounded his Reputation through his Counselors sides, leaving the
application to the People. Tacitly insinuating, that the King being misled by
such Councils, was not so Just, or Wise, as to be wished: and when afterward
they had got Power, they always made it one of their propositions, That the two
Houses should have the nominating, That the two Houses should have the
nominating of Privy-Counsellors. So in Henry the Third's time we find
Mountfort's Model of Twenty four to redress the Kingdom, to choose Counselors,
etc.
or approving and removing the Privy Council, or great Officers of State;
pretending they would set such just and righteous Persons in those places, as
would execute them for the public good only: and upon the same score (though
on another pretense) they were importunate, that the Judges should hold their
places tam diu quam se been gesserint, rather than be removeable at the Kings
pleasure. Thus by vote, without legal proof of Crimes, they blackned as many of
the Kings Privy Council as they foresaw would thwart their designs, as Seducers
of the King, and men of Arbitrary Principles; thereby to have them wholly
removed from him (as we have had Addresses of a later date from an House of
Commons against some great wise and Loyal Lords) by which severing from him
such a body of his faithful Advisers, Their Design to remove some
Privy-Counsellors, that some of their Party might be introduced.
and dangerously depriving him of the constant means (which the Law has
specially ordained him for his support) some of them endeavored to get into
their places, as was notoriously known to have been proposed, that if several
of the leading men might have had chief places and honors, they would have let
the Earl of Strafford live (as in another Treatise I hope to make clear) and by
that mean^ not only have enriched themselves, but have had the guidance of
Affairs of State, and so by little and little brought about the Promotion of
their friends, without regard to the Public.

If we impartially consider the unreasonableness of this proposal, we shall
find, The Mischiefs that would follow upon the Parliaments nominating
Privy-Counsellors.
that by granting it, we must expect to suffer all the evils which Faction can
produce. This were the ready way to kindle a fire in our bowels, which would
first break out in our Country Elections, and divide the Families by
irreconcilable hatred. For it cannot be imagined but that Power would bandy
against Power, and Relations against Relations, See Answer to Observations.
to put a Son or Kinsman into the road to preferment; nor could the flames be
quenched, but burn more vehemently even in the house: to which the insolence of
some (obtaining Offices to which they are not fit) the shame and discontent of
others repulsed, and the ambition of all, would be continual fuel; and the
greatest misery of all would be, that were the corruption never so great, we
could have but slender hopes of redress, since the prevailing Party (jealous of
their honor) would constantly maintain their choice; and perhaps it would be
necessary for them, one to wink at another, as it was manifestly seen in the
long Parliament, when the most known Offenders, and active Instruments of the
Peoples miseries, by striking in with the prevailing Party, were more safe than
innocence could make them.

It is enacted by King 17 Car. 1. c. 10. The Limitations of the Power of the
Privy Council.
Charles the First, that neither his Majesty nor his Privy Council have or
ought to have any Jurisdiction by English Bill, Petition, Articles, Libel or
any other Arbitrary way whatsoever, to examine or draw into question,
determine, or dispose of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels
of any of the Subjects of this Kingdom; but that the same ought to be tried and
determined in the ordinary Courts of Justice, and by the ordinary course of the
Law.

In the Oath of a Rot. Pat. 5. H. 4. number. 14. Fleta, lib. 1. c. 17.
Privy-Counsellor, his duty is best manifested. First, That he shall as far
forth as cunning and discretion suffers, First Particular of a
Privy-Counsellor's Oath.
truly, justly, and evenly counsel and advise the King in all matters to be
commoned, treated and demanded in the Kings Council, or by him as the Kings
Counselor. Therefore Henry the Eighth wished that his Counselors would commit
simulation, dissimulation and partiality to the Porters Lodge, when they came to
sit in Council.

Secondly, Second Branch, uprightness.
That in all things generally which may be to the Kings honor and behoof, and
to the good of his Realm, Lordships and Subjects (without particularity or
exception of persons, not fearing or eschewing so to do for affection, love,
meed, doubt or dread of any person or persons) that he shall with all his might
and power, help and strenghthen the Kings said Council, in all that shall be
thought good to the same Council for the ^niversal good of the King and his
Land, and for the peace, rest and tranquillity of the same. Therefore my Lord
Cook Instit. par. 4. fol. 53.
says, these Counselors, like good Sentinels, and Watchmen, consult of, and
for the public good, and the honor, defense, safety, and profit of the Realm:
they are his true Treasurers, and profitable Instruments of the State.

Thirdly, That he shall keep secret the Kings Counsel, Third Branch, Secrecy.
and all that shall be commoned by way of Counsel in the same; without, that he
shall not common it, publish it or discover it by word, writing, or in any
otherwise to any person out of the same Council, or to any of the same Council
if it touch him, or if he be party thereof. So Valerius M. Nihil magis opt^ndum
quam ut rerum ger ^darum consdia, qu (...) ejus fieri poterit, quam maxim
(...). Lib. 4.
says, Nothing is more to be desired, than that the Counsels of things to be
done, as much as possible, be secreet. So Vegetius Nulla sunt meliora consilia
quam quae ignoraverit ^dversarius antequam facias. Consilia nisi sunt
abscondita, exitum raro prospiciunt. Lib. 3. de Re militari.
has of old pronounced, That no Counsels are better than those which the
Adversary is ignorant of before they be executed: for unless Counsel be hidden
and secret, they rarely attain their end.

Fourthly, That Rot. Pat. 11 H 4. number. 28.
he shall not for gift, meed, nor good, nor promise of good, by him nor by
means of any other person, receive or admit, for any promotion, favoring, nor
fordeclaring, letting or hindering of any matter or thing to be treated, or done
in the Council. Therefore the part of a Counselor is, Tu civem patremque
geris, tu consule cunctis -- Non tibi, nec tua te moveant, sed publica vota.

Fifthly, That he shall withstand any person or persons, of what condition,
estate or degree they be of, that would by way of feat, attempt or intend the
contrary to the good of the King, peace of the Land, etc. and generally that he
shall observe, keep, and do all that a good and true Counselor ought to do to
his Sovereign Lord.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Ministers of State.
I Join to the Privy Council Ministers of State, being they differ from them
very little; some in name, others in degrees. For there St. Alban's Essays,
tit. Honor and Reputation.
are several qualifications of Subjects that serve a Prince. As first, those
that are participes curarum, upon whom Princes discharge the greatest weight of
their Affairs, The several Qualifications of Ministers of Princes.
as Ministers of State, and Privy-Counsellors. Secondly, Duces Belli, such as
Princes employ in their Armies and Militia. Thirdly, Gratiosi, Favorites, such
as are a solace to the Prince, and harmless to the People. Fourthly, Negotii
pares, such as not only have great places under the Prince, and execute them
sufficiently, but also Judges and all sorts of Magistrates. For as Plutarch
well observes, As the Master of the Ship chooses the best Mariners, The
Prince's Care in choosing his Ministers.
the Architect the best workmen; so a Prince should employ those that are fit
to administer the Affairs of the Commonweal Vt Gubernator optimos quaerit
Nautas, Architecton doctissimos Ministros; ita Principes eos asciscunt, qui ad
Rempublicam administrandam sunt idonei.
. Generally it is requisite that Princes choose such as are more sensible of
duty than of rising, and such as love business rather on Conscience than upon
Bravery: and it is fit to discern a busy nature from a willing mind; for some
are impatient of privateness, says my Lord St. Albans, even in Age or
sickness; like old Townsmen, that will be still sitting at the street-doors,
though thereby they offer Age to scorn.

Therefore as it is necessary that Ministers of State should be subservient to
the Sovereign; so it is most requisite that a Prince should be careful in his
choice of such as may most beneficially serve him and the Public. Some seem
fit for Employment, and yet in places disappoint expectation. Omnium consensu
capax imperii nisi imperasset, says So Tacitus of Galba, lib. 1. Hist. Alieno
Imperio felicior quam suo, vetus in familia nobilitas, magnae opes, ipsi medium
ingenium, magis extra vitia quam in virtutibus. P. 197. Edit. 5. Lips. Major
privato visus, dum privatus fuit. 1. Hist. c. 11.
Tacitus of Galba; That in the opinion of all he was capable of Empire, if he
had not discovered his insufficiency when he was Emperor. Therefore it is noted
as a good Character of Piso Quo nemo validius otia dilexit, aut facilius
suffecit negotia, magisque quae agenda suntegit, sine ulla ostentatione agendi.
Velleius Paterc. Actu otioso simillimus.
, That none more vehemently loved recess from business, or with more ease
underwent employment, or effected those things, which were to be done, more
actively and without any ostentation. So Annal. 13. Edit. Lips. 5. p. 138.
Integre sancteque egit. procax otii, and potessati^ temperantior.
Tacitus says of Otho when he governed Portugal, that he was one loosely
given, when he had little to do; but in Office and Rule, more stayed and
temperate. Such a person is truly qualified for great Managery; it being an
assured sign of a worthy and generous Spirit, whom Honor amends: Virtue in the
Ambitious being violent, and in those in Authority, settled and calm. For
Honor is, or should be, the place of Virtue; power to do good being the true
and lawful end of aspiring, and Conscience of the same is the accomplishment of
Man's rest.

Men in great places (says one St. Alban's Essays, p. 42. How Great Ministers
are Servants.
who made a great figure in his time) are thrice Servants: First to their
Sovereign or the State. Secondly, Servants of Fame. Thirdly, Of business. So
that they have no freedom either in their Persons, Actions or Time: their
rising is laborious, their standing slippery, their recess either a Downfall or
Eclipse; so that they had need borrow other men's opinions to think themselves
happy: for if they judge by their own feeling, they cannot find it; for though
Tacitus says, Sunt plerumque Regum voluntates vehementes, and inter se
contrariae; and though they serve a more benign Prince: yet they will find many
they deal with, either vehement in their Wills, or irresolved. However the
fatigue is so much the greater, when the Port cannot be gained without
doubling, and tacking to save the Wind.

Therefore it is most necessary, The necessary Qualifications of Ministers of
State.
that great Ministers of State have extraordinary Accomplishments both in
dexterity of dispatch, vast comprehension, virtuous resolvedness, and prudent
cunctation; Nam occultat eorum semina Deus, and plerumque bonorum malorumque
causae sub diversa specie latent. Panaegyr.
For as Pliny well notes, In most matters the Deity hides the seeds of things;
and mostwhat the causes of good and bad things lie hid under the contrary
appearances: So that it requires a great sagacity in a Minister of State, to
foresee what the effects will be, of Causes and Councils, when there may
intervene so many by-accidents, that can neither be foreseen nor prevented.
Therefore not only great wisdom is required, (...) Arist ^ Ethic. c. 8
but great experience; and when Ministers of State are endowed with these
qualifications, whatever the event be, yet they are not to be blamed, and
mostly such grounded resolves succeed well: For a wise man Sapiens dominabitur
(...).
overrules the Stars. So a Minister of State, who with sufficient ability,
Diligence, Care, Fidelity, Prudence, and Affection, Their danger of being
supplanted.
serves his Prince and his Country (which are no ways incompatible) needs not
fear the Detraction of some, the mining of others, or an inglorious downfall:
for the Government loses more by such an ones laying aside, than he that has
served his Prince Conscientiously, justly and wisely, shall lose. Those whom
either their lucky Stars, or conspicuous accomplishments have placed within the
Circle of the Court, are subject indeed to the greatest danger of inglorious
Exits, if they be not the most circumspect of Mortals. For the envious and
ambitious (who torment themselves that they are eclipsed by those who interpose
betwixt the Sunshine of the Princes favor) envy them the Glory of
Administration, and by cunning and artificial Insinuations of ill Conduct,
false measures and designs, are assiduously heaving them out of their places;
which if upon false Suggestions they prevail to effect, by successive Removals
(under pretense of reforming matters) all things are disjointed, the Cement of
Government dissolved, and greater Errors committed by too frequent fresh
Applications, (...).
whereby the Malady is made incurable by the multitude of Physicians.

Amongst other Rules, which Princes may find it convenient to observe, in
choosing ministers of State; It is one of no small Moment (provided they can be
as well sitted) that they (...).
be of ancient Houses, and persons of Fortune. For Tacitus Insita mortalibus
natura recentem alicrum foelicitatem agris oculis introspicere. 2. Hist.
notes, That it is inbred to men to look asquint on the Advancements, not so
much new, as of new Men; who coveting too much Power and Honor, by that means
contract Envies. For as he further Nunquam satis fida Potentia, ubi nimia est.
Ibid.
observes, The Power that is in Excess, is not to be confided in, being
mostwhat Treacherous. Therefore Vestra vos, non Principis fortur: metiamini.
Panegyr. Nihil rerum mortalium tam instabile, and fluxum est, quam potentia non
sua vi nixa. Tacit. 13. Annal.
Pliny advises, That Ministers of State should take their measures by their
own, and not their Princes Fortune; for it is a certain Truth, That the Power
wears best, and is most stable and durable that is founded upon Virtue, and
purchased by it, not by any little Arts, Wealth, or Dissimulation, according to
that of Claudian, -- emitur sola Virtute Potestas.

When Ministers of State desire to keep their Station, they must studiously
endeavor to avoid Envy and Aemulation, especially, not to give any occasion by
their own Arrogance.

Tanta illi comitas in socios, mansuetudo in hosts, visuque and auditu
venerabilis, cum magnitudinem and gravitatem fortunae retineret, invidiam and
arrogantiam essugerat. 2. Annal.
Tacitus describing the qualifications of Germanicus (who had the Command of a
great part of the Army, and the management of some Provinces) says, That he
was courteous and affable to his Companions, merciful and mild to his Enemies,
venerable in his Aspect and Discourses, and that while he retained the
greatness and Port of the highest Fortune, he avoided Envy and Arrogance; which
Character will very well become any great Minister of State.

privy-Counsellors are very well to consider that they are chosen to manage the
weighty parts of Government, and ease their Prince: but they are not to make it
their Business by little Arts of ingratiating themselves with their Sovereign,
to study only to get Honor and Wealth, and serve a Princes time; but so to
act, as not only the present Prince, but his Successors may feel the advantage
of their Administration, remembering that of Tiberius, Princip^s mortales,
Rempublicam aternam esse. Tacit. 3. Annal.
That Princes are Mortal, but the Government Immortal; which is most true in
hereditary Monarchy.

It is an odd account that Per cultum and munditias, copiaque and affluentia,
luxu propier: Suberat tam^n vigor animi ingentil us negotiis par, eo acrior quo
somnum and inertiam magis ostentabat. Idem, lib. ^od.
Tacitus gives us of Sallustius Crispus, that he imitating Mecaenas, without
Senatorian Dignity, out-stripped in Power with the Prince, many of the Consuls,
and such as had triumphed, and that by a different way, than had been before
used; by richness of Garb, delicateness, living splendidly, even bordering upon
Luxury: yet he retained a vigorousness of Mind, fit for great Employments, and
so much the smarter, by so much as he seemed more sluggish and unactive. Yea he
was next to Mecaenas, on whom the Secrets of the Emperors rested. But withal he
lets us see what old Ministers of State may expect, and what they must not be
troubled at, if they find happen to them, That in their old Age they retain the
Countenance rather of the Princes Friendship, than Power, as he expresses it,
aetate provecta speciem magis, in amicitia Principis, quam vim tenuit.

The State Mountebanks of 1641. (that they might make the Ulcer seem greater,
The Arts of the Long Parliament to remove Ministers of State.
and more dangerous for the advantage of larger Application) first aggravated
the Grievances the People lay under, by the ill conduct of the prime Ministers
of State, and by the representing a plausible Idaea of better Government (if
they might have the modelling of it) courted by little and little the well
meaning, and captivated them with a fair view of its speculative Excellence,
whereby their Fancies were raised to the expectation of a golden Age, and the
cunning and intrieguing Factors (pretending to have no other design but to take
care of the public) gained to themselves the Honorable name of Patriots.

Having thus tickled their Proselytes, and gained their applause, their next
work was to pickeer some great Officers, and Blackening them with the name of
Male-Administrators, or corrupt Officers, slily endeavored to obtain an
Opinion of their own incorruptness; whereas their great design was only to
displace such, to make Niches for their own Statues; and when they found it was
difficult to get such outed of their Preferments, the People were acquainted
that such and such were the only Rubs, and close Enemies to the State: and when
they could have no particular Evidence against them, then they made the People
believe, that such managed their Designs so much more closely and secretly,
whereby they could get no public Proof against them; and so they left them to
the Precondemnation of the People, which served for Jury and Witnesses: and
being thus presented, as ungrateful Monsters to their County, they were baited
in every Coffee-house, and Ale-bench, till at last the loud Cry runs through
the Woods and Lawns; and every one was armed to destroy those reputed Wolves
and Foxes that were believed would destroy their Flocks; and all the Umbrages
of Mis-Government, the real or imaginary Infelicities, were heaped upon the
Animals designed for Sacrifice, and they were singled for victims to conciliate
better times. And thus such Designers being prosperous in their Undertakings
against the great Minister of State, the most renowned Earl of Strafford,
(whose Fall succeeding Ages will never forget) they singled out others by way
of Impeachment, both Bishops and Judges, as was most conspicuous in our late
Troubles, imitated by the Slingers of Paris; which is, and ever will be the
usual Method of all who design to introduce a change of Government.

Therefore wise Princes, when they have chosen and had Experience of the
Ability and Fidelity of such Ministers of State, are careful to shelter them
from the Attacques of the Envious and Ambitious.

For these of all others should be such as have an humble, dutiful, and
diligent Love for their Prince, and his true Service; therefore it is unsafe to
abandon them, if such. That of Micipsa Non Exercitus, neque Thesauri, praesidia
Regni sunt, verum amiei. Sall. Jug.
being most true, That neither Armies or Treasures are so sure Defenses of a
Kingdom, as true Cordial Friends. So Praecipuum Principis opus esse amicos
parare. Panaegyr.
Pliny tells Trajan, It is the chief work of a Prince to procure Friends.

Of such as these it is that Ego ita comperi, omnia Regna, Civitates, Nationes,
usque eo prosperum Imperium habuisse, dum apud eos vera consilia valuerunt:
Vbieunque gratia, timor, voluptas, ea corrupere, post paulo imminutae opes,
deinde ademptum Imperium. Sallust. ad Caesarem.
Sallust says, he has found that all Kingdoms, Cities and Nations, have had
Prosperous Empire, while true Councils have prevailed; but where Favor, Fear,
or Pleasures have corrupted them, they have grown poor, and lost their Rule.

Above all, Princes should avoid Flatteries; for these always give them the
wrong end of the Perspective: therefore Pleraque ab eo vis, adulationibus
abiorum in melius deflexit, nec tamen temperamenti egebat, cum aequabili
auctoritate and gratia apud Principem viguerit. 6. Annal.
Tacitus gives that Commendation to Lepidus, That he converted most things to
the better, from the cruel Flatteries of others, and yet needed no
attemperament, for that he continued in equal Authority and Favor with his
Prince: and of Cornelianus Piso 4. Annal.
he says, Nullins servilis Sententiae sponte Auctor, and quoties necessitas
ingrneret, prudenter moderans; He never was willingly Author of any servile
Opinion, and as often as there was need, he prudently moderated.

I shall only annex to this, what may in general serve as a Character of an
able and useful Minister of State, faintly drawn from a great Original.

Whoever designs to serve his Prince and Country, in the Administration of
Affairs, The Method of attaining to be a Minister of State.
must have had a liberal Education, spent a great portion of his time in
diligently perusing Ancient and Modern Histories, Memoires of great men, the
Laws and Government of his own and Foreign Countries, and the best Treatises of
Politics, and then consider the most judicious and accomplished Persons; and
amongst them, such principally, as in their several Stations have the Practical
Part of Affairs committed to them, both in Courts of Judicature, the Exchequer,
and Admiralty; and in these especially note their dexterity for their
Employments, wherein their Eminencies appear, how their Interests are
interwoven, or independent; what their dispositions and inclinations are,
especially in their obedience to the Government, usefulness to it; their
Treatableness, Avarice, Pride, Ambitious or Factious Propensities; as well
prying into the Vices they conceal, as the laudable Qualities they make
themselves conspicuous by; distinguishing betwixt the natural and constrained
tempers of every one.

If such an one be not Consiliarius natus, he ought to get himself early chosen
a Member of the House of Commons, and then diligently read all such Books as
treat of that Honorable House, peruse the Journals, note well and weigh, not
only what he finds there, but also all the Speeches of the leading men, the
force of their Arguments, and the tendencies of them: Mark well who are
forwardest to supply the Government, whose Talent lies in contriving wholesome
Laws for the benefit of the Subject, who are the best Orators, who the
subtilest or solidest, who affect Popularity, who are suggesting suspicions of
the increase of the Kings Power, who the greatest informers of Grievances, who
cut the Thread evenest betwixt the Royal Prerogative and the Subjects Liberties;
in all these well pondering the grounds upon which every one bottom their
Arguments, contenting himself to be an Auditor and Register for some while; in
his Votes following the wisest and least biased by private Interest.

During the time he is under the Discipline of this Noble School, he must fill
up the intervals of his vacant hours, either in perusing such learned Authors
as treat of the Subjects have been debated in the House, or in conversation
with the eminentest experienced Members, or with such of the Court as he may be
best informed from.

During all which time, he must intermingle the Study of the Laws of those
Foreign Countries his Prince has Correspondence with, and obtain true
Characters of their Ministers of State, their regulation of Trade, their Taxes
and Gabels, their Military Force, the disposedness of any Parties to Faction;
and consider wherein his own Prince, or a Foreigner has better Laws for the
good Government of the Subjects, and for the preserving the Crown in Splendour
and Power.

A Person thus qualified and fitted for his Masters Service, and the public
good of his Country, cannot long want an opportunity of being noted; and in
peacable times, some Ministers of State will be desirous to obtain his
assistance, and will be ready to befriend him for their own advantages, to
alleviate their own burdens, and his Prince will be desirous to be served by a
Person of such a Fund.

If the times be turbulent and factious, it is not amiss for such a Person
(during his Noviceship) to mingle himself with the popular, and Malcontent
Nobility; whereby he may know the bottom of their designs, and the
plausibleness of their Pretenses, the strength of their Reasons, as well as of
their party, and the tendencies of the distinct Interests, that may be united,
in rendering the Government ungrateful to the People, though not in the methods
of modelling or subverting it.

This, I must confess, is a dangerous point, and requires one that has an
Heart and Brain all Amulet against the infection of Disloyalty, and is
dexterous enough to cajole such a Party; which he may the easilier do, by
appearing only as a rasa Tabula, and desirous of following others conduct, and
a well wisher to his Country; and then he shall be sure not to miss a serious
courtship from that party.

How then to extricate himself from those Thickets, Brambles, Coverts, or
Earths, (wherein he has entered to unkennel the Foxes) will be a great
Masterpiece, and requires no common agility, and deliberate forethought. One
of the Houses of Parliament is the fittest Theater for him to unmask himself
in, where he may at one great step pass over to the Loyal side: which will be
done with more advantage, if he take some Critical time, when the signalizing
his Loyalty will be more useful, as well as endearing to his Sovereign; and
when Courage and Resolution will best bestead his Affairs.

Then he is to discover his Talent by demonstratively manifesting his true Zeal
for, and justifying the Government in concurring with the faithfulest and
ablest Ministers of State; or putting himself in the Van, and without
Affectation or Passion, with weighty Reasons, bold and natural utterance,
smartness of Judgment, and Learning, fully determine the point in debate; and
as often as there is occasion, reinforce his Argument with fresh matter.

Here he is to set up his rest, being resolved, for his whole life, never to
desert the Interest, after he has upon so good deliberation resolved upon it.

This Action will soon he discovered to his Prince, of whose Privy Council (if
he were not before) we may suppose he will soon be admitted. Hither he must
carry a resolution, fixed and unalterable, to intend solely his Masters
Service, and the benefit of his People, that nothing of the Rights of the Crown
be diminished, or of the Liberties of the People be invaded. Here no double or
sinister dealing must enter his thoughts, he must be the same in his Prince's
Cabinet, as at the Council Board; he must use a true and dutiful diligence
above his fellows, in attending his Prince's Person, and his Councils; must be
free from unlawful Ambition, Bribery, and By-Ends; all over Oyled, that none
may fasten a gripe upon him; be free, debonaire and affable to all he
converseth with; but withal, wholly reserved as to the discovery of his Masters
Designs: Ready to prefer none but such as may be truly serviceable to their
King and Country; culling out, and recommending to his Employment, only Sober,
Discreet and Useful Persons, in their several Capacities, and never supporting
or countenancing any that once falsify expectation.

By the practicing of all the respective qualifications I have (according to my
poor Ability) set down in this Chapter, and that of the Privy Council, and
those more excellent Methods and Rules his own great Wisdom will suggest, he
shall attain to a great trust with his Master, and a great respect and
veneration from all the Wise and Sober, and shall transmit a noble Example, and
durable Pattern to Posterity.

If it so fall out, that such a Minister of State, cannot in some particular
Affair conform his Judgment to that of his Colleagues, or the Resolutions of his
Prince: It will be glorious in him, (after the laying open, with all modesty
and strength of Reason, the grounds of his Opinion) to submit quietly to his
Prince's Pleasure, with that resignedness a Servant does to a great Master, and
he will be sure to reap the benefit of it: For if his Prince, in the Sequel,
find his Counsel was sound, and not ill timed, he will employ him in greater
matters, and with more confidence than before; and if such a Minister of State
find that he has been too partial, or biased in his Opinion, he will soon
find his own error, and be less apt for the future to commit the like.

However, he is, and ever will be, a true Servant to his Prince, and a good
Minister of State, who, ex animo, and with all possible sincerity, can take as
much pleasure in obeying his Sovereigns Will, when he is laid aside, as he did
in serving of him so long as he was employed by him: Tu Marcellus eras. --
Virg^l, lib. 6. v. 883.


CHAP. XXXII. Of the Kings Soveraignity in appointing Magistrates.
IF it were possible, says In Orat. The necessity of Magistrates, to supply
the Prince's Unubiquitariness.
Libanius, that Princes in their own Bodies could be every where, there would
be no need of Magistrates to be sent into the Provinces: they themselves being
able to administer Justice unto all, as the Sun is sufficient to give light
unto them: but seeing that cannot be (no more than they can fight all their
Battles with their own Hands and Swords) therefore they must execute their
Authority by others, and determine Justice, and causes of right and wrong, not
by their own Tongue and understanding, but by the Sentence of others; so (as
the Polit. lib. 3. c. 16. (...).
Philosopher observes) making to themselves many Eyes and Ears, Hands and Feet.

It is incumbent upon the Prince in his safe keeping of his Empire (says the
Cicero ad Fratrem.
Orator) that he do not exhibit himself only, but all the Ministers likewise of
his power to be useful to the Public; and, as Plutarch Praecept. Polit.
adds, to place every one according to his capacity in his several employment.

For one Philo de Creatione Principis.
man though he have never such alacrity in body and mind, cannot be sufficient
to undergo the greatness, and multitude of business which every day do flow
upon the neck of another, unless they choose co-adjutors, out of the best men of
known Wisdom, Courage, Prudence, and Piety, who not only are free from Pride
(the frequent concomitant of Power) but are abhorrers of it, as an hateful, and
exceeding great evil. For such men are most fit helpers and assistants to good
and worthy Princes.

Therefore Lib. 1. c. 10.
Bodin, Arnisaeus Page 27. All Magistracy derived from the Sovereign.
, and other Digesters of Politics, make it the third right of Majesty to
appoint and constitute Magistrates, who having their Authority flowing from the
Prince as the fountain, derive from him all their Power of command. So Dio.
Mecaenas advises Augustus, ut solus sine Plebe, Populo, ac Senatu,
Magistratus crearet, that he alone, without the People and Senate create
Magistrates: and Zonaras rightly affirms, that creatio Magistratuum maxima pars
est muneris Imperatoris, the creation of Magistrates is the greatest part of
the Office of an Emperor. The Sovereign possessing his proper Power without a
Superior; Arnis^us, cap. 11. p. 267.
the Magistrates are Instruments, by which the Sovereign executes his Commands:
for it is reason he alone have the power of appointing them, who has the right
Intercidere Magistratuum iniquitatem, infectumque reddere qui^quid fieri non
eportuerit. Plin. Panaegyr.
to redress the unjust Actions of the Magistrates, and to make void whatsoever
ought not to have been done by them. Lampridius in Alexandro. Meliorem esse
Rempublicam and prope tutiorem, in qua Princeps malus sit, ea in qua mali
Princip^ Ministri.
Hence it is, a Prince is to be very solicitous in the choice of Magistrates;
for it is better for a Commonwealth, and almost safer, when a Prince is evil,
than when the Prince's Ministers are so: Therefore in the choice of them, the
indoles, aptness and ability of the persons for their respective Offices are
principally to be regarded; for (...). Plut. Polit. Pracept.
omnia non pariter rerum sunt omnibus apta. Some are fit for (...). Tiut.
Polit. Pracept.
Military, and others for Civil commands; Properti^s. lib 3. The use of various
Magistrates for vario^; Employments.
some for the Consulting, Contriving part, others for the Executive; some
because there is use of their Popularity, others of their Prudence, others of
their Justice; some to conciliate the Subjects dutifulness to their Prince,
others to represent the Prince gracious to the People; some for the care of the
Prince's Revenue, that he never want a Fund against all contingencies; others
to see the dispending of it for the Princes honor, and his own and the Peoples
benefit. So that in (...). Tiut. Polit. Pracept.
whomsoever any, or especially all Virtues, are conspicuous, much is to be
attributed to him, and a Prince's Eye should soon discover him to employ him
according to his Talent.

Some Magistrates are absolutely necessary for the Administration of the
Government, without whom there cannot be that (...), as the Philosopher calls
it: such are Lord Chancellors, Lord Treasurers, Lord Lieutenants, Judges,
Sheriffs, etc. others for the more splendid part of the Government, which are
Officers of the Court rather than Magistrates, as Master of the Horse, Grooms
of the Stole, Bedchamber and Privy-Chamber Gentlemen, Master of Ceremonies,
Kings of Arms, etc.

Therefore the Philosopher Absque necessariis Magistratibus Civitas ne
consistere quidem potest; absque its qui ad ornatum and (...) linem pertinent,
praclare adminislrari non potest. 6. Polit. c. 8.
rightly observes, That without necessary Magistrates a City cannot subsist;
and without those who are for Ornament and Beauty, the City cannot be
administered honorably.

It is of excellent use to the Public, as well as advantageous to themselves,
that the young Nobility and Gentry be bred up in Learning, Young Nobility and
Gentry to be so educated as they may be fitted for Magistracy.
Military Discipline, and all other ways that might accomplish them for the
service of their Prince and Country: for where a Prince can be served by the
Nobility and ancient Gentry, it much facilitates the execution of their trusts;
but in some cases it may be requisite to employ those of great Wisdom, Judgment
and Diligence (the Endowments of noble Minds) though not of so noble Extract.
So 6. Annal.
Mecaenas advised Augustus that he should choose the praefectus praetorio, out
of the Horsemen, lest if he were one of the Nobility he might attempt something
against the Prince: and so it is noted in Quod p^r negotiis ^eque ^upra erat.
Tacitus, That the Province was given to Sabinus, not for any excellency, but
that he was fit and not above the employment. But this caution is unnecessary
where Kingdoms are hereditary, and depend not upon the approbation of Soldiery
or Senate. Princes not to give too great Powers to any.
Above all things Princes should take care that they commit not any of their
Royal Prerogatives to the Magistrates, or their Curators: It Is not safe for a
Prince to entrust any of these in a Subjects hands; for it is by many Histories
apparent, that when by reason of a Prince's Captivity, Minority, his
prosecuting some War out of his Country (whereby a Kingdom cannot be governed
without a Viceroy or Protector, with the whole Authority of a Prince) the
sweetness of this Power has tempted them to usurp or do ill Offices to their
Prince or People. (...). Polit. lib. 5. c. 11.
Hence the Philosopher advises not to make such great, who in Wit and Manners
are bold and daring.

Therefore it is not safe for Princes to keep Viceroys long in their
employments, especially if there be any danger of their Ambitious aims to get
the Sovereignty into their own hands; or that they will not be observant of the
due Execution of the Laws, or for private ends will suppress the Nobility,
Great Ministers not to be long continued in the same Station.
or oppress the People; by their Interest pervert the course of Justice, or
introduce new Laws, by surprising the Sovereign in gaining his consent. In all
such cases the rule of the Qui parvo tempore Magistratui praesunt, non tam
facile nocere possunt quam qui longo.
Philosop^er is most true, They that for a short time obtain the Magistracy,
cannot so soon hurt, as they which enjoy it long; as he instanceth in
Demagogues in Popular Government, and the Dynastae in Oligarchies, which by
that means became Tyrants.

Julius Caesar Clapmarius de Arcanis Imperil, lib. 2. c. 18.
and Augustus made all their Magistrates annually; whereby they gratified all
the eminent men of the Commonwealth by rotation: but Alii taedio novae curae,
semel placita pro aeternis servavisse, quidam invidia, ne plures fruerentur;
sunt qui existiment, ut callidum ejus ingenium, ita anxium judicium.
Tiberius did otherwise, giving this reason for it, That Horse-leeches having
sucked much blood are at quiet, and so the biting of fresh men are most sharp.
Some think, says Tacitus, he did it only to seclude others from enjoying of
them, and to prevent his yearly trouble in choosing, which as it would oblige
the Elected, so would disoblige the Candidates; but most ascribe it to the
subtilty of his Nature, quod nec Tacitus 1. Annal. cap. ult.
eminentes virtutes sectabatur, and rursum vitia oderit; ab optimis periculum
sibi, a pessimis dedecus publicum metuebat; He did not make great search, or
take much care to find men of the most eminent Virtues, and yet he hated the
Vicious; fearing from the best danger to himself, and from the worst disgrace
to the Commonweal.

In our constitution of Government, The Sovereign's Power to change Magistrates.
a most excellent temper is observed, where by the Princes Power is reserved to
change the prime Ministers of State and Judicature at his pleasure; which
obliges them to great care to act justly in their Places, and prevents
Sedition, where any other had the Power of Electing: for it is the Power of
choosing in any other than the Sovereign, that is the only cause of Faction; not
what the (...). 2. Polit. c. 5.
Philosopher notes against Socrates, That the same continually being
Magistrates, is the cause of Sedition, by reason of the Envy of the rejected
Candidates, and also among Spirited and Martial People that expect those
employment.

The Kings of England have undoubtedly the sole Power of creating, and
appointing Magistrates, See more of this in the next Chapter.
and Officers of greatest Authority. So Smith de Repub. Angliae, lib. 2.
the grave Author of the Commonwealth of England affirms, That in the
appointing all the great Officers and Ministers of the Realm, whether
Spiritual, or Temporal, the highest are immediately in the Kings Power to
nominate, and the inferior by Authority derived from him.

So the Kings of England appoint the High Commissioner, and all other the great
Ministers and Officers in Scotland; the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Justices, and
other great Ministers and Officers in Ireland, and by Letters Patents appoint a
Prorex, locum tenens, or Guardian of the Realm in their absence, before whom
even Parliaments have been held: but it were endless to descend to the
particular employments of Magistrates under the Sovereign. Therefore I shall
only note what the MS. Speech, 1 Eliz. penes Rad. Thoresly de Leedes, Genesis
Chancellor in the Queens name said to Sir Thomas Gargrave, chosen Speaker of
the Commons House, That to the head of every body Politic, b^^ngeth
immediately or mediately the assignment, and admitting of every Member of the
Body to his Ministry, and Duty; the contrary whereof were monstrous in Nature
and Reason.

It is both a great glory and happiness to a Prince when he is served by
Magistrates of great probity: for the skill and watchfulness, The necessary
Care of a Prince in choosing Magistrates.
as well as indulgent care of a Prince is thereby discovered, and revered in
such a choice; and the evil Complexion of the People is chargeable mostly on
the Magistrates. Therefore what the Chancellor MS. Speech Trim. Term. 1557.
in a Speech in the Star Chamber, by the Queens direction told the Justices, is
applicable to all sorts of Magistrates, That the not, or remiss doing of
Justice, must by the Prince be charged upon their shoulders, as the immediate
Executors of the Law.

The qualifications of Magistrates may be the Subject of a Common place; I
shall only hint some more necessary, referring the rest to the succeeding
Chapter. First they ought to be Persons undisturbed with Passions; for as they
are appointed to correct the Vicious, so they should begin the Reformation at
home. Chilon's Laertius in vita Chilonis.
Brother desiring to know why he was not chosen at Sparta as well as Chilon, he
answered that he knew how to bear an Injury, which his Brother did not; for in
Public employments those who are the Censores morum, and chastise the
Infringers of the Laws, must expect Calumnies and evil Entreaties from the
incorrigible and debauched: and such must be resolved to perform their duty
without any other by-end of Revenge, Tyranny and Imperiousness on the one hand;
or hasty, rast Cholerickness, Partiality or Corruptness on the other.

Plato Lib. 4. de LL.
advises that the wealthiest be chosen for the better support of the Dignity;
but withal, that they be such as are exemplary in obeying the Laws. For none
are more fit to serve their Prince and profit the Subjects, than such as are
obedient to the Laws, which when they make a rule of their own Actions, they
will be sure to exact it of others.

It is great disparagement to a Prince, to choose men of vicious or
uncommendable lives, or such as have not worth and honor to commend them. So
the Princes of Europe think the Grand Seignior not so well served by Slaves,
nor was it so commendable in the Roman Emperors to make their Freemen of
greater Power with them, in the managery of greater affairs, than Consuls or
Senators; which made Praecipuum indicium non magni Principis, magni Liberti.
Panaegyr.
Pliny say, It was the principal sign of a Prince not great, where the Freemen
were great.

The Prince cannot be presumed to choose his Magistrates by his own knowledge of
their abilities, and fitness for their several Employments, but must trust such
as are about him: therefore it becomes them well to know the qualifications of
such as are to bear Office; for the Rule of Tacitus Melius officiis and
administrationibus non peccaturos praeficere, quam damnare cum pe^^arint. Vita
Agricolae.
is to be observed, That it is better not to prefer to Offices and
Administrations such as will transgress, than to condemn them who have
transgressed.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Sovereigns appointing Judges, Courts of Justice, and
other Officers.
HAving treated in the last Chapters of such as have a general inspection into,
and (by the Sovereigns Election, and placing them) a power of advising, at
least, how the whole frame of Government is to be disposed, as both Prince and
People may be happy: I come now more particularly to the Ministerial Officers
of Justice, such as are the Lord Chancellor or Keeper, Lord Treasurer, the two
Lord Chief Justices, and the rest of the Judges, whether they be the Judges at
Westminster, or those of Assizes, Oyer and Terminer, to try Causes in their
respective Circuits.

I undertake this Task, Lugduni tanquam Rhetor dicturns ad Aram, The Author's
Apology.
or one that procul profanus adorat: The Subject being only fit to be handled
by such as have read and digested the whole Body of the Laws, and are eminent
in the Profession of them: whereas I must own my self to have tasted only so
much of that Ornamental and most useful Study, as may quicken a dull and
languid Appetite, to praise, or rather admire it; than that I can hope to
benefit the judicious Reader, by an imperfect Description of their Calling and
Office, who by the Sovereign are appointed to be the Oracles of the Law, and
the Ministers of his Justice, whose great Wisdom and Knowledge all ought to
reverence. But as they make so great a Figure in the Government, I could not
omit them, though it be but to salute the Skirts, and hold up the Train of
their Scarlet Robes.

SECT. 1.
IN Edward the Elders Days, those that gave Judgment under the King, King
Edward the Elder's Law about Judges. Gerefa.
had the name Gerefa, under which name, Aldermen, Earls, Presidents, Prefects,
Governors, etc. were comprehended. From whence with the Germans, the word
Grave is used, for an Earl, President, Judge, etc. and our Sheriff is from
Scyre gerev, Raeve, or Graeve of the Shire. The Charge in that Kings Laws, runs
thus, Eadweard Cyning vyt thaem Gerefum eallum, that gede man swa ribte domas
swa gerihtoste cunnon, and hit on thaere dombec stand; ne wandigeth for nanum
thingum folcrihte to gerecanne, etc.
Eadward the King wills, that all his Graeves give so right Judgment as they
can most Righteously, as it stands in their Judgment Book, (that is, as we may
suppose, in the written Laws) fearing for no thing or cause, to declare or
pronounce Right or Justice to the People. The which publishing of Justice, they
shall appoint at certain times or Terms when they will perform it, and declare
the same. So that in this seems to be comprehended what is more at large in the
Oath of a Judge in After-Ages.

We must principally consider that the King is the Fountain and original of all
Justice in his Kingdom; The King is the Fountain of Justice.
therefore Bracton Lib. 3. cap. 9, 10. Rex and non alius debet judicare, si
solas ad id sufficere possit, cum ad hoc per veritatem Sacramenti teneatur
astrictus, sicut Dei Vicartus and Minister in terra.
says, That the King, and not another, ought to judge, if he alone were
sufficient to do it, being bound by his Oath to it; therefore the King ought to
exercise the Power of the Law, as Gods Vicar. But if our Lord the King be not
sufficient to determine all Causes, that the Burden may be lighter, divided
among several Persons, he ought to choose Men wise, and fearing God, See
Britton, fol. 1. Coke, 4. Inst. c. 7.
and appoint them Justiciaries.

Yet this surrogating of Judges in the Kings respective Courts, does not divest
the King of his Power; for as the same Rex habet ordinariam Jurisdictionem, and
omnia Jura manu sua, quae nec ita delegari possunt, quin ordinaria remaneant
cum ipso Rege.
Bracton says, The King has ordinary Jurisdiction, and all Laws are in his
Hands, which cannot be so delegated, but that they remain with the King. From
which, and other Authorities, Mr. Lambard says, Archaion.
That the Courts derive their Powers from the Crown, their original; and
drawing by one and one (as it were so many Roses) from the Garland of the
Prince, leave nevertheless the Garland it self undespoiled of the Sovereigns
Virtue in the Administration of Justice.

Therefore says Sir Edward Tit. Discontinue de Process, part 7. 30.
Coke, By the Common Law all Pleas were discontinued by the Death of the King;
and Process awarded, and not returned before his Death, was lost -- For by the
Death of the King, not only the Justices of both the Benches, and the Barons of
the Exchequer, but Sheriffs also, and Escheators, and all Commissions of Oyer
and Terminer, Jail-deliver, and Justices of Peace, are determined by the Death
of the Predecessor that made them.

Therefore the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. declares it to be Treason, if any man kill
the Chancellor, The Judges represent the King's Person.
Treasurer, or the Kings Justices, of the one Bench or the other, Justices in
Air or Assise, or any other Justices assigned to hear and determine, being in
their places, doing their Offices. The Id. 3. Instit. p. 18 and 140.
reason whereof is assigned, because all these represent the King's Royal
Person, in his own Courts, by his own Commission under the Great Seal, in the
very Execution of the Kings Royal Office, viz. Administration of public
Justice to his People.

As therefore the King at his Coronation, Facies fieri in omnibus Justiciis
tuis aequam and rectam Justitiam, and discretionem in misericordia and
veritate, secundum vires tuas.
takes an Oath to make to be done, in all his Judgments, equal and right
Justice, and Discretion in Mercy and Truth, according to his Power: So he lays
the Burden thereof upon the Judges, according to that of E. 3. for the
Pleasure of God, and quietness of our Subjects, as to save our Conscience, and
keep our Oath, by the assent of our great Men, and other of our Council, we
have commanded our Justices, that they shall from henceforth do even Law, and
Execution of right to all our Subjects, Rich and Poor, without having regard to
any Person, etc. Therefore before this in Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus aut
differemus Justitiam vel Rectum. c. 29.
Magna Charta we find, that the King will sell, deny or defer Justice to none.

Yet from hence it does not follow, that if in the opinion of some, the King
does not do Justice, that therefore any Subject should conclude, as the Master
of the Hospitallers of Jerusalem in England, at Clerkenwell, Anno 1252. 37 H.
3. did. The Story is thus told by Hist. p. 826, 827. Edit. prioris.
Matthew Paris:

The Master waiting a time, when he might discourse with the King, he
complained of some Injuries done him, The King loses not his Authority, though
he do not Justice.
and showed the King some Charters of Protection, of himself and his Ancestors.
The King answered with an Oath, and in Wrath; You Prelates and Religious,
especially Templars and Hospitallers, have so many Liberties and Charters, that
they make you proud, etc. Therefore they ought prudently to be revoked, which
imprudently have been granted to you; for even the Pope oftentimes revokes his
Grants, with a non obstante: and the King told him, so he would do. To all
which the Cui Magister Hospitalis respondit alac^iter, vultu elevato, Quid est
quod dici^, Domine Rex? Absit ut in ore tuo recitetur hoc verbum illepidum and
absurdum. Quamdia Justitiam observas, Rex esse poteris: and quam cito bane
infregeris, Rex esse desines.
Master (says Matt. Paris) answered cheerfully, and with a lifted up
Countenance, What is this you say, my Lord the King? far be it from you to
speak so absurd a thing. As long as you observe Justice you may be a King; and
as soon as ever you break this, you cease to be a King. Thus he would make
Dominion founded in Justice, as others in Grace. But I need not add many
Authorities upon this Head; for by the universal Suffrage of the profound
Lawyers, the Kings of England solely nominate, create, and Dyer, fol. 56.
appoint all the Judges of the great Courts at Westminister, and may remove
them at their Pleasure, and alone make Davis. 45.
and appoint Justices of Oyer and Terminer, of Jail-deliver, Justices of the
Peace, Sheriffs, and the like Officers, and Coke 4. Inst. n. 4. 14. 114. 117.
remove them when they see Cause: and the Bulstrod. 3. 296. 1 H. 7. c. 25.
Prerogative of making Judges cannot be given or claimed by a Subject.

The King has also Power to name, create, make, Sheppard's Grand Abridgment,
part 3. p. 53.
and remove the great Officers Ecclesiastical and Civil, by Sea and Land, as
Archbishops, Bishops, (by way I suppose of Conge deslier, The King's placing
and displacing all Great Officers.
and Translation) Lord Chancellor or Keeper, Lord Treasurer, Lord President,
Lord Privy Seal, Lord High Steward, Lord Admiral, Lord High Constable, Earl
Marshal, Lord Chamberlain, Privy Counselors, the Marshal or Steward of the
Kings House, and the rest of the Officers of his Household, Master of the Horse,
Officers of the Mint, of the Castles, Port-Towns, and Shipping, Lord
Lieutenants, and many more too tedious to be named. So that either mediately or
immediately, all Officers are by the Kings appointment; which is not only a
manifest badge, but a necessary appurtenance of the Sovereignty.

SECT. 2 The Court of High-Steward.
THE Kings Courts have been various, The Court of the High-Steward.
as that of the Privy Council, called the Council Board, of which I have spoke
before. The Court of the High-Steward of England, entitled, Placita Coronae
coram -- Seneschallo Angliae, disused since the Reign of Henry the Fourth; and
now a Lord High-Steward is only appointed, pro hac vice, with limitations for
the Trials of some Peers of the Kingdom upon Indictment. His Power anciently
was Coke 4 Inst. c. 4.
Supervidere and regulare sub Rege, and immediate post Regem, totum Regnum
Angliae and omnes Ministros Legum, infra idem Regnum, temporibus Pacis, and
Guerrarum. The next Court which is now totally suppressed, was the Honorable
Court of Star Chamber, The Star Chamber Court.
of ancient time styled Coram Rege and Concilio suo, and coram Rege and
Concilio suo in Camera stellata, of which I shall have occasion to write
something in the Chapter below.

SECT. 3 The Court of King's Bench.
AS to the great and standing Courts, The King's Bench.
the first of them that is mentioned in Ancient Writers, is that of the Kings
Bench, coram Rege. This, Rex illarum Curiarum habet unam propriam sicut Aulam
Regiam, and Justiciarios Capitales qui proprias Causas Regias terminant.
Bracton says, was the Kings proper Court, called the Kings Hall, and had for
Judges in it Chief-Justices, which determined the Kings proper Causes, etc. The
same Justiciariorum quidam sunt Capitales, generales, perp^tui, and majores a
latere Regis resid^ates, qui emnium aliorum corrigere tenentur injurias and
errores. Lib. 3. c. 7. fol. 108 b.
Author speaking of the Justices of this Court, says, That some of them were
Capital, General, perpetual, and the greater sitting by the Kings side, which
were to correct the injuries and errors of all others.

Fleta in describing this Court, says My Lord Coke, gives this account, That
the King in this Court has his Justiciaries, as well Knights as Clergymen, as
the Kings Lieutenants in England (as the Lords Justices were sometimes I
suppose in Ireland) before Coram quibus and non alibi nisi coram semetipso, and
Concilio suo, vel A^ditoribus specialibus, falsa Judicia and Errores
Justiciariorum re^ertuntur and corriguntur.
whom, and no where else, unless before the King himself, and his Council or
special Commissioners, false Judgments and Errors of Justices are reversed and
corrected: and there are determined Breeves of Appeals, and other Breeves upon
Criminal Actions, and Injuries against the Peace of the King. And Bracton
says, That in Criminal Matters, if they touched the King's Person, as Treason,
they were tried coram Rege; if concerning private matters, then before the
Justices only.

By many Records it appears, The Kings of England used to fit in this Court.
that the King sometimes sat in this Court, and that sometimes the King
ordered it to follow his Court, as particularly in 28 E. 1. Cap. 5.
it was established in the Statute of Articuli super Chartas.

Robert de Bruis was the first Capitalis Justiciarius ad placita coram Rege, 8
March Pat. 52. H. 3. m. 24.
52 H. 3. the Title of Justiciarius Angliae (of whose great Power the learned
Glossary.
Spelman and Sacred Laws. Sir Henry Spelman about the Office of the
Chief Justice of England.
Mr. White have given an account) having an end in Phillip Basset, who was
advanced to that place 45 H. 3. -- Who desires further satisfaction, may
consult Mr. Crompton's Jurisdiction des Courts, c. 4. Sir Ed. Coke, Sir William
Dugdale, Mr. Prynne, and the Authors they cite, who are many and learned, and
do at large treat of its Jurisdiction and the Practice in it, which are foreign
to my Design.

SECT. 4. The Court of Common Pleas. The Common Pleas.

THis Court of Common Pleas appears to be as ancient as Henry the First's time;
for in his Charter to the Coke's Reports, part 8.
Abbat of B. he grants Connusance of all Pleas; so that neither the Justices of
the one Bench, or of the other, or Justices of Assize should meddle. Bracton
Cognoscunt de omnibus Placitis de quibus Authoritatem habent cognoscendi, and
sine Warranto Jurisdictionem non habent nec Coercionem. Lib. 3. c. 10. fol. 105
b.
says, This Court had Cognizance of all Pleas, of which Authority is given
them, without warrant, they neither having Jurisdiction, or Coercion. Therefore
Sir Edward Coke says, That regularly this Court cannot hold any Common-Plea in
any Action, real, personal, or mixed, but by Writ out of Chancery, returnable in
this Court. This Court proper for Pleas betwixt Party and Party.


Those that treat of this Court, agree, That it was for hearing and determining
all Controversies in matters Civil, betwixt Party and Party; called the
Common Pleas, as contradistinct from Pleas of the Crown, and was anciently kept
in the Kings own Palace. Not to follow the King's Court.


In Magna Charta it is granted, That the Common Pleas shall not follow the
Kings Court, but shall be held in a certain place. The Exchequer having been
the place where these Causes were heard, till Articuli super Chartas, cap. 4.
28 E. 1. that by Statute it was provided, that no Common-Plea shall from
henceforth be held in the Exchequer, contrary to the form of the Great Charter.

The first, who had the Appellation of Capitalis Justiciarius in this Court,
according to Sir William Dugdale, was Gilbert de Preston, who by that Title had
his Livery of Robes, Liberat. 1 E. 1. m. 4.
1 E. 1.

The number of the Justices See Sir William Dugdale's Origines Juridiciales, p.
39 b. The number of the Justices varied.
3 E. 2. were Six, 14 E. 3. they were Nine; the latter end of Henry the Fourth,
and all the Reign of Henry the Seventh they were but Four. Those that would be
satisfied about the Jurisdiction of this Court, may have recourse to Mr.
Richard Crompton's Jurisdiction of Courts c. 7. fol. 91. the Year-Book quoted
in Ash his Promptuary, Sir Henry Spelman's Glossary tit. Bancus, and Capitalis
Justiciar. de Banco Communi, p. 417. Sir W. Dugdale's Origines Juridiciales,
Prynne's Animadversion, p. 52. and many other good Authors cited by them.

SECT. 5. Court of Chancery.
THE Court of Chancery in some Writers is placed the first, Co^rt of Chancery.
in others as I have placed it. Although it is true what Sir Edward Sir Edw.
Coke's Arguments for the Antiquity of the Chancery.
Coke says, That Kings had their Chancellors in the Saxon times (indeed he
adds the British also, of which little can be known;) yet I dare not avouch
with him, that the Court of Chancery was then, as now, the only Court out of
which Original Writs do issue: it is true, that to the Charter of King Spehran.
Tom. 1. Council. p. 631.
Edward the Confessor ma^e to the Abbat of Westminster, amongst the Witnesses
it is said, Ego Swardus Swyerg trius in Spelman.
Notarius ad vicem Reynbaldi Regiae dignitatis Cancellarii hanc cartam scripsi,
and subscripsi: So Glossary, fol. 106.
Adulph is accounted Chancellor to King Edgar, and T^rketil to King Edred, and
King Edmund, and Wolsine to King Athelstan; and that the Chancellor had a
Court, may be presumed from what is found in the Book of Ely (writ as it is
supposed about King Stephen's time) that King Aethelred who Reigned about Anno
978. appointed, and granted, Answer. Canceliarius qui vel Regum praecepta aut
Acta Judicum scribit. Spelm. Gloss. fol. 104.
that the Chapter of Ely, then, and ever after in the Kings Court, should have the
dignity of the Chancery: which albeit, as Sir Edward Coke says, it was void in
Law, to grant the Chancellourship of England in Succession; yet it proves,
that then there was a Court of Chancery. As to the first, it is apparent, that
the Chancellor then had the power of composing the Charters; and before Seals
were in use, might also subscribe with the Sign of the Cross, as other of the
Kings Officers did; but this does not prove what kind of Court he was made
Judge of: for there the Notary in the Chancellors room signs last, and in the
Tom. 1. p. 486.
Councils of Sir Henry Spelman's Edition, I find Adulph styled Herefordensis
Id. p. 489.
Ecclesiae Catascapus, signing last of the Abbats. See Spelman. Glossar. p. 106.
As to the Book of Ely, I know not how to understand that the Church should
have any dignity of Chancellorship in the Kings Court; and if it be meant of
the Bishop of that See only, it might possibly be meant to be the principal
Chirographer, or drawer of the Kings Charters. As to what is found in the
Mirror, it is of no great validity, being writ according to the then custom of
the Age; wherein the Author says, That Enrollments Pur le Enrolments de Pardon
de Roy in le Chancery en temps le Roy Alfred.
of Pardons of the King, were in the Chancery in the time of King Alfred;
Although Mauricius Regis Cancellarius, by that title subscribes as witness to the
Charter of King William the Conqueror, to the Abbey of Westminster; yet none of
these prove, that such a Court was in those Ages constituted, as we now call
the Chancery. For Sir Henry Spelman Gless. p. 107 ^.
proves the Chancery was no Court, but only the Ship (as he calls it) of the
Kings Writs and Charters in old time, now consisting of three Parts, sc. e
Collegio Scribarum Regiorum, e Foro Juris communis, and e Praetorio boni and
aqui.

Mr. Lambard Archaion, p. 62, 63.
has proved that till the Reign of King Edward the First, we find nothing of
the Chancellors hearing and determining of Civil causes: for till then the
Justiciarius Angliae had the great Power, Sir William Dugdale 's Origines
Jurid. fol. 36. b.
which being then restrained ad placita coram Rege tenenda, the King, together
with the trust and charge of the Great Seals, appointed him to represent his
own Royal and extraordinary Pre-eminence of Jurisdiction in Civil Causes: and
he gives this particular reason for his opinion, That Britton, a Learned Lawyer
in Edward the First's time, writing of all other Courts, from the highest
Tribunal to a Court Baron, makes no mention of this Chancery. Yet toward 28
E. 1. c. 5.
the latter end of his Reign we find it enacted, The Chancellor and Justices of
the King's Bench to follow the King.
That the Chancellor and Justices of the Bench should follow the King (that is,
remove with the Kings Court) so that he might have at all times near him some
Sages of the Law, which were able to order all such matters as should come unto
the Court at all times when need should require.

Yet this Act did not give an absolute Power to the Chancellor alone, of
determining in such Civil Causes; as may seem by that Law, which was made 20
Ed. 3. Cap. 6.
where it appears the Treasurer was joined with him, to hear complaints against
Sheriffs, Escheators, etc. something like this about Purveyors, and Escheators,
that they might not oppress, was enacted Cap. 3.
36 Ed. 3.

Nevertheless Mr. Lambard observes, When Causes in Equity determined in
Chancery.
that it does not appear in the Reports of the Common Law, that there is any
frequent mention of Causes usually drawn before the Chancellor for help in
Equity, till from the time of King Henry the fourth; nor are there found any
Bills and Decrees in Chancery before the 20 of H. 6. such Causes as since that
time were heard in that Court, having formerly been determined in the Lords
House of Parliament.

So Sir Edward Coke says, In the Chancery are two Courts; First, the ordinary
coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria, where in the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal proceeds according to the right line Secundum Legen and
Consuetudinem Angliae.
of the Laws and Statutes of the Realm. Secondly, extraordinary according to
the Rule of Equity, Secundum aequum and bonum.

But it is not my business to enter into particulars. The curious may consult
Sir Edward 4. Instit. c. 8.
Coke, Mr. Richard Cromptom, cap. 3. Sir Henry Spelman 1. glossar. 1. de
Cancellario a page 105. ad page 113. Ryley's Appendix, Ash's Repertory tit.
Courts, Sect. 2. Roll's Abridgment, p. 374. to 587. Prynne's Animadversions, p.
48.

Anno 5 Eliz. Cap. 18.
it was Enacted that the Lord Keeper for the time being has always had, used
and executed, and so may for the future, The Lord Keeper equal to Lord
Chancellor.
the like place, Authority, Pre-eminence, Jurisdiction, Execution of Law, etc.
as the Lord Chancellor of England for the time being, lawfully used.

The Oath of the Chancellor or Lord Keeper, is to be found Rot. Parl. 10 R. 2.
col. 8.
10 R. 2. consisting of six Parts: First, That well and truly he shall serve
our Sovereign Lord the King and his People in the Office of Chancellor, The
Oath of the Lord Chancellor.
or Lord Keeper. Secondly, That he shall do right to all manner of people, Poor
and Rich, after the Laws and usages of the Realm. Thirdly, That he shall truly
counsel the King, and his Counsel he shall layen, i. e. hide or keep secret.
Fourthly, That he shall not know, nor suffer the hurt, or disheriting of the
King, or that the Rights of the Crown be decreased by any means, as far as he
may let it. Fifthly, That if he may not let it, he shall make it clearly and
expressly to be known to the King, with his true Advice and Counsel. Sixthly,
That he shall do and purchase the Kings profit in all that he reasonably may,
as God help him, and by the Contents of this Book.

SECT. 6. Of the Court of the Exchequer.
SIR Edward Coke says, the Authority of this Court is of original Jurisdiction
without any Commission. Bracton mentions nothing of this Court, and Fleta
gives a very short account, that the King has his Court and his Justiciaries
residing at his Exchequer, but descends to no particulars of the Jurisdiction.
Fol. 2 b.
But (x) Britton (who lived in Edward the First's Reign, (and all along writes
in the name of the King, as if his whole work had been the Kings) gives us an
account of the Nature of this Court in several particulars, To hear and
determine all Causes which touch the Kings Debts, his Fees, and the incident
Causes, without which these cannot be tried: So of Purprestures, Rents, Farms,
Customs, and generally of whatever appertained to the Revenue of the Crown, the
Tenants and Receivers of it; so that the Court is divided into two Parts, viz.
Judicial Accounts, called Scaccarium Computorum, and into the Receipt of the
Exchequer.

The principal Officer is the Lord Treasurer of England, who formerly had this
great Office, The Lord Treasurer principal Officer of the Exchequer.
by delivery of the Golden Keys of the Treasury, and has the Office this day
by delivery of a white Staff at the Kings Will and Pleasure; his Oath is
muchwhat the same as the Chancellors, differing principally in that clause,
That the Kings Treasure he shall truly keep and dispend.

The other great Officers are the Treasurer of the Exchequer, the Chancellor
and Chief Baron and other Barons of the Exchequer; The rest of the Officers are
particularly reckoned in Sir 4. Instit. fol. 106 107, 108.
Edward Coke.

The Oath of the Barons of the Exchequer is to be found in the Statutes The
Oath of (...) Barons of the (...) chequer.
20 Ed. 3. cap. 2. whereof the principal parts are, That he shall truly charge
and discharge all manner of People, as well Poor as Rich, that for Highness,
nor for Riches, nor for Hatred nor Estate of no manner of person or persons,
nor for any Deed, Gift, nor Promise of any person, the which is made to him,
nor by Craft, nor by Ingen, he shall let the Kings Right, nor none other
Persons right he shall disturb, let or respite, contrary to the Laws of the
Land, nor the Kings Debts he shall put in respite, where that they may goodly
be levied; that the Kings need he shall speed above all others; that neither
for gift, wages, nor good deed, he shall layne, disturb nor let the profit, or
reasonable advantage of the King, in the advantage of any other person, or of
himself; that he shall take of no person, for to do wrong or right, to delay or
to deliver, or to delay the People that have to do before him, etc. where he
may know any wrong or prejudice to be done to the King, he shall put, and do
all his power, and diligence that to redress; and if he may not do it, that he
tell it to the King, or to them of the Council, that may make relation to the
King, if he may not come to him.

Sir Edward Coke 4. Instit. p. 103. and 110, 111.
has commented on the Mirror, to explain all the Power and particular business
of the Court, and further observes that the Patent of the King to the Chief
Baron, the rest of the Barons, Attorney General, and Solicitor, are not so
long as the King pleases, but quam diu se been gesserint, which is interpreted
a place for life; and there is good reason, being too many changes would give
too many an insight into the Kings Revenue.

There is a Manuscript Codex niger, c. 1. -- Nulli licet statutum Scaccarii
infringere vele is quavis temeritate resistere -- Habet enim hoc commune cum
ipsa Dom. Regis Curia, in qua ipse in propria persona Jura decernit, quod nec
Recordationi nec Sententia in eo latae liceat alicui contradicere.
of Gervasius Tilburiensis, writ in the time of Henry the second, which gives
an account, how it came to be called the Exchequer, from a checked Covering of
the Table, at which the Officers of the Court sat; and says, That it is
lawful for none to infringe the Statutes of the Exchequer, or by any rashness
to resist them; it having that common with the Court of the Lord the King, in
which he in his proper person gives Judgment, that it is not lawful for any to
contradict, either the Record or Sentence. By which it appears that this Court
was distinct from the Kings Bench, where the King sat in person, and that by
the Institution of William the Conqueror, not only the great Barons of this
Realm as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, but also the Justice of England, as
President thereof, by his Office, were Members of this Court, and so continued
to do long after, as the Judicious Origines Juris^ic. fol. 50.
Sir William Dugdale has by Precedent shown: Mr. Prynne has given us two
Records (out of the Exchequer Commun. Term. Mich. 35 H. 3. Rot. 2.
34 H. 3. and Rishanger 40 H. 3.) that that King in his proper person sat, and
gave judgments in the Court of Exchequer, and gave not only Rules to be
observed about the Revenue, Sheriffs and Bailiffs, but also concerning
punishing Blasphemy, defending Pupils, Orphans and Widows, and how the Magnates
deported themselves to their Tenants: and if Inquirant qualiter Magnates se
gerunt erga homines suo^, si forte non possunt plenarie corrigere, tunc
ostendant easdem transgressiones Dom. Regi.
they found them transgressing, that they correct them as they can; and if they
cannot fully correct them, they show the same transgressions to the King.

He has also given an account how, 54 H. 3. Pat. 54 H. 3. m. 22. dorso. and
Incep. 55. Rot. 3. dorso.
the accounts of the Sheriffs into the Exchequer were to be digested, and in
Michaelmass-Term, the same Year, how the Barons of the Exchequer were to
administer the new Oath to the Mayor Elect of the City of London: likewise in
the same Animadv. fol. 55, 56.
Author there is a large refutation of Sir Edward Coke's Opinion, that the
Statute of Rutland, as he calls it, was a Statute made by the King, Lords, and
Commons; where it is proved against Sir Edward, that it was made for the
ordering of the Exchequer at Rothelan in Wales, by the King and his Council,
and not at Rutland: but I shall not enter into such Particulars.

There are several other Courts, which have peculiar Jurisdictions by the
King's Grants, and Prescription, as the Court of Requests, abolished 17 Car. 1.
The Court of Chivalry, Court of Marshalsea, of the Admiralty, and that for
redress of delays of Justice, which Sir Edward Coke and others have treated of
at large, and fall not so necessarily for me to discourse of: So I shall
proceed to the Itinerant Justices, and of Assizes, and Jail-deliver.

SECT. 7. Of Itinerant Justices, and Justices of Assize, and Nisi Prius.
SOme Shadow of this we find in the time of the Conqueror, when Geofrey,
Itinerant Justices.
Earl of Constance, and some other Barons Regis, did sit at Regist. Ecclesiae
Eliensis, fol. 24 b.
Kenteford, to hear and determine the Claim touching the Rights and Liberties
of the Church of Ely, at that time disputed before them.

But the settlement of the Constitution of them, was not till 22 H. 2. Anno
1176. as Roger Hoveden Annal. pars post. p. 148, 149, 150.
has related, when the King held his Great Council at Nottingham, and communi
omnium Consilio divisit Regnum suum in 6 parts, per quarum singulas,
Justiciarios Itinerantes constituit: and the Twenty fifth of his Reign, at his
great Council at Windsor, Idem, p. 590, 591. Et unicuique partium praefecit
viros sapientes ad faciendam Justitiam and ad audiendum clamorem populi.
he divided England into four Parts, and over every Part he appointed Wisemen
to do Justice, and hear the Complaints of the People.

The Form of the special Writ from the King to empower them to act, and of the
Writ directed to the Sheriffs, to summon all such Persons as were concerned in
this Service, to appear before the Justices, may be seen in Sir William
Dugdale's Origines Juridiciales, fol. 52. a.b. In which latter Writ Cl. 3 H. 3.
m. 13. dorso.
the Persons summoned to appear, were Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Earls,
Barons, Knights, and libere tenentes, and in every Village four Legales
Homines, and Praepositum, and de quolibet Burgo, 12 Legales. Burgenses.

Sir Ed. Coke 4. Instit. p. 184.
calls these Justices in Air, and says, they had Jurisdiction in all Pleas of
the Crown, and of all Actions real, personal, and mixed, and they rode from
seven Years, to seven Years. These Justices in Air continued no longer than
till Edward the Third's time; for then as Mr. Notes on Hengham, p. 143.
Justices of Assize.
Seldom notes, Justices of Assizes came in their Places, though it is manifest
that Justices of Assize were sooner begun.

For Lib. 3. c. 10.
Bracton mentions these Justices of Assizes in his time in these words, Sunt
etiam Justitiarii constituti ad quasdam Assisas, duo, vel tres, vel plures, qui
quidem perpetui non sunt, quia expleto negotio Jurisdictionem amittunt. The
form of the Writ in Cl. 9 H. 3. m. 11. dorso.
9 H. 3. is set down by Sir William Dugdale, in which the King constitutes his
Justitiarii to take the Assizes of new disseising, and Delivery of the Gaol;
and the Command to the Sheriff, is to cause De qualibet Villa quatuor legales
homines, and Praepositum, and de quolibet Burgo, vel Villa mercanda duodecim
leg^les homines, and omnes Milites and libere Tenentes, etc.
four legal Men, and the Provost out of every Village, and twelve lawful Men
out of every Market Town, and Borough, and all the Knights, and Free-Tenents,
that is, all that held in Capite, to do what the Justices should on the King's
part appoint.

In 21 E. 1. Placit. Parliam. 21 E. 1. number. 12.
another settlement was made; that either discreet Justices should be assigned
to take Assizes, Jurats, and Certificates, throughout the whole Realm, viz. for
the Counties of York, Northumberland, Westmoreland, Cumberland, Lancaster,
Nottingham, and Derby, two. In the Counties of Lincoln, Leicester, Warwick,
Stafford, Salop, Northampton, Rutland, Gloucester, Hereford, and Worcester,
other two. In the Counties of Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Dorset, Wiltshire,
Southamptom, Oxford, Berks, Sussex, and Surrey two. For the Counties of Kent,
Essex, Hertford, Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Huntingdon, Bedford, and Bucks
two: and that the Assizes, etc. of Middlesex should be taken before the
Justices of the Bench.

M^ltis vigiliis excegitata and inventa fuit recuperand^e possessionis gratia,
ut per summariam cognitionem absque magna Juris solennitate, quasi per
compendium negotium terminetur. Lib. 4. sol 164 b.
Bracton speaking of the Writ called Assiza novae disseisinae says, it was
found out and contrived by much Vigilance, for the recovering of Possessions,
by a summary or speedy Conusance, without great Solemnity of the Law, that the
business might be compendiously determined. For before at Common Law, Assizes
were not taken, but either in the Bank, or before Justices in Air, which was a
great delay to the Plaintiff, and a great molestation, and vexation of the
Recognitors of the Assize; therefore in Magna Charta, the Assizes are appointed
to be taken in the respective Counties, and the Patents to Justices of Assize
run thus, See the Patent Clause and Fine-Rolls from King John to Edw. 4.
Sciatis quod constituimus vos Justiciarios nostros, una cum hiis quos vobis
associaverimus, ad omnes Assisas, etc. in Com. etc. arainandas capiendas, etc.
facturi inde quod ad Justitiam pertinet, secundum legem and Consuetudinem Regni
vostri Angliae. Salvis nobis amerciamentis inde provenientibus.

The Justices of Nisi Prius Ad exonerationem Juratorum, and ad ce^ lerem
justitiam in ea part exhibendum. Stat. de Finibus, 27 E. 1. c. 4.
were first instituted by the Statute of Westminster. Justices of Nisi Prius.
2. and their Authority is annexed to the Justices of Assize. These Justices
were instituted for two principal Causes, for the ease of Jurors, and for the
speedy exhibiting of Justice.

SECT. 8. Justices of Oyer and Terminer.
AS to the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, they are appointed either by Coke 4.
Inst. fol. 162.
general or special Commission. By general Commission they are to enquire of
Treasons, Misprisions of Treason, Insurrections, Rebellions, Murders, Felonies,
Manslaughter, Interfectionibus.
Killing, Burglaries, Rapes of Women, unlawful Assemblies, Conventicles,
Verborum prolationibus.
false News, Combinations, Misprision, Confederacies, false Allegations, Riots,
Routs, Retainings, Escapes, Contempts, Falsities, Negligences, Concealments,
Maintenances, Oppressions, Combinations Cambipartiis.
of Parties, Deceits, and other ill Deeds, Offenses and Injuries whatever, and
to do thereupon what appertains to Justice, according to the Law and Custom of
the Kingdom.

Special Commissions were not granted, unless for enormous Nisi pro ^nermi
transgressione, ubi necesse apponere festinum remedium. Cl. 14 E. 3. part 1. m.
41. dorso. Hill. 2 H. 4. Rot. 4. Mich. 1 H. 8.
Transgressions, where there was a necessity of speedy Remedy: In some cases we
find the Justices of Oyer and Terminer have upon an Indictment found, proceeded
the same day against the Party indicted. So Thomas () Marks, Bishop of
Carlisle, before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, was Indicted, tried, and
adjudged all in one day for High Treason. Likewise Sir Richard Empson was
indicted of High Treason, and tried all in one day. So Robert Bell, 10 Dec. 3
E. 6. and 10 Eliz. 4 Aug. John Felton was before Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer in London, indicted of High Treason, and tried the same day, by the
advice of all the Judges of England.

SECT. 9. Of the Kings Erection of Courts.
IN some Cases the King may erect new Courts of Justice, What new Courts the
King may erect.
and grant Conusance of Pleas to a Corporation, to be kept after the Rules of
the Law, not in a way of a Court of Equity but may not alter the great Courts
at Westminster, that have been time out of mind, nor erect a new Court of
Chancery, King's Bench, Common Pleas, Exchequer, etc.

Although in a proper Court, such as our Chancery, a Judge of Equity be
allowed, yet if it were permitted in all other Courts, to expound the Law
against the letter, and perhaps the meaning of the Makers, according to
Conscience, as we speak, there would soon be introduced absoluteness and
Arbitrary Power.

Therefore great Care is taken by those that understand the Law, that matters
be not left to the discretion of any Persons Commissionated by the King to
adjudge of any Causes. So the plausible Statute 11 H. 7. c. 3.
of H. 7. to put in Execution the Penal Laws, impowering Justices of Assize and
of Peace, upon Information for the King, by their Discretion to hear and
determine all Offenses, and Contempts against any Statute unrepealed, was found
to have Authorized Empson and Dudly to commit upon the Subject unsufferable
pressures and oppressions. So that 1 H. 8. c. 6.
soon after that Kings death it was repealed, and those two brought to Trial,
and executed for their oppressions. So the Statute C. 2.
8 E. 4. of Liveries, etc. by the discretion of the Judges to stand as an
Original is deservedly repealed. In the Commission of Sewers by Law Discretio
est discernere per Legem quid sit justum. Coke Inst. 4. fol. 41.
3 H. 8. allowing the Commissioners to make Orders, etc. according to their
Judgments, and Discretions; the word Discretion is interpreted by Lawyers, to
discern by Law what is Just; as appears when a Jury do doubt of the Law, and
desire to do what is Just, they find the special matter, and the entry is, Et
super tota materia petunt advisamentum and discretionem Justiciariorum; that
is, they desire that the Judges would discern by Law what is Just, and give
Judgment accordingly.

It was resolved in the Court of Common Pleas (when a new Court was Whyte's
Sacred Laws, p. 33.
erected, 31 H. 8. to hear and determine according to Law and Custom, or
otherwise to their sound discretion) That the last Clause was against Law. For
when Laws are writ and published, Magistrates know what to command, and the
People to obey; otherwise the Law must necessarily be errant, wandering,
uncertain, and unknown; which is a Miser servitus ubi jus vagum.
miserable, yea, the most miserable Slavery.

This was the ground of the taking away the most August and very Ancient Court
of the Star Chamber; The Court of Starchamber dissolved.
though appointed by Act of Parliament, 3 H. 7. c. 1. 21 H. 8.
and consisting of very great Personages, as the Lord Chancellor, Lord
President of the Council, Lord Privy Seal, Bishops, Lords, and Justices. For
(though there were other Reasons that moved the Houses to be so pressing to get
that Act pass) the grounds of its Repeal alleged in the 17 Car. 1. c. 10.
Preamble of the Act, are, That the Judges have not kept themselves to the
points limited by the Statutes, and have undertaken to punish where no Law does
warrant, and to make Decrees for things having no such Authority, and have
inflicted heavier punishments than by Law warranted; and that all matters
Examinable and Determinable before them, had their proper Remedy, Redress, and
Punishment by Common Law, and in the ordinary Courts of Justice elsewhere. In
the like manner, and on the same reason were the Court of Request Ibid. cap. 9.
, before the Cap. 48.
President of the Marches of Wales, of the President and Council in Cap. 49.
the North, and of the County-Palatine Cap. 37.
of Chester, either totally abolished or much eclipsed.

Having thus far discoursed of the several standing Courts, I think it
necessary to give an account of the Oath the Judges of either Bench are
enjoined to take; having before spoke of the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer,
and Barons of the Exchequers Oath.

SECT. 10. Of the Judges Oath.
COncerning this Oath, there is a Controversy betwixt Mr. Animadv. on Coke's
4. Inst. fol. 38.
Prynne and Sir Edward Coke, the latter affirming it to be in our Printed
Statutes, but not upon Record; which Mr. Prynne disproves thus, That the Oath
of the Judges, Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices Itinerant, and the
Ordinances annexed to the Oath were made by the King (because of diverse
complaints to him) by the assent of the great men, and other wise men of his
Council, and commanded to be openly published by the Sheriffs of every County,
by 7 May, 20 E. 3.
special Writs issued to them, for the Reasons specified in the beginning and
close of the Writs, at least three Months before the Parliament was held that
Year; and they are all entered upon Record (as they are Printed in the Statute
Books at large) Cl. 20 E. 3. part 1. m. 12, 13.
20 E. 3. in the Clause-Rolls, but not in the Parliament or Statute-Rolls of
that Year, because not made in, but before the Parliament. From whence I note a
good Argument of the Kings Prerogative in appointing Judges, and
Commissionating them himself, without any Parliamentary concurrence, since he
appoints the very Oath which was to direct them in their Office out of
Parliament.

We find the Commons so well pleased with this Oath, that in the Rot. Parl. 20
E. 3. number. 25.
Parliament 20 E. 3. they petitioned the King, that the Justices of Assise and
Enquiry might be sworn by the same Oath as the Justice of the Bench, Abridgment
of Records, p. 48.
and that the chief of them might have power to swear the rest: which the King
assented to with some Qualifications: but when in the Twenty first of his
Reign, they petitioned that his other Ministers might take the Oath, and might
be sworn to take nothing from any other; the King answered, that he would
advise what other Ministers shall be fit to take the Oath.

Mr. Prynne refers us to the Cl. 18 H. 3. m. 19. Cl. 35 E. 1. m. 7. Cl. 1 E. 2.
m. 19. and Cl. 5 E. 3. m. 27. for some Clauses of the Oaths of Justices,
agreeing with those prescribed to the Kings Council. But the Oath as it has
been after used, is to this purpose:

That they shall swear well and lawfully to serve our Lord the King, and his
People in the Office of Justice, and lawfully counsel the King in his Business;
not counsel or assent to any thing, which may turn him in damage, or
disherison, by any manner, way, or color, and shall not know of any such
thing, but cause the King to be warned thereof by themselves, or others; shall
do equal Justice, and Execution of Right to all the Subjects, and take neither
by themselves nor others, privily, or apertly, Gift or Reward, of Gold or
Silver, nor of any thing which may turn to their profit, unless it be Meat or
Drink, and that of a small value, of any man that shall have any Plea, or
Process hanging before them, etc. shall take no Fee as long as they are
Justices, nor Robes of any man great or small, but of the King; give no Advice
to any man, great or small, where the King is Party.

If any, of what condition soever come before them in their Sessions, with
force and Arms, or otherwise against the Peace, or against the Statute thereof
made, to disturb the execution of the Common Law, or to menace the People, that
they may not pursue the Law: That they cause their Bodies to be Arrested, and
put in Prison; and if they cannot be Arrested, that the King be certified: That
they themselves, nor others maintain no Plea, or Quarrel hanging in the Kings
Court, or elsewhere in the Country: That they deny to no man Common Right by
the Kings Letter, nor none other man's, nor for none other Cause; and in case
any other Letters come to them contrary to the Law, they do nothing by such
Letters, but certify the King thereof, and proceed to execute the Law,
notwithstanding any such Letters: That they shall procure the profit of the
King, and of his Crown, and if in default, shall be at the Kings Will, of Body,
Lands, and Goods, thereof to be done as shall please him.

There is in this Oath as great Security taken, Observations on this Oath.
as morally can be, that the Judges perform their Office uprightly, and judge
according to the Law; and if this will not make them wary how they give
Judgment contrary to Law, there are other Constraints upon them: As, first,
That the King may displace them when he pleases, they holding their Places only
durante beneplacito. Secondly, The House of Commons may question them for any
false Judgment and Miscarriage in their Office; which must be a great Check and
deterring of them from giving any unjust Judgment, either for Lucre-sake by
Bribes, or Partiality of Affection.

There are, besides others, two illustrious Examples of punishment of Corrupt
Judges, the one of Sir William Thorp, Rot. Parl. 25 E. 3. Rot. 10.
condemned for breach of his Oath in taking Bribes. Judges punished for
breaking their Oath.
He was Indicted before the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, and Huntingdon, the Lord
Gray, and Lord Burghers, 24 E. 3. and the Record says, Ideo consideratum per
dictos Justiciarios assignatos, ad judicandum secundum voluntatem Regis, and
secundum Regale posse suum; because he broke the Oath which he took to the
King, and so was adjudged to be hanged. The Exact Abridgment, p. 74.
Record of this Judgment was brought into the Parliament 25 E. 3. (the King
having by a Writ under the Privy Seal stayed his Execution) and it was read
open before the Lords and all the Lords affirmed the Judgment to be good,
provided this Judgment should not be drawn into example against any other
Officers who should break their Oaths, but Qui praedictum Sacramentum fecerunt
and fregerunt, and habent Leges Regales Augliae ad custodiendas.
only those that took the said Oath of Justices and broke it; such to whom the
Royal Laws of England are committed.

The other is the Famous Sir Francis Bacon Lord St. Albans, who being Lord
Chancellor was found guilty of taking Bribes by his Servants; whom though many
(for his great Learning) would acquit, as leaving too much to his Servants, yet
he fell an illustrious example of Justice against the highest Judges: and in
the forecited Record against Sir William Thorp, it is apparent that the Lords
(who in those days were the sole Judges in Parliament) thought no persons
breach of Oath was capitally to be punished but only the Justices.

Before I come to speak to some of the long Parliaments writing Champions
misapplication of the Kings Power in his Courts, I think it expedient to give
some Characters I have met withal of the qualifications of Judges.

In a Speech made to Justice MS. Speech, penes Rad. Thoresby de Leedes, Genesis
Manwood, when he was chosen Lord Chief Baron, the Chancellor tells him, There
are four things requisite in a Judge: First, His knowledge of the Law, which is
presumed every one has that the King appoints to be his Justiciary. Secondly,
Discretion, that though in his Judgment he may vary from the letter of the Law,
yet he may never judge contrary to the intention of it, which is Animus Legis.
Thirdly, Integrity, for it were better to have a Judge of convenient learning
and discretion, that would command and rule his Affection and Judgment, than
one of excellent knowledge and discretion, that will submit the same to his
corrupt Affections. Fourthly, Care and diligence. For if a judge be furnished
with all the preceding qualifications; yet if he be slothful, and do not
expedite his Judgment, all the former serve to little purpose, for qui di^
distulit, di^ noluit.

My Lord St. Albans Essays.
(though he fell, as before I have noted, under great censure) yet in his
Essays tells us that a Judge's Office is Jus dicere, non Jus dare, that they
ought to be more wise than witty, more reverend than plausible, more advised
than confident; and above all things that Integrity was their Portion and
proper Virtue; The unjust Judge being a Capital remover of Landmarks:
Injustice making Judgment bitter, and delay sour.

Another famous E. of Clarendon's Survey, p. 125.
Chancellor (whose unexpected exile, after he was raised to the happiest Estate
of a Subject, may teach all to judge no State of Felicity assured upon Earth)
tells us that Judges are presumed by Education to be fitted for the
understanding of the Laws, and by their Oaths bound to judge according to
Right, and so must be the most competent to explain the difficulties of the
Law; which no Sovereign, as Sovereign, can be presumed to understand and
comprehend; and that the judgments and decisions, those Judges make, are the
Judgment of the Sovereign, who has not qualified them, but Authoritatively
appointed them to judge in his stead, and are to pronounce their Sentence
according to the reason of the Law, not the reason, or will rather he means, of
the Sovereign. But now I proceed to other matters.

The Long Parliament impeached all the Judges that had voted the legality of
Ship-mony, The Long Parliaments Impeachment of Judges.
as also brought to their Bar the Lord Chancellor, that thereby they might
strike a greater terror on the Kings Loyal Subjects, especially in the House,
to make them comply with them: and though they would have had the Power of
nominating and removing the Judges, and have rent that branch of his Royal
Prerogative from him; yet they not trusting, if they effected this, that it
would do them any service (when they had put in such Judges as they liked) if
the King might still Commissionate them according to old form pro beneplacito:
Therefore they pressed hard, They would alter pro beneplacito.
that every Judge should continue quamdiu se been gesserit; which I only note,
to show they were desirous to new model the whole Government.

As the long Parliament of 1641. by their dissolving of Church Government, gave
birth to varieties of Opinions, The Long Parliament endeavors to weaken the
King's Prerogative.
Schisms, and Heresies in Religion; so by their design of unloosening men's
Obligation to the Monarchy, they were forced to make use of many false
Inferences and Judgments, of the known Laws: Amongst which one was, when they
were beaten off from the several pretenses of having some Paramount Power over
the King, whereby he stood obliged to resign his reason to their Votes; they
alleged that since the King could not reverse a Judgment given in an inferior
Court, a fortiori, he could not frustrate their Votes, being the Supreme Court
as well as Council.

In Answer to which it is to be considered, How Judges in their Judgments
sustain the Person of the King.
that in other Courts the Judges sustain the Person of the King, the Law is
deposited in the hands of the King, and all Justice is administered by him, and
in his name: so that his consent is by Law involved in what by Law they do.
Authoritas rei indicatae vim legis habet. So that can be no Appeal from the
King to himself; the King delegates his Power to them, and quod Rex facit per
Officiarios, per se facere videtur, they give Judgment for the King not for
themselves; to that the Laws Authorize them and none but them: so that the
Kings assent or dissent cannot frustrate their Judgment, which they render in
invitos, against the will of one of the Parties at least, because expedit
Reipublicae ut finis sit datus. Therefore as to the Power of declaring Law, the
King is restrained ordinarily to the Mediation of the Judges, who are to give
the genuine sense, and Interpretation of the Law, according to Art, and rules
of science; and so by their Interpretation and Judgment therein, they bind both
King and Subject.

Yet in some Case of our Affairs, p. 4.
cases the Judge do not only consult among themselves, Judges to apply
themselves to the King.
to determine a doubtful case, but must have recourse to the King as the
Fountain of Justice: so Postnati.
si disputatio oriatur, and Justiciarii non possunt interpretari, sed in dubiis
and obscuris Domini Regis expectanda est Interpretatio, and voluntas, cum ejus
est Interpretari cujus est condere.

It is, says Sir Thomas Smith, Commonwealth, part 2. c. 10.
to be taken for a Principle, that the Life and Member of an English man is in
the Power only of the Prince, and his Laws: so that when any of his Subjects is
spoiled either of life, or limb, the Prince is endammaged thereby, and has
good cause to ask account how his Subjects should come to that mischief; and
forasmuch as the Prince, who governs the Scepter, and holds the Crown of
England, has this in his care and charge, to see the Realm well governed, the
Life, Member, and Possessions of his Subjects kept in peace, and assurance; he
that by violence shall attempt to break that Peace, and assurance, has
forfeited against the Scepter and Crown of England.

So that from hence it appears how equal and just it is that the King should
have the appointment of Judges, Justices of Peace, Why the King only to appoint
Judges.
etc. that neither his Peace should be broken, his Subjects injured in their
Persons, or Estates, nor his Laws be violated. What Judges are to observe.
There being sufficient Provision in the Law against the violating of Justice
by the Judges who are to observe these following statutes. 1. Magna Charta,
That no Freeman shall be taken or Imprisoned, or disseised of his freehold, or
liberty, or Customs, or be Outlawed, or exiled, or otherwise destroyed: That
the King Cap. 9.
will not pass upon him or condemn him but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or
by the Law of the Land: and by another, 5 E. 3. That no man shall be Attached
by any Accusation, nor forejudged of Life or Limb, nor his Lands, Tenements,
Goods, nor Chattles seized into the Kings hands against the form of the Great
Charter, and the Law of the Land: and 25 Ed. 3 Cap. 4. Stat. 5.
That none shall be taken by Petition, or Suggestion, made to the King, or to
his Council, unless by Indictment or Presentment of good and lawful People of
the same Neighborhood, where such deed be done in due manner, or by Process
made by writ original at the Common Law: and so by 24 E. 3. c. 3.
another, That no man, of what State and Condition soever he be, shall be put
out of his Lands or Tenements, nor taken, nor Imprisoned, nor disinherited,
without being brought to answer by due Process of Law: and in another, 41 E. 5.
c. 1.
That no man be put to answer without Presentment before Justices, or matter of
Record, or by due Process or Writ original, according to the old Law of the
Land.

But I must leave this to the Learned in our Municipal Laws, and shall note
some few things from old Authors that may discover how much just Judgment has
ever been valued.

The impartiality, and yet the tenderness and compassion in inflicting
Punishment, is notorious in Zeleucus, Impartiality requisite in a Judge.
who while he governed the Locrians, made a Law, That whoever committed
Adultery, should have both his Eyes put out; and his Son being found guilty, he
commanded the Law to be put in Execution: and the body of the Citizens
interceding, he ordered one of his Sons Eyes to be put out, and likewise one of
his own, that the Law might not be broken, and yet that he might not be over
rigid to his Son.

The Neque inflecti gratia, neque perfringi potentia, neque adulterari pecunia
possit. Pro Cecinna.
Orator tells us, That Justice should neither be warped by Favor, nor broken
by Power, nor adulterated by Money; and in another place Exuit personam
Judicis, quisquis Amici personam induit.
says, That he puts off the person of a Judge, who assumes that of a friend.
He indeed is an upright Judge in whose hand the Balance of Justice neither
totters nor falls, by the Authority of any Person. Talis debet esse Juris
minister, ut in ejus manu nullius authoritate personae, titubet aut vacillet
librae Justitiae.

Besides the avoiding of Partiality, P^ecipitancy to be avoided.
it is necessary in every Judge, that he fully examine what is brought before
him, and not with too great Precipitancy determine matters upon Qui statui^
aliquid, par^e in^udita altera, (...) siatuit, (...) tamen aequus est. Senec.
Medaea.
the hearing only of one side: for though he may chance to do Justice in such a
Case; yet he does not do justly, that fully hears not both Parties Allegations.

It is a very mischievous things, when Judges delay the Executing of Justice.
Holy Court, Tom. 1. lib. 3. p. 90. Delays in doing Justice mischievous.
Causinus, out of the Chronicles of Alexandria tells us, That Juvenalis a
Widow, complaining to Theodorick King of the Goths and Romans, that a Suit of
hers in Court, was drawn out for the space of three Years: Theodorick called
the Judges before him, and acquainted them with the Complaint, and commanded
them to do her speedy Justice, which within two days they did; and being again
called by the King, he asked them how it came to pass that they had dispatched
that in two days, which had not been done in three Years. They answered, that
His Majesty's Recommendation had made them finish it so soon. To whom the King
replied, That when he put them into Office, he consigned all Pleas to them, and
other Proceedings; and since they had spun out the Business for three Years,
that required but two days dispatch, they should die, and at that Instant
commanded their Heads to be smitten off. Court to redress Delays.


We find in Sir Edward Coke 14 E. 3. c. 5. Stat. 1. Rot. Parl. 2 ^. 2. number. 63.
confirmed by Parliament.
a Court for redress of Delays of Judgment, in the Kings Great Courts, raised
by Statute, 14 E. 3. whereby one Prelate, two Earls, and two Barons, the
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, the Justices of both the Benches, and other of the
Kings Council have Power to call before them the Tenor of Records, and
Processes of such Judgments so delayed, and to proceed to take a good accord
and Judgment, and so remand all to the Justices before whom the Plea did depend.

He likewise 4. Instit. c. 6. fol. 67.
tells us, That by the Common Law, it is required, that both plena and celeris
Justitia fiat, and all Writs of Praecipe quod reddat, are quod just, and sine
dilatione reddat, etc, and that there did, and yet does lie a Writ, de
pracedendo ad Judicium, when the Justices or Judges of any Court of Record, or
not of Record, delayed the Party, Plaintiff, or Defendant, Justice; and in Case
the Prelate, the two Earls, two Barons, the Chancellor, Treasurer, etc. may not
for the Difficulty, determine it, then to bring it to the next Parliament,
there to have a final accord.

From this whole Discourse I hope it is apparent, that as our Kings authorize
the Justices to do right to every one, according to the Laws and Customs of
England; so the Judges cannot well fail of performing it. Before I end this
Chapter, I cannot omit the inserting of some of the Expressions that I find in
the Saxon Laws, whereby the desire those Kings had that equal Justice, should
be administered, is very manifest. The eighth Law of King Ina inflicts a mulct
of thirty Shillings upon every Hwilcum scirmen oththe othrum d^man.
Shireman or other Judge, that grants not Justice to him that requires it, and
besides that, within a Week he afford him right; in Saxon thus, and binnan
seoffon nihte gedo hine rihtes wrythe.

The first of the secular Laws of King Edgar, runs thus: That every one enjoy
the Benefit of right Judgment (whether he be Poor or Rich) but in exacting of
Punishments, let there be that Moderation, that they may be attempered to
Divine Clemency, and may be tolerable to Men. The Saxon runs thus, That ole man
sy folc rihtes wyrth. ( ge earm geeadig) and him mon right Domas deem. and sy
on thaerebote swylec forgyffenysse, swylec hit fore God ge beorglice sy, and
for weoruld aberendlic.

The third Law of the same King is, that the Judge who shall pass false Judgment
on any, shall pay the King a Hundred and twenty Shillings, unless he confirm it
by Oath, that he did it by Error and Ignorance, not for Malice. However he
shall be removed Et tholige a his Thegnscipes, butan he aeft al thaem Cyng
gebiege: swa he hin gethasian wills.
out of his place, unless he obtain the same again of the King. By which it
further appears, that in those days the King removed and placed Judges at his
Pleasure.

The first of the secular Laws of King Canutus runs thus:

First I will that Man That man ribte laga upp araere, and aegh wylec unlaga
georne assylle.
set up right Laws, and unjust Laws be suppressed, and that every one according
to his Power, pluck up utterly by the Roots, all unrighteousness, and set up
Gods Right, i. e. Divine Justice; and for the time to come, the Poor as well as
the Rich enjoy right Judgment, and to both of Fool rihtes wyrthe and him man
ribte domes deem.
them right Dooms be deemed.

Then the next Law is for exhibiting Mercy in judgment, that even in Capital
Matters, such moderation be used in imposing the mulct, that it be Swa it for
Good sy gebeolice and for woruld aberendlice: As in the Law of King Edgar.
attempered to divine Clemency, and be to be born by Men, and that he that
judges, think in his Mind what he asks, when he says in the Lords Prayer, and
forgive us our Debts or Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us: and he forbids that any Christian be put to Death for any small or
contemptible cause; that for a Et ne forspille man for litlum, Gods
handgeweorce and his agenne ceap the he deorgevobt.
small matter they suffer not to perish, the work of Gods Hands, which he has
redeemed with a great price.

In the Eleventh Law we find that the King says, That by all help and work it
is to be endeavored by what reason principally he may gain Counsel that may
His man fyrmest m^g raed aredian Theode to Thearfe and rib^ne Cristendom swy
thort araeran and agh wilec unlaga georne assyllan.
confirm such things as are for the profit of the Republic, and may confirm
Christian Piety, and may totally overthrow Injustice from hence, that Profit at
last coming to the Kingdom, that Iniquity may be suppressed, and Justice may be
set up in the Presence of God and Men.

I could add more, but I shall have occasion in the next Chapter to mention
something of this Subject, and shall only close with that Admonition of King
James Dalton's Justice of Peace, c. 2.
the First to the Judges in the Star Chamber, 1616. wherein he gave them in
Charge to do Justice uprightly and indifferently without delay, without
Partiality, Fear, or Bribes, with stout and upright Hearts, with clean and
incorrupt Hands, and not to utter theirown Conceits, but the true meaning of
the Law, not making Laws, but interpreting the Law (and that according to the
true Sense thereof, and after deliberate Consultation) remembering their Office
is Jus dicere, not Jus dare.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Justices of Peace, and their Sessions.
SIR Edward Coke 4. Instit. c. 31. fol. 170.
observes, that the Constitution of Justices of Peace is such a form of
subordinate Government, for the Tranquillity, and quiet of the Realm, as no
part of the Christian World has the like; which may be true in the particular
Limitation of the Power. Officers like our Justices of Peace anciently in other
Countries.
But that in other Countries such like Officers have been appointed,
particularly for the preservation of Peace, is evident in the ancient Laws of
the Wisigothes, Lib. 2. c. 16.
compiled by Theodoricus their King, about the Year of our Lord, 437. which
constituted Pacis Assertores, and appointed them Judges to hear and determine
those causes, quas illis Regia deputaverit ordinandi Potestas. So in the
Sicilian Anno 1221. Ibid. p. 704. to 722. lob. 1. tit. 8.
Laws, compiled by the Emperor Frederick the Second, we find one Title, de
cultu pacis, and generali pace in Regno servanda, and another, de Ibid. tit. 41.
officio Justiciaratus; where the Title, Office, and Commission of the
Justiciarii Regionum is at large recited, almost in Parallel terms, with ours
at this Day.

The Capitularia Caroli See Fred. Lindebrogus Codex Legum Antiq.
magnis, the Burgundian, Alman, Bavarian, Saxon, Longobard, Ripuarian, and
Frisons Laws, mention such Officers, for preserving the public Peace, and See
Prynne 's Irenarch. Redivivus, p. 1. ad 5.
punishing all Malefactors, and infringers of the public Peace, as we have.

At the Common Law, before Justices of Peace were made, there were sundry
Persons, to whose Charge the maintenance of the Peace was recommended, and who
with their other Dalton's Justice of Peace, c. 1. Conservators of the Peace.
Offices, had (and yet still have) the Conservation of the Peace annexed to
their Charge, as incident to, and inseparable from their said Offices: yet they
were only styled, and so now are, by their Offices; the Conservation of the
Peace being included therein.

First, the King is the principal Idem.
Conservator of the Peace within his Dominions, The King the principal
Conservator of Peace.
and is properly Capitalis Justiciarius Angliae; in whose Hands at the
beginning, the Administration of all Justice, and all Judicature in all Causes,
first was, and afterward by, and from him only was the Authority derived and
given to all; yet the Power nevertheless remains still in himself, insomuch
that he may himself sit in Judgment, as in ancient times the Kings here have
done, and may take Knowledge of all cases and causes.

Before I leave this Head, I cannot pass by the Act of 20 H. 7. c. 11.
H. 7. wherein is so fully declared the King's Care, to have due Administration
of Justice, as in the close of the last Chapter I have only hinted. The Reasons
why Justices of Peace made. The King's Care for right and easy Administration
of Justice.
The Preamble says, The King considers that a great part of the Wealth and
Prosperity of the Land, stands in that, that his Subjects may live in Surety,
under his Peace, in their Bodies, and Goods, and that the Husbandry of this
Land may increase, and be upholden, which must be had by due Execution of Laws
and Ordinances, and so commands the Justices to execute the tenor of their
Commission, as they will stand in Love and Favor of his Grace, and in avoiding
the pains that he ordained, if they do the contrary. If they be let or
hindered, they must show it to the King; which if they do not, and it come to
the Kings knowledge, they shall be out of his Favor, as Men out of Credence,
and put out of Commission for ever.

Moreover he charge and commands all manner of Men, as well Poor as Rich
(which be to him all one in due Administration of Justice) that is hurt or
grieved, (in any thing that the said Justice of Peace may hear, determine, or
execute in any wise) that he so grieved make his complaint to the next Justice
of Peace, and if he afford no remedy, then to the Justices of the Assise; and
if he find no remedy there, then to the King, or Chancellor, etc. and as a
further security it is added, And over that his Highness shall not let, for
any favor, affection, costs, charge, nor none other cause, but that he shall
see his Laws to have plain and true execution, and his Subjects to live in
security of their Lands, Bodies and Goods, according to his said Laws.

Thus we see who is the Principal, Other Conservator of the Peace.
and Royal Conservator of the Peace: others are the Lord Chancellor or Lord
Keeper, Lord Treasurer, Lord High Steward of England, Earl Marshal, Lord High
Constable of England, every Justice of the Kings Bench, and Master of the
Rolls, who have the power included in their Office, and over all the Realm,
when they are present, may award Precepts, take Recognisances for the Peace; of
which and others Lambard in his Eirenarche may be consulted, and how far
Justices of Assise, Stewards of the Sheriffs Turn, and Court of Pye-powders,
the Sheriffs, Chief Constable, Coroners, and Petty Constables may commit to
Ward breakers of the Peace in their view, though they cannot take surety at the
request of any man, that being peculiar to the Justices of Peace's Office.

Sir Edward Coke Term. Pasch. fol. 176. 4. Inst. Coram Rege prima fuit
Institutio Justiciariorum pro Pace conservanda. Ad Pacem nostram conservandam.
says, that the first institution of Justices for the preserving the Peace,
was 6 Ed. 1. but Mr. Prynne will have it of older date, because he finds that
King Henry the Third by several Patents, or Writs from the 17th to the end of
his Reign, did constitute and appoint several persons in most Counties of the
Realm, to be Guardians and Preservers of the Peace of the Realm; and in the
Patent 51 H. 3. m. 10.13. dorso, it is dilectis and fidelibus suis custodibus
pacis Com. Linc. North. Ebor. and Vicecom. eorundem Comitat. and the like 54 H.
3. m. 21. d.

But the first regular settlement of them seems to be Anno 1327. 1 Ed. 3. c.
16. The Authorities afterward were further explained 4 Ed. 3. c. 2. 18 Ed. 3.
c. 2. 34 Ed. 3. c. 1.

Sir Edward Coke Ibid. 171.
tells us that the Commission of Peace stood over-burthened, and incumbered
with diverse Statutes, some whereof were before, and some since repealed, and
stuffed with many vain and unnecessary repetitions, and many other corruptions
crept into it by mistaking of Clerks, etc. for amendment and correction
whereof, Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz.
Sir Christopher Wray Chief Justice of England, assembled all the Judges of
England, and upon perusal had of the former Commission of Peace, and due
consideration had thereupon, and often conferences betwixt themselves, they
resolved upon a reformation of the form, with diverse additions and alterations,
both in matter and method, as it stood in Sir Edward's time; and he says, It
needed another Reformation by reason of Statutes since repealed, and others
expired; of which he gives several instances.

Therefore he says, It is a good rule for all Judges, and Justices whatsoever,
that have Jurisdiction by any Statute, which at the first was Temporary or for
a time, to consider well before they give Judgment, Whether that Statute has
been continued or made perpetual; and if at first it was made perpetual,
Whether it be not repealed or altered by any later Statute.

What Commissions, Patents and Writs were issued out by King Edward the First,
for preserving the Peace of the Realm, suppressing, seizing and punishing of
those who disturbed it, may be found Cl. 9 Ed. 1. m. 10. d. in Rylies P. 443,
451, to 457, 433, 480. Prynne's Animadv. fol. 149.
Appendix, so there is a Patent 14 Ed. 1. m. 15. 15 Ed. 1. m. 13. de militibus
constitutis ad Articulos in Statuto de conservatione pacis edito contento^
observandos, constituting persons of note in every County to observe them,
named in the Record: and so for other Kings Reigns, in the Authors in the Sir
Edw. Coke, 4 Inst. Ryley's Appendix, p. 521, etc. 537, 563.
Margent, the exact Abridgment of the Record of the Tower, Tit. Justices of
Peace, and Prynne's Irenarchus Redivivus.

The constituting, and making of Justices of Peace, is inherent in, and
inseparable from the Crown, as appears by the Statute 27 H. 8. c. 24.

Dalton, c. 3.
Some are Justices by Act of Parliament, as the Archbishop of York, Bishop of
Duresm, and Ely, and their Successors: others by the Kings Charters, as Mayors
and other Officers of Corportion Towns.

Others are by Commission, which are properly Justices of Peace, to take care
not so much of the public Discipline, and correction of manners, as for the
Peace, and security of the Highways; they being at their Quarter Sessions to
hear and determine of Felons, Breakers of the Peace, Contempts and Trespasses,
to suppress Routs, and Tumults, restore possessions forceably entered, etc.

They Sir Tho. Smith's Commonwealth, part 2. c. 22. Who are chosen to be
Justices of Peace.
are elected out of the Nobility, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, and such as
be learned in the Laws, such and such number as the Prince shall think meet,
and in whom for wisdom and discretion he puts his trust, being mostly
Inhabitants within the County, saving that some of the High Nobility, At the
King's Pleasure.
and chief Magistrates for honor sake are put in all or most of the
Commissions. Those have no time limited but by Commission from his Majesty,
alterable at pleasure. Much increased in number.
At first they were but four, after eight, and now thirty or forty in a Shire,
either by increase of riches, learning, or activity in Policy and Government:
more being found than anciently, who have either will or power, or both to do
their King and Country service; and they are not too many to handle affairs of
the Commonwealth, especially for the benefit of the Subject, For the better
distributing of Justice.
that they may have in all parts of the County, one or more, not very remote,
to apply themselves to. The Faults they may punish.
Each of them has Authority, upon complaint to him made of any Theft, Robbery,
Manslaughter, Murder, Violence, Complots, Routs, Riots, unlawful Games,
forceable Entries, Excess in Apparel, Conventicles, evil order in Alehouses,
and Taverns, of Idle and Vagabond Persons, Masters and Servants not observing
the Laws, Rapes, false Moneys, Extortions, or any such Disturbances of the
Peace, quiet and good order of the Shire, to commit the Persons supposed to be
Offenders to the Prison, and to charge the Constable or sheriff to bring them
thither, and the Jailer to neceive them till the next Quarter Sessions when the
Sheriff or his Undersheriff with his Bailiffs be to attend him, at their
Sections.
where Informations are given in to them by Bill, which is shown to the Juries:
and if they find just cause for the complaint, they find the Bill, and the
Party is Indicted, and Tried by a Jury of twelve men, at the Kings Suit; for
the King is reckoned the one Party, and the Prisoner the other.

They are also to order the repair of Bridges, Highways, the Poor, the lame
Soldiers pensions, and do many things besides according to the Power given in
their Commissions, which particularizeth all things they are to take Cognizance
of; sometimes, upon suspicion of War, to take care for the order of the Shire,
and sometimes to take Muster of Harness, and able men.

Once in a year or two the Prince with his Council, Instructions given to
Justices of the Peace.
says a Manuscript I have seen, chooses out certain Articles (out of Penal
Laws made to repress the pride and evil rule of the People) and sends them down
to the Justices, willing them to meet together, and consult among themselves,
how to order the matter most wisely, and circumspectly; whereby the People
might be kept in good order and obedience according to Law: and they after a
certain space meet, and certify the Prince, or his Privy Council, how they do
find the Shire in rule and order touching those points, and all other disorders.

There was never, says Sir Thomas Smith Part 2. tit. Juslices of Pearce.
, in any Commonwealth devised a more wise, a more dulce and gentle, How
beneficial the Institution of Justices of Peace.
or more certain way to rule the People, whereby they are kept always as it
were in a Bridle of good order, and sooner looked to, that they do not offend,
than punished when they have offended: for seeing the chief Persons of Quality
and Interest among them, have such charge and Authority given them by the King;
and if occasion be, do commit, cause to be Indicted and punished, or sent to
Prison for disobedience, Offenders against the Laws; It curbeth and terrifieth
Offenders so, that it is a new Furbishing of the good Laws of the Realm, and a
continual repressing of Disorders, which the Common sort of People are too
prone to, if it were not for this impending lash, which every where is held
over Criminals.

The Law it self, as registered and printed, is but a dumb and dead thing; the
Ministers of the Law are those that give life to it: and for that end were
Justices of the Peace Constituted, who being Gentlemen of Interest, and parts,
are the fittest Instruments to see the Laws duly Executed, They are principally
concerned in seeing to the Execution of several Laws.
which are Committed to their Charge: and it is greatly advantageous to the
Country, that at every Quarter Sessions, in the face of the Country, one of the
Justices of the Peace gives a charge to the Jurys; wherein, with learning and
Judgment, he acquaints them with the Excellency, Antiquity, and Utility of
Monarchical Government, the usefulness of those Laws, Wise and Gracious Princes
have granted to their Subjects, the excellent Composure, Contexture and Harmony
in the Government, and many other particulars fit for them to know, as good
Subjects and good Neighbors.

Having met with some Speeches made in Queen Elizabeth's time which relate
either to Justices of the Peace, or the Execution of Laws in general; I think
it may not be unacceptable to the Reader to understand in what manner that
Queen caused her Chancellor to quicken the execution of the Laws: Some touches
of which follow. MS. Speech to the Justices Itinerant, Anno 1559. The
Conservation of Peace their principal Charge.
By the Conservation of Peace and Concord, every Commonweal has a perfect
Foundation to begin, marvelous good course to increase, a strong Pillar to
sustain it, and a strong Buckler to defend it. The plain and good order of each
County consists in the well or evil Executing of Justice: for thereby either
every man enjoys his own, and the whole Commonweal is in a calm and even
Temper; or by remisness in Execution, the Free-Booters and Beasts of Prey are
let loose to rob and despoil some, and affright the rest, and leave all in
unsecurity.

How can, says he, Justice banish MS. Speech at the end of the Parliament,
Anno 1559. Justices of Peace to be active.
Enormities when her Ministers are slothful, making no account of any of the
Common Causes of their Country; and under the notion of being accounted quiet
men, they seek only ease, profit, and pleasure to themselves, and to be
sustained by other men's care and labor: whereas the Horse-Master provideth for
the good Government of his Horse, Bits or Brakes, according to the hardness or
tenderness of his Mouth.

If (continues he) in the richest soil, the usefullest and delightfullest
Flowers, The necessity of punishing evil Men.
Shrubs and Fruits be planted, and no care be taken to weed out what would
choke and over-grow them, what pleasure or benefit could be had of all ones
cost and labor? a crop of weeds would soon such out all the nourishment from
their roots, over-shadow them from the cherishing Sun, and smother the curious
Plants: so that they would soon dye and wither. Therefore is there a great need
of choosing able, careful and active Gardiners to how and root out all such
rank Weeds.

In another MS. Speech, second Parl. 1562.
Speech (after advising great care in choosing Officers, as Justices of Peace,
etc. that have the Execution of the Laws) he tells the noble Assembly, That
sharp Laws should be made for banishing sloth and corruption, A Visitation of
the Justices of Peace proposed.
and advises there should be through the Kingdom Biennial or Triennial
Visitations of all the Temporal Officers and Ministers, that ought to see to
the Execution of the Law by Commission, to try the Offenses of those that have
not seen to the due Execution of the Laws, according to the Office and charge
committed to them; as in Church-Visitations: and that a Roll should be kept,
See something of this nature 2 H. 5. 8.
wherein all the Justices names should be set down to every Offense he has
caused to be punished, that it might appear who is diligent; and that those
that are negligent might be removed to their perpetual Ignominy, and such pains
set upon them as by Law may be. Another time MS. Speech, Starchamber, 1568.
he urges, that it ought to be considered whether it be a greater Cruelty, to
execute the Penal Laws, so as thereby a few shall be unwhipped, and many
hanged; or some shall be whipped, and thereby few hanged.

In another MS. Speech, second Session of Parliament, 1571.
I find this swasive, It would be strange to make Laws to reform manners, and
prune away the ill branches, and Members of the Commonweal, and then to ^ye
them in boxes and books; it were better to have no Laws, than them not
Executed: for besides other inconveniences, it breeds contempt of Laws and
Lawmakers.

Idem.
A Prince, continues he, that is careful of the discharge of his great Office,
leaves nothing undone, meet for him to do, for the Execution of the Laws,
making choice of Persons of most Credit, and best understanding through the
Kingdom, to whom for the great trust he reposeth in them, he gives Authority
by Commission to Execute a great part of the Law: Therefore the Burden of all
Enormities, Absurdities, and Mischiefs that grow in the Commonwealth, for the
not executing of Laws, must needs light upon those Persons that have Authority
to execute them: and if remisness be, if the Prince should be driven to commit
the Execution of the Laws to those who in respect of Practice, and gain, would
see them executed with all severity, what a burden would that bring to the
Realm?

In this manner Queen Elizabeth caused the Execution of her Laws to be
recommended both to the Justice of Assize, and to the Members of Parliament,
that at their recess they might take care to see them put in Execution. As a
close to this Chapter, and an Introduction to the next, I shall give a short
account of the Laws in the Saxons time, that were made by several Kings for the
preservation of the Peace, and of how great value the due keeping of the Peace
was. The Sixth Law of King Ina appoints, that he that fights in the Kings
Cuninges hus.
Palace, shall lose all his Goods, and it shall be at the Kings pleasure
whether he shall be Capitally punished, or not: it also ordains several Mulcts
of Money for fighting in the Mynster.
Church, in an Aldermans House, or the House of a Gefolgylden hus.
Countryman. And the next Law is against Theft, and in the 13th. against
Thieves, and Robbers, from the number of Seven, if they be 35 they are counted
a Klothum.
Troop, if more an Herge.
Army; and so in the 26th. Law appoints a Reward for apprehending Theoffes
onfeng.
a Thief: So in the 46th. Law, of the Peace violated in Burghbryce.
a Town of the Kings, or a Bishops, 120 s. and so proportionable in the Town of
an Alderman, of the Kings Cyninges Thegnes.
Minister, or any Land-holders Land hebbendes.
Town.

So in the 15th. Law of King Alfred, 150 s. punishment is laid upon his that De
gefeohtum.
fights in the presence of an Archbishop, and 100 if in the presence of a
Bishop or alderman; and in the next against the stealing a Mare or Cow, the
price, and 40 s. Mulct, and in the 26th. against Mansliht mid blothe.
Man-slaying in Companies, to pay the price of his Head, and all present 30 s.
a piece; and in the 35th. against breaking the Peace in a Town as before. fore.
The 38th. Chapter is long, That no Man assault his Enemy in his House till he
has Ae^hon be him ribtes bid.
demanded right of him, which if he deny he may besiege him seven Days, but not
Be gefeobte.
assault the House; and if he yield, he must keep him Thirty Days, and then
restore him to his Friends. This care was taken to pre\vent Bloodshed. There
are many particulars besides, worth observing in this, as well ad the 40th.
Chapter Be wundum.
against wounding.

I shall speak of that of King Edward hereafter.

The first Law of King Aethelstan is against Theft, that is manifest, where the
The of th^at th^ebbendse thing stolen is found in the Thieves Hand; hand
gefangen sy.
and so of other particulars worth reading.

The Third Law of King Edmund prohibits any Man-killer to come into the
Prince's presence, although his Servant, till he have made satisfaction Aef he on
daed^ote ga: swa Bisceop him Tace, and his serift him wis^ge.
for the Crime, as it is appointed him by the Bishop, and he makes Seven
particular Laws together against Man-killing; those that assault other in
Towns, holy places, etc. and the several punishments prefacing these Laws thus,
That to him, and the Clergy and Laity met, it seemed most profitable, that love
and mutual benevolence, through his whole Dominion should be cherished; for it
was Et us eallum tha unribtlican, and menigfealdan gefroh^e the betwux us
svlsum syndon.
irksom to them all that there should be unjust fighting among Christians; and
begins the Seventh Law thus, It is the part Witan seylon faeb. the settan.
of the prudent to extinguish Capital Enmities.

For the better preservation of Peace, King Aethelred appointed that every That
aele sreoman getreowne borb bebbe.
Freeman have sureties that if he be called in question for any Crime, these
Sureties may do justice to each one, that is satisfy for the offender, the
Title of which is, Be Borgum. In the Law, the duty of these Sureties is
described at large; and it appears by other Laws in after times, that Nine Men
were bound for every Tenth Man.

Whoever desires further satisfaction in this particular, may consult the 19th.
Law of Canutus, wherein he appoints Et we willath, that aele freoman beo on
hundrede, and on Teothung gebrobt, viz. the Tything security.
, that every Freeman enter himself into an Hundred, or into the Collegueship
of the Ten. In other matters of preserving Peace, they may consult the Second,
the Eighth, and Twelfth Laws of the same Canutus; the which Eighth Law is thus
expressed, Peace is so to be considered, as that nothing can be more desirable
that it to the Inhabitants, and nothing more contrarily is offensive as
Thieves, which in the Saxon is thus, Swa ymbe frythesbote. Swathan bundan si
selost and tham Theoffon sy lathost, and swa ymb Heosbote.

Having met with a passage in the Laws of King LL. Aethelstani, fol. 53.
Ethelstan, which both illustrates the Care of the King, to have the Peace
preserved; and likewise shows the readiness (according to their duty) of the
Subjects to assist the King with their Persons and Estates: I thought it not
amiss to insert it as a Close to this Chapter, and an Introduction to the next.

The words (as to be rendered from the Saxon, and the Latin Version of Mr.
Lambard) run thus, I Aethelstan King, do to all clearly signify [ Cyth] that I
have diligently enquired the Cause wherefore our Ure sryth is wyrs gehealden
thon^e we list.
Peace was not kept as I desired, and at Grantelee it was appointed; and I
received this Answer from Et mine witan seig^h.
my Wise Men, that it happened by my That le hit to long forboren baebbe.
forbearance; i.e. too much lenity in not punishing now of late, when I staid
at Exceter in the Middum wintre.
Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, attended by my Wise Men, I found ^t tha
ealle syn (...) mid bire sylfum and midyfre( which I signifying Heritage; and
though mis-placed in Lambard, is by him translated Children) and mid wife and
mideallum thingum ( by L^mbard translated properly all their Fortunes) to
faerenne thider thider le thonne will.
them ^ most ready themselves, with their Heirs, with their Wives and all their
Estates, to go thither, whither I will, and will purge out, or expel those
Outlaws, i. e. breakers of the Peace, that are against this, in such order, or
with such wisdom and consideration, that they never after come on the Earth
again, i.e. that they be banished. The Saxon of the latter part is thus, Bretan
hi offer this geswican willan, on tha gerade the heo naefre aest on sorda ne
cumen; which Mr. Lambard translates thus, Vt isti tandem pacis violatores Regno
hand unquam redituri pellerentur.

Then it further is added, And if these Men And gif hi mon afre af^ on thaem
eorda gemit, that hi syn swa seildig, swa se the at hebbendra banda gefougen
syn.
hereafter in these Lands be met with, or found, that they shall be so guilty
as they are that are found hand having; that is Stealing; which Mr. Lambard
renders, Ac si eorum aliquis postea in Regno deprehenderetur, pariter ac qui
est in furto manifest deprehensus plecteretur.

From all which we may observe, That the Counsel of the Witan, Nobles, and Wise
Men, was at one of the times the King kept them in course: viz. at Christmas,
called here Mid-winter. Secondly, That the King asks the Members of the Council
their advice. Thirdly, They tell him, that it happened, that his Peace was not
kept, because of his forbearance in not putting the Laws in Execution, that
were established at Grantelee. From whence we may observe, that the King was to
put these in Execution, and that his Remisness, Clemency, or Indulgence
increased the numbers of the breakers of the Peace. Fourthly, That for the
suppressing of these breakers of the Peace, the Nobles who met in Council at
Exceter, promi^e they will be in readiness provided, themselves and their who^e
Families, and all things they have, to faerenne, that is, from faer, to go
forth in Expedition Armed, as the King will appoint; the signification of which
word I have found in several Letters about the Wars betwixt England and
Scotland in Henry the Eighth's and Edward the Sixth's time, where when any
considerable party of the Scots made an inrode into England, to seize upon Men,
burn Towns, or Houses, or carry away Cattle, it was called running a Forray.
Fifthly, We may note, that this shows that the Militia of the Subjects was at
the Kings disposal to go whither then the King will; which saves me a labor in
the following Chapter to deduce the Kings Power over the Militia higher, though
I doubt not but a little looking into the Saxon Laws would afford me more
Precedents, as the Fifty ninth Law of William the Statuimus etiam and sirmiter
praecipimus, ut omnes liberi homines totius Regni noslri praedicli, sint
fratres conjurati ad Monarchiam nostram, and ad Regnum nostrum pro viribus suis
and facultatibus contra inimicos pro posse suo defendendum, and viriliter
servandum; and Facem and Dignitatem Coronae noslrae integram observandam; and
ad Judicium rectum, and Justiciam constanter omnibus modis pro posse suo sine
dolo and sine dilatiene faciendam. LL. Gul. 1. 59. fol. 171. Edit. Wheeloch.
Conqueror does expressly; as before I have touched on another occasion, but
here think fit to recite it at length, viz. The King appoints, and firmly
commands all the Freemen of his Kingdom, that they be sworn Brothers, to their
Power to defend, and manfully to keep his Monarchy, and his Kingdom according
to their might and Estates against Enemies, and to observe or maintain the
Peace and Dignity of his Crown entire; and without delay, without deceit to do
right Judgment and Justice constantly, all manner of ways, according to their
Power. So that here we find these liberi Homines, Conservators of the Peace
also, which I suppose was incumbent on them, as well as they were Lords of
Manors, where they had their Courts, as likewise they were Hundredaries, etc.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Kings Sovereignty in making War and Peace.
THE great (...) 3. Polit. c. 7.
Philosopher observes, That in a Commonwealth, that part is most powerful in
which the strength of War consists, and which is in possession of Arms; for
those, he says, that have no Arms, are the Servants of the Armed.

Plato (...) 12. de LL. Power of making War and Peace the greatest Badge of
Sovereignty.
affirms it as a standing Law, That he, who without Authority, innovates a
Peace, or makes War, shall be adjudged to punishment; and gives this reason for
it, That he who has in his Hand the Militia, it is in his Power that the
Commonwealth subsist, or be dissolved.

Bodin makes this one of the greatest badges of Sovereignty; because, without
the power of declaring War, and making Peace, no Prince can defend himself or
his Subjects, the Establishment, or Destructon of the States depending upon it:
therefore it is Capital to do the least thing in that kind without the Kings
Commission. There being nothing more dangerous in War, than to betray Counsels,
it is not fit the ordering of War, and consequently of Peace, should be in any
but the Sovereign.

In the Greek and Clapmarius de Jure Maj^statis, lib. 1. c. 10.
Latin Histories it appears, that all Wars were undertaken, and performed by
the Counsel, Will, and Pleasure of the Sovereign, whether Senate, or Emperor,
and by them solely was decreed, unless in some extraordinary Cases, that the
Peoples consent was required in comitiis Populi centuriatis; and when the
Republic was changed by the Julian Law, it was Treason to make War without the
Command of the Prince; the words of the Law being, Nulli, nobis insciis, atque
inconsultis, quorumlibet armorum movendorum copia tribuetur.

The reasons why this Power should be in the Sovereign solely, are many, and
just; for without it no Prince can provide against intestine Seditions. For if
he wanted that Authority, Reasons why this Power should be in the Sovereign
alone to make War and Peace.
as often as Ambitious or Seditious Men persuade the People they were in danger
of Oppression by the Government, or they had a mind to remove great Officers
that they might enjoy their places, or that the Rule in Church or State did not
please them; They might resort to Arms, to the ruining of their follow
Subjects, who would otherwise live peaceably and dutifully. By this liberty,
greatest Convulsions would be in the Kingdom upon every predominancy of ill
humors, and we should never be without the Plague of War in one place or
other, and all the miseries of a torn, dis-joynted and mangled confusion would
be upon us; neither should a Prince be able to defend his Subjects from Foreign
Invasions, or perform that great and necessary Work of assisting the Allies to
his State, and Te formidable to his Enemies.

Polybius (...) Polyb. O.
notes, That there are two things which preserve Government, viz. Fortitude
against Enemies, and Concor^^^ home; but neither of these can be performed, if
the Prince have not the disposal of the Militia. This is it which preserves the
Kings Authority, makes his Laws to be observed, keeps the Factious and
Seditious at quiet, gives repute abroad, and Peace at home.

All the Calamities of War are prevented, when an Armed Prince, that has the
sole disposal of his Military Power, can extinguish the Flame at its first
blaze; therefore St. Ordo naturalis mortalium paci accommodatus, hoc poscit, ut
suscipiendi belli auctoritas, atque consilium penes Principes sit. Augustinus
contra Faustum.
Austin says, That the natural order of Mortals, accommodated to Peace,
requires this, That the Authority and Counsel of making War be in the Prince.

That in the time of the Saxon Kings, the Power of the Militia was in the
Crown, does not obscurely appear in all the Laws for preserving the Peace, and
in that particularly I have instanced in of King Aethelstan; besides which, we
find the Tenth Law of King Canutus ordained, That Fenced Towns, Burghote and
Brighote beonon forth and scip forthunga aginne man georne and frythunga eac
swa a the one thearf sy for ^e men licre neode. LL. Canute 10.
or Burghs and Bridges be repaired, and there be preparations for defense both
of Land and Sea-Forces, so often as the necessity of the Commonweal requires it.

The 69th. Chapter of Hereots runs thus, Every Earl to pay Eight Horses,
whereof four with Saddles, and four without Saddles; four Helmets, and so many
Coats of Mail, eight Spears and eight Shields, four Swords, and twelve Mancusae
of Gold: and a principal Thane, half the number, and other Thanes a lesser
proportion, as may be there seen: By which there seems some beginning of a
Feudal Tenure, which in William the Conqueror's time was so settled, that (as
elsewhere I have noted) all Persons held of him their Lands in Knights Service,
to be ready at his pleasure with Horse, Men, and Arms; the which was practiced
in succeeding Ages.

The Statute 30. October. 7 E. 1. says, That it being accorded of late, that in
our next Parliament, Provision should be made, that in all Parliaments,
Treaties, and other Assemblies which should be made in the Realm of England for
ever, that every man shall come without all Forces, and Armors, peaceably to
the Honor of us, and the Peace of us and our Realm. Now all Prelates, Earls,
etc. have said, that to us it belongs, and our part is through our Royal
Signiory to i.e. forbid.
defend force of Arms, and all other force against our Peace at all times, when
it shall please us; and to punish them which shall do contrary, according to
our Laws, and usages of our Realm: and hereunto they are bound to aid us their
Sovereign Lord at all seasons.

In 3 Ed. 3. Cap. 2.
the Commons decline the having Cognizance of such matters, as guarding the
Seas, and Marches of England, but refer it wholly to the King; and 25 E. 3. it
is High Treason to levy War against the King, or aid them that do it. Also the
Statute of 11 H. 7. c. 18.
H. 7. says, Every Subject by duty of his Allegiance is to serve and assist
his Prince and Sovereign Lord, at all seasons when need shall require.

There is nothing more indisputably owned by all that understand the Laws, than
that it was High Treason by the Common Law, before the Statute of 25 E. 3. for
any Subject to levy War within the Realm, without Authority from the King; it
being one of the Rights of Majesty, Badges of Supreme Power, and incommunicable
Prerogatives of the Crown, says my Lord 3 Instit. c. 9.
Coke, and with him consent all the long Robe.

In a Speech in the Star Chamber to the Justices in Queen Elizabeth's time, the
Chancellor tells them that the Queen had levied Forces, and Reason wills, and
the obedience of good Subjects requires, that all things that the Prince
commands for defense of the State, should by the Subjects diligently, and
obediently be performed for dutys sake, either not examining the cause, or
presuming the best cause; but at that time she was pleased to signify the
cause of her doings.

As to the King of England's making War, and Peace abroad, it has always been
owned as the King's sole Prerogative; and when some Parliaments have addressed
to our Kings, to make War or Peace, contrary to what the Sovereign judged
convenient, they have been advertised of their Duties: yet when War is to be
made in remote Countries, which cannot be performed without great Expense, much
time, and the exhausting of the Kingdoms Forces, That the People may more
cheerfully serve their Prince and Country, and that the Exchequer may not be
too much diminished, whereby the usual Charges of the Government may not be
subtracted; Kings have upon good Reason, proposed the Matter to their
Parliaments, whereby necessary Aids might be sufficiently supplied.

The Laws now in force concerning the Militia, are, That the 13 Car. 2. c. 6.
14 Car. 2. c. 3.
King has the Prerogative alone, to dispose of the Militia of the Nation, to
make War and Peace, Leagues and Truces, to grant Safe Conduct, without the
Parliament; and he may issue out Commissions of Lieutenancy, impowering them to
form into Regiments, to lead them, and employ them as well within their own, as
other Countries, as the King shall direct, to suppress Insurrections,
Rebellions, and Invasions.

He has the Command of all the Forts, and places of Strength, and alone to
have the keeping and Command of the Magazins of Arms, he alone to give Letters
of Mark and Reprizal, in times of War, to give Safe Conduct for Merchants, to
make a stop of Trades as he sees cause. In the time of danger, and for defense
of the Coke 7. 25.
Realm, may command all his Subjects to Arm, and they are to assist him, and
for this the Commission of Array may be made use of, and all the Courts of
Officers of War in a time of War, are his Prerogative, and the Subjects are to
serve the King within the Kingdom, against Rebels, and Traitors, Jenkins Cent.
6. Case 14.26.89.
without Pay or Wages; and this as it seems, in any part of the Nation,
especially if the King go himself.

The Subject (except in an extraordinary Coke 7.8.
Case) is not to be forced out of the Realm, unless it be to go with the Kings
Person; nor in any case, unless upon the sudden Invasion or Assault of an
Enemy, to serve the King without wages: and the King in time of War may take
any man's I e. 3. Stat. 1. 2 Eliz. c. 2.
House to build a Fort, or make a Bulwark upon any man's Land. But the King may
not rate the Nation to pay any money toward any War of his.

It is true in time of Peace the King cannot quarter his Military Forces
without the consent of the respective Subjects, nor raise money without Act of
Parliament, for the maintenance of any Army: so that the Subject (while they
keep dutiful) are in no danger of oppression by such a Power; yet without a
competent Standing Force, and Guard, Some Standing Forces necessary.
at the Kings absolute pleasure, what Livy says of the Senate, Timor inde
Patres incessit, ac si dimissus exercitus foret, rursus c^tus, occultaeque
conjurationes fierent. Lib. 6. The Long Parliaments Claim of the Militia.
would be most true of all Sovereigns, That if the Forces were dismissed,
unlawful Assemblies, and covert Conspiracies would be again set on foot.

The longest lived mischievous Parliament, that any English History can record,
knowing that they could not effect their designs of weakening the King without
the Power of the Militia (though they had a numerous Party prepared to espouse
their Interest, and as ready for Rebellion as they could desire) yet that they
might have some color for justifying their proceedings, pretended necessity of
putting the Kingdom into a posture of defense, against foreign Invasions (which
by subtle Plots, they possessed the people they had Intelligence of) and for
fear of any violence to be offered to themselves, or that the King seduced by
evil Counselors, should set up Arbitrary Power: so having obtained that Fatal
Act of not being to be dissolved without their own consent, issued out their
Commissions for Levying, Trayning, and Exercising Forces in all Counties, where
they had power, by no Law, or color of Law, but that of pretended imminent
danger, wherein the King refused to grant Commissions to such as they could
confide in for their aforesaid purposes. All which was but color and show to
wrest the Power out of the Kings hands.

To obviate such like mischievous practices for the future, upon his Majestys
happy Restoration, it was enacted, and declared, The Claims of any Right of
the Two Houses to the Militia, totally vacated.
That the sole supreme Government, Command, and disposition of the Militia, and
all Forces by Sea and Land, and of all places of strength, etc. is, and by the
Law of England ever was the undoubted right of his Majesty, and his Royal
Predecessors Kings and Queens of England, and that both, or either of the
Houses of Parliament, cannot, nor ought to pretend to the same, nor can or
lawfully may raise, or levy War, offensive or defensive, against his Majesty
his Heirs and lawful Successors.

So that now that great Controversy which wasso violently disputed to the loss
of so much English Blood and Treasure; is I hope eternally determined, never
again to be revived without an horrid prosperous Rebellion: and this
Prerogative of the Crown being thus guarded by Law, will never more be attacked
while the Royal line continues; which is to be hoped, and wished, will without
interruption, be prolonged while the British Soil exists.

CHAP. XXXVI. Concerning raising of Money upon the Subject, and the obligation
of Subjects to supply the Sovereign.
AS to the raising of Money for the support of Government, I have discoursed
something in the Title of Property, and shall here only treat of the necessity
in all Government, That the Sovereign be plentifully supplied with a Revenue
suitable to the charge.

Although Darius the Persian be reckoned by Herodotus one of the first that
exacted Tribute; The necessity of Tributes and Aids.
yet it cannot be conceived but that ever since there was a Prince who
commanded large Countries, and had potent Neighbors, Tribute, Aid, and such
like provision was exacted of the people for the defraying the necessary
charges of it. So Tacitus Nec enim quies gentium sine armis, nec arma sine
stipendiis, nec stipendia sine tributis. 4. Hist.
tells us, That we may be preserved in Peace, Arms are necessary, and they
cannot be provided for without Taxes.

The Subjects receive the benefit of protection, and by the care of the
Government, peaceable possession of their Houses, Fields and Cattle, Liberty of
Trade, dispensation of Justice, and other great Emoluments by its guard and
vigilance; which require a numerous retinue of Officers of State, Justice, and
War, and Multitude of subordinate Ministers. Something also must be allowed for
the grandeur and port is necessary for the regulating it at home and abroad,
the maintaining Correspondence by Ambassadors, the providing for defense
against foreign Invasions, and preserving Tranquillity at home; in all which
the Public is concerned: therefore the reason is very just, and equitable,
that besides a standing Revenue for defraying these constant charges, there
should be subsidiary supplys upon emergencies, adequate to the occasions. As
Cicero justly admonishes, Da operam ut omnes intelligant si salvi esse volunt,
necessitati esse parendum: That the Subjects be made to understand, that if
they will be safe, As the Subject is protected, so he ought to support the
Government.
they must yield to necessity this absolute necessity of parting with a portion
of their Estates, for securing the rest. For though it be prudence in a private
man, justly, and moderately to enrich himself; yet craftily to withhold from
the Public, and to defraud it of such parts of the Wealth, as is by Law
required, is no sign of prudence (says Mr. Hobs as judiciously as any position
he lies down:) but want of knowledge of what is necessary, Civil War.
for their own defense, and covetousness to part with nothing they can hold,
makes this restive humor in many.

That the Kings of England have quitted that Sovereign badge of raising money
upon the Subject, by their own Impositions, without consent of Parliament, is
manifest since Edward the First's time. 27 E. 1. c. 5. Anno 1299.
The Act for which runs thus, For so much as diverse People of our Realm are in
fear, that the Aids and Tasks, which they have given us before time, toward
our Wars, and other business, of their own grant and good will (howsoever they
were made) might turn to a Bondage to them and their Heirs, because they might
be at another time found in the Rolls, and likewise for the prices taken
throughout the Realm by our Ministers: We have granted for us and our Heirs,
that we shall not draw such Aids, Task nor Prices into a Custom, for any thing
that has been done heretofore, be it by Roll or any other Precedent that may
be found. Cap. 6.
The next is thus; Moreover we have granted for us and our Heirs, as well to
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and other folk of Holy Church, as also to
Earls, Barons, and to all the Commonalty of the Land; that for no business from
henceforth, we shall take such manner of Aids, Tasks, nor Prices, but by the
common assent of the Realm, and for the common profit thereof, See for this the
Charter of King John.
saving the ancient Aids and Prices due and accustomed.

These being not fully enough expressed, the Statute of 34. E. 1. though as
short in words as any to be found, yet is of the largest extent, and as liberal
a Boon of Royal bounty, as any People can boast of from their Prince. It is
thus, No Tallage or Aid shall be taken or levied by Us, or our Heirs in our
Realm, without the good will and assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen of the Land. Therefore all those who
would enjoy the benefit of this Law, must take care they preserve the
Succession and the two Houses of Parliament.

MS. Speech, second Parl. El^z. an. 1562. Inducements to supply the Sovereign.
The Lord Chancellor in Queen Elizabeth's time, thus by the Queens command
discourses to the Houses, If when any part of the natural Body hap to be in
danger, the Head and every part hastes to the relief; so how inconvenient and
unnatural is it, when danger is offered to the whole, that the Head should take
the whole care, and bear the whole burden, and the Members remain uncareful
and uncharged.

It is certain Coke Instit. 1.90.
the Prince can make no War of any great concernment, without the assistance of
his Subjects Purses as well as Bodies, unless all would voluntarily serve upon
their own charges: for that neither sudden dangers can be evaded, nor Forces
raised, and all things necessary for them provided, nor peace be long
preserved, when the Prince has an empty Exchequer; for Treasure is Firmamentum
Belli, and Ornamentum Pacis.

A late States of France. Objection.
French Author, concerning his own Country, makes this objection, That Princes
having assigned for their usual charges of the Government, Tribute and other
Incomes, they ought to be therewith contented, and not without occasion raise
new Taxes to the detriment of the Liege people, and contrary to the intention
of the Trust: Yet he owns this ought to be soberly understood; for a wise
Physician applies those Remedies necessary without the Patient's leave, and
will force him, though by cutting off a Limb, to save his life. So when there
may happen a necessity, urgent and unforeseen, that either will suffer no
delay, or which ought not for some time to be divulged; in such cases (says
he) the King without the States, and whether they will or no, may lay new
Impositions, and make all other necessary provisions, by the absolute Power he
has to rule, and preserve his State and Subjects, he not being able to defend
them without necessary Forces: Therefore in such occasions it is to be
supposed, that with the Power of Government, there is transferred to the Prince
the Power to do that, without which good Government cannot be executed; but
when there is not that kind of necessity, the States are called. Thus far my
Author.

Since therefore Coke 1. Insiit. p. 161.
qui diruit medium, destruit finem, he that takes away the necessary means, for
a King to preserve his people in uncommon events, hazards the ruin of the
People; some have inferred that when dangers should be so sudden, that there
could not be time to convene a Parliament, or that such a Parliament met,
should for some design, deny the Prince Money, then the Kings Prerogative might
extend to the raising of Money; and they instance in the Loans by Privy Seals,
exacted upon the Subjects even in Queen Elizabeth's time.

This indeed was the Plea for Ship Money, and as the case was stated by King
Charles the First, Concerning Ship Money.
all the Judges once subscribed their affirmative opinions (though Mr. Justice
Hutton and Crook retracted after) and with great learning the case was argued,
and Judgment given in favor of the King: Yet he hoping, by the yielding to the
abolishing of it, to have stopped the misery of a War, consented to an Act for
that purpose; yet that prevented not the Inundation of blood: and we found
those men, that moved Heaven and Earth with their clamours against the King, as
governing arbitrarily; when they got the Power, made it their daily practice,
to lay what unprecedented illegal Taxes they pleased on their fellow Subjects,
to the value, as some compute, of Forty Eight Millions.

Therefore all Judicious persons, lovers of their King, The Advantages to
Prince and People, when the Crown is liberally provided for.
Country and Posterity, finding the sad effects those disputes brought to the
Blessed King and the whole Kingdom, will think it a necessary prudence in a
Prince, to have always such a provision of Money ready, as will enable him in
all difficulties, that may occur in the Administration of the Government,
without being obliged to part with any of his Royal Prerogatives, when any
discontented or designing Factious Members shall be able to take advantage of
his Wants, whereby to drive their barter with the Crown; for thereby he shall
defeat their ends. On the other side it will be the most prudent and dutiful
course both for their own security, and the Princes honor, for Parliaments
upon all just and honorable Wars, or occasions of assisting Allies, preparing
Fleets in readiness, upon necessary defense, to assist the Prince liberally,
and repay out of the Public, what for public Service he has expended out of
his own Revenue, rather than he should be in disesteem with his Neighbors and
Allies; whereby the honor of the Prince, and consequently of his Subjects,
should be Eclipsed, or he be necessitated to take any unusual course for
raising Money, or be compelled to make any inglorious Peace: for we can never
forget, how the want of supplies to King Charles the First, brought not only
Ship Money, and Knight-hoodmony, Monopolies, and the long disuse of
Parliaments, but at last that most calamitous War upon the whole Nation.

We cannot forget how zealous an House of Commons was of late to prevent any
Arbitrariness, as it was insinuated, December. 17.1680. The Care of some
Parliaments to keep the King poor.
in the late King, so that they voted a Bill to be brought in against illegal
Exaction of Money upon the People, under the Penalty of Treason, not foreseeing
that the Charters of the City of London, and many other Corporations, were
forfeitable upon that account; which if it had been made Treason, the King had
got a good Revenue, against the intentions of those who in all appearance voted
for a contrary end: which further appeared in their Vote Jan. the 7th following
Address, part 3.
That whosoever should lend, or cause to be lent, by way of advance, any Money
upon the branches of the Kings Revenue, arising by Customs, Excise or
Hearth-money, (the three principal branches) should be judged to hinder the
sitting of Parliament, and be responsible for the same in Parliament. So that
they would give nothing themselves, but as much as in them lay, terrified
others from lending, or advancing any Money to him; which was not according to
their Writ, to advise, but by duress and force to compel the King to submit to
their Judgments: and instead of giving him Assistance to support his Allies,
and enable him to preserve Tangier, they tended to the disenabling him from
contributing to either by his own Revenue and Credit; not only exposing him to
the dangers that might happen either at home or abroad, but endeavoring to
deprive him of the Possibility of supporting the Government it self, and reduce
him to a more helpless Condition than the meanest of his Subjects, as the King
sadly and justly complained; and in that Vote the Subjects Liberty and Property
was invaded, in that he could not dispose of his Money to his own Profit, and
the Benefit of the Government, if either Insurrection or Rebellion happened in
the interval of Parliament, or a foreign Force on a sudden should attacque us:
yet these Gentlemen would be counted Loyal and Dutiful Subjects.

It is not to be denied, but that if a Prince's standing Revenue were so great,
that by it he might not only support the ordinary expenses of the Government,
but lay by a sum sufficient to defray all extraordinary incident Charges,
either occasioned by intestine Rebellions, or foreign Invasions; that a King
should not have occasion to have so often recourse to Parliaments for Aids.

Yet when we confider, that there would be many other occasions of frequent
convening that great Council, for making wholesome Laws, which is one great
Portion of their Business; and that the Subjects never can be happy under a
poor Prince, who thereby should be brought into contempt, and how much greater
mischiefs accrue to the Subjects, by rendering their Prince impotent, and unable
to preserve them from factious disturbers of their Peace and Repose, and the
preserving their Properties, as well as the defending them from the designs of
foreign Princes who would injure our Merchants, lock us in our Island, and
force us to sell our own native Commodities, and receive theirs at what Rates
they pleased, if our Sovereign were not able to keep a sufficient Fleet, and
infinite other Mischiefs, which would accompany a starved Exchequer; we should
too late find that the Expense of many Millions would not again restore us to
that condition of Prosperity and Renown, that one, timely bestowed on our
Prince, would preserve us in. It is much less Charge to keep in good Repair, a
well built Fort, Castle, or Man of War, than to build a new one, especially if,
upon the demolishing of the old, we were to fight for the Ground and Materials,
whereupon and wherewith we should build the new.

It is a singular Security to the English Subject, that no Money can be levied
upon him, but by Act of Parliament, to which in his Representatives he gives
his Consent: and the House of Commons is generally careful that they understand
a great necessity, ere they pass any Money-bill; yet we have known in our Age
some, that have stood upon such terms with their Sovereign, that either he has
chosen rather to want Supplies, than have them upon such hard Terms, or their
Principals have suffered a thousand times more by such denials, than they had
done if they had been granted.

So was Constantinople lost to the Turks, for want of furnishing the Emperor
with the hundredth part of that which the victorious Enemy plundered the
Citizens of; and so the Count Palatine, elected King of Bohemia, lost that
Kingdom, and all his Hereditary Seigniories, by unfurnishing his Soldiers with
present Pay, when he had it by him. And how many suffer by the want of a
liberal and proportionable Supply, to pay off the Debts of the Exchequer, is
too sadly felt by many; and if the Parliament of 1639. had furnished King
Charles the First with twelve Subsidies (as it appears by the sequel,) the
Expense of four times as many Millions, besides the infinite quantity of
Christian Blood shed in the ensuing War, had been prevented in all humane
probability.

Therefore it is to be hoped that both Parliaments will be careful to supply
the wants of the Crown; and Princes will for the future, be as careful so to
employ the Moneys given, that they may encourage their Subjects (as often as
the urgency of Affairs may require it) to give freely what may be useful, and
sufficient for their Kings urgent occasions.

Nec juv^ntam armis civilibus aut domesticis discordiis imbutam, nulla odia,
nullas injuri is nec cupidinis ultionem afferre. 13. Annal. c. 1.
It is noted by Tacitus, that Nero coming to the Empire, told the Senate that he
being not brought up in Civil Wars, or domestical discords, would bring with
him neither hatred nor grudge, nor desire of Revenge, and promised them many
good things, which were very acceptable An cuncta vectigalia omitti juberet:
Idque pulcherrimum donum generl mortalium daret, Sed impetum ejus, multum prius
laudata animi magnitudine, attenuere Senatores, dissolutionem Imperii docendo,
si fructus quibus Respublica sustineretur; diminuerentur. Lib. 13. c. 12.
to the Senate and People; but doubting with himself whether it were best to
command that no more Subsidies or Tributes should be levied, but he should
bestow so fair a Donative on the World; though this commended the Bounteousness
of his Mind; yet the Lords of the Senate stayed him from such a Resolution,
telling him, It would be the Dissolution of the Empire, if the Revenues, by
which it was sustained, should be diminished.

These, and such Considerations, that ever to be Renowned House of Commons,
convened 23 May, 1685. have had, and with an unaccustomed speed, supplied the
King plentifully; which was a most effectual means to stifle the Rebellion of
the late Duke of Monmouth, and the Earl of Argile: and such cheerful Aids will
render his Majesty able to pursue his most Princely Design, not only of making
the English Name more considered and respected abroad; The King's Speech, 30
May, 1685.
but of carrying the Reputation of it yet higher in the World, than it has been
in the time of many of his Royal Ancestors.

Which induced the most wise King to tell them, That the readiness and
cheerfulness that attended the dispatch of it, was as acceptable to him as the
Bill it self; and that he would not call upon them for Supplies, but when they
should be of public use and advantage; and that he would manage what they
gave, with good Husbandry, and take care to employ them to the uses for which
he asked them.

So long as such a considerately liberal Mind continues in the two Houses, and
the Money is lodged in the Exchequer of such a Prince, we may presage a most
happy time, and neither fear intestine Rebellions, nor foreign Enemies; and
besides the unspeakable Benefits to our selves, the advantage must redound to
his Majesty's Allies, and the general Repose of Christendom may depend much
upon it: there being little doubt to be made, but if our late Soverereign of
Blessed Memory, had been seasonably and effectually supplied, the Lilies of
France had not been so rankly planted and secured in Flanders, nor been watered
with so much Christian Blood; nor probably had we at home been in so imminent a
danger of a Civil War, as we were by the subtle Devices of those who knew that
the Royal Eagle could make no extraordinary flight, when his Golden Pinions
were shortened.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Nobility.
HAving hitherto treated of the Excellency of Government, and particularly of
that of England, and the just and beneficial Sovereignty of the Prince, under
several Heads; Method requires that I speak something of the Subjects, who they
are and their Duties; and lastly of the causes of Disturbance, or Dissolution
of Government, by Faction, Sedition, Conspiracy and Rebellion: of which in
order, and first of the Nobility, as those who justly make the greatest Figure
in the Government, next to the Royal Lineage.

The (...) Polit. l 4. c. 4.
Philosopher makes four kinds of Nobility. First, such as have the Possession
of great Riches, Several kinds of Nobility.
and are abbe to bear a great Port. Secondly, such as have been so from great
Antiquity. Thirdly, those that by Virtue, and great Achievements, have
acquired Honor and Renown. Lastly, such as in Learning are Eminent. Under
these Heads the Nobility may yet be ranked, if we take it in a large Sense, as
the fit Subject upon which the Sovereign may impress that Character. But my
design is to speak of the second and third Order only.

How the Word Nobiles has been used in the Latin and Greek Empire, when it was
the addition to Caesar in the Branches of the Emperors Families, and how in
later times, I shall not trouble the Reader with, but refer the curious to the
most Learned Seldom, and to what I shall note in the Chapter of the Gentry.

Great Virtues have sublimed their Bloods, A Character of the Nobility.
and separated them from the dregs of the Crowds. Others are Vessels of Common
Clay; they are all China and Porcellane: others of Lead, Iron, Brass, or
Silver; they of pure Gold, or Diamonds of the old Rock. They are Stars of the
first Magnitude in the Firmament of Government, yea the Firmament it self,
betwixt the upper and the nether Waters; betwixt the pure Ether of Celestial
Intelligences (the Sovereign and Princes of the Blood) and the terrestrial
Waters of the Commons. The Blessed Medium, the double Trench to defend the
Crown and the People.

That there should be such illustrious Persons is absolutely necessary, for
that in a Multitude there must be some, Necssity of a Nobility.
who designing to live virtuously, and having Souls of a richer Composition, by
their own proper uncommon Achievements, and the transcendency of their
Virtues, shall lay the Foundation of that Nobility, which afterward enriched
and augmented by the noble Actions of their Successors, will make their
Families splendid, and Illustrious. So that Sovereigns (the Fountains and
Disposers of all Honors) justly reward them with the Ensigns of Nobility. The
present Nobility, or their noble Ancestors, (by fidelity and their great
Capacities to serve the Crown and Commonweal) have been gilded with those
Rays, and have Characters impressed upon them undefaceable by any thing but
Treason, which taints their Blood; or Degeneracy, which smuts their Esteem.
They are the Buttresses of the Throne, the Gold and Silver work of the Regalia.

St. Alban's Essays, c. 14.
It is a Reverend thing (says the ingenious Chancellor) to see an ancient
Castle, or Building, not in Decay, Of Ancient Nobility.
or a fair Timber Tree, firm and sound; how much more to behold a noble ancient
Family, which has stood against the waves, and weather of Time.

New Nobility is but the Act of Power, the ancient, the Act of Time. Those who
are first raised to Nobility, are commonly more virtuous, but less innocent;
for there is rarely any rising, without a Commixture of good and bad Acts; but
it is reasonable that the Memory of their Virtues remain to Posterity, and
their Faults dye with themselves.

-- miserum est aliorum incumbere famae, Ne collapsa ruant subduct is tecta
columnis, Juv. Sat. 8. v. 77, 78.
It is glorious in the Progeny of the old Nobility, and useful to themselves,
their King, and Country, to study to imitate the Perfections, and eschew the
Imperfections of their noble Progenitors, who were Founders of their Families
and Honors: They no doubt were Learned, Judicious, and able Ministers of
State, such as eased their Prince of their otherwise unsupportable Burden of
Government; such as were sensible of the true Fountain of Honor, true Patriots
of their Country, because zealous for the established Government, and coveted
not to make themselves popular in opposition to their Prince.

Honor is one of the prime Badges of Nobility; The Use of Nobility.
the winning of that (says St. Alban's Essays, Of Honor and Reputation.
the learned Chancellor) is the revealing of a man's Virtue without
disadvantage. If a man perform that which has not been attempted before, or
attempted and given over, or has been achieved, but not with so good
Circumstances; he has purchased more Honor, than by effecting a matter of
greater difficulty, or Virtue, when he is but a follower.

Honor that is gained, broken upon another, has the quickest reflection, like
Diamonds cut with Fucets; therefore its commendable for any to exceed his
Competitors in Honor, by outshooting them in their own Bows.

Idem Essays, c. 14.
A Monarchy, where there is no Nobility at all, (as among the Turks) is ever a
pure and absolute Tyranny. For Nobility attempers Sovereignty: a great and
potent Nobility adds Majesty to a Monarch, but diminishes Power; puts
Life and Spirit into the People, but presses their Fortunes. It is well when
Nobles are not too great for Sovereignty, or Justice, and yet maintained in
that height, as the Insolence of Inferiors may be broken upon them, before it
come on over fast upon the Majesty of Kings.

A numerous Nobility causes Poverty and Inconvenience in a State, Concerning
numerous Nobility.
brings a surcharge of Expense; and some falling to be weak in Estate, it makes
a kind of Dis-proportion betwixt Honor and Means.

To keep Nobles at some distance is not amiss; but to despise them, Kings to
countenance their Nobility.
may make a King less safe, and less able to perform any thing he desires. This
Henry the Seventh did, and though they continued Loyal to him, yet they did not
cooperate with him in his Business.

The reason of State, that we may presume, swayed with so wise a King, was, for
that the Wars betwixt the Houses of York and Lancaster had been carried on by
the sidings of the Nobility, who had in those Days numerous Retinues; the
younger Sons of the Gentry, and sometimes the elder, making a great part of the
vast Families of Noblemen, and their Tenants holding their Lands by small
Rents, and due Service, enabled them to make great alterations in the State,
accordingly as the chief of the Nobility were combined. So that he made Laws
against the number of Retainers to lessen such dependences; and likewise
bringing in use the making of Leases, made the Tenants less obliged to their
Lords, paying their Rents; and by such Tenures for Years, Honors not to be too
common.
they grew Rich: so that thereby Freeholders exceedingly increased, and all
this helped to subduct from the Power of the Nobility.

Honors are not rashly to be made common, or prodigally given; otherwise they
grow dis-esteemed, and unregarded: rare and few Honors are more glorious
(says Honores non ess^ remere pervulgandos aut essuse dandos, alioquin eos
obsoleseere; raros enim honores and tenues esse gloriosos, effusos and
pervulgatos esse obsoletos and contemptos. Giphanii Com. in cap. 3. lib. 5.
olit. Arist.
the judicious Comentator;) diffused, and common, bring Contempt and Slight.
Consentaneous to which is, what the forementioned Chancellor says, That States
which aim at greatness, St. Alban's Essays. Of Greatness of Kingdoms.
must take heed how the Nobility and Gentry multiply too fast; for that makes
the common Subject to grow to a Peasant, driven out of Heart, and in effect but
a Gentleman's Labourer. As in Copice Wood, if you leave the Stadle too thick,
you shall never have clean Underwood, but Shrubs and Bushes; and so you bring,
that the Hundredth Poll is not fit for the Helmet, especially as to the
Infantry, which is the State of France, not of England.

But in this Particular, the Custom of other Nations, a Princes Service, and
incident conveniences are to be considered. For some will be won as much by
Honors, as Offices of Profit; and it is less Expense to a Prince in the
gratifying his well-deserving Subjects. Besides, something must be allowed to
Aemulations, and a rich Soil will bring a greater Crop than a barren.

In all Ages likewise some of the ancient Nobility are extinguished, and it is
fit to plant new Standards in the room of the decayed: So that what these
Learned Men assert concerning spare Distribution of Honors, is to be
considered with just Limitations.

The Splendour, Magnificence, and great Retinues of Noblemen, conduce much to
Martial greatness; Great Retinues of the Nobility useful.
except in Poland, the State of Free-Servants and Attendants upon Noblemen, and
the richer Gentlemen, has been observed to be no where so peculiar in former
times, as in England. Those Retainers and humble Friends are fitted for all
gentile Employments, and are a Seminary of the more polite Yeomanry; whereas a
close and reserved living of Noblemen, and Gentlemen, causes a Penury of
Military Forces, and well-bred Yeomanry.

The Nobility may be Eclipsed, by sinking beneath their Orbs in affecting
Popularity in opposition to their Prince, The Nobility not to Desert the Crown.
or rearing their Heads among the Clouds in Ambition.

Whenever by Malevolent Aspects of other Planets, their Influence on the State
is less benign; or that the putrid Breath of some Malcontents taint their
Allegiance, the Contagion is of a large Spread; their Blood being mingled with
so many others of Power, takes Fire at once, and can neither be shed or
rectified alone.

Sometimes their Blood may be chilled, when they conceive others interpose
betwixt them and the warmer Gleams of the Throne, and they will not want
Factious Torpedoes, that will benum their brisker Souls, The old Nobility not
to envy the new ones.
if they be not wary to avoid their touch. But when their Lordships consider
that as they and their happy Ancestors have had a plentiful Portion of their
Princes Regards and Bounty, so they should be content that others share with
them in their Princes Munificence, and should not expect that their Families
should be every Ages Darlings: they will have more honorable and contented
Thoughts, and own not only the Truth, but yield to the necessity of that of
Fato quodam aut sort nascendi, ut caetera, ita Principum inclination in hos,
ossensio in illos. Annal. lib 4.
Tacitus, That as our Birth s are ascribed to Fate, or Chance; so the
Inclinations of Princes to some, and their dislike to others, as he instanceth
in Lepidus, under Tiberius.

We see in the great Economy of the World (which we must believe is disposed
by the Universal Monarch) some noble Families in every Age are Extinct, and
other new ones by their Virtues and great Accomplishments are raised, and the
Cadets of others like some Rivers are hid for some space under Ground, till
when they appear again, they are know by their refined Parts to be of noble
Abstract. Not to repine at the Prince's Favors bestowed on others.


The Sun is the same most luminous Body, though some Maculae are observed in it
by curious Telescopes; and if Princes Beams shine not always with the same
Serenity upon the district of some Families that it has done, it is no more
than the Sun in the great Vortex does, and is no more to be repined at.
Therefore it becomes those noble Souls to be content with their large
allotments, and shake off all those Vipers that would sting them with Envy and
Discontent.

It is well worth such Noblemens Consideration how their Interests are
interwoven with that of the Crown, and if any unhappily have loosened the
twine, or frozen the Zeal they have for its support, let them call to Mind the
Virtue and Bravery of their Ancestors, and observe what Gemms or Gold-work they
were of it, and strive to fasten themselves there again, and out of the Embers
kindle again that Loyalty they have derived ex traduce from their generous
Ancestors: so that Lucan, 1.2. v. 557.
Fervidus hac iterum circa praecordia Sanguis
Inacleat. --


And as the Crown has bestowed Honor and Wealth upon their noble Families, so
let them never be wanting with their utmost Industry, to support it in all its
splendid Prerogatives; and of all the Infamy of Mortals, let not ingratitude be
laid to their Charge. How the Nobility may honorably acquaint their Prince
with Grievances.


The Nobility are Conciliarii nati, and as their Birth and places give them
easy access to the Princes Privy-Chamber and Cabinet, though they be not of his
secret Council; so they have opportunities to present the State of Affairs, and
ill managery or grievances of the People, when they conceive them concealed
from their Prince, both better and more effectually than others of a lower Rank.

But then it should be done like Persons of Honor with all Respect and Duty to
their Prince, and the ostentation of this sort of Charity, should not lessen
the usefulness of it; much less should they blow a Trumpet when they perform
it, either to aggrandize the Enterprise, or to raise discontent at the denial.

In every Kings Reign, it has been a flourishing time, and happy, when the
Nobility studied with a refined laudable Contention to aemulate one another
Virtue, striving to outdo one another in the Service of their King and
Country, uniting in that glorious Testudo, to defend their Princes Prerogative,
and the Laws that adjust their own, and the Peoples Privileges.

It is never to be forgot, how in our late Commonwealth, How Commonwealths
depress the Nobility.
the House of Peers was by the very Posteriors of the Commons, Voted useless
and dangerous. No sooner was that sacred Head separated from them, but they
were degraded to Commoners (as to any Legislative Power:) and though those
Noblemen that were content to fit in the lower House, were highly caressed and
applauded; yet a few Years has changed the note, and their Names will be
recorded to Posterity, in far less Luster than if they had more strenuously
espoused the afflicted Kings Quarrel: and it is not to be doubted, but the
Sense of that will be a most prevalent Antidote against the Defection of any of
the Nobility, that will consider the naturalness of such a degrading, if the
Commonwealth-Men should ever appear again without their Vizors; and it will be
an excellent amulet to keep them from the Infection of such Principles and
Practice.

It is worth noting, that William the Conqueror giving to his Nobility great
Fees to be held of him in Capite, How the Nobility had greater Power anciently
than now.
for some Ages the Nobility had great Interests, and numerous dependences, and
had special Jurisdiction over great Baronies; and while they served the Crown
according to their Tenures, the inferior Gentry and Commoners being one way or
other Tenants to them, could do little in opposition to the Crown. But when in
King John and Henry the Third's time, their greatness was dangerous to the
Crown, the Commons were brought in to be a part of the Parliament. Yet for some
while after they retained their Grandeur, till (as I have hinted) Henry 7.
retrenched them, and Queen Elizabeth preferring so many new Men, making less
use of the ancient Nobility, studied to gain the common Peoples Affections by
all Arts and Bounties she could use: and in after-Ages the Nobility being less
valued by the Freeholders, and increased in Number, and some of them adhering
to the two Houses against their Sovereign, their interests both with the
Parliament and People grew less.

But now under a Prince who sets a true value upon the Nobility, if they he not
wanting to themselves, they may hope to attain the luster of their noble
Ancestors, and the Commoners be no ways abridged of their Privileges. For then
the Government is in the happiest Condition, when the Nobility are great
without Ambition, rich without Oppression, eminent in Virtue as in Character.
The Gentry so deporting themselves to the Commonalty as they desire the
Nobility may to them; and the Commonalty with humble Industry, peaceably
enriching themselves, and enjoying that freedom and liberty, which may keep
them in Heart and Courage to serve their Prince and Country with cheerful
Alacrity, and outdo those of their Rank in all other Dominions; which in the
English Soldiery is observed in all Wars to be their peculiar Excellency,
ascribable principally to the Benignity of the Government which dispirits them
not: and when this liberty is not abused to Licentiousness, but restrained
within the Bounds of humble Candor and Modesty, Reverence to their Superiors,
and thankfulness to their Prince; all is in an happy Frame.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Gentry of England.
I Shall not detain the inquisitive Reader upon the derivation of the Word
Gentilhom, or Gentleman, but refer him to Titles of Honor, P. 861, 862. Whence
the Name.
Mr. Seldom, who at large discusseth the point; whether with Velserus and some
others, it be derived from Gentilis or Heathen, as introduced when the Goths,
Hunns, and Vandals having overrun the Roman Provinces, were in a better
Condition, though Gentiles, than the Christians, under the Romans; or that it
is derived from Gens.

I am more inclined to be of the latter Opinion, finding it more agreeable to
the common Use.For Cicero In Topicis.
calls those Gentiles, qui ex eadem Gente; Ingenui, qui nunquam Capite sunt
diminuti. Gens consisting of a multitude which have sprung from one Generation,
and of many of these Gentes consists a Nation; to which agrees that of Gentilis
dicitur ex eodem genere ortus: and is qui simili nomine appellatur. Festus ad
Verbum.
Festus, that Gentilis is one born of the same Gens, or Kindred, and who is
called by the like Name. So we find the Horatii, the Corvine, Julian, Flavian
Family. etc.

So the Greeks use the words (...), for one nobly descended from great
Parentage. So (...) was Nobility, which Polit. lib. 4. c. 8. lib. 5. c. 1.
Aristotle calls (...), Ancient Wealth and Virtue, or the (...) Rhetor. ad
Theod, lib, 2. c. 5.
Dignity of the Ancestor. The first Authors of it being styled famous Men, and
Honorable, (...) and (...).

In the largest acceptance of the Word, as it is now used (says the judicious
Tiles of Honor, p. 852.
Seldom) it denotes one that either from the Blood of his Ancestors, or the
Favor of his Sovereign, or of them that have Power from the Sovereign, or from
his own Virtue, Employment, or otherwise, according to the Laws and Customs of
Honor in the Country he lives in, is ennobled, made Gentile, or so raised to
an eminency above the Multitude, perpetually inherent in his Person.

These are styled the Nobiles minores, for distinction sake, The use of the
word Nobilis.
the word Nobiles being now appropriated to those of the higher Rank. The
ancient use of Nobilis (especially before the Roman Monarchy) was such, that it
was justly given to none but him that had Jus imaginum, or some Ancestor at
least that had born some of the great Offices, or their Magistratus Curules; as
(...) 1. cap. 19.
Censorship, Consulship, etc. From whose Image kept he had the Jus Imaginum.
Therefore the preceding Ancestor was called novus Homo, or Ignobilis.

Some Ages after the Romans were under a Monarchy, the Title of Nobilis was
given to such as by the Emperors Patents of Offices, or their Codicilli
Honorarii, were first raised out of the lowest Rank. After that, Arms of
Ensigns of Distinction, born upon Shields, grew to be in may Families
Hereditary, (which was about four hundred Years since, as Sir Edward Bish in
his Aspilogia avoucheth) it came into frequent use, that he, who was either
formerly ennobled by Blood, or newly by acquisition, either assumed, or had by
Grant from his Sovereign, or those deputed by him, some special note of
Distinction, by Arms also to be transmitted with his Gentry to his Posterity.

Yet (...).
Mr. Seldom notes, that in the Proceedings in the Court of Chevalry, betwixt
Reginald Lord Gray of Ruthin, Plaintiff, and Sir Edward Hastings Defendant,
concerning the bearing of a Manch Gules in a^ Field Or, in the depositions
taken in the Moote Hall at Bedford, it is recorded, that John Botiler of the
County of Bedford, and Roger Tenstal, Mayor of Bedford, having been the
Plaintiffs Servants, severally deposed, Il est Gentilhom d' Auncestrie, mas and
point, d' Arms. Gentlemen without coats of Arms.
That he was a Gentlemen of ancient time, but had no Arms. But I shall pass
from this.

That which I desire the Gentry to observe is, Advice to the Gentry.
That they are the Seminary of our greater Nobility, and that from Loyal, Wise,
Learned, Valiant and Fortunate Persons, of their Order, in all Princes Reigns,
the Nobility have sprung. Therefore as some of them are derived from as
numerous Ancestors, as any in other Kingdoms, and have by Hereditary Succession
greater Estates than many foreign Counts, and as they desire either to conserve
the Repute their Ancestors have honorably entailed on them, or to transmit
them to their Posterities; so it will be their Interest and Glory to accomplish
themselves in all sorts of useful Learning, whereby they may be Serviceable to
their King and Country.

There are Bodily Exercises they should be well skilled in, as Fencing, Riding
the great Horse, and all Military Exercises, to enable them to serve in the
Militia of the Nation; and their diligent perusing all sorts of History, and
the Laws of the Land, will fit them for the managing of Civil affairs, and
dispensing the Kings Laws, as Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Commissioners,
Representatives in Parliament, as also for the greater Offices of State.

Since they are born to large Patrimonies, and thereby have a more generous
Education, and derive a more refined Spirit from their Ancestors, they can with
infinite more Ease enter into public Employment, having none of those sinking
Hand facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat Res angust a domi --
weights of Poverty, and mean Education, which enforce others to use extreme
Diligence e're they can mount the first half Pace, the Gentleman is seated on,
by that time he leaves his tutors.

It is true the Privileges of the Gentry of England, properly so called, are
not so great as in some Countries, where they have power of Life and Death over
their Servants, or are exempted from Taxes, and enjoy other Immunities which
are denied to the Commons; yet they have others as beneficial in that they make
up a great share of the Ministerial parts of the Government.

It is required by God and their Prince, that they should so deport themselves
as they may be singular (...) Dio, lib. 2.
Examples to their Tenants and Neighbors, of Wisdom, Temperance, Justice,
Loyalty, and all the System of Virtues; and by a generous Hospitality, without
Debauchery, preserve their Interest in the affection of their Neighbors, and
that the Poor may daily and zealously pray for them, being made the Voiders,
and receiving the Sportula of their plentiful Tables. By this way of living
they will sow among their Neighbors the Seeds of all useful Virtues, and
enrich their Countries, and be able in time of need to serve their Prince with
their numerous Dependants.

It is for the use of the blooming Gentlemen I write this. The more sage and
ancient need only such Intimations to refresh their Memories. I have made
Observations how fatal it has been to themselves, and the whole Kingdom, when
the Gentry have been seduced to slight at first, and after, (as they have been
wrought upon by Designers) to overawe or overturn the Government, and either
by Piques among themselves, or Aemulations, Envies, and Discontents, have been
brought into the Combinations and Conspiracies with those, who under the
specious Pretenses of enlarging their Privileges, have subjected themselves as
well to the slavery of Red-coats, and the Tyranny of a Corpse du guard, or
Council of War, as they had their Prince under their Committees and Armies:
which considerations I hope will be worth their remembering.

What I have writ in most of the Chapters of this Treatise, less or more
appertains to the Gentry, out of a true and cordial desire, that if any such
Critical time should in any Age return, as that of Forty and Forty one, or
Eighty and Eighty one; the Gentry may consider the History of former Ages, and
be able to distinguish betwixt Realities, and feigned Pretenses, and will well
weigh what I have writ in the preceding Chapter of the Nobility: for that it is
in most particulars applicable to to them, which makes me shorter in this; and
that above all things they will seriously consider, that though in every M^gis
alii (...) nes qu^m alii mores. Ta^it. 1. Histo^.
Generation new Men do arise, that to carry on their Factious Design, pretend
different Causes; yet the ends of all that are Malcontents, and seditiously
displeased with the Government, is the same, and commonly their Fate is
parallel.

Therefore above all the Infections, let them study to avoid that of murmuring
and repining against the Government, or that of being seduced by those, who
cover their dark Thoughts and Designs too close to be discovered by common Eyes.

The more such pretend Zeal for the common Good, the more they pretend public
Spirits, and care of Religion. If they be found to have any the least Tincture
of Immorality, Envy, Ambition, Revenge, Cruelty, or aspiring in their Tempers.
the more they are to be suspected and avoided.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Commonalty of England, of the lower rank especially.
THESE are more especially the subject matter of Government. The Employments
they are engaged in, The Common Peoples Duty.
makes it more profitable for them to look downwards, and cultivate their
Freeholds and Tenements, and reap the golden Fruits of their Toil; than to
spend their time in the fruitless enquiries after the managery of States and
Empire: for whereover Sovereignty lodges, they must still be Subjects.

Obedience (says a well observing Cornwallis's Es. says, 46.
Author) not Examination, is the destined Function of the Common People, which
Laws preserve them in. The Industrious would soon be ruined by the Free-booters
in every Hamlet, if the Laws and Government were not their Guard. By the
several Rebellions (properly of the Commons) in Richard 2. H. 8. The Miseries
of Insurrections.
and Edward the Sixth's time, we have sad Examples of the Calamities they
brought, not only on their Neighbors, and the disturbance they gave the
Government; but likewise the ruins they brought upon themselves: and when they
had wearied themselves with Rapine, Murders, and a Hundred cruel Ravages, and
Butcheries, they were at last either totally subdued, and their Chieftains
Executed, and the rest Fined, or they perished in the Fight; being never able
to effect any of their pretended Liberties, they made the Insurrections to have
obtained.

It is for want of Consideration, that they are decoyed into such barbarous
Outrages, which in such Rebellions they generally commit. They ought to
consider, Their Obligations to their Prince.
and that very seriously, that it is from their Princes sollicitous Care, that
they enjoy Peace and Plenty: to them they owe not only Allegiance and
Obedience, as they are their Sovereigns; but especially Gratitude, Loyalty, and
all dutiful Services. For the good Laws from time to time have been confirmed
by their Kings, for their Prosperities; without which, they would be in a
continual State of War and Feuds one against another.

They owe to the Paternal Care and Prudence of the Sovereign and his
Government, those Methods and Rules, whereby they are so benignly ruled, (in
England especially) whereby they are in a freer and more plentiful Estate than
any other Commoners in the World. By the virtue of those Privileges granted to
them by their Kings, they have Propriety in their Goods, none can out them of
their Possessions, imprison, or molest them, while they observe the equitable
Laws. Their Privileges.


They have according to their several Capacities and Abilities, a participation
of Offices in their particular Hamlets, Parishes, Wapentakes, or Counties,
either relating to the assistance to the Justice of the Land in Juries, or
conserving of the Peace, in being petty, or chief Constables, or other
Officers; and have a peculiar Privilege, many other Commoners want, of choosing
their Representatives, whereby they are only subject to such Laws, as they or
their Ancestors have given consent to.

The Government (worthy Countrymen) makes fertile your Enclosures, protects
your Flocks and Herds, secures your going out, and coming in, makes your Sleeps
undisturbed, guards your homebred Commodities when you send them abroad,
secures those are brought home to you, appoints you Markets for buying or
selling your Corn and Cattle, and your own Manufactures.

Let those among you, The Calamities they sustained in the late War.
that are not ashamed they were Sequestrators, Membrs of the Parliaments Army,
or active Officers, Oppressors, Plundereres, or Informers against their Loyal
Neighbors, consider what they reaped in the late unhappy Wars, begun with all
the specious Pretenses of redressing grievances, securing Propriety, and
reforming Religion (precious Names most wickedly abused.) Remember how
unsupportable were the Taxes and Sequestrations. What affrightments were you
continually in by the Quartering of imperious Soldiers, and their Plunders,
where they neither left Food nor Raiment for your Wives and Children; and what
they could not devour, or carry away, they destroyed? Consider the effusion of
so much Blood in the cruel Battles, and their most unjust High-Courts of
Justice how all the Laws either were stifled, or miserably distorted.

The best Preservatives against the relapse into such miserable times, Advice
to the Commonalty.
is to reflect upon them often, to live quietly under your Sovereign, to give
him no occasion to unsheath any of his Swords against you, to reduce you to
Obedience. Avoid all Factious Whisperers of discontent. You were within these
six Years by past, wrought so upon by cunning Designers of a Commonwealth, that
you made choice of such Representatives as neither would supply that Prince o
immortal Memory, who had preserved them and you in that Peace he had restored
them to, when nothing but War, and miserable Devastations were in all the
Countries of the Continent; nor admit our present Gracious Sovereign (who had
adventured his Life so often for their Safety) to succeed in the Throne of his
Royal Ancestors.

Remember I beseech you (dear Countrymen) these things, and consider how near
the Gulf and Pits Brink of inevitable Miseries you were. Be thankful to those
Loyal Persons, who by their Counsels and Addresses withheld you from the
imminent Ruin. Be misled no more by such as can sow nothing but Darnel,
Cockle, Poppy and Tares among your Corn; would consume your Grain, and leave
you nothing but the Chaff. Such as by instigating you to Insurrections, under
Pretense of Religion, or any other Wheedles, would necessitate the Government
for your own Security, to rule you with a Scepter of Iron; whereas now you are
under one of pure Gold, beset with all the Jewels of Heroic Virtue.

Would you avoid the Slavery of the French Commoners, and be never in danger of
being Peasants? Would you enjoy what you and your happy Forefathers have done
in peaceable times? Then study your Duty of Obedience to the Laws, banish all
Murmurings, and Repinings, heartily pray for the King's Prosperity, heartily
endeavor to serve him with your Lives and Fortunes against his Enemies; live
quietly under his careful and merciful Conduct; adore that divine Providence
that has established him peaceably in his Throne, and out of infinite
Compassion to these Nations, has prevented a Civil War.

Be sincerely and cordially thankful that you are under the Government of such
a Prince, who so freely and spontaneously promises to defend your Religion,
secure your Properties, and adventure his Person for your Defense: Who is
justly reverenced abroad, ought to be as entirely honored, and affectionately
loved, and dutifully obeyed at home. So shall the Government be Easy,
Beneficial and Merciful to you; so shall you have full Barns and Purses, and
all the Blessings of Peace and Security in the long Enjoyment of them.

CHAP. XL. Of the Temper and Disposition of the Common People of the lowest
Rank.
I IVY Vulgus metu aut spe nimium, Lib. 23. Nihil in vulgo modicum. The var^ous
Disposition of the Common People.
tells us that the Common People Fear and Hope generally is in excess. They
want skill to make Observations of the true Causes of Matters, and conclude
Effects from wrong Cause. They are ignorant of their duty to the Public, never
meditating any thing (with Reflection) like their particular Profit. If a wet
Season happen of continuance, they murmr and repine, as if their whole
Tillage were lost, and a long Drought produces the like effect.

As to the public, it is their Nature Aut servit humiliter aut sup^ be
domin^^^. (...) Annal.
slavishly to fear, or proudly to domineer, affrighting the Government, if they
be not brought to some degree of Awe; and if they be brought to fear, their
Governors may with more safety despise them: for they are wholly Strangers to
the Golden mean of Liberty, which they neither know how to enjoy or want;
despising and sleighting the Freedom they possess, and wrought upon by
Seditious Arts of Popular Men, vainly hoping to attain to some Enlargement of
that Liberty, which they fondly dream of.

In their own temper (says Vul^^^ ingenio (...) and discordiosum, cupidum
novaum rerum, quieti and (...) adversum. Sail. in Jugurtha.
Sallust) they are changeable, Seditious, full of Discord, desirous of Novelty,
impatient of Peace and Idleness: and if we allow them at some Seasons at least
to be a calm Sea, yet as that by Winds, so they are easily swelled by the
blasts of Seditious Persons; to receive which, they hoist up all their Sails.
According to that of the Or^^. pro Cluent.
Orator, Vt Mare quod sua natura tranquillum, ventorum vi agitari videmus, ac
turbari; sic populus sua sponte pacatus, hominum Seditiosorum vocibus
violeutissimis tempestatibus concitari solet.

They are too credulous of Reports, and the Designers to put them into ferment
need no more, but to put in practice what (...) primum and (...) Hist. P. ^.
Tacitus mentions of the false news of Otho's being slain; That at first a
wandering and uncertain Rumor, then as in great lies, some say they were
present, and saw it; the rejoicers and curious being aptest to believe the
Report. So that at last a general belief is given, few being willing to take
the pains to make strict Enquiry. And when such Rumors are forbidden, more
horrid things are invented than at first, and so are more difficultly
suppressed; for there is a wonderful propensity in them, to receive (...)
Ta^it. ib. P. 5.
and believe all new Reports, stretching all Rumors vastly beyond the reality
of matters: fame being with them as sure a ground of Belief, as Realty.

Res auget cuncta, ut mos est, fama in majus credita. If in things they fear
the Rumor once be broached, how swift is the Alarm! all the Air is full of
Speaking Trumpets, though nothing to be seen.

-- Sic quisque pavendo
Dat vires famae, nulloque Auctore malorum
Quae finxere timent.
This quality of the Vulgar, How they were (...) upon in (...)
the Designers of Forty one well understood, and most industriously improved.
The tumult^ of the multitude were governed by them, all the great mischiefs
were facilitated by the Midwivery of these contrived Reports; Jealousies and
Fears preparing Peoples Minds for every ill Impression.

The breaking of a Plank by two Corpulent Gentlemen, occasioned a Report that
the Parliament House was undermined; and others were so quick-scented, that
they smelt Po^der. This was carried with that swiftness into the City, that the
Rabble in excessive manner flocked to Westminster, full of revengeing Fury.

So they pret^nded Intelligence of foreign Invasions, to put the Kingdom into a
posture of Defense, and the miserable Country armed with great forwardness upon
every Alarm, little for^seeing what the ends of those dismal Acts would be. How
of later thm^.


We of late had an Experiment of this in the Story of the lsl^ of Purbeck, when
the report of the landing of the French raised many Thousands of Men, whom the
noble Peer said he could have conducted whither he would by a Letter. We cannot
forget how the report of the Fireworks, sound in Somerset House, the forty
Thousand Pilgrims, and Black Bills alarmed the Credulous. Such Mormos and
Specter ever will be made use of by those who intend to work upon the Mobile.

If the Multitude could be made Wise, A^vice to them.
to rely upon their Governors Wisdom,(that can better foresee Danger than
they, and have greater share in the present State, and having more to lose,
will more carefully endeavor to prevent Mischiefs,) they would not be so
appalled at imaginary Dangers, suggestedly crafty Men, or be so suspicious that
they are not so well governed as they should be, or so apprehensive of
Oppression; and if they should miscarry under such Conduct (which they can have
no reason to suspect) they would perish with a great deal of Discretion.

But alas there is in all the common People (as (...). (...)
Plutarch has noted of old) something malignant, and querulous against
Government; they yield open Ears to detracting and blackening Speeches against
their Governors. They are generally strong in Will, weak in Judgment, their
Affections commanding their Belief, and presaging as they believe,
short-sighted in discovering Consequences of matters, and easy to receive
Impressions from their Demagogues.

Some Birds are whistled into the Snare, others driven: Apes and Dottrels
caught by imitation of such Postures as others assume. They are the subject
matter of all Seditions, and when they are wrought upon to believe they are
like to be oppressed, they can easily find among themselves a Cade, Straw,
Tyler, or Masinello to head them.

The general Temper of the People is well described by 1. Histor, Imperaturus
es hominibus qui nec totam servitutem pati pessunt, nec totam libertatem.
Tacitus, in that Speech of Galba to Piso, Thou art to command, says he, over
Men, that neither will endure absolute Servitude, nor absolute Liberty. In
another place of the same Book, he tells us, Vulgus, ut mos est, cujusque motus
novi cupidus: It is the custom of the Common People to be desirous of Changes.
All which is only in hopes that they shall be at more Ease and Liberty, though
they are mostly mistaken in the means to attain it.

It is true, Libertas juxta bonis and malis, strenui and ignavis optabilis est.
Sallust, ad Caesarem.
Liberty is desirable by the Good as well as the Evil, the Strenuous as well as
the Slothful; but the great difference is, that the good and wise know the
Extent of it, and know, it no ways is more happily enjoyed, than by Obedience
to the Government and the Laws. But the common sort judge it to consist in
doing as they list, and being under no Rule or Correction; whereas Vires
Imperii in consensu obedientium sunt. Lib. 2.
Livy tells us, The Force and Strength of Empire, is in the Consent of the
Obedient.

We find another Character of the Common Peoples Deportment in dubious times,
such as were those in Rome, when Otho was supplanting Galba, 1. Histor. p. 193.
Edit. 5. Lips. fol.
Mixtis servitiis and dissono clamore, caedem Othonis and Conjuratorum exilium
poscentium; ut si non Circo and Theatro ludicrum aliquod postularent, neque
illis judicium aut veritas, quippe eodem die diversa, pari certamine
postulaturis; sed tradito more quemeunque Principem adulandi licentia
Acclamationum, and studiis immanibus.

CHAP. XLI. Of Subjects Obedience.
CVrtius Ingenita quibusdam Gentibus erga Reges suos veneratio. Lib. 3.
says, That in some Countries there is an inbred Obedience, or Veneration to
their Kings. To this day we find the Eastern Monarchs, as the Grand Seignior,
Sophy of Persia, and others, to have a more absolute Power than the Christian
Kings, and that their People hold their Race something Divine. Obedience to
Authority by (...)
Aeschylus is rightly termed the Mother of Felicity; for by it we enjoy
whatever Benefits the Prince, the Father of his Country, and all the fruitful
Blessings of Peace and Plenty, the indulgent Mother of our Happiness here on
Earth can bestow upon a People.

(...) In lib^de Josepho.
Philo the Jew styles it the best, and most profitable thing in our whole Life.
Therefore Plutarch, in Praeceptis.
Theopompus, King of the Lacedaemonians, hearing one attribute the safety of
Sparta to the Skill the King had in Government, made answer, That it was rather
to be ascribed to the obedience which the People so cheerfully paid to their
Governors; for is Sparta above all other places, the most powerful Citizens
showed themselves most obsequious to their Magistrates, and by their Example,
drew the rest to do the like, as knowing Obedience to be the greatest requisite
both in Cities, Armies, and private Families. To which purpose we find the
Speech of Xenoph. Cyvopaed. lib. 8.
Chrysantas to his Countrymen the Persians, telling them, They can take no
Town of their Enemies, nor keep any City of their Friends, if they be
disobedient: No Army if they be tumultuous or irregular, can obtain Victory;
nor can any good be effected by those that are not obedient to Superiors. By
this their Citizens were well governed, their Houses preserved, Ships brought
to the Coasts to which they were bound: following their Prince, they carried
all things before them, leaving nothing half done; by this they not only
purchased good things, but preserved them.

3. de LL.
Cicero tells us, That Plato likened disobedient Persons to the Titans; for as
those set themselves in Opposition to the Gods, so these to the Magistrates.

The grave Historian Qui tamen jussa Ducum interpretari, quam exequi mallent.
2. Hist.
counts it the Infelicity of Otho, That though his Soldiers under Titian ere
full of Spirit, yet withal, they chose rather to interpret the Commands of
their Captains, than to obey; and Si ubi jubeantur singulis quaerere liceat;
pereunte obsequio etiam Imperium intercidit. 1. Hist.
likewise tells us, That if every one might dispute Commands, Obedience
ceasing, the Government would be dissolved.

To govern, and to be governed, are of so near Relation, that from the
Composition of them together, Apud Stobaeum, Sermon. 1.
Crito the Pythagorean well notes, both the Strength and Concord of the State
arises.

Two both wholesome and necessary things (says the great (...) Dio, lib. 41.
Caesar) Nature has established among Men, to Rule, and be Ruled, without
which it is impossible that any thing, for never so little a while, shall hold
out.

Qui imperium libere excipit, Partem servitutis acerbissimam effugit; facere
quod nolit non qui jussus aliquid facit, miser est, sed qui invitus facit,
says Seneca: Epist. 61.
He that cheerfully and willingly obeys Commands, escapes the bitterest part of
Servitude, to do that which he would not; for he is not miserable, who does
what he is commanded, but he that does it unwillingly.

All the Office of the chief Magistrate is corrupted and dissolved, if any,
with due Obedience, do not that which ought to be done, but instead of cheerful
Observance, require time for advice, and Deliberation; for all such as make an
hesitation in their Duty, and puts off, have no other inducement to it but
Fear, which is an oblation without an Heart, spiritless, and palled.

M. Tibisummum Judicium Dii dedere, nobis obsequii gloria relicta. Tacit. 6.
Annal.
Terentius told Tiberius, That to the Emperor the Gods had given the highest
Judgment of things, and to the Subjects the Glory of Obedience is left.

Ea enim quae obsequi non eportet, leniter ac ver^cunde, ac sine derestatione
^imia sineque opp^obration acerba reprehensionis, declinanda sensim, and
relinquenda potius ^sse qu^m respuend^. Noctes Atticae, c. 13.
Aulus Gellius gives an excellent Rule how Subjects should behave themselves in
Cases, where they are not free to act and obey, viz. That in those things which
it behooves us not in our Opinions to obey, we are to decline by little and
little, mildly and reverently, without showing of too much Detestation, or
bitter reprehension, and opprobry; leaving the things rather undone, than
rejecting them.

These wise Directions of so great and ancient an Author, are worth Imitation
by our sturdy Beggars of Liberty, who do or have done it in so imperious a way,
as if they were in a condition to command it; and yet when they had the Power,
most Tyrannically exacted both Civil and Spiritual Obedience from all others,
that were not of the same Mold and Cut with themselves.

The Excellent Seneca says, That Disobedience would be the Destruction of the
Roman Commonwealth, and so long the People would be out of Danger of it, as
they endured the Bridle; which if once they broke, or being by any chance
broken, they suffered not to be again sitted on: Haec unitas and hic m^ximi
Imp^cii contextus in parts multas dissilier. Senec. de Clem. lib. 1. c. 4.
the unity and Contexture of the greatest Empire would fly in Splinters, and
the same end there would be of the Cities Dominion, that there was in obtaining
it. For of old the Commonwealth was so constituted, that the Ligament betwixt
the Sovereign and Subject could not be dissolved, without both their
Destructions; for as the Prince stands in need of the Peoples Strength, so the
People of the Headship of the Prince.

To the which, Olim enim it ^ se induit Reipublicae Caesar, ut diduci alterum
non possit sine utriusque pernicie.
Caesar says, He so embosomed, and inweaved himself into the Commonwealth,
that the one could not be disjointed from the other, without the Destruction of
them both.

But every Malecontent will be ready to say they are for Government, and can
cheerfully obey good Princes; but such as exercise Arbitrary Government, or are
Vicious and Irreligeous those they cannot obey. To such I would recommend the
Saying of Bonos Principes voto excipere, qualescunque tolerare. Tacit. 4.
Histor.
Marcellus about Vespasian, We ought to desire good Princes, but to submit to
whatever they be. So Quomodo sterilitatem aut nimios imbres, and caetera
naturae mala, ita luxum vel avaritiam dominantium tolerare. Ibid.
Cerealis told his Soldiers, As we endure Barrenness, and orecharging Rains,
and the rest of the Evils of Nature, so ought we to undergo even the Luxury,
and Covetousness of Princes. For Vices will be while there are Men, but those
are not continual, but by the intervening of good Princes are recompensed. Mr.
Civil Wars, p. 51.
Hobs truly Observes, That the virtue of a Subject is comprehended wholly in
Obedience to the Laws of the Commonwealth; for to obey the Law is Justice and
Equity, which is the Law of Nature; and to obey the Laws, is Prudence in a
Subject: for without such Obedience, the Commonwealth (which is every Subjects
Safety and Protection) cannot subsist. Indeed Mischief more often happens to
any Kingdom, from the waywardness, or factious Disobedience of Subjects, than
from the ill Government of Princes.

Therefore Plut. Canvio. 7. Sapient.
Cleobulus rightly observed, That the Republic is well composed, where the
Subjects fear Infamy more than the Laws; for then it may be presumed; they are
Obedient out of a Principle of Virtue, rather than Awe.

Plutarch De Institutione Principis.
says, That City or Kingdom is famous, where every one performs his Office.
If the Prince do what becomes him, the Magistrates exercise their Places, and
the Commonalty obey their Magistrates, and the Laws.

This is the Blessed Harmony, wherein this sublunary Government imitates the
great Economy; the nearer to which every Government comes, the more beautiful
and stable it will be.

CHAP. XLII. Of Faction and Sedition in the State: the Causers and Causes of
them.
IN every Body, whether Natural, Artificial, or Political, the Beauty,
Gracefulness, and Use of it consists in its Symmetry, Firmness and Union. The
Fragments of the most excellent Statue, the Rubbish of the most magnificent
Palaces, the crumbled Dust and Atoms of the Beautifullest Bodies, are the
Objects of our Pity and Condoling: even so ought to be the Discords, Factions,
and Seditions of a Commonweal; or Kingdom; for by these the whole Compages of
the Fabric is dissolved.

It was the Consideration of this that made the Nec priva^os focos, n^c
publicas leges, nec libertatis jura, cara babere potest, quem discordie, quem
cades civium, quem belium civil delectat: Ideo ex numero hominum ejiciendum,
ex sinibus humanae naturae extermin ^ndum puto.
Orator say, That those who delight in Discords, in the slaughter of their
Fellow-Citizens, and a Civil War, neither think their private Hearths, i. e.
their Properties, the public Laws, or the Rights of Liberty, dear to them;
therefore ought they to be spewed out from the Society of rational Men, and to
be exterminated out of the Confines of humane Nature.

Faction and Sedition being a Composition of several mischievous Ingredients, I
shall single them out, and give short Characters of them particularly, that the
Reader may with more ease know their Tendencies.

The Persons that are apt to be Seditious, 1. The debauched Persons apt to be
seditious.
are first the Debauched, as Tacitus excellently observes, Privatim degeneres,
in Publicum exitiosi, nihil spei nisi per discordias. Such as give themselves
to Luxury, degenerate from the Virtue of their Ancestors, are unbridled in
their Appetites, live without Rule and Order, have no regard to the Laws that
should restrain them, where nothing remains but the instrumenta vitiorum, as
the Curious Cum raptci^^mo cuique and perditi^mo, non Agri, non Fanus, sed sol
I Insirumenta vitiorum manerent. 1. Histor.
Historian elegantly observes of those that in Galba's time were to refund
Nero's Donative.

Such having emancipated and withdrawn themselves from all subjection to the
Laws of the Sovereign of the Universe, no wonder they yield obedience to
nothing but the Impetus of sensual Appetites; and orderly Government curbing
these, makes it uneasy to them.

Secondly, 2. Vain and lightheaded Persons.
The vain and light Airy headed Persons are fitted to feather the Seditious
Arrows that subtiler Heads do fashion: these rush into Action without
deliberation, weary of things long used, rather Pro certis and ^lim partis,
nov^, ambigua, ancipitia malu^. Tacit. 11. Histor.
choosing (for the sake of Novelty) doubtful and uncertain matters, than such as
are the issues of stayed Councils. Lampoons, Libels, and Pamphlets are their
chief Studies: They traffic most at the Booksellers Stall, they desire no
acquaintance with the seriouser Books of his Shop; the Playhouse and
Coffee-houses entertain them more than the Church or Westminster Hall. They are
brittle Tools, but sharply edged, where they are to cut Feathers and Chaff:
They are not made to work upon Marble, or write Laws in Tables of Stone.

They are the puffing Whirlwinds that raise the Dust, the Ignes Fatui that
mislead poor Mortals by a little glaring light. They are the Lapwings that
whirle about you, and no sooner stoop at you, as if they would let you know
what they meant, but they whisk off again.

Thirdly, 3. The Indigent.
The Indigent are fitted in all respects for Sedition and Tumults. They are
conscious of their low Estates, and hope to better them in the Scramble,
according to that of the Poet Lucan, lib. 1.
, Hinc usura vorax, avidumque in thempora Foenus,
Et concussa fides, and multis utile Bellum.


In the Cities, says In Jugurtha. Semper. in civitate, quibus opes nullae
sunt, bonis invident: vetera odere, nova expetunt; odio suarum rerum, omnia
mutori s^udent.
Salust, those that have no Riches, envy the Good and Rich; they hate the
ancient order of things, and are greedy of change, studying Innovations by th
uneasiness of their present condition, in hopes of bettering themselves.

According to the excellent Afflict^ sidei in pace, and rebus turbatis alacres,
per incerta tutissimi. Tac. 1. Hist.
Historian, Those who have little credit in Peace, are joyful in disturbance,
safest in uncertainties: for they know, in the condition they are in, they are
certainly undone; and adventures may chance to be prosperous to them.

So the Philosopher (...) Lib. 5. Polit. c. 6.
observes, That those who live intemperately, sand consume what they have,
study Novelties, and either themselves attain to a Tyrannical Government, or
impel others to exercise it; as he instanceth in Dionysius among the
Syracusans, in the Hi^parians, and the Amphipoli in Aegina: So Cleotimas headed
the Chalcedonian Poor against the Rich. So Tacitus ascribes Sylla's boldness
and undertakings to his Poverty: so of Cataline, Salust Homini potentiam
quarenti, egentissimus quisque opportunis^mus; cui neque sua chara, quippe quae
nalla sunt; omnia cum pretio honesia videntur.
tells us, The Indigent is the most at hand useful to Men that covet Power; and
gives the reason, Because their own Fortunes being of small, or no value, the
hopes of Reward and Gain makes every thing honest to them.

So Cicero speaking of Cataline's Conspiracy, tells us, Nemo non Roma, sed non
in ullo Italiae angulo are aliquo oppressus fuit, quem non ad hoc scelus
faedere assumerent, etc. In Catilinam.
That there were none in Rome, or any other corner of Italy, who was in Debt,
but he was received into Confederacy, having spent profusely their Patrimony,
and debauched their Fortunes; Patrimonia sua profuderunt, fortunas suas
abligurierunt.

So Plato Lib. 4. de Rep^.
observes such to be Seditious, in hopes, that if they prevail, they may elude
their Creditors; so Pericles is censured that he fomented the Pelepone^sian War
against his Country, and Cicero objects the same against Anthony.

Tacitus Compositis rebus nulla spes, omne in turbi^ consilium; lux. uria etiam
Principi onerosa, incpia vix privuo toleranda. 1. Hist.
says of Otho, There was no hopes in Matters composed; Hope and Counsel was in
the Tumult and Huddle of Affairs; he being luxurious above the State of a
Prince, and poor below that of a Private Person.

To which we may annex what the Blessed King (...).
observes, That some Men thirst after Novelties, others despair to relieve the
necessities of their Fortunes, or satisfy their Ambitions, in peaceable
times(distrusting Gods Providence as well as their own Merits) were the secret
(but principal) Impulsives to those popular Commotions. These indeed were the
Men, who having glutted themselves with the spoils of the Royal Party, by
Assesments they drained all the Wealth of the Freeholders, and were never heard
to say, Oh^ jam satis est.

These are Tools fitted for all Factious Handles and Hafts; and being always
sharp, cut deepest with a forceable Hand. Necessitas ad turpe cogit; nothing is
so Villainous, that Reward, and the hopes of bettering their Fortunes, well not
tempt them to perpetrate.

The Fourth Cause of Faction and Sedition, is Ambition. 4. The Ambitious.
The Philosopher joins them to the Covetous, and Giphanius calls them the
Pestes and publicae fontes Seditionum, the Plague of a Commonwealth, and the
Fountains of Sedition. So Timon in Stobaeus says, (...) omnium malorum and
calamitatum (...) elementa sunt.

Ambitious Persons are the Touch-wood and Tinder of Sedition; a little Spark
inflames them. Ambition is a prime Ingredient in all Factions, leading Men
naturally to change the model of all things Civil and Sacred, that is not the
product of their Counsel. This excites them to seek the removal of such, who
enjoy more Honorary or Beneficial places than themselves. Those Honores quos
quieta Republica desperant, perturata consequi se posse arburantur.
Honors which they despair to enjoy in a composed, they judge they may acquire
in a disturbed State.

These (says a late Address, ^ 1. P. 30.
Author) are generally the Incendiaries which kindle the Fire of Intestine War.
They are the worst pests a People can be Plagued with, having rarely either
Religion, Conscience or Honesty. If they rise, they are the worst companions;
they caress and flatter the People only for their own advantage. If they
miscarry, they leave the poor deluded Vulgar to sink, and they get the Prey. So
that nothing is got by these sort of Men, but much may be lost. All the People
of the World, that have been free, and are not, have been ruined by these sort
of Men, except those conquered by Foreigners.

It is an high commendation that Aut me amor suscepti negotii fallit, aut nulla
unquam Respublica, nec major, nec sanctior, nec bonis exemplis ditior fuit, nec
in qua tam sero avaritia, luxuriaque immigraveri^; nec ubi tantus, ac tam diu
parsimoniae and paupert uis honos fuerit. Livius Prooemio.
Livy gives to the Roman Commonweal, That unless the love of his undertaken
Work might bias him, there was never a Commonweal greater, or holier, or
richer in good Examples, nor into which so late, Avarice and Luxury entered, or
where Poverty and Parsimony had such a durable Honor.

But Salust as truly observes, that after they had destroyed Cavthage,
Discordia atque Ambitio, and caetera secundis rebus oriri sueta mala, maxim
aucta fuere; Discord and Ambition, and the rest of the Evils that usually
attend Prosperity, were increased. These indeed are the Cankers of Peace and
Plenty, as it is usual in temperate years, that with the abundance of Fruits,
swarms of Locusts, Caterpillars, and other mischievous Insects increase.

The Character of an Ambitious Man, in a great Gregorias in Registro.
Author, is, That he is always searing, always careful lest he say what will
displease, counterfeiting Humility, Honesty, Affability, and Bountifulness;
cringing to all, frequenting Courts of Princes, visiting the Nobility,
obsequious to all, that he may be praised of all: But when he has attained his
ends, he is quite another Man, proud and haughty, not Non cura^ prodesse, sed
gloriatur praesse.
caring to profit others, but to preside over them; not so much caring to do
good in his Office, as to be great, Senec. Tragaed.
tantum ut noceat cupit esse potens.

Fifthly, 5. The envious.
the Envious are cankered Branches in a Commonwealth. Envy (says my Essay, c.
8. fol. 35.
Lord St. Albans) is a gadding Passion, walks the Streets, seldom is at home.
Those that are Gossipers, and spend their time in carrying News Non est
curiosus, quin idem est malevolus.
betwixt one another, in their Evening Chat, mostly enviously detract from the
Fame of others.

Men of noble Birth, are noted to be Envious toward new Men when they rise;
for the distance is altered, and it is like Deceit in the Eye, when others come
on, they think themselves go back.

Envy is a Disease, spreads like Infection upon that which is sound, and
tainteth it so, that when it is once got into a State, it traduceth the best
Inviso semel Principe seu been seu male, facta premunt. Tacit. 1. Histor.
Actions, and has this addition to its Mischief, that it incessantly is at
work. As the Vulture feeds on Carrion rather than fresher Meats, the Flies seek
Dung and rotten Matter: so the Envious is always Preying on what is putrid in
the Commonweal, of which he is the Scavinger, contaminating the best
Administration by his loathsome Blasting; corroding and eating like a Canker,
ever detracting from the present Virtutem incolumem odimzs, sublatam ex oculis
quaerimus invidi. Horat. lib. 3. Od. 14.
management, and admiring what is bypast. Envy is always working, finding new
and new matter to work upon. One Man's higher Place troubles him, another
greater Endowments, Offices, or popularity; so that to the Envious there are no
Invidia festos dies non agit. 6. The discontented.
Holy days.

Sixthly the Discontented. They are always unquiet, nothing pleases them,
wherein they have not the Share they covet in the Administration; they are
uneasy to themselves, to others, and the whole State.

Discontents in the Body Politic, are like to ill humors in the Body natural,
which are apt to gather into preternatural heat, and inflame, grow dangerous,
and ill=boding, when the causes of them are long pent up before they be
observed, or are really given to Man of great Spirits, and the Multitude.

The discontented (says a Address, pars 1. p. 35.
late Author) are the silliest Animals in the World. If the Government has
injured me, I ought to take it as the injuries of the Weather, not to rage and
fret at it. Kingdoms and Nations have been ruined by such Fools, who have ever
paid dear for such revenge, and been buried in the ruins they plucked down
about their own Ears. These Malcontents are under the dominion of the
strongest Passions, and are not Masters of their own Reason; which is no part
of the Case of others, who furnish them with Brands and Grenades, without
which these Gentlemen might possibly after a little sullen rage, have come into
their Wits again. But when they see their Passions are not only pitied or
cherished, but applauded; it is a thousand to one, they never recover out of
their distemper, or not to be sure, till they, or the Public have smarted for
their folly, and those who have caressed the devilish humor in them.

Seventhly, Emulous Persons (who can neither endure equals, 7. The emulous.
or superiors) are great promoters of Factions; for when Men of great or
overweening Parts, such as have been great Commanders, or Ministers of State,
by the interposing of others, are obstructed in the sole managery of public
Affairs, or any other ways disobliged, they are egged on to make the opposite
Faction, and so the Commonweal is shaken by them: and though this discontent
begin in smaller matters, wherein the State is not so much concerned, or the
subverting of Government is to be feared; yet Ambition stepping in, Discontent
grows to Revenge, and then calls in all the Auxiliaries of Faction; which being
rendezvouzed, they are most difficultly reformed, before one side be Conqueror.
And so from a few personal Dissatisfactions, proceed those rude Shocks which
endanger the whole Government.

So in Athens we read of the aemulous Dissentions betwixt Nicias and
Alcibiades, Themistocles and Aristides, and after of Demosthenes and Eschines,
and others; and so in Rome betwixt Capio and Metellus, Scipio Asricanus and
Metellus, Gracchus and Scipio, Pompey and Caesar: of which I have at large
treated in the Chapter of Commonwealths.

So Tacitus speaking of Cecinna, who having command of a Legion under Galba,
being laid aside, upon an Accusation that he had misimployed the Public Money
to his own use; Aegre p^ssus, miscere cuncta, and privata vulnera Reipublicae
malis operi^e statuit. Tacitus 1. Histor.
grew Malecontent, and endured it ill, and in the tumultuous times, having got
the Soldiers good will, he was busy to promote all kind of Seditions, designing
to cover his own Wounds with the mischiefs to the Commonweal.

Eighthly, 8. Popular Men.
The popular Men are Engines fitted for Sedition, if they be not well
principled to the Government; for by them the Causa a^que origo furoris penes
Autores, reliqui contagione insaniunt. Livius. 1.28.
Populace is easily and effectually moved, and they give Beginning to the Rage
of the People, the rest being mad by Contagion, and Infection.

These having by many good and plausible Deeds, gained Credit with the Mobile,
and using all their Arts to captivate their affections, can lead and guide them
with as much ease, as the small Rider does the bulky Elephant, or the Keeper
does the Rhinoceros, or the Bearward his Bear, by their Rings and Chains. So
Tacitus gives frequent Examples of such Men's courting the People, and
ingratiating themselves with them, when they needed their Hands to help them to
attain their Aims; especially in the Conspiracy Nec deerat Otho, protendens
m^nus, adorare vulgum, jacere oscula and omnia serviliter pro dominatione.
Tacit. 1. Histor.
of Otho against Galba, where he tells us, that Otho besides his Feasting and
giving Largesses to his Soldiers, was not wanting (even after he had taken
Arms) to stretch out his Embraces to the People, humbly to salute them, give
all tokens of intimate affection, and all servility, in hopes of obtaining
thereby the Rule.

Such popular Men are most to be feared, who are like Vni Antoni^ apertae
militum aures, nam and facundia aderat, mulcendique vulgum Arts and Auctorit
as. Tacitus 1. Hist.
Antonius, one of Vespasian's great Captains, of whom Tacitus says, That to
him alone the Soldiers Ears were open; for he had Eloquence, and the Arts of
making gentle, and pacifying the Multitude, and had Authority with them.

Ninthly, 9. Cunning close Men.
The cunning close Men, who can best dissemble their evil Intentions, are
dangerous Ingredients of Faction; such as Pulckra loquentes, iidem in pectore
prava struant. Odyss. 5.
speak fair and plausible things of the Government, but in their Bosom, and to
their Confidents, and secret Friends, are framing Mischief. Of such, Livy
speaks, that by little Arts they strew their Fraus in parvis, fidem
sibipraestant, ut cum operae pretium sit, cum m^rcede fallant. Live. lib. 28.
ways to Credit, that when it is for their purpose, they may deceive with so
much more advantage to their public or private Designs.

These are such as speak not openly against the Government but can afford it
some good words; but then you shall be sure they will subjoyn some sighing
Wish, That such or such a thing were amended, or better managed.

Tenthly, Innovators in Religion are the most dangerous of all others, to
kindle Factions; 10. Innovators in Religion.
their Fire is pretended to be from Heaven, their zeal warmed with a divine
breath from the Altar.

Diversity of Religions (says a late grave Address, part I p. 10.
Writer) cause the greatest Ferment of the People. From hence the Part-taking,
and Part-making, ill Will, Hatred, Contentions and Jealousies spring, one Party
hoping to rise, another Party fearing it may be so, and striving to pull down
or keep down another.

Presbytery, says he, is a State-Faction hatched in Rebellion, and a popular
State; the whole Scheme of it adapted to those ends, totally inconsistent with
Monarchy, and the freedom and liberty of any People that will not be Slaves to
the Clergy: and this is not so much the Doctrine, as the necessary effects of
its ill Principles.

Independency sprung out of it, as luxuriant Suckers from the roots of the
Tree; every Minister of that persuasion, desiring only to be Head of his own
Congregation, advanced the Banner of Toleration, so that some'reckoned one
hundred and forty several Factions and Heresies; the Seeds and Relics whereof
are still scattered among us, ready upon any benign Vote of an House of Commons
(as that was about the taking off the Penal Laws, and the Union of Protestants)
to sprout out of the Soil they lay covered in. So that a worse Crop than that
of Cadmus's armed men may be expected, when ever any cherishing warmth enlivens
them.

This too manifestly appeared of late, when such as for above twenty years, had
lived Separatists from the Church established by Law; yet to be qualified for
places of Trust, Authority or Preferment, and to employ them to the ruin of the
Church and Monarchy, could take the Sacrament, Test, etc. with all the
Formalities required by the Act.

We find none of those Pamphlets that inveigh against Arbitrary Government, but
they generally are against the Church and Monarchy; such as these took
advantage at the consternation of the People at the Plague, Fire, and their
Plot, to push their designs forward; which they might do with the greater
safety, because of the confusion the People were in. So that the Scourge (which
as far as any man can judge) was sent for the sins of the former Rebellion, was
made by them a means of disposing them to commit the same over again, when time
and opportunity serve, as the same Author observes. Thus far my Author.

Having under these Ten general Heads ranked the several causes of Sedition, I
shall refer the Reader to the Polit. lib. 5. c. 3. Giphanii Comment.
Philosopher and his Commentators, to consider several others that are less
material to my purpose; noting only, that he divides the causes into such as
are real causes, and naturally produce such effects in the ill managery of
Government, and such as by designing men are the pretended causes, which are
Blinds and false Colors to muster the Parties under.

The pretenses that Factious and Seditious persons generally use, are, That the
Government invades the Property of the People, by illegal impositions of
burdens upon them; That the Laws and Customs are altered, There is Innovation
in Religion, Unworthy Persons are advanced, who promote Oppression and
Arbitrary Rule.

Liberty and ease Lilert^s (...) Tacit. 1. Histor.
of the People from some pressures or grievances are pretended. This is the
Tabret, and the Hornpipe to the Mobile, this sets them all on gog. The
weathercock common-man thinks himself set upon the Spires of Steeples, or the
tops of common Halls, though he sees not a span length before him. He is easily
(...) and suturi improvid^s spe vana (...). Id.
puffed up with vain hopes of liberty, and when the Factious designers have
once possessed the People, that such and such Actions of the Magistrates have a
tendency to deprive them of their Properties, Privileges and Liberties, their
jealousies hurry them into all the acts of Rage and Madness, which prove so
fatal to Kingdoms. For when the Rabble (that bellua multorum Capitum) once
feels their strength, and finds the reigns loose on their Necks, they are
ungovernable, wild and untameable. The hard-mouthed Creature despises the
Bitt, and casts the Rider; though it is the ircertain Fate to be mouthed by a
much greater Oppressor that so jades them, that they are blessed if they may
obtain the benefit of their former despised Masters rule.

The Nurseries of Sedition are great and populou^ Cities, The Nu^^ries of
S^dition.
being bodies aggregated of all dispositions. Hence the Philosopher Giph^.
(...) in c. 15. lib. 4. (...) Arist.
well observes, That if the Citizens be rich, they can spare time to hear the
Orations of the. Demagogues, to club in Consultations and Combinations, and
bestow some parts of their wealth to carry on their designs. If poor and
wanting employments, they are ready for all evil impressions and tumults; they
are ready to ascribe the want of their Trade, and their poverty, to the ill
administration of the Government.

All sorts make it a relaxation of their toils and cares in the managing their
Trades, to refresh themselves with occurrences of State; here seditious Libels,
half whispers, false News, licentious discourses, jealousies, murmurings and
repinings are forged, to be Repast for every Palate; Oglios here of several
kinds are cooked by the Seditious; so they such Poison with their very racy
Liquors; they grow as wise as Statesmen, by drinking Tea and Coffee, and by
telling and hearing shreds of News. Their Ale and Claret makes their Political
heads settle affairs of State; and according to their own inclinations, they
furnish their Correspondents with News by retail, casking them up with their
Wares, and the Plague spreads into the Country by that means.

Besides, in this vast multitude, it cannot be wondered there should be
diversities of Opinions, as well as Interests: Some, and those the wisest,
favoring Alii Principum partibus, alii Patriciorum and Factionibus student.
Tacitus.
their Prince, others the Patriots (as they call them) and study Factions. Yea
the very heads of several Companies and Societies, often bandy one against
another by emulations first, and after by siding into Parties: so that it is
observable, that by their natural proneness to Factions, where nothing but
Rivers, low and high grounds, have divided the Inhabitants, those local
distinctions have been sufficient to discriminate them into Parties. So it
happened betwixt the Inhabitants of the Pyroeus and Athens, also at Syracuse
betwixt the City and Citadel; At Rome betwixt the Cis and Trans-Tyberini. So
at Monstrelate, lib. 1
Paris the Inhabitants on one side the Seyne were for the Faction of Orleance,
and the other for Burgundy; The like we have known between London and
Southwark, and Westminster and London. A judicious Humane Prudence.
Author says, A great City is the fittest Engine to turn an old Monarchy into
a new Commonwealth: and the reason is obvious; for Corporations and Cities are
so many Republics within a Monarchy, which when by their Combinations in
numerous swarms they attcque, they much endanger: though being composed of the
Loyal as well as Factious, after they have found the tyranny of their fellow
Citizens, and the difference betwixt the mild Rule of their Princes, and the
Arbitrary one of their fellows, they mostly return to their Senses and
Allegiance again.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Symptoms and Diagnostick signs of Sedition and Faction.
THE learned Apud Japonios Campana est, quae quoties Regno magnae instant
Seditiones Tumultusque, suapte sponte pulsatur. Phonarg. lib. 2. sect. 3. c. 14.
Athanasius Kircher, in his curious Book or Sounds tells us, That in Japan
there is a Bell, which toleth of its own accord, so often as great Seditions
and Tumults are forming or beginning in the Kingdom. And in Spain in a Town
called Vibilla, in the Diocese of Caesar Augusta Lib. 2. de Fascinatione, cap.
14.
( Varius tells us) there is a Bell which they call Miraculous, for that some
Months before any mischief or calamity befalls Christendom, it sounds by it
self without any one that is known to ring it, as in several calamitous periods
he mentions.

As to matter of fact (though attested by grave Authors) I shall not make any
enquiry, whether the Relations be true or not. But if God Almighty had
vouchsafed such a virtue to every Parish Bell, it might supersede all enquiries
into the signs of approaching Sedition and Faction: Yet I question whether it
would enable Governors to prevent them; for the most would be apt to conclude,
That as they were by a supernatural Power, or from the Deity appointed to be
the presages of Factions and Seditions; so they would conclude that God
Almighty had destined such Commotions, and would be the more ready to promote
and push them forward.

Shepherds of People (says the ingenious Essays. Descriptions of the Signs
particularly.
Chancellor) had need know the Kalenders of Tempests in the State. There are
certain hollow blasts of winds, and secret swellings of Seas that forerun them,
and so there are in States.

First, Hatred.
Hatred to the Government is a certain sign of intended Sedition. It is not
easy to be conceived, says Seneca Neseis qu^ta rab^es oriatur, ^hi supra
modum olia crev^runt. De Clementia.
, how great a Rage may arise when the hatred is overgrown: it is then ready to
teem, and the Poison will break forth. Therefore Cicero says, No Government
can be lasting, which is much feared, be it grounded or ungrounded: for Quem
quisque odit, p^riisse expetit. Cic. de Officiis, 2.
men naturally hate whom they fear, and whomsoever one hates on such an
occasion, he wishes his destruction.

Secondly, Contempt.
This secret hatred acquires an efficaciousness by Contempt; for Fear is slow
and undaring, but Contempt puts on the Armor: Fear is an extinguisher of an
Attempt, and a Prince is in Sanctuary while his Enemies fear: but when a
Factious man is emboldened to contemn his Prince, he shakes off fear, and
consequently reverence. This happens most to mild Princes and criminally
merciful, by which they do themselves and the Pleb^ Reverentiam omnem
excutiunt, and licenti^^ pr^bent peccandi, Arist. Polit lib. 6. c. 4.
public great harm; liberty is thereby taken of trangressing, and the
Reverence of the People is thereby laid aside. Augetur and crescit quicquid in
honor est, desi^it and minuit quiequid in contemptu. Dio in Nerva.
While Honor to the Prince lodges in the Subjects breasts, the veneration to
him daily increases; but when he is once contemned, his Authority and Power
sinks in the Socket, For Reverence is that wherewith Princes are girt of God,
and when Discords, Quarrels and Factions are carried openly and audaciously, it
is a sign that reverence to Government is lost.

In Tiberius's time, Greedy after News.
when Julius Fl^rus headed the Gallick Rebellion Cuncta in m^jus credita, mul^i
prasentium odio and cupidine muationis suis quoque periculis ^atabantur. 3.
Annal.
Tacitus gives us an account how the Malcontents at Rome received the news of
it, whereby we may learn some Symptoms of Seditions. For all things (says he)
done by Florus were believed to be worse; many for the hatred they bore to the
present management, and out of the desire of changes, even rejoiced in their
own dangers.

Thirdly, Libels.
Other great signs of Troubles and Factions, are sholes of Libels and
licentious discourses against the State, spreading false News to the
disadvantage of it, the often running up and down of such, and the greedy
embracing them; for Seditious Tumults and Seditious Fame, are but Brothers and
Sisters.

The Presses are pestered with Seditious Pamphlets, deluding, abusing,
flatterring, enticing, terrifying, or Address, Part. 3.
affrighting, according as they may be serviceable to the Faction they wish
for. The Illustrious Saint and Martyr felt the heat, and suffered the
scorchings of those Tongues set on fire by Hell, and after of those Pamphlets
sparks and flakes which raised that fatal fire in his three Kingdoms: and when
the Kings Ministers, his Judges, Officers Civil and Military, were represented
in the most odious manner that malice could invent, with a thousand false and
ridiculous Lies of fear of Popery, and Arbitrary Government (which was, and
ever will be, the burden of those Sirens Songs) it was easy to discover the
approaching Storm, and an evident Symptom of a distempered People on the
Tiptoes of Frenzy.

The grave Occultis primum s^rmonibus, ut vetita solent; mox vago rumore apud
imperiti^imi cujusque promptas a^es, aut rursum ap^d tur^idos, eoqu^ nova
cvpientes. Tac^. 2. Anna^.
Historian describes secret murmurers, and spreaders of false News, thus, That
they begin with secret Speeches, as is usual in matters forbidden; then with
wandering Rumors, fitted for the open ears of the most unskilful, and then
adapted for the turbulent, and those that are desirous of change. Thus they
raise their Trumpets till they sound to Arms, and Onset.

Fifthly, These are open contagious Airs, Clubs and Consults.
Shafts flying by Night and Day, but they arise from the hollow Caverns, where
Clubs and Associations sit brewing of them, and feathering those Bolts. So
Tacitus Per conciliabula and caetus seditiosa disserebant. Lib. 3. Annal.
observes of the Ga^ls, In little Consults they debated Seditious Matters.
Where obiter we may note, how congenial the Actions of Seditious Persons are in
all Ages; which he further describes in the method of Nocturnis colloquiis, aut
flexo ad vesp^um die, delapsis melioribus, deterrimum quemque congregantes.
Idem, 1. Annal.
Porcennius when he excited the Soldiers of Pannonia to Rebellion, That by
Nightly Conferences, and Evening Clubs, when the better sort were retired, he
gathered the worst, and such as he could confide in, to work them to his
purpose, and confederate them to carry on his Designs.

Sixthly, The Method Studi^ militum affectaverat, contubernales appellando,
alios agnoscere, quosdam requirere, pecunia aut gratia juvare: inserendo
querel^s and ambiguos de Galba sermones, quaeque alia turbamenta vulgi. Lib. 1.
Histor.
Otho took to supplant Galba, Calumnies.
the same Judicious Historian describes thus: That he had practiced before to
get the Favor and good will of the Soldiers, calling them Mates, and
Companions, relieving, and being bountiful to them, inserting now and then
complaints, and glancings at Galba, with Speeches of doubtful Construction, or
what other way he could bethink him, to stir up, and alter the Vulgar sort by
disquieting and affrighting them.

Thus the Designers of changes in any State, fit their Discourses to the
present emergencies of Affairs, and finding any sorts of grievances to complain
of, with innuendo's aggravate them, and excite the People to believe that they
only are forward to redress them.

Seventhly, It is a sign of a Seditious Spirit, Calculating a Princes Nativity.
when he is busy in Calculating the Nativity of a Prince. Therefore Firmicus
gives it in charge to his Astrologer, not to answer such Questions. Tertullian
Cui opus est perscrutari super Caesaris salute nisi a quo aliquid adversus eum
cogitatur, vel optatur, aut. Apologia 35. Sueton, in Domitiano.
tells us, That there is no need that any curiously enquire after the health of
Caesar, unless it be one that meditateth or wishes something against him, or
hopes for some advantage after him. So Tribonius was sent into Exile, because
he enquired of the Chaldaeans the end of the Prince. So Domitian slew
Pomposian, because he had the Emperors Nativity, and carried about him the
Speeches of Kings and Captains out of Livy, and called his Servants by the
names of Mago and Hannibal.

Although Prophecies, Prodigies, and Prognostications are like Mercenary
Soldiers, that may be listed to fight on any side; yet every Man's Superstition
interprets them to his own advantage, or according to his wishes, hopes or
fears. So that when the Designers have a mind to make impressions of fear on
the People, they bring in some ill-boding Signs, as Apparitions, raining of
Blood, Oxen speaking, Battles in the Air, and such like, to keep the People
either in fear of Calamities, or in hopes of more prosperous times by changes:
both which would be equal disturbances to Government.

Tacitus Genus hominum p^tentibus insidum, sp^rantibus fallax, quod in Civitate
nostra, and vetabitur semper, and retinebitur. 1. Hist.
speaking of Otho's confiding in the predictions of the Astrologers, tells us,
They are a sort of men unfaithful to the Great, deceitful to the Hopers, which
always will be forbid, and always retained.

That the Romans judged such as gave credit to the Chaldaean Promises, the
Ceremonies of the Magicians, and Interpreters of Dreams, to be practicers
against the State, and guilty of Treason; we have a memorable example of Libo
2. Annal. ad Chaldaeorum promissa. Magorum sacra, somniorum etiam Interpreres
impulit, etc. plenam imaginibus domum ostentat, hortaturque ad luxum and as
alienum, etc. Infernas umbr^s carminibus eliceret.
Drusus, of the Scribonian family, whom the Astrologers put in mind, that
Pompey was his Great-Grandfather, Scribonia, wife of Augustus, his Great Aunt;
the Caesar's his Cousin Germans; that his House was full of Images and Monuments
of his Predecessors: then they brought him to Licentious Riot and Debaucheries,
and to raise Infernal Spirits by Enchantments. And though my Author judge there
were some of Tiberius's Arts in his Accusation before the Senate, yet we find
he killed himself, to avoid the infamy of a Sentence of the Senate; and upon it
a Decree was made to expel Astrologers and Magicians out of Italy. Facts and
de Mathematicis, Magisque, Italia pellendis Senatus consulta.


Before I come to treat of the Prognostics of the Mischiefs of Factions, I
must take notice of two of the certainest, most demonstrative, and dangerous
signs of Faction running up to Seed that can be, and those are Tumultuous
Petitioning and Tumults.

These will the better be illustrated, both separately and in conjunction, The
Method the Long Parliament used.
by laying open the Methods the Long Parliament took to effect their designs
against their Gracious King. First, With great show of Compassion and
Commiseration for their fellow Subjects sufferings, they eagerly debate the
Grievances, which by a correspondence betwixt the Members of the House of
Commons, and their Friends in the Country, by Petitions, many thousands strong,
were daily represented to them, every one striving to be foremost in
representing, and outstrip his Neighbor in exaggerating the Grievances (as
they called them) that they lay under. In these Petitions to the Houses (but
mostly to the House of Commons) were Bead-rolls of Complaints against the
oppression of the Subject, both by the Kings Council, President, and
Ecclesiastical Courts, the Star Chamber, High Commission Court, the Judges
countenancing exorbitant Power, that the Property and Liberty of the Subject
was invaded by Monopolies, Ship Money, Knight-hood-money, etc. illegal
Sentences in the Star Chamber, the Innovations of the Bishops, their severity
against pious Nonconformists, and People of peaceable and tender Consciences,
as they called them; and the baser sort of the People were permitted, or rather
invited to come to the Parliament House, to back these strong Petitions.

By this Artifice, they exposed the Government to obloquy and contempt among
the People, and raised in them a confident Opinion that their only Redress was
to be hoped from the Parliament, and so brought themselves into a popular
esteem, by so much more loosening the Peoples Affections, and Allegiance to the
King, by so much as they faster knit the Peoples Hearts and Hands to their
Representatives, using all their industry to make the Subjects believe they
were the only Patriots and Liberators.

They pass Votes conformable to the Petitioners desire, animate them to search
for more, and especially to fix them upon Persons they were mindful to remove
out of places of trust. Then they begun to impeach several Ministers of State,
and the Judges, that they might weaken the King in his Councils, and terrify
others into compliance: always taking care to charge the misdeeds upon the
Kings evil Counselors, magnifying the Kings Natural Goodness, and declaring,
That if he would consent to redress those Grievances, and to punish the
Authors, they would make him a richer and more glorious King, than any of his
Predecessors. Seditious Address.
Pamphlets daily came out, and the Printing-Press labored Night and Day to
abuse the King and his Ministers, and bring the Government, Ecclesiastical and
Civil, into obloquy. Their Preachers in the mean time, like so many Demagogues,
plied their business so effectually, blowing the Trumpet as they phrased it,
for the Lord and Gideon, that by them the Houses Interest prevailed every
where, especially in the Populous City, which was in a manner wholly at the
Houses devotion.

Having removed the Great and Noble Earl of Strafford by great Industry and
Art, and the Midwifery of Tumults, and got themselves (by as strange an Art as
oversight) perpetuated, they set themselves to Remonstrate; in which they
odiously recount all the miscarriages (as they called them) in the Blessed
Kings Reign, charging him (though covertly) with them, and all the very
Misfortunes of his Reign. They revive the Bill against the Bishops sitting in
the House of Lords, which had been rejected, and in a Parliamentary way ought
not again to be set on foot that Session; the better to effect which, they
cause the Rabble and their Confederates to menace and assault them, and other
Loyal Members of the House; they Post up several names of Lords and Commons,
who opposed their proceedings: and having driven the King, and his whole Family
away by most outrageous Tumults; they declare their Ordinances to be binding
during their sitting, and assume the Power of interpreting, and declaring what
was Law; and by all these Arts they brought the People, not Culpae vel gloriae
socii. Tacit. 3. Hist.
so much to join with, as to conspire with them.

Then they pretend a necessity of putting the Kingdom into a posture of
defense, to secure it against Popery, and Arbitrary Government, and the
Invasion of Foreigners, which they pretend were to be brought in to assist
these. They single out the most confiding and daring in every County to be
their Commissioners of the Militia; so Quanto quis audacia promptior, tanto
magis sidus, rebusque motis potior babetur. Idem, 1. Histor.
much as every one was forwarder in boldness, and more hardy, by so much the
more he was to be confided in, and sitter to help forward the turbulent work
they were about.

Having first got the Peoples affections to revere them as their Deliverers,
they the more easily obtained their Bodies, Armor, and Moneys, and so
prosecuted a Rebellious War openly; yet with that shameful pretense, that they
were fighting for the King against his Evil-Counsellors, and, amongst hands,
court him with most Dethroning Propositions: and success Crowning their arms,
they wholly destroyed that Monarchy they had all along pretended to establish
upon surer foundations for the Honor of the Crown, and benefit of the People,
than former Ages had known. Instead of which, they made themselves Masters of
all their Fellow Subjects, seizing their Estates, Imprisoning and Murdering
their Persons; altering the established Ecclesiastical Government, and all the
fundamental Laws, enriching themselves, and over-awing the Kingdom by a
standing Army.

Thus I have drawn that in Miniture, which was the Tragedy of many Years, and
the Subject of numerous Volumes, and I shall tack to it something parallel in
later Years, to let all Posterity see what a Characteristick Mark it is of
Turbulent and Factious Inclinations, when Petitions against the Will of the
Government are violently promoted.

The great mischief of tumultuous Petitions being considered by the Loyal
Parliament, The Act against Tumultuous Petitions.
upon the late Glorious King's happy Restoration, Provision was made, that the
number of deliverers of Petitions should not exceed ten; that three of the
Justices of Peace in the County, or the major part of a Grand Jury at an
Assize, or General Sessions; or in London, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council have the ordering, and consent to such Petitions, which shall be
for alteration of things established by Law, in Church or State, by way of
Petition, Complaint, Remonstrances, Declaration, or other Address to the King,
or either Houses of Parliament.

It cannot be forgot (in the interval of a later Parliament) how zealous and
busy multitudes were to get Petitions with Hundreds and Thousands of Hands, to
the late King for the sitting of a Parliament, before the King in his Wisdom
thought sit. This occasioned the King to issue forth a Proclamation against
tumultuous Petitions, and other Loyal Persons to express an abhorrence of such
Petitions, that would press the King to precipitate their Sitting.

Those that petitioned the King for convening of a Parliament, could not but
foresee the ungratefulness of such Petitions to the King; yet the Designers
gave it not over: for they had other Ends. As first, to engage Men by their
Subscriptions to be more fast to them: Secondly to try whether the People might
be brought to Tumults: Thirdly to incense the People more against the
Government, if their Petitions were denied: Fourthly to show in terroreon, the
number of their Adherents: Fifthly, That through every County the confiding and
zealous might be known each to other: and Lastly, that whenever that Parliament
should sit, they might have their Thanks, and by their Numbers the Parliament
might be encouraged to proceed in such things as they desired, knowing hereby
the Strength of the Party.

When the House of Commons met, nothing was so much clamoured against, as the
Proceedings upon the late Proclamation; as if all the Liberties of the Subjects
of England had consisted in this. Therefore they vote that it ever has been
the undoubted Right of the Subjects of England, See the Votes.
to Petition the King, for the Calling, and Sitting of Parliaments, for
redressing of Grievances; and to traduce such Petitioning, was a violation of
Duty; and to represent it to his Majesty as tumultuous, and Seditious, was to
betray the Liberty of the Subject, and contribute to the design of subverting
the Legal ancient Constitution of the Kingdom, and introducing Arbitrary Power,
and so a Committee (called of Abhorrence) was appointed to enquire of all such
Persons as had offended against the Rights of the Subjects.

This was it that explained their Vote, for all the Controversy was, Whether a
sew private Men might agree upon a Petition, then send Emissaries abroad to
procure the Subscriptions, and then tender them, as it were by their number to
affright the King to a Compliance; or that the King (to whom the Execution of
the Laws, or suspension in some measure surely appertains) might not forbid
such Petitions.

They singled out Sir Francis North, then Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, after Lord Keeper, and Earl of Guilford, Sir George Jefferies,
then Recorder of London, now Lord Chancellor, Mr. Justice Withins, and others,
as Subjects of their displeasure, for disliking, and abhorring the irregular
dangerous way of Petitioning. But they received more Luster and Regard in the
Eyes of their Sovereign, and all Loyal Subjects, by their Censure, than they
did discredit by it. It seems worth the while for Persons that have regard to
the quiet and repose of the Subject, to the Honor and Establishment of the
Government, and for the Tranquillity and Liberty of their Posterity to
consider, whether any mortal Man can either produce Precedent or Law to justify
the Imprisonment of those Gentlemen Abhorrers; of which I have spoken something
before, in the Chapter of Parliaments.

I shall now conclude with the last and formidablest sign of Sedition, Of
Tumults.
viz. Tumults, which are but unarmed, and Pen-feathered Rebellion. They have
the Mien and Standard of it, only want the Artillery. The fatal black
Parliament disciplined them to be ready at any watch word, and whatever they
voted against the King or Church, was ushered in by thousands of all sorts,
flocking out of the City and Country, braving and threatening all along as they
went by White Hall, and so in Sholes crowding to the Houses, promising to stand
by them, and crying out for Justice. They were so insolent and rude, that they
forced the Merciful King to withdraw from his Palace, to which he never
returned, till they brought him to his Barbarous Trial and Murder.

That Blessed Kings Sense of them can be expressed by none so emphatically as
by himself; therefore I shall extract some of his feeling Expressions.

I (...) c. 4.
never thought any thing (except our Sins) more ominously presaging all those
mischiefs which have followed, than these Tumults. And this was not a short
Fit or two of an Ague, but a quotidian Fever, always increasing to higher
Inflammation, impatient of any Mitigation, restraint or remission. Those who
had most mind to bring forth Confusion and Ruin, upon Church and State, used
the Midwifery of Tumults, by which they ripped up with barbarous Cruelty, and
forcibly cut out abortive Votes, to crowd in by force, what reason would not
lead. Some Men's Petulancy was such, as they joyed to see their Betters
shamefully and outragiously abused. So the Blessed King finding they invaded
the Honor and Freedom of the two Houses, and used such contemptuous words and
Actions against him, thought himself not bound by his Presence to provoke them
to higher Contempt and Boldness. For he says it was an hardiness beyond Valor
to set himself against the breaking in of the Sea; being daily baited with
Tumults, he knew not whether their Fury and Discontent might not fly so high,
as to worry him, and tear him to pieces, whom as yet they played but with in
their Paws: Therefore thinks himself not bound to prostitute the Majesty of his
Place and Person, etc. to those who insult most when they have Objects, and
opportunity most capable of their rudeness and petulancy.

Our late gracious Sovereign in later times, when some Men were endeavoring to
practice the same Methods, found some offers of the like at Windsor (a place of
all others, in which one would have thought he should have had the most Honor
for the Benefits he did to that Town by his so frequent residence) when first
the Boys, and then the Rabble were set on to shout for a Burgess of Parliament,
in opposition to a Loyal Person His Majesty favored, even in his own Presence.

The Prophetic Observation of the Martyred King is worth noting, That he
believes the just Avenger of all Disorders, will in time make these Men, and
that City, see their Sin in the Glass of their Punishment: which needs no
application, but only to desire they would be so just to themselves and their
Posterity, as to follow no such Precedents, and that none will encourage such
outrageous doings.

I shall dismiss this ungrateful Subject with the Description V^^ibus
truculentis strepere, rursum viso Casare trepidare. Murmur incertum, atrox
clamor and repent quies, diversis animorum moribus, pavebaret and terreba^^.
1. Annal.
Tacitus gives of the mutinous Tumult of Drusus's Soldiers, That the
Ringleaders when they looked to the multitude with outrageous Voices made
terrible noises, but viewing Caesar, shrunk again: and of the whole multitude
he says, an uncertain Murmur, an horrible cry, and suddenly a calm, by diverse
emotions of Mind they feared and did affright.

CHAP. XLIV. Prognostics of Sedition and Faction.
BOdinus Seditio semel accunsa, quasi scantilla, impetu populari repent
agitatur, ac totum prius inflammari solet, quam extingui possit. De Repub. c. 4.
tells us, That Sedition once kindled, is suddenly fanned, and blown by popular
fury into a Flame, which is wont to set all on Fire, ere it can be extinguished.

The danger therefore of Faction is not to be slighted, but the Government
should be watchful over the least Sparks, which no Man can forbid, or tell
whence they may come, or how far they may ravage, when there is a Propensity to
Faction. Therefore Governors should not suffer matter of Trouble to be
prepared or hatched, but crush the Cockatrice in the Egg, and the Monster in
the Embryo; especially Vbi Respublica aegra, quave vix cicatrices, clade
intestina acceptas, obduxerit. Clapm. de Arcanis dominationis, lib. 3. c. 16.
When Danger less.
when the Scars of late Wounds are not healed, or hardened, as after a Civil
War, when Factions are most dangerous.

The danger is less, says my Lord Essays.
St. Albans, when it springs only from the Discontent of the People, being slow
of Motion, and the greater sort, of small Strength without the Multitude, can
do little; but the danger is greatest, when those of higher Rank wait but for
the troubling of the Waters. So Jupiter by Pallas's Advice, when the other Gods
would have bound him, sent for Briarous with his Hundred Hands: an Emblem to
show how safe it is for Monarchs to make sure of the Good Will of their People.

The motions of the greatest Persons in Government, ought to be as the motion
of the Planets, under the Primum Mobile (according to the old Opinion, that
every of them is carried swiftly by the highest Motion, and slowly by its own.)
Therefore when great Men, in their own particular motion, move violently,
Liberi usque ut Imperantium meminissent, as Tacitus speaks, It is a sign the
Orbs are out of Frame.

Where Factions are not Combinations against the Government, When Princes not
to make themselves Parties.
but only private-Animosities betwixt some of the Nobility, wherein the
Government is not much concerned, there may be some allowance for my Lord
Verulam's Opinion: That Princes being Common Parents, should not lean to one
Party; because a Boat that is overset by the unequal Weight on one side, may
carry such Passengers in it, as the Prince would not lose. Therefore to study
ways to piece them, and solder up the flaws, is better than to side with one,
to the Ruin of the other, and sometimes of themselves also. As we may observe
in Henry the third of France, who entered into the League, and it was shortly
after turned against himself: which may be a document (says that wise Lord) to
Kings how they make themselves a Party: for by that a Prince makes himself unus
ex nobis, which makes an Obligation Paramount to that of Sovereignty. So that a
Prince must be very cautelous (when he must side with one Party) which he
espouseth, In caducam pari^tem ne inclinet.
lest he lean upon a ruinous Wall.

But if there be a Party, by whose fall the Prince Cujus r^ina se quoque
tradura est. Tacitus de Moribus Germ.
likewise shall be sure to be ruined, (as in case of Factions against
Government, as I mean in this whole Discourse) it is necessary for him
strenuously to support it. When Princes to support one Party.
Upon this Consideration, it seems to me, that it ever will be the great
Interest of the Kings of England to defend and support the Episcopal
Government; for that by fatal Experience it was found, that the overthrow of it
was the Praeludium to the Destruction of the Blessed King and Monarchy. For
although he was a very great Champion of the Church of England, as established
by Law; yet he too fatally yielded to take away the Bishops Votes in
Parliament, whereby he lost a considerable Party in the House, that would never
have deserted his Interest. So that in this case I may apply that of Galba
Manifestum est neque perire nos, neque salvos esse nisi una posse. Tacit. 10.
Hist. P. 195. Edit. Lips. 5.
to his Soldiers, It is manifest that undivided or alone, they can neither be
Saved, or Perish, in times when they are attacqued.

But to return to the Prognostics of dangerous Seditions. I shall mention some
that Tacitus has noted and described: Speaking of the Revolt of the Legions in
Germany, under Germanicus at the Beginning of Tiberius's Reign, Unanimity a
dangerous Sign.
he says, Those that looked deeply into the Disposition of the Soldiers,
judged it a strong Argument of an unappeasable Revolt, Id militares animos
altius conj^^^antibus, praecipuum indicium magni atque implacabilis motus, quod
neque disjecti, nil paucorum instinctu, sed pariter ardescerent, pariter
silerent; tanta aequalitate and constantia, ut regi crederes. 1. Annal.
that they were not scattered or divided, nor any attempt given by a few; but
grew insolent together, were quiet at once, with such moderation and constancy,
that one would have thought they had been governed by one Head. For when any
Sedition is carried on with such Unanimity, it is a certain Sign that the
Poison has a large spread, and there are few sound Parts left.

The Progress Ad tuendam plebem Tribunitio Ju^e ^tentum; militem do^is, populum
Annena, cun^los dulcedine o^ii pellexit. Insurgere pa^tatim, munia Sena^us,
Magistratuum, Legum, in se trahere, nullo adversante. lbid.
Augustus made to establish the Sovereignty in himself, The Methods of
Designers.
is the usual Method by which such as intend subverting of Government, may
proceed; which, according to the same Author, was, That to ingratiate himself
with the People, he contented himself with Tribunitian Authority to defend the
Common People.; that he wound himself into the Favor of the Soldiers, by
Gifts; of the People, by Provision of Sustenance; and of all in general, with
the sweetness of Ease and Repose; by little and little taking upon him the
affairs of the Senate, the Duty of the Magistrates and Laws: and so without the
Contradiction of any, he obtained the Empire.

This in Augustus was commendable and Politically done, being to alter a
Commonweal into a Monarchy, and Wisemen by his method might have foretold his
Design. So in Seditious enterprises against Monarchy, the way is to court the
People, and insensibly cajole them with the sweetness of Liberty under a
Commonwealth, and the heaviness of the Yoke of Monarchy; and having possessed
them with this, they have no more to do but to await some critical time or
revolution that may suit their Design, as some new Imposition laid, some
public Calamity, the displacing some great Officer, or Death of some great
Man, or their Prince: such Opportunos magnis conatibus transitus rerum. 1.
Histor.
Revolutions being the sit times for great Attempts, as Tacitus speaks of
Otho's Conspiracy, by Galba's Covetousness to the Soldiery, etc.

Concerning Sejanus the same Judicious Primas dominandi spes in arduo, ubi sis
ingressus, adesse studia and ministros. Lib. 4. Annal.
Author gives us the Saying of Drusus, That the first hopes of attaining
Command, or working themselves into Power by Sedition is difficult; but after
the Entrance there will not want aids of Council, and assisting Hands.
Therefore it is most necessary, Speedy Suppression most necessary.
that Princes diligently watch the motions of all kind of Seditious aspiring
Persons, to prevent their first Entrance upon their Designs, lest they prove
afterward too Powerful.

In such a State of affairs the Council of Nibil in civilibus discordiis
festinatione tutius, ubi facto magis quam consilio opus. 1. Hist.
Tacitus is to be followed, That nothing is safer in Seditions, and Civil
Discords, than quickness of dispatch, when there is more need of Action than
Consultation.

The misfortune is great which happens to the Subjects by Faction and Sedition;
The Mischiefs of Faction.
for such things once begun, are not in a short time hushed, but the
Animosities are durable, and when one Inter victores victosque nunquam solida
sides coalescit. Idem, 2. Hist.
Party overcomes, yet the Conquered retains his old grudge, and is always
catching at opportunities to promote his Interest; and there is rarely (in that
Generation at least) a sincere amnesty, and union of Affections. Therefore as
Princes by Acts of Pardon endeavor to put all into a State of
Unpunishableness, though they cannot into a State of Innocence; so those that
have assisted the Seditious Party, ought with a generous Repentance and
Fidelity to their Prince, endeavor all their Lives, to be rubbing out those
Stains by their Loyalty; For he that Quem paenitet peccasse, pene est innocens.
repents he has offended, is in the next degree to the Innocent.

It is one of the dangerousest signs of a strong and prevailing Faction, when a
Prince has notice and apprehension of it; yet either for want of courage, or
easiness of temper, to believe better of the Factious than they deserve, quiets
his resolution of opposing them at some critical time: whereby they finding
their Prince to yield to their importunities, in granting some one thing he
has declared against, readily interpret it a fear in him; and when they have
taken him at low water-mark, they flow amain upon him with new and new Floods.

Such Princes thinking to make themselves easy by complying, embarrass
themselves the more with fresh troubles, strengthen the hands of the Factious,
and by deserting their best Counsels and Friends, open their own retrenchments,
dismount their own Artillery, and give such ground to the Factious, as at last
they are either forced to quit their Throne, or with too late rallied
resolutions, fight for that Post they have so supinely quitted.

CHAP. XLV. The Remedies of Faction and Sedition.
AS no Malady in the natural Body can be cured without the knowledge of the
proper causes; so the prevention, of the growth of Faction and Sedition unto
Rebellion, is best effected by substracting the matter, and taking away the
fundamental causes of it.

First it is to be observed, Omne recens malum facile opprimitur, inveteratum
fit plerumque robustius. Cicero Philip.
That all budding evils are sooner stifled, than those that are not only run up
to Seed, but suffered to shake in a rank Soil. Therefore the Historian
Incipiens, and nondum adulta seditio melioribus conciliis flectitur.
says, That young and not grown up Sedition is bent with easier Councils. So
beginning Ulcers are easilier cured, than those that are festered to the Bone,
or are Callous Fistulas.

Sedition is a personal Crime; but because it consists in the several
qualifications of the Persons, I shall treat of the Cure in the same method as
I have of the Causers and Causes. The signs being as so many Symptoms, which
will require also some remarks.

First as to the debauched, 1. The Debauched.
they are but the Velites, the lightarmed Vancouriers, there is small danger
from them. They grow as Tares in every Country and Age, they are the luxuriant
branches of a rank Soil and long peace; They are the Sutlors of the Camp: There
is a curse of peace that brings such weeds, but the Howes of the Laws and
Ecclesiastical discipline will hinder their growth, and eradicate them.

The best Antidote against the mischiefs these people can bring to the
Commonweal, is the Prince's example to put vice out of fashion and
countenance; for a Prince's Virtue and Piety influenceth much.

No doubt his Majesty's great care to forbid and discredit all kinds of Vice,
will work a greater Hac conditio Principum, ut quicquid faciam, pr^ipere (...).
Quintil. Declam. 2.
reformation among the dissolute, than his Laws, and will engage the hearts and
affections of all virtuous, sober and considerate Persons: for as the passage
among the Romans to the Temple of Honor was through that of Virtue; so must
that be to Loyalty and Christianity through Morality.

Secondly, The lightheaded airy Persons, 2. Lightheaded.
as they are something a kin to the debauched (the one pleasing his sensual
Appetite, and the other feeding the Chimaeras of his Brain, as their peculiar
Province) so they are as little dangerous. The suppressing Libels and Pamphlets
would starve them. But if they wanted them, it is likely they would be worse
employed; Therefore it is necessary in all Governments, to countenance and set
on work ingenious Persons, who are well principled to the State, to ridicule
the Factious, and feed these flutterers of the Air with Canary-seed; and they
will never fly against the wind, or out of their Aviary, but there sport
themselves with as much variety of hopes, flights and short Notes, as the Birds
do; and yet other mortals be as ignorant of the impulsive causes, as we are of
the motives of the frisks and flutters of those Choristers of the Air.

However these are not to be countenanced and indulged, lest their wild Notes
be imitated, or that airiness grow too fashionable, whereby solidity and
stayedness be ridiculed; as we have seen it too much in our age, when the
Military educacation made the Schools and Universities less frequented, and the
licentiousness of those times is not yet forgot. So that whereas in one
Pontefract. Mr. Wakefield Mr. Hitchin Mr. Skipton
Ald.
Corporation before the War, the Earl of Arundel found three Aldermen, that
used their Greek Testaments at Church; it may be there are not three in a
County that do so: and Gentlemen have too much disused the reading of Latin
Authors, from whence our Language has received the greatest improvement: and
yet to cover their unkilfulness, many are too prone in this Age to decry the
use of quotations out of such choice Authors. But this in transitu.

Thirdly, 3. The Indigent.
The necessitous and indigent (being the Infantry of Faction, and the gross
Body) require the Governments greater circumspection, to prevent their being
arrayed by the Factious Chieftains.

Necessitas ad turpe cogit, Robbing and Stealing are their Master exploits in
times of Peace. Those which will adventure to stretch an Halter, will adventure
upon Bullets for a small constant Salary; and being Mercenary will pass on
either side, where the greatest prospect of gain is: therefore the Government
is too take all possible care that Prodigality and Luxury bring not the better
sort to want.

The way to enrich a People in general, is to open and well balance Trade,
cherish all sort of Manufacture, banish Idleness, repress wastes and excess,
improve and husband the Soil, regulate all things vendable, moderate Taxes and
Tributes, to invite the Indigent to people new Plantations, or those that are
fit for it, to serve abroad in Military employments.

These are such Remedies, as being vigorously put in execution, will leave few
in want, but such as by their laziness will choose to freeze on Horseback,
rather than take the pains to go on foot to get them heat.

A Prince that would enrich his Subject (says my Essays.
Lord St. Albans) must take care that the Treasure of money in the State, be
not gathered into few hands; otherwise a State may have a great stock and yet
starve: Money being like Dung, not useful unless spread.

The best Mine above ground is when a Country affords not only the Commodity,
but the Manufacture and carriage; for then treble hands are set on work. Thence
in all projects of cutting Rivers, for the transporting of Commodities further
within Land, it ought to be well considered, whether it be not more profitable,
to have many poor men and their Cattle employed in Land carriage, than by the
cheaper way of Water only, to enrich the Tradesmen, and starve a hundred heads
for one.

If the wholesome Laws for setting on work, and relieving the Poor by the labor
of their own hands, and forcing sturdy Beggars and idle Vagabonds to work, or
be confined to their own Parishes, were strictly put in Execution, we should
have less reason to complain of them.

It is true it is not from the poor and lazy that the Government is so much in
danger; for those are not fitted for Soldiers. It is the spirited poor that
have spirits above their fortunes, or by living above their income, have wasted
their Estates, that are Instruments fit to be made use of by the Factious; yet
their numbers are not so great, but vigilant Magistrates may have an eye upon
them, and the Government may employ the ablest of them in collecting the
Revenue. Others may be made inferior Officers in the Militia, and the rest must
be left to better hushand what they have remaining, and kept in hopes that if
they pay due respect to the Government, at one time or other they may be
provided for: and the Loyal Gentry may find ways to oblige them in their
Services; so that every one that is fit to be made good use of, may by one way
or other be set to gain a better livelihood, than they are like to get by
santring and flandring the Government; which if they do, some severe
Animadversion may amend them, or deter others.

It is not possible that the Government can provide for all the Indigent,
without strict execution of the Laws. But the care of the Justices of Peace,
enjoined by the Sovereign, may do much good; however they may keep such from
molesting the Government.

Since therefore that of Tacitus is so true, L^vissimus quisque and fauri
improvidus sp^ vana tumet.
That the least provident to prevent future want, build Castles in the air, and
are big with vain hopes and expectations; their hopes and desires are to be so
directed that they may hope for more advantage from their Prince, than from
Factious Oppressors.

Fourthly, 4. The Ambitious.
Ambition is so near a kin to Nobleness, that it seems a Nobility and
unvulgarness it self, being an Inmate only of Souls elevated above the level of
the common sort of mankind.

Ambitious men are the Field-Officers and Brigadeers of Faction; and by so much
as they are commonly persons of Birth and Parts, they the more require a
Prince's regard above all other Factious persons.

If they find (says my Lord St. Albans) the way open to their rising, they are
rather busy than dangerous; but if they be checked and stopped, like ill
humors they grow Malignant. These (faith St. Alban's E^ says, c. 36.
the Chancellor) become first secretly discontented, looking upon men and
matters with an evil eye, and are best pleased when things go backward; and so
are the worst Servants of Princes or States.

Therefore it is good for Princes if they use ambitious men, so to handle the
matter, as they be still progressive; which because it cannot be without
inconvenience, it is good not to use such natures at all: for if they rise not
with their Masters service, they will take care to make their service fall with
them.

There is less danger caeteris paribus, of ambitious men, if they be of mean
Birth, than if Noble; and if they be new raised, rather than grown cunning, and
fortified in their greatness.

It is less danger (says the same great Chancellor Idem.
whose wise observations on this head I cannot omit) to have an ambitious man
stirring in business, than great in dependence. He that seeks to be eminent
amongst able men, has a great task, but such as is ever good for the Public;
but he that plots to be the only figure amongst Ciphers, is the decay of a
whole Age.

Princes may make use of Ambitious men in pulling down the greatness of any
Subject that over-tops, as Tiberius used Macro in pulling down Sejanus. Also
they make use of them as Screens in matters of danger and envy: But no man will
take that office, unless he be a seeled Dove, that mounts and mounts, because
he cannot see about him.

Commanders in Wars, though Ambitious, are useful; for their Service dispenses
with the rest: and to take a Soldier without it, is to pull off his Plumes and
his spurs.

Favorites are remedies against ambitious great ones, and they are well
corrected also, by ballancing them by others as proud as themselves: but then
there must be some middle Counselors to keep them steady; for without that
Ballast the Ship will roll too much.

These, and such like, may be the cures of Ambitious Men, while they are of the
Council of Princes, on Ministers of State. But when they want Employment, and
are tainted in their Principles, or entertain designs of altering the State, or
by the unboundedness of their aspirings, aim at the sole direction of Affairs,
and care not what mischiefs befall their Prince, or Country in the pursuit of
their Designs; a Prince should look upon them as in the next degree of most
dangerous Traitors.

In this case a Prince has but two ways, either to set wise men to work, who
cambring them to their Service, and make them sensible, that their advantage
will be greater by studying the Service of their Prince in consort with other
experienced Statesmen, than by heading of any Faction against the Government;
and letting them see by the many examples in History, how unprosperous it has
been to all that have striven to wrest Honors and Employments from their
Prince, without proportionable Service: That they are not to presume to be
wiser than the Government: That Kings have long Hands, can reach Malefactors at
a great distance, and unprovided: how unable they are to vie with Majesty; and
make them sensible, that never any durable Renown or Wealth was got by courting
the People, in opposition to the Prince; and demonstrate the Justness of the
Government in such Particulars as they most quarrel at. And if this will not
bring them to their right Senses, then either send them abroad, or give them
some ticklish Employment at home, wherein, if their Ambition tempt them to
outdo their Commission, they may be run into a Praemunire, whereby they may be
crushed at once.

Still a Prince has a difficult task how to comport himself, to cast off
Ministers of State, who having been accustomed to be very leading, and much
credited in Councils, have been employed in great and weighty Affairs, got
themselves great Estates, and Dependences. If such (upon some Reasons the
Prince best knows to himself) be softly to be laid aside, whereby his Partisans
may be induced to believe, it was for no Guilt, but to make room for others
advancement; a Prince is in danger to have his Affairs much obstructed by them.

For these (upon every ill succeeding Affair of State after their removal) will
suggest to the People, the evil tendency of it; and they shall be sure to have
their repute for Judgment and forecast much valued by the People, because it
was so once by the Prince: and so the vulgar instantly credit his Sentiments as
Oracles; so that he having already acquired an easy belief, with the greatest
facility in the World, puts a false gloss upon the Princes best designed
Actions, and retaining his old dependences, they will whisperingly disperse his
sense of things.

Let him then make himself heads of the Country Party, and the true Protestants
(as of late some affected to be called) and he is presently without further
labor and industry adored as the Peoples prime Patriot. Having got Tools
enough to work with, still pretending his concern for the Public weal of the
People, and at the same time, tacitly insinuating some reflections upon his
Quondam-fellow Counfellors, depreciating their Wisdom, and Honesty, and leaves
the application to his Admirers: They will be sure to aggravate all appearances
of Maladministration (since his laying aside, and insinuate that Affairs have
a tendency to oppression of the People, altering Religion, or such like
plausible Subjects; and so by little and little the Peoples affections will be
estranged from their Prince, and shall be set upon this new Idol, the fallen
Lucifer.

If the Sovereign upon some emergences by necessitated to call a Parliament, he
shall obtain a great, if not a major part of the Members, chosen (according to
the Common Peoples by as, he shall put upon them) most opposite to the Kings
Interest. In such an Assembly he shall be sure to have great Interest, and
under some pretenses of Grievances of the Subject, render useless to the
Affairs of the Sovereign, and upon its necessary dissolution, improve still his
Interest, that the succeeding Parliament shall be as wayward; and by promoting
Bills, he knows his Sovereign can neither in Honor or Conscience assent to,
still more alienate the Peoples affections from him, till at last he get to be
sole Director of such Assemblies; having all this while the Wisdom and cunning
to keep himself within the compass, and reserve, that for Words or Actions he
be not obnoxious to the Laws.

Having obtained this height, he is able to influence the Elected of City
Magistrates, secure himself by them, and at last to form Conspiracies against
his Prince; till which time, he being the Idol of the People, is only feared
and suspected: but nothing of Traitorous Designs being yet pregnantly
discovered, he runs on his risk till some fortunate discovery of his designs
force him to abscond, and then his whole machinations come to light; and if he
escape the hand of Justice, he is forced to leave his Country, and ends his
life ingloriously abroad.

This is the common exit of such, who had much better have offered violence to
these headstrong Passions, and been content with a quiet retreat, and dieted
and physicked their virulent distempers with the applications of sage Counsel,
and the Precepts of Judicious Men, finding out the cure for their Diseases in
Books, and Solitude; than thus to live in the Pangs and Throes of Ambition, to
the disquiet of their Prince, and the emptying of their Country.

Of such we may not only say with Percandam posthac modestiam ut contentius
esset. Tacit. 4. Annal.
Drusus, That Modesty must be prayed to, that they be content with their
Greatness; but Justice must be invoked to prune such luxuriant Branches, as not
only overtop and Shade all the rest, but suck away from them all their Sap and
Nourishment.

In (...). Lib. 2.
Dio Cassius I find it, advised, That such Criminals as these, that are above
the stroke of Justice, and whom a Prince cannot with security to himself bring
to a Public Trial, should not be arraigned, but as open Enemies instantly
punished.

So some Princes, finding such subtle ambitious Men, beyond the reach of their
Justice, by way of public Arrest and Trial by the Law, being satisfied in
their Consciences that they were hatching great mischiefs to their State, and
the subversion of their Government, have commanded by their Sovereign Power,
execution of them by private hands.

So fell Friar History of Hungary
George, newly made Cardinal, for tampering with Solomon the magnificent to
bring him into Transylvania, and exclude King Ferdinand, by direction from the
King to Castald his General there.

So fell the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Burbon; but this sort of
Justiec brought as great mischiefs afterward to their Crowns, as they could in
probability have sustained by their lives, at least, if the Prince had with
watchful oversight so timed the Execution, that they had let them live till
they had made their Treasons more manifest.

So Tacitus Inauditi atque indefensi tanquam inno. centes ^erierunt. 1. Histor.
speaking of Galba's putting to death Cingonius Varro, and Petronius
Turpillianus, says, That they being not suffered to be heard, and defend their
Causes judicially, perished in the repute of Innocents.

Therefore there are other ways more just and safe for Princes to take with so
great and subtle Criminals. As to toil them into some great errors, give
them opportunities to show their ill Conduct and Council, or to do something
ungrateful to the People, that they may go out of their places with such a scar
as will stick by them in their retirement, and study to enjoy a quiet recess,
lest they be called to an account for what they connived at when they fell; so
if they can be rendered unuseful, and of little credit with the People, they
will have none to back them in their attempts, but Persons of small Reaches,
and Interest; and then for smaller Transgressions they may be called to an
account; and if they be conscious to themselves of any guilt, they will quit
their undertakings, for fear of a suddener Catastrophe than Ostracism.

If such Ambitious Persons have gained so great Interest, that neither by
setting Spies upon them, or by other Arts their secret drift can be sifted out,
(...). 5. Polit. c. 11.
then Aristotle's Rule is to be observed, by compassings and windings to remove
them, and not to tak all their Power away at once, or to remove them to some
higher place, where they may have a new Administration to begin, in which they
are not so well versed, on wherein they can do nothing without the Prince and
his Councils daily inspection, and where no dependences are to be gained.

Above all, a Prince is to take care to follow the (...). Ibid.
Philosophers Rule, to make no man too great: for as he says, It is the
safeguard of the Principality to make no one Man great. For Tacitus Semper
periculosum, privati hominis nomen supra nomen Principis attolli. Vita
Agricolae.
well observed. It is most inconvenient, and dangerous, to have any one more in
vogue than the Prince; for if such have not powerful Principles of Loyalty
lodged in their breasts, they have great temptations and opportunities to do
Mischiefs, especially, if after the obtaining great Authority and Power, they
are sensible of parties-making against them. For then, self-preservation is
mixed with their Ambition, and that prompts them to dangerous undertakings, as
it did the Earl of Essex, in Queen Elizabeth's time.

For as Dio (...) Lib. 2.
Cassius notes, Long and lasting Command lifts up men's Spirits, and induces
them to alter Affairs. So the long continued Favors of the Queen, and the
great Employments under her, made that unfortunate Earl impatient to see
himself eclipsed, and whether out of pure envy to the present Ministers of
State, or upon greater Designs (I enquire not) seek to remove at least those
with a violent Hand, that he thought were his Enemies: in which attempt he fell
worthily under the Severity of the Law, which will allow no Man to expound the
goodness of his Intentions, when he offers force to his Prince.

When therefore there is any Necessity of State to make any great, Magna
libertatis (ac Principatus) custodia, si magna imperia, diuturna esse non
sinas. Lib. 4.
Livy's Rule is to be observed, That his Authority be short; for that is Safety
to the Liberty of the People, as well as to the Sovereignty of the Prince. So
the Lord Lieutenants of Ireland, and elsewhere, are not only removable at the
King's Pleasure; but they have not been used to be continued long: for more
durable Commands too much elevate ambitious Men's Genius's, and gain them great
Dependences, who will be apt to own their Honor, and places of Profit, rather
to such great Ministers, than to the King himself; whereby if they have a mind
to make Innovations, they have Opportunities, and Coadjutors.

Sejanus is a great Example of Ambitious aspiring, and most deserved, violent,
and praecipitate Ruin. Tacitus Corpus illi laborem tolerans, animus audax, sui
obtegens; in alios criminator, juxta a^^l^tor and superbus; palam compesitus
pudor, intus summa apiscendi libido, and ejusque causa modo largitus, and
luxus, saep^us industria ac vigilantia haud minus noxiae, quotiens parando
Regno finguntur. 1. Annal.
gives us his Character thus, That he was of Body able to endure Labor, of
Mind bold, in his own Actions secret, an Informer against others, as proud as
flattering, in show Modest, but inwardly greedy of Aspiring: for which Cause he
used sometimes largesses and lavishing, but more often Industry and Diligence;
means, says he, dangerous alike, when they are dissemblingly used to win a
Kingdom.

This Sejanus poisoned Drusus, by corrupting Livia his Wife, and practiced to
destroy Agrippina and Germanicus's Children, from whom he endeavored to
alienate Tiberius's Mind. He requested Tiberius, that he might Marry Livia,
widow of Drusus, by which means he thought to get himself incorporated into the
Royal Family; and having destroyed the whole Race of Germanicus and Drusus, the
next Heirs of Augustus, he might the easier have usurped the Empire in
Tiberius's old Age, whom he had got to retire to Capraea, and commit the
management of affairs to himself.

But for all these gradual and high Steps, when he was almost at the top of his
Ambition, snatching the very Diadem, having already got his Image with
Tiberius's, decreed by the Senate, to be set about the Altars of Clemency and
Friendship, he was at last by Tiberius's Authority, and Macro's Diligence,
utterly destroyed: Tiberium variis artibus devinxit, adeo ut obscurum adversum,
alios, sibi uni incautum intectumque assiceret. Id.
Though he had so overcome Tiberius by his Arts, that though he was reserved to
all others, yet to him alone he was cautionless and uncovered. For as by his
cunning (by which he was also circumvented) says Tacitus, so by the Anger of
the Gods to the affairs of Rome, with equal mischiefs to it, he flourished and
fell. So Juvenal Satyra 10.
tells us.

-- Sejanus ducitur unco
Spectandus, gaudent omnes --
-- nam qui nimios optabat honores,
Et nimias poscebat opes, numerosa parabat
Excelsae Turris tabulata, unde altior esset
Casus, and impulsae praeceps immane Ruinae.
Fifthly, 5. The Envious.
The Envious are very carefully to be watched over; they secretly sow the Tares
that choke the Fruitful Crop of peaceable Government.

There are some Envies that are less prejudicial to a State, as being against
some Ministers of State only, and not against the Government; and these are so
natural, that in the calmest times they are practiced: and to prevent this, it
is only needful for Princes to take care of the choice of such as they commit
matters of public Administration to, and that Persons envied so deport
themselves, as they may not deserve it.

Public Envy (says the Learned St. Alban 's Essays, c. 1. p. 33.
Chancellor) is an Ostracism, that Eclipseth Men when they grow too great, and
is a Bridle to great ones to keep them within Bounds.

Those above others are most subject to be envied, Id.
who carry the greatness of their Fortunes in an insolent, proud, and imperious
manner; whereas wise Men will rather sacrifice to Envy in suffering themselves
to be crossed, and overborn in things that do not much concern them. So the
carrying greatness in a plain and open manner without Arrogance, and
Vainglory, does demolish Envy. Therefore the wise sort of great Persons ever
bring upon the Stage somebody, upon whom to derive the Envy, which otherwise
would fall upon themselves.

Persons of eminent Virtues, Id.
when they are advanced, are less envied: for their Fortune seems but due to
them, especially if they be of noble Blood, being that much is not added to
their Fortune; so those advanced by degrees, are less envied than those per
saltum.

Those that have joined with their Honors, Id.
great Cares and Perils, are rarely envied; son Men think they earn their
Honor dearly, and pity them sometimes, and Pity heals Envy. There fore the
more sober sort of Politic Persons, in their Greatness, are ever bemoaning
themselves, quanta patintur! not that they feel it so, (though certainly to
discharge great places honorably, is a vast Fatiegue) but to abate the Edge of
Envy, as my Lord St. Albans wisely observes.

Unworthy Persons are most envied at first; Id.
whereas Persons of Worth and Merit, are most envied when their Fortunes
continue long: for by that time, though their virtue be the same, yet it has
not the same Luster; for fresh Men grow up to shade it.

These are not the Envies that are so perilous to States, for that they are
terminated on particular Persons only; but that Envy which is dangerous to a
State, is when it is great upon the Ministers of State, when the Dolendi modus,
ti mendi non item.
Causes of it, especially, are small, and the Fear greater than the Feeling;
for that shows the Envy raised upon Design, and to be general upon all, or most
of the Ministers: and then however it may be disguised, it is upon the State it
self.

It is this kind of Envy that principally forebodes Mischief, and requires
greater Skill and Dexterity in the Prince, and his Ministers, to avoid the
Malignity of the Blast of these black Souls, and the Sting of such Asps,
Vipers, and Scorpions.

Therefore it is no small Skill to choose out such, for public Negotiations, as
will be less subject to be envied; which in Part may be understood by electing
those that have Worth, Ability, and Virtue to commend them, and not private
Affection or Interest only.

Sixthly, 6. The Discontented.
The discontented are File-leaders of Faction, The best foresight and
prevention of Mischief from them is, that there be no fit Head, that has
Reputation with the discontented Party, upon whom they may turn their Eyes.
Such are either to be won off, or affronted with some other of the same Party,
that may oppose them, and so divide the Reputation, and make distinct Interests
among them: for Factions generally subdivide, as that of the Optimates and
Lucullus did against Pompey and Caesar; and when the Senates Authority was
pulled down, Caesar and Pompey after broke upon one another. So Antonius and
Lepidus against Brutus and Cassius; and after they were overthrown, Antonius
and Augustus divided. So in the late War, the Presbyterians and Independents
clashed, till at last the Contest betwixt them two so weakened both, that it
much facilitated the Restoration of the King.

To give moderate Liberty for Grief and Discontent to evaporate (so it be
without too great Insolence, says a Wise Man) St. Albans, tit. Sedition.
is safe, especially if a Prince noting the Causes of Discontent, be removing
of them insensibly, during his Connivence, so as he seem aliud agere; to let
them see it was not for want of Foresight, or Good Will, that he set not on the
Work sooner, but that he waited the critical time.

The neglect of this, some think, was one of the great misfortunes of King
Charles the First's Reign: That his Ministers (who could not but be sensible
how universal the discontent of the People was from the beginning of his Reign;
yet suffered them fifteen years to be fermenting, and the causes not to be
insensibly removed, till when it was done at last, all at once, Anno 1640,
1641. the King got no thanks for it, as seeming to be favors rather extorted
than freely granted. For by the long lodging of discontent in the bosom of the
People, the humor turned back, made the wound bleed inwardly, and ingendered
dangerous Ulcers and malignant Imposthumes. However it is too apparent (though
that was a great oversight) yet the backwardness of the Parliaments to afford
Supplies, and the designers of the Civil Wars, who had been at work all along,
were the true Cause of those Miseries, together with the blessed Kings Clemency.

Carrying men from hopes to hopes of redress (so as it be not too tiresome) is
one of the best Antidotes against the poison of coffeehouse; and when it
arises not so much from malice as mistake, Da malorum poenitentiae, honorum
consensui spacium. Tacit. 1. Histor.
a Prince may respite a while the Prosecution, to give space to the evil to
repent, and to the good to consent or be convinced: perhaps a little time will
mellow and meliorate humors, diem forsitan tempusque ipsum leniturum iras,
sanctitatemque animis allaturam, as Livy judiciously observes.

Yet this is to be admitted with some restriction: For as Tacitus notes, Ipse
inutili contatione agendi, tempus consultando consumpsit; mox utrumque
concilium aspernatus, quod inter ancipitia deterrimum est, dum media sequitur
nec ausus est satis, nec praevidit. Id. 3. Hist.
in another case of Valens Lieutenant to Vitellius, That using delay in
prosecuting the Enemy, to the great danger of his cause, he spent the time of
Action in Consultation; and then rejecting the extremes of Counsel, he took the
middle course, which, says he, in cases of danger and doubt, of all other is
the worst.

So in punishing Authors of Faction, it is better use severity at first for a
terror, than to suffer smaller Symptoms of discontent to pass so long
unrectified, that at last they sprout out with Hydra's heads, and grow too
numerous to suppress: for in such cases all delays are dangerous, and soft
quiet dealing brings more evil, than hazarding rashly; as in another case about
Nec contatione opus, ubi perniciosior fit quies, quam temeritas. Idem, 1. Hist.
Otho's Conspiracy and the quickness of the execution of it, he relates; which
might have been prevented, if Galba or Piso had well observed Otho's
popularity, and his ingratiating himself with the Soldiery, whom Galba had
discontented about the Donative.

Seventhly, 7. The Emulous.
The Emulous being such as think themselves equally capable of their Prince's
Trust and Regard, make great ruptures in a State. Therefore Tacitus condemns
the Politics of Caius Caesar Aequatus inter duos beneficiorum numerus, and
mixtis utriusque mandatis, discordia quaesita, auctaque pravo certamine,
legatorum jus adolevit, diuturnitate officii, vel quia minoribus major mulandi
cura. 4. Hist.
that divided the Proconsulship of Africa betwixt the Proconsul and the Legate,
giving the latter the Legion: for by parting the Office thus betwixt two,
without subordination; their charge and points of Commission lying
intermingled, and running jointly together, bred and nourished discord and
quarrel; and through sinister emulation the Legate Valerius Festus (who had
command of the Legion) murdered Piso the Proconsul of Africa. So by the reason
of that emulous hatred betwixt Vinius and Lucro, (c) Galba knew not what
Council to follow, and was ruined.

Eighthly, 8. Popularity.
Popular men are to be noted of what Principles they are, and to which of the
qualifications of the Factious Persons they are inclined, or how many of
Factious Ingredients are in their composition: It is worth the Prince's care
(says a great Operae pretium est (...) nere litium animos e^sque tanquam
suspectos notare, qui nimium populariter student: ^i enim facile plebis animos
quaquaversum torquent, adrapiunt quodlib ertatis avidi praesentem Rempublicam
contemnua^. Lipsius Polit. Praefat.
Author) to discover the inclinations of his Subjects, especially those who
over much affect popularity, for their wheedles easily twine and hurry the
common peoples minds whither they please, despising the Government out of a
greedy desire of liberty.

If these (being covetous) cannot be set upon some Collections of Taxes and
Duties on the Subject, which may be heavy upon them, though laid on by
Authority, whereby they may be rendered ungrateful to the people, who often
bestow their ill will upon such; or if they cannot be trapped in some escapes
of their words or actions, whereby fear of punishment may make them slacken
their Sails, lest they be over-set and cannot ride the storm: Or if they be not
guilty of some great immorality, which being discovered, may render them less
acceptable; it will be necessary that the Prince choose fit Persons to make
applications to them, by such as have some Authority over or with them, and can
rectify any mischiefs of the intention of the Government, and by dint of
reason make such out of love with the Contagion of popular breath, to suck in
the vitabler air of the Court, or by rectifying their Judgments, oblige them to
manage the multitude in their duty to their Prince, rather than encourage them
in the sullen Malecontentedness of their nature. By such means these popular
persons might be made as good Instruments as ever they were evil.

For certainly were the generality of people once brought to a sense, that
established Government is infinitely less oppressive to them, than when Faction
giving it a disturbance, forces it to arm for their suppression, at the common
Peoples charge, they would neither lend an Ear to the pragmatical and idle
Persons, who never are in their Element but when they are sowing Dissentions,
or making Parties, either in their Parishes, (especially in Corporations), or
busying themselves with Officers of State, which is another kind of business
than their shallow understandings can apprehend. But the itch of appearing some
body in the rout, makes them scrub upon every log and post, rather than lose
the pleasure of spending that little Salt in their Blood.

Ninthly, 9. Cunning men.
The cunning close men are either such who are no great lovers of the
Government, yet dare slily nibble at it, or they are the Achitophels. As to the
first, their strength lies in the Art of wheedling, shrugs and insinuation,
they being afraid to show their morphewed. Complexion, never put off their
Vizard but when they are among their Confidents: which shows how little courage
they have, unless in a Crowd, or Tumult, and then they are no longer assured
than the whole body is succesful. If it come to dispute and hazard, they are
the first that fly to their Burrow. They are Moles indeed: But if their walks
be once discovered, they are easily caught, and are so blind they neither know
how to avoid the Trap, or their own destruction, and when uncased are the
despicablest of Vermin.

The Achitophels are presumed to be of quicker sense, and nimbler parts, and
have always some private Privati pertinacia in publicum exitium. Tacit. 10.
Hist.
end that they eagerly pursue, though it be to the ruin of the Public: yet
they have a peculiar short sightedness, In that they neither look back on
former Precedents of unsuccessful attempts of that nature; nor forward to
consider how many contingences may happen, whereby the whole design may be
disappointed; or how many and different Engines are to be employed, to rear
that new Frame of Government. So that if any few, that have generousness or
honesty, scent the design, the whole machine, by the unloosing of some few
pins, falls in confusion, and buries in its rubbish the Architects who Imperium
cupienribus, nihil medium inter summa aut praecipitia. Tacit. 2. Hist.
have no half paces betwixt height and precipice.

These are presumed to have plotting heads, and all the wiles of the subtilest
Foxes, and not to want courage, resolution, and conduct; rarely undertaking
such designs, but when there is some general discontent, or pretensions of
redressing Grievances. Therefore wise Princes are to substract the subject
matter of their pretenses, and to set on work able Counterminers, whom they are
in some public manner to disgrace, or disoblige, whereby they may the easilier
be admitted into the inmost Councils of the Achitophels, and by secret
Intelligence on the one hand advertise the Prince of the methods, drift and
design of those men; and on the other side push things forward to some overt
Acts, in which these Miners may be surprised. During which time the Prince is
to encourage, strengthen and empower all who are true to his interest; which
done, it will be a strange fatality, if he in a little time triumph not over
these cunning Intriguers.

As to I novators in Religion, it is found by long expetience how difficult it
is to suppress them. Tenthly, Innovators in Religion. A nulla re majus
periculum Imperiis and Sceptris, quam ab innovata, and insidiose simulata
Religione. lib. de una Religione.
For though it be true what Lipsius says, That danger to Empires happens from
nothing more, than from Religion innovated, or treacherously dissembled; yet
neither he nor any Prince could yet find a sufficient means, either to prevent
the Ingress, or stop the spreadings of different Modes of Religious worship,
and of Doctrines that are judged conducible to a more Pious living, when they
are not too chargeable or too difficult to be performed. Therefore most Princes
in Europe (whose Subjects are numerous of different Religions) considering the
inconvenience of dispeopling their Countries, or endangering Civil Wars,
countenance one form of Discipline, that appears to them the best adapted to
the constitution of their Secular Government, by capacitating only such as
adhere to it, to enjoy Offices and Preferments, and permitting others in a
private way to enjoy the liberty of their Opinions, so as they may not be
dangerous to the State. Interdicting public Orations upon controverted Points;
or when they find danger of Seditions by them, retrenching some of their
privileges to keep them in subordination.

Having thus gone through these ten particulars, I shall say something of
Libels and Corporations, and so close this Chapter.

As to Libels, we find in Tacitus, Of Libels.
That Crematius Cordus being accused that he had commended Brutus and Cassius
as the last of the Romans; this was thought to reflect upon Tiberius: and in
his defense, Cordus Ipse divus Julius, ipse divus Augustus and tulere ista, and
reliqu^re, haud facile dixerim moderatione magis an sapientia: namque spreta
exolescunt, si irascare agnita videntur.
says, That Livy had commended Pompey, that Messalla Corvinus had spoken
honorably of Cassius, that Catullus and Bibaculus's Verses were read, which
were stuffed with Calumnies against Julius and Augustus; yet those Emperors
suffered them, and left them unpunished, whether with more moderation or
wisdom, he would not determine: For such things being slighted, grew stale and
unregarded; but if the Prince be incensed against them, they take fire faster.

Such Libels therefore as in a slight manner only make ingenious Reflections
upon select Persons, In the twenty eighth Law of King Alfred, entitled, Be
fool leasungum gewyr^tum, Of false Rumors or Lies done or told to the People,
the Punishment was, That his Tongue should be cut out, bim mon accors tha
Tungan of, unless he redeemed it at the price of his Head.
or attack not the Government enviously, and in such a way as the Government is
not in danger, may be connived at. But the Authors of malicious witty Libels
are principally to be sought after, as the Trumpets and Kettle-drums that call
together the whole Array against the Government: And if they cannot be
dispossessed of that Evil Spirit by gentler means, they are to undergo the
severity of the Laws which are made against Incendiaries of a Kingdom, which is
of more dangerous consequence than the firing of a Private Man's Habitation.

The danger from these Libels are the greater, because In civitate discordi,
and ob crebras Principum mutationes, inter libertatem and licentiam incerta,
parvae quoque res magnis motibus agebantur. Tacit. 2. Hist.
in times of Faction, and the often Changes of Government, the People being
unfixed, fluctuating betwixt Liberty and Licentiousness, small Matters are
transacted with great Emotions.

As to Corporations, they have all of them been endowed with their Privileges
by the Grace and Bounty of the Sovereign, from whence all Immunities and
Honors do flow. The first Institution of them was, no doubt, Concerning
Corporations.
that Justice might be executed in them, for the better governing their
numerous Inhabitants; that they might be the Places of Traffic, where the
adjacent Country might be supplied, and their Neighbors might vend their
Growth and Manufacture. And thus being enriched by Commerce, separated from
their Country-Neighbours by Honors, Offices, and Liberties; something a
Gentiler Education might be expected there, whereby they might be Patterns to
their adjoining Neighbors of good and virtuous Deportment, being exempted from
the Jurisdiction of the Justices of Peace, and attendance upon Assizes, whereby
Legal Matters, in order to the necessary Administration of Justice, are
executed in their Precincts, by their own Members; and many of them (besides
the Privileges to be found at large in the Statutes and Law Books) have power
to choose as many to represent them in Parliament, as the whole County has. It
would fill a large Volume, to recount the particular Powers and Freedoms have
been granted to them by the Royal Favor of the successive Kings of England,
whereby they are erected into little Commonwealths.

Therefore there is good reason, as they may do much good or harm, and they
have all the enriching Streams and Conduits from the Sovereign Spring and
Fountain; so they should have a strict dependence upon the Sovereign, that they
may not employ those great Privileges against the Laws and Government; nor the
rich pragmatical Magistrates, Citizens, and Freemen, animate Factions and
Seditions against it; or presume to obtrude their impertinent Advices upon
their Sovereign, or by their clamorous Petitions for Redress of pretended
Grievances, and Maladministration, or by their Election of Factious
Representatives, dispose of the Fate of the Empire, as they did in 1641. by
their general Combinations with the then Parliament, which they so effectually
assisted in their Rebellion.

It is too manifest how little Justice the two last Kings could have in the
great Metropolis, the King's Imperial Chamber, or in other Corporations,
although they had all, less or more, received great Instances of their Royal
Favors and Graces. And though the great City, by the late King of Immortal
Memory's Royal Munificence, and Princely Care, as much as in him lay, by Act of
Parliament, and his own particular Bounty, (after it was so fatally reduced to
Ashes) was raised into one entire Palace, so beautiful and splendid, as all
People must acknowledge it the Eighth Wonder; yet the grateful Returns were
unproportionable.

This great City enjoyed as ample and beneficial Privileges as any could wish
for; and though it be deprived of some of them, yet, by the Munificence of our
late and present Sovereign, it enjoys what is needful for its well governing in
subordination to the Public.

Since therefore the Corporations, mostly, were found to have made ill Returns
to their Sovereigns, for all their special Graces; by a most wise Council it
has been judged fit to enquire by what Warrant they enjoyed those Privileges,
and to recall those Charters, that new ones might be granted, mostly with
Additions of Privileges; only that the Magistrates (if they should abuse their
Authority) might be displaced at the King's Pleasure: A most necessary
Resumption of Power, whereby they might not be in a capacity for the future to
give any Disturbance to the Government.

Elsewhere I have given short Hints of the Practice of former Kings, in
vacating the Charters of the great City, and shall only add what I find in the
most Judicious Historian was done in a like Case, by the Senate of Rome, in
Tiberius his Reign.

The License Crebrescebat enim Graecas per urbes licentia atque impunitas asyla
statuendi; complebantur ^^mpla pessimis servitia^um, eodem subsidio obaera^i
adversus creditores, suspectique capitalium criminum receptabantur: nec ullum
satis validum Imperium erat coercendis seditionibus populi; flagitia hominum,
ut Caeremonias Deum prot^entes. Igitur placitum ut mitterent civitates Jura,
atque Legauos, etc. Magnaque ejus diei species fuit, quo Senatus majorum
beneficia, sociorum p^cta, Regum etiam qui ante vim Romanam valuerant, decreta:
Ipsorum numinum Religiones introspexit libero ut quondam, quod firmaret
mutare^ve, Tacit. 3. Annal.
and Impunities of ordaining Sanctuaries and Privileged Places increased, says
my Author, throughout the Cities of Greece; the Temples were filled with most
lewd Bondslaves; in the same were received Debtors against their Creditors, and
Men guilty of Capital Crimes were protected; neither was there any powerful
Authority able to bridle the Sedition of the People: Villainies were protected
no less than the Ceremonies of the Gods. Therefore it was appointed, That the
Cities should send their Agents with their Laws. Some, by way of Resignation of
their Charters, freely remitted those things they had falsely usurped; many did
confide in the Antiquity of their Superstitions, and their Deserts to the
People of Rome. The Pomp of that Day (says the Historian) was great in show:
In which the Senate (for Tiberius had left the Senate a Shadow of their ancient
Estate, by sending the Requests of the Provinces to be examined by them)
considered of the Privileges granted by their Predecessors, the Agreements with
their Confederates, the Decrees of the Kings, before the Countries became
subject to the Romans, and the Religion of the Gods themselves, to confirm or
alter all.

By which it may appear, to be no new thing, for Sovereigns to enquire into the
Privileges of Cities, though claimed by Divine Original, as many of those were,
from their Gods, or by the Bounties of Princes.

As to Conventicles, the Nurseries of Seditions, since the Laws are obvious by
which they may be suppressed, and that in another Chapter I have treated of
them, I shall take no further notice of them here; being as unwilling that
truly conscientious mis led People (that endanger not the Government) should be
severely punished, as I heartily wish they would give no Disturbance to it.

CHAP. XLVI. The Preservatives against Faction and Sedition.
THE general Amulets, Preservatives, and Antidotes against the Poison and
Infection of Faction and Sedition, are a Prince's innate Virtue, his Prudence,
Justice, Providence, Political Capacity, Wealth, Militia, Fortunateness, Fame,
and the harmony betwixt him and his Great Councils of which, in order.

As to a Prince's Genuine Virtues, A Prince's Virtue.
they are many, and where they meet in a Constellation, they outshine the
Jewels of the Crown. The Majesty and Awfulness of these, commands sometimes
where Armies cannot; they win upon all. Nothing Nihil virtute amabilior, quam
qui adeptus est, ubicunque erit gentium a nobis diligetur. Cicero l. 1. de
Natura Deorum.
is more amiable, nothing more universally loved and honored than Virtue: even
the same of it when the Person is unknown, gains an applause; how much more
must it be revered in a Crowned head.

Laws do not preserve all things (says Stobaeus, Sermon. 1.
Antisthenes) but the Rule of Virtue teaches every where what is honest, and
unbecoming. So Epictetus compares a Soul, thoroughly imbued with Virtue, to a
Spring of Water, which is always pure, sweet, plentiful, and endued with no
evil quality. Therefore Plutarc. in Lacon.
Charilaeus being asked, Which was the best Commonweal; answered, That wherein
many Citizens strive who shall excel in Virtue without Sedition.

As in the Opal the color of several precious Stones are found, the smaller
Fire of the Carbuncle, the shining Purple of the Amethyst, the green Sea of the
Smaragd: so in a truly Virtuous Prince, all the Sunbeams of Light, Warmth,
Beauty, and Celestial Influence, for his Peoples cherishing, comfort, Glory and
Prosperity, are contained.

So the Intaminatis fulget honoribus; Nec sumit nec ponit secures, Arbitrio
popularis aurae. Horat. Carm. Lib. 5. Od. 2.
Poet tells us, That it shines with unsullied Honors, neither assuming, or
laying down the Ensigns of Sovereignty, at the suffrage of the Populace, having
a firmer Basis than the Fleeting Bubbles of their Breath.

Pliny Discimus experimento sidissimam esse custodiam Prineipis ipsius
innocentiam. Panaegyr.
tells Trajan, That we learn by experience, That a Prince's own Innocence is
his faithfullest Guard. By this word I understand, not only his gentleness in
not oppressing his Subjects, but the whole complex of Virtue, whereby he is
guilty of no enormous Vices, but has the Sovereignty over his own passions, as
well as over his Subjects.

As to a Prince's Prudence, A Prince's Prudence.
I have elsewhere spoken at large, and shall now add upon so copious a Subject,
some gleanings out of good Authors.

In these things, says Praeterita cogita, praesentia ordina, futura provide.
Senec. de Benefic^s.
Seneca, Prudence is best discovered, when bypast times are collated, by
observing the Annals, and Histories of former Ages, by ordering present
Affairs, according to the best Reason, and providently forecasting future
effects of present Counsels. Tanquam oculus mentis undiquaque lucidissimus.
So a Prince will know how former Seditions have sprung, and what has been the
cure of them, how parallel the present are to bypast, and how for the future
to provide, That the Roots and Fangs of them be dug up: for foregon Facta
praeterita, certa documenta dant futuris.
deeds give certain instructions for the future; former miscarriages teach such
a Prince sufficient caution.

Other Virtuous Qualifications may be common to the Sovereign, and Subject; but
Prudence is his peculiar Province: therefore Stobaeus de Prudentia.
Jamblichus calls this, The very Prince of Virtues. So when Plut. in Lacon.
Archidamus was commended, that he had overcome the Arcadians in Battle; he
answered, That it had been much better if he had overcome them by Prudence. So
Antisthenes Tutissimum murum esse prudentiam, nec collabitur, nec proditur.
Machinis aut suffossionibus, aut vallorum proditione capiuntur; prudentis autem
decreta sunt inexpugnabilia. Laert. lib. 6. c. 1.
says, Prudence is the safest Wall; it neither falls down, or is betrayed: all
Walls, Bulwarks, or other defenses by Batteries, Mines, or Treacheries, may be
taken; but the determination of a Prudent Prince is inexpugnable. The Counsels
and Actions of a Prince, endowed with this Virtue, are never like to have the
misfortune of those Vtque evenit in consiliis infoelicibus, optima viderentur
quorum tempus essugerit. Tacitus 1. Hist. A Prince's Justice.
which are never known to be best, till they have passed the season of being
put in execution.

Justice in a Prince's Government, and Faith in the Sacred observance of their
Royal Words, are not to be reckoned among the lesser Stars, but are the two
great Luminaries, without Remota Justitia, quid sunt Regna, nisi magna
latrocinia? Aug. 4. de Civ. Dei.
which, there would be nothing but Gloominess, Tempests and Showers: yet,
though Justice be that Sun, Faith is not to be reputed that Moon, that is
changeable as to us, by the interposition of the Earth, but as it is in it self
always enlightened by the Sun.

Faith is the companion of Justice, and that Justitiae consors, tacitumque in
pectore Numen. Silius Ital.
secret Divinity lodging in a Prince's Breast, which must needs be reverenced
of all: Acts of State, and Power, may alter according to emergencies; but a
Prince, that makes the Just Laws, and his Promises the Standard of his Actions,
is surely possessed with that Divine Sanctissimum humani generis bonum. Senec.
Epist.
Wisdom which every where is reputed Sacred: for his Subjects have thereby as
sure a foundation to rely upon, as his Laws; for they may be mis-interpreted by
corrupt Judges, but nothing can vitiate, corrupt, or extinguish that vestal
Fire which burns in the Breast of a Prince, who is the Defender of his Laws and
his Faith.

Therefore Cato Censor tells us, That the Romans placed Faith next to Jupiter
in the Capitol; for that they both are the defenders of Mankind, nothing so
efficaciously preserving Government in its force, stability, and titeness, as
Justice and Faith.

As to a Prince's Providence, it is a sure Rampire; A Prince's Providence.
for who will rebel against him, whom they judge to do all things
circumspectly, and with cunctation? The opinion conceived of such a Prince, In
animos hominum illabitur admirationis praetextu velata. Valor. lib. 2. c. 1.
slides into the Souls of Men, shaded with admiration, and the Subjects soon
fall from suspecting to admiring his Conduct: for such a Prince is in his own
nature wary, and better pleased with cautelous Cunctator natura, and cui cauta
consilia cum ratione, quam foelicia ex casu placent.
Counsel with reason, than happy ones by chance, as the great Historian
observes.

A Provident Prince passes vigorously, from the beginning of his Affairs, to
the end; and disposes all things with easy order (having by his forecast
removed all difficulties by a foreplotted Chart, and foreordained Chain of
Causes) that certainly will produce their effect. Nothing Sapientis nihil esse
vovum, aut subitum, ut nunquam dicat non putaram. Laertius, lib. 6. c. 1.
can happen to him new or sudden, or that he is not provided for; so that he is
free from the imperfection of those that being surprised, have no excuse, but
that they had not thought.

Seneca says, Nothing living is so morose as man, none to be treated with
greater Arts: and Xenophon (...). Cyropaed. lib. 1.
tells us, It is easier to command all Creatures else, than man: Therefore
prudent and provident circumspection is more necessary for Princes, than for
all conditions of men besides.

This it is that makes them confident, and boldly to undertake any Action, when
the design is plotted out before, and all Circumstances measured by Scale and
Balance. For as Thucydides (...). Lib. 1.
observes, When with a negligent confidence any matter is proposed, in the
performance it totters of fails.

Therefore Herodotus (...). A Prince's Political Capacity.
rightly describes a provident Person, That he is upon that account, the best,
if in deliberating he prolong time, and be fearful of what may happen; but in
Action be confident.

As to a Prince's Political Capacity, it is a Theme too bulky for this
Treatise: it consists of all the Wisdom, Forecast, Circumspection, Adroitness
and Dexterity a Prince can use: not only to obtain a repute of Wisdom, but also
to govern his People in difficult times, with such Art, as they may feel they
are brought into a state of Tranquillity, when they were wholly despairing of
arriving at it. Every ordinary Pilot can steer the Ship in an open Sea, and
fresh Gale; it is Tempests, Quicksands, and Rocks that require Skill. King
James the First called it King-craft. It is indeed the Royalest of all Arts,
and they are the happiest Princes, who, with a good Conscience, can best use
it: All the observations through this whole Treatise, are but an illustration
of this Political Skill; which, though collected by a weak Judgment, yet being
the observations of Wise and Learned Men, may I hope not want their use.

In those dextrous Hits, his late Majesty of Glorious Memory, was very
fortunate in the Transactions with some of his Parliaments, and stemming those
Troubles, too many endeavored to involve his Reign with. In which none doubts
but his present Majesty, (who was particeps Curarum) had a great Stroke: when
every Period in those turbulent times were so ordered, that a Civil War was
prevented; so that we now reap the Benefit of them in enjoying a Blessed Calm
(which we hope and pray for, it may continue) after so threatening a Storm.

Another primary Prevention of Sedition is for a Prince to be Wealthy. A
Prince's Wealth.
Riches (...). Co^icus Vetus.
are not unelegantly called the Life and Blood of Mortals. when a private Man
is possessed of them, we observe how many he obliges, what Respect is paid
him, how easily he accomplisheth any thing he undertakes ^ How much more
therefore must it be advantageous to a Prince, Obedience is not more generally
paid to Shrines than to rich Coffers -- Te columus Regina pecunia. Thousands of
Hands are set on Work, thousands of contriving Heads consult the best for the
Prince's affairs, Millions of Weapons are fitted for his use who has a full
Exchequer: Fleets are equipped, Quisquis h^bet nummos secura navigat aura,
Fortunamque suo temperat arbitrio. Petronius.
and scour the Ocean, defending a Prince's Territories, and carrying his
Victorious Ensigns into remotest Lands, when their Admiral is ballasted with
Silver. When all Engines of Battery fail, the strongest City may be reduced by
an Ass laden with Gold.

The (...). 2. Polit. c. 7.
Philosopher tells us, It is not only necessary to have Wealth, according to
Phaleus's Constitution, suitable to the Extent of the Command; but also for the
Uses abroad, to defend the Country against the next Neighbors and Strangers.

Above all other means to prevent and suppress Sedition, The necessity of a
Standing Force.
the keeping up a sufficient Force, is the securest, and most efficacious
means; for thereby the Person, and the Government of the Prince, are surely
defended. Therefore Dio (...). Li. 42.
Cassius says, There are two things that maintain, keep, and increase any
Government, viz. Military Force and Riches.

So (...). Polit. lib. 2. c. 7.
Aristotle tells us, That all forms of Government are so to be ordered, that
they may have sufficient Warlike Force. Therefore the keeping in good
Discipline a competent Force, and having good Guards, are most necessary for a
Prince. So that I think it was but a part of Tiberius's Art of Dissimulation,
when Togonius moved, That so often as he came into the Senate, twenty Senators
armed, should be appointed for his Guard; and he made reply, Neque sibi vitam
tauti ut armis tegenda fo^e^. 6. Annal.
That his Life was not of that worth, that it should be sheltered or defended
with Arms.

Sloth never preserves Non ignavia magna Imperia contineri, sed virorum
armorumque faciendum certamen. Si foris bostem non habet, domi inveniet.
great Empires, but Arms, and Men of Valor; for it is a certain Rule, That in
all Countries, where Enemies are wanting abroad, Peace, Riches, and the
Factions that they produce, without a Competent Militia, will endanger Civil
Wars at home. Therefore a Prince must always keep subsidiary Forces, to prevent
such Mischiefs; for at one time or other, Seditious Men will be troubling the
State, and such times may happen, Is habirus animorum suit, ut pessimum facinus
auderent pauci, plures vellent, omnes paterentur. 1. Histor.
as Tacitus describes in Otho's Insurrection against Galba, That such was the
disposition of their Minds, that some few durst commit the greatest Wickedness,
more willed it, and the most, or all, did quietly suffer it: whereas by the
readiness of standing Forces, the Prince may top the Poppy Heads, and
overpower Insurrections at their first Peeping; and so terrify all the rest,
that they may keep their Huts and Cabins.

There is more need for a Prince to have a well disciplined, competent Force,
for that new raised Men are not to be relied upon. Besides Tumultuari^e.
Belgarum Cobortes, Paganorum lixarumque ignava sed procax ante periculum manus.
Subito delectu supplet^ Legiones augebantur. 4. Hist.
many other Proofs of this, we may find one memorable instance in Tacitus, who
tells us, That Herennius having in his Camp, certain tumultuary cohorts of the
Belgians, and a great number of Peasants, and followers of the Camp, (brave
Men, says he, before the danger appears, but in danger pitiful Cowards) as
soon as Julius Civilis's Army could advance, they were soon defeated: and he
ascribes the cause of it to the hasty choice of Men to supply the Legions.

Such new Ignavissimus quisque and in periculo minimum ausurus, nimii verbis,
linguae feroces. Id. 1. Histor.
Men make a glittering show at a Muster, and will brag more than any, of their
Courage; but they will sooner unsheath their Tongues than their Swords: the
Slothfullest, and those that dare do least with their Hands, being forwardest
to boast of their Exploits.

Pro Muraena.
Cicero comparing the Soldiery, and the Gownmen, gives Preference to the
Military Sagum. For he says, All the Lawyers Study, Industry, and Commendation
of Pleading, is owing to the safeguard of Warlike Virtue; the one consults
for, and defends his Client; the other is exercised in the defense of the City,
and propagating the Limits of the Empire: and the arts of the long Robe are
silenced upon the very suspicion of Tumults.

Vegetius Nihil neque sirmius, neque felicius, neque laudabilius est Republica
in qua abundant milites. Plurimum enim terroris armorum splendour importat. 2.
de Re Milit.
tells us, That nothing is more firm, more happy, or more commendable, than
that Commonwealth which abounds with Soldiers; the brightness of their Arms,
striking Terror into their Enemies: whereas their rustiness tempts them to be
assaulted, as being unprepared, and unprovided.

A standing Force (proportionable to the occasion, and no greater) is as a
Nursery to educate the growing Youth in Feats of Arms, to inure them to Labor,
Watchfullness, Discipline and Courage; for few Princes live their whole time,
without some occasion of War, either at home, or abroad.

In this Kingdom the standing Force is not so great, as to be oppressive, or
formidable to the People, and the Militia, being a Portion of the People
themselves, armed by the King's Authority, can never be repined at, by such as
are Lovers of their King and Countries Safety. To have them kept in good
Discipline, by training twice a Year, more earefully and industriously, would
be for the safety and ornament of the Government.

Only it is requisite that great Care be taken, that the Soldiery be not only
skillfully trained, but be exquisitely St. Alban 's Essays.
obedient to their Prince, and the Officers be well assured, and of good
repute, not in the least inclinable to Faction, and Sedition, holding also good
Correspondence with other great Men in the State; for the most excellent
Historian says, The Fluxa militum sides and periculum a singulis.
Faith of Soldiers is unstable, and there wants not danger from them single,
much more if they should make any formidable Conjunction.

There are infinite Examples how the standing Armies have altered the
Government, as in the Roman Empire was most usual, the Armies setting up one or
other, mostly after Nero's death; so that we find scarce a Succession of three
in many Ages.

As to a Prince's fortunateness, A Prince's Fortunateness.
it is an happy thing, and much for his Security, that his Subjects have an
Opinion of it, or, as we ought to speak, that he is the care of Heaven, and
that Divine Providence is his Tutelar. Therefore the great Orator Ad
amplitudinem and gloriam and ad res magnas gerendas divinitus adjuncta fortuna
-- dormientibus dii omnia consiciunt, and in sinum iis de coelo victoria
devolat. Pro Leg. Manl. Sed ^e -- Nos facimus fortuna deam, coeloque locamus.
says, That to greatness and Glory, and the atchieving great things, Fortune
divinely sent, is to be joined; that even to them sleeping and waking, the
Deity is Beneficial, and Victory from Heaven descends into their Lap.

Plut. de Fortuna Romans
Ancus Martius first built a Temple to Fortune, in a man's habit, and Tullus the
King ascribed all his actions to the guidance of Fortune. So Pliny Lib. 36. c.
5.
tells us, The Image of good Fortune, made by Praxitiles, was kept in the
Capitol. By all which we may note, how advantageous they thought good luck or
fortune to be for the preservation of the Government; and lest it should
forsake them (according to the opinion of that Age, that the Deities lodged in
the Statues, as the Souls in the Bodies) they chained the Image, that it might
not remove from them.

That is only reputed good Fortune among the common sort, when Princes
Prosperis tuis rebus certaturi ad obsequium; Fortunam advers^m omnes ex aequo
detrect abunt. Tacit. 2. Histor. Lib. 1. Od. 35.
affairs succeed well and according to their wishes; and when they are so, all
strive to show obedience: and when adverse fortune or evil things happen, all
do semblably withdraw their Service from their Prince.

It is of this, Horace so elegantly writes, under the name of Fortune: Te Dacus
asper, ^e profugi Scythae,
Urbesque and gentes, and Latium ferox
Regumque matres Barbarorum, and
Purpurei metuunt Tyranni.


To this fortunateness, as near akin, Of a Prince's Fame.
I subjoyn the fame and good reputation of a Prince; It fans away the
Pestilential air of Factions and Seditions; keeps young even the old age of
Princes. So Tacitus Magis sama quam vi stare res suas. 6. Annal.
says of Tiberius when he grew old, and was retired to Capraea, to indulge
himself, and had contracted much hatred, His affairs rather subsisted by fame
than other force; which, if it were true of such a Prince, how much more may it
be advantageous to one that has acquired a good fame upon the constant
practices of laudable and Princely Actions?

Therefore the same great Caeteris mortalium in eo stare consilia quid sibi
conducere arbitrentur: Principum diversam esse sortem, quibus, praecipu^ rerum
ad famam dirigenda. 4. Annal.
Historian says, That the Counsels of other Mortals consists, in doing what
they may judge conducible to their private Affairs; but the lot of Princes is
different: for they must direct their principal actions to attain fame, which
must necessarily be that which is commendable and of value.

Yet there lies some difficulty in the make of the speaking Trumpet of a
Prince's fame; for sometimes it must be fitted to vulgar conception; for they
mostly misinterpret it, as (...). Lib. 3.
Thucydides well notes, That modesty with them, carries a show of Idleness or
Cowardice, the circumspect and provident is reputed slothful, and whatever is
suddenly undertaken and hasty, is counted vigorous and manly. Therefore a
Prince that expects a good fame and report, must sometimes anticipate
expectation in his proceedings, and by surprise gain a repute of great
sagacity, and in some seasons and actions accommodate himself to the
inclinations of his People, and gratify them in their desires. So Queen
Elizabeth got more money by remitting one Subsidy (thereby gaining the opinion
that she would exact no more than was absolutely necessary) than many Princes
have got by downright representing the necessities of Supplies.

Lastly, One of the greatest preservatives against Faction and Sedition, is
when there is a blessed Harmony betwixt the Prince and his great Councils;
which when it happens otherwise, requires great prudence in both: On the
Prince's part, so to propose his demands, as the Equity, Convenience and
Justice of them may be understood; and when he finds they are unrelished, and
heats are like to arise, either to bring some new matter upon the Stage, that
the former proposal may insensibly be forgot; or by some whiles intermission of
such great Councils, give respit to his own and their second thoughts: and on
the great Convention's part, to entertain a reverend opinion of their Prince's
Judgment, and with real assurances of their Loyalty, humbly and dutifully offer
their grave Counsels without exasperation; so that the Prince may
demonstratively know, that they have no other ends in the noncompliance, but
the common good of Prince and People.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Conspiracies and Treasons.
I Have hitherto treated of Faction and Sedition, both as they tend to the
disquiet of the Government in general, and as they may influence the Court
only, or particular persons, and so we may consider them marshalled and
distinguished, Faction to be the siding of Parties, Sedition the drawing them
into Tumults; and now I come to Conspiracies and Treason, or Rebellion, as
Overt-Acts. The first two are the Root and Plant, the latter the prickly heads,
and Seeds of those Thistles.

Conspiracy differs from Rebellion, because the one may be managed by a few,
and primarily aims at the Assassinating the Prince, and secondarily at the
overthrow of the Government; whereas the other arms Multitudes against him in
hopes to worst him in open Battle.

Uncovered Hostilities, says A^ma aperta palam vites; fraus, and dolus
occulta, eaque in^vitabilia. 2. Hist.
Tacitus, may be openly avoided, but Deceit and Treachery are hidden, shrouded
Arms, and by so much the more inevitable. It is not so difficult for a strong
well prepared man to master his open Adversary, as it is for a valiant and
vigilant man to avoid hidden dangers: The Snake may lie in the Grass he treads
on, the Scorpion may sting him to death in his Bed; a Felton or Raviliack lodge
a Knife in his Bosom, when he Multa pericula neque evitare, neque (...) in
promptu est. Sallust. ad Caesarem.
neither suspects, nor fears, or can avoid it; of which, the great Caesar is a
most eminent Example.

The condition of Princes, that have Seditious Subjects, is the more hazardous,
when guarded, as they think, by their own Innocence, they are too confident of
their own Safety. When as Quibu^ de conju^^tione comperta non creditur, nisi
occisis. Lib. 40.
Livy says, the Conspiracy in part detected, is not believed till perpetrated.
A single Arm, or a few Br^t^, who value not their own lives (as Seneca
Contempsit omnes ille, qui mortem prius. Octav.
elegantly) may be Lord, or Butcher of another.

The danger is so much the greater when the Conspirators are many, provided
they be equally resolute. Quisquis vitam suam contempsit, tui dominus. Epist. 4.
They have many Multae illis manus, tibi una cervix.
Hands, and the Prince but one Life to lose; even in the Lifeguard, and among
the Halbardiers Conspirators may be listed, if the Officers be not most
circumspect to know the Inclinations and Tempers, as well as Faces of the
Soldiers.

The Life of the Prince is so valuable a Blessing, that no care, foresight, and
circumspection, can be too much to preserve it; for by such a death, Magni
fortunam populi in ruinas agat.
the happiest fortune of a great People may be brought into instant ruin.

Against these kind of Conspirators, the Clemency, Heroic Virtue, obligingest
Temper or Piety of a Prince are scarce sufficient Mail. Therefore when such
have Factious and Seditious Subjects, it ought to be their special care, and of
all their Ministers of State, and all their Subjects, to double and treble
their diligence, and use all their probablest means, to prevent, and foreslow
it; and generally such rational Omnia summa ratione gest^^etiam fortuna
sequitur.
diligent caution will have a prosperous event.

It may be useful to Princes to conceal the first Intelligence of Conspiracies,
till more fully discovered; according to that of Solum sape insidiarum remedium
esse, si non intelligantur. 1. Annal.
Tacitus, That the only remedy against Treachery, often is, That they are not
understood: by which, I suppose, he means not only pure ignorance of them, but
that they mis-ken, and conceal their knowledge of them. Yet in the interim, it
is requisite to have trusty Spies, securely mingled in all suspicious
Companies, that as the Conari ne te lateat quid quisque subditorum f^cit. 5.
Polit. c. 11.
Philosopher says, It be not concealed from them, whatever his Subjects
(especially the Malcontents) say or do. This Cromwell made one of his
Masterpieces, Fas est ab host doceri.
and by it prevented many generous designs against his Person and Usurpation.

Salust observes, That of all mischiefs to a Commonwealth, that of Conspiracy
is the worst; therefore such Impia proditio celeri poena vindicanda est. Valor.
Lib. 3. c. 6.
impious and barbarous Treacheries are to be punished with a swift Hand, and
Unrelenting Heart; as also with the severest tortures: Insidiatori, and
latroni, quae potest inferri injusta nex?
for as the Orator says, No kind of death can be unjust to a Traitor, and a
Thief.

However in the first place, it is convenient, not only that the Prince be
secured, but that all the suspected be in arcta and salva custodia, in close
and safe custody, before a Prince proceeds to Regular Justice, according to
that of the excellent Securitati consules antequam vindictae. 12. Annal.
Tacitus, To consult Security before Revenge.

In detecting Conspirators, and exposing them to the hatred of the People,
great future security comes to a Prince; therefore strict examination, bolting
out the Truth, undeniable Testimony, and a fair open Trial, render the
Conspirators more odious, and the Prince's Justice more conspicuous, as well as
his future security more permanent. Otherwise a Prince may b^ ^alumniated
Crebro vulgi rumore laceraberis, tanquam viros intontes, ob invidiam aut metum,
extinxeris. 15. Annal.
That he destroyed the innocent for envy or fear. However it may be rationally
presumed, that whoever clandestinely whispers such things against a Prince, may
either be reputed a confederate, or wisher of success to such a Conspiracy.

It is to be considered, that it is natural to the Common People, to have a
Commiseration of those when they suffer, whom they have pursued with the direst
imprecations to the Scaffold. It is the custom of the vulgar, changeable on
sudden occasions, to be as prone to pity as they were immeasurable in Cruelty,
as the excellent Est mos vulgo mutabili, subita, and tam prono in misericordiam
quam immodicum saevitia fuerit^ 1. Hist.
Historian observes in Cossus's appeasing the Soldiers, who were enraged
against the Helvetians.

It were indeed much better (if the safety of the Government would suffer it)
to heal the vicious Melius sanare vitiosas parts, quam exsecare. 2. ad Attic.
Ep. 5.
parts, rather than cut them off; but it is a most certain Rule of the same
Omnis animadversio, non ad ejus qui punit aliquem, sed ad Reipublicae
utilitatem referenda. 2. de Offic.
Orator, That the sentencing of Criminals, should not relate to him that
punishes, but to the profit of the Commonweal; that is, not to be so ordered,
as the Prince should be judged to consult only his own Revenge or safety, but
the Peace, Tranquillity, and Prosperity of his People.

Therefore the excellent Non tam ut ipsi percant, quam ut alios a pereundo
deterreant. 1. de Ira.
Seneca says, It becomes not Princes to chastise only, that the guilty may
perish, but that others may be affrighted from perishing. For it is a ferina
rabies, says he, to rejoice in Blood and Wounds. Hence all good Princes
unwillingly, and with great torment to themselves, inflict Capital Punishments;
nor is execution in most cases performed while the Prince's Wrath, and Rage,
(how just soever) is upon him; because that Mediocrity then cannot be observed,
which ought to be, betwixt much and little; therefore all Punishments are most
kindly that are more patrio, lest that Sarcasm of Qui puniendi causam habent,
modum non habent. 2. de Clem.
Seneca be verified, Though the cause of punishment be great, yet a Mean or
Measure is not observed.

So Tacitus instructs us, That though it be against the guilty, and such as
deserve to be extreme examples; yet a Prince should have mercy, not so much for
the profit of the Republic, but that multitudes should not be consumed, for
the cruelty of one, as the People in an overglutting revenge will be apt to
censure.

Therefore caution should be used, that the punishment be not overspreading, as
to Heads of many Families, lest if they be illustrious, and of great Interest,
the Prince attract more Enemies, and as the Latin Philosopher Parents
liberique eorum qui interfecti sunt, and prepinqui, and ami^i in locum
singulorum succedunt. 2. de Clementia.
says, The Parents, Children, Kinsmen, and Friends of the slain succeed in
their places, to meditate revenge, if there be any hopes of success by it. Such
an Hydra especially is despairing Rebellion. Yea, though in China, Japan, and
other of the Eastern Countries, whole Families are commonly extirpated for the
crime of one, yet no Civilized Nations imitate it, no not when Rebellion proves
most formidable.

If an illustrious Person be in Conspiracy, to whom a Prince and his Subjects
have been obliged (if it may safely be done) the punishment may be Poenam, si
tuto poteris, donabis; sin m^nus, temp. rabis. (...) Clem.
attempered, if the Crime cannot be pardoned. So Livia told Augustus, That the
Criminal being secured, cannot hurt, but in his Pardon the Prince might augment
his Fame: as King James the First did to the Lord Colha^, and his Companions,
when he concealed the discovery of their Pardon, till the Prisoners were upon
the Scaffold, and expected nothing but the last stroke of the terrible Axe.

As Physicians in Blood-letting and purging (if in so great a Theme so low an
example may be used) with the bad humors, must necessarily evacuate some of
the good: So in Conspiracies and Rebellions, some may not be so maliciously
inclined in their own natures, but by their popular Facile studia vulgi ad se
trabunt, vel inviti.
temper, or easiness to be seduced, be caressed to be partakers in some
pretended reformations, the black Arts and Designs being hid from them, and so
be made properties. If therefore the Prince can be secured, that either, in
their own natures, they are not prone to Rebellion, or while they are alive,
they can never expect to head parties again; Banishment may be sufficient
punishment for them.

So when, in Nero's Vt consuleret sibi, and turbis, seque prave defam^tibus
subtraberet. Esse illi per Asiam agros, in quibus and tuta and inturbida
juventa frueretur. Tacit. 14. Annal.
time, upon the appearing of a Comet, it was bruited that it portended the
change of a King, and R^belli^us Plautus was celebrated as the Person: Nero
writ Letters to Plautus, That he should consult his own good, and withdraw
himself from the Rabbles defaming of him to his prejudice; and having
Possessions in Asia, he might enjoy his blooming Years, undisturbed, and in
safety. Which was most humanly done, for by that he spared Plautus, and yet
provided for the quiet of the Commonwealth.

But as the merciful temper of a Prince in some cases is most Christian and
Prudent; so in others, too much Clemency may encourage Sedition; and
consequently Treason. For as the Orator Maxima illecebra peccandi impunitatis
spes. Pro Milone.
says, The hopes of escaping punishment is the greatest allurement to do evil,
a wicked Subject fearing that Prince Apud quem conditum, imo constrictum est
ferrum. Seneca.
little, who wears a Padlock on his Sword.

There are few that eschew evil for the Turpitude of it, but for the fear of
punishment: therefore in such dangerous matters as Conspiracies, and Rebellion,
the edge of the Prince's Sword is always to be sharp: and the Council of
Tiberius Corruptus simul, and corruptor, aeger and flagrans animus, haud
lenioribus remediis restinguendus est, quam libidinibus ardescit. 3. Annal.
in his Epistle to the Senate is to be followed, That the corrupt, and the
corruptor, the sick and burning Soul, is scarce to be quenched with milder
remedies, than such as bear proportion to the lusts it burns with, of what kind
soever it be.

The punishment of a few wicked Persons restrains the malevolent effects of
many, as Cicero Vnius improbi supplicio, muliorum improbitates coercere. 3. in
Verrem.
notes: Nor, says Neque aliud gliscentis discordiae remedium, quam si unus
alterve, maxim prompti, subverterentur. Tacit. 4. Annal.
Tacitus, is there any other remedy of glowing Discord, than that one or other
of the most forward be orewhelmed, and examplary Justice be executed upon them.
Though the Gangreen begin but in in a Toe or Finger; yet it may require
Amputation, lest a Leg or an Arm be in danger: so the skillful Gardener prunes
his cankered Branches more speedily than the luxuriant.

By punishing the Advisers, Fomenters, and Actors of horrid things (as purging
Sacrifice Rerum atro^ium ministros, veluti placulares publici odii.
of public Hatred) atonement is made to public Justice, and the less crimmal
have the greater Obligations to dutiful Repentance; for the Punishment of such
Ringleaders and Coryphaei, is not so much the revenge of the Prince as of the
Commonwealth. Otherwise the Prince by Ne sanguinem nostram largeas, dum P^aucis
sceleratis parcis, bonos omnes proditum eas. Sallust. in Catilinam.
sparing a few Wretches, will be Prodigal of his better Subjects Blood, which
those Criminals would, as soon as they had obtained Power, more profusely shed.

Therefore it becomes all good Subjects to bestir themselves for the safety of
the Prince, to hasten, says Tanquam ad clarum and beneficum sidus certatim
advolare, objicere pro illo mucronibus insidiatorum p^ratiss^mi. De Clem. lib.
1. c. 3.
Seneca, to his Standard, esteeming him as a luminous and beneficial
Constellation, and most ready for his safety, to expose themselves betwixt the
Traitors unsheathed Swords, and his Royal Person.

I cannot more emphatically express the clemency of our Princes, and their Laws
against Treason, or better discover the Limits and Bounds of Punishments, and
the desire that our Princes have had, That none should fall under the guilt of
Treason, than by reciting the Preambles to the Statutes, made in King Edward
the Sixth's, and Queen Marys time, concerning Treasons.

The words of the Statute of King Edward 10 Ed. 6. c. 12.
the Sixth, are, Nothing being more Godly, more sure, move to be wished and
desired, betwixt a Prince, the Supreme Head and Ruler; and the Subjects whose
Governor and Head he is, than on the Prince's Part great Clemency and
Indulgence, and rather too much forgiveness, and remissness of his Royal Power,
and just Punishment, than exact Severity and Justice to be showed: and on the
Subjects part, That they should obey rather for love, than for fear of his
strait and severe Laws: yet such Events sometimes happen in the Commonwealth,
that it is necessary and expedient, for the repressing of the Insolence and
unruliness of Men, and foreseeing, and providing Remedies against Rebellion,
Insurrection, or such mischiefs, that sharper Laws, and an harder Bridle should
be made, to stay those Men, that might else be occasion, cause, and Authors of
farther Inconvenience.

That as in Tempest, or Winter, a coarse Garment is convenient; in calm or warm
Weather, a more liberal, race, or lighter Garment, both may, and ought to be
followed and used: So that sometimes there have been occasion at diverse
Parliaments, to make and enact certain Laws and Statutes, which might seem and
appear to Men of exterior Realms, and the Subject, very strait, sore, extreme
and terrible; although they were then, when they were made, not without great
Consideration and Policy moved and established, and for the times, to the
avoidance of further inconvenience, very expedient and necessary; and when
Princes are more indulgent, it is to provoke the Subject, with Clemency showed
on the Prince's behalf, to more love and kindness to him, and upon Trust they
will not abuse the same, but rather be encouraged thereby, more faithfully, and
with more diligence to serve him, etc.

In the Statute of Queen Mary, 1 Mar. c. 8.
of the repeal of certain Treasons, Felonies, and Praemuni^e's, wherein she
reduces all to 25 Ed. 3. the words are; Forasmuch as the State of every King,
Ruler, and Governor of every Realm, Dominion, or Commonweal, stands, and
consists more assured by the love and favor of the Subject toward their
Sovereign Ruler and Governor, than in Dread and Fear of Laws, made with
rigorous Pains, and extreme Punishment, for not obeying of their Sovereign
Ruler and Governor: and Laws also justly made for the Preservation of the
Commonweal, without extreme Penalty, or Punishment, are more often for the most
part obeyed and kept, than Laws and Statutes made with great and extreme
Punishment, etc. Therefore some are repealed.

By these the Clemency of the Princes is discovered, and the reason of enacting
severe Laws in such Cases, in Terrorem, is cleared.

I must refer all other Discourses of the Laws against Treason, to the Learned
Books writ on that Subject, and only note what a Transcendent and multiplied
Rebellion, p. 25. See Sir. Tho. Wyat's Speech, at his Execution, in
Hollingshead, well worth perusing by all concerned.
grave Author says, That if we peruse all our Books, Records, and Histories,
we shall find it a Principle in Law, a Rule in Reason, and truth in Experience,
That Treason does ever produce fatal and final Destruction to the offenders,
and never attains the desired End, although infinite mischiefs are effected by
it. For Conspirators and Traitors one way or other have generally come to
condign Punishment.

If what I have hitherto laid down, work any good Effect upon the Subjects in
general, to keep them in their Duty to their Sovereign, and his Laws, or have
afforded them such Rules for Obedience, or dehortments from Faction, Sedition,
Conspiracies, and Rebellion, as I wish; I have attained the end for which I
write: which is only to satisfy all sorts of Subjects, how excellently
composed the Government is, that our Kings cannot, or have any Interest, to
rule Arbitrarily.

Therefore it will be the duty, advantage, and true Interest of all Subjects,
so to comport themselves to the Government, as to consider the excellent
Foundations upon which it is built, that neither by the Cunning of unquiet
Spirits, the pretenders of Reformation of abuses, the ambition of the aspirers,
nor especially by the plausible Charms of the Republicans, they be ever induced
to disquiet the Government, or rebel against it; lest in conclusion they bring
upon themselves, and Posterity, such a Slavery, as we had too bloody an Example
of in the late Calamitous times: and that above all things, they consider that
excellent Saying of the best of Quippe in turb^ and discordias pessimo cuique
plurima vis: pax and quies bonis Artibus indigent. 4. Hist. initio.
Historians, That to stir up Dissentions, and troubles, the worst Men commonly
have the greatest Influence; but Peace and quietness are not established, but
by Men of rare gifts, and excellent Virtue.

FINIS.
THE Author being at great distance from the Press, and sending up his Copy by
Parcels, which (by reason of his Employment in his Profession) he was
constrained sometimes to commit to the Care of others; The following Chapter
was not sent up till most of the Treatise was Printed. Therefore he chooses
rather to place it at the end, than to disturb the order of the Pages, and
desires the Candid Reader will peruse it next immediately after the 15th.
Chapter, it being designed to have preceded the 16th. Chapter of The King's
Sovereignty.

CHAP. (XVI.) Of the Benefit and Excellency of Hereditary Monarchy.
THE Arist. Pol. l. 3. c. 10. (...) The Advantage of Hereditary Succession in
Private Families. Aristotle's Opinion.
Philosopher dividing Kingly Government into four kinds, as I have before
instanced, allows all to be Haereditary, except the Aesymnaetian, which was
Elective; and since in many places, he affirms Kingdoms to be more durable than
Commonwealths, we may conclude that the fundamental cause of that duration is
the Lineal Succession.

We experience in private Families (where a long Series of Ancestors have
transmitted Inheritances to Posterity) how by the settledness, and increase of
their Estates, their alliances, and the Employments they have had in their
respective Ages, they have acquired Honor, Renown, Interest and Stability;
that not only a greater Respect is paid to them, than to others of a later
Rise, but they are thereby enabled, upon many accounts to manage public, or
private affairs, with more sure success, and repute, than those than have not
acquired such a nodosam Aeternitatem.

(...) De Repub. l. 3. c. 11.
Aristotle makes that (...), or natural Love of Parents to their Children, to
be one reason of the Succession of Sons to Fathers, in their Kingdoms: thence
he makes it improbable, that they who have obtained the Sovereignty, should not
deliver it to their Children, because it would discover a Virtue beyond the
ordinary Elevation of humane Nature, to prefer the Benefit and good of the
People, by leaving them the Liberty of choosing, upon every avoidance, the most
worthy, (if such a Prince's Son appeared not so) rather than to establish the
Principality in their own Family.

(...) p^ly. (...). lib. 6. p. 455. D. Edit. Wickl. 1509. Several Reasons why
Succession is to be preferred before Election.
Polybius speaking of Kings being most eminent for Wisdom, Polybius his Opinion.
Justice, and Valor (whereby they drew the People to reverence them, and
consequently to submit themselves to their Conduct and Command) says, That the
Son (having his education under such a virtuous wise Father, whereby he had
been present with him when affairs of the greatest Importance had been debated)
in common presumption was judged to be better capacitated to govern, than any
of a strange Family, and so none would envy him his dignity, but all readilier
judged him the fittest to succeed. And there is good reason to consider the
cause of it; for Government is an Art not easily attained to, and by the
unskilfullness in the proper Rules and Maxims, the wrong Applications, the
Ignorance in pursuing the right Methods, and choosing fit Instruments, the
Factious and Populace get advantages to make unfortunate times. Therefore those
Monarchs, who from their Infancies are trained up, and accustomed to
Instructions in the Rudiments of Government, as they grow up, must more readily
comprehend them, must attain the better understanding of the great affairs, and
secret reasons of St^^^, be more quick, apprehensive, and sagacious, in
perceiving what is conducive to the common good, and what not; and so more
ready in all public Dispatches, than such who have not been educated with all
these Advantages. Besides, Governors at first must be to seek in understanding
the nature of great Affairs; so that one may as well expect Dr. Nalson's Common
Interest, p. 113.
a Man taken from the Plough should be able to Conn a Ship, and carry her an
East India Voyage, as that a Person (though of the greatest natural and
acquired Parts) should at first be fit to Pilot the Government, or skilful and
dexterous in the steerage of the important affairs of a public State: and (as
in Republics it falls out) by that time he has arrived at a competent Skill,
he must resign his Place and Power to others, as raw and unexperienced as he
was. Whereas Succession in Monarchy does effectually prevent this
Inconvenience, and (which is of great moment) it gives them an Interest, and
desire of designing well for the public good, safety, and security of the
People, and the opportunity of finishing whatever is well begun.

For though it have happened by the Succession of a weak, or vicious Prince,
that damage and infelicity have befallen the People; yet it is very rare in
History, that two such succeed one another. So we find in this Kingdom, that
Ed. 1. and Ed. 3. brought as great Honor and Renown to their Countries, as
their Fathers had Misfortunes; and even in such Princes Reigns, the Calamities
that have befallen their Kingdoms, have rather sprung from the Potency of
Factions (that took the advantage by the weakness of the Prince, to bring him
to Contempt, that they might obtain the managery of affairs) than from other
Causes. For even under such unfortunate Princes, if it were not for factious
Disturbances, the Laws and good Order might, during their Reigns, conserve
their Kingdoms in Peace.

Whereas in Kingdoms that are Elective, The Inconveniences that happen where
Right Succession is not observed.
Competitors and Candidates cause not only great Disturbances and Mischiefs at
the Instant (as we have infinite Examples when the Roman Emperors were chosen
by the Factions of the Senate or Army, as also in Germany, before the expedient
of choosing a King of the Romans, and in the Miseries that have befallen Poland)
but Aemulations and Animosities have been continued for Ages among the prime
Nobility: and thence it is that the (...) Lib. 5. Polit. c. 10. Giphanii
Comment.
Philosopher so long since has ascribed it one of the Principal Causes of the
Destruction of a Kingdom, when there is Discord in the Royal Family, or, as his
Interpreter says among the participes Regni, as Brethren and Kindred of the
Royal Family, as In vita Cleomenis and Aegidis.
Plutarch tells us in the Kingdom of Sparta, and as Justin gives us an account
of the slaughter of Brethren and Kinsmen in the Kingdom of Syria, and as it
occasioned the Destruction of the flourishing Kingdom of Egypt, by the
Competition betwixt Ptolomy and Cleopatra, and as our Ancestors sadly
experienced in the Civil Wars betwixt the Houses of York and Lanca^^^, and
France in the Faction of Orleance and Burgundy, and of later Date in the
Kingdom of Hungary, betwixt King John and the Emperor Ferdinand.

If therefore such Calamities befall Countries, where Factions ruin their
Peace; how much more shall we judge the miserable Confusions will be, when any
shall challenge a Power to make a Breach in the Royal Chain of Succession,
especially when we find even at Rome, upon the Election of the Pope, by custom
the People plunder the Palace of the Cardinal who is elected Pope: and since
that outrage is committed where such an one is chosen, as is owned by so great
a part of Europe to be Christ's Vicar, we are not to wonder, that at the Death
of the Ottoman Heir, the Janissaries and Soldiery rifle and plunder Jews and
Christians, and cease not to commit all manner of Outrages, till the new Grand
Signior, by his Presence, and Bounty, puts an end to them.

Therefore as a grave Nalson's Common Interest, p. 118.
Author observes, He that has not deposed Reason, the King of his Soul, and
elected in its place Prejudice and Passion, to govern there, or dare credit the
universal Experience of the World, must be convinced of the great, necessary,
and desperate Inconveniences of a long Interregnum, and elective Monarchy; and
that a lineal Succession is the best Barrier against assaults from abroad, and
is that sacred, perpetual, vital Energy, which preserves Government from
internal Putrefaction, and secures us from one most dangerous Inconvenience, of
having another Family to provide for. Therefore the 10. Annal.
Excellent Historian most wisely observes, That Minoris est discriminis,
Principem nasci quam sumi; That Subjects, more naturally submit to an
undoubted, unquestionable Title (when the Government descends in the same
manner as other Inheritances, with due respect to the singleness of
Sovereignty) than to new Princes, the worth of whom, and their Families are
untried.

This leads me to consider, that this right of Succession flows from the Law of
Right of Succession, p. 149.
Nature, is founded on the Law of God, and Nations.

First, That is accounted to flow from the Law of Nature, Hereditary Succession
agreeable to the Law of Nature.
which every Man finds grafted in his own Heart, and which is obeyed without
any other Law, and for which Men neither seek, nor can give any other distinct
reason: all which holds in this case. For who doubts, when he hears of an
hereditary Monarchy, but that the next in Blood must succeed, and for which we
need no positive Law? nor does any Man enquire for a further Reason, being
satisfied therein, by the Principles of his own Heart. From this ground it is,
that though a remoter Kinsman did possess as Heir, he could by no length of
time, prescribe a valid right: because no man (as Lawyers conclude) can
prescribe a right against the Law of Nature; therefore the Law Cum ratio
naturalis. ff. de bonis damnati.
says, Cum ratio naturalis, quasi lex quaedam tacita, liberis, parentum
haereditatem adjecerit, veluti ad debitam successionem eos vocando: propter
quod suorum haeredum nomen eis indultum est, adeo ut ne a parentibus quidem ab
ea Successione amoveri possint. So in the Matthew. 21.
Parable, the Husbandman (who is presumed to understand nothing but the Law of
Nature) is brought in, saying, This is the Heir, let us kill him, and seize on
his Inheritance. So the Et Sect. emancipati. Institut. de Haered. quae ab
Intestato.
Law further says, Praetor, naturalem aequitatem sequutus, iis etiam bonorum
possessionem, contra 12 Tabularum leges, and contra jus civil permittit. By
which it is apparent, that this right of Nature was stronger than the Laws of
the twelve Tables; though these were the most ancient, and chief Statutes of
Rome.

This holds also in the Collateral Succession of Brothers, and others,
according to that, L. hac part. ff. unde cognati.
Hac part, Proconsul, naturali aequitate motus, omnibus cognatis permittit
bonorum possessionem, quos sanguinis ratio vocat ad haereditatem. For those who
are now Brothers to a present Prince, have been Sons to the former; therefore
as St. Paul says, If a Son, then an Heir, except he be secluded by the
Existence, and Succession of an elder Brother.

Secondly, Agreeable to the law of God.
That the Law of God gives right of Succession to proximity of Blood, is
manifest, in that, if a Man has no Numb. 27. v. 9, 10.
Son, or Daughter, his Inheritance shall descend upon his Brother; and so God
determines in the case of Numb. 36.
Zelophead's Daughters; and so 2 Chronicles. 22.1.
Ahaziah was made King (though the youngest) in his Fathers stead, because,
says the Text, The Arabians had slain all the eldest: which clearly shows, That
by Gods Law, he could not have succeeded, if the eldest had been alive. So we
see the birthright was owned in Esau, but that he sold it, the privilege of
which is there fully discovered, not only in discovering the right of
Primogeniture, but likewise in the Donation of Parents to their Children; that
Blessing being like the last Will and Testament.

Thirdly, Agreeable to the Law of Nations.
As to the Law of Nations, it might be made clear by the recital of all the
Laws of Kingdoms that are Hereditary, and not Elective, That degrees of
Succession were exactly observed, according to that of De Repub. lib. 6. c. 5.
Bodin, Ordo, non tantum naturae, and divinae legis, sed omnium ubique gentium
hoc postulat. So Pope In c. grand. de supplenda neglig. Pralat.
Innocent, In regnis haereditariis caveri non potest, ne filius aut frater
succedat; and so in all Histories of Hereditary Monarchies, we find it where
Potent Usurpation has not obstructed the free current, or by some violent
means derived it into another Channel.

If Successions of so great importance had not been fixed by immutable Laws of
God and Nature, the various and inconstant inclinations of present Governors
(says a very Jus Regium p. 158.
Judicious Author) had made the Nations whom they governed very unhappy: If
they yielding to the importunities of Mothers, or Stepmothers, or clouded by
the Jealousy of Flatterers, or Favorites; or upon some unaccountable
aversion, should place the Crown upon what Head they pleased. Therefore God did
very justly and wisely settle this Succession, that both King and People might
know, That it is by him that Kings Reign, and Kingdoms are secured in Peace
against Factions.

To come more particularly to our own Country: The Monarchy of great Britain
and Ireland, The British Monarchy Hereditary.
is undoubtedly as firmly established hereditarily in his Majesty's Blood and
Family, as it is in any Monarch's in Europe.

A late French Of the States and their Powers, p. 68.
Author, speaking of the Succession of the Crown of France, says, That the
Election of the Kingdom is not of one Person only, but of the blood, and
operates so far, as there is life in that blood; The blood being chosen with
the Prerogative of Primogeniture: So that when one Person of the blood is dead
(the Power by the same Prerogative being transferred to the blood) remains and
rests in the blood still living, and in him of the blood who succeeds by that
Prerogative, and in none else.

The Majesty Royal (says a Majestas Intemerata.
profound Lawyer and Antiquary upon the murder of King Charles the First)
expired not, nor was left adhering to the bloody Axe or Block. It wandered not
like Adrian's Ghost, nor hovered in an Airy abstraction. For the King, or
rather the Kings line (says another Finch, p. 83.
great Lawyer) is a name of Continuance, which, as the Law presumes, shall
always remain as Head and Governor of the People. For the English Monarchy
Coke 4. Report. Praef.
knows no Interregnum, being Successive by inherent Birthright, whereby
infinite inconveniences are avoided: so that the young Phoenix stays not to
arise out of the Spicy ashes of the old, but the Soul of Royalty, by a kind of
Transmigration, passes immediately out of one body into another; and in the
same manner, will every right Heir acquire the Royalty after his Predecessor
cease to be.

Therefore the judicious Lord Interregnum aut tituli suspensionem ^aeges Regni
non permittere. Hist. H. 7. p. 26.
Verulam observes, That H. 7. knowing that the Laws permit not any interim,
suspension, or stay of the Title, and having no mind to own his Queens Title
the best, (She being the Heiress of the house of York, as he in some respects
was Heir of the House of Lancaster) he ordered the Act so, that it should
neither be by recognition, nor his Title be established by a new Law: Potius
media via institit, simplicis stabilimenti. Ideo verbis tectis and utrinque
nutantibus his, ut haereditas Coronae resideres, remaneret and continuaretur in
Rege.
but chose a milder way, viz. of simple Establishment in covert words,
interpretable several ways, that the inheritance of the Crown should reside,
remain, and continue in him.

So King James in his (...), p. 209. tells the Prince, That at the very moment
of the expiring of the King Reigning, the nearest and lawful Heir enters in
his place; and so to refuse him, or intrude another, is not to hold out the
Successor from coming in, but to expel and put out their Righteous King.

So Sir Report 7, 8, 10, 11. Calvin' s Case, Watson and Clark' s Case, 1 Jac. 1.
Edward Coke affirms, That it is a known Maxim of the Laws, That in the moment
of the descent of the Crown, the person on whom it descends (which is the next
immediate Heir only) becomes complete and absolute King, to all intents and
purposes. And so he says, The second Son of the King of England after 3.
Instit. 8.
the death of the firstborn is eldest Son, within the Statute of 25 E. 3. as
it was resolved in the case of Prince Charles, concerning the Duchy of
Cornwall.

It would be a tedious work to recite all the Authorities in this Case may be
found in the Statutes and Law Books. I will content my self, instead of all
others, with the Act of Cap. 2.
Recognition 1 Jacobi primi, wherein, The Recognition of King James the First.
after the two Houses had enumerated the benefits by the Conjunction of the
Houses of York and Lancaster, and the uniting of England and Scotland in the
Kings Person, and that They agnize their constant Faith, Obedience and Loyalty
to him, and his Royal Progeny, The worlds of the Act are, In most humble and
lowly manner, do beseech your most Excellent Majesty (as a memorial to all
posterity among the Records of your High Court of Parliament for ever to
endure, of our Loyalty, Obedience, and hearty humble affection) it may be
published and declared in the High Court of Parliament, and enacted by
Authority of the same, That we (being bound thereunto by the Laws of God and
man) do recognize and acknowledge (and thereby express our unspeakable joys)
that immediately upon the dissolution and decease of Elizabeth late Queen of
England, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, etc. did by inherent
Birthright, and lawful undoubted Succession, descend and come to your most
Excellent Majesty, as being lineally, justly, and lawfully, next and sole Heir
of the blood Royal of this Realm, as is aforesaid, etc. and thereunto we most
humbly and faithfully do submit and oblige our selves, our Heirs, and
Posterities for ever, until the last drop of our blood be spent; and do beseech
your Majesty to accept the same as the first fruits of this High Court of
Parliament, of our Loyalty and Faith to your Majesty, and your Royal Progeny
and Posterity for ever.

By which, it first appears that the Crown of England is an unalterable Entail,
and the reversion in him only by whom Kings reign, without any Election or
consent of the People, otherwise than by acknowledging the lawful Right of the
Kings, derived from God by their blood to them.

Also from this Recognition we may consider, How to understand the Act made by
Queen Elizabeth against the Claims of Mary Queen of Scots.
Secondly, what to think of that Act of Queen Elizabeth, That if any Person
shall affirm that the Parliament of England has not full power to bind, and
govern the Crown in point of Succession and descent, that such a Person, during
the Queens life, shall be guilty of High Treason. For we must consider that by
the words bind and govern, we may conceive the sense to be, That the Parliament
is Judge where there are differences Jus Regium, p. 181.
betwixt Competitors in nice and controvertible points, which cannot be
otherwise decided. So that such temporary Acts as these, are to be interpreted,
and restrained by other uncontroverted Laws.

We must also look upon it as made to secure the Queen against Mary Queen of
Scots, and to let her know it was to no purpose for her to design any thing
against the Right or Person of Queen Elizabeth; upon that ground, as may be
presumed, the Queen of Scots might claim, for that Queen Elizabeth by Act of
Parliament had been declared a Bastard. Therefore to let her know, that it was
to no purpose to insist upon any such claim, and that her other Right as next
undoubted Heir by blood to the Crown, might be altered or governed, this Act
was made: So that we must from hence conclude, That it was to be reckoned only
as one of those Statutes which the Law says are made ad terrorem, and ex
terrore only; which may appear the more evidently, because it was never made
use of. For it is to be mainly considered, that this Law being made to exclude
Queen Mary and the Scottish Line, as appears by that clause wherein it is
declared, That every Person or Persons of what degree or Nation soever they be,
who shall during the Queens life, declare or publish that they have Right to
the Crown of England, shall be disinabled to enjoy the Crown in Succession.
Therefore it was never valid: Id. p. 183.
For if it had been good, King James might have thereby been excluded by that
person who should have succeeded next to the Scottish Race: For it is
undeniable, that Queen Mary, did during Queen Elizabeth's life, pretend Right
to the Crown, upon the account that Queen Elizabeth was declared Bastard.
Therefore the calling in of King James, after this Act, and the acknowledging
his Title, do clearly evince, that the Parliament of England knew, they had no
Power to make such an Act; and we may conclude, That such Politic and
Temporary provisions find no approbation, either by the Laws, or succeeding
ages (who in all such cases judge more impartially:) therefore it is much more
honorable, for the Legislative Power, to found their Laws upon Justice and
Right, rather than upon the humors and Interests of those, who desire but the
shadow of a Law to countenance their designs.

It must be owned that King Edward the Second was deposed, The Injustice in
deposing Kings.
for making use of Gaveston and the Spencers. But how illegally, all succeeding
ages have acknowledged; and it rather shows how extravagant the People, and
their Representatives are in their humors, than how just their Powers are: For
by the same parity of Reason, the horrid Murder of the blessed Martyr, or the
Murder of Edward the Second, may be justified as his deposing may be; and the
like may be said of King Richard the Second, against whom the Fourteenth
Article was, that he refused to allow the Laws made in Parliament; which had
been in effect to consent, that the two Houses should have been the Sovereign,
and that he had transferred the Royal Power on them. Whoever desires further
satisfaction, may consult Arnisaeus in that Treatise, Quod nulla ex causa
subditis fas sit contra legitimum Principem arma sumere.

Whereas Richard Duke of York in Henry the Sixth's time, after he had been
declared Heir Apparent, was by another Act of Parliament declared incapable of
Succession; all that can be inferred from it is, When Acts of Parliament to be
less esteemed.
That Acts of Parliament (when they are bottomed upon private affections to
Parties in times of Faction and civil War) are not to be looked upon with that
veneration, as when they regularly pass, in times that are calm, when no potent
Persons oppress Justice, or usurping Powers hinder faithful Judges from
expounding the Laws soundly. Therefore we find, in the claim of the said Duke
of York, that it is more consentaneously to Law expressed, That no Act takes
place, or is of force against him, that is right inheritor of the Crown, as
accords (says the Record) with Gods Laws, and all natural Laws: and we may
observe that though there was a Succession of three Kings of the House of
Lancaster, who had usurped the Crown for Sixty Years; yet all our Historians,
and the Laws call those Kings de facto and not de jure. Such a true sense of
just and right the uninterested Ages have had of that Usurpation ever since:
although there were Acts of Parliament carefully penned, to corroborate ^he
Title of the house of Lancaster during that time, and all ways and means used
to have established that Line; yet by virtue of the Right of Lineal Succession,
Edward the Fourth, Son to the said Duke of York, came to be owned lawful King
of England, though the Right of his Family had been interrupted ever since
Henry the Fourth usurped the Crown: which might have been a sufficient document
to all Ages, not to have attempted any sort of praeterition of the Right Heir.

Yet we find that unsuccessful attempts were made by H. 8. contrary to the
fundamentals of Succession, which, when rightly considered, I hope will
convince all, of how little validity, even such Acts are to be reputed.
Therefore because these have been made use of for Precedents, I shall speak a
little more fully to them.

In the 25 of H. 8. Cap. 22.
the Marriage with Queen Katherine is made void, Concerning the several
Entailings of the Crown by King Henry the Eighth.
and that with Queen Anne's declared good, and an Entail made on the Issue Male
or Female, and the Penalty for hurting the Kings Person, disturbing his Title
to the Crown, or slandering the present Marriage is judged High Treason; and
Anno 26. Cap. 2.
a strict Oath is enjoined to observe the Succession there appointed.

But 28 H. 8. Cap. 7.
it is declared that the former Act was made upon a pure, perfect and clear
foundation, thinking the Marriage then had between his Majesty and the Lady
Anne, (they are the words of the Act) in their Consciences, to have been pure,
sincere and perfect, and good, etc. till now of late, that it appears that
the said Marriage was never good or consonant to the Laws, but utterly void and
of none effect; and so both the Marriage with the Princess Katherine and the
Lady Anne are declared void, and their Issue made illegitimate; and the perils
are enumerated that might ensue to the Realm, for want of a declared lawful
Successor to the Crown; and the Act impowers the King (if he dye without Issue
of his body) that he may limit the Crown to any, by his Letters Patents, or his
last Will in Writing: and it is declared Treason to declare either of the
Marriages to be good, or to call the Lady Mary or Lady Elizabeth Legitimate,
and the former Oath is made void: and this may be judged to be procured when he
resolved to settle the Crown on Henry Fitz Roy, Duke of Richmond, his natural
Son.

But after the Birth of Prince Edward, 38 H. 8. Cap. 1.
another alteration is made, whereby the Crown is entailed on Prince Edward,
and for want of his Issue on the Lady Mary, and for want of her Issue, on the
Lady Elizabeth; and for want of Issue of the King, or them, then the King is
empowered by his Letters Patents, or last Will, to dispose of the Crown at his
free will.

It is therefore to be considered, that in such a juncture of affairs, when the
legality of the Kings Marriages were so disputable, by reason that two of the
legal Successors (upon niceties not of nature, but of the Popes (...) for
Divorcing) were declared Bastards, there was some ^eason 25 H. 8. c. 22.
that the Act should express that the Ambiguity of several Titles pretended to
the Crown (then not perfectly declared, but that men might expound them to
every ones sinister affection and sense, contrary to the right legality of
Succession, and Posterity of the lawful Kings and Emperors of the Realm) has
been the cause of that great effusion and destruction of men's blood; and the
like cause will produce the like effect, as the words are.

Upon such grounds it was very plausible to declare by Act of Parliament the
Succession. But this does not prove that where the Right of nature is clear,
that the Parliament may invert the same: and they teach us how dangerous it is
to leave Parliaments to the Impression of Kings (when it is too obvious, the
first of these Laws was made to gratify the Kings affection to Queen Anne) in
the case of naming a Successor; as it is also to expose Kings to the
Arbitrariness of Parliaments. And we may well infer ( H. 8. taking such care by
his Parliaments to legitimate and illegitimate his Issue, according to the
present interests of his Affairs and Passions) that such contradictory Acts
could not be all true; and though the Responses from Delphos or any Oracles of
the Gentile ages, might miss the truth as much, yet by their dubious answers,
they forfeited not their reputations so much.

We may also note Jus Regium, p. 178, 179.
that by God Almighty's Providence, and the care of his own Laws, the Duke of
Richmond was removed by death, to prevent the unjust Competitors, and Prince
Edward was born; and by the same Providence, and the sense the Subjects had of
the great Fundamental of Hereditary Succession, contrary to some of these Acts,
and what Edward the Sixth did in settling the Crown upon the Lady Jane Gray,
proved of no force: for Queen Mary succeeded, though she was a Papist, and
Queen Elizabeth succeeded her, though she was declared Bastard. The rights of
Blood prevailing over the Formalities of Divorce and the Dispensations of the
Popes, and the Laws made to gratify Henry the Eighth's pleasure, as the
strength of nature does often prevail over Poisons; and to evince the greater
certainty of their being void, so little notice was taken of those, and the
subsequent Acts, Anno 1535. that the Heirs of the Blood succeeded without
repealing that Act, as an Act in it self invalid from the beginning: For such
Acts are past by without being repealed, as we find in the Act of Recognition
of Queen Elizabeth, no notice was taken of the Act of Parliament against her;
and Blackwood P. 45.
observes very well, that so conscious were the makers of these Acts, Jus
Regium, p. 179.
of the illegality of them, and of their being contrary to the immutable Laws
of God, Nature, and Nations, that none durst produce that Kings Testament,
wherein he did nominate a Successor conformable to the power granted by those
Acts; but that as soon as they were freed by his Death, from the violent
oppressions that had forced them to alter a Successor three several times, and
at last to swear implicitly to whomsoever he should nominate, they proclaimed
first Queen Mary, and after her decease Queen Elizabeth.

Therefore all these Acts, both of Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, are
to be looked upon as Politic interims, to serve for some present ends. And as
we observe the trepidations, vibrations, and as we may say, uneasiness of
things in all that have been displaced, till reseated again (whereby we have a
certain Indicium of any thing Natural) so may we note the naturalness of
Hereditary Succession by the Tragical Convulsions, and unsetledness of things
in any State, where great force and policy have usurped the Crown, till it has
returned to the right owner. So we see after the force was removed by the
expiration of Henry the Eighth and Edward the Sixth, things returned again into
their pristin State, according to the Laws of the Crown.

I shall now pass to consider other Reasons; and First it may be observed,
Fundamentals in Government not to be altered.
That the Venerable Age of such Fundamental Laws, should have another kind of
respect paid to them, than to be made obsolete, because they will not sort
with some new-fashioned Intrigue. For it is a most true Maxim, Non magis
aliunde floret respublica, quam si legum vigeat Authoritas. So in the first
Parliament Cap. 2.
of King James the First, it is fully expressed, That to alter and innovate the
Fundamental ad Ancient Laws, See Commission for Union, 16^4.
Privileges, and good Customs of the Kingdom, (whereby not only the Kings
Regal Authority, but the Peoples securities of Lands, Livings, and Privileges
(both in general and particular) are preserved and maintained, and by the
abolishing or alteration of the which, it is impossible but that present
confusion will fall upon the whole State and frame of Government) is of most
dangerous consequence: whence we may well infer, That to endeavor to alter the
right of Succession of the Crown, in the direct line, is one of the most
dangerous Innovations of all others, as drawing innumerable mischiefs after it.

Now there can be no greater fundamental right than the Succession of our
Monarch. The Hereditary Succession is a Fundamental.
That our Monarchy is Hereditary, is the great Basis upon which most of all the
positions of the Laws are established, which every where we meet with in the
Writings of Lawyers, viz. That the King never dies, the next Successor in
Blood is legally King, from the very moment in which the last King dies; that
there needs neither Coronation, or Recognition of the People, to entitle him to
the exercise of his Regal Authority; that his Commissions are valid, all Men
are liable to do him Homage, and hold their rights of him, and his Heirs; he
may call Parliaments, dispose of the Lands belonging to the Crown; and all that
oppose him are Rebels: Generally this Principle runs through all the Veins of
our Laws, it is that which gives Life and Authority to our Statutes, but
receives none from them, which are undeniable marks and Characters of a
Fundamental Right in all Nations.

Secondly, Such further provision has the Law made, to secure the Succession
in the direct line, that if the right Heir of the Blood, or the Father or
Mother of the right Heir be attainted of High Treason, by Parliament, the
Attainder is no obstruction to the descent. If he, who were to succeed had
committed Murder, or were declared Traitor formerly to the Crown, for open
Rebellion against the King and Kingdom; yet upon his coming to the Crown he
need not to be restored by Act of Parliament: but his very right of Blood would
purge all these Imperfections. For tanta est Regii sanguinis praerogativa, and
dignitas, ut vitium non admittat, nec se contaminare patiatur; says a Craig.
learned Lawyer: and the Reasons given are, For that no Man can be a Rebel
against himself, nor can the King have a Superior; and consequently there can
be none whom he can Jus Reg. p. 169.
offend: and it would be absurd, that he, who can restore all other Men, should
need to be restored himself. Also the Punishments of Crimes, such as
Confiscations, etc. are to be inflicted by the Kings Authority, or to fall to
the Kings Treasury; and it would be most absurd, that a Man should exact from
himself a Punishment.

So Richard Plantaginet Duke of York, and Edward the Fourth his Son, were both
attainted; yet Edward the Fourth was rightful King, and no impediment in the
Succession accrued by it.

So Charles the Seventh of France (though banished by Sentence of Parliament)
did afterward succeed to the Crown; and though Lewis the Twelfth forfeited for
taking up Arms against Charles the Eighth, yet he succeeded: and Alexander Duke
of Albany, and his Descendants, being declared Traitors, by his Brother, King
James the Fourth; yet his Son John being called home upon his Uncles Death, was
declared Tutor and Governor, without any remission, or being restored; and if
his Cousin King James had died without Issue, he had been declared the true
Successor of the Crown.

We have a memorable Instance of this in H. 7. who when he came to the Crown,
called his Parliament; and the Judges having determined, that those Members of
the House, that had been outlawed by the Parliament in Richard the Third's
time, and been declared Rebels, should absent themselves, till a Bill were
brought in for their restoring: It was moved among the Judges what should be
done about the King, who had been condemned, and declared Traitor, etc. and it
was by the unanimous consent of all the Judges (says the learned St. Alban's
Hist H. 7. p. 29.
Chancellor) declared, That the Crown removed all the obstructions in the
Blood, which might in any manner impede its descent; and from that time the
King took the Crown, Coronam ipsam omnes sanguinis oppilationes quae descensum
Coronae ullatenus impediunt, deobstruere. -- Vt Regi opera Parliamentaria non
fuisset opus.
the fountain of his Blood was purged, and all the Corruptions and Impurities
taken away: so that he had no need of any Parliamentary help to supply him.

Thirdly, The Consideration of the Oaths, which the Subjects are bound to take
and observe, gives some further Proof of the Obligation of all the Subjects to
maintain this lineal Succession.

The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy bind the Subjects to bear Faith and true
Allegiance to the King's Highness, The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
against altering Succession.
his Heirs, and lawful Successors, and that to their Power they shall assist
and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities
granted to the King's Highness, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, or united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and of those Privileges, etc. I
think none will deny, but that Hereditary Succession is one of the principal
Prerogatives intended by those Oaths.

We are not in these only sworn to His Majesty, but his Lawful Successors;
which word, Lawful, is inserted, to cut off the Pretenses of such as should not
succeed by Law, and the insolent Arbitrariness of such, as being but Subjects
themselves, think they may choose their King.

These being promissory Oaths, as well to the Successors, when their Right
shall fall, as to the present King; they have every of them in their respective
degrees and orders, and indispensible Right confirmed to them by this Oath. So
that the Predecessor has no legal right to deprive his Successor, as hereafter
I shall clear, nor to remit the Peoples Obligation to him as lawful Heir and
Successor: Address, part 3. p. 64.
much less can the two Houses do it; for they are all within the Obligation of
this Oath, and it is unreasonable, that Men should dispense with their own
promissory Oaths to others: for this would destroy all Faith and Confidence
amongst Men, and pull up the very roots of Society and Government

Whereas some object out of my Lord Coke on Littleton, p. 8.
Coke, Objection.
That none is Heir before the death of his Ancestor, but Heir apparent: It is
to be considered, Answered.
that it must be the Heir presumptive, or apparent, that is here understood;
otherwise the inserting the word, Heir, were superfluous, if by the Oaths were
not intended, he that is next Heir upon the Death of the King; and if any
Person think to evade it by affirming, that if the Parliament declare any
Person to be no next Heir, he cease to be so; as also not to be lawful
Successor, because by such an Act he is outlawed: Let such Persons consider
that this is neither better nor worse than palpable Aequivocation. For we swear
in the common Sense of the words, and so by Heir we understand such as by
proximity of Blood, have greatest right to succeed in the Inheritance.

It may be farther considered that the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, and Judges,
See 18 E. 3.
all the great Officers of State, the Privy Council, etc. are all sworn to
defend the Rights of the Crown, and that they shall not concur or assent to
any thing which may turn to the King in Damage or Dis-herison. How then can any
of these, much less the Judges (who are to expound, and interpret the Law)
consent without palpable violation of their Oaths, to the changing of the
Essence of the Monarchy.

I shall now endeavor to prove, Acts of Parliament cannot alter Lineal
Succession.
that no Parliament, by a complete Act, can legally alter the Succession in an
Hereditary Monarchy.

For first all Jus Reg. p. 153.
Kings and Parliaments are subordinate to the Laws of God, the Laws of Nature,
and Nations. So that unless we give the Inferior Power and Jurisdiction over
the Superior, no Act of Parliament can be binding to overturn what those three
Laws have have established; and I hope I have proved under all these Heads, in
the preceding part of this discourse, that the right of Succession is founded
on them. As to the Law of God, it is clear not only from the general dictates
of Religion; but 28 H. 8. c. 7. the Parliament uses these words, For no Man can
dispense with God's Laws, which we also affirm and think.

As to the Laws of Nature they are acknowledged to be immutable from the
Principles of Reason. So the Sect. sed natural. Institut. de Jure naturali.
Law it self confesses, Naturalia quaedam Jura, quae apud omnes gentes
observantur, divina quadam providentia constituta, semper firma atque
immutabilia permanent: Certain natural Laws, which are observed by all Nations)
and such is that of Primogeniture) by Divine Providence being constituted,
remain always firm and immutable. So when the Law declares that a supreme
Prince is free from the obligation of Laws (solutus Legibus) yet Lawyers Voet.
de Statutis sect. 5. c. 1, Accursius in L. Princeps F. de Leg. Clementina
pasturalis de re Judicata.
still acknowledge, that this does not exclude these Supreme Powers from being
liable to the Laws of God, Nature, and Nations, as is evident by all that treat
of that Point.

Nor can the Law of Nations be overturned by private municipal Laws; so all
Statutes to the prejudice of Ambassadors (who are secured by the Law of
Nations,) are confessed by all to be null, and the highest Power whatsoever
cannot take off the denouncing of a War, before a War can be lawful.

Besides, secondly, a Parliament cannot do more than Jus Reg. p. 154.
any absolute Monarch in his own Kingdom; for they, when joined, are but in
place of the supreme Power sitting in Judgment. We must not think our
Parliaments have an unlimited Power de jure, so as they may make a forfeiture,
or take away Life without a cause, or pass Sentence against the Subjects,
without citing or hearing them. For if they had such Power, we should be the
greatest Slaves, and live under the most arbitrary Government imaginable.

Therefore an absolute Prince cannot, in an Hereditary Kingdom (where the
Successor is to succeed Jure Regni, Nulla clausula Successori Jus auferri
potest, modo succedat ille Jure Regni. Aristaeus c. 7. number. 5.
prejudge the Successors right of Succession; for the same right, the present
King has to the Possession, the next of Blood has to the Succession.
Therefore Hottoman Lib. 2. de Regno Galliae affirms, That ea quae, Jure Regni,
primogenito competunt, ne Testamento quidem Patris adimi possunt: That in the
absolute Monarchy of France, The Father cannot by his last Will deprive the
Firstborn of those things which belong to him by Royal right. So when the King
of France designed to break the Salique Law of Succession, as in the Reign of
Charles the Fifth, it was found impracticable by the three States. So when
Pyrrhus would have preferred his younger Son to the Crown; Pausanias, lib. 1.
the Epirots (following the Law of Nations and then own) refused him. So Anno
1649. when Amurat the Grand Signior left the Empire to Han the Tartarian,
passing his Brother Ibrahim, the whole Officers of State did unanimously cancel
the Testament, and restored Ibrahim the true Heir, though no other than a Fool.
So if Kings could have inverted their Succession, Saint Lewis had preferred his
own Third Son to Lewis his Eldest; and Alphonsus King of Leon in Spain, had
preferred his Daughter to Ferdinand his Eldest Son; and Edward the Sixth of
England, had preferred, and did actually prefer the Lady Jane Gray to his
Sisters Mary and Elizabeth.

Thirdly, It is undeniable, in the opinion of all Lawyers, That a King cannot
in Law alienate his Crown, but that the Deed is void, nor can he in Law consent
to an Act of Parliament declaring that he should be the last King: For if such
consents and Acts Jus Regium, p. 163.
had been sufficient to bind Successors, then weak Kings by their own
simplicity, and gentle Kings by the Rebellion of their Subjects, or being
wrought upon by the importunity of their Wives, or Concubines, or the
mis-representation of Favorites, might do great mischiefs to their People, in
raising up continual Factions; of the miseries of which I shall speak hereafter.

This is owned in Subjects, That the Honor and Nobility that is bestowed upon
a man and his Heirs, does so necessarily descend upon those Heirs, that the
Father or Predecessor cannot exclude the Successor, or derogate from his Right,
by renouncing, resigning, following base, or mean Trades, or such like. For,
Fab. Cod. 9. ti^. 28.
say the Lawyers, since he derives his Right from his old Progenitors, and owes
it not to his Father, his Fathers Deed should not prejudge him; so much more in
Kings (the ill consequences of such violations of Justice and Right being
infinitely more destructive) the Predecessor should not do any Act to prejudice
his Successor: For that right of blood which makes the Eldest First, makes the
other Second; and all the Statutes that acknowledge the present Kings
Prerogative, acknowledge that they belong to him and his Heirs. For as a Prince
cannot, (even ex plenitudine potestatis) legitimate a Bastard, in prejudice of
former Children, though they have only but an hope of Succession; much less can
he bastardize or disinherit the Right Heir, who is so made by God, and honored
from him with the Character.

If therefore Kings (how absolute soever) cannot de jure invert the natural
order of Succession, there is no reason that the States of Parliament should
have such a Power. For by the known Laws they have no Legislative Power
otherwise than by assenting to what the King does, and all that their assent
could do, would be no more than that they, and their Successors should not
oppose his nomination, because of their consent: but that can never amount to a
Power of transferring.

For if the States of Parliament had this Power originally in themselves to
bestow, why might they not reserve it for themselves, and so perpetuate the
Government in their own hands? So Judge Jenkin asserts, according to Law, That
no King can be named, or in any time made, in this Kingdom, Liberty of Subject,
p. 25.
by the People, Kings being before there were Parliaments: and there is good
reason; for then the Monarchy should not be Hereditary, but Elective: the very
Essence of Hereditary Monarchy consisting in the Right of Succession: whereas
if the Parliament can prefer the next save one, they may prefer the last of all
the Line; and the same reason by which they can choose a Successor (which can
only be, that they have Power above him) should likewise (in the opinion of a
very Jus Regium, p. 167.
learned Person) justify their deposing of Kings; as we saw in the last Age,
that such reasons as of late have been urged, to incapacitate the Children of
King Charles the First from the hope of Succession, viz. Popery and Arbitrary
Government, did embolden men to dethrone and murder the Father, who was actual
King. For if it were once yielded that the Houses had a Right in themselves, to
take care for the Salus populi, that none but such Princes should succeed, who
were approved of by the prevailing Faction in their body, nothing but confusion
would follow, one Party having their Votes seconded by force one time, and a
quite contrary another; yet all pretending the Public Weal: and so a large
breach should be made (by pretending to stop one dangerous Successor) to the
inflowing of successive Usurpers, and thereby the Crown should not only by
ambulatory, but unstable upon every head that wore it, and always in danger of
a bloody surprise; till at last the Regalia being secured from the expectant
Heir, the Factious would find a way to pillage them from the present Sovereign,
and convert them into a Mace for an House of Commons.

I writ this Part with greater Enlargements, in answer to the plausiblest
Arguments for the Bill of Seclusion, while that matter was in the hottest
agitation. But since there will be no need of dilating upon that Subject (now
that God Almighty has so signally determined the Controversy, by the
peaceable settlement of his Majesty upon his Throne) I shall close this
Chapter, with some few remarks of the miseries have been brought upon Kingdoms,
and especially upon this, by the disjoynting the Succession.

So we read what dreadful Jus Regium, p. 166.
mischiefs arose from Pelops preferring his younger Son to the Kingdom of
Mycene: The Miseries which Kingdoms have sustained where the Succession has
been interrupted.
from Oedipus commanding that Polynices his Youngest Son should reign
interchangeably with the Eldest: From Parisatis the Queen of Persia's
preferring her Youngest Son Cyrus, to her Eldest Artaxerxes: From Aristodomus
admitting his two Sons Proclus and Euristhenes, to an equal share in the
Lacedemonian Throne. The like observations are to be made in the Succession of
Ptolomaeus Lagus, and Ptolomaeus Phisco; In the Sons of Severus, in the
Succession of Sinesandus, who killed his brother Suintill rightful Heir of
Spain, and that of Sforza and Francis Duke of Milain, and thousands more; in
all which, either the Usurpers, or the Kingdoms that obeyed them, perished
utterly, or were brought to great ruin.

In Britain the whole nation of the Picts were extirpated, by the endeavor of
that People to hinder Keneth Son of Alpinus, from possessing the Kingdom as
right Heir of Fergusiana, Sister of Mordred their King. In England the
Usurpation of Harold, upon the Right of Edgar, opened the passage to William
the Conqueror. The Usurpations of William Rufus, and Henry the First, upon
their Brother Robert, and of King Stephen, upon the Empress Maud, were
accompanied with great effusion of Blood: So that a great part of the ancient
Norman Nobility, (both such as resided there, or were transplanted hither) were
slain or grievously harassed. The Usurpation of King John, upon his Nephew
Arthur, caused great disquiets, during his Reign, and the effects lasted a
great while after. The removal of King Richard the Second by Henry the Fourth,
occasioned those lasting Wars, and most miserable devastations, betwixt the
Houses of York and Lancaster; during which Usurpation (before the Crown was
settled upon Edward the Fourth) Historians reckon no less than seventeen pitched
Battles, and eight Kings and Princes of the Blood slain, and put to death; and
that forty six Dukes and Earls, besides innumerable Barons and Gentlemen, and
above 200000. common People were slain and destroyed, in the space of Sixty
Years. To which we may add the cruel death of Edward the Fifth, and his
Brother, by their bloody Uncle, and his own miserable end; and the calamitous
fall of the Lady Jane Gray, and her Noble Relations.

All which Princes (although for the supporting their unjust Claims, Invasions
and Usurpations of the Crown, they procured Parliamentary concurrence, and
popular Establishments yet) after so great effusion of blood, could not, in
reality, transfer the Right from the next Heir of the blood, but at last all
centred again in the Right Heir.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 31. for Babarous read Barbarous. for und r. and, and l. 24 for
wins r. wires. p. 13. l. 6. for Resumption r. Presumption. p. 17. l. 5. for who
r. where. p. 44. l. 45. for removeable r. removal. p. 47. l. 27. for purity r.
parity. p. 63. l. 26. for Herds r. Hords. p. 81. l. 18. for third r. fifth. p.
83. l. 46. for than r. not. p. 92. marg. l. 5. for mediocrita r. mediocriter;
and below, for ad Clement. r. ad Cluentem. p. 133. l. 48. after before r. l. p.
141. l. 36. dele That. p. 150. l. 28. for Peace r. Grace. p. 152. l. 27. for
68. r. 6. E. 1. p. 160. l. 43. for Sarson. r. Sarron. p. 162. l. 12. for Fenix
r. Ferrix. l. 48. after rewards add he. p. 167. l. 18. after find add 4, p.
176. l. 5. for implied r. employed. l. 32. for Frameae r. Framiae. p. 180. l.
46. for Wargild r. Weregild. p. 181. l. 10. for many r. money. p. 194. marg. l.
17. for King Edward's r. King Edmund's. p. 197. l. 41. for Northrigena r.
Northwigena. p. 199. l. 19. for Markesus. r. Markerus. p. 216. l. 11. for
Silvanset. r. Silvanect. p. 222. l. 36. for Aubert r. Hubert. p. 245. l. 18.
for Bochan r. Boetian. p. 266. l. 3. for whereas r. where. l. 18. for
Mauleveren r. Mauleverer. p. 291. l. 36. for Hull r. Hall. p. 321. l. 13. dele
having. p. 335. l. 12. for Privileges r. Prerogatives. p. 341. l. 8. for
Salteyn r. Salveyn. p. 376. l. 33. for dies twice, r. diu. p. 380. l. 24. for
ele r. aelc. and in marg. for up. r. App. p. 387. l. 6. for lie. r. tie. p.
389. l. 5. after finishing add a Period. l. 7. for almost r. all, most. l. 13.
for Bretan r. ^^^^an. l. 14. for sorda r, eorda. p. 400. l. 28. for albe r.
able. p. 419. l. 2. for Hisparians r. Hipparians. l. 3. for Cleotimac r.
Cleotimas. l. 17. for Peleponensian r. Peleponesian. and for Ob r. Obe. p. 427.
for Fifthly, Sixthly, and Seventhly, r. Fourthly, Fifthly, Sixthly. p. 430. l.
13. for keep r. help. p. 437. l. 24. for hopes r. hops. p. 446. l. 37. for end
r. and. p. 452. l. 31. for Fung r. Fangs. p. 459. l. 1. for Brats r. Brut^. p.
461. l. 7. for Colbar r. Cobbam. l. 25. for Rebellious r. Rubellius. p. 462. l.
43. for rare r. race. p. 467. l. 28. for Praeter r. Praetor. p. 468. l. 1. for
discovered r. described. p. 469. l. 11. for milder r. middle.

A Catalogue of Books, Printed for, and Sold by, Robert Clavel, at the Peacock
in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Books in Folio.
A Companion to the Temple, or a Help to Devotion, in the Use of the Common
Prayer; divided into Four Parts. 1. Of Morning and Evening Prayer. 2. Of the
Litany, with the Occasional Prayers and Thanksgivings. 3. Of the
Communion-Office, with the Offices of Baptism, Catechism, and Confirmation. 4.
Of the Occasional Offices, viz. Matrimony, Visitation of the Sick, etc. The
whole being carefully corrected, and now put into one Volume. By Thomas Comber
D. D. Praecentor of York.

A Practical and Polemical Commentary or Exposition upon the Third and Fourth
Chapters of the latter Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy. By Thomas Hall B. D.

A Course of Divinity; or, An Introduction to the Knowledge of the True
Catholic Religion, especially as professed by the Church of England: In Two
Parts. The one containing the Doctrine of Faith; the other, the Form of
Worship. By Matthew Scrivener.

Etymologicon Linguae Anglicanae, seu Explicatio Vocum Anglicarum Etymologica
ex propriis Fontibus, scil. ex Linguis duodecim; Anglo-Saxonica seu Anglica
prisca, notata A. S. Runica, Gothica, Cimbrica seu Danica antiqua, notata Run.
Dan. Franco-Theotisca, seu Teutonica vetere, notata Fr. Th. Danica recentiori,
notata Dan. rec. Belgica, notata Belg. Teutonica recentiori, notata Teut.
Cambro-Britannica, notata C. Br. Franco-Gallica, notata Fr. Italica, notata It.
Hispanica, notata Hisp. Latina, notata Lat. Graeca, notata Gr. Authore Stephano
Skinner M.D.

The Voyages and Travels of the Ambassadors sent by Frederick Duke of Holstein
to the Great Duke of Muscovy, and the King of Persia; begun in the Year 1633.
and finished in 1639. Containing a complete History of Muscovy, Tartary,
Persia, and other adjacent Countries; with several Public Transactions,
reaching near the present Times: In Seven Books. Whereto are added the Travels
of John Albert de Manstelslo, a Gentleman belonging to the Ambassie from Persia
into the East Indies; containing a particular Description of Indosthan, the
Mogull's Empire, the Oriental Islands, Japan, China, and the Revolutions which
happened in those Countries within these few Years: In Three Books. The Whole
illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures. Written originally in
Italian by Adam Oliarias, Secretary to the Embassy. Rendered into English by
John Davies of Kidwelly. The Second Impression.

The History of the Execrable Irish Rebellion, traced from many preceding Acts,
to the Grand Eruption, October 23. 1641. and thence pursued to the Act to
Settlement in 1662.

The Journals of all the Parliaments during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; both
of the House of Lords, and House of Commons. Collected by Sir Simon D' Ewes of
Stow-Hall in the County of Suffolk, Knight and Baronet. Revised and published
by Paul Bows Esquire of the Middle Temple.

I Ragguagli di Parnasso; or, Advertisements from Parnassus, in Two Centuries:
With the Politic Touchstone. Written originally in Italian, by that Famous
Roman, Tra^ano Bocalini: And now put into English by the Right Honorable Henry
Earl of Monmouth.

Cosmography and Geography: In Two Parts. The First containing the general and
absolute Part of Cosmography, being a Translation from that eminent and
much-esteemed Geographer Varenius; wherein are at large handled all such Arts
as are necessary to be understood for the true knowledge thereof. To which is
added, the much wanted Schemes, omitted by the Author. The Second Part being a
Geographical Description of the World, taken from the Notes and Works of the
Famous Monsieur Sanson, late Geographer to the French King. To which is added
about One hundred Cosmographical, Geographical, and Hydrographical Tables, of
several Kingdoms and Isles in the World, with their Chief Cities, Seaports,
Bays, etc. Drawn from the Maps of the said Sanson: Illustrated with Maps.

The Annals of King James and King Charles the First of ever Happy Memory;
containing a faithful History and impartial Account of the Great Affairs of
State, and Transactions of Parliaments in England, from the Tenth Year of King
James, 1612. to the Eighteenth of King Charles, 1642. Wherein several material
Passages relating to the late Civil Wars (omitted in former Histories) are made
known.

A perfect Copy of all the Summons of the Nobility to the Great Councils and
Parliaments of this Realm, from the Forty ninth of King Henry the Third, until
these present Times: With Catalogues of such Noblemen as have been summoned to
Parliament in Right of their Wives; and of such other Noblemen as derive their
Titles of Honor from the Heirs Female from whom they are descended, and of
such Noblemens Eldest Sons as have been summoned to Parliament by some of their
Fathers Titles. Extracted from Public Records, by Sir William Dugdale Knight,
Garter, Principal King at Arms.

The History of the Affairs of Europe in this present Age; but more
particularly of the Republic of Venice. Written in Italian by Baptista Nani
Cavalier, and Procurator of St. Mark. Englished by Sir Robert Honywood Knight.

The History of Barbados, St. Christophers, Mevis, St. Vincents, Antego,
Martinico, Monserrat, and the rest of the Caribby-Islands, in all Twenty eight:
In Two Books. The First containing the Natural, the Second the Moral History of
those Islands. Illustrated with several Pieces of Sculpture, representing the
most considerable Rarities therein described.

The Works of the Famous Nicolas Machiavell, Citizen and Secretary of Florence.
Written originally in Italian, and now faithfully translated into English.

A Complete Treatise of Preternatural Tumors, both General and Particular, as
they appear in Humane Bodies, from Head to Foot. To which also are added many
excellent and Modern Historical Observations, concluding most Chapters in the
whole (...) Discourse.

The Present State of the Ottoman Empire, from the Year 1623. to the Year 1677.
Containing the Reigns of the Three last Emperors, viz. Sultan Morat, or Amurat
the Fourth, Sultan Ibrahim, and Sultan Mahomet the Fourth, his Son, the
Thirteenth Emperor. By Sir Paul Ricaut late Consul at Smyrna.

The History of the Cardinals of the Roman Church, from the time of their first
Creation, to the Election of Pope Clement the Ninth: With a full Account of his
Conclaves. In three Parts. Written in Italian by the Author of the Nepotismo di
Roma.

The World Surveyed; or, The Famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent le Blanc of
Marcelles, into the East and West Indies, Persia, Pegu, Fez, Morocco, Guinny,
and through all Africa, and the Principal Provinces of Europe.

A General Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France, upon Questions
of all sorts of Philosophy, and other Natural Knowledge. Made in the Assembly
of the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most Ingenious Persons of that Nation.
Englished by G. Havers. In two Volumes.

A Treatise of the Sibyls, giving an Account of the Names and Numbers of them,
of their Qualities, the Form and Matter of their Verses, and of their Books.
Written in French by David Blondell. Englished by Jo. Davis of Kidwelly.

Tracts written by John Seldom Esquire of the Inner Temple. The first entitled,
Ja^^ Anglorum Facies altera. Rendered into English, with large Notes thereupon,
by Redman Westcoat Gent. The second, England's Epinomis. The third, Of the
Original of Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions of Testaments. The fourth, Of the
Disposition or Administration of Intestate Estates. Printed for Tho. Basset and
R. Chiswell, and sold by R. Clavell.

Basilica Chymica, and Praxis Chymiatrica: or, Royal and Practical Chemistry
augmented and enlarged. By John Hartman. To which is added, His Treatise of
Signatures of Internal Things, or a true and lively Anatomy of the Greater and
Lesser World; as also the Practice of Chemistry of John Har^man M. D. augmented
and enlarged by his Son, with considerable Additions. All faithfully Englished
by a Lover of Chemistry.

The Complete Chemical Dispensatory, in Five Books; treating of all sorts of
Metals, Precious Stones, and Minerals; of all Vegetables and Animals, and
Things that are taken from them, as Musk, Civet, etc. How rightly to know them,
and how they are to be used in Physic, with their several Doses. The like Work
never extant before. Being very proper for all Merchants, Druggists,
Surgeons, and Apothecaries, and such Ingenious Persons as study Physic or
Philosophy. Written in Latin by Dr. John Scroder, that most Famous and Faithful
Chemist; and Englished by William Rowland Doctor of Physic.

The Royal Pharmacopaea, Galenical and Chemical, according to the Practice of
the most Eminent and Learned Physicians of France; and published with their
several Approbations. By Moses Char^as, the King's Chief Operator in his Royal
Garden of Plants. Faithfully Englished, and illustrated with several Copper
Plates.

An Abridgment of diverse Cases and Resolutions of the Common Law,
Alphabetically digested under several Titles. By Henry Rolls Sergeant at Law.
Published by the Lord Chief Baron Hales, and approved by all the Judges.

The Reports of Sir George Croke Knight. In three Volumes, in English. Allowed
of by all the Judges. The second Edition, carefully corrected by the Original.

Les Reports de Henry Roll Sergeant del' Ley, de diverse Cases en le Court del'
Bank le Roy, en le Temps del' Reign de Roy Jaques, Colligees par luy mesme,
and Imprimees par l' Original.

Brief Animadversions on, Amendments of, and Additional Explanatory Records to
the Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts. By William Prynne Esquire

Brevia Judicialia: or, An exact Collection of approved Forms of all sorts of
Judicial Writs in the Common Bench, together with their Returns. By Richard
Brownlow.

Thesaurus Brevium: or, A Collection of approved Forms of all sorts of Original
and Judicial Writs in the King's Bench, with their special Directions. By J. C.

Folio stitched.
The Order of the Installation of Henry Duke of Norfolk, Henry Earl of
Peterborough, and Laurence Earl of Rochester, Knights and Companions of the
most Noble Order of the Garter, in the Royal, Chapel of St. George at Windsor,
July 22. 1685.

The General Catalogue of Books, English and Latin, continued from the Year
1666. to the end of Michaelmas Term, 1685.

The late Proposals of Union among Protestants, Reviewed and Rectified. Being a
Vindication of the most Reverend Father in God, Edwin Lord Archbishop of York;
and the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury, from the Misprisions of an
Apocryphal Proposer; with a full Answer to his Proposal, presented to the
Parliament.

Books in Quarto.
An Historical Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes, from Scripture,
Reason, and the Opinion and Practice of Jews, Gentiles, and Christians in all
Ages. Designed to supply the Omissions, answer the Objections, and rectify the
Mistakes of Mr. Selden's History of Tithes. Part I. The second Edition
corrected and amended. By Thomas Comber D. D. Praecentor of York.

An Historical Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes; which is further
proved by Scripture and Antiquity, and illustrated by the Solemn Consecration
and great Convenience of them: With an Answer to the Objections of other
Authors against them. Part II. To which is added, A Discourse concerning
Excommunication. By Thomas Comber D. D. Praecentor of York.

Brutum Fulmen: or, The Bull of Pope Pius the Fifth, concerning the Damnation,
Excommunication, and Deposition of Queen Elizabeth; as also the Absolution of
her Subjects of their Oath of Allegiance; with a peremptory Injunction, upon
pain of an Anathema, never to obey any of her Laws or Commands: With some
Observations and Animadversions upon it. By Thomas Lord Bishop of Lincoln.
Whereunto is annexed the Bull of Pope Paul the Third, containing the Damnation,
Excommunication, etc. of King Henry the Eighth.

The Protestant Peacemaker: or, A seasonable Persuasive to all serious
Christians, who call themselves Protestants, That laying aside Calumnies, and
all exasperating Disputes, they would pursue Charity, Peace, and Union, as the
only means (now left us) of Safety, and Reformation of the Public Manners:
With a Postscript, or Notes on Mr. Baxter, and some other late Writings for
Peace. By Edward Lord Bishop of Cork and Ross in Ireland.

A Treatise of Spousals, and Matrimonial Contracts: Wherein all the Questions
relating to that Subject are ingeniously Debated and Resolved. By Mr. Henry
Swinburne, Author of the Treatise of Wills and Testaments.

The Geometrical Key, or the Gate of Equations unlocked: A new Discovery of the
Construction of all Equations, howsoever affected, not exceeding the Fourth
Degree; viz. of Linears, Quadratics, Cubics, Biquadratics, and the finding of
all the Roots, as well false as true, without the Use of Mesolabe, Trisection
of Angles, without Reduction, Depression, or any other previous Preparation of
Equations by a Circle, and any (and that but one only) Parabole; and this by
one only General Rule, and than which, a more Simple, more Perfect, more
General, more Easy to be understood, or more fit for Practice, cannot be
devised or wished for. Fortified with Demonstrations, illustrated with Figures
to each Equation, and exemplified with Numeral Equations (according to all the
variety of Cases) adapted to each Figure. By Thomas Baker Fellow of the Royal
Society.

The History of Gavelkind, with the Etymology thereof; containing a Vindication
of the Laws of England, together with a short History of William the Conqueror.
By Silas Tailor.

Quarto stitched.
Bishop of St. David's Answer to Sidney's Speech.

-- A short Way to a lasting Settlement.

-- Billa Vera; or, An Arraignment of Ignoramus.

-- Verbum dici: A Word in season.

An Admonition to a Deist.

The Complete Conformist; or, Seasonable Advice concerning strict Conformity,
and frequent Colebration of the Holy Communion. By Dennis Grenville D. D. Dean
of Durham.

Religion and Loyalty supporting each other: or, A Rational Account how the
Loyal Addressers, maintaining the Lineal Descent of the Crown, is very
consistent with their Affection to the established Protestant Religion.

Dr. Standish's Sermon at the Temple.

-- before the Lord Mayor of London.

-- at the Assize at Hartford.

Elston's Visitation-Sermon before the Bishop of Exeter.

Laxton at the Funeral of Christoph. Sherrard Esquire

Warren of Religious Loyalty.

-- of the End of Christ's Advent.

We^ge of the Excellency of Man's Soul.

Davison of the Fall of Angels.

Dr. Morris his Sermon 30 Jan. before the King.

Bishop of Ely's Sermon 30 Jan.

-- At the Coronation of King James the Second and Queen Mary.

Dr. Gower's Sermon on Christmas Day, 1684.

Archbishop of Tuam's Sermon before the King at Windsor.

Dr. Comber's Sermon of Oaths.

Plays.
Andronicus Commenius, a Tragedy. By Jo. Wilson.

Heracleus Emperor of the East, a Tragedy. By Lodowick Carbel Esquire

Lancashire Witches.

Books in Octavo large.
Short Discourses upon the whole Common Prayer, designed to inform the
Judgment, and excite the Devotion of such as daily use the same. By Tho. Comber
D. D. Praecentor of York.

The Mystery of Rhetoric unveiled: Wherein above 130 of the Tropes and Figures
are severally derived from the Greek into English, together with lively
Definitions, and variety of Latin, English, Scriptural Examp^es, pertinent to
each of hem apart. Eminently delightful and profitable for young Scholars, and
others of all sorts; enabling to discern and imitate and Elegancy in any Author
they read, etc. By John Smith Gent.

The Art of Chemistry, as it is now practiced. Written in French by P.
Thybault, Chemist to the French King; and Englished by W. A. Doctor in Physic,
and Fellow of the Royal Society.

Aurora Chymica: or, A Rational Way of preparing Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals for a Physical Use; by which Preparation they are made most
efficacious, safe, and pleasant Medicines, for the Preservation of the Life of
Man. By Edw. Bolnest Med. Reg. Ord.

A Complete Treatise of Preternatural Tumors, both General and Particular, as
they appear in Humane Bodies, from Head to Foot. To which also are added many
excellent and Modern Historical Observations, concluding most Chapters in the
whole Discourse. Collected from the Learned both of Ancient and Modern
Physicians and Surgeons.

The Surgeons Storehouse, furnished with Forty three Tables cut in Brass;
in which are all sorts of Instruments, both Ancient and Modern, useful for the
performance of all Manual Operations, with an exact Description of every
Instrument; together with 100 choice Observations of Famous Cures performed;
with three Indexes. 1. Of the Instruments: 2. Of Cures performed: And, 3. Of
things Remarkable. Written by Johannes Scultetus, a famous Physician and
Surgeon of Vlme in Suevia. Faithfully translated into English by E. B.

The Complete Chemist: or, A new Treatise of Chemistry, teaching, by a short
and easy Method, all its most necessary Preparations. Written in French by
Nicholas Glasier, Apothecary in Ordinary to the French King and the Duke of
Orleans; and from the Fourth Edition, revised and augmented by the Author, and
now faithfully Englished by a Fellow of the Royal Society.

Il Nepotismo di Roma: or, The History of the Pope's Nephews, from the time of
Sixtus the Fourth, Anno 1471. to the Death of the late Pope Alexander the
Seventh, Anno 1667. In two Parts. Written Originally in Italian, and Englished
by W. A. fellow of the Royal Society.

The Present State of Egypt: or, A new Relation of a late Voyage into that
Kingdom, performed in the Years 1672. and 1673. by Fr. Vansleb R. D. Wherein
you have an Exact and true Account of many rare and wonderful Particulars of
that Ancient Kingdom. Englished by M. D. R. D.

The History of the Government of Venice, wherein the Policies, Counsels,
Magistrates, and Laws of that State are fully related, and the Use of the
Ballotting Box exactly described. Written in the Year 1675. by the Sieur
Amelott de la Houssa^e, Secretary to the French Ambassador at Venice.

The Present State of the Ottoman Empire: In three Books. Containing the Maxims
of the Turkish Policy, their Religion, and Military Discipline. Illustrated
with diverse Figures. Written by Sir Paul Ricaut, then Secretary to the English
Ambassador there, and since Consul at Smyrna.

The Memoires of Philip de Comines Lord of Argenton: Containing the History of
Lewis the Eleventh, and Charles the Eighth, Kings of France; with the most
Remarkable Occurrences in their particular Reigns, from the Year 1404. to 1498.
Revised and corrected from diverse Manuscripts and Ancient Impressions, by
Dennis Godfrey Counselor and Historiographer to the French King; and from his
Addition, lately printed at Paris, newly translated into English.

A Relation of three Embassies from His Majesty Charles the Second, to the
Great Duke of Muscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark. Performed
by the Right Honorable the Earl of Carlisle, in the Year 1663. and 1664. By an
Attendant on the Embassies.

The Secret History of the Court of the Emperor Justinian. Written by Procopius
of Caesarea. Faithfully rendered into English.

The History of the late Revolutions of the Empire of the Great Mogul, together
with the most considerable Passages for many Years in that Empire; with a new
Map of it. To which is added, An Account of the Extent of Industan, the
Circulation of the Gold and Silver of the World to discharge it self there; as
also the Riches, Forces, and Justice of the same, and the Principal Cause of
the Decay of the States of Asia. By Monsieur F. Bernier, Physician of the
Faculty of Montpelier. Englished out of French by H. O. Secretary to the Royal
Society.

The Voyage of Italy: or, A Complete Journey through Italy. In two Parts. With
the Character of the People, and the Description of the Chief Towns, Churches,
Monasteries, Tombs, Libraries, Palaces, Villas, Gardens, Pictures, Statues,
and Antiquities. As also of the Interest, Government, Riches, Force, etc. of
all the Princes, with Instructions concerning Travel. By Richard Lassels Gent.
who traveled through Italy five times, as Tutor to several of the English
Nobility and Gentry.

The History of France under the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine; viz. from the
Death of King Lewis the Thirteenth, to the Year 1664. Wherein all the Affairs
of State to that time are exactly related, by Benjamin Priolo; and faithfully
Englished by Chr. Wase Gent.

The History of the Twelve Caesar's, Emperors of Rome. Written in C. Suetonius
Tranquillus. Newly translated into English, and illustrated with all the
Caesar's Heads in Copper Plates.

The Complete Gentleman; or, Direction for the Education of Youth, as to their
Breeding at home, and Traveling abroad. By J. Gailliard Gent. who has been
Tutor abroad to several of the Nobility and Gentry.

The Annals of Love, containing Select Histories of the Amors of diverse
Princes Courts, pleasantly related.

Deceptio Pisus: or, Seeing and Believing are two things. A pleasant Spanish
History, faithfully translated. In two Books.

The Loves of sundry Philosophers, and other Great Men. Translated out of
French.

The Novels of Dom Francisco de Quevedo Villegas, Knight of the Order of St.
James; faithfully Englished. Whereunto is added, The Marriage of Belphegor, an
Italian Novel. Translated from Machiavel.

A Relation of the Siege of Candia, from the first Expedition of the French
Forces under the Command of M. de la Fuillada Duke of Koannez, to its Surrender
Sept. 27. 1669. Written in French by a Gentleman who was a Voluntier in that
Service, and faithfully Englished.

The Present State of the Greek and A^menian Churches, Anno Christi 1678. By
Sir Paul Ricault late Consul at Smyrna, and Fellow of the Royal Society.

The Rights of the Bishops to judge in Capital Cases in Parliament, cleared.
Being a full Answer to two Books lately published; the first entitled, A
Letter from a Gentleman to his Friend, etc. the other, A Discourse of the
Peerage and Jurisdiction of the Lords Spiritual in Parliament; endeavoring to
show the contrary.

A Resolution of Conscience touching Impositions.

Suffragium Protestantium: Wherein our Governors are justified in their
Impositions and Proceedings against Dissenters: Meisner also and the Verdict
rescued from the Cavils and Seditious Sophistry of the Protestant Reconciler.
By the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of St. David's.

The Living Temple: or, A designed Improvement of that Notion, That a Good Man
is the Temple of God. By John How M. A. sometimes Fellow of M. Coll. Oxford.

A Friendly Conference between a Minister and a Parishioner of his inclining
unto Quakerism, etc. With the Vindication of it from the Exceptions of Thomas
Ellwood, in the pretended Answer to the said Conference.

Thirteen Sermons preached before King Charles the Second in His Exile, by the
late Reverend Henry Byam D. D. Rector of Luckham, Canon of Exeter, and one of
His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary. With the Testimony given of him at his
Funeral by Hamnet Ward D. D.

Counsel and Directions Divine and Moral, in plain and familiar Letters of
Advice from a Divine of the Church of England, to a young Gentleman his Nephew,
soon after his Admission into a College in Oxford.

The Christian's Defense against the Fears of Death, with seasonable Directions
how to prepare our selves to die well. Written originally in French, by the
late Reverend Divine of the Protestant Church of Paris, Char. Drelincourt; And
translated into English by M. D' Assigny B. D.

A Discourse of Natural and Moral Impotency. By Joseph Truman B. D.

Aminta, the famous Italian Pastoral, translated into English.

Paradise Regained, a Poem, in four Books. To which is added, Samson Agonistes.
The Author John Milton.

The Fables of Esop, in two Volumes: Paraphrased in Verse, adorned with 100
Copper Sculptures, and illustrated with Annotations. By John Ogilby Esquire

Actions upon the Case for Slander: or, A Methodical Collection, under certain
Heads, of thousands of Cases, dispersed in the many great Volumes of the Law,
of what Words are Actionable, and what not; and of a Conspiracy and Libel. By
William Sheppard Esquire

An Exact Abridgment, in English, of the Cases reported by Sir Francis Moor
Knight, with the Resolution of the Points of Law therein by the Judges.

Books in Octavo small, and Twelves.
Sterometry made easy; or, The Description and Use of a new Gauging Rod, or
Sliding Rule; by which the content of any Tun, Copper, Cask, or other Vessel,
may be readily found, either the Whole, or any Part thereof, the Area's of
Circles in Gallons and Barrels being found, by Inspection only: as also the
Extraction of the Square and Cube Root, Questions concerning Interest and
Annuities, and many other Arithmetical Problems, are hereby resolved, without
Pen or Compasses. To which is added, An Appendix, containing the Description
and Use of another New Rule, very useful in Gauging of Worts, and resolving
Questions in the Mensuration of Solids and Superficies. With a Table of the
Area's of Circles, and Contents of Cylinders, in Ale-Gallons. Calculated to
every tenth part of an Inch, from 12 to 156 Inches Diameter. By Tho. Everard,
Philomath.

The Policy and Government of the Venetians, both in Civil and Military
Affairs. Written in French by the Sieur de la Hay, and faithfully Englished.

An Enquiry whether Oral Tradition, or the Sacred Writings, be the safest
Conservatory and Conveyance of Divine Truths, down from their Original
Delivery, through all succeeding Ages.

The Rules of Civility; or, Certain Ways of Deportment observed amongst all
Persons of Quality, upon several Occasions. Newly revised, and much enlarged.

A Breviate of the Proceedings of France, from the Pyrenaean Treaty to this
time.

Grammatica Reformata; Or, A general Examination of the Art of Grammar, as it
has been successively delivered by Franciscus Sanchus in Spain, by Gasper
Scioppius in France, by Gerardus Joannes Vossius in the Lower Germany, and
Methodiz'd by the Oxford Grammarian, in his Observations upon Lilly. By John
Twells Schoolmaster.

Fundamenta Grammatices; or, The Foundation of the Latin Tongue: Being an
Explanation of the Eight Parts of Speech, with a more easy Method for the
Declining of Nouns, terminating the Declensions, Comparing of Adjectives,
Conjugating of Verbs, etc. Also Propria quae maribus, Quae genus, and As in
praesenti, examined, and made plain to the meanest Capacity; with the meaning
of all the Rules in Syntaxis, with the particular Examples of each Rule applied
and parsed, for the Use and Benefit of all those that desire to be instructed
in the Latin Tongue.

A Course of Catechizing: Being the Marrow of all Orthodox and Practical
Expositions upon the Church-Catechism, and of all Controversies upon the
Church-Customs and Observances. Digested into Fifty two Heads, for Fifty two
Sundays in the Year. Useful for Ministers and their People, Schoolmasters and
their Scholars, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants. Illustrated with
many Copper Pieces, fitted to the several Occasions.

Seneca, with Farnaby's Notes. Printed for R. Scot, Tho. Basset, R. Ch^swell,
etc. and sold by R. Clavell.

Aesop's Fables in Greek and Latin. Printed for Jo. Redmayne, and sold by R.
Clavell.

Midicina Instaurata: or, A brief Account of the true Grounds and Principles of
the Art of Physic, with the insufficiency of the Vulgar Way of Preparing
Medicines, and the Excellency of such as are made by Chemical Operation.
Whereunto is added, A plain Discourse, as a Light to the True Preparation of
Animal and Vegetable Animals, with a Discovery of the true Subject of the
Philosophical Mineral Mercury; and that from the Authorities of the most Famous
Philosophers. By Edw. Bolnest M. D.

The Temperate Man, or, the right way of preserving Life and Health, together
with the soundness of the Senses, Judgment and Memory, unto extreme old Age: in
three Treatises, the first written by the learned Leonardus Lessius; the second
by Lodowick Cornaro, a Noble Gentleman of Venice; the third by a Famous
Italian, faithfully Englished.

Two plain and profitable Discourses upon the two Sacraments; the first laying
open the nature of Baptism, and pressing the serious Consideration, and
Religious observation of the second Vow made by all Christians in their
Baptism: the other pressing as earnestly the frequent renewing of our Baptismal
Vow at the Lords Holy Table, demonstrating the undispensable necessity of
receiving, and the great sin and danger of neglecting the Lords Supper.

The present State of the Princes and Republics of Italy, with observations on
them; the second Edition enlarged, with the manner of electing Popes, and a
Character of Spain.

Treasons Masterpiece, or a Conference held at White Hall between Oliver
Cromwell, the late Usurper, and a Committee of the then pretended Parliament,
who desired him to take upon him the Title of King of England, etc. with an
intent to exclude the Royal Line, wherein many of the Leading Men of those
times did by unanswerable Arguments assert, and prove Monarchy to be the only,
Legal, Ancient, and Necessary Form of Government in these Kingdoms.

Usury stated. Whereunto are adjoined some Animadversions on Mr. Bolton's and
Mr. Capel's Discourses concerning the same Subject.

Schematologia Grammatica examplis tam Graecis quam Latinis illustrata, ad
defectus Grammatices vulgaris in hac part supplendos. Autore Michaele
Gilberto, A. M.

(...) or, a History of Fevers, composed according to such use of the Parts,
circulation of the Blood, and the various Offices both of the Limpid Liquor,
and Nervous Juice, as have been the happy Discoveries of Modern Anatomy;
together with a more particular description of the uses of the Spleen and
Pancreas; as also of the manner of Natures proceeding in the several motions of
Fermentation and Ebullition, than has been formerly divulged.

The present state of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, as to the
Government, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs, Revenue, and Territory of
the Dutch: in three Books; Collected by W. A. Fellow of the Royal Society.

Accidence Commenced Grammar, and supplied with sufficient Rules; or a new and
easy Method for the learning of the Latin Tongue. The Author John Milton.

The Golden Calf which the World adores and desires; in which is handled the
most rare and incomparable wonder of Nature in transmitting Metals. viz. How
the entire substance of Lead was in one moment transmitted into Gold Obrison,
with an exceeding true Particle of the Philosophers Stone at the Hague, in the
year 1666; written in Latin by John Frederick Helvesius, Doctor and
Practitioner of Medicine at the Hague: faithfully Englished.

Medicina Statica; or Rules of Health, in eight Sections of Aphorisms,
Originally written by Sanctorius, chief Professor of Physic at Padua,
Englished by J. D.

Physic for Families, or the new, safe, and powerful way of Physic upon
constant proof established, enabling every one at Sea or Land by the Medicines
herein mentioned, to cure themselves, their Friends and Relations, in all
Distempers and Diseases; without any trouble, hazard, pain, or danger of
Purges, Vomits, Bleeding, Issues, Glisters, Blisters, Opium, Antimony and
Quicksilver, so full of perplexity in Sickness, by W. Welwyn Physician.

Compendium Politicum, or the Distempers of Government under these two Heads,
The Nobilities desire of Rule, The Commons desire of Liberty, with their proper
Remedies in a brief Essay on the long Reign of King Henry III. By J. Y. of
Gray's Inn Esquire.

Books newly Printed.
Of the Excellency of Monarchical Government, especially of the English
Monarchy: Wherein is largely treated of the several Benefits of Kingly
Government, and the Inconvenience of Commonwealths. Also of the several Badges
of Sovereignty in general, and particularly according to the Constitution of
our Laws. Likewise, of the Duty of Subjects, and the Mischiefs of Faction,
Sedition, and Rebellion. In all which, the Principles and Practices of our late
Commonwealths-men are considered. By Nathaniel Johnston Doctor in Physic.

Sir William Dugdale's Summons of the Nobility to the Great Councils and
Parliaments of this Kingdom, etc.

Dr. Combers First and Second Book about Tithes, with a Discourse of
Excommunication.

Dr. Stern Archbishop of York, his Book of Logic. In Octavo.

Dean of Durham his Counsel and Directions, Moral and Divine to a Young Gent.

Swinborns Treatise of Spousals and Matrimonial Contracts.

The Installation of the Duke of Norfolk, Earl of Peterborough, and Earl of
Rochester, all newly published.


