The Judge's Authority OR CONSTITUTION: A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral
Church of St. Peter in York, upon Monday the 7th day of March 1669/70, at the
Assizes holden for that County before the Right Honorable Baron Littleton; The
Right Worshipful Sr Philip Monckton Knight being High Sheriff of Yorkshire. By
James Johnson Bachelour in Divinity, and Fellow of Sidney-Sussex College in
Cambridge.

Credant qui volunt, malle me legendo, quam legenda dictando, laborare. S. Aug.
de Trinit. l. 3. in Prooem. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the
University, for Samuel Simpson Bookseller in Cambridge, 1670.

TO THE Highly and worthily Honored Sr PHILIP MONCKTON Knight, High Sheriff of
YORKSHIRE.
HONORED SIR,
TO make a trivial Apology for publishing the following Sermons, would be as
idle, as themselves in this scribbling age to some may seem superfluous. Those
usual reasons of friends entreaties, and desired Copies might be as justly
alleged by me, as they are commonly by others; but these cannot so far
prevail, as your commands, no longer now to be disputed, much less denied.

Sir, Your word carries Authority with it not only ad praelium, sed ad
praelum, in submission to which (though I exchange charitable ears for critical
eyes) I rather choose to expose my self to the censure of others, then become
guilty of any disrespects to your self.

And though the meanness of these discourses may a little impeach the judgment
of you the Approver, Mihi nunqua^ placuit cuiqua^ illustri viro, and tanta,
quanta es ipse sublimitate conspicuo, praesertim non ociosa dignitate jam
fruenti, sed adhuc publicis negotiis, eisdemque militaribus occupato, aliquid
meorum opusculorum legendum impingere, etc. S. Aug. de nup. and concupis. ad
Valerium, l. 1. c. 2.
and not a little show the inabilities of me the Composer, yet they presume to
present themselves, being not only ennobled by your repeated commands, but
emboldned by your readiness to receive them into that Patronage and protection,
they cannot more confidently implore, or better expect then from your self, who
have lately so eminently appeared, and still make it your business to dethrone
those Epidemical and reigning sins they decry, and to uphold the forsaken
Justice they plead for and maintain. Whilst others enjoy their places for
private advantage, you freely conferring your Offices, make use of yours for
the Common good, in laying down whereof, you may avow as Nerva (in a case not
much unlike) did, se nihil fecisse, quo minus possit, imperio deposito,
privatus tuto vivere, with so much integrity have you demeaned your self in
your place, holding on (like a Cato or Fabricius) in the course of Justice,
notwithstanding all the difficulties did occur.

Macte ergo sis virtute tua, praestantissime Philippe, never to find what
another good Philip of the last Age, to his great grief Old Adam too hard for
young Melancthon.
did, any thing too hard for you, but continue so prosperous a Patriot in your
country, that no Two nightsprung mushrums that sucked the earths fatness from
far better plants than themselves, growing up in Hen. the 7th time, and cut
down by Hen. the 8th. Speed, p. 762, 766.
Empson or Dudley may be able to stand before you, and that by the faithful
discharge of those great Trusts reposed in you, you may if possibly exceed the
renown of your noble Sr Philip, and Sr Francis, Grandfather, and Father, and
the present Sr Philip, all sequestered Knights in one house at the same time.
Ancestors.

And as from his late Majesty of glorious memory, you had the Knighted at
Newcastle for eminent service done against the Scots, 1644.
sword of Honor, as an Ensign or Trophy of your valor, Toga Aca^emica relicta
Miles evasit.
early brandished over your undaunted head, so have you by his present Majesty
this addition, viz. Philippus ex utroque,
both swords Civil and Military, put into your hands, as a farther mark of his
Royal Grace and Favor, for your former Loyalty, and signal Services.

And though you may now with -- Vejanius armis Herculis ad postem fixis latet
abditus agro. Horat.
Vejanius, justly hang up your armor, and betake your self to rest, Tanquam
miles emeritus, yet to the joy of your Country, are you still employed to
serve your King and them, doing worthily in Ephratah, and being famous in
Bethlehem.

Sir, to enumerate particulars were more fit for a Volume than an Epistle, yet
should my pages swell in that kind, I need not fear the imputation of the
Delphick Oracle, in the case of your namesake of Macedon, niis (...), for all
is so well known in your own County, the very mention of your Name is enough to
bring them to remembrance; amongst which the grand and public affair (fit
only for so public a spirit as your own) now in hand deserves not the least
commendation.

Be not dismayed, Exo. 32. 20.
Great Sr, if a Golden Calf be not so soon broken, or burned, as once it was.
New upstart Idols (as our Henry the seventh upon another On Perkin Warbeck (who
following the steps of Lambert Symnel) was another cheat, that then also abused
the people.
occasion said) were always God Almightie's vexation; and so are they his
people's too: but yet when zeal and power unite against them, they cannot long
be idolized. Ld Verul. in vit. Hen. 7.
A Golden Eagle was once observed to fall down at the approach of a Noble
Philip, and still Magna est veritas, and praevalebit: which that it speedily
may, I with the joint suffrages of innumerable more (both injured and others)
of our Country men, do congratulate its valorous Champion, (...). Ignat.
Epist. ad Polyc.
and cordially wish an event proportionable to the merits of your Cause, and an
issue as successful as your designs are just and honorable: so prays he whose
ambition is to be

Sir The meanest of Your Votaries, J. J.
Sid. Suss. Coll. Camb. October. 20. 1670.
Deuteronomy. 16. 18, 19. Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates
which the Lord thy God gives thee throughout thy tribes, and they shall judge
the people with just judgment.

Thou shall no wrest judgment, thou shall not respect persons, neither take a
gift; for a gift does blind the eyes of the wise, and and pervert the words of
the righteous.


IT were to be wished, that the dictates of reason and religion, that the rules
of justice and equity, that the laws of Christianity and piety, were so
generally entertained, and cordially embraced, that the voice of oppression and
injustice, of deceit and wickedness, of fraud and violence, were not so much as
heard amongst us; then would primitive innocence, and neglected justice (that
divine Astraea that has left the earth so long) return, and once more take
place amongst us; then would the world become as a garden of Eden, no forbidden
fruit of what belongs not to us, would then be touched, nor would there be any
serpent there, to envy at, or tempt us from our happiness: then might every one
with no less satiety than content, eat the fruit of his own vine, and sit under
his own fig tree; then would each man's possession by a secure and peaceable
enjoyment thereof be doubly blessed unto him. The Wolf might then (as the
Prophet Isaiah speaks) dwell with the Lamb, Chapter 11.
and the Leopard lie down with the Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion, and
the fatling together, they should not hurt, nor destroy in all God's holy
mountain. But whilst in stead of this divine and evangelical, this calm and
serene, meek and innocent temper, men (if so they may be called that cast off
all reason and religion, and abandon natural justice and equity) become brutish
and savage, inhumane and ravenous, the garden of Eden is turned into a
wilderness, and men become serpents to each other; or as the same Prophet
expresses it, Chapter 34.
the wild beasts of the desert meet with the wild beasts of the island, (...),
Ignat, Epist. ad Antioch. si sit Ignat.
satyrs and vultures, tigers and dragons, viz. men of cruelty and barbarity,
of brutish and unnatural dispositions become possessours of it.

And now man that is by nature (...), (as the Philosopher terms him) a gentle
and sociable creature, made for converse and society, becomes degenerate, and
overthrows those very foundations that should uphold it: they that should be
helps and supporters, become supplanters and underminers of each other: instead
of Homo homini Deus, (...) Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesios.
it is Homo homini Lupus, and men live together, as though they were made to
bite and devour, to ruin and destroy one another. And as being impatient of
all restraint and control, the excentrick and irregular passions of such
degenerate minds become so furious and headstrong, as that which was intended
for their restraint, does but irritate, and stir them up, and make them
oftentimes the more outrageous, like the troubled sea (to which such like men
are by the Prophet compared) they are continnally casting forth mire and dirt;
and as the waves thereof contemn all bounds, and in anger foam, and clash, and
break themselves against the rocks that keep them in, so these men's restless
and raging passions overflow all banks that should bound them, -- magnoque
irarum fluctuat aestu. Virg.
and in contempt spit defiance in the face of laws, and lawgivers. And now when
men's passions become as wild and boundless, as they are otherwise lawless and
unaccountable, it is time for the law to take courage to it self, and double its
strength to chastise the boldness of such offenders, it is but equal that that
against which they offend, should become the instrument of their punishment.
Thus by reason of offenders, laws and the execution of them become as
necessary, as they would otherwise be useless, and the Magistrates power to
preserve every one in his right, and defend him from the violence of another,
is as requisite as the prostitution of laws to every extravagant and unbridled
humor would be intolerably pernicious and mischievous; to prevent the sad
consequences, and insufferable enormities whereof, Judges and overseers of the
law are constituted and appointed for the safety and security of those that
live under its protection; that there may be a due and right administration of
justice, and that the people may be judged with just judgment, without
wresting, or distoring that which is the common rule of every one's right;
without favoring or respecting any persons, upon whom the law looks with an
equal and impartial eye; without selling, or taking gifts for that which the
law freely dispenses and imparts to all. This is the end and design of the law;
this is the duty and employment of Judges and Officers of Justice; this is the
work and business of this time; and this accordingly is the injunction and
command of Moses here in his charge to, or concerning the Judges. Judges and
Officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates, which the Lord thy God gives
thee, and they shall judge the people with just judgment, etc.

In which words here is
1. Judicum institutio, the Judge's authority, or constitution, Judges and
Officers shall thou make thee. 2. Judicii executio, the Judge's Office and
employment, viz. the execution of Justice, they shall judge the people. 3.
Judicandi modus, the manner how that execution of Justice is to be performed,
1. Positively, with just judgment. 2. Negatively 1. Without perverting of
equity, Thou shall not wrest judgment. 2. Without partiality, Thou shall not
respect persons. 3. Without bribery, Thou shall not take a gift;


And that enforced by a twofold reason,

First, because it blinds the eyes of the wise;

And secondly, as a consequent of that, because it perverts the words (or, as
some read it the matters) of the righteous.

The Charge consists of many parts, each of which might be directed to the
several persons concerned in the administration of Justice.

To the Head and Chief of which, that sits in Moses's chair to hear and
determine, judge and pass sentence, to him that gives a charge to others, in
the first place is a Charge given, Thou shall judge the people with just
judgment.

To him that prepares and makes ready the cause for the Judge's hearing, the
Advocate or Pleader to whose care and trust the state and suit of the Client is
committed, when he speaks in a cause, there is a caveat for him, Thou shall not
wrest judgment.

To him that is returned to serve as a sworn man or Juror, in matters of grand
or petty inquest; or that is in any office of trust, or place of service in, or
about the Courts, so as it may come within the verge of his power to do a
suitor a courtesy, or displeasure, is the next injunction, Thou shall not
respect persons.

Lastly, to him that is bound over to prosecute for the King in a criminal
cause; or that offers himself as a voluntary informer upon some penal statute,
or is brought in by process to give public testimony upon Oath; or comes of
good or ill will to speak a good word for, or a contrary one against any
person, is the last prohibition, Take not a gift; when he opens his mouth to
give witness, he must not open his hand to receive a gift, for a gift does
pervert the words of the righteous.

But because the several corruptions of justice do often unite in the same
persons, and as the Philosopher observes of moral virtues are concatenated and
linked together in the same subject, that the same men Proteus-like put on
several shapes, that they rather endeavor an engrossing of all abuses, than a
monopoly of any particular one to themselves, and that by such a complication
of them, they (as Saint James speaks in another case) in many things offend
all, I shall not be so injurious to the words, as to imprison them in such
narrow limits, and confine that to some sort of persons, A prima hujus versus
dictione quintam hujus libri sectionem incipiunt Hebraei, quam vocant (...)
Vatab. in l.
to which men's general practices have unhappily given a greater extent and
latitude.

The first thing that presents it self to our view, is the Judge's authority or
constitution; Judges and Officers shall thou make thee. Moses in the precedent
verses had given charge concerning religious matters, he now descends to civil
affairs; as before he had taken care for the establishment of piety toward
God, so here he endeavors the promotion of justice toward men: the affairs
both of Church and State fall under the Magistrate's care and inspection, he is
custos utriusque tabulae; both the Tables of the Law were given Moses to be
kept, and though he once in anger broke them, yet now in zeal he takes care for
restoring and preserving of them. What he here gives in charge and command to
others, was the discharging of that which himself undertook, like Gideon to his
followers, or Caesar to his soldiers, he bids them do no more, than what he
had done before them. At first indeed he judged the people by himself, but
their contentions growing as numerous as their persons, and their strifes as
endless, as they were unreasonable, that soon became a burden too heavy for his
shoulders alone, chapter 1. 12. How can I my self alone bear your cumbrance, and
your burden, and your strife? and therefore following Jethro his father in
law's advice, Exodus 1^. 25.
he chooses out among the people able men to perform that task with him, that
they might judge of the smaller matters, whilst only the harder causes were
brought unto him; and what he then commanded, he again at this second
promulgation of the law charges upon them, thereby perpetuating his care to
successive generations, whom he appoints to make Judges and Officers over them.

By these two names, Judges and Officers, some think the same persons to be
meant, so a Lapide, Judices and Magistratus constitues, i. e. praefectos, pula
viros sapientes qui quasi Magistri and Magistratus praesint juri dicendo, iidem
ergo sunt Judices and Magistratus. The words indeed (...) and (...) here used,
are often placed together, and so by some taken for synonymous terms; but
Pagnin gives a caution against this, Cave (says he) ne cum plerisque
interpretum, utramque vocem confundas; and for the distinction of them, makes
mention of several sorts of Judges or Magistrates among the Jews.

First, (...) Seniours or Elders.

Secondly, (...) Judges.

Thirdly, (...) Exactours (who exacted what the law required.

Fourthly, (...) Prefects or Masters, being the same which is here rendered
Officers, and is distinguished from Judges, because Judex judicabat, Praefectus
exequebatur quod judicatum erat, Item Executores Graecis (...)* saepe (...)
coactores. Late se diffundebat eorum munus, ut non tantum ad causas injudicio
decisas spectaret, sed magistratus nomine alia populo intimarent, Jos. 1. 10,
11. v. Crit. M. P.
the Judge passes sentence or determines, the Officer puts in execution what is
so sentenced or determined. The Septuagint renders it, (...), Judges and
Magistrates shall thou make thee, with which agrees the Chaldee paraphrase, and
vulgar latin, but according to the Syriac version it is, Judges and Scribes,
Wolphius renders it Apparitores, Junius and Tremellius, Moderatores, some
translate it Decanos, others Duces, Officiales, Ministros Magistratuum, or
Castigatores; Apparitors, Moderators, Officials, Captains, Leaders, Virgers, or
Correctours, according to the last of which Paulus Fagius thus distinguishes
them, (...) sunt Judices, qui determinant causum, sive judicium, (...) sunt qui
dominantur populo, and exequuntur mandata eorum, scilicet Judicum, cum virga
and flagello; their office being much of the same nature with that of the
Lictors among the Romans, and so rendered castigatores, those that chastise or
correct the people, agreeable with the third sort of Magistrates among the Jews
called (...) Exactours, to which happily that of the Prophet Isaiah alludes,
Isa. 60. 17.
I will make thine Officers peace, and thine Exactours righteousness.

Or by Judges and Officers may be distinguished the Supreme Judge from the
rest, either in the great Council or Sanhedrim of the Jews consisting of 70
Elders, or 71, Godwin l. 3. c. 8. Edit. Lat.
or sometimes 72 if the High Priest were there, in which he that sat chief, in
the place of Moses was called (...) Praefectus, and (...) Excellens; or else in
the less Council consisting of 23 which were in the smaller cities, except
those that had not 120 men in them, and then only three Judges were placed
there. Or these Officers might be those that attended at those Councels to be
taught and instructed in their proceedings, (called, (...) scholars of the
wisemen) like young students at the law that come to hear the Judge's sentence
in doubtful and controverted cases, or as St. Paul that sat at the feet of
Gamaliel to be instructed in the law; So Grotius upon the words, Ad pedes
sedebant discipuli, ut ipso usu jus addiscerent, and in morientium aut
decrepitorum locum surrogarentur, that so those who sat at their feet to learn
the law, might be so skillful therein that they might at length be made Heads
or Governors.

Or perhaps these Officers were only those that waited on those Courts, as
preco's or cryers, scribes or notaries; Ad^rant (as the forecited Author
adds) duo scribae, praecones totidem, etc. of which scribes or notaries, one
stood at the right hand to write the sentence of absolution, and what was
spoken in defense of the party, and the other at the left hand to write the
sentence of condemnation, and the objections made against him; to which, some
think, Mat. 25. 33.
Christ speaking of the last Judgment, had reference, he shall set the sheep
on the right hand, but the goats on the left.

Or lastly, these Officers most probably were those that were in manner of
Sheriffs, who were present to execute what the Judge determined, whence they
carried up and down their staves and whips, as the Consuls at Rome had their
rods and axes carried before them, for the more ready execution of justice. To
this seems to allude that of Saint Luke, Chapter 12. 58.
When thou go with thine adversary to the Magistrate, as thou art in the
way, give diligence that thou may be delivered from him, lest he hale thee
to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer.

But however these two may differ as to their kind and dignity, their
subordination or dependence upon each other, yet they agree as to their common
aim and end, their design and institution, in promoting justice, and executing
Judgment. These are the powers which are ordained of God, and are (as the
Apostle speaks) his Ministers continually attending upon this very thing. Romans
13. 6.
The Magistrate's power has the stamp of divine authority impressed on it,
(and that more firmly, than Phidias's image was on Minerva's statue) and
therefore they that resist this power, resist the Ordinance of God; and of such
there are a generation in the world, impeaching Magistracy with the titles of
tyranny and usurpation, and branding all justice with the names of cruelty and
oppression; such there were in the Apostle's time: 2 Ep. 2. 10.
Saint Peter makes mention of some, who despise government, and are not afraid
to speak evil of dignities; Jude 8.
and Saint Jude of such whom he calls (...), filthy dreamers, who despise
dominion. Such were the Manichees of old, who conceived that Magistracy was a
constitution of their bad god. Of the like stamp were the Weigelians and
Swenkfeldians of later years; and such it is to be feared, if we may guess by
their practices, are too many amongst us at this day, whose principles (durst
they so far vent themselves) would animate them not only to pluck the sword of
the Spirit, (the word of God) out of the mouths of Ministers, but the sword of
Justice too (had it not too sharp an edge for them) out of the hand of the
Magistrate, that so their licentiousness might escape the punishment of the
latter, as well as the reproof of the former. Thus it was with those famous (or
rather infamous) leading rebels, Corah, Dathan and Abiram, who set themselves
up, not only against Aaron the Priest, but against Moses the Magistrate, and
thought both of them took too much upon them, to lift themselves above the
congregation of the Lord, and therefore they both envied Aaron his Priesthood,
and Moses his Authority, they would neither hear Aaron's bells, nor kiss
Moses's rod, neither give ear to the one nor obedience to the other. But let
these spurn at this authority in their pride, or reject it in their folly, yet
it is the power of God, and the ordinance of God. Governors (says the Apostle)
are sent by God; Pe^. 2. 14.
this is their commission; By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice: By me
Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. Prove. 8. 15.
The Magistrate is, (...), Romans 13. 4.
the Minister of God (says Saint Paul) a revenger to execute wrath upon him
that does evil.

It is the divine authority which makes that justice in the Magistrate, which
would be cruelty and murder in another, and who shall tax his obedience to that
authority to be criminal or faulty? The divine providence has not entrusted
the Sword of Justice in every private man's hand; if it were so placed, how
soon would each man, (like Cain) upon any distaste sheath it in his Brothers
bowels, and make it drunk with the blood of revenge? If every one might be the
righter of himself, and revenger of his own wrongs, the world would soon become
an Aceldama, a field of blood; and therefore God, who has prohibited all
private Christians (who are naturally partial in their own causes) to avenge
themselves, has authorized the public Magistrate with his Commission to be
the avenger of wrath, or (as Saint Peter speaks) to be for the punishment of
evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well: for this end are Judges
and Officers constituted and appointed: Judges and Officers shall thou make
thee, and they shall judge the people; which is the second thing propounded.

2. Judicii executio, the execution of Judgment. The original word (...) to
Judge, signifies both jus dicere and exequi, to determine what is right, and to
execute what is so determined; the first is a decree of Judgment, the second is
the execution of that decree; the first is an act of skill or understanding,
the second an act of courage and resolution; both which are requisite in him
that judges: the act of judging supposes ability and skill in him that
undertakes it; hence Judges were anciently called Cognitores, Epise. nup. Linc.
and cognoscere in approved Authors is as much as to do the office of a Judge,
as Seneca, si judicas cognosce; it is a necessary qualification to be able to
know the truth, Med. 2. 2. Ignoranti^^. judicis saepe fit calamitas innocemis.
that so in difficult and intricate cases covered with darkness and obscurity,
perplexed with windings and turnings, overlaid with cunning and crafty
conveyances, they may extricate and find out that which would otherwise be lost
in a maze and labyrinth, set free and deliver that truth which otherwise would
be shackled and imprisoned; necessary to which is the examination of witnesses,
and hearing evidences, and considering allegations, and weighing circumstances,
and putting in cross interrogatories, and making queries, and raising doubts to
overweigh and out-balance the craft and subtilty of those who of purpose
involve the truth of things with falsehoods and deceits; In animis hominum
multae latebrae.
all which as they are necessary to a right determination, so they are only
subservient to a due execution; the other acts are lame and imperfect without
this to complete and finish them. This is that which adds life and strength to
the laws, without which, notwithstanding all the other formalities, they would
die and languish: by execution the Judge breaths life into them, and is
therefore called by the Philosopher (...), and by some of the Ancients (...),
the living law; Execution of laws is as necessary as the promulgation, or
constitution of them; God has put a sword into the Magistrate's hand for this
end, Romans 13. 4.
and he expects he should not bear it in vain; not bear it only for honor, or
safety to himself, but to strike fear and terror into offenders. Rulers are
not a terror to good works, but for evil; v. 3.
not to bear it as a badge and ensign of authority, but to draw it out as an
instrument of justice and severity. Where there wants execution, there wants
not transgression, impunity encourages to all iniquity, Maxima peccandi
illecebra est impunitatis spes.
not to light slips only, but to gross enormities, so that according to the
Rabinical proverb, (...) transgressors need a Session-house, the laws suffice
not to keep men in due bounds, In severit^^^ judicis, sita e^i legum authoritas
the Judge must necessarily exert his power to execute the laws; and he that
does not this, at the same time both robs the law of that defense which should
secure it, and himself of that innocence which should protect him; for he that
punishes not those faults which are in offenders, thereby transferrs them upon
himself; the guilt is devolved upon his head, Qui par^^ mali^ laedit bonos.
Parcendo saevit.
who by punishing it in some should have prevented it in others. To which
purpose is that story of Lewis King of France, who being at his devotions, was
solicited by a Courtier to pardon a malefactor, that was found guilty of
death, the King without any more ado, made a sign with his head, that he
granted his suit; but presently after, chancing to read a verse of the 106.
Psalm, containing these words, Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he
that does righteousness at all times; v. 3.
he bid call him again to whom he had granted the pardon, and disanulled it
with this memorable Apophthegm, viz. The Prince that can punish a fault, and
does not punish it, is no less guilty before God, Camerar. p. 398.
than the offender himself. According to which was the wise answer of a certain
fool or Jester made to a King of the same land, who found fault with a Courtier
that had begged pardon of him, saying that this was the third murder he had
committed, nay King, quoth the Jester, this suitor has committed but one of
the murders, it is thou that art guilty of the second and third, for if thou
had not granted him pardon for the first, Camer. p. 400.
he had not lived to have done any more. It was his first pardon which promised
him so much security, as encouraged him to commit the like enormity. Thus
according to that principlein moral policy, an ill executour of the laws is
worse in a state, than a great transgressour of them. It is the non-execution
of laws that is the cause of so frequent breach of them, for those, the
neglects whereof are the severeliest punished, are the least violated, else why
are murders and robberies (though too often, yet) more rarely committed, than
those common sins of drunkenness, whoredom and the like, but that the laws are
put in execution against the former, but scarce, or not at all against the
latter, such a connivence at misdemeanors makes offenders, and (as the Royal
Psalmist speaks) frames mischief by a law; this is rather to stifle and
suppress the law, than to execute it, and to make it partial in its
proceedings, than to judge according to just judgment, which is the third
thing proposed.

3. Judicandi modus the manner of its execution, and that

1. Positively, (...) judicio justitiae, with the judgment of justice, summa
aequitate (as Vatablus) or as the Syriac version may be rendered, that he may
teach the people the judgment of equity. That is just or equitable, which is
regulated according to the law, proportioning punishments to the nature of the
offense, neither giving more nor less than that deserves; to punish less, gives
too much encouragement to others to offend, to punish more, gives too great
cause of complaint of injustice to the offendour, for innocence it self suffers
so far as any is punished beyond the demerits of the offense. The Romans had
their fasces or bundle of rods with an axe in the midst to signify the equity
of the Magistrates in punishing some only with a rod, others with an axe, the
one for petty, the other for capital crimes; and the Poet in the Greek Epigram
taught the silver axe of justice carried before the said Roman Magistrates to
proclaim, (...)
(...)


If thou be an offender, I am an axe to punish thee; but if innocent, I am
only silver not to affright thee.

When judgment is justly executed, there is no fear of punishment to the
innocent, nor flattering hopes of escaping justice to the delinquent; when
Judgment is thus laid to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, when
every fact is laid to the rule of the law, and sentenced according to its
rectitude, or obliquity to it, when every action is weighed in the balance of
justice, and receives sentence according as it is found wanting, then the
people are judged with just Judgment. Justitia jus suum cuique tribuit.


This is that, which is both the peoples safety, and the laws security, it is
that which both conveys and entails a blessing upon a State or Nation; it is
both columna and corona reipublicae, a prop to make it firm in it self, and a
crown to render it glorious in the eyes of others; this is that which (as the
Psalmist speaks) when the foundations of the earth are out of course, upholds
the pillars of it; it is as the cement in a building to unite and hold together
the several parts of it. Jus and aequitas (as the Orator phrases it) sunt
vincula civitatum: it is in the body politic, as joints and ligaments, as
nerves and sinews in the body natural, by this is its strength derived and
preserved, for by righteousness (according to that of the wise man) is a nation
exalted, and by judgment is the Throne established. Justice and Judgment are
such inseparable adjuncts of the Throne and Nations happiness, Remota justitia,
quid sunt regu^, nisi magna la^^oci^ia.
that they who subvert and undermine the one, do thereby necessarily destroy
and raze the very basis and foundation of the other, and there can be no
greater enemies to a King or Kingdom, than those that by thus doing set
themselves against both, nor scarce can there be any sadder symptoms of a
declining and decaying nation, than when justice is thus obstructed, and
Judgment is turned backward. No wonder therefore that Moses the King in
Jesurun, strengthens his command concerning Judgment, with a threefold
caution, that like a threefold cord it might not easily be broken, which is the
Negative part of the injunction, Thou shall not wrest Judgment, nor respect
persons, nor take a gift. All which prohibitions were so necessary to be
observed in Judgment, that, Rabbi de Cozi.
as Simeon de Muis notes from some of the Rabbis, when Solomon ascended the
several steps of his Throne (mentionned, 1 Kings 10. 19.) there was a praeco or
herald appointed to cry when he entered upon the first step (...) Thou shall not
wrest Judgment; when he ascended upon the second: (...) Thou shall not respect
persons; when he ascended upon the third (...) Thou shall not take a gift.

The first prohibition is,
1. Thou shall not wrest Judgment. The Septuagint renders it, (...) they shall
not decline Judgment; so the vulgar Latin, nec in alteram partem declinent,
(...) (as the Chaldee paraphrase) thou shall not pervert, or (according to the
Syriac) thou shall not bend Judgment, nec prece, nec precio, in loc.
as Lyra. Wresting of Judgment is here immediately opposed to just judgment,
which seeing it is that which proceeds according to the standard of justice,
viz. the law, which is the rule of right and wrong, when that rule is
distorted, then is Judgment wrested; And to do this, as it is contrary to the
nature of the law, so to the office of those, to whose protection the law is
committed. Judices, (as one descants on the word) are juris indices, they must
jus dicere, as their name signifies, and jus dare too, as their office imports.
The Judge is the laws interpreter, he must not make it speak, but what it
means, to do otherwise is to make it act a part of Jesuitism, to declare one
thing, and by a mental reservation to understand another. Jus wrested is turned
into vis, the letters transposed, and justice perverted; the former of which is
not so obvicus, as the latter is pernicious, for this does not only enervate
and weaken the law, but thwarts and crosses the very end and design of it; it
makes it patronize that which it chiefly opposes and contradicts, and under a
pretense of justice, to do the greater injustice more plausibly and securely.
This was one of those great evils which Solomon saw under the sun, that in the
place of judgment, Eccl. 3. 16.
wickedness was there, and in the place of righteousness that iniquity was
there; This is so much the greater iniquity, by how much it shrowds it self
more closely under the covert and pretext of equity: simulata aequitas, duplex
iniquitas. This is to make the sword of Justice turn its edge, and do execution
upon those whom it should protect and defend; it is to make the law instead of
being an hedge of defense, become as so many thorns and briars to rend those
whom it should preserve; it is to convert a medicine into poison, to turn the
rod into a serpent, to make that an instrument of cruelty, which is the rule of
equity, and is so much the more intolerable, by how much it cuts off all the
means and methods of redress.

Scepters born by Kings, and the Maces of Magistrates are all straight emblems,
of that justice which is held forth by them; (...) the Scepter carries a kind
of instruction with it, the straightness thereof should be a memento to shun
crooked and perverted judgment: he that wrests the law, crooks the Kings
Scepter, and falsifies that which more lively than his coin, bears his Royal
impress on it; to do thus is to make the Kings laws (like the Pope's Canons)
plumbeas and cereas (as one speaks) waxen and leaden laws, to bend and bow this
way or that, and (by perverting them besides or contrary to their genuine
sense) to make them become guilty of the same soloecism with that of the
Canonist, Statuimus, id est, abrogamus, we command this, that is, we do the
contrary.

And as Judgment is wrested by perverting the law, so likewise by perverting
those actions of which the law takes cognizance; and this is too often done by
Jurours who give in a verdict besides or contrary to the nature of the fact, or
matter that is brought before them, as though a verdict had its name given by an
Antiphrasis, like Diogenes his man, manes a manendo, because he would often be
running away; so a verdict from verum dicere, because they make it speak the
contrary.

This is done too by those, whose profession they think obliges, or at least
allows them to make the best they can of their Clients, and the worst of their
adversaries cause, against whom upon some plausible pretense they usually run
descant at pleasure, perverting what is said or done, either to make their
matters ill when they are not, or else aggravating them to make them seem worse
than indeed they are; and thus nimium altercando, they are like that
Rhetorician that could mirifice res exiguas verbis amplificare, wonderfully
amplify small matters with great words, for which Agesilaus thought he
deserved no more commendation, than the shoemaker that made great shoes for
little feet: and though these may count it the glory of their profession (as
Protagoras, and the old Greek Sophisters were wont to do) by dexterity of wit,
and volubility of tongue (...), to make the worse side the better, yet a good
Orator as well as good man (which Cicero joins together, vir bonus dicendi
peritus) should make use of both the one and the other, to decry injustice and
defend equity, to protect innocence and crush oppression, to detect fraud and
advance truth, De Consid. 1. 4. c. 2.
to succor the distressed and help them to right that suffer wrong. They that
make use of their rhetoric or eloquence, The famous Orator Pericles (when
Advocate in Greece) from the principles of nature, ever before he pleaded a
cause, entreated his gods that not a wo^d should fall from him besides his
cause.
reasons or arguments for or against any person should not be as the Roman
Advocates (of whom St. Bern. complains, Hi sunt qui docuerunt linguam suam
grandia loqui, etc. these are they that have taught their tongues to speak
lies, nimble-tongued against righteousness, skillful to defend falsehood, wise
to do evil, eloquent to oppose the truth) but rather be as St. Paul, able to do
nothing against, but for the truth.

The second prohibition is,
2. Thou shall not respect persons; though a civil respect of persons be
elsewhere commanded, yet a judicial one is here forbidden; though respect of
persons is due in offices of humanity, and overtures of love, yet in the Gate,
in the seat of Judicature, (...) Thou shall not acknowledge; or (as the Syriac
version) thou shall not honor faces. The Septuagint changes the person, (...),
they shall not know a face, or person. The Greeks usually render it by (...),
which word non personam significat sed personae attributa, and circumstantias,
in Ephesians. 6. 9.
it is properly verbum forense, and de judicibus proprie praedicatur, as
Zanchy. Respecting persons is a sin incident to those who are conversant about
matters of judicature and transactions of law, and ('it is to be feared) is as
frequently practiced, as it is seldom rightly understood; When Jurours consider
not so much the cause, as the persons betwixt whom it is depending, when
respect to the latter sways more than equity in the former; when the verdict
speaks the language of their affection, not of their judgment, and is the
result of their malice or prejudice, not of their knowledge or Conscience. When
the authority of the Foreman (whom the rest usually follow as sheep) or the awe
of some great person, vir gregis. qua itur, non qua eundum.
or interest of some relation, or suggestion from some friend, or consciousness
of self-guilt, or hopes of favor in the like case, prevails with any of them
more than the justness and merits of the cause it self.

When witnesses swear home in one man's cause, but nicely or not at all in
another, because they fear some men's persons, or bear ill will to, and malign
others, making their love or hatred a rule of their evidence, rather then the
obligation of their oaths, or sense of duty.

When an Advocate or pleader argues the cause of the indigent faintly and
coldly, but that of the rich with a great deal of zeal and ardour; when the one
is narrowly and strictly examined, the other slightly and perfunctorily passed
over: when all dilatory courses are used to protract and delay the one, but all
means made use of, to expedite and dispatch the other.

When by him that passes sentence, a cause is weighed in the balance not of
equity, but of favor and affection; when the person commends the cause, not
the cause the person, like that of Caesar, Causa Cassii melior, sed Bruto nil
denegare possum; such a man's cause is the better, but the other is more my
friend, such a case is equitable, but another's person is more considerable; so
that the respect and reverence which is due to right and equity, is given to
the rich and mighty, and laws hereby (as Zeleucus, or Anacharsis complained of
old) become like cobwebs, wherein the smaller flies are caught, but great ones
are not ensnared by them; petty thieves wear chains of iron, but grand robbers
chains of gold; manacles and halters lay hold on less transgressors, whilst
the great ones break these bonds asunder; small offenders receive severe
correction, whilst the great ones escape unpunished. To prevent which
partiality, and respect of persons, the Areopagites, the Athenian Judges, had
their judicatures in some dark rooms, and passed their sentence in the night,
that they might not be biased by prejudice or affection to those upon whom
they passed judgment, but that sentence might be given equally upon all, poor
or rich, small or great. In pursuance of which impartiality, Torquatus a Roman,
and Zaleucus a Grecian, spared not to sentence even their own sons. Favor must
not be showed by any, only (...), as the Heathen speaks, only to the altar,
so far as Religion and piety will admit; and by the Magistrate (...), only to
the Judgment seat, so far as Justice (which confines affection) will give
leave. Exuat (says the Orator) personam Judicis, qui induit amici, which
likewise was the apophthegme of Pericles an eminent Judge and Chieftain in
Athens, that when he put on him the person of a Judge, he put off the person of
a friend: the affection of a friend suits not the function of a Judge; hence
was that renowned act of Brutus, who condemned his two sons to be executed for
conspiring with Tarquin's Ambassadors against the Common wealth, sacrificing
their lives for the preservation of that justice which was more dear unto him,
so exactly was he observant of what is here prohibited, not to respect persons.

The last prohibition is,
3. Thou shall not take a gift. Omnia venalia, the complaint of old, that all
things are set to sale, grows yet but slowly out of date, being still too much
verified amongst us, whilst scarce any office or place is to be had without
Judas his question, what will ye give? We have not only of old had the Pope's
ridiculous merchandise, sale of pardons; and of late the Poet's venales manus,
sale hands, or mercenary soldiers; and still sale Churches, by those who are
rather the Plagues, than Patrons thereof, selling their own and the people's
souls for Balaam's reward; but venalem Justitiam, sale justice, (or rather
injustice under that name) by those that are (...), Heluones patriae, and
p^cuniae.
or (...), enhansers of fees, bribe-eaters or ravenous devourers of gifts, who
hasten to the Tribunal as Dramoclidas and Stratocles in the Historian, tanquam
ad messem auream, as to a golden harvest, hoping for such Clients that shall
come to them, Sicut hydropicus, Quo plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntur aquae. Non
missura cutem, nisi plena cruoris hirudo.
as Jupiter came into Danae's lap, per impluvium in a shower of gold, after
which they have a constant thirst continually crying out with the greedy
daughters of the Horsleech, give, give.

This is a sin which has both multitude of offenders to plead for it, and the
greatness of the delinquents to grace and countenance it; insomuch as it is
made a note of a generous and heroic mind to receive great gifts, and not
stoop unto any mean or sordid prey; and it is counted a badge of folly, and
sottish stupidity to be bashful in exacting bribes, when the party is backward
in tendering of them; few being of Epaminondas his resolution, Neque in mala
causa neque in bona fieri debet, de mala vix quisquam dubitat. Qui autem bonam
habet causam, and sibi injuriam facit and judici si munus offerat. Rivet. in
Exodus c. 23.
who (though poor, yet) refused great presents sent to him, saying, If the
thing were good, he would do it without any bribe, because good; if not honest
he would not do it for all the goods in the world. Of the like mind was
Phocion, to whom an hundred talents being brought as a gift from Alexander, he
demanded of the messenger, wherefore 'twas sent to him, rather than to any
other of the Athenians, and upon this answer returned, because he knew him to
be an honest and just man, then, said he, I would entreat your master, that he
would suffer me to continue in my honesty and justice; implying, that he could
not possibly be such an one, if he suffered himself to be corrupted with
rewards; which when they are entertained, the receivers of them are so far
animated, Non hospes ab hospite tutus, non s^cer a genero, fratrum quoque
gratia rara est, etc. Lucrum in arca damuum in consci^^tia.
as they will adventure upon any villainy, suborn witnesses, distort justice,
oppress the innocent, devour widows and orphans, betray their friends, enervate
God's laws, and the King's, violate equity and conscience, and whatsoever is,
or should be dearest to them.

-- Quid non mortalia pectora cogit
Auri sacra fames. --
These and many more are the mischiefs that are effected by the unsatiable
thirst after that, Eo etiam sacra illa sames nonnul^os adigit, vt patriae
preditores fiant, ut Philippu^. Macedo non tam armis quam auro libertatem
Graeciae expugnavit. Diffidit urbium portas vir Macedo, and subruit aemulos
Reges muneribus: munera nav^ium Savos illaqueant duc^. Horat. l. 3.
which (as the Apostle speaks) is the root of all evil: all the other
corruptions of justice are small and inconsiderable, if compared with this.
This is more dangerous in its enterprises, more successful in its event, more
pernicious in its practices, more bewitching in its allurements, more secret in
its workings, and more universal in its infection, than all the other
intercepters of justice and judgment; and therefore whereas they are mentioned
with a single prohibition, this is urged with a double enforcement, for

First, It blinds the eyes of the wise.

Secondly, It perverts the words of the righteous.

1. It blinds the eyes of the wise: Crescit peccandi libido, ubi redimendi spes
datur, and facile ad culpam itur, ubi venalis est innocentium gratia. Ecclus
20. 29.
A sword is put into the Magistrate's hand, but a bribe turns the edge thereof;
though the law bids strike, yet a gift stays the hand; when the law should give
sentence, if there be bos in lingua, it stops its mouth; so the wise son of
Sirach, Presents and gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and stop up his mouth
that he cannot reprove. Wresting of Judgment distorts and draws the eyes
aside, Ut lances in eam partem vergunt in qu^ plus ponderis, ita magistratus in
^am, in qua plus aeris.
and favor makes them pore-blind, but gifts quite blind, and put them out. The
Ancients painted justice, peplo oculis obducto, with a veil drawn over her eyes
to signify that no partiality by bribes, or other means should be admitted in
the administration of justice; and the Statues of the Judges in Egypt were
without hands, and with their eye lids closed, against those two soloecisms,
Cambyses Persarum Rex Sesamen unum ex Judicibus, quod injuste ob pecuniam
judicass^t, interemit, and interempto detractum corium in lora cons^idit,
quibus tribunal in quo deinceps sedens judicaret, operuit, ilique filium ejus
Otanem sedere judicem praecepit, atque in memoria habere ex quo tribunali
judicaret.
respecting persons, and taking gifts: so also the Judges Oath in Athens
protested against both, with imprecation and wish of destruction to himself,
and his house, if he transgressed in either; to prevent both which was Jethro's
direction to Moses, The Kings of England also when they put the sword of
Justice into the Judges hand, speak the same words in effect, and the Judges
solemnly protest and swear, that they will use the same sword indifferently
between the King and the subject. So it was the saying of Trajan the Emperor,
Hunc tibi trado gladium, ut pro me utaris cum justa facio, contra me vero
utaris si injusta facio. And the Egyptian Kings presented this Oath to their
Judges, not to swerve from their consciences though they should receive a
command from themselves to the contrary.
to choose out for Judges those that were men fearing God, and hating
covetousness; fearing God, that they might not respect the persons of men, and
hating covetousness, that they might not receive a gift, which as it does blind
the eyes of the wise, so

Secondly, It perverts the words of the righteous, verbainnocentium, or
justorum (as some) Causas justas (as others) verbarecta (...) (as the Chaldee
paraphrase) right words, or the words of those that would seem to be, or are,
or should be righteous.

It perverts the words of him whose tongue is hired to speak what another
pleases; of the Pleader that shall argue indifferently for right or wrong,
Justus Advocatus a nullo injustas causas accipit.
as his fee emboldens him; that shall palliate and smooth over any cause,
though he speaks against his own and the judgment of the law, which is venalis
Advocatorum perfidia; (as was sometimes said of the Roman Advocates) such being
like the Oracle of Delphos, whereof Demosthenes complained in his time, that it
did speak nothing, but what Philip would have it, who had given a double fee.

It perverts the words of the Jurours, who often weigh out their sentence
proportionable to the gift that is received, (...) pollet (...)
with whom the greatest evidence often times is not half so convincing as a
secret gift; a bribe shall be more persuasive than all the evidentest testimony
that can be brought; their mouths will be open for him, whose hand is so
toward them, and that cause shall be best, which brings the best reward with
it; Ibifas est, ubi maxima merces.

Lastly, It perverts the words of the witness, who will swear or forswear at
what rate his briber will have him, who regards not so much what Oath, as what
gift he has taken, Qui (...) amentum a malo viro postulat, insanit.
for which either Naboth's blasphemy, or Susannahs adultery shall be attested,
though neither the one was spoken, nor the other done; ^mp oborum ^uramentum ^n
aqua scribe.
like knights of the post that make a jest and sport of an Oath, a play and
pastime of a deposition, that will exchange a testimony (which is verborum
munus as some paraphrase upon the words) with a brother of the same fraternity,
as they used to do in Greece, Hodie mihi, cras tibi.
(...), swear for me to day, I Will do as much for thee to morrow.

Thus they justify the wicked for reward, and condemn the innocent without
offense; they invert the nature and order of justice and equity, they make a
sinner just, Isa. 5. 23.
and a just man a sinner, they take away (as the Prophet speaks) the
righteousness of the righteous man from him, not considering that God shall
come in vengeance as a swift witness against them; Mal 3. 5. Job 15. 34.
that fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery, and that the habitations
of such men shall be desolate.

And now seeing there are so many corruptions of Judgment, and so many hands
through which justice must necessarily pass, every one of which are ready to
receive gifts, Prove. 17. 23.
and thereby to respect persons, and so to wrest Judgment (the latter of which
Solomon makes the consequent of the former, A wicked man takes a gift out of
the bosom to pervert the ways of Judgment) it is no wonder if a good cause
has not always the happiness to succeed well, nor is seconded with an event
proportionable to its equity. If thou see (says the same Solomen) the
oppression of the poor, Eccl. 5. 8.
and violent perverting of judgment and justice in a province, marvel not at
the matter; but yet as it follows there, he that is higher than the highest
regards, and there be higher than they.

Wherefore let all that have any hand in the administration of justice, Psalm.
82. 1.
consider (as the Psalmist speaks) that God stands in the Congregation of the
mighty, (...) (...).
and that he judges among the Gods; let them bear in mind that great account
they must e're long make unto him, Epist. ad Heron. sub nom. Ignar.
and remember that a day is coming, wherein all (both small and great) must
appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, and with what judgment they here
judge others, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
themselves must then be judged, and with what measure they mete to others,
Mat. 7. 2.
it shall then be measured to them again.

And if the consideration of that future Judgment will not deter men from
acting injustice, the immediate address, next under God, must be to your
Lordship' s wisdom, and integrity, to regulate and overruled, and by present
judgment to correct and punish such offenders, that so the obstacles of
justice being removed, Job 29. 17.
Judgment may run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream; that
the jaws of the wicked (as Job speaks) being broken, and the spoil plucked out
of their teeth; the ear that hears you, Chap. 1. 1^.
may bless you, and the eye that sees you may give witness to you. I shall end
all with Moses s charge to the Judges; Hear the causes between your Brethren,
and judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the stranger that
is with him, you shall not respect persons in judgment but you shall hear the
small, as well as the great, 2 Chr. 19. 6, 7.
you shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is God's; or
with that charge of famous Jehoshaphat, as parallel to the text, Take heed what
you do, for you judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the
judgment. Wherefore let the fear of the Lord be upon you take heed, and do it,
for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor
taking of gifts.

FINIS.

