A SUDDEN ESSAY, With a sincere desire to vindicate Christianity, or the
Common Faith: From the superlative Heresies, or fantastical Novelties, of all
selfe-particular Sciolists, endeavoring the subversion of the same: by seven
Arguments used in Opposition to Mr. John Biddle, Febr. 18. and Febr. 25. 1654.
at his School in Coleman-street.

By Richard Jackson, Master of the Free Grammar School in Sedbergh, and
Preacher of the Gospel in Garsdale.

LONDON, Printed by THO. HARPER. 1655.

To his Highness the Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Sir,
THis bold address is made, not to move for any secular aid or armed
assistance, either to maintain the Arguments, or mall the adversary. The
Catholic faith, (once delivered to the Saints) is a truth which humane
authority seldom understands, nor ever ought to change or alter.
Magistrates, in my conceit, may do well to countenance what they conceive to
be right and Canonical, so they do not for the interest of their own sense,
by secular compulsion, suppress all different Opinionists, walking orderly in
reference to the worlds polity. When Kings or Parliaments act otherwise, I am
in great fear it is more for their own ends, then advance of the faith, which as
all other Religions may be retained as an instrument of tyranny, (so one of
the Turks has acknowledged) not as a saving truth. And therefore I could not
think, but that the late Parliament incurred some reproach, in so casting this
learned Opinionist into Prison, contrary to the notorious example of some
Calvinisticall Magistrates in Geneva, meddling with a more superlative Heretic,
Servitus the Spaniard, and quite against the moderation of such able mn, as was
that pious Bishop of Marseilles [Salvianus.] So giving scandalous advantage to
our clamorous Adversaries, who conclude an absolute necessity of secular
compulsion, subordinate to Ecclesiastical power, without the which, sects will
abound, and baffle the ablest of Bishoply Doctors; saying also, it is
irrational to think, that these Arrian questions, can be definitively
resolved, by a critical libration of dead and uncertain words, as if in these
mysteries, the spirit were not Gramatically plain. Therefore deeming this
opinion better corresponding with the profane and ignorant, then with the
pious and able in Scripture understanding; in the first place I humbly Petition
your Highness that mine Adversary may be free to write what he pleases, in
answer to the Arguments, or for his own Assertion; for upon pretended fears
they have refused the proffered way of giving and receiving just satisfaction,
and in this fai^e way if I cannot wrap him up in such apparent obstinacy
against the evidence of the word, as the indifferent must acknowledge, I (...)
then openly confess mine ignorance and presumption, knowing full well that in
my defaylance, Christ has many others, with spiritual weapons sufficiently
armed for the work, unto which they are called and excited by reason of the
combat and opposition of the contrary minded, which is an eminent effect of a
fatherly providence so provoking truly pious souls to awake from that lethall
security wherein long tranquillity had plunged them: so that if we counter
poyse the good accruing by these men's rousing of their zeal and forces, with
the loss sustained by others straggling out of the way, the profit will at
length surmount the prejudice by plain and Apodeicticall Arguments against all
heretical novelists, Phanaticke opinionists, and Atheistical Epochists,
abounding heerabouts, who have Apostarized from the primest reputation of
strictest profession into the horrible darkness of irreligion, making that
very thing an unanswerable argument for liberty; from the which, Papists, and
some of our Protestant Grandees with a self confounding sottishness, do
obstinately assert compulsive authority: for this point thoroughly sifted will
induce by degrees an orderly discussion of all these articles, wherein he
differs from the unanimous consent of those who are called Orthodox, and by a
clear reflection serve to refell those hyperephanian fancies which obey pride
as a father; for he is not to be found, I fear, amongst the phanaticke or
new fangled, who had not rather be leader of some straggling troop though in
the path of perdition, then an humble Disciple in the school of truth, evinced
by Scripture evidence. But this and the rest are humbly referred to your
Highness further examination, in a reverend regard to your gracious aequanimity
and great ability to distinguish the chiefest Argument of a prime magistrate,
really apprehensive, imperare liberis, which very thing to the Princes of this
world seems impossible.

Your Highnesses humble servant in the truth, (...) Jackson.

Argument 1. from Act. 20.26.27. and cap. 26.22. with Romans 16.26.
IF the Apostle Paul were obliged to declare the whole counsel of God from the
Scriptures Prophetical, and that he did declare according to his obligation,
then the Apostle Paul did declare and preach the blood of Christ (which is the
blood of the New Testament powered out) to be a proper sacrifice for sin.

Assumpt. But the Antecedent is evident from the places alleged, Ergo, the
Consequent is infallible, viz that Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles did so
declare and preach. The Consequence of the Proposition (which Mr. Biddle
denied) is proved thus.

If one of the Prophets have expressly asserted his soul a sacrifice for sin
(which is a term in the Old Testament, and in the Mosaicall Phrasiology, unto
which Isaiah refers himself and all others, chap. 8.20.) aequipollent to
that of blood, then the Consequence is undeniable.

Assumpt. But one of the Prophets has expressly so asserted, Isa. cap. 53.10.
Ergo, the Consequence is undeniable, the Consequence is unquestioned, etc. The
Assumption was proved thus, Deuteronomy. 12.23. Take heed that thou eat not the
blood, for the blood is the soul, as it was then evidenced by the express
words both of the Hebrew Original, and the Greek Septuagint or Translation.
Again, by Levit. 17.1^.14. where the Greek and Hebrew Texts were both
alleged again as speaking expressly, that the soul of all flesh is in the
blood etc. And (says the Lord) I have given you the blood upon the Altar to
make an expiation of your souls, for the blood is that which makes an
expiation for the soul, which Mr. Jackson then compared with that in Heb.
2.14.17. observing unto us (by the way) that the son of God participated of our
flesh and blood, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest to
propitiate for the sins of the people, and therefore that he was an high
Priest, before he came in heaven, according to our nature assumed, and his
blood so assumed which was his life, (as touching the flesh 1. Pet. 4.1.) the
most proper part by which he did sacrifice himself, or suffer for us to purge
our sins. To this Mr. Biddle had nothing then to reply, but captiously sought
evasion from the double signification of the Hebrew word Asham, asserting that
it signified sin; which Mr. Jackson acknowledged, but averring withal, that
here it must signify a sacrifice for sin, without which there was no sense.
Mr. Biddle therefore alleged that in 2. Cor. 5 21. which he boasted to
clear: but so they brangled rather then disputed out the time. But presently
after Mr. Jackson told us, that to clear that Text from all or any such
sophistical evasion, it was needful to consider the Idiom of the Hebrew
expression; and secondly to weigh those two words Levit. 7. Asham and Chattah,
which are in the Lexicons promiscuously used, in the very same acceptions,
though there seems to be a difference in the degree of Guilt, and in this
difference the aggravation lies upon Asham, Levit. 7.

Then to clear this by Apodeicticall Argument. If these two words Asham and
Chattah do commonly according to the Idiotisme of the Hebrew, signify and
design, some Calfe, Bullock, or such like creature, as a sacrifice for sin,
and that Mr. Biddles evasive Allegation, be sottishly wicked, and against the
express word; then the Text in Isai. 53.10. is full and clear enough to prove
the blood of Christ a proper sacrifice for sin.

Assumpt. But these two words etc. do commonly according to the Idiotisme of
the Hebrew (and the phrase of the Spirits expression) signify a sacrifice for
sin, and design some Calfe, or the like, for the same purpose, as may clearly
appear by Levit. 7.1.

This is the Law (Haasham) not of sin, but of the sacrifice for sin, or of the
trespass offering etc. with Exodus 29.36. Thou shall make the Calfe (Chattah)
not sin, which were absurd, but an offering for sin, etc. with Levit. 16.6. and
11. verses. And Aaron shall bring, or make to be brought, (not the Calfe sin)
but as the Septuagint renders it, the Calfe the sacrifice for sin, etc. So also
in verse 11. and several other places, but these may suffice, to show the
vanity of Mr. Biddles evasion: and withal that S. Paul's phrase 2. Cor. 5.21.
(which Mr. Biddle catched at to countenance his captious escape) is a mere
Idiotisme of the Hebrew tongue. He has made him sin, that is to say, a
sacrifice for sin, by laying all our iniquities upon him, Isai. 53 6. without
the which he could never become a sacrifice for sin, nor be made a curse, as it
is said Gal. 3.13. and was intimated by Mr. Jackson, who to avoid the prolixity
of a critical contention, in this or any other of like nature, will refer
himself to any learned Theologue, (or because they cannot endure the name of
Divines) to any able man in these original languages.

Secondly, that Mr. Biddles evasive Allegation, is sottishly wicked, and
against the word, may appear: 1. for then either the essence of the soul must
be made sin, quite contrary to all Philosophy or Divinity, (which always
asserteth sin to be an Ataxie or privation) except we should revive the
monstrous fantasy of the Manichees, or the scandalous imagination of Mathias
Illiricus, so much scoft at by Cardinal Bellarmine.

Or secondly made the soul sin, i. e. sinful, as one of Mr. Biddles
Proselites, with a Legal or Law driving Gravity, has averred, viz. that
Christ died for his own sins, which is against the express Text of Heb.
7.26. 1. Pet. 2.22. And this very place in 2. Cor. 5.21. ton me gnonta
amartian, that has not known sin; that is to say, has not sinned, or has no
experience of sin. For so Christ is said to learn in matter of sufferings; and
we also to know when to try by experience what we had by speculation.

Ergo, that text in Isaiah 53.10. is clear enough to prove the blood of Christ
a proper sacrifice, from what has been said in Levit. and Deuter. to evidence
that the expression of the spirit in Isai 53.10. does intend the life and so
the blood, by the term of soul. I will but only add our Saviors own
language in John 10.17.18. The Father loves me because I lay down my life, or
my soul, (as it is in the Original) or my blood, according to the Mosaicall
Idiotisme, the law and rule of Prophetical speech, Isai 8.20. which was the
blood of the new Testament powered out, a proper sacrifice, offered by the
command of his father, who made him an high Priest, as shall be proved
abundantly.

Argument 2. From Heb. 9.23.
IF the opening of the entrance into Heaven Heb. 9, 11 12, the consecrating of
the same, Hebr, 10, 19, 20, and the purging of those who enter, Heb, 9, 14, be
by the blood of Christ, or Christ's own blood, then the blood of Christ, or
Christ's own blood, must needs be one of those better sacrifices, Heb, 9, 23,
(or that better sacrifice) (answering and exceeding those of the Law) whereby
the blot of sin is purged, and the wrath of God is pacified.

Assumpt. But all these were by the blood of Christ, or by Christ's own blood;
as appears plainly from the very letter, Ergo, the blood of Christ must needs
be one of those better sacrifices, or that better sacrifice.

The connection or consequence of the proposition is infallible, by the whole
coherence of the Apostles discourse in that Chapter. So that no wrested
interpretation can bear water against the clear and unforced evidence of the
word. What Mr. Biddle has said, is very obscure and incertaine, what he can
say to entangle the evidence of this argument let him briefly discover, so as
we may examine the truth of his conception, and we shall either fairly accept,
or fully refell it. But let every sound Christian diligently observe, how the
spirit of Christ in that part endeavors an exact parallel between the
typical of the Old, and the true blood of the New Testament even to the word
of sprinkling Heb. 9, 20, 21, with cap. 10, 22: and to that purpose speaks of
purging heavenly things, ^o make the blood; of Christ answerable to that of
Bulls ^^d Goats, which purged (also) the holy of holies. Into which though the
people never entered, yet thither (it seems) their uncleanesse extended,
Levit. 16, 14, 16, 17.

Even so as if the impurity of our nature, and its operations, had so
penetrated the Heavens, and made them unclean as it is phrased (Job, 15, 15,)
that they also may be purged, together with the true antitype of the Ministeri
all vessels. But the Argument is clear without examaning what (...) does
intend: which is not the question now, (except one would cavil. And then he
may consider Ephesians, 2.6. with Coloss. 1.20. And so conceive aright without a
Corrector) no more then what is meant by the eternal spirit, cap, 9, 14, which
in due place, shall be declared, to design something Antecedent to the pouring
forth of that blood of the New Testament, Mat, 26, 28, and to intend the very
deity of Christ which is eternal, and did so offer its own blood Act. 20, 28,
But let him avoid such digressions and deal only with the Argument, as it
stands directed unto him.

Argument 3. Ex Hebr. 9, 26, with Heb. 7, 27, 1 Cor. 5, 7, Ephesians. 5.
IF Christ could not be a slain sacrifice, as the word signifies, but by the
wounding of his body, and pouring out of his blood, then the blood of Christ so
powered out is much more properly styled a sacrifice.

The reason is, (...).

Assumpt. But Christ could not be (as the word signifies) a slain sacrifice,
but by the wounding of his body, and pouring out of his blood.

Ergo, the blood of Christ so powered out is much more properly styled a
sacrifice.

I never had Socinus his writings, nor any time to read Mr. Biddles Books,
having my spirit oppressed, and memory burdened with importunate business of
far baser nature, and therefore according to Aristotle, more Narcotical to all
intellectual abilities; such pettifogging Mammonists, as pride themselves and
fatten their insulting envy if they can captive poor suitors and entangle
Scholars in the woeful Labyrinth of Law practice, are spiteful enemies of the
public good, no less then of truth and piety. Hence it is, that I cannot
certainly say, how far this Argument reaches him; for his Answer was neither
directly nor distinctly returned, but he seemed to me by shuffling so to
overshadow the Text as if Christ were not a sacrifice in being wounded upon the
Cross, and slain here on earth, but only by his personal appearance in
heaven, where he ever lives to make etc. Heb. 7, 25. Therefore that this
Argument may clearly reach him, and conclude absolutely against him, I shall
frame another Syllogism from Ephesians. 5, 2, Heb. 9, 26, cap. 7.27, with 1 Cor. 5,
7.

That which is expressed in the preterperfect tense as a thing done on earth,
in the sight and for the example and imitation of all true Christians, (in one
kind of way) and which could not be effected but by sufferance, which was but
once, nor could nor needed to be reiterated, that can never be interpreted
truly, of his personal appearance in heaven, to make intercession for us, but
must needs intend some proper sacrifice of himself here upon the earth.

Assumpt. But that Christ should be a slain or bloody sacrifice unto death,
(as Divine Justice required for due satisfaction, and the word signifies) 1
Cor. 5, 7 is expressed in the preterperfect tense, as a thing done in the sight
of men, and for their example and imitation, in a kind, Ephesians. 5.2, which could
not be but by sufferance, and was but once, nor could or needed to be
reiterated, Heb. 9, 25, 26, Heb. 7, 26, as the very letter of these Texts does
clearly intimate. Ergo, that Christ should be such a slain Sacrifice, or
bloody unto death etc. can never be interpreted of his personal appearance in
heaven, by the act of intercession, but must needs intend some sacrifice here
on earth, which is that of the nature assumed, both of body and blood
especially, so often inculcated.

The Proposition is undeniable from the Law of Dissentanees, or rather
Disparataes; for of Christ's intercession in heaven, how can it be said, (he
has given himself for us, as a slain sacrifice) which the word thusia there
signifies, being derived of thuein to kill; as in Hebrew Zebach a slain
sacrifice of Zabach (Mactare, to kill) which none will contradict, not disposed
to cavil. Secondly, how can that giving or presenting of himself, be
presented to us for example, seeing in that action he never fell under humane
sight or observation? Thirdly, in that sense it may be said, he will give
himself for us, again and again, so often as we stand in need of the spirit,
and of special application in times of perilous tentation, but cannot as a
slain sacrifice; for that death can have no more dominion over him, nor he any
more to suffer in the flesh, Romans 6, 9, with 1 Pet. 4, 1.

For the Assumption, (called the minor) it is evident in every part of it, from
the express words of the Texts, recalling but to mind the true signification
of thusian, a slain sacrifice, which may be cleared from Matthew 22, 4. 1 Cor.
5, 7. Mine oxen and my fatlings (...), slaughtered etc, What in Scripture were
called Sacrifices, espetially explatory, were to be destroyed, If living
creatures, by slaughter (as other things by combustion, and some by effusion)
and the bodies of those offered for sin, to be burned without the Camp, which
is the reason why some one in Eusebius. called it (...), a fume, or exhalation,
which ascends from the burning: when God by inspiration did order Abel and
others successively to officiate by expiatory sacrifice, he intended but to
shadow out the supreme sacrifice of all to be expected. Dan. And therefore not
only the use of the thing was to be offered unto God, but also the very life
and substance of it, which occasioneth this word and phrase, Ephesians. 5.2. in
correspondence to the types. And because I would have Arguments to exceed in
weight rather then number, Mr. Biddle may for further illustration take notice,
that the Apostle in Heb. 8.3. plainly gathers and concludes, that he could
not have been an high Priest, except he had that sacrifice which he could
offer, viz our humane nature both of body and blood Vid. Gen 22 7.

That Divine Justice required such a sacrifice, for due satisfaction, may be
easily made manifest afterward, and illustrated also from the eminent instance
of Zaleucus*

This third Argument is coincident with that which I used upon our former day
of Debate, Febr. 18. 1654. viz. whatsoever agrees to the whole principally in
respect of any essential part, is more properly praedicated of that essential
part, then it is of the whole.

Assumpt. But to be a proper sacrifice expiatory, agreeeth to the person of
Christ, 2. Cor. 2.10. by reason of the humane nature assumed, viz. the body
Heb. 10.10 and the blood especially, Heb. 9, 22, with Math. 26, 27, 28.

Ergo, the blood or the body is more properly styled a sacrifice.

This Argument thus urged, entangled us in a tedious and disorderly contest
before the non-intelligent; Mr. Biddle denying the Proposition, and giving an
instance against it, which seemed too gross and insufficient, so that at
length by a comparison I brought him off it, to the acknowledgement of
Theological axiom, viz. that if any one should call him or me Gowry fellow,
in reference to a Gowty leg, then Gowtinesse were more properly praedicated
of that integrall part, then of the whole, etc. So likewise for the other
alleged, viz that whosoever denominateth any thing so, or so, is much more
properly such then that which it so denominates. If Apollos for his tongue be
entitled an eloquent man, then his tongue is much more properly so entitled.
I hope Mr. Biddle will not balk the best sense of what is alleged.

Argument 4.
SEeing the slight esteem Mr. Biddle had of Divines, I durst not allege that
axiomaticall Assertion, of the most Dianoeticall Doctor, amongst all those
Latin lights, who from the Church have shined unto the world in life and
Doctrine, however casually by increasing snuffes obscured, viz. that the
passion and death of Christ, is a most true and perfect sacrifice. Which Mr.
Biddle seems (for as yet I have found no clearness, or constancy in his
assertions) to make (together with the blood powered out) but only as certain
previous actions to that sacrifice or oblation (without any distinction of
these words used by him, in my hearing) which was not made upon the Cross when
he lost his own life; But only by his presentation in Heaven where he
lives for ever. To which purpose (as I remember) he used an illustrating
assertion, viz. that the bringing and killing of the beast, the pouring out of
the blood, and the burning of the body, were not the sacrifice, but the taking
of the blood of the Goat, or Bullock, and so making an atonement by carrying it
into the Holiest of all etc. Therefore some things here, had need be
interposed, not to increase the number, or trouble the tenor of our Discourse
used in our Diatribe, but only to clear the candle of whatsoever obscureth, or
may entangle the inexpert in the word of righteousness, Heb. 5.13.

We must proceed to a fourth Argument against that pretense of some previous
actions, as distinct from, and therefore not formally proper to the sacrificing.

If the presenting of the Beast before the Tabernacle, made it a sacrifice, the
killing and pouring out of the blood were the proper sacrificing of that beast;
and then that the taking of the blood, and the sprinkling of it about the Altar
of Incense in the holy place, were only a typical circumstance, to show the
efficacy of that blood formerly sacrificed etc. and so to shadow out, Heb. 10,
1. the virtue and efficacy of Christ's blood once offered, by which he entered,
(as it is assorted already) and now ever lives to intercede for us, so to
obtain, for our consolation, the Holy Ghost, in our greatest calamities of
conscience. Then the denying of Christ to be a proper sacrifice by assuming
our nature, and presenting himself in the same here upon the earth, Heb. 10,
6, 7, 8, 9 and especially by pouring out his blood upon the Cross, Heb. 10,
10, as if yet he were no sacrifice for all that (nor any purgative efficacy in
his blood so offered) but only by the offering and presentation of his person
in heaven, is a most abominable slighting of the blood of God, Act 20, 28, and
brainsick error, as shall be evidenced.

Assumpt. But the former part of the Antecedent is most evident from those
Books of the Law, Exodus Levit. Numbers.

And the other clause or part of it, is apparently proved by what is already
alleged from Heb. 9.

Ergo, the Consequent is conclusive and infallible.

Truth like virtue clears its way as it goes; so here I hope. And to this
purpose on Febr. 18. I insinuated (against his mystical asseverations) from
Heb. 9, 27, that there was a vast disparity between these two terms, (...) and
(...), to offer, and to appear, but it was not resented or observed, except by
himself, though the Apostle in that Chapter, separateth the apparition from
the oblation far enough, bringing in, and establishing the one, upon the by
passed efficacy of the other, (which is already evidenced;) and upon his
appearing, utterly denying all further oblation. Observe but the Text, and you
must needs see it, Heb. 9, 24, 25, not that he should offer himself, etc.
though some may easily see a difference between sacrifice and oblation; for
that some things may be offered which are not sacrificed, yet are they
promiscuously used in reference to the person of Christ, Ephesians. 5, 2, Heb. 10,
10, with cap 9, ^6. But neither the Holy Ghost, nor the Greeks, I trow, did
ever use (...), i. e. an oblation, for (...), i. e. an apparition. If they did,
then produce an instance from some Classick Author, for I suppose you able for
such a purpose, if it be possible for any to find such a place.

Lastly, to clear all this (upon which I have interposed between the Arguments)
briefly: If Christ's entering once by the sacrifice of himself, that is to say,
of his own blood, Heb. 9, 11, 12, be holden forth by the spirit, as in a
certain Antitypicall opposition, only proper in being opposed to the entrance
of the High Priest, each year with others blood, Heb. 9, 25.26. with v. 11,
12, then the spirit never intended to teach us any comparative opposition
between Christ's oblation, and the high Priests entrance into the holiest of
all; as if Christ could not offer or sacrifice himself till he came in
Heaven, the oblation consisting in Christ's entrance, by which he became to be
the high Priest of our profession, as Mr. Biddle seems of opinion, though
that overthrows the proportion and long coherence of the parallel so apt and
Grammatically plain.

Argument 5. From Rev. 3, 6, 9, with John 1, 29, 1 John 1, 7, and 1 Pet. 1, 18,
19, with Romans 3, 25.
THat which purges and redeemeth from sin both Positively and Negatively, and
effectually reconcileth us unto God upon our faith or application, that must
needs be offered as a true and proper sacrifice, to the same end and purpose.

Assumpt. But the blood of the Lamb, the Lord Jesus, purges and redeemeth
from sin both Positively and Negatively, and effectually reconcileth us to God,
upon our says or application.

Ergo, The blood of the Lamb, the Lord Jesus, was offered as a proper sacrifice
to the same end and purpose.

The Proposition or major, as they call it, is manifest from the third Book of
Moses, declaring the end and institution of the sin or trespass offerings,
Levit. 5, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. with verses 15, and 16. So also cap. 6, 6, 7. with
cap. 9.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 15. and cap. 16.16, 7, 8, 9. and verses 11 12, 13, 14.
so he shall not die. So in verse 16, 17, 18, 19. All which and diverse other
places make it evident that these were sacrifices instituted for such ends and
purposes, because they did so purge and make atonement, that is to say,
reconcile and redeem from death temporal, according to the tenor of that
Covenant, under which the people then stood, though in comparison they were but
carnal ordinances, extending only to the purifying of the flesh, Heb. 9, 1, 13.

The Assumpt. or minor, as he calls it, is clear from those places alleged,
Revol. 5, 6, 9. Joh. 1, 29. 1 John 1, 7. Heb. 9, 15. 1. Pet. 1, 18, 19. Romans
3.25. with Ephesians. 1, 7.

Ergo, The Conclusion is infallible and undeniable.

To the Assumption Mr. Biddle said, that the blood of Christ had an influence
upon the remission of sins, and toward reconciliation. But what is this
influence think we? For whereas he would and did tie me to the express words of
the text, this word is strange to the text, and serving only for some untouth
interpretation. Does it imply any such formal object of faith, as is the blood
of Christ, To. 3, 25. unto which, (as it is the blood of God, Act. 20, 28.
faith relates with an infallible adherence, as the only prime foundation, in
effect, of all our consolation here, and of all our future hopes hereafter;
else it is but a vain term to avoid the evidence of the text. An influence, and
is that all? for ought I yet understand by that term, he might say, that
Christ's riding upon an Ass, has or had an influence upon the Jews, and our
reconciliation; therefore let him explain, if he be not to seek, what we should
conceive by it; for upon his clear explication, I shall willingly confess mine
own weakness, if I do not make his conceit in this very thing, appear so
absurd and nonsensicall, to any impartial man, that may be found, that it
subverteth the great mystery of our most holy faith; upon which as I told them,
depends all our consolation here, and all hopes of salvation hereafter. Of
the which mystery of Godliness, truly so styled, Mr. Biddle seems in this
novell imagination, either grossly ignorant, or profanely contemptuous.

Secondly, afterward and obiter, as we use to say, Mr. Biddle alleged that
of Numb. 19. concerning the red Cow, etc. concluding from thence, as I thought,
that a thing may be purgative of sin, and yet no sacrifice. I did not then
cause the place to be read or examined, for I did not remember the original
word what it would bear, nor did I deem it pertinently urged at that instant.
But so soon as ever it came in my mind, the same night when I came at my
lodging, I looked for it, and the first Bible I opened rendered it expressly, a
sin offering: and so it is by the two last words of the Hebrew text, Number. 19,
9. yea all the circumstances do there ver. 2, 3, 4, 5. so concur to constitute
a formal sacrifice, that I hope Master Biddle in his serious thoughts will
acknowledge it. And that therefore mine Argument is in that part of this
Assertion irrefragable, viz. the blood of Christ therefore a proper sacrifice,
because purgative, etc.

Now lest he should avoid these two Arguments (as he seemed to endeavor) by
making them only previous actions, to the offering and presenting of his person
in heaven, this may be fairly, firmly, and briefly opposed from the words of
the texts alleged, viz. If the Scripture do imply the person of the
Mediator, as praevious to those actions of sacrificing his own body and blood
according to the clearest conceptions of the most Catholic Doctors in the
Church of Christ, then these actions can never in common apprehension be
conceived and taken as praevious only to the persons oblation or presentation
of himself in heaven, (which Mr. Biddle takes as equipollent terms from Math.
2.11.) nor by the curious neither, without some palpable affectation of novelty
and singularity.

But the Antecedent is very true: ergo, the Consequent. The Assumption is clear
from Heb. 1.3. where the Greek Idiom is very observable; when he had purged our
sins, by himself, Heb. 9.26. Col. 1, 20. 1. Cor. 5.7. Ephesians. 5, 2. or the
offering himself, he did or has sat down at the right hand etc. And how can
he offer himself so, but by the yielding of his body, and the pouring out of
his blood, Tit. 2, 14. Heb. 10. 10. Matthew. 26.28. Heb. 9.14.

And therefore is the spirit so exact in expression, to wit, that he might
reconcile unto himself, having made peace, through the blood of his Cross,
(...) through him, referring all unto his person, as also Ephesians. 2.13.14.15.16.
To say nothing of the most punctual correspondency between the Greek (...), so
emphatically used, Heb. 2.17. to answer the Hebrew Caphar, so often used in the
old Testament, for purging or expiating, to show the perfect accomplishment of
typical sacrifices in that true blood of the Covenant, so sprinkled or powered
out, from such a person, as is called our Passover, 1. Cor. 5.7. Nor should
Mr. Biddle slight, but reverently examine whatsoever such have well said
according to the word, as we have reason to style able Doctors of Divine
mysteries, and graciously instructed in the main; for notwithstanding any
accidental error, yet none of us can without highest impudence, think our
selves comparable to them in virtue or piety, knowledge or judgment, wisdom
or sufficiency. I wish therefore he would peruse and seriously ponder, how
Austen expresses himself upon those four things considerable in every
sacrifice. 1. To whom. 2. For whom. 3. By whom. 4. What. Lib. de Trinit. 4.
cap. 14. So, I think, he might see enough for his satisfaction, and without
any shame receive it from such an Author.

Argument 6. From Heb. 13.20.
Whatsoever is blood of the Covenant powered out and sprinkled, the same is
sacrificed blood, or blood of the sacrifice, shed for obtaining the end of the
Covenant, that is to say, remission offins, as appears by Levit. 7, 2. cap.
5, 9. cap. 9*9 cap. 8, 15. compared with Hebr. 9, 19.20, 22.

Assumpt. But the blood of Jesus Christ sprinkled or powered out upon the
Cross, is the blood of the everlasting Covenant, shed for the remission of
sins and iniquities, never to be remembered any more, as appears plainly from
these texts, Heb. 1^, 20 Matthew. ^6, 28. Heb. 8, 6, 12. Ergo, the blood of
Christ (so sprinkled and powered out) was sacificed blood or blood of the
sacrifice.

This Argument was slightly offered Feb. 25. 1654. in way of refelling Mr.
Biddles fancied evasion, from Argument 2. and especially that which is Argument
5. by saying that it cleansed and reconciled, not as a sacrifice, but as the
blood of the Covenant, etc. which seems a cold distinction without a
difference. But let him answer distinctly upon deliberation, and if he do not
acknowledge this Argument as Apodeicticall, I doubt not but to make it evident,
that he is grossly ignorant of the New Testament, according to the true nature
and tenor of it, which rightly understood, must needs destroy or subdue those
heretical novelties, which exalt themselves against the truths of Jesus.

Argument 7. Gal. 2. ult.
EIther the blood of Christ (so sprinkled and powered out) was a proper
sacrifice, necessarily required for due satisfaction to divine Justice, or God
the Father is to be accused of monstrous cruelty, in so giving up his son, Ioh.
3, 15. and the son himself of temerity, in that he would be made a curse,
Gal. 3, 13. and exposed to reproach and punishment, without a cause, Gal. 2.21,
by that shameful death of the Cross, Philip. 2, 6, 7, 8.

Assumption. But God the Father is not to be so accused etc. nor the son
neither, nor can be without highest Blasphemy.

Ergo, the blood of Christ, so sprinkled and powered was a proper sacrifice,
necessarily required for due satisfaction to divine justice, and to make good
his truth; which is the reason why he has been made the servant of
circumcision. Romans 15.8, submitting himself by our nature, assumed unto
circumcision, that so under the Law he might answer the Law for us, and by
death destroy him who had the power of death: all which evidently appears from
these texts, Genesis 2, 17, Rom, 6, 23. with Rom, 8, 32, 33, 34, and Genesis 3, 15,
with Heb. 2, 14.15, for as Zalucus lawgiver to the Locrians, after that he had
made adultery punishable by loss of both the eyes, although as an absolute
Prince he might have pardoned his son, though convict of the sin, and so have
dispensed with the Law in his particular, yet as a just Prince, or as such as
he desired to be reputed, he could nether pardon nor dispense.

So though I repute it full of irreverence and profane presumtion, to dispute
what is within Gods absolute power, what not, or any way to limit that by the
Law or rule of our speech or reason. Yet, Salva dei Justitia and verytate,
saving his justice and truth, he could not pardone our sins without punishing
them, nor abollish the curse, without undergoing it, nor distroy the death
without enduring it, neither could he so have conquered sin, curse, and death,
as to swallow them up to absolute victory, if he were any other kind of person,
then we confess him, nay now and belleve him to be.

Now to prove the disjunction necessary, take but notice of the opposition of
those two parts in the Proposition, and then you will aprehend, viz. that if
the truth and justice of God had not required such a sacrifice as necessary, it
had been both cruelty and more then Stoicall temerity, or rashness, to make a
person of that dignity, innocence, and meritoriouse eminency, so to suffer the
extremest of all reproaih and punnishment. Mr. Biddle seemed rather to slight
or decline rather then answer any thing to this Argument, so opposed, saying no
more then what I have heard some modern Jews assert upon such like occasion;
But if upon second thoughts he can aver any thing, to avoid the force of it,
and not in so doing, abandon the very basis of the common faith and
christianity, it shall be presently examined and acknowledged.

Mr. Biddle:
THough I have reason to understand you better then some of your Advers^r^^s,
having so lately been an ear witness of your Assertions, yet by a more naked
Discovery, I can better evince the enormity of your new conceits: If you
therefore abound it that candor and ingenuity which you accused me to want, then
let your deliberate Answer be distinct and punctually directed to what
pincheth; never stand upon strictest terms us at the contest, when you and your
Auditors would tie me to prove by express text, viz. the blood of Christ to
be, not only a proper, (or the chief) but the only sacrifice, for so we may
lose the principal, and stray it in the throng of Incidents, which I earnestly
desire to avoid. Whatsoever I have said for your better satisfaction, according
to the sense of that sacred Doctor (August contra advers. Leg. and Prophet.)
viz. quoniam singulari, and solo vero sacrificio Christi sanguis pro nobis
effusus est: which I durst not there allege, lest there both he and I should
be disdayned, but did rather assert the error of your assumed Principle from
our Saviors answer to the Sadduces, and that testamentary instance of Matthew.
26.26. (...), and the ponderation of words used by the Apost Gal. 3. arguing a
maine principle not evidently appearing in the text: to say nothing how they
were written for our search, and that Aristotle says enough to make that
absurdity evident: (...).

FINIS.

