To the right Worshipful, Sir William Stone Knight Mercer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.
YOur friendly disposition (right Worshipful) giving grace to the well meaning
minds, has edboldened me amongst others, to testify that good will in
outward show, which my heart of long time has secretly bore to your Worship;
and now taking opportunity, I present to your fovourable censure, this small
book, containing many quick flashes of the witty jests of old Hobson the merry
Londoner, lately a Citizen of good estimation. And I think not altogether
forgotten of your Worship: Receive this little Treatise (I beseech you) with
favor answerable to my good will, and as your leisure shall serve, bestow now
and then a little reading thereof, which if it please you to do, I doubt not
but you will like well of the labor, and besides the honest recreation which
it offordeth, apply what your worship makes choice of, unto your private
pleasure: and this wishing your prosperity, acceptance to this my gift, and
opinion of the giver: I conclude, hoping that my honest wish shall not be yoid
of a happy success.

Your worships most humbly to command, Richard Johnson*

THE Pleasant life of old Hobson the merry Londoner, full of humerous
discourses, and witty merriments, whereat the quickest wits may laugh, and the
wiser sort take pleasure.
Of Master Hobsons description.
IN the beginning of Queen E^izabeths most happy Reign our late deceased
Sovereign, under whose peaceful government long flourished this our Country
of England, there lived in the City of London a merry Citizen, named old
Hob^o^ a Haberdasher of small wares, dwelling at the lower end of Cheape-side,
in the Poultry, as well known through this part of England* as a Sergeant
knows the Counter gate: he was a homely plain man, most commonly wearing a
buttoned Cap close to his ears a short Gown girt about his middle, and a pair
of slippers upon his feet of an ancient fashion, as for his wealth it was
answerable to the better sort of our Citizens, but of so merry a disposition
that his equal therein is hardly to be found: hereat let the pleasant disposed
people laugh and the more graver in carriage take no exceptions, for here are
meriments without hurt, and humorous jests savouring upon wisdom: read
willingly, but scoff not spightfully, for old Hobson spent his days merrily.

2. Of Master Hobsons proverbs.
NOt many years since, there was Sir John Baynes* (by the commmon voice of the
City) chosen Sheriff of London, which man in former times had been Mr. Hobsons
Prentise, and riding along the streets with other Aldermen, about the City
business, was saluted by M. Hobson in this manner, Bones a me man what a clock
horse-knave, and thy Master a foot here is the world turned upside down: Sir
John hearing this his Masters merry salutation, passed along with a pleasant
smile, making no answer at all, upon which slight regard, M. Hobson took
accasion to say as follows: here is pride rides on horseback, whilst humility
goes a foot, in speaking these words came four other Aldermen riding after
Master Sheriff, whose names were these: Alderman Ramsey, Alderman Bond,
Alderman Beecher and Alderman Cooper, at whose passage by he made this pleasant
rhyme.

1* Ramsey the rich, 2. Bond the stout,
3. Beecher the gentleman* 4. and Cooper the ^out.
This pleasant Rhyme so suddenly spoken by M. Hobson* is to this day, accounted
for his Proverb in London.

3. Of M. Hobson and John Tawny-coat*
MAster Hobson being a Haberdasher of small wares (as I said before) and his
shop on a time full of customers, his negligent prentises ^ar les^y credited a
Kentish Peddler with 10. pounds of commodities, neither knowing his name, nor
his dwelling place, which oversight when M. Hobson understood, and noting the
simplicyty of his servants, and their forgetfulness* demanded what apparel
the fellow had on? marry Sir (quoth one of the Prentises) he had a Tawny-coate
then (quoth M. Hobson) put down Jo^n Tawney-coate, and so was the Peddler by the
name of John Tawny-coate, entered to the book; about a month after, the same
Peddler came again to London to buy ware, and coming to M. Hobson in a Russet
coat, willed him to turn over his book for ten pounds that one John Rowlands
owed him: Ten pounds (quoth. M. Hobson) that John Rowlands owes me, I remember no
such man, bones a good knave thou owe me none: But I do, said the Peddler:
whereupon the book was searched, but no John Rowlands was to be found. I think
thou art mad (quoth Hobson) for thou owe me nothing: but I do, quoth the
Peddler, and will pay it. Being in this strife a long time, one of his servants
said that he had found in the book, such a debt by one John Tawny-coat* That is
my self, replied the Peddler* I was then John Tawnycoat though I am now John
Russet-coat, so paid he ten pounds by the same name to M. Hobson, and received
twenty more upon his own word and name of John Rowlands, the which twenty
pound he shortly after paid for suretyship* and so by his over-kind heart,
paying other men's debts, he grew so poor, and into such necessity, that he was
forced to maintain his living by hedging and ditching, and other such like
country labors: within a while after this, M. Hobson coming into Kent to
seek up some desperate debts, he came to Datford, where finding this poor man
ditching for a Groat a day, in pity of him said, how now John Tawny-coat,
bones a God man thou can never pay with this poor labor, come home knave,
come home, I will trust thee with twenty pounds more, follow thy old trade of
pedling again, and one day thou may pay me all.

Thus the Peddler had new credit of M* Hobson, by which good means he grew
rich, that in time he bought his freedom of London, and therein grew so
wealthy a Citizen that he became one of the Masters of the Hospital, and when
he dyed* he proved a good benefactor to the same house.

4. How Master Hobson called the Lord Mayor of London knave by craft.
MAster Hobson in his youthful time having nothing to dinner on a day but
bread and cheese, good beer and a red herring, and being merrily disposed to
jest, came unto his door to sit, where he said to a Sergeant of London, I have
dined this day (quoth he) as well as my Lord Mayor: the Sergeant hearing this
and being a pick-thanke companion, went and certified his Lordship thereof, who
immediately sent for M. Hobson, being then a man but of mean estate, who no
sooner being come into his presence, but his Lordship would needs know the
cause of his comparison clapping twenty knaves on poor Hobsons shoulders* I
mean not Sergeants, but knaves of my Lord Majors own making? I will teach thee
knave (quoth his Lordship) how to use my name in thy comparison^, and not in
thy beggarly dinners, and drunken banquets to compare with me, and whilst you
live to except me in any thing: and thereupon sent M. Hobson to the Counter,
where he lay some two or three days without bail: but at last being set at
liberty, he met with the same Sergeant again: whom he saluted in this manner,
well met Sergeant (quoth he) by thy means I am commanded to except my Lord
Mayor in all things and so I will, for I think in my conscience, thou art the
veriest knave in all London, except my Lord Mayor. Thus M. Hobson most
cunningly called my Lord Mayor and the Officer, both knaves.

5. How Master Hobson made a light banquet for his company.
UPon a time M. Hobson invited very solemnly the whole Livery of his company to
a light banquet, and for the same provided the greatest Tavern in all London in
a readiness: the appointed hour being come, the Citizens repaired thither
richly attired the better to grace M. Hobsons banquet, but expecting great
cheer and good entertainment, they were all utterly disappointed: for what
found they there think you? Nothing on my word* but each one a cup of wine and
a mancher of bread on his trencher: and some five hundred candles lighted about
the Room, which in my mind was a very light banquet both for the belly and
the eye: by this merry Jest, he gained such love of his company, that he
borrowed g^atis out of the hall, a hundred and fifty pound for two year.

6. How Master Hobson chaulkt his Prentises the way to the Church.
Evermore when M. Hobson had any business abroad his Prentices would either be
at the Tavern filling their heads with wine, or at the Dagger in Cheap Side,
cramming their bellies with minst pies: but above all other times it was their
common custom (as London Prentices use) to follow their Masters upon Sundays
to the church door, and then to leave them, and hie unto the Tavern, which M.
Hobson on a time perceiving one of his men so to do, demanded at his coming
home, what the Preachers Text was. Sir (quoth the fellow) I was not at the
beginning. What was in the middle, (quoth M. Hobson) Sir, quoth the fellow,
then was I asleep: said M. Hobson again, what was ^hen the conclusion, then
replied his servant* I was come Sir away before the end: by which means he knew
well he was not there, ^ut rather in some Tippling house, offending Gods
Majesty, and the laws of the Land: therefore the next Sunday morning after,
M* Hobson called all his servants together, and in the sight of many of his
neighbors and their Prentises, took a piece of chawke and chaw^ked them all
the way along to the Church di^rectly, which proved a great shame to his own
servants* but a good example to all others o^ like condition, after this was
there never the like misdemeanour used amongst them.

7. How Master Hobson hung out a Lanthor^ and a Candlelight.
IN the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reigne^ when the order of hanging out
Lanthorn (...) candlelight was first brought up, the Beadl^ of the ward where
M Hobson dwelt in a dar^ evening went crying upon and down, hang ou^ your
Lanthornes hang out your Lanthornes using no other words. Whereupon M. Hobso^
(...) an empty Lanthorn* and according to the Beadles call hung it out; this
flout by the Lord Mayor was taken in ill part, and for the same offense was
Master Hobson sent to the Counter, but being Released the next nigh^ the Beadle
thinking to ammend his call, crye^ with a loud voice* hang out your lanthorn
an^ candle, hang out your Lantern and candle M Hobson hereupon hung out a
Lanthorn and a candle unlighted as the Beadle again ^ommanded, whereupon he
was sent again ^o the Counter: but ye next night* the Beadle ^eing better
advised, cried hang out your lan^horn and candlelight, which M. Hobson did, ^o
his great commendations, which cry of lan^horn and candlelight is in right
manner used ^o this day.

8. How M Hobson bai^ed the Devil with a dog,
NOt far from M. Hobsons house, there dwelled one of these cunning men,
otherwise called fortune tellers, such cuzning companions to this day (by their
crafts) make ^imple women believe how they can tell what husbands they shall
have, how many children, how many swee-hearts and such like: if goods ^e stole,
who has them with promise to help them to their losses again, with many other
deceitful illusions: To this wise man, (as some terms him) goes M. Hobson not
to ^eape any benefit by his crafty cunning, but to make a jest and a trial of
his experience: ^o causing one of his servants to lead a masty dog after him,
staying at the cunning man's ^oore with the dog in his hand: up ^oes M. Hobson
to the wise man* requesting his skill, ^or he had lost ten pound, lately taken
from by thieves, but when and how he knew no^ well, the cunning man knowing M.
Hobson to be one of his neighbors, and a man of a goo^ reputation, fell (as he
made show) to conju^ring and casting of figures, and after a few words of
incantation, as his common use wa^ he took a very large fair looking glass,
an^ bad M. Hobson look in the same, but not t^ cast his eyes backward in any
case: the which he did, and therein saw the picture of a hog and a large Ox
with two broad horns on hi^ head: the which was no otherwise, but (as h^ had
often deceitfully showed to others) a co^zening fellow like the cunning man
himself cleathed in an Oxes Hide which fellow h^ maintained as his servant to
blind people^ eyes withal, and to make them believe h^ could show them the
Devil at his pleasure i^ a glass. This vision M. Hobson perceiving and
guessing at the knavery thereof gave a whistle for his dog, which then stayed
below at the door in his man's keeping which whistle being no sooner heard, but
the dog ran u^ stairs to his Master, as he had been mad* and presently
fastened upon the poor fellow in the Oxes hide, and tore him as it was
pit^tifull to see: the cunning man cried, for the passion of God take of your
dog: no (quot^ M. Hobson) let the Devil and the dog fight venture thou thy
Devil, and I will venture my dog: to conclude, the Ox-hide was torn from the
fellows back, and so their knave^ies were discovered, and their cunning shifts
laid open to the world.

9. How Master Hobson allowed his wife two men to wait on her to the market.
AS M. Hobson increased in riches, so increased his wife in pride, in such sort
that she would seldom go out of doors without her man before her. Upon a time
having business to Cheap Side market, amongst many other of her neighbors,
the more to show her high and haughty stomach, desired of her husband that she
might have her man to attend her: who seeing her disposition, willingly
consented thereunto, and thereupon called two of his lustiest men put them in
armor with two brown bills on their necks, placing one of them before her, the
other after, and so proffered to send her forth to market: she in a niceness
took such a displeasure hereat, that for a month after she lay sick in her
bed, and would eat nothing but Cawdles made of muskadine.

10. How Master Hobson made a jest of his man's name.
ONe of M. Hobsons Prentices by name was called George Bacon, a near kinsman
of Sir Nicolas Bacon, L. Keeper of England, a youth of much forwardness and
good government: near unto M. Hobson, dwelled a Grocer, which had likewise to
his servant a youth, called by the name of George Hog, also of a good wit and
a pleasant disposition: their two Prentices were great companions, and spent
much time together, whereat M. Hobson being much displeased, called the said
George Hog to him, saying, I marvel my boy (quoth he) why thou keep my
man Bacon company, knowing him to be a Prentise but newly bound, and thou thy
self another man's servant: to whom replied this George Hog wisely saying:
your man Bacon, Sir is a near kinsman of mine* and we can by no means part
friendship: How knave (quoth M. Hobson) a kinsman of thine? let me understand
how it comes: marry thus answered the boy, my name is Hog, and his is Bacon,
two names that cannot choose but be of a kindred: Nay, not so my lad (quoth M.
Hobson) a hog is no kinsman to Bacon till he be hanged, and when thou art
hanged, thou shall be my man Bacons kinsman, till then thou art but a bare
hog: thus by the ^est did M. Honson part their companies.

11. Of an Epitaph that Master Hobson made for a dead man.
THere was a very rich Citizen dwelling not far from London Bri^ge) who in his
lifetime was never known to do any deed worthy of memory: who dying, left M.
Hobson his only Executor, to dispose of his goods, as also to lay upon his
grave a fair marble stone: and as upon marble stones there be commonly
engraven certain verses in the manner of an Epitaph of the man's conversation
thereunder bured, so M. Hobson considering what Epitaph he would set upon his
friends grave, knowing the few good deeds he did in his life time, caused these
two verses following to be engraven upon the marble stone.

EPITAPH.
He was begotten, borne and cried,
He lived a long time, fell sick and dyed.
12. How Master Hobson proved himself a Poet.
MAster Hobson having occ^sion to ride into the wild of Kent, where in that
age Scholars were somewhat scarce, during the time of his tarryance there,
there happened to be buried one John Medcaulfe, a very sufficient Farmer, upon
whose grave was written these verses following, in fair Roman letters: I
desire ye in the Lords behalf,
To pray for the soul of poor John Calfe.


Master Hobson noting the simplicity of the verses, writ underneath as
follows: O thou death more subtle then a Fox,
Thou might a let this Calfe lived to be an Ox:
To have eat grass, hay, and corn,
And like his sire to have worn a horn.


13. How Master Hobson served an Inne-keepers wife.
COntinuing in the wild of Kent, M, Hobson being benighted in travel, it was
his chance to happen into a very poor Inn, where was no more Beds in all the
house but two, the one for the good man and his wife, the other for the Guests
that ^ame thither: and both these beds stood both in one Chamber, for indeed
there was no more (...) rooms in all the Inn: M. (...) supt, was lighted to
bed by the (...) himself* who like an unmannerly Chamberlain set* M. Hobson
never a Chamberpot: which he looking for round the Chamber espied a wodden
Bowl under the good man's bed, and a straining dish of the same fashion hanging
up against the wall: the strainingdish then M. Hobson takes and sets under the
good man's bed, and removed the Chamberbowle from thence, and sets it under his
own. The good man and his wife, according to custom, came to bed without
light, where they had not long lain but the good wife had occasion to make
water and thereupon desired her husband to reach her the Chamberbowle* the
which he did as he thought, but being deceived by M. Hobson, he Gave her the
strainingdish, wherein when she had made water, it ^an quite through upon her
husband: goods my life (quoth the Good man) woman thou spillest over, no
Husband, no (quoth she) it is not yet at my thumb: which in my opinion, was a
mark and custom they had: M. Hobson hereat could scarce sleep for laughing,
but lay and spent the whole night with merry imaginations.

14. How Master Hobson found his Factor in France with a French Curtizan.
MAster Hobson having in France a Factor which dealt for him in Merchandise,
and lacking diverse sorts of wares to furnish his Chapmen for Bristow fair,
sent to his aforesaid Factor (being a merry conceited youth) for certain
matches of such commodities as were then most in request: he mistaking his
Masters meaning, sent him all the matches used for Gunpouder that could be
bought in France, the value of two thousand pounds worth: M. Hobson receiving
them, and seeing himself matched with a commodity of matches, thought all was
not well in France, and that his man neglected his business there.

To know the truth thereof, the next morning very early, not revealing it to
his Wife, in a night gown, a buttoned cap, and a pair of shippers, took
shipping at Billinsgate, and passed over into France, where after some enquiry
made of his man's life and conversation, he found him in a lewd house, revelling
with a most gallant French Curtizan, whom M. Hobson after a smile or two
saluted in this manner: What now knave? what a wenching knave? a rack and
manger knave? bones of me cannot a snatch and away serve your turn knave? is
this the French wares you deal withal knave? his man seeing himself so taken
napping, for a time stood amazed, not knowing what to say, but recoverinh his
senses, he gave his Master this pleasant answer. Though Sir, this ware is a
broken commodity, yet may we deal with them: being dealers with all wares, or
rather Haberdashers of small wares, which is seldom liked of French
Gentlewomen: M. Hobson at this pleasant answer could not choose but pardon him,
and so came they both over into England, where now this rack and manger is
grown to a Proverb.

15. How Master Hobson got a patten for the sale of his matches.
THe Commodity of Matches which his Factor sent him from France, being slow of
sale, considering the little use for them, being in time of peace, like a witty
Citizen, Master Hobson hies himself to Court, being in the days of our
gracious Queen Elizabeth, and having a pattent ready made for the sale of the
^foresaid matches, where so soon as he came into the Queens presence, he
kneeled down, and desired her grace to give an assignement to his Pattent,
declaring What it Was, and the great loss he was like to sustain by that
commodity: the Q. perceiving for what intent he came* and considering the
benefit that would come by such a grant, and meaning to gi^e it to some
Gentleman near unto her, as a recompense for his service, said unto M. Hobson,
my friend (said the Q.) be content for thou shall not have thy pattent sealed,
nor will I give thee thy request: M. Hobson, hearing the Q. denial, said, I
most heartily thank your Majesty, both I and all mine are bound to thank and
pray for your Highness: and low obeysiance, went his way: at these his words
the Q. much marvelled, and when he had gone a little from her, she caused him
to be sent for back again, whom when he was returned, the Q. asked if he did
well understand what answer her Grace did give him: yes truly said M. Hobson:
What said I (quoth the Q.) Marry your grace bid me be content for I should not
have my desire, nor my patten sealed: why did you then (quoth the Q.) give me
such great thanks? because (said M. Hobson) your Grace gave me so speedy an
answer, without either long suit, or loss of time, the which would have been
to my very much harm and great hindrance, for I have at home a great charge of
household to which I am bound in duty to look diligently, and to provide
carefully. The Q. marking well the wisdom and discreet answer of M. Hobson,
and now conceiving a new favor toward him; said now shall you give me twice
thanks and have your pattent sealed, and your desires performed that you sue
for. So casting her eyes upon the Lord Chancellor, commanding the same by him to
be done, which was accomplished with all speed whereby in short time he had
quick sale of his commodity of matches to his hearts content, and his wealths
great increase.

16. Master Hobsons jest of ringing of the Bells upon the Queens day.
UPon Sant Hewes day, being the 17. of November, upon which day the triumph was
holden for Q. Elizabe^hs happy government* as bonefires ringing of bells, and
such like, but in the Parish where Master Hobson dwelled he being
Churchwarden, was no ri^ging at all by reason the Seeple was amen^ing* and the
bells down and being asked by a servant of the Queens house, why they (...)
not? he answered because they had no be^^s in their steeple: Then quoth the
Queens man you may very well sell away your steeple: Why so, quoth M. Hobson,
because quoth the other, it stands empty and vacant* to whom M. Hobson
replied again, we may better sell away our Pulpit, for these twelve months
was there never a Sermon in the same, and it rather stands empty and vacant.
After this the Parson of the Church preached every Sunday following.

17. Of a Beggars answer to Master Hobson.
A Poor beggar man, that was foul, black, and loathsome to behold* came on a
time to M. Hobson, as he walked in Moore fields, and asked some thing of him
for an alms: to whom M. Hobson said I pray thee fellow get from me, for thou
look as thou cammest lately out of hell: the poor Beggar perceiving he
would give him nothing, answered; forsooth Sir, you say true, for I came lately
out of Hell indeed: why did not thou tarry there still, quoth M. Hobson? Nay
sir quoth the Beggar, there is no room for such beggar men as I am for all is
kept for such Gentlemen Citizen as you be: this witty answer caused M. Hobson
to give the poor man a teaster.

18. How long M. Hobsons daughter mourned for her husbands death.
MAster Hobson had a Daughter which was a very fair young woman who made great
sorrow and lamentation for her husband that lay a dying: no means could
comfort her: wherefore her father came to her and said, Daughter leave off your
mourning, for if God take away your Husband, I will speedily provide you
another of great wealth and credit as he is now of, and far more young and
lusty: but yet for all this, would she not leave mourning and grew greatly
displeased that her Father made any motion of another husband, protesting that
she would never marry more. But now mark the vaviable minds of women: her
husband was no sooner dead and buried* the charges of his burial paid for, and
she with her friends set at supper to comfort her, between sobbing and weeping
she wispered her father in the ear and said: Father, where is the man that you
said should be my Husband? Thus you may see (quoth M. Hobson) the nature of
Women kind, and how long they mourn for their Husbands after they be dead:
these words made the young woman never after to ask her father for a husband.

19. Master Hobson caus^ing his man to set up a sign.
MAster Hobson having one of his (...) new come out of his time* and being made
a freeman of London, desired to set up for himself: so taking a house not far
from Saint Laurence Lane, furnished it with store of ware, and set the sign of
the Maidenhead: hard by was a very rich man of the same trade, had the same
sign, who reported in every, place where he came, that the young man had set
up the same sign that he had only to get away his customers, and daily vexed
the young man therewithal, who being grieved in mind told M. Hobson, his late
Master, who commining to the rich man said, I marvel sir, (quoth M. Hobson)
why wrong you my man so much as to say, he seeks to get away your customers,
marry so he does (quoth the other) for he has set up a sign called the
maidenhead as mine is. That is not so (replied M. Hobson.) for this is the
Widows head* and no Maidenhead, therefore you do him great wrong: the rich
man hereupon seeing heimself requited with mocks rested satisfied, and never
after that envied M. Hobsons man, but let him live quietly.

19. Of M. Hobsons jest of a louse and a flea.
UPon a time M. Hobson going to my L. Majors to dinner amongst the Livery of
his Company, and being waighted on by one of his Prentices, the said Prentise
spyed a louse creeping upon the side of his Gown and took it off M. Hobson
espyi^g him to do something in secret, asking what it was: the fellow being
ashamed, was loath to tell him but being importuned by his Master, said (...)
was a Louse: oh (quoth M. Hobson) this (...) good luck: for it shows me to be
a man, for this kind of vermin chiefly breeds on man kind, and thereupon
gave five shillings to hi^ man for his labor: another of his Prentices being a
pick-thanke knave, and having hear^ that his fellow had five shillings given
him for taking a Louse off his Master, (having hi^ Gown likewise on) and made
as though (...) took a flea from the same, and conveyed (...) away: but when
M. Hobson constrai^ned him to tell what it was, with much dis^sembling
shamfastnesse, he said it was a flea M. Hobson perceiving his dissimulation,
sa^^ to him, what do thou make me a dog? for fleas be most commonly bread
upon dogs and instead of his expected reward, he recei^ved fifteen stripes;
for said M. Hobson, ther^ is a great difference between one that does ^ thing
with a good mind, and him that does ^ thing by dissimulation.

21. How one of M. Hobsons men qu^ted him with a merry jest.
MAster Hobson had a servant that he ha^ long before made a freeman, and wa^
still at M. Hobsons commandment, and did him much good service, wherefore upon
a time he came unto his Master and said Sir, I have done you* service long time
justly and truly, wherefore I pray you bestow something upon me to begin the
world withal: fellow quoth. Mr. Hobson, thou say true, and thereon have I
thought many times to do a good turn, now will I tell thee what thou shall
do. I must shortly ride to Bristow Fair, and if thou will bear my charges
thither, I will give thee such a thing, as shall be worth to thee an hundred l.
I am content quoth. the fellow; so all the way as he rode. his man bore his
charges, and paid for all things duly, till they came at the last lodging, and
there after supper he came to his Master and said, Sir, I have borne your
charges as you commanded me, now I pray you let me know what the thing is that
will be worth to me 100. pounds? did I promise thee such a thing (quoth. his
Master?) you did* said the fellow: show me in writing (quoth. his Master) I have
none, said the fellow, then thou art like to have nothing, quoth. M. Hobson; and
learn this of me whenever thou make a bargain with any man, look that thou
take a writing for thy security and be well advised how thou give thy bond to
any man, this thing has benefited me in my time 200. l. and so it may likewise
do thee: thus when the poor fellow saw there was no remedy, he held himself
content, and all that night pondred in his mind how to grow quittance with his
master, so on y^ morrow when his Master had dispatched his business in the
Town, and was set forward back again toward London, he tarryed a little
behind to reckon with the Hostis where he lay, and of her he borrowed as much
money on his Masters cloak as came to all the charges that they spent by the
way. M. Hobson had not rode past 2. miles* but that it began to rain, whereupon
he called for his cloak of another servant that rode by, who said that it was
behind with his fellow, who had it with him: so they took shelter under a
tree, till he overtooke them; when he was come, M. Hobson most angerly said:
thou knave, why come thou not away with my cloak: the fellow answered* Sir
and please you* I have laid it to pawn for your carges all the way; Why knave
quoth. M. Hobson, did thou not promise to bear my charges to Bristow? did I
quoth the fellow? yes, said M. Hobson, thou did: show me a writing thereof,
says the fellow, whereunto M. Hobson seeing himself so cunningly over reached,
answered but little.

22. Of M. Hobsons riding to Sturbidge fair.
MAster Hobson on a time in company of one of his neighbors, rode from London
toward S^urb^dge fair, so the first night of their journey they lodged at
Ware in an Inn where great store of company was and in the morning when every
man made him ready to ride and some were on horseback setting forward, the
Citizen his neighbor found him sitting at the Inn gate booted and spurred* in
a brown study, to whom he said, for shame M. Hobson why sit you here, why do
you not make your self ready to horseback that we may set forward with
company? M. Hobson replied in this manner* I tarry (quoth. he) for a good cause:
for what cause quoth his neighbor: marry quoth M. Hobson, here be so many horses,
that I cannot tell which is my own, and I know well, when every man is ridden
and gone, the horse that remains behind must needs be mine.

23 How M. Hobson found a farmers purse.
THere was a Farmer that lost 40. pounds betwixt Cambridge and London, and
being so great a sum, he made proclamation in all market towns thereabout,
that whosoever had found 45. l. should have the five pounds for his labor for
finding it, and therefore he put in the 5. l. more then was lost: it was M.
Hob^ons fortune to find the same sum of 40. l. and brought the same to the
Bayliffe of Ware, and required the 5. l. for his pains, as it was proclaimed:
when the Farmer understood this, and that he must needs pay five pounds for the
finding, he said, that there was in y^ purse 45. l. and so weuld he have his
moneey and five pounds over: so long they strove, that the matter was brought
before a Justice of peace, which was then one M. Fleetwood, who after was the
Recorder of London: but when M. Fleetwood understood by the Bayliffe, that the
proclamation was made for a purse of 45. l. he demanded where it was, here quoth.
the Baily, and gave it him: it is just ^0. l. said M. Fleetwood; yes truly (quoth.
the Bayliffe:) here M. Hobson, said M. Fleetwood, take you this money for it is
your own, and if you chance to find a purse of 45, l. bring it to this honest
Farmer: that's mine* quoth. the Farmer, for I lost just 40. l. you speak too late
(quoth. M. Fleetwood,) Thus the farmer lost the money, and Master Hobs^n had it
according to justice.

24. How Master Hobson was a judge betwixt two women.
THere dwelled not far from Mr. Hobson, two very ancient Women, the youngest of
them both was abount 60. years of age, and upon a time sitting at the Tavern
together* they grew at variance, which of them should be the youngest, as Women
indeed desire t^ be accounted younger then they be, in such manner that they
laid a good supper, of the value of 20. s. for the truth thereof; M. Hobson
they agreed upon to be their Judge of y^ difference: so after M* Hobson had
knowledge thereof, the one came to him, and as a present gave him a very fair
pigeon pie worth some 5. s. desiring him to pass the verdit on her (...):
within a while after the other came: and gave M. Hobson a very fair greyhound,
which kind of dogs he much delighted in: praying him likewise to be
favorable on her side, wherefore he gave judgment that the Woman that gave
him the Grayhound was y^ younger* and so she won the supper of 20, s. which she
perceiving, came to him and said, Sir, I gave you a Pidgion pie* and you
promised the verdite should go on my side: to whom M. Hobson said, of a truth
good woman, there came a Gray-hound into my house and eat up the pigeon pie,
and so by that means I quite forgot thee.

25. Of the pride of M. Hobsons wife.
MAster Hobsons wife carrying something a stately mind, and delighting in brave
apparel, upon a time walking abroad with other Women her neighbors* they
espied a pair of silk stockings upon her legs, and desiring the like, never
let their husbands to live quiet after, till they had silk stockings of the
same fashion: so within a week or two fol^lowing, their husbands came
complaining t^ M. Hobson, and said, Sir, (quoth. one of them) (...) suffrance of
your Wifes pride, has spoyle^ all ours, for since she has worn silk
stock^ing, our wives have grown so importunate that they must needs have the
like, and you are the chiefest cause in suffering her to wear the same: O good
my neighbors (quoth. M. Hobson) I have great cause in doing so, and i^ brings me
much quietness, as how (quoth. one of them, marry thus (neighbors) for seeing I
cannot please her above the knee, I must needs please her below the knee, and
the only taing to please a woman is to let her have her will*

26. Of Master Hobsons rewarding a Poet for a books dedication.
UPon New Years day, M. Hobson sitting at dinner in a Poets company or as you
may term him, a writer of Histories therecame a poor man and presented him a
couple of Orenges, which he kindly tool^ (...) a New-yeers gift, and gave the
poor man for the same an Angel of Gold and thereupon gave them to his Wife to
lay up among other Jewels, considering they had likewise cost him an Angel*
the which she did, the Poet sitting by, and marking the bounty of M. Hobson for
so small a matter, he went home an devised a book containing 40. sheets of
paper, which which was half a year in writi^h, and came and gave it to M.
Hobson in dedication, and thought in his mind, that he in the recompencing the
poor man so much for an Orange, would yield far more recompense for his book,
being so long in studying, M. Hobson took the Poets Book thankfully, and
perceiving he did it only for his bounty showed for the Orange given him wiled
his Wife to fetch the said Orange, being then almow rotten, and gave to the
Poet, saying here is a Jewel which cost me a thousand times the worth in Gold,
therefore I think thou art well satisfied for thy books dedication: the Poet
seeing this went his way ashamed.

27. How M. Hobson gave one of his servants the h^lfe of a blind man's benefit.
MAster Hobson ^^eing still very good to the poor, and most bountiful to aged
people, there came to him usually twice or thrice a week, ^ silly poor old
blind m^n to sing under his window, for whch he continually gave him 12. pence
a time. M. Hobson having one of his servants so churlish, and withal so
covetous* that he would suffer the blind man to come no more unless he shared
half his benefit, the which the blind singing man was forced to give, rather
then to lose all: after twice or thrice parting shares, M. Hobson had thereof
intelligence, who consulting with the blind man, served his servant in this
manner; still he looked for half whatsoever he got, so this at last was M.
Hobsons gift, who gave commandment that the blind man should have for his
singing threescore jerks with a suf^^cient Whip* and to be equally parted as
the other Gifts were the which were presently given; the blind man's was very
easy* but M. Hobsons man's were very sound ones, so that every jerke drew
blood, after this he never sought to diminish his Masters bounty.

28 How M* Hobson found out the pi^^stealer.
IN Chri^^mas holy days when M. Hobsons Wife ha^ many pies in the Oven* one of
his servants had stole one of them out, and a^ y^ Tavern had merrily eaten it:
it fortune^ (...) day, some of his servants ^ined with him, and one of the best
pies were missing* the stealer ^hereof after dinner he found out in (...)* he
^a^ed all his servants in friendly (...) to the hall, and ^aused each of them
to drink one to another, ^oth Wine Ale and (...)* till they were all drunk,
then caused he a table to be furnished with very good cheer, whereat he
likewise pleased them; being set altogether, he said* why ^it you not
down^fellowes, we be set already quoth. they* Nay quoth. M. Hobson* he that stole the
pie is not yet (...) that I do, quoth he that stole it, by which meames he
knew what was then become of the pie, for the poor fellow being drunk could
not keep his own secrets.

19, Of M. Hobson and a Docter of Physic.
UUpon a time when M. Hobson lay sick, and in very great pain there came unto
him a D. of Physic that told him he could not escape, but must needs dye of
that sickness. M. Hobson a while after, not by the D. help, but by the will
of God recovered, and was whole of his disease, yet was he very low, and bare
brought and as he walked forth one day* he met the said D. which doubting
whether he was the sick man or no, said are not* you Sir, the man called M.
Hobson? yes truly; (quoth. he) are you alive or dead, said the D. I am dead quoth. M.
Hobson: what do you here then said the Doctor? I am here quoth. M* H^b^o^*
because I have experience in many Earthly things, and God has sent me to the
World again, with a commandment to take up all physicians I can get, and send
them thither to him, which made him look pale, M. Hobson seeing this, said unto
him, fear not M, Doctor, though I said all Physicians, you are none; and there
is no man that has wit, will take you for one, therefore you are not in my
charge: farewell.

30, How M. Hobson answered a popish Friar.
IN the Reign of Q Mary, when this Land was builded with superstition, there
was a po^ish Friar that made an Oration in the Ch^^ter ^ouse yard, where many
(...) of people, (...) hear the same Oration, (...) which number, there sat
M. Hobson, which much ext^lling him that was then Pope of Rome, comparing him
to St. Peter, for in degree he (...) him above all the holy Fathers in time
(...), ^s Doctors, Martirs, Prophets, yea (...) more then Prophets, John
Baptists: then (said he) in what high place shall we place this go^^ man, what
place I say, to ^it for him, or where shall he ^it? M. Hobson hearing him
speak so pro^^i^ely* and sitting among the Audience, start ^p and said, if
thou can find no other place, set him here in my place, for I am weary, and
so went his way.

31. How Master Hobson won a wager in m^king a Knight to laugh.
THere was a Knight dwelling in London, that for the death of his Wife would
not be comforted, nor of many days was once seen to smile; upon a time the
Chamberlain to this Knight, being in company with M. Hobson, laid a Wager of
40. shillings with him, that he should not make the Knight laugh by any means
that he could do, whereupon the match was made, and the money staked down, for
the winning of the same. M. Hobson gets him an ill favored Masty bitch almost
starved, and fills her belly with so much butter-milke and whay* that she (...)
to burst: so coming into the presenc^ on the mouth and nose* that through the
stopping of her winds, and her belly being so overcharged with buttermilke*
that so strained her, that (...) filled all the Knights Chamber: hereat ye
Chamberlain grew so angry, that he said he would make old Hobson make it
clean* or put hi^ nose into it: not so Chamberlain, said M. Hobson, I will
not take your office out of your hand, for it is your duty to make clean the
chamber: hereat the Knight laughed very heartily, and so M. Hobson won the
Wager of the Chamberlain.

32 How M. Hobson answered Musicians.
UPon a time M. Hobson lying in S. Albones, there came certain Musicians to
play at his chamber door, to the intent as they filled his ears with their
music, he should fill their purses with money: where when he had one of the
servants of the Inn (that waited upon him) to go and tell them, that he could
not then endure to hear their music, for he mourned for the death of his
mother, so the Musicians disappointed of their purpose, went sadly all away.
The fellow heard him speak of mourning, asked him how long ago it was since
he bured his mother, truly quoth. M. Hobson it is now very near forty years
ago* the fellow understanding very well his subtilty and how wittily he sent
away the Musicians, laughed very heartily.

33* Of M. Hobson^ teaching a Cow to speak.
Upon a time M. Hobson being in company of a London Alderman* and being merrily
disposed took (...) pounds of the said Alderman, upon this c^ndition, that if
he made not a Cow to spoke in ten years, and to read perfect English, he would
have for the same a hundred: the match being made* with in few days after came
one of his Neighbors and said he was unwise, and that he undertook a thing
impossible, and that every body laughed hm to scor^^: to whom M. Hobson smiled
and said, neighbor, I am nothing afraid of loosing my hundred, for in the
space of ten years, either I, the Cow, or else M. Alderman may dye.

34. M. Hobsons teaching his man to use money.
MAster Hobson had a servant so covetous, and withal so simple witted, that
all the money he could get together hid in the Ground, of the which M. Hobson
having some intelligence, ^ell a conjuring in this manner; with a Wand he so
belabored my young man that he presently revealed where it lay: the which sum
of money M. Hobson took quite away all, saving a small sum; the which the
poor fellow put to so good a use in bying and selling that in short time he
greatly increased it: When M. Hobson understood what he had done* and what good
use he put his money to, he said, Sir, you can tell ^ow to use money, an^
learn to make prophet thereof, I will restore to thee all again, and so he
did, which made the fellow ever after a good husband.

35. How M. Hobson flouted a Jester.
Upon a time M. Hobson dined with a company of merry fellows, amongst whom
there was one that found much fault with his merry jests, and as the company
^at laughing and sporting together, they asked one another which was the most
reverent part of a man's body one said the eye and another said the nose,
another said the hand; but M. Hobson said the mouth was the most reverent part.
Marry said the fellow that was the finde-fault, the part that we sit on is ye
most reverent part: and because the company marvelled why he made this reason,
marry (quoth. the fellow, he is most reverent among the common people, that is
first still set* which saying contented them all, and caused much laughter
amongst them; and he that spoke it was not a little proud of his saying, in
that he had overcome (as he thought in wit) M. Hobson: this passed on, the next
night following, they were bidden again to suprer to the same place, where M.
Hobson remembered the f^rmer jest of this scoffing fellow: thereupon he turned
his backside toward him, and saluted him with a great fart against his face,
the fellow dis^aning his rude salutation, said, ill nurtur'^ old Knave, where
wast thou brought up? why disdainest thou this (quoth. M. Hobson) if I had saluted
thee with my mouth, thou would have found fault, as an inferior part and now
I greet thee with that part of my body, which by thine own saying is the most
reverent, thou art displeased; thus ^at M. Hobson again the praise that he had
lost before, and the poor fellow was laughed at of the whole company.

36. Of M. Hobsons sore eyes, and his answer to the Physicians.
UPon a time, when M. Hobson had sore eyes another Physician came to him
thinking to have some recompense for his counsel, warning him that he should
in any case forbear drinking, or else by the same lose his eyes: to whom M.
Hobson said, it is much more pleasure for me to lose my eyes with drinking,
then to keep them for worms to eat them up. Another time a Physician came to
M. Hobson and said, Sir, you look well, and grie^e at nothing and have a
healthful countenance. Thus (quoth. M Hobson) for I have not to do with any
Physicians, nor with Physic: to whom he replied, Sir, said he, you have no
cause to blame the Physician* for his Physic never did you hurt. Thou say
true quoth. M. Hob^on) for if I had proved Physic, I had not (...) here alive.
Another Physician came to him on a time and said, Sir, you be a very old man:
very true, (quoth M. Hobson) for (...) were never my Physician: such manner of
cheks and ^louts would he still give to them that spoke to him of physic, for
in his life he never took any.

37. How Master Hobson sold charms for the Plague.
Upon a time in London, when great plagues was suspected to come, the common
people went daily in great number to Physicians to prevent it, M^ Hobson seeing
their simplicity, and the doubt they had of Gods mercy, went about to hinder
the Physicians, whereupon he not only gave out speeches to his neghbours, but
in most parts of the City, saying, that he had little writings fast sealed up,
had such a virtue, that whosoever bore it hanging about his neck 15. days
should not die of ye plague: the foolish people trusting hereupon every one
after his power, gave him money for a ^^rowle or writing sealed up, with a
thread of silk about it, charging them that they should not open it, till it
hung about their necks for the space of fifteen days, for if they took it
away before that time, it was of no virtue. Within a while after, the desire of
folks was to know the contents of these writings: so in opening of them they
found these li^es writ: y^ women's charm for the plague was this, Woman when
thou stoopest low, this lesson thou shall find,
Take heed of thy hinder part, for breaking too much wind.
(...) to such men that were so simple-witted as to believe his merry
persuasions* and thereupon would fondly bestow their money, he gave likewise
this charm in writing: Man that drinks late over night take counsel by a
fool:
When thou risest pray unto God, thou may have a good stool.


This was all the skill that M. Hobson had and the greatest help he could
teach them: but this merry medicine of his made the ruder sort more wise, and
not after that time so vainly to cast away their money.

38* How M. Hobsons jest of the sign of S. Christopher.
MAster Hobson and another of his neighbors on a time walking to Southwarke
fair, by chance drunk in a house at the sign of S. Christopher, of the whch
sign the Good man of the house gave this commendation, S. Christopher (quoth. he)
when he lived upon earth, bore the greatest burden that ever was, which was
this, he bore Christ over a river: nay there was one (quoth. M. Hobson) that bore
a greater burden: who was that (quoth. the In-keeper) marry (quoth. M. Hobson) the
Ass that bore both him and his mother: so was the In-keeper called Ass by
craft. After this talking merrily together, the aforesaid In-keeper being a
little whitled, or gone with drink, and his head so giddy, that he* fell into
ye fire, people standing by, ran suddenly and took river, nay there was one
(quoth M. Hobson) that bore a greater burden, who was that (quoth the
In-keeper) marry, quoth M. Hobson, the ass that bore both him and his mother:
so was the In-keeper called ass by craft. After this talking merrily together,
the aforesaid In-keeper being a little whi^tled, or gone with drink, and his
head so giddy that he fell into the fire, people standing by, ran suddenly and
took him up, oh let him alone (quoth M. Hobson) a man may do what he will in
his own house, and lie wheresoever he lists; the man having little hurt,
with this fright grew immediately sober, and afterward foxe^ M. Hobson and his
neighbor so exceedingly, that coming over London bridge, being very late, ran
against one of the chaine-posts, at which M. Hobson thinking tt to be some man
that had iustled him, drew out his dudgion dagger, and thrust it up even to the
very hilts into the hollow post, whereupon verily he had thought he had killed
some man: so running away was taken by the watch, and so all the ^est was
discovered:

39. Of Master Hobsons answer to a messenger of the Lord Majors.
Upon a time M. Hobson had arested one of my Lord Majors kinsmen for a certain
debt ^wing him, and being in the Counter, my Lord Mayor sent one of his
Officers for to entreat M. Hobson to be favorable and kind unto his kinsman,
telling a long tale, and to little purpose, whom Mast. Hobson answered in this
manner: my friend (quoth he) what thou said in the beginning I do not like
of, and what was in the middle I do not well remember, and for thy conclusion,
I understand it not: and this was all the favor M. Hobson showed to my Lord
Majors kinsman.

40. How Master Hobson bade an Alderman to dinner.
THis M. Hobson on a time had a servant that was full of words, and too much
talkatiue, being offended therewith he gave him in charge, to say nothing,
and to answer to that he was demanded and no more: so upon a day M. Hobson
made a great dinner, and sent his said servant some two days before to invite
an Alderman of London thereunto, so upon the day when dinner time came, all the
gu^sts staid for the Aldermans comm^ng till two of the clock, and at last M.
Hobson said unto his servant: did thou bid M. Alderman to dinner? yes truly
said he, why comes he not then, quoth M. Hobson? quoth the fellow, he said
he could not: why ^oldst thou me not so, quoth M. Hobson? because said the
fellow you did not ask me? Hereupon (though long first) they went all to
dinner, and being merry together drinking of Wine, there came in a certain
Russian and stole one of the fairest silver cups away: the which the fellow
seeing, said never a word but let him go, which when M. Hobson missed, he
demanded of his servant where it was: Sir, quoth the fellow, a thief came in
and stole it away: why did thou not stay him (quoth M. Hobson?) marry sir,
quoth he, because he asked no question of me: after this, M. Hobson noting the
simpleness of his servant, let him have his tongue at free liberty.

41. How M. Hobson grew out of love with an Image.
IN the reign of Q. Mary when great superstition was used in England, as
creeping to the cross, worshipping of Images, and such like: it was Mast.
Hobsons chance amongst other people to be in the Church, and kneeling to an
Image to pray, as it was then used, the same Image by some mishap fell down on
M. Hobson and broke his head, upon which occasion he came not thither in half
a year after, but at length by the procurement of his neighbors he came to
the Church again, and because he saw his neighbors kneel before the same
Image, he kneeled down likewise, and said thus, well I may cap and kneel to
thee, but thou shall never have my heart again so long as I live: meaning for
the broken head it had given him.

42. How M. Hobson said he was not at home.
ON a time M. Hobson upon some ocasion came to M. Fleetwoods house to speak
with him being then new chosen the Recorder of London, and asked one of his men
if he were within, he said he was not at home, but M. Hobson perceiving that
his master bad him say so, and that he was within not being willing (at that
time) to be spoken withal, for that time dissembling the matter he went his
way: Within a few days after it was M. Fleetwoods chance to come to May.
Hobsons, and knocking at the door, asked if he were within: M. Hobson hearing
and knowing how he was denied Mast. Fleetwoods speech before time, spoke
himself aloud and said: he was not at home; then said M. Fleetwood, what M.
Hobson think you that I know not your voice, whereunto M. Hobson answered and
said: Now M. Fleetwood I am quit with you: for when I came to speak with you,
I believed your man that said you were not at home, and now you will not believe
mine own self: and this was the merry conference betwixt these two merry
Gentlemen.

43. How he answered a Scriuener of the old religion.
Upon a time, what with age, and misdieting himself he took so great a
sickness, that he grew in danger of death, whereupon a Scriuener dwelling by
was sent for, who savoring somewhat of the po^ish religion, councelled M.
Hobson to take the Sacrament, which is, said the Scriuener, the very body and
blood of Jesus Christ: to whom M. Hobson replied being then upon a Friday, oh
neighbor (quoth he) I will eat no flesh on fasting days: the Scriuener
hearing himself flouted of the sick man, moved to him no further questions,
but fell to making of his Will, as follows.

44. Of master Hobsons last Will and Testament.
IN the name of God Amen: I Master Hobson the merry Londoner, whole of mind,
but sick of body, do here make my last will and testament, in manner and form
following. First I give my soul to God, ^or that is his: my life to death, for
he spares no man: and my body to the worms, for that's their nourishment: al my
lands, tenements and moueables, to my wife and children, reserving a few
legasies, which I mean to bestow on the World.

I give to all Gentlemen such a desire of pride, that shortly an outlandish
broker by them, shall be held more in request then an English ^aylor, and that
London Citizens shall grow wealthy by the fall of riotous Courtiers: also I
give and bequ^ath to London Merchant wi^es, that they shall carry the minds of
Ladies of the Court, every month sick of a new fashion. Also I bequeath that
Country Farmers wives shall be in the fashion of the horn buske, and silk
girdles. Likewise, to Chamber-maides, and waiting Gentlewomen, I give all my
huge poaking sticks, and French periwigs: But as for my smaller sort of
poaking sticks* I bequeath to the modest sort o^ Citizens wives. Also I
bequeath to all ^^nches above thirtene years of age, gold Hat^ands, changeable
fore-parts, and silk girdles* and to young married men, I give all my yellow
garters: points and shoe-strings, all of a suitable color: and to Kitchen maids
that scowre pots, and scrape trenchers, all my washed gloves and silk laces:
and to all country dairy wenches, that ride to London markets with cream and
butter-milke, all my maskes, wyer-busks, and silk colored scarfes: and to
conclude, to all England I bequeath the pride and fashions of all other
Nations: and if any will further understand what other gifts old Hobson the
merry Londoner has bestowed, inquire at his grave at S. Mildreds Church in the
Poultry in London, where he now lies buried.

FINIS.

