LUDGATE, What it is: Not what it was. OR, A full and clear Discovery and
Description of The Nature and Quality Orders and Government Duties of Officers
Benefits and Privileges Fees and Charges
of that Prison. Also an exact Catalogue of the Legacies now belonging to the
said Prison, the Names of the several Donors, and the persons appointed to pay
them. Very useful and profitable to all sorts of persons, especially in London,
whether CREDITORS or DEBTORS.

Humbly presented to the Right Honorable THOMAS ALLEN, Lord Mayor of this
Honorable City, By M. Johnson, Typograph. a late Prisoner there.

London, Printed by and for Tho. Johnson, and are to be sold by Fr. Cossinet in
Tower-street. 1659.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS ALLEN, Lord Major of this Honorable City of
LONDON.
May it please your Lordship,
KIng David (that holy man, great Prophet, and good Magistrate) longed for, and
accepted of a Bottle of Water from his three Worthies, drawn out of the Well at
the Gate of Bethlehem, which was then the Quarters of the Philistines his
enemies, though he drank it not, but poured it forth before the Lord as an
offering, to quench the thirst of his droughty Army; I hope, my Lord, his Exam
I may (in some part) be an incentive to your Lordship to accept of this small
Tract presented unto you by one Unworthy, though you read it not, which was by
him collected during his sad Restraint and Captivity within the stone walls and
iron grates of a Prison, the pleasant Territories of a Jailer, but the
Charnel-house to hide men ruinated by their dislocated and broken fortunes.

It would (my Lord) be an act worthy your Honors owning, to inspect a little
into the premises hereafter mentioned; And I beseech you, my Lord, disdain them
not for the indigency of the style (for he that wrote them wants Learning) but
mind them for the Truths therein contained.

If your Honor thinks that a living Dog is better then a dead Lion, then let
Compassion move your Lordship (as God has now planted you in Authority) to
look upon the dying condition of living men in a Prison.

Your Lordship (perhaps) may be informed by the Jailer, that persons under the
power of his Key want not for subsistence: I do affirm (my Lord) that such an
assertion is a notorious falsehood; and, that if it lay in his power, the
Prisoners of Ludgate would be of all prisoners the most miserable.

My Lord, it would add Excellency to your Worth, and Eternity to your Memory,
would you but according to your Honors power and wisdom, endeavor the finding
out where those noble and great Legacies are buried, and in whose hands they
died, which formerly belonged to that Prison, Generations yet to come would
find reason to engrave your Action in Golden Characters.

When your Lordship views the Revenues of the Keeper to arise from nothing to
six or seven hundred pounds per annum, it will amaze you; but if your Lordship
considers, that two Turnkeys and a Butler do likewise raise their aunuities to
2 or 300 l. a man, and that it is harassed out of the decaying Estates of poor
men, I hope then it will be beyond your admiration.

My Lord, frequent Visitations of Prisons, by just and worthy Persons
authorized to Examine Abuses therein, would (I humbly conceive) stop the
torrent of their Avarice and Oppr^ssions: Their Extortions being indeed the
real cause why men are forced rather to Compound than pay their just Debts.

Two things I humbly crave of your Lordship, Pardon and Protection: Pardon for
my boldness in presenting so mean and frivolous a thing to so noble a
Magistrate: Protection, because I have neither Rhetorique nor Eloquence to
defend my self against the Adversaries malice. Truth and your Lordship must be
herein both my Shield and Buckler.

Your Honors greater thoughts shall be no longer detained by reading of the
mere Entities of

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servant, Marmaduke Johnson.
Ludgate Chapel, Nov. 7. 1659.
A short Preface to the Citizens of London, of what degree or quality soever.
Gentlemen,
IT is you of all men that are most concerned in the fo^lowing premises, and
therefore to you I thought it convenient to declare my Reasons for the
publication thereof: It does in it self concern each particular Member of this
City, and all men that are Merchants or Traders in any way within this
Commonwealth. The rich Citizen or Merchant it concerns,

I. For that their way of Trade oftentimes is, to trust young beginners, that
have but small stocks, upon day, and if they prosper, they pay for their
Credit; but if they fail, having imbezled the stock entrusted with them, their
Bodies are immediately forced to prison; this book shows you what you gain by
that, proving what your Experience could not but tell you, That prisons pay no
Debts.

To the Money-lender or rich Userer, it declares

II. That such as are laid in upon their account, have no reason to take care
for the payment of debts, nor do they; for you shall find they here meet with
Charges and expenses to spend what they have in their hands, and do it for the
most part, and are thereby disabled to return any Satisfaction.

To such who think men have sufficient in that prison to maintain them,

III. It sufficiently proves the contrary, fully acquainting them with what
Benefits accre^ (...) prisoners, which is not comparable to what indeed
formerly they did receive.

Them who hereafter shall be prisoners there, it informs,

IIII. What Fees and Charges they must expect to be liable to and pay, their
poverty or inability not considered, and the utmost of convenience they shall
be partakers of during their imprisonment.

Them who against good Times do now adays withdraw their Charity,

V. It serves to undeceive, showing the Legacies given, how they are bestowed,
and the sad loss of their great donations, to invite all pious and good men to
their former Charities and Liberalities.

Its principal end and intendment, being this in general, to show the rich
Creditor his common loss and hazard, the poor Debtor his common misery, and
su^ferings, and both of them the common gain and profit of Lawyers, Goalers,
and their Under-substitutes.

The prayer of the Author is, That the present Power would be pleased in their
grave wisdoms to find out a better way for satisfying of Creditors, an easier
punishment for those Debtors willing to pay their Debts, and a harder for such
who make Prisons their Sanctuaries to defraud their Creditors. This is the
hearty desire of

The meanest of Citizens, and humblest of your servants, Marmaduke Johnson.
Ludgate-Chappel, Nov. 7. 1659.
LUDGATE, What it is: Not what it was.
I Have by Preface given the reasons inducing me to write this small Tract,
which perhaps to some may seem impertinent, to others sufficient for the
exhibiting of a matter of this nature: And that I may methodize the business,
and model it to my best advantage, and for the better understanding of the
Reader, (being poor, and deprived of such lights herein as are afforded by
Records, and some Books of History and Survey) I will, so near as I can, give,
an account of these five Heads following, viz.

I. Of the Nature and Quality of the Prison.

II. Of the Order and Government thereof.

III. Of the Officers thereof, and their several Duties.

IV. Of those Benefits and Privileges, which are vulgarly known and enjoyed by
the Prisoners in the same Prison.

V. The Fees and other Charges belonging to the House, at a Prisoners Entrance
and Exit.

Of which briefly thus:

I. To give an account what the Prison was two hundred years since, I must be
beholding to Report, which I assure was very credible, and appears to me very
reasonable, and is thus: That the Prison then consisted of those Rooms or Holes
over, and belonging to the Gate, built by King Lud, about the year of the world
3895. but since beautified and enlarged by others; neither had it then so
goodly an Entrance thereinto as now it has, (nor half so many Turn-keys) but
only a little Door underneath the Gate toward Ludgate Hill, which still
remains, though now quite useless.

When the Prison was in this condition, there happened to be prisoner there one
Steven Foster, who (as poormen are at this day) was a Crier at the Grate, to
beg the benevolent Charities of pious and commiserate Benefactors that passed
by: As he was doing his doleful Office, a rich Widow of London hearing his
complaint, enquired of him what would release him? To which he answered, Twenty
pound, which she in charity expended; and clearing him out of Prison,
entertained him in her service, who afterward falling into the way of
Merchandise, and increasing as well in wealth as courage, wooed his Mistress,
Dame Agnes, and married her.

Her Riches and his Industry, brought him both great wealth and honor, being
afterward no less then Sir Steven Foster, Lord Mayor of the Honorable City of
London; yet whilst he lived in this great Honor and Dignity, he forgot not the
place of his Captivity, but mindeful of the sad and irksom place wherein poor
men were imprisoned, bethought himself of enlarging it, to make it a little
more delightful and pleasant for those who in after times should be imprisoned
and shut up therein: And in order thereunto, acquainted his Lady with this his
pious purpose and intention, in whom likewise he found so affable and willing a
mind to do good to the poor, that she promised to expend as much as he should
do for the carrying on of the Work; and having Possessions adjoining thereunto,
they caused to be erected and built, the Rooms and places following; that is to
say, The Paper house, the Porch, the Watch hall, the Upper and Lower Lumbries,
the Cellar, the Long-ward, and the Chapel for Divine Service; In which Chapel
is an Inscription upon the wall containing these words:

This Chapel was Erected and Ordained for the Divine Worship and Service of
God, by the Right Honorable Sir Steven Foster, Knight, sometime Lord Mayor of
this Honorable City, and by Dame Agnes his Wife, for the use and godly Exercise
of the Prisoners in this Prison of Ludgate, Anno 1454.

An act of so great piety and worth in a holy and religious Couple, is left
without a parallel in these uncharitable times, which sooner sets the Stamp of
Authority to Demolishments and Devastations, than gives the favor of an
auspicious look toward the increase of piety, virtue, and godliness.

He likewise gave Maintenance for a Preaching Minister, which I suppose is in
the hands of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, or some by their
appointment, who to this day do allow a Minister for Sabbathdays, but what
Sallary he has is not certainly known.

This was not all, his Charity stopped not here, he likewise ordained what he had
so built, with that little which was before, should be free for all Freemen,
and that they providing their own bedding, should pay nothing at their
departure for I odging or Chamber-rent (as now they call it) which to many poor
men becomes oftentimes as burdensome as their debts, and are by the Keeper
detained in prison as for debt, only for their fees, though discharged and
acquitted of what he was committed for.

This worthy Gentleman (sure) had some prophetic inspection into the Times
that after him should ensue, and we now see come to pass, and therefore it
seemed needful to his judicious Eye to lay a Charm or strong Obligation, and an
absolute forewarning of the Master-Keepers that should after come there, not to
take or receive any such money for Lodging, as is now daily exacted and
extorted from poor men: which that it might be effectual and obligatory enough
to the deterring o^ them from the breach thereof, was rendered in a style not
ordinary, though very necessary, and is set down by Stowe in his Survey, to be
in these words: For Water and Lodging there is nothing to pay,
As the Keeper shall answer at dreadful Doomesday


This Inscription engraven in Brass was set up (as a Monumental Testimony of
the worthiness of the act) in the said Chapel, just by the former writing
mentioned page 6. which some of the late Master-keepers (the introducer of the
present Oppression of paying for Lodging) most basely and injuriously caused to
be taken down, and set up over the outward street door, with these words
engraven on the other side, This is the Prison of Ludgate, absconding the
former words in the wall, who could not but have a reflection on his Conscience,
whilst this Pillar of Truth and Antiquity stood staring in his face, and was so
obvious to the Eye of the oppressed, and every honest beholder.

According to the Constitution of the prison by the said Sir Steven Foster, it
continued many years, and was, (and is still, though falsely) accounted the best
and freest prison in all England, and it was so then, for as Charity built the
House, so Charity maintained the prisoners in the House: But since men of
corrupt and seared Consciences have got the dominion, who neither fear God,
nor will serve men in their generations, what is there, or what can there be
expected from such men who make Gain both their God and Godliness, but the
banishment of Charity and piety, the razing of Records, the defacing,
obliterating, and pulling down the poor man's Pillar of Truth, and the horrid
and inhumane spoiling and impoverishing of the miserable and oppressed?

The water I find not to be altogether his gift, (which indeed is the only
thing that is free, though it may well be supposed by the former words in the
Brass, that he had made a provision for the prisoners in that kind) for that I
perused lately a Book wherein I found a Memorandum, That Sir Robert Knowles
gave maintenance for the supply of the Prisons of Ludgate and Newgate with
water for ever, leaving it to the care of the Company of Grocers; and that if
at any time any s^op should be, that the water could not come to the places
aforesaid (which God forbid) that then the M^ster and Wardens of the said
Company shall repair to the Chamber of London, where the grand Instruments are
kept, and to consult with the Lord Major, Court of Aldermen, and Chamberlain
for the finding out some other way for the supply thereof. It is set down more
largely in the Company of Grocers Journal Book, to which I refer the
Inquisitive.

II. As touching the Government of the said prison, it will appear best in the
Description of the Offices holden in the House, which I shall endeavor to make
perspicuous, as well by the Orders by which they are Elected, as by some
Explanatory Additions wherein there shall be occasion, therein discovering the
government of the present, from that of the primitive Institution: And so as to
this second ^ivision I shall only say this: That the Political Orders by which
it is governed by its own Officers, are derivative from the power of the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen of the City of London; many of whose Orders I have
seen the Originalls of; and if so be that I could procure Copies of them, they
would prove neither much useful nor profitable to me or the Reader, to publish.

The persons entrusted with the Government of the Prison, and the Execution of
the said Orders, are the Master-Keeper, the two Stewards, and the seven
Assistants for the time being, who likewise have made, and do still make, as
occasion is offered, several and respective Orders, touching the decent and
quiet Government of the Prison, the ordering and civillizing of the Prisoners,
and the punishment of misdemeanors and offenses therein committed. I shall now
pass from this, and come

III. To the several Offices therein holden, and to decypher (as near as I can)
their Duties and proper Employments, viz.

1. A Reader of Divine Service. 2. The Upper-Steward, called, The Master of the
Box. 3. The Under-Steward. 4. Seven Assistants, that is, one for every day of
the week. 5 A Running-Assistant. 6. Two Churchwardens. 7. A Scavenger. 8. A
Chamberlain. 9. A Running-Post. 10. The Cryers at the Grate, which are commonly
six in number.
I. Of the Office of the Reader.
BEcause I find the Office of Reader first set down in the public Orders of
the House, I therefore will in the first place exhibit his Duty, and manner of
choosing. And the Orders by which he was appointed his Office and Employment, I
find to be made in the Reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, (for
before her time I suppose their Service was the Mass) and to be nominated and
chosen thereunto by the Master-Keeper, Stewards, and Assistants for the time
being successively, and not by common Vote at Elections as other Officers are:
appertaining to the appointment and injunction of whose duty, I find two or
three Orders, which I must be content only to give the sum of, being denied
the perusal of those kept privately, so as to take a transcript, and those
which are public and commonly exposed, being so obliterated, that from them I
could not: But his duty was, To ring the Bell twice every day to Prayers (which
is now fallen to the Officer, called A Running-Assistant, for what reason I
shall afterward show) which indeed is all the alteration which I find in this
Office from the primitive Institution thereof; which said Running Assistant now
ringing the Bell at ten in the Morning, and eight at Night, the people having
likewise notice by the Churchwarden to repair to the Chapel, the Reader goes
into the Pew or Desk provided in the Chapel for the same purpose, joining to
the Pulpit, where he reads such Prayers, Confessions, Psalms, Chapters, and
singing Psalms, as are appointed in a certain Book therefore given, for you
must know, that the Common prayer is not there used now, according to the
Appointment of the Instituters of the said Office) by reason of a prohibition
by Sir R. T. when he was Lord Mayor, who took away or caused to be taken the
said Book of Common Prayer formerly given and belonging thereunto. For the
performance of which, he has the allowance of two Shillings eight Pence per
month, one penny of every prisoner at his first coming, if he pays Sixteen
pence for his Table-money, and a dish of Meat out of the Lord Mayors basket
when it comes in, which by reason of a fault that lies in, I know not well who,
but yet I guess, proved often a very empty one.

There has formerly been a custom to ring a bell for the space of a quarter
of an hour at nine of the clock at night, for all strangers to depart the
prison, which did belong to the Reader to do, but that bell has been long
down, and strangers are now warned to depart by him that is called the
Chamberlain; of which hereafter.

II. Of the Upper-Steward, or Master of the Box.
THe authority of him that is Master of the Box, is by the prisoners esteemed
almost Equal to the Master-Keeper, and by all the House respected with a
respect befitting him, whose care and Courtesies to and for all men (to my own
knowledge) has exceeded, and does far exceed any with whom I have had yet to
deal.

The Order by which he and the Under-steward are chosen, says, that they shall
choose (that is, the ^risoners at such election) two ^onest and discreet
persons, the ^ne to be called The Master of the ^ox, the other The
Under-steward, etc. To the Charge of which Master of the Box is committed the
keeping of the several Orders of the House, as well as all Accounts of Moneys
received upon Legacies given for the relief of poor prisoners (As for those
given for their Release, I shall afterward point (...) at that Scylla or
Carybdis upon, or in which they miscarry before they come to the appointed
haven where the Donors intended their unlading) also the distribution of all
bread or other provision sent in by the right honorable the Lord Major or by
any other private persons. And (which is the chief and most material) the Money
which is begged at the Grates by the Cryers, with the Garnishes or Table money
(as it is commonly called) paid by every prisoner at his Entrance, which i^
sixteen pence, and is bestowe^ weekly for bread, Candles, and other necessary
Charges belonging to the House, except what is paid out of it for Officers
Salaries, as is, and shall be showed in their proper places: He has also a
List or Roll of all prisoners, as well those that are upon the Charity, as
those that are not, to whom (with the assistance of the Assistant for the day)
he gives their proportion and allowance of bread or other provisions according
as by Order and custom of the House is appointed. The Gifts likewise of Market
people, Burchers, Fishmongers, or any other benevolent or charitable person,
which is taken by the Clerk of the Market, and brought in by him who is the
Post, is delivered to him or the Under Steward, for which they give receipts,
and by either of them in the presence of the Assistant for the day, is exposed
to sale to the Charity-men as a Market: which Money so raised for such
victuals or provisions is put into the Common Stock or Bank, and there
remains till the Account day.

Once every Month there is an Election of Stewards, Assistants and
Churchwardens, by the vote and consent of all the prisoners belonging to the
House; for the other Offices are only by nomination and appointment of the
Master-Keeper, Stewards and Assistants: but you must know, that no offices
chosen by Election or suffrage of the prisoners, elected for any longer time
then one month, and if he be found honest, that is, a popular Man, then he is
again chosen, and so many months together, but if otherwise, he is ejected,
and another chosen in his stead: this Election is always on a Saturday. The
monday aster this Election, is the Accompt-day, wherein the whole Moneys
received or gathered in the Boxes, as also Legacies given that Month (if any)
are summed up by the said Master of the Box, Under-steward and Assistants, and
the divident of each Charity-man cast up; which done, the Master-Keeper of the
prison (by order of his own making) receives two shillings four pence out of
every man's Charity; if the divident amount to three shillings four pence to
each man, otherwise he is to have but one shilling two pence for his months
Lodging, and the rest to go on, to be paid at his being discharged from prison
(all which is contrary to that former recited Distich obligatory, made by that
good Founder and Benefactor, Sir Steven Foster.)

Here I may raise one Observation, That the Goalers Creatures and Confidents,
are the poor Man's Enemies and Charity-Robbers: which you shall well perceive,
if you observe, That all Charges of and belonging to the House, as well
ordinary and certain, as extraordinary and casual; are paid out of the common
Stock of Charity money: and those ordinary Charges are such, as payment of
officers fees, and buying of bread for the Charity and ample men, (which Ample
men are such as are not Entered upon the Charity) which is in the whole one penny
loaf every sunday after his being one Month Prisoner, and likewise Candles for
the use of the House in places necessary; for the Table money mentioned before,
does not answer that Charge by far, by reason of the Multitude of prisoners in
the House: This kind of Charge we grant to be good; Then Extraordinary Charges
are, when any poor prisoner is sick, and is not able to supply his wants, or
when any dies, and is buried at the charge of the House, that is also good;
but that which appears to me to be the most extraordinary, and most
unreasonable payment, is, to the Turn key of the Prison, who receives twelve
shillings per month out of the said Charity, for turning his Silver Key to let
in the Gifts and Charity of the House (which God knows are very few) as the
Lord Mayors Basket, and the other Provision mentioned before; which twelve
shillings, with what Salary is allowed the Post for his pains in fetching it,
I do (and so will a hundred men more beside) avouch to be as much as it is
worth: All which Deductions and Payments made, with such as I shall mention
hereafter, I have known when the remaining Divident to each Charity-man, has
amounted to no more then six pence per man, and indeed seldom more now adays;
and I hope no sober man or Christian will judge that four pence in bread, and
six pence in Money, can be a Competency sufficient to maintain a man a whole
month, taking in withal that Allowance which comes in by the Lord Majors
basket. Some other matters also are pertinent to his Office, which as occasion
serves, he does perform with a pregnant reason, and a very commendable honesty,
according to that Trust reposed in him by the Charity-men, and the whole House.
I shall next speak of

III. The Under-Steward.
TOuching whose Duty and Office, there can no absolute alteration be made in
any particular from that of the Master of the Box, he being indeed in power and
form the same in the absence of the other, and his authority and actings of the
same latitude and extent; for he is chosen as a Delegate or Adjutant to the
former, to help him in the true and exact keeping and stating of the Accounts,
and for the writing out the same in the Accompt-Book every month; and in a
word, to do all things in his absence, and to perform all those particular
Duties mentioned in the fore going Paragraph of the Master of the Box. I shall
therefore end with them two, and come to

IV. The Office and Duty of an Assistant.
I Have made mention of seven several Assistants, that is, one for every day of
the week, and there are so: but forasmuch as their office and duty is all one
and the same without any alteration or difference, I shall make the description
of one serve to delineate all the rest.

He that is an Assistant is chosen, as has been said, every month by all the
prisoners at an Election, next after the Electing of the two Stewards; and by
the Orders then read, is enjoined to the several duties following, viz. To
attend in the Watch-hall all his day, to see what strangers come to speak with
Prisoners, and to call them down to them, and to attend for the changing money
for the Cryers at the grates: which duty is now wholly neglected, also to set
down in writing what Moneys or other Gifts, of what kind soever, are sent in
for the prisoners in his day, and what monys is given to the Boxes, and to keep
an account thereof, and the same to charge the Stewards withal at the Account
day, and to see the Accounts truly cast up, as well for all the prisoners as
for themselves (by which we see they ought to be Charity men) and to see
whether the charges of the House ordinary and extraordinary brought in by the
Stewards, ought to be allowed upon Accounts: and that if he shall refuse to
hold the said employment, being chosen thereto, then to forfeit one shilling
for a fine to the use of the House, or to wear the Bolts or Shackles three
days, or three nights, unless mitigated by the Master-Keeper, Stewards, and
Assistants for the time being, or the major part of them: Thus far the contents
of the Orders in general. Now he likewise has power, either by assumption or
consent, that if one Prisoner abuse another, or that a Prisoner abuse or wrong
any stranger, to commit to the Stocks, Bolts, or shackle any such disturber or
offender, without calling a Table of Officers for the public adju^ging of the
same. You must note, that the time that every Assistant comes into his Office,
is at eight of the Clock at night, and so continues till eight the next night;
and the time of the Boxes opening is at five in the afternoon, and at nine at
night. His duty for the day being performed, and day ended, it is his care (by
some collateral order) to see the Cellar cleared by ten of the Clock of all
Prisoners, and the Prisoners to be in their lodgings quietly and civilly, for
which (by either an Order or Custom of their own constituting) six pence is
allowed out of the Charity-money every night, and is accounted thus to be
spent, two pence for the Assistant, two pence for the Master of the Box, and
the other two pence allowed in money or drink to him that is the
Running-Assistant, or to the Scavenger, for bearing tow Candles before them
(good pay for ^^le employment in a prison!)

Thus you see the sum of the Duty of an Assistant, I have purposely omitted the
Magnificence of an Assistants going down the first night, with the flaring
illumination of forty of fifty great Candles, provided by the Prisoners, with
the expense and charge which they were at therein, because it is lately laid
aside, and I also judge it a matter both very vain and superfluous: And herein,
I think, I have left out nothing of the Office and Duty of an Assistant, at
least nothing which is material, but what will be taught them who shall come to
that preferment. For Salary, I think the better sort of them take none, I am
sure there is nothing allowed them; but I believe the poorer sort borrow of the
Charity what they cannot pay, and so discount for their duty. I come now to
handle

V. The Office of Running-Assistant.
HE that is so styled, attends upon the Cryers for changing of Money, and also
their Boxes at appointed hours, opens them at five in the afternoon, and at
nine at night, sets up the Candles in their respective places, waits upon the
Assistants and Stewards when they go to see the Cellar cleared of company after
Evening Prayers, looks to the Clock, rings the Bell to Prayers, is the Crier
for sale of Markets to Charity-men, has many other small Employments incumbent
upon him, for which his Salary is four shillings eight pence per month, and
two pence out of the sixteen pence paid by every Prisoner at his first coming.
This Officer stands in the choice of the Master-Keeper, Stewards, and
Assistants, as their Prerogative, as I showed before in treating of the
Appointment and Nomination of the Reader. Now follows

VI. The Office of the Churchwardens.
THere is a decorum observed in the number, though not in the quality, with the
Churchwardens in Parishes, they having the Stock of the Parish in their hands,
these having none at all. Two of the youngest Prisoners are nominated at every
Election to that Office, for the month ensuing, who refusing to hold it, are
fined four pence to the use of the House, and so by gradation of two, till some
wanting money to fine, are forced to hold. He that first holds upon such
Nomination and Election, is styled the Upper Churchwarden, and has no duty but
only on Sabbath days; the other is Under Churchwarden, and is for all the week
days to call to Prayers when the Bell is rung; their duty likewise being to set
down such of the Charity as comes not to Prayers, who should be therefore
fined one penny, but that Order is now altogether neglected: He that performs
his duty, has at the Accompt-day for his reward one groat, and no more.

VII. Of the Office of the Scavenger.
IT is the Duty of the Scavenger to keep the House cleansed in all the several
places and parts thereof: To him it belongs properly to put the Bolts or
Shackles upon any Prisoner punished for the breach of Orders in the House, and
to have of the offender one penny, the like of them that suffer the Stocks, at
their release: He has for his standing Salary, five shillings eight pence per
month, two pence of every Prisoner at his coming in first, out of the sixteen
pence Table-money by him paid; which, as is all the rest, is paid by the Master
of the Box at the Account day.

VIII. The Office of the Chamberlain.
THe Chamberlain is by single nomination of the Master-Keeper only, and
neither by the Table of Assistants, nor by common vote; the reason is, because
to him is committed the keeping and looking to of all the Bedding and Linen,
which is the Master-Keepers; to him it belongs to place men in Beds at their
coming in, to furnish them with Sheets, for which he receives one shilling six
pence, and pays to the Keeper at the rate of six pence for all Sheets used in
the House; But then note, that Sheets afterward are only eight pence or
twelve pence a pair, if you lie single, or with another: the Chamberlain is at
the charge of the washing them into the bargain. He should, by Order of the
House, make the Beds for all the Charity men, for which he should (by an Order
made for his advantage) have two pence a month for his pains, which for a long
time he has received, though he never touches their Beds; but in the beginning
it was not so. He warns all strangers to depart the House at ten of the clock
at night, which formerly was done by ringing of a Bell: he has no House
Salary, but as aforesaid, yet lives well thereupon, having most of his
subsistence at the Master-Keepers, and is as his household servant.

IX. The Duty of the Running-Poste.
HE that is Post is chosen by the Table or Court, consisting of the Master
Keeper, Stewards and Assistants, and his duty is to fetch in the Basket of
broken meat from the right honorable the Lord Majors: to wayt upon the Clerk of
the Market for such kind of provision as he gets for prisoners of the Market
people, which when brought home, is exposed to sale among the Charity, as in a
Market, and he that bids most carries it: The reason is, because every one
cannot partake of that little that is so sent, therefore he that has the
market, has the less money, to prevent difference amongst the necessitous: The
Clerk of the Market takes a Receipt for what he sends in, and so do all that
send in any provision: His business lies most abroad, and therefore called the
Running-Poste; he has four shillings per month Salary, one penny per month
out of every charity man's divident, and the like out of the sixteen pence
Table-money before spoken of, and no other allowance whatsoever.

X. The Office of the Cryers.
THere be six Cryers at the grates, which divide the week amongst them, and by
their days and their hours, as they have so ordered the business, that they
have mutual time of begging allowed them: As for example: A Box is let down in
the Hole at the Gate, at five in the afternoon, the man begs till about nine,
and then it is taken up and opened, and the Master of the Box takes an account
thereof: in the morning the same Box is let down again, and the same man begs
till twelve a clock; then another Box is let down, and another man begs till
two, then the same goes in again till five; at which time the time the Box is
opened again, and the Crier receives the fourth part of what is begged: The
like decorum is held at the window toward Blackfriers, only because of the
little that is there, the Crier has half of what he gets. Thus go they by
turns, and what they so crave, and how it is bestowed, I shall hereafter make
appear in the Chapter of Privileges.

IV. Having given an account of the several Officers of the House, and their
respective Duties, it follows in order to treat of the Privileges and Benefits
vulgarly known and enjoyed by the Prisoners; and they properly consist in the
Gifts and Legacies given by many worthy men and good Benefactors, the Arms of
some of them, with their names, hang up in the Chapel at this day, and are
most of them comprised in one entire Table which is likewise there: In the top
of which (in good old Characters) is thus written:

The Arms of our good Benefactors which gives to the Relief of us poor men, in
this Goal of Ludgate, Prisoners. The Catalogue of whose names I had thought to
have exposed to view as they are there set down, but having (by a very strange
providence) the sight of a book wherein was set down the Names of all the
Benefactors, whose Donations are now paid unto the House, the several sums
they gave, and the persons or Companies which do pay the same, I chose rather
to take a Breviate thereof, and publish it for general satisfaction, and
afterward to give you an account how they now differ in the present disposing
thereof, from the original intendment of the Donors, as by that Table before
mentioned will appear. It is thus entitled: Legacies and Ample-mony,

Th^s^ Legacies bequeathed by good Benefactors deceased, for the most part
yearly, and for ever, be as follows.
SIr Thomas Gresham gave yearly to this house for ever, to be paid by the
Chamberlain. 10 l. Sir Roger Martin, by the Mercers. 2 l. Sir John Peache, by
the Grocers. 5 s. Sir John Kinsworth, by the Fishmongers 1 l. Sir James Smith,
by the Fishmongers 3 s. 4 d. Mr. John Draper, by the Skinners 13 s. 4 d. Sir
Will. Horn. by the Salters 5. s. Mr. Robert Ferrebras, by the Leather-sellers 6
s. 8 d. The Lady Elizabeth Morris, by the Armorers 1 l. Sir William Peacock, by
the Haberdashers 1 l. ^ s. Mr. Tho. Cottels. Tallow chandler, gave to this
House yearly for ever, a hind quarter of Beef and a peck of Oatmeal, by the
Churchwardens of St. Dunstans in the East, rated at 1 l. The Lady Margaret
North gave yearly for ever in bread, 13 pence every Sunday, out of the
King's Head Tavern by Newgate, 2 l. 12 s Mr. Warner King, by the Fishmongers 1
l. Mr. Will. Roper, by the Parish Clerks 1 l. Mr. Tho. Dawson White-baker, by
the Churchwardens of St. Ethelbrows 9 s. Mistress Cock Widow, by the Salters.
5 s. Mrs. Margaret Dane Widow, gave 12 stone of Beef, and 8 dozen of bread, by
the Ironmongers, containing 1 l. Mr. John Heydon Alderman, by the Mercers 3 l.
The Lady Mary Ramsey, by the Treasurers of Christ's Hospital. 2 l. 10 s. Mr.
Peter Blundel, by the Salers 2 l. The same Mr. Blundel gave more by the
Ironmongers 2 l. Mr. John Bennet, by the Armorers 1 l. Mrs. Holligrave Widow,
by the Clothe-workers 5 s. Mr. Robert Rogers, by the Leatherfellers 1 l. Mr.
Hugh Ofsley Alderman, by the Leathersellers 5 s. Mrs. Margaret Simcots Widow,
by the Chamberlain, every nine weeks in bread 5 s. Mrs. Joan Sambach Widow, by
the Churchwardens of St. Brides 1 l. Mr. John Simmons, by the Mercers 4 s. Mr.
John Marsh, by the Mercers 5 s. Mr. John Wooller, by the Merchant-taylors 1 l
Rich. Shipsey Yeoman, gave to be paid in ten years, by 5 s per year 2 l. 10 s
Mr. William Parker, by the Merchant-taylors 1 l. 10 s Rich. Jacob Vintner, gave
yearl to be paid for 257 years by Joseph Hewet Haberdasher, and Sarah his
wife, or by their Heirs, etc. out of the five Tenements in Lincolns Inn Fields
2 l Mr. John Highlord senior, Skinner, gave to be paid by twent^ shillings per
year 5 l Mr. Thomas Chapman Skinner, by the Churchwardens of Saint Pancras 6 s.
Mr. James Hodgson Vintner, by the Churchwardens of St. Sepulchers 10 s. Mr.
John Kendrick, by the Drapers, for the relief of one Prisoner of the Company 1
l. 10 s. The Lady Mary Carey, Wife of the Lord Carey, by H. Rochford her
Executor 2 l. John Jucksey Merchant-taylor, for the releasing a Prisoner out of
this House, to be paid out of cer^ain Lands in Moreclack in Berkshire 1 l.
Lancelot Andrews Lord Bishop of Winchester, gave two thousand pounds, for
purchasing of a hundred pound Land by the Year, ^o be distributed in four
kinds 1. Aged men. 2. Aged women 3. Fatherless children and orphans. 4. For
release and relief of poor Prisoners out of the four prisons in London, and one
in Southwark; Of which five pounds comes to this Prison yearly, the Thursday
before Easter, one half for relief, the other for release of Prisoners, now
paid by Mr. Shambrook in Colemanstreet, Dr. Salmon in Stepney, and Mr. Jones of
the Temple 5 l. Sir Ralph Freeman Lord Mayor of London in 1633. by the Company
of Clothworkers 5 l. From the Chamber of London, in lieu of 250 l. this Prison
is to receive 1 l. 11 s. 3 d. the half of 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. the other half to
others: the Gift of Mr. William Middleton 1 l. 11 s. 3 d. John Stone
Haberdasher, sometime living in Bow Churchyard, gave for ever out of a Tenement
in Bow lane, called the White Griffin 2 l. It was paid till the year 1650. In
anno 1632. John Meredith of London, Skinner, gave for ever to buy Coals every
November yearly, Elizabeth his Wife his Executrix. 1 l. 2 s.
Here I observe two things: First, That some whose Names are in the
forementioned Table, are not set down in this Book of Legacies, out of which I
took this Catalogue, for there is wanting Sir Steven Foster, Sir John Allen
Mercer, Mr. Wyat, etc. And seondly, That what Legacies are now belonging and
paid to the Prison, are only the later Gifts of Benefactors; those large
Donations of Charity given before the Reformation, being too full of
Superstition, and looking with faces like the meritorious Gifts of Papists, and
therefore thought good by Avarice and Covetousness to be obliviated: Nor knew
they a surer way to do it, that they might be utterly obscured from the eyes of
after Ages, but by consulting (as it were) with their Religion and tender
Consciences, who soon resolved them, That the wisest way would be to demolish
the Idolatrous Tombs and Sepulchers of those best of men, and greatest of
Benefactors, and to take from before the eyes of the Godly those Monuments of
Brass, which spoke only of their good works and deeds, defacing them as
vainglorious, and pretending they would be more advantageous to a thriving
State to have them exposed to sale.

The Sum of these known Legacies is about 70 l. but some of them I find are out
of date, having run their full race and time out, therefore I do think 60 l. is
the extent of what annually comes in.

The smaller sort I find to be rightly bestowed, that is, for the Relief of
the Prisoners in bread, or otherwise. And those are commonly received by the
Master of the Box: The greater Sums are bestowed for Release of Prisoners, as
they call it: The way of Relief is to be understood, the supplying of them with
necessaries, as victuals or money: That called Release, is thus: That when a
poor man has got his Discharge from both Com^ters, and run the Gantlope of
Clerks Fees, and fobb'd Actions, whereby his small stock is utterly exhausted,
and he has not wherewith with to run quite through the Regiment of Extortions,
he stops at the door. By the Turn-key is brought him a Bill of Fees to be paid
(which I shall speak of when I come to treat of Charges and Fees) wherein
Lodging leads the Van, which he not being able at present to pay, shall be
detained until he either does, or else give security to pay it, though perhaps
his Creditors took his own Bond for twenty times a greater Sum: if he can
procure no such security there he must lie until the next Quarter, or that some
Legacy be brought by some Company, or other person, for to discharge Prisoners,
and then by Petition to them presented, signed by the Keeper (which he does for
his own ends) very likely the man shall b^ immediately turned out.

Corruption in some, and Policy in others, has made it customary now, that
these larger Gifts never come within the Prison, but are swallowed up in the
Paper-Office by the Keeper, for Lodging and Fees (which is that Scylla or
Carybdis I before spoke of) contrary to the intendment of the deceased Donors.

I have heard it credibly spoken by a knowing and rational man, that these
moneys (and much more than these) was at their appointed times used to be paid
to the Stewards of the House, who kept the moneys in stock, and if a Prisoner
^ay there that might be discharged from his Creditor or Creditors, for the sum
of three, four, or five pound, did by his easy Address procure the said money,
and his discharge immediately followed.

Note, That Lodging was not then exacted cum privilegio, as now it is, the more
the pity: But this I am confident of, that of this sixty pound a year, or
thereabouts, there is not above Ten that the Prisoners taste of, the rest by
that other Project is converted into Lodging-money, as I have sufficiently
showed.

Now I have begun to unlock the hid Treasures of Ludgate, I intend, according
to my poor ability, to signify what more I understand to be given them sreely,
and for their necessary Sustenance, and not to the use before spoken of.

To be upon the Charity of the House is the accounted benefit which a poor man
receives, and that he is admitted unto by Petition, and showing the Copy of his
Freedom to the Master-Keeper, two Stewards, and seven Assistants; and of this
kind there are about fifty in number, sometimes more, seldom less now adays,
who partake of what Moneys is begged at the Grates, etc. as I shall demonstrate.

I gave you an account of six Cryers, and their manner and turns of Crying; and
also that the Money by them begged, was put into the custody of the Master of
the Box until the Accompt-day, and it is so; at which time it is cast up by the
Stewards and Assistants, and after the charges of the House is taken out of it
for that month, as the buying of Bread for the Charity-men, and Ample-men,
(that is, such as are not upon the Charity) the buying of Candles, the paying
of Officers their small Salaries, and other things incident and necessary for
the House, as I have showed; then I say, they in the next place cast it up into
shares or dividents for each Charityman; which done, the Bell being rung, they
come all up into the Chapel, where the Under Steward reads in the Accompt-book
to this purpose: We the Stewards and Assistants, having perused the Account for
this month, being such a day of the month, do find that it has pleased God
to bestow upon us out of the Boxes, by good Benefactors (the House charges
being deducted) the sum of eight pound eight shillings (or the like) to be
divided amongst fifty Charity-men and women, which comes to three shillings
four pence apiece, for which we bless God, and give thanks.

A man hearing this read, would he not, being on the Charity, expect to
receive it, think you? But stay, when he comes to the Master of the Box to have
his share, he shall find him to write thus in a Paper: Lodging 2s. 4 d. Post
and Chamberlain 3 d. Markets (perhaps) 5 d. Remains 4 d.


This I have often found to be the Account, nay sometimes nothing at all in a
month, when formerly every man's share has come to sixteen, eighteen, or
twenty shillings a month; and at a good time, as Easter and Christmas, it may
be three or four pound apiece, therefore this may well be called Ludgate, What
it is: Not what it was.

This is done, because with the Keeper it is sic volo, sic jubeo, etc. though
there is a pretense of an Order of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen for his
receiving it, but I could never see it: and if there be, it was granted when
Charity did (as Justice should do) run down like a mighty stream, but the
channel being now almost quite dried up, the banks thereof having been cut by
the oppressing hand of Wars and Calamities, it is now high time for the present
Lord Mayor and Court, to search into the reason of its granting, and to
abrogate it, for poor men's lives are much concerned therein, to my knowledge;
for three shillings four pence will go further with a sick and indigent man,
then a groat of six pence will, especially in a Prison.

I will give you a short Example of an honest and charitable act of the Master
Keepers, for which I think he had no Order of the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen: It pleased God to inflict sickness upon me after my being in Prison
about a month or six weeks, I then not being upon the Charity, and being a
very poor man, and altogether friendless (a poor wife and child excepted) was
at the Accompt-day allowed four shillings eight pence by the Stewards and
Assistants, in consideration of my charge in my sickness, and my known poverty,
which the Keeper understanding, took half of it for his Lodging, and left me
the other to repair my broken and dislocated fortunes. I could give other like
Examples of his kindness to Prisoners, but that is not here my business.

The freest Gift, and now most esteemed Benefit, is that of the Lords Mayors
basket, which is twice (or thrice sometimes) in a week, and is divided amongst
poor Prisoners: His Lord ship likewise sends in light bread sometimes when he
takes it from the light Bakers, which is likewise a great help when it comes.

What is sent in by the Clerk of the Market, as Chumps of Beef, or any other
kind of provision, and likewise by the Water-bayliff, as unsized Fish, but
that very seldom, is (as I told you) exposed to sale as in a Market amongst the
Charity-men, by which means every man receives a like benefit.

I may conclude this fourth Head with this observable Truth, That all the
benefits (I mean of Legacies) formerly given to Prisoners, does not add to
their relief a farthing a day, which is small allowance: And that if it were
all bestowed amongst the Prisoners in general, as it should be, it would not
amount to a penny day for each man. To come now to

The Charges to Prisoners at their Entrance and Exits.
A Freeman of London being arrested by Action Entered in either of the Compters,
may refuse to go to the Compter (as is usual) but may require to go
immediately to Ludgate, which the Keeper thereof cannot deny to receive into
custody, although no Duce facias be brought then, but shall afterward be sent
for; which way, (if practiced) would save many a pound to poor men, which the
Sergeants and yeoman do daily extort from them: But the usual way indeed is to
go to the Compter being arrested, and take a Duce, which costs fixteen pence,
and so go to Ludgate with the officers, for which service only they will often
exact three, four, or five shillings, sometimes more of a poor man, though
their just due is but two pence.

When the officers have brought him to Ludgate, the Turnkey takes him into
custody upon sight of his Duce, and enters his Name and Addition, into a Book
kept for that purpose, for which Entrance, (or turning of the Key) the Prisoner
pays fourteen pence.

Having paid that, and being turned into the Prison, his next work is to fit
himself with a Lodging, which is of three sorts, or several rates, and is one
penny, two pence, or three pence per night.

Being furnished by the Chamberlain of the House with lodging, his next payment
is for Sheets, which is eighteen pence, and is paid to the said Chamberlain,
who is accomptable to the Master-Keeper at a certain rate for the same, whose
goods they only are.

Before he shall repose himself in his new provided Lodging, his Chamber
fellows will acquaint him with a Garnish of 4 shi^lings, to be by him paid,
and by them spent, either in Coals or Candles for their own proper use, or else
in a Dinner or Supper, as they can agree; for non-payment of which, though
through poverty, or for refusing through obstinacy, his Clothes shall be taken
privately from him in the night (or Mobb'd, as they call it) which shall be
detained by he knows not who, until such time as he has paid the uttermost
farthing.

Having rested one night, he shall the next day be called upon for a due of
sixteen pence, which is to be paid to one of the Stewards of the House, and is
called Tablemoney, with which Candles, etc. is bought for the use of the House,
every night set up in places necessary.

These Fees and Dues must be paid by every Prisoner be he never so poor, at his
Entrance, amounting in all to eight shillings, which I have particularly
mentioned, to undeceive such who think Ludgate to be so free a Prison, and that
the Fees are small, and the Benefits and Privilege therein very great, which
in their due place I have discovered.

But now to administer a word of Instruction to such as desire, (not being
brought in upon, nor sued to Execution) to have liberty to go out: It is
wrought by two several ways, though by one and the same Engine, Money.

He, I say, that would have his liberty, must procure to go either with a
Keeper, or else upon Security; In order to which, he must send to each Compter
to know what Actions are Entered against him, which must be certified under the
Clerks hands, and will cost four pence the Search, as much for every Action,
and four pence for the Clerks hand to them.

This being done, and that he desires to go out with a Keeper, he must for his
first days progress pay two shillings six pence to the Head Turnkey, twelve
pence to the Under-Turnkey, and eighteen pence to the Keeper that attends upon
him, which is also a Prisoner; and twelve pence to the Turnkey, and as much to
his Keeper every day of his going out afterward.

If a Prisoner will go out without such an Attendant, it must be by Security of
two men, such whom the Keeper or Turnkeys shall accept of, and judge
sufficient, each of them entering into Bond severally, for his true
imprisonment, and likewise one other Bond for payment of his Lodging to the
Master-keeper; for which the Turnkey takes as his Fee, five shillings at the
least, nay, I know some of whom he has demanded twenty shillings, for his good
will to let him out after Bonds sealed, for which the Prisoners must pay too,
with some saucy expenses to boot, and what they condition for weekly, must be
truly and punctually paid, or he is soon fetched in and deprived of Liberty,
and his Bond cancelled and made void.

But supposing a Prisoner to end with his Creditor, and that he bring in his
Discharge from each Compter, he shall then find to pay at his Exit, the several
Fees following, viz. Two shillings the Master-Keepers Fee, 14 pence the turning
of the Key, twelve pence for every Action that lies against him; if he be
charged in Execution, then it is two shillings six pence, and as much for every
Writ that lies against him: these added to his Lodging, proves sometimes as
much, or more than the original Debt, and yet perhaps the Creditor never the
nearer being satisfied. The justness of taking which Fees, I refer to the
Legislators to consider of.

Having stepped thus far into the Discovery of matters, I shall give you likewise
an account what the Keeper makes of his Lodgings, and also name you the
Chambers as they are called by the Prisoners, and their several Rates, and then
give all in one gross Sum: And first to begin with the several Rooms at three
pence per night, with the number of Beds therein contained, two persons lying
in bed for the most part.

Chambers at 3 d. per night.
The Star Chamber has three beds for five men 8 s. 9 d. The New Chamber four
beds, 14 s. The Carpenters Chamber has four beds, 14 s. Two Hoppets, two beds
7 s. Another little Hoppet, with a single bed 1 s. 9. The Sun Chamber, four
beds 14 s. The Horn Chamber and the Hoppet, three beds 10 s. 6 d. The Chequer
Chamber and the Hopper, three beds 10 s. 6 d. Weekly, is 4 00 06
Chambers at 2 d. per night.
The inner Knights Ward, four beds 9 s. 4 d. The outward Knights Ward, three
beds 7 s. The inner Portcullis, four beds 9 s 4 d. The outward Portcullis,
three beds 7 s. Weekly, is 1 12 8
Chambers or Lodgings at one penny per night.
The Long Ward, twelve beds 14 s. The Lumbry, twelve beds 14 s. The Women's Hole
and Hoppet, five beds 5 s. 10 d. Weekly, is 1 13 10
The Lodgings at this rate amount to seven pound seven shillings per week:

And is in a year, Three hundred sixty one Pound, fourteen shillings four pence.

Now if an Objection should be, That there is not so many constantly, and that
sometimes men die, and then the money is lost.

To this I answer: That it may, and will be affirmed, that take those who are
abroad upon Security, which likewise pay for their Lodgings, with those that
are within, which must pay, that then these beds would not contain them.

And to the second, That when men do dye, and though they be maintained in
their sickness, and buried after their deaths by the Charity of the House, yet
the Keeper will seize upon whatsoever they have in the House; as clothes,
bedding (if they have any) or other matters, unless he be paid his Lodging-rent
by some friend; A custom not usual, till Covetousness turned the Key; but if a
man had been buried at the charge of the House, his clothes were by the
Stewards and Assistants expoposed to sale amongst the Prisoners, and the money
for them received was put into the Master of the Box his hand, for repairing
the the loss of the Stock by such disbursements.

Having peeped into every Room in the House, I think I had best step down into
the Cellar too, and out of barrels of Beer and Ale, I shall find the Keeper
has a very considerable Profit running into his purse.

He is the Head-butler of King Luds House, only for his ease he lets it out to
another, which is no prisoner, who allows him sixteen shillings a barrel for
all the Beer and Ale that is drawn in the Cellar; The Tobaco he meddles not
with, but allows that profit to this his Under-butler, with which, it is is
supposed he finds fire, pipes and Candles, and that I think is all he can do.

What he pays a Barrel for his Beer and Ale to the Brewer, I know not, but it
is sold to prisoners at 2 pence a full pot for Beer, and two pence a quart for
Ale, though none of the strongest.

His certain weekly draught I know not, but did you but see the Cellar how it
is daily thronged with prisoners and their friends, you would guess it to be
about twenty barrels in a week.

Now suppose it so, and that he pays the Brewer 12 shillings a barrel for both,
which is as much as it is worth, then this kind of Trade brings in the Keeper
about four pound a week, for which he wets not his finger. This, if constant,
comes to 2 hundred and 8 pounds per year. Now notwithstanding all this, yet
such is the covetous cruelty of the Keeper and his Turnkeys, that if any drink
be sent to a prisoner by a friend, they will take it away at the door, and give
it to such as least want it, and sometimes break the vessels, though perhaps
the person it was sent to, is ready to perish for want of a draught of it: I
hope he has no order of the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen for these kind
of practices. Authority I am sure does think that the profit thereof belongs to
the prison, but I find that it is transmitted into Blackfryers. This added to
his other In-comes by Lodgings, does amount to betwixt 5 and 600 l. per annum,
besides his fees at the door which I hope is more then the Conscience of a good
Magistrate will suffer to be the annuity of one Jailer only. I need not
trouble my self to conclude with a prayer to the Magistrate, for regulating
these things, because the beginning supplies that in special to the persons
empowered with Authority, as well as good Consciences, (I hope) to do it: And
truly after my tedious writing of this Tragi-Comedy, I think it fit to repose
my self and Reader with a Song fitted to the purpose, compsed by a merry
Drollist that was lately a Prisoner there.

The SONG.
THe Ninth of February, fifty and eight,
For to be Arrested it was my hard lot;
I called for a Duce to better my fate, Which forced me to Ludgate on a
Sergeants trot.
Where I espied a muckle tall man
Russling of Papers in a little room,
He looked like a Turnkey, and asked me my Name,
But he read unto me my Fourteen pence Doom.
Out of his Pocket he pulled a great Key,
As bright as a Pistol, it frighted me sore;
unto a great Room he showed me the way,
And for nine months I could scarce find the door.
I walked up and down with a sorrowful heart
At the sight of the Shackles, the Bolts, and the Stocks,
The Prisoners showed me the Cellar so dark,
Which drowned me faster than Doors and their Locks:
Where a Crab-footed Tapster star'd me in the face,
He told me a Running-Assistant there stood:
He asked me four Groats for Candles and Bread,
I told him I never was used to such food.
An old man with a Broom I espy,d I Would thought he would bin going to sweep the
Streets,
He told me he would me a Lodging provide,
But first I must pay eighteen pence for my Sheets.
Then I to a Court of Justice was called,
Thinking some Law or Religion to hear,
Because two Books before him lay spread,
But alas, they were Orders for Prisoners to fear.
A Garnish then was buzzed in my ear,
With that me thought my Money grew scant,
I afterward found, what I then did not fear,
But a Cloak to my back I in the mornning did want.
FINIS.

