NATURE INVERTED, OR, Judgment turned into Gall.

DELIVERED IN A SERMON At the Cathedral Church of St. Peter in York, upon
Monday the 18th of July, 1670. being the Summer Assize held before the Right
Honorable Baron Turner and Baron Littleton; The Right Worshipful Sr Philip
Monckton Knight being then High Sheriff of Yorkshire.

By James Johnson Bachelour in Divinity, and Fellow of Sidney-Sussex College
in Cambridge.

(...). Ignat. Epist. ad Trall.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University, for Samuel
Simpson Bookseller in Cambridge, 1670.

Amos 6. 12. Shall horses run upon the rock? will one plow there with oxen? for
ye have turned Judgment into gall, and the fruit of Righteousness into
hemlock.
THis proverbial speech among the Jews (the like to which, as Osiander in loc.
relates, they have among the Germans) used to express a thing difficult or
impossible, seems at the first view, as difficult as the thing it expresses;
and though it be a style very suitable to the Prophet, who was a herd-man of
Tekoa, to speak of Horses and chapter 1. 1.
Oxen, yet there seems to be as incongruous a connection of that which is joined
with them: for what coherence is there betwixt Horses and Judgment; betwixt
Oxen and Righteousness? or what dependence Sept. (...). ci^m femollas ineunt.
nihil a mente Prophet alienius, Drusius.
betwixt running upon a rock, and turning Judgment into gall; betwixt plowing
with Oxen, and turning the fruit of Righteousness into Hemlock? The strangeness
of which connection according to the several aspects it bears, has administered
as diverse and strange apprehensions in the judgments of those that have
plowed with their heifers to find out the riddle.

1. Some straining the words so far, as to interpret them to be a prediction of
the rejecting of the Jews, and election or taking in of the Gentiles; the Jews
being those, that like untamed heifers, would not submit their necks to the
yoke of Gods law, which was as difficult for that stubborn and stiff-necked
people to do, in loc.
as for the wild ox (of which S. Jerome Quecirca Christus repudiatis Judaeis
jugi evangelici impatientibus, q asi bubalis, elegit Gentes quasi bones cicures
and domites, dixitque illic tollite jugum meum super vos, v. Ruper. a C. a Lap.
cit. in l.
understands this place) to plow upon the rocks; and therefore Christ rejecting
these, makes choice of the Gentiles, a people of a more tame and gentle nature,
to bear his Evangelical yoke, and to them he says, take my yoke upon you.

2. Others conceive the Prophet by these words to express the Israelites
ineptitude and unfitness for the performance of any good that was required of,
or expected from them. They were like the Prophet's girdle hid at Euphrates,
marred; or like the pin in Ezekiel made of the vine, useless, and good for
nothing; they were (as the Psalmist speaks) wise to do evil, but to do good,
they had no understanding. The ox knew his owner, and the ass his masters
crib, but Israel Jer. 13. 17. Ezekiel. 15. 3. Telluris in. utile pondus.
did not know, this brutish people did not understand. They misunderstood, or
neglected their duty, and were as unskilful in the choice, as unfit for the
performance of it; their choice and wishes being like those of the horse and
ox, mentioned by the Poet, Optat ephippia bos piger, optat arare caballus. And
therefore to these creatures, the Prophet compares them, it being as impossible
for them to do well, or run in the ways of Obedience, as it is for Horses to
run upon the rock, or one to plow there with Oxen.

3. Others apprehend the words as a reproof of their folly, in that they
thought to advance themselves, or establish their kingdom by idolatry,
oppression, and the like, mentioned chapter 4. which was a course as foolish, as a
horses running upon a rock, and as fruitless, as ones plowing there with oxen.
As though the Prophet had told them, how agreeable soever wickedness was to
their nature, yet it was contrary to their design; they made use of very
unlikely means to promote their ends; they were so far from advancing
themselves by impiety, that they took the readiest and most compendious way to
effect their ruin. They that think by fraud and injustice, by oppression and
violence, by rapine and other wickedness to lay the foundation of their
greatness, do thereby undermine those very foundations which they lay; they
cannot set upon a more speedy and effectual way of destroying themselves, than
by practicing such attempts upon others.

4. Others understand the words as a reproof of their gross security, and
sottish stupidity, in that they thought, notwithstanding their sins, God upon
the account of his Covenant, was bound to be propitious to them, and to load
them with his benefits; they looked that themselves (like Gideons fleece)
should be wet with the dew of heavens blessing, though all nations about them,
were but as dry ground: Because God entered into league with their Fathers, they
therefore expected the benefit of that covenant, though they did not perform
the condition of it. The Prophet at once refutes their folly, and condemns
their impiety, telling them God could be unmindfull of that Covenant, seeing
they on their parts had so hainously broken it; and whilst they were such
stupid and senseless rocks, he could no more run on in the way of blessing, and
doing them good, than horses could run on a rock, or one plow there with oxen,
for they had turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of Righteousness into
hemlock, he therefore must deal accordingly with them, he will recompense them
according to their doings. The divine Nemesis will retaliate to men according
to their offenses. The secure sinner shall not always go unpunished, but
receive the effects of his sin, adequate to the nature of it. As I have done
(says Adonibezek) so has God Judge. 1. 7.
requited me. And though the Jews here might think to escape better, and
compound with God for their sins, and hope by their numerous sacrifices, and
ceremonious worship to propitiate that Deity they had displeased, yet God tells
them, though ye offer me chapter 5. 22.
burnt-offerings, and meat offerings, I will not accept them, neither will I
regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts. Take thou away from me, the
noise of thy songs: for I will not hear the melody of thy viols. But let
judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.

5. Others think the words to be an exprobration of Vincere consuetudinem dura
est pugna.
their accustomed courses in sin, they had been so long inured to the practice
thereof, as it was now difficult or impossible for them to lose the habit. Can
the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye do well,
that are accustomed to do evil. Can horses run upon a rock, or one plow there
with oxen? Then may ye execute justice, that have turned judgment into gall;
and do uprightly, that have turned righteousness into hemlock.

6. Others take the words to be a denunciation or threatening of the divine
judgment, which should unavoidably overtake them. It is as impossible for such
sinners, as you are, to stand out Gods judgments, and go free, as it is for
horses and oxen to run, or plow on a rock. Which judgment some conceive to be
either,

1. General, in the unsuccessfulness of their affairs and undertakings, wherein
their labors should be as fruitless, and endeavors as successless, as a horse
or oxe's running or plowing upon a craggy rock. According to that threatening in
Deuteronomy. They should be cursed Deu. 28. 16, 17.
in the city, and in the field, in their basket and in their store, in their
going out, and in their coming in. Quicquid calcaverint, spina fiet. Nihil
eorum (as Mercer) quae acturi sunt, sit illis successurum, ut si quis per rupes
equum concitet, aut aret in rupe bobus, quod frustra and (...). S. Cyril. Alex.
in l.
sine fructu fecerit. Or else,

2. A particular judgment by destruction from their enemies, either the
Assyrians, as S. Cyril, or other Adversaries, as Arias Montanus thinks, who, as
it is in the preceding verse, should smite the great house with breaches, viz.
their Kings and Princes, Judges and Nobles, or (as some understand it) the
Priests and Levites, or (as others extend it) the whole ten Tribes of Israel;
and the little house with clefts, viz. the lower and inferior rank of people
(as Albert. Mag.) or the laity among the Israelites (as Lyra) or the two Tribes
of Judah and Benjamin (as Drusius and Grotius) the destruction of the Great
House (according to the latter of these) being referred to the time of
Salmanassar, as that of the little one is to the army of Sennacherib.

And now though the Israelites might boast of their power and strength by
reason of Jeroboam their Prince, who had gotten great victories, and enlarged
the Territories of their Kingdom: yet (as it is v. 13.) they rejoiced in a thing
of naught, for the courage and strength and success of their enemies should be
such, that they should besiege their gates, beat down their strong holds, and
lay their palaces in the dust. The City (in which they might hope to take
sanctuary) should be delivered, with all that was therein; the city or hill of
Zion wherein they were at ease, or the mountain v. 8. v. 1.
of Samaria wherein they trusted, and the rocks in which they placed their
confidence, should be so brought down, and as it were levelled by their
enemies, that even in a literal sense horses might run, or oxen plow there.
Which effects would not seem strange to them, if they did but consider their
sins, the cause thereof, which were more strange and monstrous.

Thus when Judgment and Righteousness the two bulwarks of a Nation are thrown
down; when men change the order and nature of Justice and equity into that
which is most opposite and contrary thereto, it is no wonder if God for their
punishment change the very order of nature, and to make his judgments
wonderful (as is threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.) cause through a multitude of enemies,
even horses to run upon a rock; and men to plow there with oxen.

7. Others judge the words to be a complaint of the Prophets unsuccessfulness
in his reproofs which were frustrated by them. They were become so degenerate
in their principles, so depraved in their practices, so stupefied in their
minds, and so hardened in their hearts, that his words were but as thrown
against a rock, or as water spilt upon the ground; rebuking of them, was as if
one did sing a song to a deaf man, so that instead of reprehending them, he is
ready to reprove himself, for that mispense of labor that was cast upon those,
who were so desperately corrupted, that they turned all the good presented to,
or bestowed upon them into evil, so that his endeavors herein were as
successless as a horses running upon the rocks, and as ineffectual as ones
plowing there with oxen.

8. Lastly, Others look upon the words as a charge drawn up against them for
their grand injustice and cruelty, in that they had overturned all law and
right, and were become such monsters therein, as if they had changed the very
order of law and nature; They had so corrupted all judgment, overthrown all
right, undermined all law^ that thereby (as the Psalmist speaks) all the
foundations of the earth were out of course: for they did not only privately
swallow up the needy, and Chapter 8. 4.
make the poor of the land to fail, endeavoring to buy the poor for silver,
and the needy for a pair of shoes, making also the Ephah small, and the shekel
great, and falsifying the balances by deceit; but they did publicly afflict
the just; they took a bribe, Chapter 5. 12.
and turned aside the poor in the gate (the place of open and public
judicature) from their right. They turned judgment into wormwood, and left off
righteousness Chapter 5. 7.
in the earth; or (as the Prophet here expresses it) they turned judgment into
gall, and the fruits of righteousness into hemlock, they made that which in it
self is sweet and pleasant, as nauseous and distasteful to God, as gall and
hemlock are to the tastes of men.

In which charge drawn up against them may be considered,

1. The specification of their Sin.

2. The nature and quality of it.

1. The Specification of it. The Prophet thinks it not sufficient to tell them
only they are sinners, but charges that sin upon them, for which they are most
notorious. Discourses at large and in general, seldom make impression upon any
in particular; generalia non pungunt: Such a reproof is like the flourishing or
brandishing of a sword in the air, none is pierced or wounded by it; a close
and particular application is requisite for conviction; as in the course of the
law general accusations will ground no actions, for if a man be accused, it is
not sufficient to say he is a malefactor, but he must be charged with
particulars; so the Prophet according to that method, when he arraigns these
sinners here, he frames an indictment against them of notorious and personal
offenses. Men generally take great exceptions against this kind of dealing,
especially they that are in power and authority, such as those against whom the
Prophet here draws up his accusation, which notwithstanding is not stifled by
any awe of their power, or suppressed by any fear of their greatness. If they
be great, he is the messenger of one that is greater, and therefore if they be
bold in sining, it well becomes him to be so in reproving. Those that are
advanced above the ordinary pitch of men in the world, think the addition of
their outward fortune (which is often all the worth they have to boast of) must
exempt and privilege them from the rebukes which come from those that in any
secular respect are below them; accounting it a diminution of their greatness
to be taxed with any crime, as though the reproof of their sin were a greater
dishonor, than the commission of it.

It is the folly of men that they had rather be flattered in their vices, than
reproved for them, especially if they be so notorious as the world takes notice
of them. These magistrates here could happily have been content that the
Prophet had inveighed against some other sin, wherein they had not been
concerned, thereby to justify themselves in their own eyes, whilst they heard
others condemned for that, of which their own thoughts proclaimed them
guiltless; but when he comes so close unto them, as to touch their guilt, and
thereby to gall their conscience, this proves as bitter and distasteful to
them, as their injustice and oppression did to others.

Such like entertainment this kind of dealing had from Ahab, who upon that
account esteemed Elijah 1 Kings 21. 26.
his enemy, and for the same reason was so incensed 1 Kin. 22. 8.
against Micaiah, as he could not endure him. The Galatians entertained hard
thoughts of Saint Gal. 4. 16.
Paul for it, and looked upon him as their enemy because he told them the
truth. The mistaken world counts it love and respect to forbear reproof, and
hatred and ill will to tell men their faults; Satius est solemn non lucere, quam
Chrysostomum non docere. Psalm. 141. 5.
But David who knew how to make a better estimate herein, counts such his
chiefest friends, Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, let him
reprove me it shall be an excellent oil; and Solomon his son confirms the
same, Faithful are the wounds of a friend; and God himself has made this not
Prove. 27. 6.
only a part of our duty, but a sign of friendship and amity, thou shall not
hate thy brother, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer
sin upon him. Peccata permittere non est mansuetudo, Lev. 19. 17
sed crudelitas; to cut and lance apostemated wounds and fretting sores, it is
not cruelty but mercy. As he Recede a me in quit languidus lethargicus, ob^cero
te, recede a me. S. Aug. de verbis Dom. secund. Joan. ser. 59.
that binds a man in a frenzy, or awakens one in a lethargy, though he
troubles both, yet he shows more mercy, than disquiet to them. Ligatur
phreneticus, stimulatur lethargicus, ambo offenduntur, sed ambo diliguntur. And
how unwelcome a messenger soever the Prophet might be to these here, or how
disgustfull his messge, yet he is so far from flattering them in their
greatness, or soothing them in their vices, that on the contrary he points out
unto them the deformity of their vices, and the stain of their greatness, even
their injustice and oppression, that they had turned judgment into gall, and
the fruits of righteousness into hemlock.

2. Which leads, secondly to the consideration of the nature and quality of
their sin, which is of great extent, and like the sin of our first parents,
has many others included in it. This is

1. Inversio naturae, an inverting and changing of nature it self; This is to
alter the essence and being of things; to reduce the creation, as much as is
possible, into its Primitive Chaos and confusion; to take away all distinction
of right and wrong; to call evil good, and good evil; to put bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter, darkness for light, and light for darkness; It Is to make
Candida de nigris, and de candentibus alba. It Is a stranger inversion of nature
than for horses to run, or oxen to plow upon a rock. God has imprinted in the
natural consciences of men notions of right and equity, and he blots out, and
obliterates these, that make so strange a metamorphosis, as to turn judgment
into gall, and righteousness into hemlock. This is

2. Abusus legis, an abuse of the law. Which is abused

1. By a bare pretense unto it, which is a crime so much the greater, by how
much it does the more closely lurk and shroud it self under that which is
intended for its prevention, thereby making the law a partner with it in the
transgression. Such cunning oppression under the specious color of justice, is
one of the greatest dishonours can be laid upon the law, which yet is most
commonly done by those that pretend to be the chief preservers of it, who
instead of being instruments of justice, become engines of cruelty, which they
act the more safely and securely, because under a pretense of equity, being
herein like the bush or bramble in the Fable, that, instead of sheltering the
sheep from the storm, tears the fleece from it; such greedily feed upon other
men's wants, live by other men's losses, and as the common soldier complained
against Pompey, miseria nostra magnuses, they grow great by other men's
miseries. It was one of the aggravations of injustice that Saint Cyprian
complained of in his time, that Ad Donat. l. 2. Ep. 2.
inter leges ipsas delinquitur, inter jura peccatur, nec innocentia illic, ubi
defenditur, reservatur. As there is no impiety like that impiety that is
committed in Gods sanctuary, so no injustice like that injustice whereby men in
the midst of laws sin against law, and do injustly in the Courts of Justice.

To erect an high Court of pretended Justice to condemn Royal innocence, is so
much the greater injustice, by how much under that disguise it would appear to
be the less. Pretenses of justice alter not the nature of actions, though they
may set a fair gloss upon them: The Devil is not at all the better for
appearing in Samuel's mantle; no more are men's fraudulent actions for having
the law as a cloak to cover them; by the help of which they generally arrive at
a greater height and perfection of wickedness, than they could otherwise attain
to. Under the protection of this, a crafty pleader, like Tertullus, will argue
any thing injuriously; a spiteful prosecutour, like Sanballat, will suggest
any accusation falsely: a confident witness, like those against Naboth, will
swear any thing boldly: a tame or heedless jury, like the Jews against our
Savior will swallow down any thing rashly and inconsiderately: a craving
Scribe, or corrupted Officer, like him in the Gospel that writ fifty for an
hundred, will for a tacit bribe foyst in any thing secretly and unjustly: by
reason whereof, though the Judge in these cases be not like Felix that expects
a reward privately, but administers justice without by respects and
impartially, yet can he scarce hinder (though he may complain as Dioclesian the
Emperor, that pessimis servis cautus and optimus venderetur imperator) but
that justice will sometimes be perverted, and judgment turned into gall.

2. The law is abused by an unnecessary use of it, when men bring trifling and
frivolous suits, not worthy the Magistrates cognizance to the Judgment seat;
so that let the judgment be what it will, it must needs in some measure prove
gall to the parties concerned in it; for even he that gets the conquest by so
chargeable a remedy, shall thereby be a loser; a man's relief by such means
being heavier than the injury it removes; for it often happens, as he in the
story said, ut tu victrix provincia plores. In which cases such may have cause
to answer the congratulations of their friends, as Pyrrhus (in Plutarch) did
his after he had gotten two famous victories over the Romans, (...) if they
should get In vita Pyrrhi.
a few more such victories, it would be to their utter ruin. And if such
quarrelsome and contentious spirits (with whom there is no more ado, but a word
and an action, a trespass and a process) will not be so favorable to
themselves as to forbear such trivial actions, it were well if Judges would
take Gallio's course, and drive such actours from the Judgment seat. We go not
to the Physician for every ail, and small distemper, no more should we to the
law for every petty quarrel and slight offense.

It Is a strange opinion that has possessed the minds of many (not to say most)
men, that when they please they may sue for their own, and lawfully contend for
their right, and he is accounted a good and just man that seeks after no more:
but if this be universally understood, and in all cases, it will not hold true.
For the rules of equity as well as of Christianity oblige us to yield
oftentimes in such things wherein by law we might stand, and to forgo such
things which by law we might require, without which equity, justice and peace
could not consist. Equity has a power of overruling, that liberty which the
law gives, and enjoins us in many cases to recede from our right for the
upholding and preserving either of public peace or private. And therefore they
that always make use of the law to get their own, are not so just, as they
would seem to be, for that which is done by law, is not always justly done.
Quod jure fit, non semper just. To go to the law for trifles; so likewise to
steal law upon others, and surprise them unawares; or to make use of the law as
the first remedy of justice, which is ordained to be the last; or to enter
suits before any overtures of peace and agreement be made, whereby many are
forced into the Courts, that would willingly satisfy by private order, as much
or more, than they are compelled by public. Such proceeding is not (...) but
(...), not justice but extremity; for as to make use of the law for a cause
sufficient, and where right is denied, is justice and equity; so to make use of
it for trifles, and when other remedies may be had, is extremity, and so an
injury.

3. The law is abused by an undue suspension and suppression of it, which
likewise is a perverting of justice, and turning judgment into gall, for
suppressing of the law is oppressing of those that should be preserved by it,
and according to the Jewish proverb, (...) pernoctante judicio, cessat
judicium. When waters are stagnant, they presently cause a stink and
putrefaction, and when the law is stopped in its course, the streams which
should run down like a river, prove like the waters of Marah, bitter and
unpleasant. Currat lex (as an eminent Judge of our own nation once answered the
letter of some great Lords writ in behalf of their friend) or according to the
Emperor's Motto, Fiat justitia, pereat mundus; let the law have its course and
justice be done, be the consequents or parties concerned in it what they will.

There are two usual obstructours of the law, fear and favor, neither of which
must stop its passage.

The greatness of any must not cause fear in those, to whom the inspection and
execution of the law is committed. Deliver him that suffers wrong from Ecclus
4. 9.
the hand of the oppressor, and be not faint hearted, when thou sit in
judgment, says the wise son of Sirach.

Fear regards more the greatness of the person, than the nature of the cause;
to prevent which Jethro advises Moses to employ such in judicial affairs, as
were men of courage (...) strenuous and undaunted, and God himself forbids the
magistrate to fear the face of man, for the judgment is God's. It was a
valorous resolution of Papinianus, that chose rather to die, than to excuse the
parricide of the Emperor Antoninus Bassianus. And it was no less heroic act
of those Catholic Bishops who being charged by the Arrian Emperor to condemn
Athanasius, both without witness, and unheard, would rather hazard their
estates, than by fear be betrayed to do that injustice.

Favor is another obstructer of the law, which when it is observed, judgment
must needs be perverted. Accept no person against thy soul, and let not the
reverence of any man cause thee to fall, as that wise Ecclus 4. 22.
man advises. It was a strange message that Agesilaus the Lacedemonian Prince
(a man otherwise justly renowned for his good government) wrote to some Justice
or Officer of state in favor of Nicias; Niciam, si insons est, dimitte, si
sons, mea causa dimitte, utcunque dimitte. If Nicias be not guilty dismiss him;
if guilty, yet for my sake dismiss him: however let him be dismissed. But as
the law (which is the dumb magistrate) is made without respect of persons, so
should the magistrate (which is the speaking law) execute it without favoring
of them, punishing a grand oppressor, (...).
as well as a petty purloiner, an haughty adulterer, as well as an inferior
debauched person, and laying the law to a great Recusant, as well as to a poor
schismatic or separatist; and if such great ones were made examples of
justice, and the laws not suppressed out of fear or favor to them, such
severities would strike more awe and terror into transgressors, then the
punishing of an hundred underlings, and inferior persons. Such should have no
more favor showed them than what Galba Governor of Arragon in Spain (the same
as some think that afterward was Emperor of Rome) did to a condemned Gentleman
that entreated he might not die the death of ordinary malefactors: he offered
him only this privilege, that waving the common gallows, he should have one
made higher, and if he would carved and painted too.

4. The law is abused by a too severe execution of it, when the extremity of it
is prosecuted against any, that perhaps have done something contrary to the
letter of the law, but not violated or contradicted the end of it, or intent of
the law giver; in which cases if rigor should always be used, laws which are
intended for the behoof, and benefit, would by such severe construction become
the bane and ruin of humane society; and judgment which of it self is sweet
and pleasant, by such forcing and straining it, would be turned into gall and
bitterness. Wringing of the nose (says Solomon) brings forth blood, and by
wringing of the law, and making it a nose of wax to bend to the humor of every
inconsiderate prosecutour, forces blood, and thereby rather contracts a guilt,
than takes any away. Our laws are not like Tiberius or Caligula's decrees,
which were termed furores, non judicia; and therefore are they not without
great necessity to be executed (as Draco's were said to be written) in blood;
for by such proceedings summum jus, would be summa injuria. To prevent which
not only ours, but all well governed polities, have given some power, more or
less, into the hand of the Magistrate, even in those Courts that were (as one
speaks) strictissimi juris, according to the exigency of circumstances, and
variety of occasions to qualify and mitigate something of the severity of laws
by the rules of equity; wherein appears the great wisdom of Lawmakers, who
though they wisely foresaw the mitigation of the law, to be as necessary and
requisite, as the severity of it, yet because of the proneness of all men to
offend, thought it fit to express the extremity plainly and literally, thereby
to keep men within the compass of obedience; but to leave the mitigation to the
discretion of the magistrate tacitly and secretly, thereby to moderate rigor
into equity: which is so far from evacuating the law, or perverting justice,
that it rather establishes and confirms it; for equity being of the essence of
all laws, it must either be directly expressed, or implicitly understood in
them. These two have such near and close dependence upon each other, that like
Hippocrates's twins, they live and die together; for (as the Philosopher
speaks) (...). The nature and essence of a law consists Arist. Eth. l. 5. c. 10.
not in letters and syllables, but in the scope and intention of it. Men's legis
est ipsa lex; and therefore for any by a cunning and sinister construction, by
a forced Orat. pro A. Caecina. Scriptum sequi, calum (...) is esse; boni
judicis, voluntatem scriptoris, auctoritatemque defeudere, etc. Id.
and indirect interpretation either of laws or actions, per verborum aucupia,
and literarum tendiculas (as Tully speaks) to protect injury, or wrong
innocence, is to make the law, which is intended for a fence, become a snare,
and to oppress that innocence, which it should protect.

3. This sin of injustice and oppression, or turning judgment into gall, is
contemptus authoritatis; it is an implicit contempt both of that divine and
humane authority, by which laws are constituted. It is aspitting defiance in
the face of Magistrates, and contemning of that power wherewith they are
invested, which they who are guilty of such practices, think to elude, by
outwitting the law, and those that sit to judge according to it. And such how
do they hugg themselves in their private recesses, and inwardly applaud the
dexterity of their wit, which is able to contrive the gaining of so great a
conquest, as to make Magistracy it self accessory to their practices. Such,
they deal with the Magistrate, as the Jews with our Savior, suffer a scarlet
robe to be put on him, and crown him with ensigns of authority, only that he
may thereby become a more ready object of scorn and derision. And what greater
opprobrium can be offered to the Magistrate, than not only to nullify and
evacuate his power, but to render it contemptible and ridiculous.

But the contempt rests not here, it rises higher still, and reaches not only
to the Judge's seat, but to the Throne of the Almighty, and sets a mark of
contempt and brand of infamy upon the several attributes of God, both his
wisdom, and power, and mercy, and justice: for he that by fraud, or violence,
or other indirect means (though under the covert of the law) invades or usurps
upon the rights of another, does, so far as in him lies, without any warrant,
frustrate and annihilate the gifts of God, and takes upon him to thwart and
contradict his most wise Providence, setting up himself, as it were, in God's
stead, and dethroning him, to erect and establish a new order of providence of
his own, thereby reproaching his wisdom, as though God had not wisely enough
dispensed his blessings; questioning his power, as though he were not able to
maintain the injuriously oppressed against a furious adversary; impugning his
mercy, as though he would not suffer God to bestow his largesses, but upon whom
himself shall please; and impeaching his Justice, as though God would not take
notice of, and repay those wrongs which are done upon the earth. And thou that,
by a plea of judgment, do these things, think thou, that thou shall
escape the judgment of God? no, they that honor him shall be honored, but
they that thus contemn him, shall be contemned by him.

4. Lastly, this turning of judgment into gall, is, Frustratio expectationis
divinae, a frustration of Gods expectation: God looks for grapes, but behold
they bring Ver. 32, 33.
forth wild grapes; so that (as it is, Deu. 32.) their vine is of the vine of
Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gal, their
clusters are bitter, their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venime
Chap. 5* 7.
of aspes; or as the Prophet Isaiah expresses it, God looks for judgment, but
behold oppression, for righteousness, but behold a cry; where by an unhappy
mistake, they change (as the sacred language has it) (...) into (...) and
(...) into (...), instead of grapes, they bring forth thorns, and thistles
instead of figs. They that are in authority should not be as the fruitless
fig tree that frustrated those expectations that were raised about it; nor as
Jotham's bramble to rend and tear those that hope to find relief under their
shadow. When any are put into offices of trust, or places of power, it is not
to this end, that they should bear rule and sway over others at their pleasure
but that they should be a succor and help to those that stand in need of, seek
to, and depend upon them for their aid. God endues them with that power which
others want, that they may make use thereof, to help those to right, who have
not power to help themselves; and when any shall so far abuse this power, as to
make use thereof to contrary ends, and instead of helping the injured to right,
to take it from them; instead of being a refuge to them from the oppressor,
themselves to turn oppressors, it is an high provocation and indignity offered
to him, to whom they stand accountable for that power they have received from
him, and who expects some proportionable returns to be made unto him, and if
they be made contrary to his expectation, how direful and sad will the account
be? what a strange reckoning will the rich steward make, when God shall at last
(as assuredly he will) require of him an account of his stewardship? Behold,
thou have given me five talents, and I have made them ten; and when the
question shall be put, how, or by what means? what a strange and unaccountable
return will it be to say, I have unjustly and injuriously robbed from my
fellow servants those few talents which thou gave them: I have gained thus
much by my violent maintaining a cause which thou hate, and which my own
conscience secretly told me was most unjust. So much I have wrung from others
by extortion and oppression, by forged records, sycophancy or false accusation,
by suborned witnesses, and such other unjust practices, which surely are sore
evils, that are too commonly done under the sun.

And now for the punishing and preventing of these and such like practices,
upon whom are the minds of the people set, but upon your Lordships? their eyes
are toward you; their hopes are in you; their expectations are from you. In
your known integrity and uprightness is their confidence placed for a redress
of those injuries, which either through the power, or pride, or malice, or
revenge, or wrath, or cruelty of oppressors have been either felt or feared by
them. May your authority accordingly be made use of, to abate the pride, and
suppress the power, and curb the insolency, and quell the oppressions of those
that use (or rather abuse) their power and might to overbear and sway down
right and equity: so that all may see that it is not the fullest baggs, or the
greatest friends, or the skilfullest pleaders, that shall prevail beyond the
merits of any cause, when they have to do with such upright Judges as your
Honors, who will not suffer by indirect practices, judgment to be turned into
gall, or the fruits of righteousness into hemlock.

Soli Deo Gloria.

