

Vera Effigies. Roberti Johnson


Praxis Medicinae Reformata: OR, THE Practice of Physic REFORMED. BEING AN
Epitome of the whole Art: Wherein is briefly showed, The true Causes, Signs,
Prognostics, and Cure, of most Diseases.

Published for the Benefit of all Persons.

By Robert Johnson, Med. Professor.

Medicina Experientia and Ratione fundari debet.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, in Cornhil. 1700.

TO THE READER.
IN this little Tract, I have bestowed some Pains, in searching out, and
proposing the true Causes and Cure of Diseases: Which, I hope, will induce
other Ingenious-spirited Artists to a farther Enquiry, that so the Art of
Physic may be the better illustrated, and many things in it that are yet
obscure, may be made known.

The Chief End of Physic, is to maintain and recover Health; wherefore I think
it would be more for the Honor of all Learned Physicians, to employ themselves
in the Improvement of the Materia Medica, (which have been hitherto too much
neglected) than to content themselves with a formal Way of Practice: For
Diseases cannot be cured by Scholastic Twattle, or Fine Words, but by good
Remedies.

The great Platerus, Helmont, and the famous Franciscus de la Boe Sylvius, etc.
did endeavor to reform the Practice of Physic, and excelled many others
(their Contemporaries) in the most difficult Cures; yet because they had
recourse to Chemical Remedies, in the Cure of many Diseases, the more lazy
Tribe of Physicians made it their Business to traduce them.

Truly there are too many such carping Zolius's at this Day (who envy Glory to
all, except themselves) from whom I must expect the same Fate: I can do no more
but pray for them; Lord, forgive them; for they know not what they do.

From the lower-most Door, on the Right Hand, in Norfolk-street, in the Strand.
THE INTRODUCTION: Containing the CAUSES and CURE OF DISEASES In GENERAL: AS
ALSO, Some Choice SPECIFICKS for the Cure of DISEASES.
THE Causes of Diseases depend on Lympha any way vitiated, because it will (in
time) corrupt the whole Mass of Blood.

Quicquid enim, sive Bilis sit, sive Pituita, sive succus Pancreaticus,
sanguisve menstruus, Lympham reddere potens acriorem, dolorem and morbos facile
causat, part affecta male sese habente.

This is the Hypothesis of most eminent Physicians, both Ancient and Modern.

Spittle being continually swallowed down, and adhering to the Gut, the more
fluid part of it is dissolved by the continual Conflux of Choler, and the Juice
of the Pancreas, or Sweetbread, in the small Guts.

If Choler (which abounds with a bitter volatile Lixivial Salt) be mixed with
the Juice of the Pancreas, which is naturally sourish, (as has been
sufficiently evinced by the indefatigable Industry of the most ingenious
Anatomist, Regnerus de Graaf) they must of necessity stir up an Effervescency
in their Concourse there. As long as the aforesaid Humors are well tempered,
the Effervescency will be mild, and friendly to Nature, and therefore cannot be
perceived in healthy People.

The Humors rising from this mild Effervescency, pierces into the Lacteal
Veins, and circulates with the Lympha to the Heart, and seems to give the
natural Consistency to the Blood.

The more viscous part of these Humors, passes by degrees to the thick Guts;
and being there mixed with the Excrements, makes them more viscous and yellow,
and helps the Excretion of them.

But if there be an Obstruction of the Lacteal Ducts, or Branches of the
Panereas, or Sweetbread, by reason of viscous Phlegm, which being separated
from the Blood by the Glandules of the Pancreas, is there collected by degrees;
it is sent from thence (in too large a quantity) to the main Duct, or Pipe
thereof, which detaineth the Juice of the Pancreas contrary to Nature, which
ought continually to flow into the small Guts.

The Juice of the Pancreas being compelled to stagnate, or stand still in its
passage, quickly grows acrimonious, because the volatile Spirit (which is
naturally conjoined to it to temper it) does gradually fly away, by which it
becomes more acrid, and acquires a putrefactive Ferment, whence at length it
makes way through the obstructing Phlegm, and is effused into the small Gut,
called Duodenum; where meeting with Choler (peccant, in a Lixivial Salt
Acrimony) it stirs up a vicious Effervescency, or preternatural Ferment, which
raises acrimonious Humors, and halituous or flatulent Vapors, which are
carried through the Lacteal Veins, and Thoracick Passage, and so through the
Vena Cava, ascendens to the right Ventricle of the Heart; from whence it
circulates with the spirituous Blood and Lympha, vitiating, and corrupting the
whole Mass of it with its fermental Acrimony: Which is the Cause of most
Chronical Diseases, as the famous Franciscus de le Boe Sylvius, has accurately
observed.

If the acrid Humors do affect the Head, it may cause most Distempers incident
to it, as Headache, Convulsions, Epilepsie, Palsy, Apoplexy, etc.

If it invades the Lungs, it causes Difficulty of Breathing, Inflammations,
Ulcers, and Phthisis, or Consumption.

If it penetrates the Membrane Pleura, it causes the Pleurisy.

If it possesses the Joints, it causes Arthritick Pains, or the Gout; which
has its Name from the Part affected.

If there be a Defluxion of acrid Humors on the Reins, Bladder, or Womb, it may
cause Inflammations, Ulcers, or Cancers in them.

If it be conveyed to the obscene Parts, (especially after too much impure
Coition) it may cause malign Eruptions, etc.

If the Lympha becomes very acrid in the conglobated, and conglomerated
Glandules, and if Nature be over-burthened by its plentifulness, it may be the
Cause of Catarrhs, Rheumatisms, Scrophula, etc.

If acrid Humors be luxuriant in the Blood, and Lympha, it may be the Cause of
all Eruptions, as Itch, Scabs, Erisipela's, Leprosy, etc.

Acrimonious and flatulent Vapors, may be the Cause of all Ague-Fits, with all
their Symptoms, as in the beginning, Horror, Chilness, Cold, Shaking, etc. then
follows Reaching, Yawning, and Vomiting, etc.

At length these sharp halituous Vapors are carried to the right Ventricle of
the Heart, and by their Acrimony alters and troubles its Vital Effervescency;
and by over-stirring the Heart, causes a more frequent Pulse, and many times
produces grievous Symptoms, as great Heat and Thirst, Difficulty of Breathing,
Raving, Heart-ach, Swooning, and all other Symptoms that happen in all
Intermitting Fevers.

If Choler become peccant, not only in a Lixivial salt Acrimony, but also an
inflamable Oyliness; the Humors (that are produced from its vicious
Effervescency, with the too tart Pancreat Juice, and overviscous Phlegm in the
small Guts) will be the more acrid and fervid; and circulating (with the
spirituous Blood and Lympha) to the Heart, will cause an Effervescency in the
right Ventricle of it, which will stimulate and incite it to a more forcible
Motion, whence the Pulse is continually produced more frequent against Nature;
after which follows great Heat and Burning, etc. and therefore may be called a
Fever; so that this may be the Cause of all continual Fevers not putrid.

If the Stomach by Dietetick Errors, as in Eating, or Drinking too much sour
Fruit, or Juices, be over-charg'd with Acids, it may prove hostile, injurious,
and a morbisick Cause of that which we call the Heart-burning, etc. with sour
Belchings, and sometimes a Nauseousness even to Vomiting.

In this Case, after the Operation of a gentle Emetick, you may administer half
a Dram of the Powder of Pearl Crab's-eyes, or any of the Testaceous Pouders,
(twice or thrice in a Day) to absorb the peccant Acidity; Chalybeates may be
also safely administered.

Likewise in all Chronical Diseases, caused by the over-sourness of the Juice
of the Pancreas, etc. as aforesaid; after general Evacuations, the finest
Filings of Iron turned to Rust, may be given to half a Dram at a time, in a
stued Prune, or any other Vehicle, twice in a Day; because the Stomach by its
incisive Acidity, (together with other accidental, or concomitant Acids) does
penetrate the Particles of the Iron, and rarifie its Vitriolick Salt, which
will not only help Digestion, but kill Worms, and circulates with the Blood and
Lympha, and will in time purify the whole Mass of it.

But if Choler be peccant as aforesaid, causing Fevers, and other Acute
Diseases; then after Evacuation, by Vomiting, or Purging, I commend acid
Liquors, and Juices, as Lemons, etc. Also purified Niter may be given in all
Fevers.

But here we may note, That it is the Nature of all Acids, to coagulate and
thicken the Blood and its Serum; wherefore we must be cautious, that we do not
let Blood, nor give too many. Acids in the Smallpox, and malignant Fevers,
because in these Distempers, the Blood is preternaturally viscid, and therefore
it abounds with too much Acidity; of which you may read more at large in the
ensuing Treatise.

I come now to mention some choice Specificks for the Cure of Diseases, for the
Sake and Benefit of the Poor, who have not Money to pay a Doctor for his long
Receipts, nor the Apothecary for Medicines.
SAlt Niter purified, is an efficacious Medicine in the Cure of most Diseases;
it may be poudred with an equal Quantity of white Sugar, and given to half a
Dram at a time every six Hours, in all Fevers, the whole time of Sickness, and
also before and after; because it is an acid Salt, and contains in it a
volatile incorruptible Sulphur; and by reason of its Acidity, it refrigerates
the inflamed Blood, and powerfully checks the preternatural Fermentation of it,
and preserves its natural Consistency: For (by the subtilty of its Spirit) it
insinuates it self into the whole Mass of Blood, and penetrates into all Parts,
and so strengthens and recreates the Heart, as to make it resist and overcome
all Putrefaction, and therefore it is a great Antidote against the Plague, and
all contagious Fevers.

If it be dissolved in any liquid Vehicle, and drank a little often, it will
dilute. the Lixivial Salt of Choler, and being mixed with proper Catharticks,
and Balsamic Medicines, it will conduce much to the Cure of most Chronical
Distempers also; for it discusseth Wind, opens all Obstructions, and causes the
vicious Humors to precipitate, and to be evacuated both by Urine and Stool.

Quicksilver boiled in Water, with a few Raisons of the Sun to sweeteen it, and
the Liquor drank freely, kills Worms. The Quicksilver may be boiled a
thousand times, and always have the same weight; so that the Water partakes of
Mercurial Irradiation, by which it becomes destructive to Worms.

A strong Decoction of Ground Ivy, or Alehoof, sweetened with Sugar Candy, and a
quarter of a Pint of it taken twice or thrice in a Day, helps Distempers of the
Breast and Lungs; and a strong Infusion of it in Aqua Vitae, or Brandy, cures
the Colic.

The Decoction of Herb- Robert, and Patronichia, or Whitlow-Grass, with Leaves
like Rue, (given inwardly every Day, 'till the Mass of Blood, and Juices of the
Body be impregnated with the Virtues of the Herbs) cures the King's Evil.

The Juice of Pennyroyal clarified; and a little sweetened with Sugar Candy,
and given the quantity of a Spoonful, three or Four times in a Day, cures all
sorts of Coughs.

Cows and Goats-milk boiled in an equal quantity of Water, (wherein unslak'd
Lime has been quenched, and a little Cinnamon, and the young Bark of the Oak
bruised and boiled in it, 'till a third part be consumed) cures all kinds of
Fluxes.

Glauber's Sal Mirabile, is an excellent Lenitive Cathartick: It may be safely
given to Men, Women, or Children, in all Diseases where purging is necessary.

The Dose is from half a Dram to an Ounce, dissolved in warm Whey, or Milk and
Water.

A few Drops of rectified Oil of Vitriol, mixed with a quarter of a Pint of
fair Water, to a light Acidity, a little sweetened with white Sugar, and drank
every Day for some time, kills Worms, and quenches Thirst in Fevers.

If you mix an Ounce of rectified Oil of Vitriol, with two Ounces of Oil of
Ben, or pure Oil of Olives, stirring it 'till it be well incorporated, you have
a good Balsam to ease Pain, and cure an Inflammation in any part, by anointing
once in a Day or two, you may apply a Colwort-leaf, (or a Plaster of
Diachilon, or a Poultis of White-Bread and Milk, with a little Butter in it) to
the grieved part, after anointing; but you must have a care that it does not
touch your Linen.

A strong Tincture of Catechu, or Japonian Earth, (with half its weight of
Jesuits Bark, both in fine Powder) in small Cinamon-Water, cures Catarrhs, and
all sorts of Fluxes.

Take a quarter of a Spoonful thrice a Day, in any Vehicle.

Sweating is good in most Diseases, if Strength permits.

Virginia Snake-Root, and the Root of Contra Yerva, bruised and boiled in fair
Water, and sweetened with a little Sugar; and given a quarter of a Pint every
four Hours, to any that are bitten with an enraged Viper, soon cures the
Patient, especially if you bathe the part bitten with the same Decoction,
(without Sugar) so hot as can be endured.

Gambogia finely poudred, and mixed with an equal quantity of pure Niter, and
given to half a Dram at a time, twice or thrice in a Week, soon cures the
Yellow-Jaundice, and Dropsies.

The best Gum Arabic, given at least a Dram, twice or thrice in a Day, either
in Powder, or dissolved in small Ale, or any other convenient Vehicle, does
wonderfully mitigate the Sharpness of Urine.

A strong Decoction of woody Nightshade, a little sweetened with Sugar, and
given to a quarter of a Pint every Morning, will purge gently, and open all
Obstructions, and cure the Yellow-Jaundice, Dropsies, etc.

The Decoction of Hearts-Ease, sweetened with Sugar Candy, cures the Pleurisy,
and other Inflammations. It is an excellent Antivenerian, etc. and therefore it
may be a chief Ingredient in Decoctions to cure the French Pox.

A Decoction of Groundsel is an universal Medicine for all Diseases coming of
Heat: It purges gently; and if the Stomach be nauseous, it may cause Vomiting:
It is very safe, and may be given in all Distempers, where Purging is necessary.

The fresh Herb, boiled in Milk 'till it be tender, and then strained out, and
the Herb bruised and boiled in the same Milk, with Crumbs of White-Bread, or
fine Oatmeal, into the Consistence of a Poultis, and a little Oil, or Hog's-fat
put to it, and applied to any Inflammation, or Swelling, it will soon give Ease,
and either dissolve the Tumor, or bring it to Suppuration.

Native Cinnaber, finely powdered and washed, (from its volatile malignant Salt)
often in warm Water, and rectified Spirit of Wine burnt over it two or three
times, does Wonders in curing most Chronical Diseases. The Dose is from ten
Grains to twenty, in any Vehicle.

Missleto dried, and finely poudred with double its weight of white Sugar, and
a few Drops of Oil of Amber mixed with it; half a Dram of this Powder given
twice or thrice in a Day, cures Convulsions, and the Epilepsie.

Crude Antimony flux'd (at least an Hour) with decrepitated Sea Salt, in a
strong Fire, and afterward washed from the Salt in warm Water, is friendly to
Nature, and cures Fevers. The Dose is from five Grains to ten, in any Vehicle.

The Jesuit's Bark finely poudred, and given from half a Dram to two Drams, or
more at a time, infused in Wine, and drank at the going off of the Fit, and
afterward every four Hours, is such a Specific for the curing of all
Intermitting Fevers, or Agues, that it seldom fails, especially if the Patient
be well purged before he take it.

You must continue the use of it for at least ten Days, that the Particles of
the Powder may be continually conveyed into the Blood, by which the Febritick
Ferment may be destroyed.

Give the Sick a little Broth of Mutton, or Chicken, with a few Crumbs of
White-Bread, (or any other Food easy of Digestion) within half an Hour after
the taking of each Dose, which will mix with the Chile, and the Blood will be
impregnated with the Virtue of it. It also cures all kinds of Fluxes.

Three or four Drops of the Juice of Ivy, or of Asarabacca clarified, and dropped
into each Ear warm, every other Night, (and the Ear gently stopped afterward
with Cotton, or Wool) will soon cure Deafness; snuff up the Juices into each
Nostril also, to purge the Head.

Two Grains of each of the aforesaid Herbs dried, and finely poudred, and
snuffed up each Nostril, at Night going to Bed, twice in a Week, will purge the
Head of Rheum, and cure an inveterate Headache, Toothache, and Inflammation of
the Eyes, etc.

The Syrup of the Juice of Buckthorn-Berries, or of wild Cucumbers, taken an
Ounce at a time, with two Drams of pure Nitre, dissolved in Ale or Whey, twice
or thrice in a Week, cures the Dropsy.

The Powder of Olibanum, or Mastick, or equal parts of both, mixed with old
Conserves of Roses, and taken the quantity of a Nutmeg, twice or thrice in a
Day, cures a Catarrh, especially if you blow some of the Powder into the
Throat every Night going to Bed, to strengthen the Salival Glands.

Lapis Haematites, or the Bloud-stone, being applied to the bleeding part, will
stop the Hemorrhage.

It is likewise an excellent Medicine taken inwardly, being repleted with the
Primum ens Auri; from which (being finely poudred) may be drawn a Gold-like
Tincture, with a strong Aqua Regis, made of the rectified Spirit of Nitre, and
Sal Armoniack; to which you may add four times the quantity of rectified Spirit
of Wine.

Take twenty Drops of it in a Glass of Ale or Wine, two or three times in a
Day: It cures most Chronical Diseases.

The true Lapis Nephriticus, cures the Stone, being prepared and taken after
the same manner.

Ens Veneris is good to cure the Rickets; three or four Grains of it may be
given to a Child twice a Day, in any Vehicle.

Half a Dram of the fine Powder of Gum of Guiacum, mixed with an equal quantity
of factitious Cinnaber in fine Powder, given every other Morning, (in a
Spoonful of Milk or Whey) for thirty or forty days, cures the Venereal Pox,
and most other Chronical Diseases.

Oil of Walnuts, or Linseed-Oyl, (by expression) (either exhibited inwardly, or
given in Clysters to four Ounces at a time) gives Ease in the Stone and
Colic, etc.

A Dram of Oil of Amber unrectified, (mixed with an Ounce of Populion) cures
the Piles.

Purified Honey is a universal Balsam: It cures Sore-Eyes, being spread on a
fine Rag, and applied; mix it with Gargarisms for sore Mouths, and with
Injections for hollow Ulcers, etc.

The gross Powder of Mastick is excellent (to smoke in a Pipe) for a Defluxion
of Rheum on the Lungs, etc.

Saccharum Saturni, (dissolved in Water) mortifies sharp Humors in the Eyes,
and all other Inflammations; it is a great Anodine, cures Burnings, and
Scaldings in a short time, stops Bleeding, and prevents Accidents in
Amputations, for it resists Putrefaction.

If you give half a Dram of it twice a day, in any Vehicle, it will soon quench
the Flame of Lust.

Half an Ounce of burnt Alum, mixed with two Ounces of White-wine-Vinegar,
cures an Inflammation in any part, being spread on a Rag, and applied.

Sulphur of Copper, or Vitriol (called Sulphur of Venus) is an incomparable
Anodine, far exceeding any Opiate.

Roman Vitriol calcined to redness, stops all Fluxes of Blood in a moment,
and cures Wounds by the first intention.

You may dissolve half a Dram of it in three or four Spoonfuls of warm Water,
and dip a Pledget of Lint in it, and apply it to the Wound, keeping the Lips of
it close: But if the Wound be deep, it must be injected with a Syringe.

Any other Vitriol is of the same Virtue; but not so potent.

Half an Ounce of Quicksilver, mixed with an Ounce of Pomatum, (spread on a
long Linen Rag, two Inches broad, and covered with another Linen Rag for a
Girdle) worn for some time, cures the Itch.

But you must purge once or twice in a Week, to prevent Salivation.

The small Bone in a black Snail's-head, used as an Amulet, to hang about the
Neck; and Rings made of an Elk's-hoof, or of the Teeth of a true Seahorse, and
worn continually, are all of the same Virtue, and cures the Cramp.

The Hand of a dead Man or Woman, being laid upon a Scrophulous Tumor, and
there kept 'till the Patient do feel the Coldness of it penetrate to the
innermost parts of the Swelling, it will dispel and cure it by often doing.

It likewise cures a Dropsy of the Belly.

The Roots of Contra yerva, or Counterpaison, Virginia Snake-root, and Zedoary,
all, or either of them, is good against the Plague, and all contagious Fevers,
any way used.

Here follows some Receipts of choice Medicines, which I use in my own
Practice.
Pulvis Balsamicus noster, Our Balsamic Powder.
TAke of Sarsaparilla grossly poudred four Ounces; let it be infused in two
Quarts of rectified Spirit of Wine, for two or three Days, then press it out
very hard, and add the same quantity of Sarsaparilla as before; do this for
eight or ten times, the ostner the better; add to the Spirit, of the best Gum
of Guiacum, in fine Powder half a Pound; the Balsam of Peru and Tolu, of each
two Cunces, mix them all together in a Glass Resort, lute a Receiver to it, and
digest it for ten days, then draw off all the Spirit with a gentle heat in
Balneo Mariae when it is cold, break the Retort, and take out the Powder, and
keep it for use.

It is an efficacious Medicine against the Rheumatism, Gout, Venereal Pox, and
all Chronical Diseases.

The Dose is half a Dram in a Spoonful of Whey or Milk, or any other Vehicle,
every Morning fasting; or mix it with an equal quantity of factitious Cinnaber
in fine Powder, and give it every Morning and Evening for some time.

Electuarium Antiscorbuticum nostrum, Our Electuary against the Scurvy, etc.
Take of the Berries of Bays, Ivy and Juniper, of each four Ounces; the Seeds
of Dwarf-Elder, Burdock, Ash, Broom, Peony, Gromwel, the Bark of Elder, of each
two Ounces.

Let them be all bruised, and boiled in the Juices of Elder-Berries, and wild
Cucumbers, of each one Pound; the Juice of Buckthorn-Berries, four Pound, 'till
half of it be boiled away; then press it out very hard, and boil it to the
Consistence of a Pulp; to every Pound of it, add an equal quantity of white
Sugar, and boil it again, 'till it be almost as thick as an Electuary; then
dissolve in it (whilst it is very hot) the same weight of pure Nitre, as there
is of Sugar.

To every Pound of the Electuary, add four Ounces of Balm of Gilead, two Ounces
of our Balsamic Powder before mentioned, one Ounce of factitious Cinnaber, in
fine Powder; and two Drams of Oil of Juniper; mix all together, according to
Art.

It is an excellent Cathartick in all Diseases which requires Purging, for it
potently evacuates all vicious Humors promiscuously out of the Body; it cures
the King's Evil, Rheumatism, Gout, Dropsy, Scurvy, dry Belly-ach, and all
curable Diseases.

The Dose is from two Drams to an Ounce. It may be given in the form of a
Bolus, or dissolved in Ale, Whey, or any other liquid Vehicle, and taken in the
Morning fasting.

Sal Chalybis noster, Our Salt of Steel, or Iron.
Take the finest Filings of Iron, or Steel, rectified Oil of Vitriol, of each
one Pound, mix them together in a large Earthen-Pan, well glazed; let it stand
for two or three Hours, then pour into it two or three Quarts of fair Water,
and it will presently effervesce, and the Salt will stick about the Pan; take
it out, and keep it for use.

Tinctura Chalybis, The Tincture of Iron, or Steel.
Take the finest Filings of Iron, or Steel, four Ounces; rectified Spirit of
Nitre half a Pound; mix them together in an Earthen-Pan, well glazed, when the
Effervescency is over, let it cool, and add to it Spirit of Wine rectified,
five Pound, mix it well together, then filter it through brown Paper, and keep
it for use.

Both of these Medicines are great Aperitives, opens all Obstructions, cures
the Rickets, Green Sickness, Stoppage of the Terms, Yellow-Jaundice, etc. they
strengthen the Stomach, kills Worms, and purifies the whole Mass of Blood.

You may give from half a Scruple, to half a Dram of the Salt, in any Vehicle,
every Morning.

The Tincture may be taken from ten to forty Drops at a time, in Beer, Ale, or
Wine.

Aqua Styptica nostra, Our Stiptick Water.
Take of pure white Vitriol, Roch-Alum, of each four Ounces, let them be
poudred, and calcined in a Crucible, 'till it be red-hot, then quench it with
Wine-Vinegar, and calcine it again.

Take it out of the Crucible, and dissolve it in a Gallon of Spring Water; add
to it two Ounces of Saccharum Saturni; then strain it, and keep it for use.

It cures the Itch, and all other Eruptions, the grieved Parts being washed
with it three or four times in a day. It likewise cures hollow Ulcers, and
Fistula's, the Gonorrhaea in Men, and the Whites in Women.

You may inject it with a Syringe warm, twice in a day.

AN INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS, Comprehending all the Diseases of this BOOK.
The Contents of the First Book.
Chap. Page I. OF the Headache. 1 II. Of the Palsy, and Apoplexy. 13 III. Of
Convulsions, and the Epilepsie. 22 IV. Of the Nightmare, and Vertigo. 35 V. Of
the Lethargy, Coma, Carus, and Catalepsie, or Catochus. 38 VI. Of the Frenzy,
and Madness 44 VII. Of Catarrhs. 55
The Contents of the Second Book.
Chap. Page I. OF Shortness of Breathing. 69 II. Of the Pleurisy, and other
Instammations. 72 III. Of the Consumption, or Phtisick and Hectick-Fever. 83
IV. Of the Palpitation of the Heart. 92 V. Of an universal Languishing, as also
of Swouning, and Syncope. 96 VI. Of Fevers in General. 103 VII. Of Intermitting
Fevers. 116 VIII. Of Malignant Fevers, and the Calenture. 124 IX. Of the
Plague, or Pestilence. 129 X. Of the Smallpox, and Measles. 136
The Contents of the Third Book.
Chap. Page I. OF the thirsty Disease. 141 II. Of Hunger vitiated, or of a
depraved Appetite. 144 III. Of want of Appetite, or loathing of Victuals. 148
IV. Of the Hiccet, or Hiccough. 152 V. Of Belching. 156 VI. Of Vomiting, and of
the Choleric, and Iliack Passion. 158 VII. Of Pain in the Stomach, and of
various Pains of the Guts, as Colic, etc. 168 VIII. Of Worms. 179 IX. Of
Loosenesses, or Fluxes of the Belly. 185 X. Of the dry Belly-ach. 196 XI. Of
the Yellow-Iaundice. 202 XII. Of a Cachexy, or ill Habit of Body. 207 XIII. Of
Dropsies. 211 XIV. Of the Scurvy, and Hypochondriack Suffocation, commonly
called Fits of the Mother. 222 XV. Of the Green Sickness, and Suppression of
the Courses. 231 XVI. Of the immoderate menstrual Flux, and the Whites in
Women. 237 XVII. Of the Falling down of the Womb, and Fundament. 242 XVIII. Of
Barrenness. 245 XIX. Of Abortion, or Miscarriage. 249 XX. Of hard Travel in
Childbirth. 252 XXI. Of Nephritick Pains, and of the Stone in the Reins and
Bladder. 257 XXII. Of extraordinary Pissing. 269 XXIII. Of involuntary Pissing,
commonly called Pissing in Bed. 272 XXIV. Of the Stoppage of Urine, and the
Strangury. 274 XXV. Of the scalding or sharpness of Urine. 277 XXVI. Of
Venereal Affects. 279 XXVII. Of the Rachites, or Rickets. 288 XXVIII. Of the
Gout and Rheumatism. 303
Praxis Medicinae Reformata: OR, THE Practice of Physic REFORMED. BEING AN
Epitome of the whole Art: Wherein is briefly showed, The true Causes, Signs,
Prognostics, and Cure, of most Diseases. BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Of the Headache.
THE Headache may be divided into three Kinds.

The first is the momentany Headache, it Cephalalgia.
is called in Greek (...), from (...), Caput, and (...), Dolor.

The second is an inveterate Headache, and is called in Greek (...), quod tegit
Calvarium.

The third is a Pain on one Part of the Head, before, behind, or on one side;
this is called in Greek (...), from (...), Hemicrania.
cranium, and (...), dimidium.

There is little difference between Cephalaea and Cephalalgia; only per
Cephalaeam affectae parts multo redduntur quam in Cephalalgia debiliores.

These Distempers are caused by Halituous Vapors, and Humors, fuming up (from
the Stomach and other Parts) to the Head.

1. If the Pain be external, so that the Signs.
combing of the Head be troublesome, then the Pericranium is affected: But if
the Pain be internal, reaching to the Eye-roots, then the Dura matter is invaded
with the peccant Humors.

2. If there be pricking, distending Pain with great Pulsation, it is from
sharp bilious Humors, or Halitus; but if the Pain be heavy, it is caused from
viscous Phlegm or Melancholy.

1. If a violent Headache come suddenly Progn.
on a healthy Person, and the Party become dumb, and snort, it is a mortal sign,
unless a great Fever do immediately happen.

2. If corrupt waterish Matter or Blood do issue out of the Nostrils, Mouth,
Ears or Eyes, (especially on the fourth Day) the sick will suddenly recover;
but if the Pain be very violent, and do suddenly vanish without a Crisis, it is
doubtful.

3. If the Pain be without a Fever, accompanied with noise in the ears,
deafness, or megrim, with numbness of the extreme parts, an Apoplexy or
Epilepsy, is at hand.

4. Those that have Choleric stomachs, are most subject to a Hemicrania; and
if it continue long, it causes weakness of the Eyes, and sometimes blindness.

If the Headache proceed from Phlegmatic Cure.
Viscous humors abounding, first give this Clyster.

Take of Vervain, Betony, Mallows, Mercury Clyster.
of each one handful: Let them be cleansed, bruised and boiled in a Quart of
Posset Drink, 'till half of it be boiled away, then strain it and dissolve in
it one ounce of the Electuary Caryocostinum, Oil of Chamomel two ounces; mix it
for a Clyster.

Sour things, and all that have a Lixivial salt, either fixed, or volatile, and
all Aromaticks do correct and amend the viscous Phlegmatic humors.

Let these forms serve for example.

Take the Waters of Baum, and Mint, of Iulep.
each three ounces; Cinamon-water, and aqua Coelestis, of each half an ounce;
Syrup of Fennel, and Mint, of each six drachms; Spirit of Salt, as much as will
make it of a grateful taste, mix it, and give three spoonfulls of it often.

Take salt of Tartar vitriolated half a dram; Cream of Tartar one dram;
Powder.
white Sugar Candy two drachms; make it into a fine Powder for four Doses,
which may be taken every morning and evening in white or Rhenish wine.

For the Rich you may prepare a medicinal Wine.

This may serve for example.

Take the Roots of Elicampane, Calamus aromaticus, of each one ounce; of Rue,
Sage, A medicinal Wine.
Vervain, sweet Marjoram, of each three handfulls; Anise-seed, sweet
Fennel-seed, of each an ounce and half; Orange-peel half an ounce; let them be
cleansed, bruised and infused in two quarts of White Wind.

It may be given to three or four ounces in the morning fasting, with twenty
drops of Elixir proprietatis, you may also give it by it self, at dinner and
supper.

When the Wine is used, fresh Wine may be put to the Ingredients, for a second
infusion.

But farther to correct, and gently evacuate the viscous Phlegmatic humors.

This opening Apozeme is effectual.

Take of the five opening Roots of each two ounces, Liquorish an ounce and
half; Apozeme.
Guiacum half a Pound, Anise-seed, sweet Fennel-seed, the Berries of Bays, and
Juniper, of each half an ounce; Vervain, Betony, of each one handful; let them
be cleansed, bruised, and infused in two quarts of Rainwater very hot, for
twenty four hours; then strain it out very strongly, and add the best Manna,
Syrup of Roses solutive with Senna, of each four ounces; tincture of Cinnamon
three ounces; salt of Tartar vitriolated half an ounce; mix it, and give three
ounces every morning fasting.

If there be need of stronger Physic you Purging Pills.
may administer these purging Pills.

Take of Extract. Rudii, pil. foetidoe, Cochioe, of each half a dram;
Mercurius dulcis twenty grains; mix it for three Doses.

If the pain be old and stubborn, apply Vesiccatories to the Neck, also Leeches
to the Temples, and Haemorrhoids; or open the jugular, or frontal Vein, which
has often proved effectual.

Errhines, Sternutatories and Apophlegmatisms may also be used, and Ventoses
with Scarification if need require.

Baths of Sulphur (whether natural or artificial with Cephalic Herbs) are good
to bathe the Head and whole Body.

Some approve of the fume of Amber, taken into the Mouth and Nostrils.

Also spirit of cranium humanum, or spirit of salt Armoniack, held to the Nose
in a narrow-mouthed Vial, gives present ease in all cold Pains of the Head.

Also you may touch the Nostrils and Temples with Oil of Amber, or Nutmegs, or
apply this Epitheme to the Temples and Forehead with Linnen-rags.

Take the Waters of Vervain and Betony, of each one ounce; Vinegar of Roses,
Ointment Epitheme.
of Alabaster, of each half an ounce; Laudanum opiatum one scruple; mix it.

Cold distempers of the head, may also be corrected by hot Cephalicks quilted
in a Cap for the Head.

Take of sweet Marjoram, Stoechas, Vervain, For a'quilted Cap.
Betony, Sage, Flowers of Chamomel, of each one handful; Nutmegs, Cloves, Wood
of Alloes, the Roots of Galangal, Cyperus, Calamus aromat. of each half an
ounce; let them be all beaten into Powder for a quilted Cap.

Before you put it on, let the Hair be shaved close, and the Head gently rubbed
for some time, the better to open the pores.

Let the Sick abstain from fat and viscous Food, and let the mind be composed
to cheerfulness.

If the Juice of the Pancreas abounding in the Body, be over sour, it causes a
vicious Effervescency, being opposed by Choler and Phlegm in the small guts;
from whence sour and ungrateful vapors may be sent to the Stomach, and thence
to the Head.

If the humors be over sour, the sense of Signs.
hunger will be increased, notwithstanding the Pain of the Head.

This distemper is to be cured by giving Cure.
those things which temper, and amend the acid Juice in the Body, and do
prevent its increase.

Those things abounding with either a lixivial or volatile salt, do powerfully
destroy this acid Juice; as Pearl, Crab's-eyes, Coral, Chalk, Amber,
Bloud-stone, Filings of steel, etc.

Take this as a form of a Powder.

Take of Crab's-eyes, Pearl, red Coral prepared, Powder.
of each half a dram; white Sugar half an ounce; let it be made into fine
Powder for six Doses; which may be taken morning and evening in two or three
spoonfulls of the following Cordial Julep.

Take Waters of Baum and Mint, of each Cordial Iulep.
three ounces; Scurvigrass-water two ounces; Cinamon-water, Syrup of Wormwood,
of each one ounce and half; Oil of Juniper one dram; mix them together for a
Julep, of which you may also give two or three spoonfulls every fourth hour.

I prescribe no Purgers in this Distemper, because I am taught by large
Experience, that the sour Humors in the Body may be stirred up indeed, but not
purged, unless with very great gripes, which will do more hurt, ^^an good.

The encre^^e of the acid Juice, may be pr^^^nted by abstaining from the use of
ac^^^*

Let the Patient's diet be moist, and fatty, as fat Broths, Jellies aromatiz'd,
etc.

When the Headache proceeds from a hot cause, if the Patient be costive,
first give this Clyster.

Take of Mercury, Violets, Lettice, Mallows, Dandelion, of each one handful;
Damask Clyster.
Prunes twenty; let them be cleansed, bruised and boiled in two pints of
Fountainwater, till half of it be boiled away; then strain it, and add
Electuary lenitive, one ounce and half; Oil of Lillies two ounces; mix them for
a Clyster.

After its operation, you may open a Vein and draw eight or nine ounces of
blood.

Some Authors will not consent to Phlebotomy in any Headache, except the Pain
be intolerable; but I have had sufficient Experience, that it may be done
safely in any Pain of the Head.

Elixir proprietatis, taken in Wormwoodwine, to the quantity of half a dram
at a time, a little before meat, does wonderfully conduce to amend the vicious
quality of Choler.

Choler may be evacuated by vomit, most commodiously by Antimonial preparations.

Take of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum one ounce; Oximel of Squills half an
ounce. Give it in the morning. Vomit.


But if the Patient be averse to vomiting, the Choler may be evacuated by
stool, by this or the like Cathartick.

Take of Baum-water one ounce, Cinamonwater two drachms, Syrup of Roses
solutive, Purging Potion.
the best Manna, of each half an ounce; Powder of Cream of Tartar twenty
grains, Diagredium ten grains; mix it for a Potion, which may be given in the
morning fasting.

Also these most grateful Tablets of Scammony may be prepared, and kept for
use.

Take Cristals of Tartar two ounces; Scammony one ounce; white Sugar four
Troches.
ounces; with Gum Dragon dissolved in Rosewater as much as is sufficient; let
it be made into Troches according to Art.

Half a dram of these Troches may be given to a Child with careful
governing; a Man or Woman may take two drachms of them.

They who are fearful of Scammoniats, though safe and potent, let them take
the following infusion.

Take of choice Rhubarb two drachms; Cream of Tartar one dram; infuse them
Purging Infusion.
in four ounces of Endive-water for a night; then strain it and add Syrup of
Roses solutive, Syrup of Cicory with Rhubarb, of each half an ounce,
Cinamon-water two drachms; give it in the morning fasting: This Electuary is
also an excellent Cholagogue.

Take the Pulp of Damask-prunes ten ounces; Powder of Scammony, Cream of
Tartar, Electuary.
of each two ounces, Rhubarb ten drachms, Cinnamon half an ounce; yellow Sanders
two drachms; the best Manna, Syrup of Cicory with Rhubarb, of each eight
ounces; mix all together into an Electuary according to Art.

The Dose is from two drachms, to half an ounce, taken either in a Bolus, or
dissolved in a sufficient quantity of Endive-water, or any other convenient
vehicle.

These excellent Medicines do not only purge Choler abounding, but purify the
Blood and other Humors; and here we may note, that if a purging Medicine do
not operate according to Expectation, it may safely Observation.
be repeated the same day without any danger.

If the Headache be accompanied with a great Fever, and Thirst be augmented;
the following Medicines will much conduce to assuage it.

Take of Barley-water two pints; Cinamon-water two ounces; Syrup of Violets
four Iulep.
ounces; salt Prunella half an ounce; mix it, and give the sick three or four
spoonfulls of it often.

This Tincture is also very effectual

Take of Barley-water two pints; Red-rosebuds Tincture.
one ounce; spirit of Vitriol twenty drops, or as much as is sufficient to make
it of a good Tincture, let it infuse all Night, then strain it, and add Syrup
of Jujubes four ounces; mix it, and give three or four spoonfulls every three
hours.

If an Emulsion may please better, take this following form.

Take of sweet Almonds one ounce; the Emulsion.
four greater Cold-seeds of each half an ounce; white Poppy-seeds two ounces;
let the Almonds be blanched, and all well beaten in a stone Mortar; then with
four pints of Barley-water, make an Emulsion; strain it, and add Syrup of the
Juice of Limmons, Diacodium, of each three ounces; Cinamon-water two ounces; of
which let the sick drink often, four spoonfulls at a time.

You may also have a little fine Sugar, and salt Prunella equally mixed, which
may be kept in the Mouth, to deceive the Thirst.

But where rest is hindered by the Choler abounding, and cannot be obtained by
the Emulsion, which gently procures sleep; you may dissolve two grains of
Laudanum opiat. in two or three spoonfulls of it, and give it at night; or you
may order this or the like Julep.

Take the Waters of Lettice, Water Lillies of each two ounces; Syrup of red
Poppies Iulep.
one ounce; Cinamon-water half an ounce; Laudanum opiatum four grains; Oil of
Vitriol six drops; mix it, and give four spoonfulls of it to cause sleep.

This Epitheme may be applied to the Temples, and Forehead with Linnen-rags.

Take the Oils of Violets, and Water Lillies of each half an ounce; the waters
of red Roses, Epitheme.
Lettice, and Houseleek, of each two ounces; Vinegar of Roses half an ounce;
mix it.

You may also anoint the Temples and Forehead with this Ointment.

Take the Ointment of Alabaster, Populion, Ointment.
Oil of Mandrakes, of each half an ounce; mix it.

Let the Patient's diet be Mutton or Veal-broth without salt.

When a salt Catarrh, or the like spittle is the cause of Thirst augmented, you
may administer a Pill of Styrax, or Cynoglosson, which will temperate the
saltness of the humors; and if salt serous matter abound in the Blood, you may
purge it by Stool and Urine, for which there are variety of Medicines
prescribed in the Chapter of Catarrhs.

CHAP. II. Of the Palsy, and Apoplexy.
THE Palsy is called in Greek (...), quod a (...), i. e. a solvendo, eo quod
nervorum genus resolutum, facultate animi Paralysis.
defluere prohibita sensu motuque destituatur.

It may be also called (...), i. e. dimidia Apoplexia.

In Latin it is called nervorum resolutio vel relaxatio.

It is a Privation of sense and motion of one side of the Body, or of some
particular part.

The Apoplexy is called in Greek (...), Apoplexia.
ex (...), percutior, attonitum reddo.

In Latin it is called stupor corporis, it being an Abolition of sense and
motion through the whole Body.

The parts affected are the Brain, Spinalis medulla and Nerves; the motion of
the Animal spirits through them being depraved.

The causes are either external, or internal.

The external is much cold and moisture, Cause.
which does chill and over moisten the Head, and extreme parts; and this seems
to prove Cause internal.
that phlegmatic and watery Humors abiding about the Ventricles of the Brain,
and Nerves, may over moisten, and perhaps so far loosen the Tunicles or
Membranes of them, that it may render them unfit to let the Animal spirits pass
through them; hence it is that sometimes one particular Member has been
Paralytick by too much Cold and Moisture; and sometimes more parts have more or
less lost sense and motion.

It is the opinion of most eminent Physicians both ancient and modern; that the
Animal spirits being severed from the Blood in the Brain, etc. are from thence
carried through all the Nerves to exercise the external senses and Animal
motion; which is continual and equal in healthy persons, but changeable and
unequal, according to the diverse diseases of the Body or Mind.

Wherefore when no Animal spirits are carried to the Organs of the external
Senses, or Animal motion; the functions of seeing, smelling, tasting, hearing
and touching: and the sense of heat, as also of motion in the Palsy and
Apoplexy, cease all that time.

The Signs of the Palsy are manifest; to wit, deprivation of sense and motion
of the Signs.
Paralytick parts; the Eye, and half the Tongue, (viz. of that side affected)
is much weakened, and depraved.

The signs of the Apoplexy approaching are these, a sudden crying out for help,
with an abolition of sense and motion.

1. If the Palsy, or Apoplexy do invade the sick in the decrease of the Moon,
and the Patient Progn.
be old, it is an ill sign.

2. If the sick do snort, and is droughty, and cast spume or froth out of the
Mouth, and have great sweat with difficult breathing, it is mortal. But if the
Person be young, and a strong Fever immediately happen, it is a good sign; for
the Fever consumes the superfluous moisture, and makes a Dissipation of the
gross and phlegmatic Matter.

3. A Palsy coming after the Apoplexy is ill, and many times turns to the
Apoplexy again.

When any of the extreme parts be Paralytical, Cure.
or when the Head is ill affected by the external coldness of Air, Water or
Snow; or a stoppage of the Head be also bred thereby, or the defect of the
Animal spirits chiefly urge; then the sick may be cured by driving out
whatsoever cold has pierced into the Head, or any other parts of the Body,
which may be done by spirituous and volatile Sudorificks; for they do not only
alter and correct the cause of Cold, and other Evils accompanying it, but do
also amend the harm entering into the Body, containing, and contained.

To this end I commend this following Form.

Take of Treacle-water one ounce; Fennelwater, Cordial to cause sweat.
and Epidemical-water, of each two ounces; Syrup of red Poppies, and Syrup of
the Juice of Scurvigrass, of each half an ounce; Bezoar-mineral, Antimony
Diaphoretick, of each ten grains; Laudanum opiat. three grains; Spirit of salt
Armoniack twenty drops; Oil of Cloves four drops; mix it, give the sick three
or four spoonfulls of it, and expect to sweat, being meanly covered; and a
spoonful every half hour afterward, till the sweat break forth; then give them
some pure Broth, with a little Wine in it, whereby strength may be recreated,
and the Patient enabled to bear a Sweat longer; for nothing so much helps the
sick as a sweat continued mildly a while, which experience has often taught me.

For by the help of this spirituous, and volatile, and also Aromatic medicine,
or one like it, the troublesome Cold, and dullness of motion are discust.

They who let blood in this Distemper caused Observation.
by external Cold; or think they can carry out the Cause of this Evil either by
vomit or siege, put the sick into danger of death, or at least of most grievous
Evils.

But when phlegmatic and watery Humors stick about the Nerves, etc. And too
much moistening and loosening their Membranes and Marrow, be the cause of the
Palsy and Apoplexy, and if the same humors much abound in the Body; then
Phlegmagogues, and Hydragogues may conduce to the Cure, after Clysters, and
internal Aromatic Sudorificks.

Wherefore to begin the Cure of this; you may first give this or the like
Clyster, which must be made strong.

Take of sweet Marjoram, Betony, Sage, Pennyroyal, Clyster.
Hyssop, Rue, Mercury, Marshmallows, the lesser Centaury, the Flowers of
Chamomel, and Stoechas, of each half a handful; Anise-seed, sweet Fennel-seed,
Juniper Berries, of each half an ounce; let them be cleansed, bruised and
boiled in a quart of Fountain Water, till half of it be boiled away; then
strain it, and dissolve in it the Electuary Diaphoenicon, benedicta laxativa,
of each half an ounce; pil. Cochioe twenty grains; common Salt one dram; Oil
of Rue two ounces; mix it for a Clyster.

The next day (if the sick have a Plethorick body) you may draw blood from
either arm, to eight or nine ounces.

If Phlebotomy cannot be done, apply Ventoses with Scarification to the
shoulders; afterward sweat the Patient with the aforesaid Sudorifick.

Sometimes Suppositories may be used in stead of Clysters.

This may serve for Example.

Take the Powders of Coloquintida, Saltniter, Suppository.
Hiera-picra simple, of each one dram; Euphorbium half a dram, Honey boiled
as much as will make it into a Suppository. But if it appear that phlegmatic
and viscous Humors do abound in the Body, Purgers may be prescribed most
conveniently in the form of a Pill, because the Gums are most apt (above all
other Medicines) to loosen and cut viscous Phlegm; neither can they be easily
dissolved in any liquour.

Let this, or such a like form of Pills serve.

Take the Gums Amoniacum, and Galbanum, of each two drachms; dissolve them in
Vinegar Purging Pills.
of Squills, strain it, and boil it, to a due consistence; then add Powders of
Troches, Alhandal, Scammony, Mastick, of each one dram; Oil of Anise-seed
eight drops; make it into a Mass of Pills according to Art.

Let the sick take five or six small Pills of this in the morning fasting, and
an hour after drink some thin broth.

If the humors be more serous, I commend this Electuary.

Take Juniper Berries one pound; boil them in six pints of Fennel-water, till
Purging Electuary.
half of it be boiled away; then add the Fruit of Tamarind eight ounces, and
pulp them both through a Sieve: To which add Powder of Jalap, and Scammony
prepared, of each three ounces; Cinnamon, sweet Fennel-seed, of each half an
ounce; white Sugar one pound, make it into an Electuary according to Art.

The dose of this effectual Medicine, is to half an ounce, to people of age; a
Child may take from half a dram, to a dram, either by it self, or dissolved
in Whey, or Parsleywater, or in any other convenient Vehicle.

After universal evacuation has been made, and the Patient's stomach be still
nauseous, this vomit may safely be given.

Take the Infusion of Crocus metallor. Vinegar Vomit.
of Squills of each one ounce, give it in the morning with Care: After the
operation of it, give some of this Cordial Julep.

Take the Waters of Sage, Couslips, Lillies Cordial Iulep.
of the Valley, of each two ounces; Cinamon-water one ounce; Syrup of
Peonyflowers, Stoechas, of each six drachms; Spirit of Castor two drachms;
Spirit of Salt as much as will make it of a grateful taste, of which you may
give the sick three or four spoonfulls every fourth hour.

To correct a slow ferment, and also to amend Phlegmatic viscous humors, a
Medicinal Wine may be prepared for the rich, in this form.

Take the Roots of Galangal, Elecampane, Medicinal Wine.
of each half an ounce; the tops of Wormwood, Mint and Calamint, of each one
handful; Powder of Cinnamon, Anise-seed, of each half an ounce; Nutmegs two
drachms; let them be cleansed, bruised and insused in six pints of White Wind.

The sick may drink of this Physick-wine at dinner and supper, adding to every
draught, five or six drops of Elixir proprietatis.

When the wine is almost consumed, more may be poured on, till it cease to be
Aromatical.

External means for the Palsy, and Apoplexy are also to be used.

Bathing is much commended, both natural and artificial; and how excellent it
is daily experience does manifest.

This artificial Bath, or one like it, may be prescribed, where a natural
sulphurous or nitrous Bath cannot be had.

Take Sage, Pennyroyal, Betony, Organ, Bath.
sweet Marjoram, Hyssop, Rue, Time, Groundpine, of each six handfulls; Flowers
of Chamomel, Melilot, of each four handfulls; Roots of Briony, Pellitory, of
Spain, of each four ounces; Bay Berries, Juniper Berries of each three ounces;
Brimstone six pound; Saltniter two pound; let all be bruised and boiled in
twenty Gallons of Spring Water, till the third part be consumed.

Let the sick be well bathed with this as often as strength will permit.

After bathing, anoint the hinder part of the Head and Neck, and down the
Vertebra of the Back with this Oil; upon which let a Fox-skin dressed be worn.

Take Chymical-oils, of Juniper Berries, Oil.
Turpentine, Spike, of each half an ounce; Oils of Chamomel, Earthworms, Rue,
Foxes, of each one ounce; Spirit of Castor two drachms; mix it.

This plaster may be applied to the Head.

Take Galbanum, Opopanax, of each half an ounce; Mustard Seed, white Pepper,
Euphorbium, Plaster.
Castor, of each two drachms; Chemical Oil of Sage and Rue, of each twenty
drops; Oil of Spike and Turpentine, of each a dram; make it into a Plaster
which you may spread on leather, and apply it warm to the Head.

Or you may make the quilted Cap as is prescribed in page 6. to wear
constantly; Oil of Nutmegs is good to embrocate the Ears and Nostrils; also
Errhines, Sternutatories, and Apophlegmatisms may be used with good success.

Take Castor, sweet Marjoram, Betony, Sneezing Powder.
Root of white Hellebor, of each a dram; beat them all into a fine Powder.
Blow up some of this Powder (with a quill) into the Nostrils, to cause sneezing.

Let the Patient's diet be such as may not breed Phlegm, and let it be thin and
spare, as Water Gruel, in which boil some Mace; or you may make Broth of
Mutton, etc. in which boil Sage, Rosemary, Time, sweet Marjoram, Couslips, etc.

Of this broth you may make Panado's with the Crumbs of white Bread, and the
Yelk of an Egg.

Let Anise-seed, or sweet Fennel-seed be baked with the bread.

Abstain from all clammy Diet, as Fish and Milk, etc. and eat little or no
supper.

CHAP. III. Of Convulsions, and the Epilepsie.
THE Cramp or Convulsion is called in Greek (...), in Latin Convulsio. Spasmus.


It is a very painful, involuntary Contraction of the Nerves and Muscles
toward their Original.

There are generally two sorts of Convulsions. viz. A true Convulsion, and a
Convulsive motion.

A true Convulsion is either universal or particular.

Of the universal there are three Kinds.

The first is called in Greek (...), in Latin tentio ad anteriora; when the
Body and Head is drawn forward.

The second is called (...), and in Latin tentio ad posteriora when the Head
and Body is drawn backward

The third is called (...) in Greek, and distentio in Latin, in this the whole
Body is inflexible.

The particular convulsions are various.

If it be in the Eye, it is called strabismus.

That of the Mouth, is call tortura oris, etc.

The Falling Sickness or Epilepsie, is called Epilepsia.
in Greek (...), ab (...), invado, quod sensum atque mentem pariter apprehendat.

It is called also in Latin Epilepsia vel invasio; item morbus hominem ita
invadens, ut retineat and sistat sensuum actiones, because the mind and senses
in this disease are suddenly surprised.

It may be called morbus caducus, a cadendo, or morbus puerilis because it is
most subject to Children; or more properly noverca puerorum, quod eos male
tractat.

It is also called Herculeus, and Elephantiasis a magnitudine, because it is
difficult to cure.

Some call it morbus lunaticus, because the sick are most subject to the fits
at the change of the moon; but enough of the Names.

The Epilepsie is an universal Cramp or Convulsion of the whole Body, with
deprivation of sense and motion in the time of the fit.

The parts affected are not only the Brain, Cerebellum and Spinalis medulla,
but all the Parts affecte.
Nerves and Museles.

The causes are either external or internal. Causes.


The external, may be by the biting of some venomous Creature; or by a wound or
puncture of a Nerve or Tendon.

Sometimes it may be caused by surfeiting or drunkenness; and also by the
taking of Hellebor, etc.

It may be also caused by a mineral Gas fuming from the Mines of Lead, or
Antimony, etc. which infecteth the Air with noxious metalline exhalations of a
venomous malignity; which is many times the cause of Convulsions, as they can
tell by experience, that live near those Mines.

The internal causes are acrimonious and flatuous Vapors, rising from the
small guts, because of over viscous Phlegm, and the over acidity and tartness
of the Juice of the Pancreas, which causes a vicious effervescency of the
humors, by which the Lympha is also rendered very sharp.

These sour flatuous Vapors continually ascending to the Head, together with
the spirituous substance of the Blood, and going forward into the Ventricles of
the Brain, and Cerebellum, and so to the first spreading of the Nerves; and
corroding them, causes an inordinate agitation, and very fierce motion of the
Animal spirits; and by a continual and grievous Irritation, urging about the
beginning of the Spinalis medulla, is the cause of an universal Convulsion, or
Epileptick-fit, in which all the Muscles of the Body are most vehemently
contracted.

The Irritation in a particular Convulsive motion or the Cramp, which may be
often observed in the thigh or leg, and other extreme parts, may be also ascribed
to the same sharp and sour flatuous Vapors, carried to the beginning of the
Nerves and Tendons of the said Members, fretting and gnawing them sometimes
with great pain.

The signs of Convulsions are manifest. Signs.


The preceding signs of the Epilepsie, are trembling, sadness, fearfulness,
vertigo, numness, debility of the senses, troublesome sleep, with great pain of
the Head.

The signs of the Epilepsie presently approaching, are a vehement shaking of
the whole Body, foming at the Mouth, and a sudden deprivation of all the Animal
functions.

1. A Convulsion or Epilepsie, being hereditary, is incurable. Progn.


2. If a pregnant Woman be taken with either of them, it is very dangerous; and
also after Abortion.

3. Children are most subject to these diseases, because they abound with
abundance of moisture, and flatulent Vapors in the Brain; and because they
have Nervorum poros angustos, whereby the Brain is easily filled with such
vapors; and therefore we see that Children are often troubled with them, young
People more rarely, and old Folks but seldom; and we find that Children better
suffer them than either of the other, who frequently die of these fits,
especially of the Epilepsie, when in their falling there follows snorting,
gnashing of the teeth, a ghastly countenance, much some at the Mouth,
involuntaria seminis effusio, and great cryings out.

4. Of all the kind of Convulsions, Tetanos is the most difficult to cure;
because it is (as it were) composed of the other two kinds; but if a fever
happen in this or any other Convulsion, the sick will suddenly recover, because
a fever dissolveth it; but if a Convulsion should succeed a fever, it is very
dangerous, especially from a wound, or proceeding from venomous matter.

So likewise it is very dangerous if it be caused by taking of Hellebor.

When a particular Convulsion is caused Cure.
from a prick of a Nerve or Tendon; as it may happen sometimes by the
unskilfulness, or precipitancy of the Chyrurgeon in opening a vein, then most
speedily pour into the wound or puncture, the Oil of Turpentine, with rectified
Spirit of Wine, both actually hot; as that famous Chyrurgeon Mr. Ambrose Parey
advises in his ninth Book, Chap. 11. of which I have had large experience with
good success.

The like course may be taken with all other wounds of the nervous parts.

But if the wound of the Nerve or Tendon yield not to this medicine, the same
is to be cut asunder cross-ways, seeing it is safer to lose the action of one
part, than that the sick should be exposed to the danger of a deadly Convulsion.

When the Nerves or Tendons of the Muscles are pricked by sharp splinters of
bones, the grievous pains succeeding, soon cause a particular Convulsion of
that part, and at length an universal Convulsion will attend the Patient, if
there be not speedy help.

Wherefore if possible, the sharp fragments of the bone must be cut away; or if
this have been neglected, or could not be done, and an universal Convulsion be
feared, you must hasten to amputation of the member; For, Necessitas non habet
legem.

If a particular Convulsion be occasioned by a hot Tumor or any other sharp
pain, which has raised an inflammation; let the pain be diminisht as well by
internal, as external Anodines and Narcoticks, to allay the over increased
motion of the Animal spirits.

To this end you may give the sick two or three grains of Laudanum opiat. at a
time, either in a Pill, or dissolve it in a little Wine or other convenient
Vehicle.

And if the ingenious and judicious Physician, or Chyrurgeon, do add a little
volatile Salt, either of Animals or Vegetables, to his topical Medicaments,
whether fomentations, Cataplasms, or Ointments, he will wonder at the
incredible benefit; for by the help thereof the Tumor will be mollified and
dissolved, the internal obstruction loosned, and the pain eased.

If a Convulsion be caused by the taking of Hellebor, or any other venomous
matter; administer an Antimonial vomit with all speed.

But if it be a Child, give it ten grains of Salt of Vitriol, or half an ounce
of Oxymel of Squills, with a dram of Oil of Almonds.

After the operation of the Emetick, (and also at other times) you may give
some of this Julep.

Take of Black-cherry-water, the Water of Iulep.
Line-flowers of each two ounces; Briony-water compound, Syrup of Peony, of
each one ounce; Tincture of Castor half an ounce; Confection of Alkermes one
dram, Spirit of Salt Armoniack twenty drops; mix it, and give three or four
spoonfulls every fourth Hour.

Having briefly hinted at the Cure of particular Convulsions; I come now to
those more universal, as likewise Convulsive motions, and the Epilepsie.

And seeing there is little difference, in the remote causes of them in the
Body; these diseases may (for the most part) be cured with the same Remedies.

1. First then the peccant humors are to be tempered, and diminisht.

2. The rising of vapors is to be hindered, and their expulsion procured by
sweat, or insensible transpiration: By which the over motion of the Animal
spirits will be restrained and brought to tranquillity, that is a more quiet
motion.

All Aromaticks, and all things abounding with either a fixed or volatile Salt,
do not only correct, and by cutting amend the viscous phlegmatic humors; but
do powerfully temper and destroy the over acidity and tartness of the juice of
the Pancreas.

To temper and diminish these humors, I commend these medicines.

Take the Roots of Male-peony, Valerian, Infusion.
Missletoe of the Oak, and Peony-seeds, of each two ounces; Castor half an
ounce; let them be all bruised, and infused in Peony-water compound, the Water
of Line-tree-flowers, of each one pint, for the space of twenty four hours;
then strain it out very strongly, and add Syrup of Peony and Stoechas, of each
three ounces; Spirit of Castor half an ounce; mix it, and give three spoonfulls
at a time every fourth hour, with which you may mix Spirit of Salt Armoniack,
Elixir proprietatis, of each six drops.

Also you may give the Patient half a dram of the following powder in three
or four spoonfulls of this Infusion, with the aforesaid Spirit and Elixir.

Take of Crab's-eyes, Salt of Tartar vitriolated, Salt prunella, of each half an
ounce; volatile Salt of Hartshorn, Salt of Amber, of Man's skull prepared, of
each two drachms; make it into a fine powder, which may be taken half a dram
at a time, morning and evening.

The peccant humors being tempered and diminisht, by the frequent use of the
abovesaid medicines; the inordinate, involuntary and impetuous motion of the
Animal spirits, (in Convulsive and Epileptick fits) will be the better reduced
to a calm and voluntary motion, by the help of volatile and spirituous
Sudorificks, mixed with Anodines, and Narcotick medicines used in a small
quantity, and at times; which two will be expedient to be given together,
because then they will the better circulate to the Animal spirits, and temper
and educe the hurtful flatuous Vapors.

For which I commend the following form.

Take of Treacle-water, Fennel-water, of each one ounce; Syrup of Peony, Syrup
of Cordial to cause Sweat.
the Juice of Scurvigrass, of each half an ounce; Antimony Diaphoretick, Bezoar
mineral, Crab's-eyes in powder, of each ten grains; Laudanum opiat. four grains;
Tincture of Castor one dram; Oil of Cloves three drops; Spirit of Salt
Armoniack ten drops; mix it, and let the sick take it, being well covered with
cloths, whereby the sweat will the easier come forth.

If the Body be costive, let it be made soluble by a Clyster, or Suppository;
such as is prescribed in the cure of the Apoplexy.

As often as the Stomach is naufeous, or the sick inclines to vomiting; let the
Emeticks before mentioned be carefully administered; and likewise three or four
days before the full of the moon.

But if the sick be averse to vomiting, and Pills or Potions are more
acceptable, take the following as Examples.

Take of Extract. Rudij, pil. foetidoe ex duobus, Purging Pills.
of each a dram and half; Castor, black Hellebor prepared, of each half a
dram; Salt of Amber twenty grains; Oil of Rosemary twenty drops, with Syrup
of Stoechas; make it into a Mass for pills; of which you may give half a dram
twice a week.

Also this purging Infusion is very effectual.

Take of the best Senna, Rhubarb, and Cream of Tartar, of each an ounce and
half; Infusion.
Liquorish, and the five opening Roots, of each one ounce; Guiacum,
China-roots, of each six ounces; Missletoe of the Oak, Anise-seed, sweet
Fennel-seed, Bay Berries, and Juniperberries, of each half an ounce; let them
be all bruised, and infused in Black-cherry-water, and the Water of
Line-tree-flowers, of each a quart, very hot for the space of a Night; then
strain it very hard, and add Syrup of Roses solutive with Senna, Syrup of
Succory with Rhubarb, of each three ounces; Cinamon-water two ounces; Salt of
Tartar vitriolated half an ounce; mix it.

Let the sick take four ounces of this purging Infusion every morning, whereby
the viscous humors and flatuous Vapors may be both corrected, and also
evacuated gently by degrees.

If blood abound, let a Vein be opened; in Women open the Saphoena in either
Foot, but in Men you may apply Leeches to the Hemorrhoidal Veins. etc.

Bathing has been often used (with good success) in these diseases.

A natural sulphurous Bath, such as is in the City of Bath, is excellent; but
when it is not to be had, an artificial Bath may serve.

That which is set down in the Cure of the Palsy and Apoplexy, is of excellent
Virtue, and very effectual in these distempers.

After bathing, let the Spina Dorsi, and other affected parts be anointed with
the following Ointment.

Take the Oils of Euphorbium, Rue, Castor, Ointment.
Petre, Spike, Turpentine, Bricks, Dil, Chamomel, of each half an ounce; Oils
of Amber and Juniper, of each two drachms; the Ointments Martiatum and Aregon
of each one ounce; mix them for an Ointment.

Issues are approved of, either in the Neck, or Arm; also Ventoses with
Scarification, Sternutatories, Errhines and Masticatories are all commended.

This Masticatory may serve for Example. Masticatory.


Take the Roots of Pellitory of Spain, Ginger, Calamus aromaticus, of each one
ounce; Mustard Seed; all sorts of Pepper, Nutmegs, Castor, Mastick, of each
half an ounce; beat them all into fine Powder, and with fine Honey boild into a
Syrup, make them into Troches according to Art.

When they are dry you may chew them one after another, when you please to
draw the Rheum out of the Mouth.

When the fit is coming, or upon the party, blow up some Sneezing-powder into
the Nostrils, or the Smoke of Tobacco into the Mouth.

Embrocate the Temples, Forehead and Nostrils with Oil of Amber; and hold the
Spirit of Salt Armoniack to the Nose, in a Narrow-mouthed viol.

Make a noise in the Ears; and let the sick be kept in a light Room, with the
Head upright.

Let the teeth be kept open with a stick, or rather with a little viscus
quercinus, if it may be had.

Let the soles of the feet be well rubbed with Salt and Vinegar; also Frictions
and Ligatures may be used in the parts affected.

Some commend a Pigeon cut asunder, and applied hot to the Navel; for hereby
the venomous halituous Vapors are partly drawn away.

I might add variety of medicines for the cure of these diseases; but those
before mentioned are sufficient to give light to the ingenious Artist, who
knows how to prepare diversity of them, as well milder for Infants and
Children, as stronger for Adults.

I will therefore prescribe a powder to preserve Children from Convulsive and
Epileptick-fits, and so conclude this Chapter.

Take the Roots of Peony, Valerian, of Epileptick Powder.
each half an ounce; the Moss that grows upon a Man's skull, the triangular
Bone of a Man's skull prepared, Missletoe of the Oak, Elks-hoof, the Seeds of
Peony, sweet Fennel and Annise, of each two drachms; red Coral, whitest Amber,
and Emerald prepared, of each one dram; white Sugar the weight of them all,
let them be reduced into a fine powder.

You may give a Child twenty grains of this powder with a little Oil of sweet
Almonds, so soon as it is born, which may happily preserve it from Convulsions,
and Epileptick fits.

And because obstructions of the Belly in Children, exposes them to flatuous
Vapors, and Gripings, and so consequently to Convulsive and Epileptick-fits; I
advise you to keep the Belly open, either with a little Manna, or a Carminative
Clyster, so often as you see convenient.

Let the sick live in a serene Air, and abstain from all food that breeds bad
nourishment, and flatulent Vapors.

CHAP. IV. Of the Nightmare, and Vertigo.
I Shall treat of these two distempers in one Chapter, because if either of
them continue long; they are Forerunners of the Palsy, or Apoplexy, and
sometimes Convulsions, or Epilepsie.

The Nightmare is called in Greek (...), Incubus.
in Latin it is called Incubus ab incubando, quod externa vis quoedam aut moles
incubare videtur.

It is called the Nightmare, because it oppresses the sick in the Night, at
which time they think that some great weight lies upon them, by which they
seem to be almost suffocated.

It happens most commonly after the first sleep, whereby the party oppressed,
is deprived of speech and motion, and sometime breathing for a time.

When the fit is upon the sick, they do imagine that some Witch or Hag lies
hard on their Breast or Stomach, (from whence it has also acquired that Name)
in which they cannot stir, nor call for help, though they have a great desire,
and do strive very much to cry out, but are possessed with a panick fear.

The cause of this distemper, is most commonly Cause.
intemperance in eating and drinking, especially in the Night; whereby crude
halituous Vapors are bred in such plenty, that nature cannot disperse nor
dissolve them before sleep; and therefore they are raised up to the Ventricles
of the Brain, by which imagination, sense and motion are all depraved.

The giddy motion is called in Greek (...), i. e. obscuritas oculorum.

In Latin it is called Vertigo, ex vertendo quod Caput vertere videtur. Vertigo.


In this disease the Animal spirits are wrong moved, which makes the sick
believe that not only all things they look on, go in a Circuit about, but
their Head and other parts, seem to turn round; which many times causes them
to be in danger of falling, or tumbling headlong.

The cause of the giddy motion, is either Cause.
external, or internal.

The external are either an intent looking at any object that turns round, or
about, especially if very remote; or a frequent turning about of the Body it
self.

The internal cause, is the ascent of flatuous Vapors to the Head, together
with the spirituous part of the Blood, and carried with the Animal spirits,
into the passages of the Brain, and Cerebellum; by which the motion of wheeling
about is communicated to the Animal spirits, and anon carried to the
Cristalline humor of the Eyes, by the Optic nerves; and so a Giddiness seems
to be produced.

For the Cure of these diseases; seeing they are the Forerunners of the
Apoplexy, and Epilepsie; I refer you to those excellent Medicines prescribed
for the Cure of them.

Let such as are subject to these distempers, be very sparing in their diet;
let them avoid all Herbs, Roots and Fruits, that are windy; and all viscous and
gross diet, such as is of hard Concoction.

Let the external Causes be removed, and the internal causes corrected. Sublata
causa tollitur effectus.

CHAP. V. Of the Lethargy Coma, Carus, and Catalepsie or Catocus.
THE Lethargy is called in Greek (...), id est, ab oblivione Lethargus.
and inertia. Because in this disease, the sick is very forgetful and
slothful.

In this distemper, there is a very great Signs.
propensity to sleep, accompanied with a Symptomatical Fever, and sometimes
with the Hiccough, with difficulty of breathing, dullness of the Head, and many
times a deprivation of the Senses.

(...), sopor altus, is an insatiable inclination to sleep; the sick being
called unto, Coma.
they open their Eyes, and answer, but presently fall a sleep again.

(...), is called in Latin crapularis redundantia; because it is sometimes
caused Carus.
by surfeiting, end drunkenness.

It is deep and profound sleep, whereby imagination, sense and motion are all
depraved.

In these there is no Fever, in which they differ from the Lethargy.

Catalepsis, vel Detentio, is called in Greek (...), which signifies a
withholding, or restraining, because in this distemper, the mind, with the
senses, and motion are all suddenly surprised, so that the sick remain stiff,
and immovable, in the very same posture in which they were taken, with their
Eyes open.

The causes of these diseases are either Causes.
external, or internal.

The external causes are gross food, idleness, spirituous wine, or any other
inebriating liquour taken in excess; and sometimes by the Air inspired, which
is defiled by the Smoke of Coals, or other mineral Fumes, by which the Air may
be infested.

The internal cause, is a Narcotick force mixed with the Animal spirits, bred
by degrees in the Body, by the frequent use of opiats, not well corrected,
which not only dulls the mind, but causes a sluggishness of the whole Body;
for the Animal motion being depraved, the external, as well as internal senses,
will be thence soon infected, and defiled.

These diseases are all very dangerous, and except they are speedily cured,
they will soon Progn.
hurry the sick into the Boats of Acheron, or devouring Jaws of Death.

But if a Frenzy comes immediately after any of them, it cures the Patient
with little help of medicine.

To cure these diseases, let the drowsy Animal Cure.
spirits be stirred up, and raised from sleepiness, and stupidness, by potent
external Objects, which may sharply move the external senses; let the sick be
kept in a light room, and be often called upon very strongly, and let sharp
smells be applied to the Nostrils, such as Spirit of Salt Armoniack,
Hartshorn, etc.

Also sharp spices or salts should be put into the mouth, and gentle frications
used (with warm Clothes) to those parts that are affected with Numness.

The Animal spirits may be freed from the Narcotick force mingled with them,
(and likewise slothfulness, and sleepiness may be (by little and little)
diminished,) by the frequent use of sharp volatile Salts, and all Medicines
endued with an Aromatic biting; such as Pepper, Cloves, Castor, Garlic,
Horseradish, Mustard, Scurvigrass, etc. Of which you may make diversity of
Medicines, for example.

Take the Waters of Hedge-mustard, Scurvigrass, of each two ounces, Syrup of
the Iulep.
Juice of Scurvigrass one ounce; Tincture of Castor two drachms; Oil of Cloves
four drops; mix it, and give the sick two or three spoonfulls every two hours.

This decoction is also very effectual.

Take the Roots of Horseradish, the best Decoction.
China, of each two ounces; Roots of Galangal half an ounce; Scurvigrass,
Hedge-mustard, of each one handful; Cloves one dram; let them be all
cleansed, bruised and infused in White Wind, and Fountain Water, of each a
quart, for the space of a Night very hot; the next morning boil it gently for
half an hour, then strain it, and add Syrup of Hedge-mustard, Scurvigrass, of
each three ounces; Cinamon-water two ounces; mix it.

Let the sick lying in bed, meanly covered take often in a day five or six
spoonfulls of this decoction, whereby a light sweat may break forth to ease
them.

By the frequent use of these medicines, the Animal spirits will not only be
freed from their drowsiness, but even the Narcotick force bred in the Body
(either in the length of time, or received in from without) may be corrected,
and by degrees gently educ'd by insensible transpiration: So that at length,
these dangerous distempers may happily be overcome.

Let Clysters, and Suppositories be often administered, as need requires.

Those prescribed in page 17, 18. in the Cure of the Palsy and Apoplexy, are
very effectual here.

If strength and age permit, let a vein be opened in either Arm or Foot, as you
shall see cause; for generally Authors consent to it, besides Experientia
docet.

Let Ventoses with (or without) Scarification be applied to the shoulders and
hinder part of the Neck.

And let Sternutatories be often snuft up into the Nostrils, to provoke
sneezing.

Take the Roots of Pellitory of Spain, white Sneezing Powder.
Hellebor, of each half a dram; Castor, Nutmegs, white Pepper, of each twenty
grains; Flowers of Lillies of the Valley one dram; beat them into a fine
Powder.

If the Stomach be foul, and the sick incline to vomit, give this or the like.

Take the decoction of Horseradish, two Vomit.
ounces; the infusion of crocus metallorum, Oxymel of Squills, of each half an
ounce; Oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn, two drachms; mix it, and give it in
the Morning.

But if the sick had rather take Pills or Potions, let the following serve.

Take Extract. Rudii, pil. foetidoe, ex duobus Purging Pills.
of each half a dram; Powder of Castor twenty grains; Oil of Cloves six
drops, with Syrup of Stoechas, make it into Pills, for three doses.

You may give them twice a week in the Morning fasting.

This purging Infusion is also very effectual. Purging Infusion.


Take of the best Senna, Rhubarb, Polypodium, of each half an ounce; Mechoacan,
Agarick, Turkey-Turbith, of each three drachms; Ginger, Anise-seed, of each two
drachms; let them be bruised and infused in eight ounces of Ale very hot, for
the space of a Night, then strain it, and add the best Manna; Syrup of Roses
solutive of each one ounce; Spirit of Castor twenty drops; mix it for two doses.

Let the affected parts, as the Head, etc. be bathed with this or the like
fomentation.

Take the Roots of Master-wort, Angelica, Fomentation.
Zedoary, of each three ounces; Bay Berries, Juniper Berries, of each four
ounces; Sage, Marjoram, Rue, Rose-mary, Betony, Flowers of Lavender, Melilot,
Chamomel, of each two handfulls; let them be all cleansed, bruised and boiled
in White-wine-vineger, and Fountain Water, of each three quarts, till half of
it be boiled away.

After bathing anoint the hinder part of the Head with this Oil.

Take of Oil of Rue, Marjoram, of each Oil.
half an ounce; Oil of Amber, Rose-mary and Bricks, of each two drachms; Oil of
Bays, Euphorbium, Castor, of each six drachms; mix them.

For Revulsion, let the soles of the feet be washed with Salt and Acet.
Scillitic. Vesiccatories may also be applied to the Coronal Suture, and behind
the Ears; or upon the Shoulders, Neck, Arms, Thighs, etc.

Avoid all vaporous and phlegmatic Nourishment.

CHAP. VI. Of the Frenzy, and Madness.
THE Frenzy is called in Greek (...), Phrenitis.
and (...), ex (...) men's; quia mentis morbus.

The Frenzy is an inflammation of the Brain and Meninges, both the dura and
pia matter; causing an acute continual Fever, which remains from the first
moment of its invasion, to the last of its duration, thence a delirium, and
raving Madness, together with great trouble of mind, afflicts the sick in a
superlative manner.

Madness is called in Greek (...), a (...), insanio, it is called in Latin
amentia, furor, insania. Mania.


It is a furious alienation of the mind, or a vehement delirium without a
Fever; in which it differs from the Frenzy.

I know there are not wanting the works of great Physicians, who have written
very learnedly of these diseases; but omitting the opinion of others; I shall
in a few words, relate that which seems true to me, to be the cause of these
furious distempers.

None who are ingenious Searchers of Truth; and have weighed accurately (with
an attentive mind) both the fabric and ways, or Vessels of the containing
Body, and the natural motion of the Blood, and other humors; will deny, that
almost innumerable diseases do arise from the vicious effervescency of over fat
Choler, the too tart Pancreat juice, and over viscous Phlegm, flowing together
in the small guts; for by this vitiated mingling not only hurtful humors are
produced, but often wind, and halituous Vapors, causing much harm to humane
Bodies.

Wherefore I judge, when Phlegm is very viscous, or otherwise vicious, and the
juice Cause.
of the Pancreas too tart and harsh; sharp halituous Vapors are thence
produced, elevated from the small guts, because of a vicious effervescency
there raised; and thence continually ascending to the Head; and with the
spirituous Blood, circulate into the Ventricles of the Brain, by which the
Animal spirits are vitiated, and troublesomely moved, and hindered of natural
rest and tranquillity; therefore it is no wonder that the Empty mind of the sick
is thereby disturbed, and at length the sick become distracted and mad.

But if Choler be predominant, these vapors become very choleric and
acrimonious; which rarifies the Blood by degrees more and more; so that at
length the heat and burning Fever in the Heart, (and thence through the whole
Body) is increased by Choler successively overruling, which causes the
Frenzy.

No marvel then if heat, pain, and inflammation, and pulsation of the Head do
chiefly vex the sick in this grievous distemper; seeing no part of the Body
has so many Arteries, and receives so much Blood as the Head; wherefore the
pulsation of the Temples is felt more troublesome than elsewhere, because of
the remarkable windings of the Brain, through which great Arteries are carried;
from whence great watchings, and at length raving Madness do molest the sick.

But there still remains something requisite to be set down, as the chief cause
of these, and most other distempers, which ought not to be despised (either by
Jew or Gentile) seeing we have the word of God for it; and that is the crying
sins of Mankind continually drawing God's Judgments on them.

You may read the 28th. Chapter of Deuteronomie, where the Prophet Moses
enumerates the many diseases, with which God would smite the Children of
Israel, for the wickedness of their doings, whereby they had forsaken him.

And not only they, but we also shall be subject to these grievous distempers,
and eternal destruction also, if we do not turn to the Lord by unfeigned
repentance, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, says our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ in Luke 13. 3. Verse.

Those poor creatures who have been miserably afflicted with these furious
diseases, and happily recovered; can tell by sad experience, that they have
been many times hurried almost to desperation, by the cunning wiles and
temptations of Satan; which has prevailed on many to lay violent hands on
themselves; from which let us pray, libera nos Domine.

1. The Frenzy is a most acute and dangerous Progn.
disease, insomuch that it ends most commonly in seven days; for in that time
it either terminates by the recovery of the sick, or else they go over the
threshold of the other world.

2. If the Phrenetical party has a Crisis either by sweating, bleeding at the
nose, or Haemorrhoids, etc. or a tumor appear behind the Ears, there is hopes
of recovery: but if the sick gnash with his teeth, and his Excrement and Urine
be whitish, and no Crisis appear, it is mortal; so likewise is it very
pernicious, if it turn either to the Lethargy, or Convulsion.

In the Mania or Madness, if the stomach or appetite decay, and the sick be
very fearful, and has continued long, it is most difficult to cure: but if
the party be merrily conceited, it is not so dangerous.

3. If the swelling of the Veins in the Legs, called Varices, or the
Haemorrhoids, or Menses, or any other flux of blood should happen to them that
are mad or frantic, there may be hopes of recovery.

And that we may pass on to the cure of Cure.
these lamentable diseases: let the following Golden precept be speedily
observed.

Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur: Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
For unless speedy help be procured for the Frenzy, it kills the party in a
short time: and likewise Mania or Madness becomes often (by degrees) so stubborn,
and rebellious, that it can be cured only late or never.

Ttherefore the friends of the sick are to be admonished to consult with the
honest Physician, so soon as the signs begin to be manifest; for when it has
taken deep root, it is hard to be eradicated, or overcome, unless by an
Herculean labor.

First therefore let a Clyster be administered.

Take of Mallows, Marshmallows, Violets, Clyster.
Lettice, Beets, Pellitory of the wall, Mercury, Centaury, Water Lillies, of
each one handful. Damask Prunes twenty. Boil them in a quart of Barley-water
till half be consumed, then strain it, and add Electuary Lenitive, Syrup of
Violets, Roses Solutive, of each one ounce; Oil of Violets two ounces; Common
Salt one dram. Mix it for a Clyster.

After the Operation of it, you may open a Vein in the Arm.

But if Menses, or the Haemorrhoids be suppressed, then open the Saphena, in
either Foot; and let the orifice be made pretty large, because thereby sharp
and fatty vapors may more plenteously be effus'd together with the blood:
whereby the troublesome heat will be the better tempered, and not a little
diminisht.

Neither will it suffice to let blood once, but this evacuation is often to be
iterated, till (by the diminisht feverish heat) it appears that the cause is
removed or overcome.

But let Phlebotomy be warily done, where choler abounds, because sanguis est
fraenum Bilis: wherefore I advise the young Practitioner to take away but
little blood at a time, which may be done so often as need requires, either by
an instrument, or leeches to the Haemorrhoids.

Ventoses with scarification, may be applied to the shoulders, also
Vesiccatories to the arms, thighs, and inter scapulas, in extremis morbis,
extrema sunt adhibenda remedia.

Choler over plenteous in the body, may be safely diminisht by a mild
chologogue; for example.

Take of Dandelion, Succory, Sorrel, of Iulep.
each two handfulls; Tamarind-fruit two ounces. Boil them in a quart of
Barley-water till half be consumed; Strain it, and add the waters of Cinnamon,
and Fennel of each one ounce; The best Manna, Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, of
each three ounces; Spirit of Niter twenty drops. Let the sick take often a
draught of this Julep, till the body be made soluble; but if there be a strong
constitution of body, I refer you to those excellent Medicines prescribed in
page 8. 9. of this book, which evacuates choler more powerfully by stool.

But where the Stomach is full and nauseous, let a vomit be administered without
delay; and here I prefer Antimonials before all o-thers, both because they do
most happily empty any humors promiscuously, and because they are most
friendly to humane nature, bringing all the humors by degrees (after a
peculiar manner) to a most laudable state.

And because in this distemper, the sick is always attended with a grievous and
furious raging; let those things be given which will not only promote sleep,
but powerfully temper the sharp choleric humors.

To this end I commend any fixed Mineral, Sulphur of Vitriol or Antimony, which
will temper the Acrimony of choler, and free the blood from such matter perhaps
before all others. But where these choice Medicines are not to be had, Opium
well prepared will conduce beyond any commonly known Medicine; which may be
used both Internally and Externally.

This Cordial Opiat is of great virtue.

Take the Waters of Sorrel, Lettice, Pennyroyal, Opiat.
Fennel, of each two ounces; Cinnamon water, Syrups of red and white Poppies, of
each one ounce; Laudanum ten grains; Tartar vitriolated half a dram; Oil of
Vitriol ten drops; mixit, and give two spoonfulls of it often, whereby the body
may the sooner be reduced to sleep, and the mind to tranquillity.

The following Epitheme, and Linament may be used outwardly to give ease, and
promote sleep.

Take the Waters of Betony, red Roses, of Epitheme.
each two ounces; Vinegars of Roses, and Marygolds, of each half an ounce;
Opium twenty grains. Mix it.

Let Linen clothes be dipped in it being warm, and applied to the Forehead, and
region of the Temples; and as often as the clothes are dry, moisten them with
the same, till pain be diminisht, and sleep follow.

Take Populion half an ounce; Opium dissolved Linament.
in Oil of Poppies half a dram; mix it for a Linament; wherewith anoint each
region of the Temples, and spread some of it on brown Paper and apply it.

Let the diet be very thin and cooling: Avoid hot spices, Wine, and other
strong Liqours, Dieta.
and let the common drink be Barleywater with Syrup of Limmons.

Pigeons cut asunder, and applied to the Soles of the Feet, do many times
avail, by drawing down hot Vapors and Fumes from the Head.

By this you may know how to cure not only Phrensies, but all ravings and
watchings, which are engendered by Fevers; for it will not be very hard from
what is aforesaid, to frame or join such helps as may conduce to the same.

In mania or madness; when Phlegm is over viscous, and the Juice of the
Pancreas too tart and harsh, exceeding, and overruling the other humors in the
Body; whereby sharp halituous Vapors are continually raised, disturbing the
sick both in Body and Mind: Speedy care must be taken to correct and educe the
vitiated humors, to amend and discuss the hurtful flatuous Vapors, and also
to compose the immoderate passions of the mind.

Volatile Salts and Aromatic Oils do not only correct viscous and acid
Phlegm, but sour and tart Vapors also; for they have power to cut and dissolve
that which is viscous, to temper and correct that which is sour and tart, and
to discuss and dissipate what is vaporous and windy.

The following Julep, whose power is singular and stupendous, may be
deservedly preferred before many others.

Take the Waters of Parsley, Fennel, Mint, Iulep.
Pennyroyal, Scurvigrass, of each two ounces; the Waters of Treacle and
Cinnamon, of each half an ounce; Syrups of Fennel, Poppies, and the five opening
Roots, of each one ounce; Laudanum opiat. twenty grains; Spirits of Salt
Armoniack and Niter, of each twenty drops; Oils of Annise-seed and Cloves, of
each ten drops; mix them.

By the frequent use of this Julep or such like; the hurtful humors and
vapors will not only be corrected, and amended; but a new Production of them
will be hindered, and both Body and Mind reduced to a more quiet frame.

These Pills will be also useful to correct more, and mildly educe, or expel
the vicious humors.

Take of Galbanum prepared with Vinegar Purging Pills.
of Squills; Powders of Mastick, Troches Alhandal, Rozin of Scammony, and
Jallop, of each one dram; Powders of Castor, Mirrh and Saffron, of each
twenty grains; Oils of Cloves, Hartshorn, Balsom of Sulphur with Oil of
Anise-seed, Spirit of Salt Armoniack, of each ten drops; beat them all into a
Mass for Pills, of which you may give half a dram at a time, in the Morning
fasting.

It will be convenient to take these Pills twice a week, for the better
vanquishing the rebellious and redoubled humors.

Also let Antimonial vomits (rightly prepared) be sometimes administered, they
being endued with an universal force of cleansing Man's body from all harm and
impurity.

By these forms any judicious Practitioner, may easily invent other
prescriptions in some things to be varied, as the disease requires.

Thus having premised a rational, and dogmatical cure of these grievous
diseases, confirmed by experience; I think it my duty (once for all) to
admonish the honest Physician, and others who attend the sick; to be often
seeking the Lord for a Blessing on the means.

And if all refuge fails, to take the Advice of the Apostle James in the 5th.
Chapter and 14, and 15. verses.

This was the Custom of the Primitive Christians without doubt, and I wish it
were more in use amongst us at this day; for God is as able to heal the sick
now, as he was then, for he is the same yesterday, and to day and for ever.

I thank God, I have had some experience of his great goodness and mercy,
extended toward some of his poor Creatures, by means of this ordinance, when
all other help of medicine, etc. have proved unsuccessfull, for which uni Deo
and trino Gloria.

CHAP. VII. Of CATARRHS.
THE Catarrh is called in Greek (...) a (...), fluo.

It is called in Latin distillatio, because it is a defluxion of
excrementitious and sharp Rheumatick humors from the Head, into most parts of
the Body; invading not only all the conglobated, and conglomerated Glandules;
by which the Circulation of Lympha and Spittle are depraved: But also the
Nerves, which causes intense or vehement pains, and inflammations in the parts
ill affected, which is most commonly attended with a Symptomatical Fever,
especially if the Rheum be thin and sharp, and do flow very violently.

And seeing this distemper is not enough explained in Authors, either ancient
or modern; I therefore (God prospering my endeavors) will bestow some pains in
searching out, and proposing the true causes and effects of it; which I hope
will induce other liberal and ingenious spirited Artists to a farther inquiry
after the occult causes, not only of these, but other obscure diseases daily
occurring in practice; that so by little and little, many things in the Art of
Physic, as yet most obscure and confused, may be illustrated, and most
commodiously explained.

Experience confirms, that there are many kinds of Catarrhs; some are more
thick, others more thin; some acid and salt, others more sweet; some Rheums are
hot and sharp, flowing more violently, other cold and pituitous, flowing but
slowly; hence it is, that some Catarrhs are attended with Fevers, and some
without.

The causes of Catarrhs are either external, Cause.
or internal.

The external cause is from external sudden Cold, shutting the pores of the
skin, hindering the discharge of sweaty Vapors by insensible Transpiration; for
if the usual ports of the skin do deny passage to the sweat, it will in a
little time condense, and thence become sour, by which the extreme parts are
chilled, which does manifest it self by a shivering; as any one may
experimentally observe after taking Cold.

These humors having not vent through the porous skin (which is absolutely
necessary) by the habit of the Body; they are conveyed to the Head (together
with the Lympha) through the Lymphatick Vessels.

The internal cause arises from pituitous humors, gradually collected (besides
Nature) in the conglobated Glandules, observeable about the Plexus Choroides in
the side Ventricles of the Brain, and elsewhere; perhaps in the Tonsils, and
all the rest of the small Glandules about the trachoea Arteria; hence the
Lympha becomes sourish salt, as is tasted in a Coryza.

Whence also we may probably conclude, what way soever the conglobated
Glandules are hurt, that the Lympha declines from its natural State and
Quality: And as its depravation is milder or sharper, more grievous, or lighter
pains are thence bred; of which we have many times an ocular demonstration in
the flowing down of the Rheum through the Nostrils, which is often so sharp, that
it does corrode the skin, and superficies of the face where it comes.

If it be in quantity moderate, it is conveyed to the infinite little
salivary Ducts or Channels, in the conglomerated Glandules, which open into the
palate of the mouth, and there pour out the salival Liquour which they contain;
which is either swallowed down into the Stomach, or else it is evacuated by
spitting; and if Nature be overburthened by its plentifulness, it is also sent
forth by the Nostrils.

But if the Lympha becomes more sharp, acid and salt in the Glandules before
mentioned, it produces first a stoppage, and burdensome Pain of the Head,
which overcomes the retentive, and provokes the expulsive faculties; so that
Nature being driven to most violent motions, does extravasate, and intravasate
the Rheumatick humors, hic and ubique, a Capite ad Calcem, through the most
abstruse and inconspicuous passages of nature; so that it is the opinion of
many learned Physicians, that a Catarrh is the original of many diseases
incident to humane Bodies.

1. Catarrhs happening to Children, are dangerous, especially if there appear
plenty of Progn.
humors, because they abound with moisture, and are full of excrements:
Wherefore if a sudden defluxion happens to any of a tender age, desperate
accidents may follow.

2. If the Rheum flow through the Nostrils, it is but gentle; if to the Throat
it is worse, but if to the Lungs, worst of all; and if it becomes inveterate, it
is very hardly cured.

In the Cure of Catarrhs, the Head is Cure.
chiefly to be taken care of, because the Rheum does continually flow from it;
therefore the Head ought to be corroborated, and the superfluous moisture
thereof to be dried up: And likewise the part or parts (to which the Rheum
flows) must be strengthened; the vicious quality of Lympha, and the other
humors is to be corrected, and their plenty diminisht.

As Catarrhs consist of a different matter, and afflict diverse parts, so they
require diversity of medicines to cure them; for if the matter be thick and
viscous, it must be attenuated and cut with Aromaticks, and afterward evacuated
with Phlegmagogues: So likewise serous and salt Catarrhs are to be tempered
with Oily things and Opiats, and the plenty of humors to be diminisht with
Hydragogues; by which means the cure will be the sooner performed.

For viscous Catarrhs, accompanied with a Cough, I commend these following
medicines.

Take the Waters of Hyssop, Mint, of each Iulep.
three ounces; Cinamon-water, Syrups of Fennel and red Poppies, of each one
ounce and half; Laudanum opiatum six grains; Spirit of Salt Armoniack twenty
drops; mix it, of which you may give three or four spoonfulls, every three
hours.

By the frequent use of this Aromatic Julep, the viscous Phlegm will not only
be attenuated, but the over sharp Vapors will be discust, and the other
humors tempered.

After the Phlegmatic humors, etc. are thus prepared; it will be convenient
to evacuate them downwards, by gentle purgation, with powerful and effectual
Phlegmagogues; and such are all mercurials, Colocynthis, Hermodactils, etc. to
be taken chiefly in the form of Pills.

Take Extract. Rudii, pil. ex duobus, of each one dram; Mercury dulcis half a
dram; Purging Pills.
Oil of Cloves four drops; mix them for three Doses.

If the sick be averse to Pills, give this Potion.

Take of Rhubarb, Agarick, Hermodactils, Polypodium, of each two drachms;
Cinnamon, Purging Potion.
Cloves, of each one dram; Sage, Rosemary, of each one handful; sweet
Fennelseed, Juniper Berries, of each three drachms; bruise them and insuse them
in Hyssop-water very hot, for the space of a Night, then strain it, and
dissolve in it Syrup of Roses solutive, Electuary Diaphaenicon, of each one
ounce; mix it for a Potion.

Every night give the Patient a Pill of Styrax, or Hounds-tongue, to stay the
Rheum, and to give ease and rest.

If the Catarrh be serous and hot, accompanied with a Fever, and the sick have
a costive Body, this Clyster will be effectual.

Take the common decoction for Clysters Clyster.
twelve ounces; Diacatholicon, Electuary of the Juice of Roses, of each six
drachms; Oil of Chamomel two ounces; common Salt one dram; mix it for a
Clyster.

After the operation of it, you may open a Vein in either Arm, and take away
eight or nine ounces of Blood.

Then give this purging decoction.

Take Borage, Lettice, Purslain, Endive, Purging Decoction.
Violets, of each one handful; the four greater coldeeds, of each one dram;
Damask-prunes ten, Anise-seed, sweet Fennelseed, of each two drachms; let them
be bruised, and boiled in eight ounces of the pectoral decoction till half be
consumed; then strain it, and dissolve in it Syrup of Roses solutive, Electuary
of the Juice of Roses, of each half an ounce; Spirit of Niter six drops; mix it
for a Potion.

You may give this Potion twice in a week; which will both temper and gently
evacuate the serous and acid humors; and flatuous Vapors will also thereby be
discust, and gently educ'd.

To cause rest, and thicken the Rheum, let one of these Pills be given every
Night to bed-ward.

Take of Laudanum three grains; Powder Pills opiat.
of Olibanum, Extract of Saffron, of each four grains, with a little pectoral
Syrup, make it into four Pills.

Or you may give a Pill of Styrax every Night going to bed.

When the Rheum flows down from the Head, into the Trachoea arteria, it stirs
up a Coughing more or less, according to the Tussis.
sharpness and plenty of the humors, which are many ways vitiated; wherefore a
Cough may be diversely cured, according to the diversity of its cause.

If the humors be over sour, they may be corrected with Pearl, Coral,
Crabseyes, etc.

If the Rheum be too serous and salt; the aforesaid pil. Estyrace and Cynaglos.
etc. is excellent to temper it.

Becchical Troches, both white and black are not only effectual, but grateful
to the sick in this coughing distemper.

If the humors be thick and viscous, they require sourish sweet things, and
Aromaticks to attenuate and cut them.

The forementioned Julep may be prescribed in this Case.

When the salt, sharp and serous humors abounding, are corrected and tempered;
they may be diminisht by Hydragogues.

The Hydragogue Electuary prescribed in page 18 is an effectual and grateful
medicine, which may be often used to the profit of the sick.

Children may take from one dram to two, and Adults to half an ounce; of this
excellent medicine once or twice a week.

As in other distempers always, so let me here admonish you in general, to be
very diligent to attend to the medicines that most conduce to every particular
Body, whereby they may be preferred before the rest; and as long as they profit,
continue in the use thereof, that so the health of the sick may be every way
promoted.

When much blood is voided by coughing, Sputum Sanguinis.
there is great danger; wherefore we must hasten the more to its cure; left the
opportunity here (if any where urgent) be lost by delay; for the singular
substance of the Lungs is easily infected and corrupted, but difficultly
restored and repaired; wherefore blood carried down from the Head into the
Lungs, and raising a Cough, is to be stopped in its efflux.

To this end let a Vein be opened, especially if a Plethora concur, or there be
a notable heat of Blood, or a suppression of its wonted emptying.

After bleeding, let the over great heat be allayed with sour and tart
medicines; for example take the following Decoction.

Take of Plantane, Housleek, Wood Sorrel, of each two handfulls; boil them in
Barleywater Decoction.
one quart till half of it be boiled away, then strain it, and add Syrup of
Jujubes three ounces; Salt prunella one dram; Spirit of Niter twenty drops;
mix it, and give four spoonfulls every three hours.

The flux of blood may be stopped by conglutinating medicines, which have power
to close the Vessels, either broken by violent coughing, or corroded by the
sharpness of the descending Rheum.

Take the Waters of Comfry, Plantane, of each two ounces; Cinamon-water,
distilled Astringent Julep.
Vinegar, of each one ounce; Syrup of Mirtles, Comfry, of each six drachms;
Powder of Dragons-bloud, red Coral prepared, of each one dram; Laudanum
opiat. six grains; Oil of Sulphur per Campanam twenty drops; mix it, and give
three or four spoonfulls every two hours.

This choice medicine often taken, will cure the most ruptions of vessels, and
will soon stop the flux of blood, beyond expectation; but I advise, that a
sparing use of it should be continued for some time, after the disease is cured
to sense, whereby the affected parts may be strengthened against the access of a
new evil.

The blood distilling into the sharp Artery of the Lungs, will soon corrupt and
turn into purulent matter, if not prevented by convenient medicines, which has
power to dissolve the coagulated blood, that it may be the easier expectorated.

The following form may be preferred.

Take the Waters of Hyssop, Fennel, of Pectoral Iulep.
each two ounces; Cinamon-water, distilled Vinegar, of each half an ounce;
Syrup of Hore-houud one ounce; Powder of Crabseyes, Antimony Diaphoretick, of
each half a dram; mix it, and give two or three spoonfulls every two hours.

If the Lungs be ulcerated, the Cure thereof will be promoted, if you add two
or three drops of Balsam of Sulphur, with Oil of Annise-seed, to every
spoonful that you give of the aforefaid medicine, or in any pectoral
Decoction; it must be given often in a day; the better to finish the Cure.

In all Catarrhs if the Rheum have been long, you may use a Decoction of China,
which will wonderfully temper the humors; or you may add lign. sanctum,
sassaphras, sarsaparilla, etc. which will dry up the Rheum by degrees.

The sharp humors being tempered, and the matter of Rheum partly evacuated by
Phlegmagogues, and Hydragogues, etc. outward means that dry up Rheum are
likewise to be used; as Caps for the Head, Perfumes, Errhines, Sternutatories,
Masticatories, Apophlegmatisms, etc.

Ventoses with Scarification, may be also applied to the Neck and Shoulders;
and Fontinels may be made in the Neck and Arm, for they have been often
profitable in Catarrhs.

Also Vesiccatories applied to the Coronal future, and inter scapulas will
avail much.

Let the Temples and parts adjacent be anointed with Oil of Amber, Oil of
Nutmegs, etc. and let the Fume of Amber or Mastick be often drawn up into the
Nostrils.

Also a Sternutatory (such as is prescribed in page 21. in the Cure of the
Palsy) is very effectual to cause sneezing, twice or thrice in a day.

A Cap may be also quilted for the Head (of the following things) with
Cottonwool and red Sarcenet.

Take of sweet Marjoram, Betony, Baum, For a quilted Cap.
Bazil, Red-rose buds, of each half a handful; the Berries of Myrtle and
Juniper, the Seeds of Peony and white Poppy, of each one dram; Calamus
aromaticus, Nutmegs, Cloves, Frankincense, Mastick, Styrax calamitis, Laudanum,
of each two drachms; let them be all beaten into a gross Powder, for a quilted
Cap.

Also this following Powder may be prepared, to fumigate the Head and Clothes;
morning and evening.

Take of Olibanum, Styrax calamitis, Amber, Powder to fume the Head, etc.
of each two drachms; red Roses, Coriander-seeds prepared, Mastick, Gum of Ivy,
Cloves, Mirtle-berries, white Poppy-seeds, of each one dram; let them be all
beaten into a gross Powder.

Also this Masticatory may be often used.

Take of Mustard Seed, Roots of Pellitory Masticatory.
of Spain, Master-wort, Capers, Mastick, Amber, of each one dram; let them be
all beaten into a gross Powder, and tie up some of it in a Linen-rag, and chew
it in the mouth every day before Dinner and Supper.

Or you may chew either Mastick, Amber, or the Root of Pellitory of Spain by it
self, which will draw the serous humors away by spitting.

Errhines may also be used; they are either moist or dry, the dry are made with
Pepper, Betony, Rosemary, Stavesacre, etc.

The liquid are made with the Juices of Rosemary, Ivy, Beets, Mercury, sweet
Marjoram, etc.

And it may here be noted, that when Rheum does flow down to the Throat, Lungs,
etc. then Errhines may be used; but when the humors flow to the Eyes, Nose,
etc. then use Masticatories, for a Revulsion; Revulsio enim est humoris
fluentis attractio in partem contrariam.

The Spirit of Salt Armoniack, held to Note.
the Nose in a narrow mouthed Glass, does wonderfully conduce above all others,
not only to dissolve the viscous phlegmatic humors, obstructing the
Glandules: But also temperates the acid Saltness of Catarrhs.

Plasters may be also applied to the Head being first shaved, to dry up the
Rheum, and strengthen the Brain.

This may serve for Example.

Take of the Plasters ad Herniam, and Plaster for the Head.
Cephalic, Taccamahac, of each half an ounce; mix it, and spread it on
leather, and apply it to the Head.

Let the Rheumatick live in a warm and dry Air, and use a drying Diet with
moderation in eating, drinking, sleeping, and all other things.

Jejunet, vigilet, sitiat: qui Rheumata curat.

BOOK II.
CHAP. I. Of Shortness of Breathing.
SHortness or Difficulty of Breathing, is called in Greek (...), ex (...)
spiro, vel (...), i. e. afflo calidum ori. Asthma.


It is a disease in which the Bronchia of the Lungs are so stuffed with viscous
Phlegm, that the sick can hardly breathe, but with wheasing, blowing or
puffing, and do make a great noise with snorting; in which the Diaphragma, and
intercostal Muscles are violently moved.

If the Lungs only are stuffed, it is without snorting, and is then called in
Greek (...) aegre, and (...) spiro.

In this the conduits of the Lights are much stopped, causing hardness, or
straitness of breath, and pursiness.

But if the Patient fetches breath with much difficulty, with the Neck
stretched upright; it may then be called (...), ab (...), rectus, and (...),
spiro, i. e. erecta cervice spirare.

The cause of this disease, is the Juice of Cause.
the Pancreas growing more sour by its obstruction, joined to viscous Phlegm in
the small gut, by which it becomes more flatulent; and being stirred up in its
effervescency with Choler, it rises to the Thoracick passage, by the Lacteal
Veins, and so to the Heart and Lungs, and filling the airy conduits thereof,
and sticking there, it causes a breathing with snorting.

The same humor is also carried to the Stomach, which causes many sour
Belchings in this distemper; and if these flatuous humors become more sharp
than viscous; so often as they come to the Lungs, they pierce into the sharp
Artery, and do so provoke and molest it, that thereby the Lungs are compelled
to cough, by which the Expiration of Air is depraved.

If there be much moisture contained in Progn.
the sharp Artery, it will be the easier expelled by the help of coughing, but
if the Trachea Arteria be affected with dryness, then nothing is spit out,
though with great and much labor, but the universal Body is wearied in vain
with endeavoring to cough; whence there is sometimes raised a vehement Pain
both of the Head and Hypochondries, and other parts; yea sometimes a Rupture is
bred by it, and the Urine and Excrements are thereby often involuntarily
extruded.

2. If this disease be not speedily removed, it will prove chronical and hard
to be cured, unless the Patient be young and of a strong constitution, for
otherwise it will end in a Cachexie or Dropsy.

An Asthma, or wheasing Anxiety may Cure..
happily be cured (in the beginning) by an Antimonial vomit, especially in
those who do vomit easily, because the Phlegmatic humors (which are contained
in the sharp Artery, etc.) are thereby immediately brought up; but if vomiting
hurts the sick, the humors may be evacuated downwards by gentle purgation,
with powerful and effectual Phlegmagogues, and Hydragogues, such as is
prescribed in the Chapter of Catarrhs. page 56. 57.

If the Patient has a costive Body, let carminative Clysters be often
administered; and if the Body be plethorick, let a vein be opened, either in the
Foot, or apply Leeches to the Haemorrhoid veins, which will much conduce to
free the respiration.

Such medicines as have an expectorating quality, and have power to temper and
discuss the over sharp vapors, may be often used in a little quantity.

The following Julep may be commended in this case.

Take of the pectoral Decoction half a pint, Pectoral Iulep.
Cinamon-water, Syrups of Hore-hound, Fennel, of each one ounce and half;
Spirits of Salt Armoniack, Niter, of each twenty drops; Laudanum opiatum ten
grains; Oil of Sulphur per Campanam ten drops, mix it.

Quercetanus his Syrup of Tobacco, is commended in this distemper.

Also Tobacco taken in a Pipe, or chewed in the mouth, draws abundance of
viscous Phlegm out of the Stomach and Lungs.

Many more medicines might be inserted, but I refer you to the Chapter of
Catarrhs, where you may be thoroughly furnished.

CHAP. II. Of the Pleurisy, and other Inflammations.
THE Pleurisy is called in Greek (...), ex (...) latus, quod tunicoe costos
succingentis Pleuritis.
lateris dolor.

It is also called in Latin Pleuritis, and Inflammatio; it being an
Inflammation of the Pleura, and also of the intercostal Muscles, and other
adjacent parts, as the mediastinum, pericardium, diaphragma, etc.

It is attended with many Symptoms, as difficulty of breathing, shooting and
pricking pain of the sides, which is the more Signs.
exasperated by coughing, and is common in this distemper; the Patient has
also a continual acute Fever, which is most commonly symptomatical.

The Inflammation of the Lungs is called in Greek (...), ex (...) circum and
(...) Peripnmonia.
pulmo, quod a (...) spiro.

It is also called in Latin Peripneumonia, and Peripneumonicus morbus.

It is not different in the causes or signs from a Pleurisy.

The cause of the Pleurisy, and Peripneumony, Cause
and all other inflammations, is an obstruction of the Capillary vessels, (in
the inflamed part) by glutenous Phlegm, carried together with the blood through
them, and if a Plethora concur, the blood and humors will soon be stagnated,
and become acrid and fervid, which preternaturally distends the vessels, by
which circulation of the Blood is hindered, so that at length the vessels break,
and the Blood is poured into the part affected; which there corrupts and
increases the pain and inflammation, and consequently produces a tumor, whee
the putrid blood and humors, (being ^y degrees corrupted,) are converted into
^urulent matter; for the blood being stagnated, or standing still in any part,
the s^irituous, and more volatile and s^btle parts, that are wont to temper
both the acid and salt parts, do afterward begin to vanish, whence both being
made sharper, do more fiercely rise up one against another, and stir up an hot
Effervescency, because of the Oily parts of the blood present; yea by degrees
do so corrupt the blood, as it turns it into matter, which is different
according to the variousness of the blood corrupted.

1. The sooner the inflammation and Tumor Progn
comes to suppuration, the more easy will be the Cure.

2. If a Pleurisy follow an Inflammation of the Lungs, there may be hopes of
recovery; but if a Peripneumony follow a Pleurisy, or Quinzy, it is dangerous,
and (for the most part) mortal.

3. If much matter be expectorated by coughing, and there still remain
difficulty of breathing, it is an ill sign; so likewise is it, if in coughing
nothing be spit up.

4. If the Pleurisy, or Peripneumony remain above twelve days, an Empiema will
inevitably ensue; for the blood standing still, is by little and little
collected in its vessels, and being peccant in a great excess, it distends them
more and more, till at length they burst; whence there happens an effusion of
blo^d into the Cavity of the Breast, and being there collected, and corrupted
into matter, it constitutes a suppuration called Empien^a. Empiena. Cure.


To ^ure a Pleurisy, and any Inflammation, and Aposteme following, it is
required, that

1. The obstruction of the vessels be opened, that the Circulation of the Blood
stopped, and standing still may be restored.

2. That the Blood effus'd out of its vessels (if possible) may be discussed,
before it turns to matter.

3. That if the Suppuration cannot be hindered, it must be promoted with all
expedition, that the purulent matter collected, might be evacuated.

4. That the cleansing and consolidation of the Ulcer be speedily performed.

An obstruction of the vessels by viscous Cure.
Phlegm, or blood coagulated in them, may be cured by volatile Salts, prepared
not only of several parts of Animals, but also of Scorbutic plants, viz.
Dandelion, Hedge-mustard, Scurvigrass, Garden and Watercresses, etc.

To these may be referred Crab's-eyes, the Jaws of a Pike, the Bone of a
Harts-heart, Mummy, Sperma coeti, Antimony Diaphoretick, Opium prepared, etc.
as also all fixed metallic and mineral Sulphurs.

These volatile medicines have an egregious Power of dissolving all things
coagulated, and conglutinated in Man's body, and of reducing the same to their
wonted fluidity, and do mildly promote sweat; hence it is that often by one
such Diaphoretick given in season, both a Pleurisy, and Piripneumony, and also
Inflammations of other parts have been most happily and safely cured without
Phlebotomy.

But where a Plethora concurs; after a stool has been procured by a
carminative Clyster, let a vein be opened, for thereby the blood standing still
will be restored to its wonted Circulation; for some of the blood being let
out, there will be a larger space made in the veins, for a more brisk and swift
motion of the universal Mass of it.

After a sufficient quantity of blood is taken away, it will be profitable to
give a Sudorifick.

This may serve for example.

Take the pectoral Decoction four ounces; Sudorifick.
the Waters of Hyssop, Fennel, Parsley, Juice of Horse-dung clarified,
distilled Vinegar, of each three ounces; Treacle-water, Cinamonwater, Syrups of
the five opening Roots, and of red and white Poppies, of each one ounce; Powder
of Crab's-eyes, two drachms; Mummy, Sperma coeti, of each half a dram;
Laudanum opiatum ten grains; volatile Salt of Hartshorn half a dram; Spirit
of Salt Armoniack twenty drops; mix it.

Let the sick take often a spoonful of this Julep, which is rich in volatile
Salt, and powerfully corrects the acidity of the blood; by the help whereof the
clottering of it will not only be hindered, but its over thick parts incided,
and by degrees attenuated; and its over thin parts will be discust, and
evacuated together with Sweat or insensible Transpiration: Its over sharp parts
will be also tempered, and the Pain assuaged, and at length wholly taken away;
as also the obstruction it self will be loosened and dissolved; for when the
volatile Salt of the Sudorifick comes to the place of obstruction, it attempts
the matter obstructing be it what it will, and cuts, attenuates, loosens, and
makes it fluid; whence it is farther driven forward together with it more
easily.

The blood is also thereby more and more rarefied, and becomes more fluid, and
moveable; wherefore there needs no farther care for elaborated medicaments, and
Methods.

Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora.

As for Topical medicaments, or external applications, the following are
excellent.

Take the roots of Briony, Smallage, Fennel, Fomentation.
of each four ounces; the tops of Elder, Dwarf-elder, Hedge-mustard, Agrimony,
Wormwood, Mint, Vervain, Flowers of Melilot, Chamomel, of each two handfuls;
Cummin-seed, the Berries of Bays and Juniper, of each two ounces. Let them be
all cleansed, bruised and boiled in two gallons of Rainwater till half of it be
boiled away, then strain it for a Fomentation.

Let the Inflammation or Tumor be well bathed with it, as hot as may be
suffered, either with woollen clothes, or soft spunges, fit to cover the part
affected; after which let it be anointed with the following ointment.

Take Ointments of Marshmallows, Martiatum, Ointment.
of each one ounce; Oils of Dill, Bays, Lillies, Poppies, Henbane, of each half
an ounce; Oils of Amber, Turpentine, Bricks, of each one dram; Camphire two
drachms; mix it. Then let this plaster be spread on leather, or linen cloth,
and applied.

Take Yellow Wax four ounces, Sperma Plaster.
caeti, two ounces; Galbanum prepared with Vinegar, one ounce. Make it into a
plaster according to art.

This egregious Plaster does not only preserve the blood from coagulation in
any part where it is applied; but Milk also from curdling in the Paps. But if
it be not to be had, the following dissolving, and mollifying Cataplasm may be
substituted.

Take of Onions roasted under the ashes two Pultis.
ounces; Dwarf-elder, Hedge-mustard, Vervain, Elder, Chervil, Watercresses, of
each one handful; Powders of Album Graecum, Lupines, a Swallows nest,
Barley-meal, of each one ounce; Butter-milk as much as will make it into a
Pultis.

Apply it meanly warm to the inflamed part, for thereby the internal
obstruction will be the better opened; but it must be renewed as often as it
begins to dry.

When the blood is effus'd into such places, out of which it cannot be well
removed, or discust; suppuration or the generation of matter, must be promoted,
and hastened; which may be done by emollient and ripening Medicines, as the
roots and leaves of Mallows, Marshmallows, white Lillies, Onions, Squills, the
powder of Fenugreek, and Flax-seed, the meal of Barley and Beans, the Marrow of
all bones, and all kind of fats, and almost any Oil that is expressed of seeds,
or kernels; as also diverse sorts of Gums, as Galbanum, Liquid Styrax, Bdellium,
Amoniacum, and also Wax and Turpentine, etc.

Of these you may prepare Cataplasms, Oils, Unguents, Emplasters, etc. Which
Judicious Physicians and Chyrurgions may do as they see occasion.

But when there is much heat in the part inflamed, beware of all unctuous
things, and let your Fomentations and Cataplasms be made with Butter-milk,
which does egregiously temper heat, and hinder St. Anthonie's fire from being
easily joined with the Inflammation.

The generation of matter being promoted, and the Tumor come to suppuration,
let it be opened either with an Instrument or potential Cauterie, in the
softest and lowest part of it; and let the matter be evacuated by little and
little, because otherwise the strength of the sick will not be a little
prostrated, especially when there is much matter contained in the Aposteme;
wherefore let not the Tumor be pressed hard, which is familiar with many
Chyrurgions, but often proves prejudicial to the Patient.

If the Orifice be too small, you may dilate it with a tent made of sponge dipped
in Melilot plaster, and afterward pressed; but it is better to lay it open by
incision, if it may conveniently be done; after which you must forthwith
proceed to cleanse and consolidate the Ulcer; to which end several Medicines
are wont to be applied, all which I neither blame nor carp at.

I have often considered (with admiration) the laudable effect of Balsam of
Sulphur with Balsam Sulphur.
Oil of Turpentine, etc. In this case incredible to many, if a little of it be
mixed with a milder Balsam, and dropped in or applied to the Ulcer; for shortly
after, the generation of new Phlegm is so diminisht, that often by the help of
this one Balsam, I have in a few days perfectly cured notable Apostemes after
Inflammations, bred both in the Breasts and elsewhere.

By this experiment not a little to be esteemed I judge the cleansing and
consolidation of Ulcers following Apostemes, to consist in the correction of
acid and corroding matter, adhering to the Ulcer, and corrupting the blood, (at
least in part that is apt to nourish it) and turning it into new matter; which
may be corrected by the mentioned Balsam of Sulphur which is not only
Aromatical, but abounds with a volatile oily Salt; by which the acid Spirit
(which corrupts the blood into matter) is not only dulled, but so amended,
that the blood flowing to it soon repairs the parts before consumed, and
finisheth the last consolidation.

What farther may be deduced from this experiment, to perfect Physic and
Chyrurgery also in other cures, let both ingenious Physicians, and Chyrurgeons,
weigh and judge.

If a Pleurisy, or Peripneumonie, be (...)
not carefully cured, and Empiema (which is a collection of purulent matter in
the cavity of the Breast) will unavoidably follow.

Wherefore if these Humors cannot be evacuated by expectoration, nor by
sweating, pissing, or purging; the matter may be drawn out by a Compunctio.
Paracenthesis made in the Breast.

The Apertion may be made four or five inches Caution.
from the Sternon; not so near the upper as the lower rib, because under each
rib there is an Intercostal Vein, Artery and Nerve.

I do not approve of the old way of performing this operation, viz. After the
Orifice is made, to put in a Perforated Pipe of Gold, Silver, or Lead, and
there to remain till the matter be all discharged.

There is now a safer and surer way wherein is not only avoided many
difficulties and dangers, but it is also done with less trouble and pain to the
Patient.

The Instrument must be made of Steel, sharp at the point like a Lancet, and
hollow like a quill, with holes in several places toward the point, the better
to evacuate the matter.

When the quantity (which you intend) is discharged, draw out the Instrument,
and put a little pledget of dry lint on the Orifice, and upon it a sticking
plaster; the next day (according to the strength of the sick) repeat it, either
in the first place, or make a new Apertion. Thus you may do every day, till
the matter be all discharged.

By this Instrument may a Hydrocele be also discharged, and likewise the
Dropsy of the Breast and Abdomen.

They that desire more directions in this Operation, may peruse Hieronymus
Fabricius ab aqua pendente, in Libro de Operationibus Chirurgicis.

CHAP. III. Of the consumption or Phthisick, and an Hectic Fever.
THE Consumption is called in Greek (...), ex (...), Tabesco, because in this
disease the sick does consume or waste away.

It is called in Latin Tabes, which is a general Tabes.
name for all Consumptions, whether it be Atrophia, Cachexia, or Phthisis; but
it may most properly be taken for an Extenuation of the whole body, caused by
an Ulcer of the Lungs.

The purulent matter of the Ulcer circulating with the blood, does infect, and
by degrees corrupt the whole mass of it, which makes it unfit for nourishment;
hence it is that all the parts of the body do waste and consume.

The causes are many, sometimes purulent Causes.
matter may be communicated to the Lungs, from the Plurisie or Empiema,
inflaming and corrupting them, which causes an Ulcer.

Sometimes a salt and sharp Rheum flowing down from the Head to the Trachea
Arteria, which does not only cause a vehement Coughing, but does corrode the
Lungs being naturally tender; Hence an Ulcer will be caused.

Also many times Pustules, or Tubercles, are generated in the Lungs, and coming
to suppuration, they break; and the matter flowing to the Bronchia, it may be
spit up, if the Patient have strength; but often times an Ulcer remains, which
causes a Consumption.

These causes depend sometimes on Choler, sometimes on the juice of the
Pancreas, sometimes on Spittle, sometimes on Chyle, sometimes on Lympha any way
Vitiated, by which the mass of blood (in time) becomes also corrupted.

When the Lungs decline from their Natural consistency, they Will soon become
hard and tumorous, and so by degrees they will be corrupted, and ulcerated; and
the matter of the Ulcer corrupting, and making the mass of blood glutinous, in
circulating with it, does so weaken and corrupt all the parts of the body, that
they become unfit to perfect natural nourishment; and therefore of necessity
the universal body must consume and pine away; sometimes it is caused by an
obstruction of the lacteal veins, which hinders the natural passage of the
Chylus.

Authors mention many more causes of Consumptions; as Gonorrhoea, Nocturnal
Pollutions, want of Nourishment, etc.

The signs of a Consumption begun, are a Signs.
great defluxion of Rheum into the sharp Artery, causing a violent Cough, by
which the Lungs are exasperated, and there follows a Hectic Fever, sometimes
putrid, from the purulent matter flowing into the Veins.

To know whether the Lungs be ulcerated, let the Patient spit into water; if it
sinks it is matter, which is an infallible sign of an Ulcer; for Phlegm always
swims in water.

When the Ulcer is confirmed, there is difficult breathing, and wasting of the
whole body; the spittle is thick, and of various colors.

If the Ulcer of the Lungs, and Consumption Progn.
has not been long, and the strength of the sick remains, there may be hopes
of recovery; and e contra.

The Hectic Fever is called in Greek Febris Hectica.
(...), i. e. ab habitu; quod in habitu corporis, vel in partibus solidis
consistat.

It is an unnatural heat which has seized upon the solid parts, and wastes
the moisture of them.

The heat in an Hectic Fever is but little, and therefore rarely troublesome
to the sick, except one or two hours after meat; at which time the heat is a
little sharpened and increased, which may be known by an over frequent though
weak Pulse; but it soon returns again to its former equality.

But here it will not be amiss to show you that there is a threefold moisture
in the body, viz. blood in the Veins and Arteries, a dewy substance in every
part, and also a glutinous moisture; which does not only nourish, but
moistneth it, and keeps the substance of each part together.

In the beginning when the moisture begins Signs.
to fail, the Hectic Fever is not easily discerned because there is still
sufficient moisture to entertain the natural heat; but if (by the long
continuance of the Hectic Fever) the radical moisture of the solid parts
begins to consume, it may then be easily known, for there follows a continual
and lingering leanness of the whole body; which being reduced to its extremity,
may be called in Greek (...), and in English an extenuating Fever.

The Latin Authors call it Marcor, which signifies Corruption or Rottenness.
It is an immoderate dryness, and Consumption of the whole body, by reason of
the defect of the substantial humidity.

There are two degrees of it according to Liber 12. de marc. cap. 4.
Galen, the one is, when this extenuation of the body is in fieri, in
consuming; the other is when it is in facto esse, or consummate; in which the
body is reduced to such leanness, that it seems to be nothing else but a
walking Sceleton.

The causes of an Hectic Fever, are External Causes.
or Internal.

The External causes are all that may occasion any of the other Fevers, for often
times Hectic Fevers are observed to follow other diseases, and especially
Fevers of one day, proceeding from a great error in Diet, and also from
continual, and intermitting Fevers, when they are very vehement; but most
frequently from Inflammations of the Bowels, especially of the Lungs, for when
an Ulcer follows, then the whole mass of blood is infected by matter, and gets
a singular glutinousness; which being communicated to the other humors, spoils
them with the same fault, and renders them unfit to perform the natural
Functions rightly.

Sometimes Hectic Fevers are observed to arise immediately from excess of the
nonnatural things, as most vehement anger, too much watchings, immoderate
sorrow, continued labor, want of food, etc.

The Internal cause is, the over viscousness of the blood and humors, because
of which not only the appetite of all food is diminished, and at length
dejected, but the nourishment of all the parts of the body is daily decreased;
for when there is loathing of food, then fermentation, separation of useful
from unusefull parts, sanguification, generation of the Animal Spirits, etc. is
hindered and destroyed; whence the toughness, and sluggishness of Choler,
Spittle, the juice of the Pancreas, and Lympha, is daily augmented, and the
evil becomes by degrees greater, and at length incurable.

If you perceive that there is so much of Progn.
the radical moisture remaining, as is able to cherish the natural heat, which
you may discern, if the color of the body be fresh, if the figure be decent,
if the proportion of the parts be according to nature, and the sick can (in
some good measure) perform all actions, you may conceive some hopes of recovery.

But if the Body be extenuated, almost like a Sceleton, viz. when the body
seems to be nothing else but Skin and Bone, (as the vulgar proverb is)
acquaint the sick with the danger, least Death seize upon them unprepared.

Nevertheless, if the sick implore your aid of Christian Charity, withdraw not
what comfort you are able to procure unto them.

The Cure of a Consumption, and Hectic Cure.
Fever, will differ not a little, according to the diversity of causes
producing them.

When an Hectic Fever comes with, or succeeds Fevers with or without fits,
then upon their account, the cure may be varied according to the diverse harm of
the humors, differently peccant.

If a Consumption, or Hectic Fever, be caused by purulent matter from an Ulcer
of the Lungs, etc. then you must endeavor to free the blood and humors from
matter, which may be done by any Antimonial medicines rightly prepared, perhaps
before all others; whether they be Diaphoreticks, Purgers, or Vomiters, as
experience does manifest; for it has been observed, (even in a Phthisick, and
an inveterate great Ulcer of the Lungs) to bring away a good quantity of
matter, by Stool and Urine, so that then for many days, no matter was cast
forth by a Cough.

Among common things, all Vulnerary plants are good used in Decoctions. Let
this or one like it, be a form of a Decoction in this case.

Take the Roots of Plantain, Comfry, Round-birthwort, Liquorish, of each two
ounces; Fennel, Scabious, Plantain, of each two handfulls; Figs, Raisons of the
sun stoned, of each four ounces; let them be all cleansed, bruised and boiled
in three quarts of Barley-water till a third part be boiled away; then strain
it, and add Syrups of Hore-hound, and Hyssop, of each two ounces; Laudanum
opiatum ten grains. Mix it. Let the sick drink two ounces of this Decoction often
in a day; and if you add one or two drops of Balsam of Sulphur with Oil of
Annise-seed to every draught, it will be the more effectual. The Balsam
prepared of the truly Sulphurous and inflameable Flowers of Antimony, is most
excellent in this distemper, if it may be had, which may be taken as the Balsam
of Sulphur.

Also those medicines may be used which mildly amend and correct the
viscousness, and glutinousness of all the humors; for which I commend all mild
Aromaticks, and Oily Volatile Salts, as that cut and alter every viscous
humor, and reduce it into its natural state.

Those medicines are to be selected as do most conduce to, and agree with the
constitution of every sick person.

Vitriolated Tartar is an excellent medicine, which will agree with all
constitutions, and may be taken from ten to twenty grains (every other morning)
in a little warm Broth.

Also the following medicine is very effectual.

Take the Powder of Cream of Tartar, Powder.
and Tartar Vitriolated, of each half a dram; Volatile Salt of Hartshorn,
Salt of Amber, of each ten grains. Mix it for two doses, which may be taken in
Chicken Broth, in the morning.

These choice medicines will conduce much to cleanse the blood and humors from
all purulent matter, if there be any hopes of the Patient's recovery.

All Effusions of Blood, Seed and Milk, are to be shunned, except the wonted
emptyings, which are natural and serve the individual.

Let the motions of the Mind be moderate, and the exercise of the Body be
gentle, and let sleep and watchings keep a mediocrity.

Appoint a moistning and nourishing Diet, which is of easy fermentation, as
Broth, and Jellies of young Creatures, and Milk of Goats, Sheep and Cows, and
chiefly of wholesome Women.

A Panado made with the Broth of a Chicken, the Crumbs of White-bread, and the
Yelk of a new laid Egg, may sometimes be given the sick for a change.

Let cooling Herbs be boiled in the Broth, and Jellies; adding other
ingredients that are cooling, moistning and cordial, both to strengthen Nature,
and revive the Spirits.

Let the sick drink Barley-water, made pleasant with some Pectoral Syrup; and
if they have been accustomed to drink Wine, let it be well diluted with water.

As for Fruit, Apples are much commended, especially Pippins, and Permains,
which will much refresh the sick. If the Patient be costive, you may sometimes
administer a Clyster of Milk and the yelk of an Egg.

The worst symptom that can attend these diseases, is a Looseness; if it so
happen, give Goats or Cows milk, wherein steel has been quenched, and Rice
boiled in it, adding a little Powder of Cinnamon, and let the sick eat commonly
of it.

CHAP. IV. Of the Palpitation of the Heart.
THIS Disease is called in Greek (...), and in Latin, palpitatio Cordis, (...),
quod leviter ac frequenter commovet; because there is an over frequent
Pulsation or leaping of Blood in the Heart, etc.

It is a Convulsive motion of the Heart, with a vehement Systole, and Diastole
of it; which sometimes has been so inordinate, that the Pulsation has not
been only seen, but heard at a notable distance; yea sometimes it has been so
great, that the adjacent Ribs in young and tender people (who have been
afflicted with this distemper) has been dislocated, and the Aorta or great
Artery, has been much dilated. See Fernelius lib. 5. cap. 12. page 292.

This depraved motion, or Palpitation of Cause.
the Heart, is for the most part caused from sharp, viscous and flatuous
humors, frequently arising out of the small Guts, and transmitted to the
ventricles of the Heart, and adhereth to them, by which the Heart is provoked
to a vehement and unequal contraction of it self, without intermission.

These humors are moved and driven forward, either by their vicious
effervescency; or else they are stirred up by violent motion or exercise of the
Body, especially in the quick ascending of a steep hill; and sometimes they are
constrained, or urged by grievous Passions of the mind.

Sometimes there have been observed fleshy Tumors, and Cartilaginous
excrescencies in the Substance of the Heart, when dissected; and those poor
Creatures when living were never free from a vehement Palpitation.

Also Worms have been found in the Pericardium, of some that have been
dissected after death; which without doubt caused a depraved motion, or
pulsation of the Heart when living.

That which is caused by fleshy Tumors, Progn.
Cartilaginous excrescencies, Worms, or any other extraneous thing in the
Pericardium, or substance of the Heart, is incurable.

But the Palpitation of the Heart which is caused by acrimonious, flatuous and
viscous humors may be cured.

Those medicines must be administered, Cure.
that cut, and discuss, and temper an acid Acrimony.

The following Julep may serve for an example.

Take the Waters of Parsley, Fennel, of Iulep.
each three ounces; Tincture of Cinnamon, Syrup of Mint, of each two ounces;
Chemical Oil of Mace ten drops; Spirit of Salt Armoniack twenty drops; Laudanum
opiat. ten grains; mix it, let the sick take a spoonful of it every quarter of
an hour, till they get some ease.

If the distemper has persever'd long; the peccant humors must be emptied out
by purging; and to educe them, I prefer before all others, Pills to be made of
Gums, seeing they loosen the glutinous humors, and dispose them to be easier
carried out.

For example.

Take of Galbanum prepared with Vinegar Purging Pills.
half an ounce; Powder of Scammony prepared, Troches Alhandal, of each two
drachms; Oil of Carraway twenty drops; make it into a Mass for Pills.

Take five or six of these Pills in the Morning fasting, twice a week.

They who abhor Pills, may use an Aromatic and purging Decoction.

The following though bitter is very efficacious.

Take the five opening Roots, of each one Purging Decoction.
ounce; Roots of Angelica, Berries of Bay and Juniper, of each half an ounce;
the best Senna, Orange-peel, Carraway-seed, Coloquintida, of each one dram;
Guiacum four ounces; let them be cleansed, bruised and boiled in two quarts of
Fountain Water till half of it be boiled away, then strain it, and add Syrup of
Roses with Senna four ounces, Cinamon-water two ounces; mix it.

Let the sick take four ounces of this bitter Decoction, every other Morning;
which will by degrees diminish, and mildly educe the hurtful humors by
purging.

But seeing not only the cause ought to be removed, but also the Symptoms
asswag'd, by refreshing the Heart; you must administer cordial Medicines which
have power to corroborate the Heart, and to cherish and strengthen nature.

The following Cordial may be preferred in this Case.

Take the Waters of Baum, Mint, Borage, Cordial Iulep.
Cinnamon, of each three ounces; Syrups of Baum, red Poppies, of each two
ounces; Laudanum opiat. Amber-greese, of each ten grains, mix it.

Let the sick take two spoonfulls of this rich Cordial every three hours, which
will wonderfully refresh, and delight the sensible Stomach, from whence the
perfumed impressions will soon be communicated to the whole Body; by which all
the vital and animal Functions will be refreshingly cherished, and strengthened,
and the Palpitation of the Heart eased and abated.

If the Patient has a costive Body, let a carminative Clyster be sometimes
administered, and if a Plethora concur, let a vein be opened, either with an
Instrument in the Arm, or by Leeches applied to the Haemorrhoids.

CHAP. V. Of an universal Languishing, as also of Swouning and Syncope.
AN universal Languishing of the strength of all the parts and functions, is
sometimes observed to remain after some disease preceding, not rightly cured;
especially when the Infirmity has been grievous, for then a weariness or
defect of the Animal motion does usually concur, together with a weak or little
pulse, and dullness and debility of the internal and external senses; whereby
the sick continues weak and more languishing (by certain intervalls) than is
natural.

All the kinds of Swounings, may be divided (for methods sake) into two, viz.
the lighter kind, and the most grievous.

The lighter kind of Swouning or fainting is called in Greek (...), vel (...)
in Latin animae defectio, ex (...) anima, and (...) deficere, because it is an
Imbecility or Feebleness of the Heart and Courage.

The most grievous and singular kind of swouning, is called in Greek (...), ex
(...) Syncope.
concido, to cut away; quod praeceps virium omnium lapsus.

It is also called (...), i. e. pulsus privatio, because there is no pulse;
neither indeed (presently in the fit) is there any Animal or voluntary motion
or respiration to be observed, so that they are more like dead than living
Creatures.

The signs of these fits approaching are Signs.
yawnings, a Cardialgy, Anxiety of Compression of the Heart, griping and
distension of the Belly, tinkling in the Ears, dimness before the Eyes, and a
Giddiness; and at the approach of a Syncope, there are often Convulsive
motions, with a cold and glutinous sweat, and paleness of all the parts of the
Body.

The causes of these distempers are either Causes.
external, or internal.

The external are many, as extreme weariness of the Body, exceeding passions of
the mind, prolonged hunger or thirst, ungrateful smells, the sight of any
Person or thing that is envied, too great effusion of Blood, Seed or Milk, over
great evacuation of the humors, by Vomit, Stool, Sweat, Urine, etc.

It may also be caused by the biting or stinging of any venomous Creature, and
by any other vehement pain.

Sometimes it is produced by a great heat, either of the Sun, Fire, Bath or
Fever.

Any of these Causes mentioned (being extreme) may so change, and diminish the
natural effervescency, and rarefaction of the blood, that the Heart it self is
not thereby enough expanded, and contracted: So that the vital blood cannot be
sufficiently effus'd into the Arteries; and therefore the Pulse is felt less
and more languishing, yea sometimes none.

The internal Cause is glutinousness increased in the blood, and the other
humors; and sometimes an increased Acidity in the Juice of the Pancreas,
Lympha and Spittle; by which the Circulation of the Blood and Humors becomes
too slow; hence the Ventricles of the Heart are not enough dilated, which
causes the Pulse to be weaker than is natural, for the effervescency of the
blood and humors being not potent enough, cannot provoke the Heart to contract
it self, and therefore a Swouning or Syncope will inevitably ensue.

They who are much subject to a Swouning Progn.
or Syncope, dye suddenly.

Those fits which are produced from some evident cause, as vehement passions of
the mind, immoderate evacuations, etc. are less dangerous than those which come
from an internal cause, as glutinousness of the blood and humors, etc. Which
in a great measure hinders its free Circulation through the Ventricles of the
Heart, whereby there is a sudden and swift sailing of the vital Spirits, and
consequently of all strength.

To cure an universal languishing, as also a Cure.
Swouning and Syncope; the phlegmatic, glutinous, and acid Humors must not
only be corrected, but when they abound, must be diminished and educ'd out of
the Body.

Therefore to correct and amend the said humors abounding, both in the
universal Body, and Blood; I will here set down some forms of select medicines,
for the sake of young Physicians.

The following Decoction, is an efficacious Medicine.

Take the Roots of Elicampane, Galangal, Decoction.
Angelica, Calamus Aromaticus, the sive opening Roots, of each one ounce; Sage,
Baum, Betony, sweet Marjoram, the Tops of Hore-hound, Centaury, Wormwood, the
Flowers of Rosemary, Staechas, Chamomel, Clove-gilliflowers, of each one
handful; the Seeds of Anise, Sweet-fennel, Parsley, Cardamoms, Berries of Bays
and Juniper, of each two drachms; Orange-peel, Cinnamon, of each half an ounce;
Nutmegs one dram; let them be cleansed, bruised and infused in two quarts of
Fountain Water for a night; then boil it gently till a third part be consumed;
strain it, and add Syrup of Mugwort, Staechas, tincture of Cinnamon, of each two
ounces; mix all together.

Two or three ounces of this Decoction may be taken at any time, twice in a
day, either before or after meat, that so the power of the medicine may mildly
mix and incorporate it self, not only with the food, but with Spittle in the
Stomach, and also with the threefold humor flowing together in the small Guts;
and thence with the universal blood and humors in all the Veins and Arteries;
whereby the desired amendment, and correcting of them will be performed,
sooner, easier and more happily.

If any like a medicinal Wine better, they may infuse the aforesaid Ingredients
in a sufficient quantity of White Wind, and drink it daily both at dinner and
supper time.

These choice Medicines may be continued for some time; but when the sick is
weary of them, you may use the same Ingredients in the form of a Powder, or
Electuary, or make them into Troches, with Syrup of Staechas, Mugwort, etc.

Or you may make use of those compound Powders which are to be sold at the
shops, viz. Spec. Diambr. Diagalangae, Dianthos, etc. all or either of which
may be used as aforesaid.

If any will be better pleased with Pills than other Forms, you may prescribe
these, or some like them.

Take of Galbanum prepared with Vinegar Purging Pills.
two scruples; Powder of Amber, Mastick, of each one scruple; Frankincense,
Mirrh, Castor, of each ten grains; Vitriol of Mars prepared to whiteness, half
a dram; Chemical Oil of Mace, eight drops; beat them into a mass for Pills.

Let the Patient take four or five of there Pills in the morning fasting, or at
night an hour after supper; whereby the viscous phlegmatic and acid humors
will be potently corrected, and tempered; which being done, the peccant humors
may be effectually educ'd with these hydragogue Pills.

Take Gum, Sagapenum prepared with Vinegar Purging Pills.
half a dram, Rosin of Jallap, Gambogia, of each one scruple; Oil of Juniper
four drops; mix them into Pills.

Four or five of these Pills may be administered at a time; or more or sewer, as
the sick is more difficult or easy to be purged.

When a swouning Fit or Syncope is near approaching, give those things that
will powerfully concentrate the sour flatuous vapors, and discuss the
glutinous Phlegm.

The following Volatile, and Aromatic Cordial will conduce much to this
purpose.

Take the Waters of Mint, Fennel, Betony, Cordial Iulep.
Scurvigrass, Cinnamon, of each one ounce; Syrups of Borage, Mint, of each six
drachms; Tincture of Castor, Confection of Alkermes, of each two drachms; Salt
of Amber one dram; Spirit of Salt Armoniack twenty drops; Laudanum opiat.
Amber-greese, of each six grains; mix it.

The sick may take two or three spoonfulls of this Cordial in time of the fit,
and likewise both before and after, which will much repair both the Vital and
Animal strength, which is wont not a little to languish in these fits.

None but they who have tried, will be easily persuaded of the wonderful
efficacy of the aforesaid medicines; not only in preventing, but in
diminishing and soon curing Swounings and the Syncope.

When either of these fits urges, or is upon the party, you must use those
outward things, which may stir up the external senses; as frictions of the
external parts, shoutings in the Ears; also make a smoke with Amber, or
Partridg Feathers at the nose, or hold the Spirit of Salt Armoniack, (in a
narrow mouthed glass) to the Nostrils. You may also wring the Fingers, and pull
the Hair, etc.

If you have not a Cordial ready, give Cinnamon, or Treacle water, or the
Apoplectick or Antepileptick waters, or for want of them, Brandy, Aqua vitae or
strong Wine may serve.

CHAP VI. Of Fevers in General.
A Fever is called in Greek (...), vel a feritate morbi, that is from the
fierceness of the disease.

It is called febris in latin a fervore, quasi fervens, because it is a hot
distemper.

A Fever is a nonnatural heat, which may be so termed, because it is more than
nature requires, for the continual management of her vital functions; for when
nature is grieved, or over-burthned by any distemper, there is a struggling
endeavor of nature her self to remove it, which causes this nonnatural heat.

It may be called the Prince of diseases, because it is the general door,
through which most of humane mortals take their exit of this world.

The cause of the preternatural frequency of the pulse, is either a permanent
and over rarefaction of the blood, or any sharp, sour, or salt vapor carried
to the Heart, corroding the internal substance of it; by which the Archaeus or
vital Airy spirit of the Heart is provoked to allarm all the faculties, and
powers both vital and natural, that it may the more courageously resist its
invading Enemy, so that the spirits are thereby much stirred up and inflamed;
from whence proceeds a Conflagration, or vicious Effervescency of the Blood
and Humors throughout the whole Body.

Fevers are either continual, or intermitting.

A continual Fever is that which remains from the first moment of its invasion,
to the last of its duration.

When a continual Fever is very mild, and remains but one day; it is called in
Greek (...), ex (...) dies, quod diem durans.

It is called in Latin Diaria, and Ephemera febris.

This Fever is often excited by sudden passions of the mind, as vehement anger,
etc. and also by our abode too long in the Sun, or by vitiously using any other
of the six nonnatural things so called; for which there is no great need to
prescribe Medicines for a Cure, it being not difficult, the very nature of such
a Fever terminating it self, most commonly by a breathing sweat, especially if
you substract the Patient from the inflammatory Cause.

If the Fever continues longer, it may be called in Greek (...), ex (...),
continuo. From whence it is called in Latin febris continua, quae nullas
hujusmodi mutationes habet, quae accessiones videri possint, sed unicam modo
accessionem a principio usque ad finem nullis exacerbationibus distinctam.

The continual Fever is also called Homotona, quae fimilem calorem ad finem
usque servat.

It is also called Acmastica, quae continuo crescit and intenditur.

A Synochus, or continual Fever, may be divided into two sorts, viz. that which
is not Difference.
putrid, called in Latin Synochus non putrida, and that which is putrid, called
Synochus putrida.

In a Synochus non putrida, the blood, and other humors is a little sharper
than is natural, and the heat somewhat great and vaporous, declining a little
to the nature and manner of those called putrid.

Continual Fevers are often times mixed or compounded with those intermitting,
having some fits, and again remissions, so that they are not intermitting, but
still remain continual.

These fits come sometimes every day, sometimes the third, and sometimes the
fourth day; whence it may deservedly be named, either a Quotidian, Tertian, or
Quartan continual Fever.

These Fevers upon the account of their diverse causes, may not unfitly be
distinguished into Choleric and Lymphatick Fevers.

And because under the general name of Lympha, we do not only comprehend, that
Lympha which goes from the conglobated Glandules, and other parts to the Heart;
but also the Juice of the Pancreas, and Spittle it self, proceeding from the
conglomerated Glandules, and also the Liquour that arises from the threefold
sway of the Guts, all mixed together with Lympha, and the blood in circulating
with it.

Hence may Lymphatick fevers be subdivided into glandular, pancreatick and
salivary Fevers.

All these Fevers may differ something according to the diverse Constitution of
other humors together being in the Body.

But I shall wave the nice descriptions and differences of Fevers, and let the
dextrous, and judicious Physician put a difference between them, as their
Symptoms shall direct and indicate, for though there are many sorts of
continual Fevers not putrid, yet the Cure is almost the same in all; I shall
therefore (in a few words) mention some of their differences, taken from the
more grievous Symptoms often accompanying them; after the example of famous
Practioners, and chiefly great Platerus, and the most famous Helmont, and
judicious Sylvius, etc.

1. First, let us take notice of the exceeding heat, and most urgent burning,
which Symptoms.
attend some Fevers.

It is called in Greek (...), which does signify Causes.
burning; in which the sick is very dry and thirsty, which is hard to be
quenched.

This heat is not of the essense of the disease, but proceeds from the
inflamed spirits, as is before mentioned in page 98.

Neither does the great thirst in Fevers, proceed from heat and dryness, as in
a true and natural thirst, but from some excrementitious matter, which adhereth
to the sensitive faculty of the internal membrane of the Stomach, which is
common to the Throat, Mouth and Lips, as that famous Physician, and ingenious
Anatomist Doctor Alexander Read, did well observe; which is also the cause,
that those parts are always afflicted in this dry and thirsty distemper.

In this Symptom, Choler is peccant, not only in a salt Acrimony, but also an
inflamable oiliness; hence the Pulse is very great, and over frequent, etc.

2. Raving may be often observed in many Fevers, which is grievous to the sick
for some time, chiefly when the Fever is malign, or epidemical.

The cause of this is Choler peccant as aforesaid, which so diminishes the
viscousness of the Juice of the Pancreas, that it causes a vicious
Effervescency with it, and being made sharper, it produces a humor not much
unlike black Choler, which causes the Headache, and Watchings, and hence
Ravings, and at length sometimes Convulsions, and Death it self.

There are many more Symptoms belonging to continual or synochal Fevers.

1. As first, a speedy wasting of several parts of the body, caused by Choler,
the Cure whereof may be referred to the Cure of a Hectic Fever.

2. A malignity, which suddenly dejecteth the vital strength, without manifest
cause; which for the most part is Epidemical. But of this I intend to treat
particularly in Chap. 8. of this Book.

3. The last Symptom which I shall here mention, is seldom observed; in which
(all the time of the disease) the external parts are cold, while the internal
parts burn; and therefore it is called by the Latins Lipyria febris, and in
Greek (...), quia destituitur Lipiria febris.
ardore externo.

Some think this distemper consists of a double Fever, Choleric, and
Pancreatical; and not without reason, because such like vapors may be
continually raised in the small guts, by the Juices of the Pancreas universally
over-sour; which may be confused only with the Mass of Blood, and breed a
sense of cold in the habit of the Body, whilst a burning heat is stirred up in
the internal parts by a Fever, caused by Choler more oily than sharp.

The cause of every continual Fever not Cause.
putrid, is sometimes Choler vitiated, sometimes Lympha together with the Juice
of the Pancreas and Spittle, and many times all these together are ill affected.

These vitiated humors flowing always to the Heart, cause a continual
Effervescency in the right Ventricle of it; whence the Pulse is continually
produced more frequent against nature.

Fevers in Children are caused either by the Food abounding in quantity, or by
some vicious quality of it, or from an ill disposition of the digestive ferment.

Milk is the general Food of Children, and there is such a propensity in its
own nature to curdle, that if it be not quickly digested, it obeys the acid
Ferment of the Stomach, and is soon coagulated like new tough Cheese, and if it
be not speedily vomited up, it begets a putrefactive Ferment, which produces
terrible Symptoms, as griping, scouring, vomiting, etc.

I know a Woman, that had a young Child Hystory.
about a Month old, which was taken very ill with Convulsions, after which
followed a thorough Thrush, with a Fever, accompanied with the aforesaid
Symptoms, as griping, etc. which continued many days, till the whole body was
so maciated, that it was in a total Atrophia; and when there was no hopes of
recovery, the Nurse gave the Child a little of the infusion of the Antimonial
Cup, which caused it to vomit up a Curd, three or four inches long, very green,
and as tough as new Cheese: After which the Child did wonderfully recover and
grow fat.

Continual acute Fevers are often times accompanied Progn.
with a secret malignity, and therefore dangerous; parvoe febres quandoque
valde malignoe.

The Stomach (in continual Fevers) is Pars affecta.
most commonly primarily affected through undigestion, or else from Excrements,
not being separated and orderly evacuated; which causes an irregular Ferment,
or nonnatural heat in the Stomach; which (though begun else where) is much
aggravated by vitiating Juices, found in this first Elaboratory of decocting
Nature.

For as in humane frame, the first heat of Nature (preparatory to all her
depending motions) is the digestive heat for Chylification in the Stomach; so
likewise the corrupting or exasperating of the same, either by the sour
Ferments, or too much of the overflowing Gall, is the Cause of most Fevers.

Therefore in the beginning of the Cure, Cure.
evacuation by vomiting never ought to be neglected by the careful Physician
(provided it be duly timed) because then most commonly it removes the sole
cause of the feverish Intemperature, without the help of any other means.

And here I commend Antimonials well prepared, before all others, seeing that
Antimony as well rightly prepared, as administered, serves no less to purify
Man's body than Gold.

But if the Patient's body be costive, and there be eminent signs of a
Plethora, or great fullness of Blood; then let a carminative Clyster be first
administered, and after its operation let a Vein be opened, and draw seven or
eight ounces of blood at a time, and if there be occasion let it be reiterated;
for I always prefer its repeated less diminution, (as need requires) sometimes
instituted in the same day, before great evacuations made suddenly, which has
brought many Evils to the sick.

It matters little what vein be opened, unless in Women, because of the monthly
Terms either at hand, or hindered.

And seeing it is the duty of every honest Physician to be Natures helper, he
ought to endeavor to remove all impediments, whereby the sick may be cured
more quickly, safely and pleasantly, without demurs, to magnify the Cure, and
inflame the reckonings.

Wherefore since the first curative intention of most Fevers, is the discharge
of the first turgent Monitor from the Stomach, and adjacent parts by vomiting,
as is before said.

Let the Patient (upon the discovery of the assaulting Enemy) take an
Antimonial Emetick, and if one does not suffice, let it be reiterated; by which
the Morbifick matter will be evacuated, nature calmed, and the contemperating
of the incited, or enraged nonnatural heat, will be the easier performed.

But here the Sex is to be considered, the Female not so well enduring this
evacuation; Cautio.
because Emeticks cause great Commotions, and flatuous Vapors in them; which
may also prevent or corrupt natures own intentions in her great discharge of
turgent humors.

Wherefore administer no Emetick to them, except they vomit very easily; but
rather let the peccant humors be diminisht, or emptied out gradually by the
following decoction to be taken twice a day to three or four ounces.

Take the Roots of Parsley, Fennel, Plantain, Purging Decoction.
Peony, Dandelion, Succory, of each two ounces; the Leaves of Endive,
Houseleek, Fumitory, Damask-roses, of each one handful. Let them be cleansed,
bruised and infused (for a Night) in one quart of Fountain Water very hot, then
boil it gently till a third part be consumed, strain it and add Syrup of
Succory with Rhubarb, the best Manna, of each two ounces; Powder of Cream of
Tartar, and Tartar vitriolated, of each two drachms; Oil of Sulphur twenty
drops; mix it all together.

This pleasant Medicine will conduce much to correct the salt sharpness of
Choler, and will also amend its Oily inflameableness, and separate it from the
Blood, and mildly dispose it, and the rest of the abounding humors to be
voided out by stool.

After these Evacuations, give the sick the following Medicine twice a day in a
little thin broth, or Water Gruel.

Take Salt of Amber, volatile Salt of Hartshorn, Volatile Powder.
Tartar vitriolated, of each six grains; mix it.

This excellent volatile Medicine is both abstersive, and Diuretic, and will
cleanse the Stomach and Intestines of the remaining Sordes, and expel them by
Urine.

In the Declination of the Fever, if sleep be wanting; this following Julep
will much avail, both to cause rest, and refresh the spirits.

Take the Waters of Carduus benedict. Fennel, Cordial Iulep.
of each two ounces; Treacle-water, Syrup of red Poppies, of each one ounce;
Laudanum opiatum six grains; Salt of Wormwood half a dram; Spirit of Salt
twenty drops; mix it, and give the sick three or four spoonfulls every three
hours.

By the frequent use of this Cordial Julep, (or one like it) all pains will be
eased, nature quieted and relieved, and the importunate thirst allayed.

But if thirst still urges, give the dulcified Spirit of Salt, or of Niter, in
Posset Drink, and all the Liquids they take, from six, to ten or twelve drops
at a time.

If you fear there be any Malignancy in the Fever; give the sick eight or ten
grains of Bezoardic. mineral. every fourth hour, in a spoonful or two of the
aforesaid Julep, or good sound Canary-wine, to keep the Patient in a breathing
sweat.

As for the Cure of Fevers attended with grievous and furious raging, and
watchings, etc. I refer you to the Chapter of Phrensies, which is full to this
purpose.

I shall now give some directions to young Physicians and Nurses, and so
conclude this Chapter of Fevers in general.

1. First, give no Opiats in the beginning of a Fever, because they tie up the
Archaeus of the Stomach, and first passages, thereby hindering it from
expelling, the occasional cause of the Disease.

2. Give the sick neither Mithridate, nor Diascordium (as is the common
custom) nor apply it to the Wrists, nor Stomach, (nor any thing else that is
nauseous) whilst Nature and the Disease are struggling; but if the Patient tends
to coldness, you may moisten a piece of Rose-cake, or a tossed of stale Bread in
Sylvius's Spirit, or for want thereof in Brandy dulcified, and apply it to the
Stomach twice a day, which will revive nature, and fortify it against the
invading Enemy.

3. Give no meat whilst the disease is on them, for the Stomach is not fit to
receive it, neither has it strength to digest it; and therefore it will become
a recruit or supply to the Disease, except it be speedily vomited up again.

4. If it be a Child, give it not any Milk, and if it Suck, wean it; for Milk
is the first matter, and foundation of this disease in them; neither give it
Beer, nor water, nor any cooling things to correct the heat, because it will
weaken nature, and strengthen the Disease.

But hot Posset Drink turned with Whitewine, or sound Beer with a little
Vinegar, may be drank liberally, after the Cause is removed.

5. If the sick be Adult, you may give two parts of Water, and one of good
Wine, either French Wine or Sherry; but Malaga, or any other sweet Wine is not
so good.

6. When the Patient begins to recover, the plainest broths, and gruels, are
the best; till then a little is too much; and if you did use Salt and Vinegar,
instead of Spice and Sugar, it would agree better with them.

CHAP. VII. Of intermitting Fevers.
AN intermitting Fever is that which returns after intervalls, sometimes
longer, sometimes shorter in diverse Fits; whence according to the diverse space
of every access or fit; the same gets also diverse Names, for if a new Fit
return daily, answering the precedent in proportion, it is called a Quotidian.

If it comes every other day, it is called a Tertian.

If the fit return after two days intermission, it is called a Quartan, and so
forward, although Quintans, Sextans, etc. are seldom observed.

And here you may note, that intermitting Fevers do but seldom return in the
exact Observation.
intervall of natural days of twenty four hours; but return quicker or slower,
for the most part; wherefore then they are said to anticipate the expected time
for some hours, which is disliked, or to come later, which is commended by some.

Although it matters not, whether the fits anticipate, or come later; if so be
that their continuance, and the grievousness of Symptoms (daily accompanying)
be diminished.

There is great diversity among Authors concerning the Causes of intermitting
Fevers, which I shall not insist on; but in a few words will set down the true
Causes of them.

The causes then, are either external, or Causes.
internal.

The external Cause of Agues is a stop of the usual necessary discharge of
fermenting humors; the porous skin (being shut by external sudden cold) denies
passage to the constant discharge of the sweatty humors, which happens most
commonly about Autumn; and likewise when any comes suddenly out of a hot
Climate, into a cold Region; for the sweatty Vapors being detained by the
Constipation of the skin, or shutting of the Pores, the same condense, and
thence become sour, which chills the external parts, and causes the shaking,
or shivering cold fit, at the first invasion of this disturbing Foreigner;
after which the inflaming Ferment of Choler (being exasperated) does act its
part, and (having gained Dominion) it does rarefie the Blood by degrees; whence
the Pulse becomes greater and stronger) which is increased by an irritation of
the Acrimony of Choler, and the rarefaction of the Blood at the Heart; for the
heat and burning in the Heart, and thence in the whole Body, is increased by
Choler successively overruling.

The internal Cause of Agues or intermitting Fevers, is an obstruction of one
or more of the lateral ducts or branches of the Pancreas or Sweetbread, by
reason of viscous Phlegm; which being separated from the Blood by the Glandules
of the Pancreas, is there collected by degrees; whence it is sent (in too large
a quantity) to the main duct or pipe thereof, which detaineth the Juice of the
Pancreas contrary to nature, which ought continually to flow into the small Gut
called Duodenum.

The Juice of the Pancreas, which is naturally sourish, being compelled to
stand still in its passage, quickly grows more acrimonious, or acid; because
the Volatile Spirit (which is naturally conjoined to it, to temper it) does
gradually fly away; by which this Juice (becoming more sharp and acid) acquires
a putrefactive Ferment; whence at length it makes way through the obstructing
Phlegm, and is effused into the Duodenum, where meeting with Choler, it stirs
up a vicious effervescency, or preternatural Ferment, from whence comes the
Ague fit, with all its Symptoms; as in the beginning Horror, Chilness, Cold,
Shaking, etc. then presently follows Reachings, Yawning, and Vomiting, etc.

At length acrimonious and flatulent Vapors (raised by the aforesaid vicious
Effervescency) are carried through the Lacteal veins, and Thoracick passage,
and so through the Vena cava ascendens, (in what form soever) to the right
Ventricle of the Heart; and by its Acrimony, alters and troubles the vital
Effervescency, and by over stirring the Heart, causes a more frequent Pulse;
and many times produces grievous Symptoms, as great Heat and Thirst,
difficulty of breathing, Heart-ach, Raving, Swouning, and all other Symptoms,
that happen in all intermitting Fevers.

The nature of viscous Phlegm is such, The cause of the Return of the fit.
that though it be pierced through by the Juice of the Pancreas too acid and
acrimonious, yet it does presently run together and unite again, and so repairs
and renues the obstruction that was in part opened; and the Juice of the
Pancreas being stopped as before, grows sour by standing still as aforesaid, so
that it forces through the Phlegm that stopped its natural passage, and so
produces, a new fit; sooner or later, as the Phlegm (obstructing the lateral
passage of the Pancreas) is pierced through by the forementioned Juice.

For if the obstructing Phlegm be not very glutinous, and the Juice of the
Pancreas be plentiful and acid, a new fit of an intermitting Fever will return
in the space of twenty four hours, and therefore it is called a Quotidian
Quotidian.


But if the Phlegm be very viscous and plentiful, and the Juice of the
Pancreas be little in quantity, and also tart and obtuse; so much the slower
will the new fit of the intermitting Fever be produced; so that it is sometimes
three, sometimes four days, before the returning of the fit; from whence it is
called a Quartan, or Quintan, etc.

So likewise as often as the obstructing Phlegm, and the Juice of the Pancreas
are in a medium, viz. The Phlegm more glutinous and plentiful, than in the
Quotidian, but not so much as the Quartan; as likewise the Juice of the
Pancreas is more in quantity, and more acid than in the Qutartan, but not so
plentiful and acid, as in a Quotidian) so often new fits of intermitting Fevers
will return almost every other day, from whence they may be called Tertians,
which much differ in their Symptoms beyond what other intermitting Fevers do,
although none of them return in the exact intervall of the Days or Hours before
mentioned, but return quicker or slower for the most part.

The Cure of all intermitting Fevers will Cure.
be performed.

1. First, if the glutinous coagulated Phlegm, (which is the cause of the
obstruction) be cut and dissolved, and wholly carried out of the Body.

2. If the increased Acidity, and Acrimony of the Juice of the Pancreas, be
tempered and corrected.

3. If its vicious Effervescency with Choler, etc. In the small Gut, behindred
and amended.

Phlegm obstructing will be cut most commodiously with Aromaticks, and any
Volatile Salt.

This Volatile Aromatic Julep may serve for Example.

Take the Waters of Carduus, Parsley, Fennel, Fumitery, Succory, Treacle,
Cinnamon, Cordial Iulep.
of each one ounce; Syrup of Carduus, the five opening Roots, of each an ounce
and half; Powder of Crab's-eyes, Tartar vitriolated, of each one dram; Salt of
Amber, Antimony Diaphoretick, of each half a dram; Laudanum opiat. ten
grains; Oil of Cloves six drops; mix it.

Take a spoonful of this Volatile Medicine, often in a day throughout the
whole Cure, using some exercise, that thereby the whole Body may grow warm, and
the force of the medicine being dispersed over all the Body, may come at last to
the lateral passages of the Pancreas, and dissolve the obstruction.

Three or four hours before the coming of the fit, you may give three or four
spoonfulls of the aforesaid Cordial, which will not only cause a breathing
sweat, but will temper and correct the increased Acidity and Acrimony of the
Juice of the Pancreas, and hinder, and amend its vicious Effervescency with
Choler, etc. in the small gut, which will conduce much to a Cure.

Three hours before the return of the next fit, administer an antimonial
Emetick, which is in this case proper before all others; for by the help
thereof, not only Choler abounding, but also phlegm obstructing, will be
expelled to the small gut, and thence to the Stomach, and at length by the
mouth; and the straining to vomit does many times procure a stool or two, which
is very beneficial.

But if the sick be a Female, or vomiting be prejudicial, or not approved of;
then such things as cut and purge phlegm downwards, may be administered, for
example.

Take of pil. faetidae one dram; Mercur. Purging Pills.
dulcis, Powders of Troches Alhandal, Scammony prepared, Tartar vitriolated, of
each half a Scruple, Salts of Amber and Wormwood, of each one Scruple; Spirit
of Salt Armoniack, Oil of Amber, of each ten drops, with Syrup of Buckthorn;
make it into a Mass for Pills.

Take four or five of these Pills, four hours before the coming of the fit;
which will both cut, and purge the viscous Phlegm out of the Body, and also
educe other peccant humors.

After purging or vomiting, let the sick often take the following Powder in a
glass of generous Wine, or in two or three spoonfulls of the Cordial
Diaphoretick before mentioned, to provoke sweat as is there directed.

Take Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, Salts of Powder.
Amber, Wormwood and Carduus, Tartar vitriolated, of each ten grains; Sugar of
Pearls the weight of them all, mix them for two doses.

You may take a dose of it two or three hours before the access of the fit;
which will wonderfully conduce to dissolve the obstruction, and cause a
breathing sweat.

Let these evacuations be as often reiterated as occasion requires.

If the intermitting Fever has continued long, or the sick has a Plethorick
body, let a vein be opened.

By these few forms the young Practitioner may easily invent other effectual
Medicines, in some things to be varied as the distemper requires.

CHAP. VIII. Of Malignant Fevers.
IN the Chapter of Fevers in general I told you, that Synochal, or continual
Fevers, were without any fit, to their last and complete ceasing; and likewise
I did distinguish them into putrid, and not putrid.

Those that are not putrid, have little or no malignity in them, but the putrid
are always accompanied with malignity.

A malignant Fever differs from others in Difference.
this, that it draws its putrefaction immediately from its own matter,
putrefaction being joined with it; from whence the vital strength is suddenly,
and unexpectedly dejected; or far more grievous Symptoms occur, than are wont
to be observed in such a like disease.

Malign Fevers are either more acute, ending in few days; or longer, continuing
more days.

And they are either contagious, and epidemical raging among many in the same
time, having a common cause, as the Air or Food vitiated, etc. Infecting
others, or else they are not contagious.

Among contagious Fevers, we may not Calenture.
neglect to speak something of a Calenture, because it is a contagious
distemper, assaulting not only those which use the Sea; but also many that
live near the Seashore, in Seaport Towns, etc. are subject to it.

The signs of this disease are a great pain Signs.
of the Head, sometimes with violent raging fits, and delirium, the rest of the
Body being in good temper; the sick do fancy the Water to be a green Meadow,
and will endeavor to get into it.

The cause of a Calenture is the intemperature of the Climate, together with
ill diet, causing strong obstructions, and an ill habit of body, by which
flatuous vapors are increased in the body, and in time ascend to the Head.

The cause of the malignity (in this, and all other putrid fevers) is a sharp
volatile salt Cause of Malignity.
in the Air, which is drawn into tbe Lungs by degrees, and weakens the liquor
of the glandules (which is naturally sourish) and makes it sluggish, and of
little force, whence the natural consistency of the blood is diminished, and
the separation of the Animal spirits often hindered.

The sharp volatile salt aforesaid, may be also swallowed down with food or
spittle into the Stomach, or it may enter the pores of the body; by which not
only the liquor of the glandules, but the blood also may be infected; hence
depends the variety of symptoms which may be observed in these Diseases.

In Malign fevers, there often precedes a light Signs.
shivering, after which a gentle heat soon follows; the pulse is frequent and
unequal, though little and weak, and sometimes deficient, the sick is often
drowsy, and possessed with a kind of Lethargy; and when they sleep, they are
often vexed with turbulent dreams; they are often gripped in the Stomach, and
troubled with loathing and vomiting, accompanied with the Head-each, raving,
giddiness, etc. also there is great thirst, weariness, and unquietness of the
whole body; sometimes there happens choleric and fetid loosnesses; and also a
haemorrhage at the nose or womb does often concur.

1. If tumors in the glandules, and spots and Prog^
little pimples, diverse both in color and greatness, do break forth in many
parts of the body, they are signs of great malignity.

2. If the sick get no ease after sweating promoted by Art, there is little
hopes of recovery; also if the extreme parts soon wax hot, and again are
presently cold, it is an ill sign.

First to preserve and defend the body from Cure.
all malignity, and infection in time of contagion.

I commend the frequent, and moderate use of sour and tart things mixed with all
things potable, for the Patient's drink, or food; as Barberries, Quinces,
Oranges, Pomgranates, Limmons, Wood Sorrel, Verjuice, Vinegar, etc.

In the beginning of malign Fevers, and also the Calenture, if a loathing
urges, part of the acrimonious volatile salt adheres to the tunicles of the
Stomach; wherefore in this Case, first administer an Antimonial Emetick, which
is well prepared, mild and fixed, because it has an admirable sulphur in it,
whereby any sharpness is wonderfully tempered, and the Malign Poison is thereby
in part sent out by Vomit and Stool.

After the Operation of the Emetick, let a Cordial Sudorifick be presently
administered, that the remaining part of the Malign Poison may be driven
forward, and expelled most safely, and commodiously out of the Body.

The following Cordial may serve for example. Cordial Sudorifick.


Take of Epidemical water, Spirit of Vinegar, of each one ounce; The Waters of
Treacle, and Cinnamon, of each half an ounce; the Waters of Carduus, Scabious,
of each two ounces; Syrups of the Juice of Carduus, Clove-gilliflowers, of each
one ounce and half; Antimonie Diaphoretick, Bezoar-mineral, of each one dram;
Venice-treacle, two drachms; mix it.

Let the sick take a quarter of this Diaphoretick Julep, and dispose the Body
to sweat, and after half an hour, take one or two spoonfulls more, and so go
on, till a profitable Sweat follow.

In the interim if the sick be thirsty, let them drink a little warm Broth
tempered to a gratefulness, with juice of Oranges, Citrons, or Verjuice, etc.
whereby the breaking forth of the sweat will not only be promoted, but also
the hurtful Acrimony of the peccant Salt will be corrected, and assuaged.

After this excellent medicine has been sufficiently and rightly used, so that
you perceive the Malign Poison to be carried out of the Body; yet you must
persist in the moderate use of it, as likewise in the use of four things, a
little Harsh, mixed with drink, or Broth as beforesaid; because they much
conduce to restore (by degrees) the former consistency to the Blood.

In Calentures, Phlebotomy may be safely used.

CHAP. IX. Of the Plague or Pestilence.
THE Plague or Pestilence is called in Greek (...), solvo, quod vitam solvat.

It is called in Latin Pestilentia, and Pestis, ex depascendo, quod veluti
incendium depascat.

It is also called (...), percutio hinc Angl. the Plague.

Pestis significat omne malum; quod tam inanimis quam animatis mortem and
exitium repentino adfert.

The Plague is a contagious disease, suddenly afflicting the Heart, and all the
vital, animal and natural faculties with many grievous Symptoms.

The Cause is chiefly the sins of Mankind, Cause.
provoking the great God to send this Pestiferous distemper as a judgment on
them for their Impiety.

The Cause (next to God's judgment) is a sharp venomous and contagious volatile
Salt in the Air, very much heightened (inspired with the Air into the Lungs, or
is swallowed down with the food or spittle into the Stomach; it may also get in
through the pores into the Body) by which the acid liquor in all the
conglobated glandules is weakened and made sluggish, that it does not circulate
with its wonted force: whence the natural consistency and rarefaction of the
Blood is diminsht, and the separation of the Animal Spirits hindered; and the
vital strength is much oppressed, by which the Pulse becomes not only little,
but also languishing; till at length the Spirits are extinguished, and Death
(unexpected to many) carries them speedily (torrenti similis) in fiery
Chariots, God knows where.

All the signs in Malign Fevers are common (and much heightened) in the Pest;
besides Signs.
many other grievous symptoms, as Diarrhaea, Hemorrhage at the Nose, Ears,
Eyes, Mouth and Secrets; sometimes yellowness of the Eyes, Buboes in the
Groins, Armpits, and behind the Ears, and in some white Bladders, and
Carbuncles, also spots called the Tokens, with raving, etc.

1. The Pest is deceitful above all other diseases, Progn.
therefore no certain prognostic can be drawn of it; for many have died when
there has been great hopes of recovery, and on the contrary, many have escaped
with mortal signs.

2. A Bubo is less dangerous than a Carbuncle, and it than the spots, (vulgarly
the Tokens) which most commonly portend Death wheresoever they are.

3. Buboes encompassed with a blue or livid circle, are most commonly a mortal
sign, especially if they suddenly disappear, unless the Malign humor be sent
to some other part; and if with a Bubo behind the Ears, there be pain of the
Throat without inflammation it is mortal.

4. If a Carbuncle rise after a Bubo, and look white, with a little push or tail
at the end of it, it is dangerous, except the Fever do very much abate; and if
after cauterizing, or cupping, the Carbuncle abate not in twenty four hours,
it is a sign of Death approaching, except matter appear; and if Carbuncles seize
the Stomach, Guts, Bladder, or other Intrails, it portends Death.

5. Deliriums, Drowsiness, Heart-ach, Trembling, Convulsions, great dryness of
Tongue, are all bad signs; also a Dysentery is most commonly mortal; but a
Hemorrhage at the Nose, or Menses are not so dangerous.

To preserve from this Pestiferous distemper, although transmigration in the
fear of God may be lawful, yet let none think to escape by flying, and so
neglect their duties to God, for it is impossible to run out of his reach, for
he fills Heaven and Earth with his presence; wherefore let servent prayers be
put up to God, whose compassions fail not; and then make use of an honest
Physician.

1. You must endeavor to purify the infected Air, with great fires, wash the
house daily, and after sprinkle it with Vinegar; and Fume either with Pitch,
Frankincense, Mirrh, Amber, Benjamin, Wood, and Berries of Juniper, etc.

2. Avoid all passions, watchings, and immoderate exercise and venery.

3. Eat nothing that is hard of concoction, and use a moderate diet though
easy of digestion, and drink good sound Wine, etc.

4. Go not forth with an empty Stomach, but always take some preservative
against infection. For example,

Take Spirit of Vinegar, Julep of Roses, of each one ounce; mix it.

Vinegar, Verjuice, Oranges, Limmons, Citrons, Pomgranats, Barberries, Quinces,
Wood Sorrel, etc. are all very good, used as before directed in Malign Fevers.

This Poison must not be sent out by vomiting Cure.
or purging; neither is phlebotomy allowed.

For it is known by manifold experience, that the cure of the Pest is most
happily instituted by Cordial Sudorificks, rightly prepared of Antimony,
because it has an admirable Sulphur in it, whereby not only sharpness is
wonderfully tempered, but the Malign poisonous volatile Salt is thereby most
safely driven forward, and expelled by sweating out of the Body; to which may
be added other Cordials, as follows.

Take the Powders of Crab's-eyes, Tartar Cordial Electuary.
vitriolated, Antimony Diaphoretick, Bezoar-mineral, of each one scruple;
Bezoar-stone of the East, red Coral prepared, Salts of Rhue, Scordium, of each
half a scruple; Venice-treacle, two drachms; Spirit of Salt ten drops; mix it
into an Electuary with confectio de Hyacintho.

Let the sick take half a dram of this Cordial Electuary every three hours,
and drink three or four spoonfulls of this Cordial Julep after it.

Take of Epidemical-water, the Waters of Cordial Iulep.
Carduus, Borage, Scordium compound, of each three ounces; the Waters of
Treacle, Cinnamon, Syrups of the juice of Carduus, and Limmons, Syrup of
Saffron, of each one ounce; Salt Prunella, and Salt of Wormwood, of each one
dram; Laudanum opiat. ten grains; mix it for a Cordial.

Let the sick person take the aforesaid medicines, till sweat is plentifully
provoked; then let the sweat be gently wiped off with warm linen clothes.

In the mean while give the sick a little hot Chicken-broth, or other Broth of
fresh Meat, tempered to a gratefulness with some sour thing, as was directed in
Malign Fevers, as Barberries, Wood Sorrel, Limmons, etc.

You must persist in this course till the danger be over, and some time after,
(though the sick think themselves well) lest the disease deceive you by a
sudden surprise again.

There are many Cordial Confections always to be had ready at Apothecaries
Shops, as Mithridate, Diascordium, Venice-treacle, London-treacle,
Treacle-water, etc. any of which may be used by the Rich or Poor, for they will
not only cause sweating, but also will temper and moderate the hurtful
acrimony of the volatile Salt before mentioned.

You may dip a hot Toast in aq. prophylactica, and apply it to the region of
the Stomach, and also tie some of it in a rag, and smell to it.

If there be great drowsiness, avoid Opiates, and take the Cordial Julep
without the Laudanum; but if there be great Watching, Vomiting, Flux of the
Belly, or Hicket, you may give it with the Laudanum prescribed, for it will
much conduce to ease the sick of all these symptoms.

If there be a Bubo, apply a strong Vesiccatory, and when the Blister is well
raised, open it, and dress it with Mustard, and Basilicon, of each equal parts;
after cure it according to Art.

If there be a Carbuncle, apply Leeches, or Ventoses, with scarification, or
the Actual or Potential Cautery, after which often apply Mithridate, 'till the
Eschar be separated; then dress it with Unguent. Basilicon, and Aegyptiacum, or
else you may use Butter of Antimony 'till the Ulcer be well cleansed and fitted
for the last consolidation which may be performed by any desiccative Medicine.

CHAP. X. Of the Smallpox, and Measles.
THE Smallpox, and Measles are called in Greek (...), and in Latin Morbilli,
quasi parvi morbi, vel parvorum morbi.

They are also called Variolae, and Pustulae, ex vario, vel varium facio, quod
cutis fit varia. Because the skin is of various forms.

These distempers are most commonly attended with a Malign Fever, which often
proves Epidemical, Contagious and Mortal, and therefore may justly be termed
Pestilential.

The Smallpox is a cutaneous Eruption, or large Pustules, something like to
Warts on the Skin, with Inflammation, which in few days comes to suppuration,
if the sick recover.

The Measles are little Pustules in the Skin, with a deep redness, and may be
best perceived by feeling; they are usually discussed in five or six days
without suppuration.

There is an other sort of Pustules, or Tubercles, like little Bladders,
incident to Men, Women and Children; which are without Inflammation or redness;
and also without a Fever.

Some call them Cristals, others Blisters, but Country people call them
Swine-pox, Hen or Chicken-pox, etc.

To these also may be referred, those red fiery spots which break out about the
fourth or fifth day (in Malign Fevers) all over the Body; and if the sick
recover, they vanish about the eighth day, after which the Cuticula comes away
in flakes; this is commonly called the Scarlet Fever.

The signs of the Smallpox approaching, Signs.
are pains of the Head, shining before the Eyes, with redness and swelling of
the Face, and sometimes bleeding at the Nose; also a grievous pain of the Back,
which reaches to the Neck, with great heat and pricking all over the Body;
there is often loathing of the Stomach, and vomiting, with trembling of the
Heart, great terror in sleep, difficulty of breathing, and sometimes raving
and convulsion.

The cause of the Smallpox and Measles, Causes.
is an ill quality or impurity of the Mothers blood, with which the Child was
nourished in the Womb, which does communicate pollution, and defile the mass of
Blood; and after the Child is born, when there is an ill disposition of the Air
proportionable to the disease, there follows a peculiar effervescency or
ebullition of the Blood and other humors, by which nature is enraged and
provoked to cast forth the impurity.

The excrementitious matter is either thin or thick; if it be thin, the Measles
follow, if thick, the Smallpox are produced.

And if there be a Malignant constitution of the Air, it causes not only a
purging forth of the corrupt matter of the Blood, etc. but corrupts the whole
mass of Blood, and so produces a dangerous and Epidemical Smallpox.

If they come out red, and soon ripen or Progn.
turn white, being round pointed, and outward in the skin; if the voice and
breathing be free, without any grievous symptoms, there is no danger, but if
there be a great Fever (which is not abated after their eruption) with great
thirst, and difficulty of breathing, also black or bloody Urine, or Stool,
Hemorrhage at the Nose, Mouth, etc. does signify a great acrimony, and
malignancy of the blood, that nature is compelled to evacuate it by such
preposterous ways; and are most commonly mortal signs.

So likewise if it be long ever they come out, and they be green, bluish, or
black, and sink in again, the sick is in great danger of Death.

As for the Cure of these distempers, if they be Malignant, or Epidemical, let
the same Cure.
means be used as is prescribed in Malignant Fevers, but if there be little or
no sign of Malignancy, you may first administer an Antimonial Emetick, and
after its operation, give this or the like Cordial.

Take the Waters of Carduus, Dragons, Cordial Iulep.
Treacle, Scordium compound, of each two ounces; Venice-treacle two drachms;
Syrups of the Juice of Limmons, Carduus, Saffron, of each one ounce; Confection
of Hyacinth one dram; mix it for a Cordial.

Let the sick take two or three spoonfulls of this every half hour till a sweat
be promoted; after sweating, keep the Patient in a warm Room, till the danger
be over.

Before the Eruption, (if there be eminent signs of a Plethora, and the sick be
adult) Phlebotomy may be used with good success. Phlebotomy.


Bezoar and Gascoign's Powder, and Diascordium are commonly used in these
Diseases.

You must endeavor to defend the inward parts with the pectoral decoction, to
which you may add a little Saffron.

Also a Saffron Stay, in which is put a few Sows (called Millepedes) bruised,
is excellent to defend the Throat.

For the Eyes, this water is good.

Take the Waters of Plantain, white Roses, Water for the Eyes.
of each three ounces; of Camphire, Saffron, of each ten grains; mix it.

Or you may use Women's milk, and Saffron.

If the Throat and Mouth are inflamed, make a Gargarism with Plantain-water and
Gargaris.
Syrup of Mulberries.

To defend the Nose, put up this with a rag or feather.

Take of red Rose Water, Vinegar of red Roses, of each one ounce; Powder of red
Nodulas.
Saunders, Camphire, of each one dram; mix it.

When the Smallpox begins to dry, anoint them often with Oil of sweet Almonds,
and Oil of the Yelks of Eggs, which will prevent their pitting.

OF DISEASES OF THE BELLY. BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Of the Thirsty disease.
THIS is called in Greek (...), a (...), sitio, to be thirsty. In Latin it is
called sitis morbosa.

Thirst is the first natural Passion of Mankind, and also of Beasts; as is
manifest by their first sucking milk out of the Breast to assuage it.

The causes of thirst augmented, are either Cause.
external or internal.

The external are the Air over heated by the Sun, over salt Food, too much
exercise of body, vehement passions of the mind, as much anger, etc. prolonged
watches, the Body either too costive, or too loose, much sweating, Urine voided
too plentifully, any notable Evacuation of Blood, Milk or Seed, etc.

The internal Cause is deduced (for the most part) from too sharp Choler,
carried down into the small Gut; where it raises such an Effervescency with
the Juice of the Pancreas flowing thither, that thence are elevated salt
Vapors to the Stomach and Gullet, and there produces a sense of drought.

It may also pierce through the lacteal Vessels, and so to the Heart, and
infect the Blood too much with its Saltness, whence the Spittle, and the other
Humors also become too salt, by which a great Thirst is stirred up and
augmented.

The signs are manifest, for the Patient's Signs.
complaint for want of drink, will inform you.

This distemper may be cured by such acid Cure.
Liquours, and oily Emulsions, which will dilute the Lixivial Salt of Choler,
and potently change its Acrimony, and assuage its sharpness, and deduce it to
the Bladder.

The following Julep may serve for Example.

Take Tincture of Red-roses, Barley-water, Iulep.
of each twelve ounces; Cinamon-water two ounces, Syrup of Violets three
ounces, Salt Prunella two drachms; mix it, and give the sick three spoonfulls
every two hours.

This Emulsion is also of great Virtue, not only to restrain Thirst, but
mildly to procure rest also.

Take of French-barly boiled four ounces; Emulsion.
sweet Almonds blanched; white Poppy-seeds, of each two ounces; let them be
well beaten in a stone Mortar; then with two Quarts of Barley-water, the Waters
of Cinnamon and Fennel, of each two ounces; make an Emulsion; to which add Julep
of Roses four ounces, Syrups of Violets, and the Juice of Limmons, of each two
ounces; mix it.

Let the party thirsting, drink a moderate draught of this Emulsion, often in a
day, which will be very acceptable.

You may also make grateful Troches, or Pellets of Sugar, and Salt Prunella,
to be kept in the Mouth, to deceive the Thirst.

If salt serous matter abound in the Body, purge it by Stool or Urine.

This grateful Medicine may serve for both intentions.

Take the Roots of Flower-de-luce, Parsley, Purging Infusion.
China, of each two ounces; Dandelion, Agrimony, of each one handful; Senna
one ounce; Rhubarb half an ounce; Agarick, Turkey, Turbith, Jallap, of each
three drachms; Cinnamon, Cloves, of each two drachms; let them be cleansed,
bruised and infused in two quarts of White Wind, for the space of twenty four
hours, then strain it, and add Syrup of the five opening. Roots four ounces; of
which you may give the sick four ounces every third day in the morning fasting.

If there be a salt Catarrh, it may be tempered with Pills of Styrax, you may
administer a Pill every Night going to bed.

Let the Patient's diet be Mutton or Vealbroth, without Salt.

CHAP. II. Of Hunger vitiated.
HUnger may be called the Appetite of Meats, as Thirst is of Drinks.

It may be many ways depraved, viz. when it is augmented, diminished, or
abolished.

Hunger augmented may be depraved two ways, either in quantity or quality; if
it be in quantity, there is more Nourishment desired than the Stomach can
digest.

This distemper is called in Greek (...), ex (...) fames; quod affatim edatur.

It is called by the Latins fames canina, and in English Dog's appetite;
because in this distemper the sick do feed insatiably; after which some do
purge and vomit like Dogs; and are presently hungry again, and sick if they do
not eat.

If hunger be depraved in quality, then vicious things, which are not Food, (as
Coals, Ashes, Clay, Turfs, Leather, and I know not what) are desired.

This is called in Greek (...), and Pica also Pica.
in Latin; ab ave Pica, vel quod varia appetant, ut Pica varii est Coloris, vel
ex eo quod and Pica terram mandet.

If this distemper be in Women with Child, Malacia.
it is called in Greek (...), and in Latin also Gravidarum malacia, which is an
inordinate longing in them, of which I shall treat more at large in the Chapter
of the Hypochondriack suffocation.

Hunger diminished is caused of too fat and Cause.
viscous Spittle, swallowed down (by little and little) into the Stomach; and
being unfit to promote the fermentation of Food, it passes into the small
guts, and there generates viscous Phlegm like to it self, which does not only
dull the moderate acidity of the Juice of the Pancreas, but thereby at length
all the acidity in the Body becomes less sharp and dull.

Choler also being too fat, arising from the small Gut, to the Stomach, does
there corrupt both the remainders of Food and Spittle, and prostrates their
grateful acidity by which means the Appetite becomes dull.

These causes being complicated, if they be most grievous; will at length quite
take away and abolish Hunger.

The cause of Hunger augmented is sometimes Cause.
worms in the Stomach, which devour the Chylus; but most commonly it is caused
by the over-sourness of the Juice of the Pancreas abounding in the Body, and
chiefly in the small Gut; whence it sends sour Vapors to the Stomach, which
do potently urge and increase the sense of hunger.

The cause of hunger depraved in quality, Cause.
(as Pica, etc. in Women) is the suppression of their monthly Courses, which is
more or less corrupted about the Womb, and having not its natural Evacuation,
it returns, and (in circulation) is mixed with the whole Mass of Blood, by
which it is all vitiated, and depraved; and so produces a Cachexy, or ill
habit of Body, which in time corrupts all the other humors; from whence not
only hunger, but all the functions are depraved.

Hunger augmented needs no other sign, Signs.
than the devouring of Food.

The signs of Hunger depraved in quality are also manifest, as the longing
desire for those things which are not food, as Coals, etc. before mentioned.

If these distempers continue long, they Progn.
are difficult of Curation, because the sick will easily fall into a Cachexy,
Dropsy, Consumption, Vomiting, Fluxes, etc.

Hunger increased, may be cured by giving those things which destroy, and do
temperate and amend the over acidity of the Juice of the Pancreas, and do
prevent its increase.

There are variety of Medicines (proper for these intentions) prescribed in the
6th. and 7th. pages of the first Book.

If hunger be diminished, or abolished, it may be cured by Medicines that
correct and educe the viscous Phlegmatic humors, of which you may be
thoroughly furnished in the 3d. and 4th. pages.

If hunger be suddenly diminished by Choler, either over fat, or abounding in
plenty; Cure.
it may commodiously be evacuated by an Antimonial Emetick. Many other proper
Medicines are set down in the 8th. and 9th. pages.

CHAP. III. Of want of Appetite, or loathing of Victuals.
WAnt of Appetite is called in Greek (...), ex (...), sine, and (...) appetitus.

In Latin it is called inappetentia, because in this distemper the sick has no
desire after food, but their minds are averse to, yea they loath most kind of
meat and drink, which sometimes rises to that height, that it takes away their
strength.

This differs from vomiting only in degrees, it being a desire to vomit up
whatsoever troubles the Stomach, but cannot, either by reason of weakness, or
toughness of the matter. Nausea.


Loathing is called in Greek (...), ex (...) Navis, quod navigantibus proecipue
contingit.

All loathing is either natural, or adventitious.

The natural (for the most part) is common to Women with Child; wherein it is
thought by some, that the mind of the Child in the Womb is affected, as well in
this distemper, as in the disease called Malacia, or longing; wherein if the
Woman have not presently what the longs for, wheresoever she first puts her
hand on any part of her body, in that part the Child is marked, as we may see
often by experience.

The adventitious loathing, or that which comes by accident, is stirred up in
healthy People by prejudice, they esteeming some sorts of food ungrateful, or
prejudicial to their Health, and therefore their Stomachs loath them.

Sometimes nauseousness, and loathing even to vomiting, immediately follows
Intemperance in eating and drinking, which is dangerous.

That we may the better judge of the causes of this distemper, let us first
consider what is the natural Cause of Hunger, by which we may the easier
discover it.

I judge the chief Cause of natural hunger to be the remainders of food
fermented in the Stomach, and the longer it stays there, it is still more and
more fermented by the Spittle; which is continually swallowed down, and
intermixed with it; and at length it raises a somewhat sour and grateful
Vapor, which pleasingly affects the upper Orifice of the Stomach, and so
natural hunger seems to be produced.

And if food be withheld somewhat longer than ordinary, then this hunger is
increased even in healthy People; which I think is promoted and augmented by
the Juice of the Pancreas, having a friendly Effervescency with Choler and
Phlegm in the small Guts, from whence sour and grateful Vapors are sent to
the Stomach, which increases hunger; and if food be seldom taken, it may
proceed to fainting fits.

Hence we may gather, that if there be a Cause.
vicious Effervescency of the aforesaid humors in the small Guts, then vicious
Vapors are thence produced, which rising up to the Stomach, and other parts
adjacent, not only diminish hunger, but more or less deprave Thirst, as also
the senses of tasting and smelling; hence it is that the sick do loath all
sorts of food, as soon as they smell, taste or see it.

1. Want of Appetite or Loathing is a digression Progn.
from the natural State, and is therefore dangerous; and is worse in Children
than Adults, because they require more Nourishment.

2. In all diseases this is an evil Symptom, and if the sick recover and want
Appetite, or loath their Food, there is danger of a relapse.

This distemper (either in healthy People, or those that are sick) may be
cured, Cure.


1. First by freeing the mind from every prejudice. 2. By correcting or purging
out the vicious and peccant humors.
If the Humors incline upward, they may be safely carried out by an Antimonial
vomit; and after the operation, at night going to bed, let the sick take this
Cordial Opiate.

Take the Waters of Damask-roses, Baum Cordial Opiat.
and Cinnamon, of each one ounce; Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers, red Poppies, of
each half an ounce; Confectio Alkermes half a dram; Laudanum opiat. four
grains; Oil of Vitriol six drops; mix it.

But if the humors be very viscous, (and the Stomach be not nauseous) let them
be purged out by stool, with such Medicines as have power to alter, amend and
evacuate the vicious humors.

For example.

Take of the Decoction of Senna Gereonis Purging Decoction.
four ounces; the best Manna, Syrups of Epithymum, Roses Solutive with Senna,
of each half an ounce; mix it for two Doses, to be taken in the Morning fasting.

After purging, the Stomach must be strengthened; which may be done by this
excellent Diet-drink.

Take the Roots of China, Sarzeparilla, of Dietdrink.
each eight ounces; Guiacum two pound; Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmegs, of each one
ounce; Raisins of the Sun stoned one pound; Aniseseed, Liquorish, of each one
ounce and half; let them be bruised and infused in two Gallons of
Fountain Water very hot, for the space of twenty four hours, then boil it to
the consumption of the third part; strain it, and add Syrups of Cinnamon, and of
the Juice of Rasberries, of each four ounces; mix it, and let it be put into
Bottles.

The sick may drink four ounces of it three times in a day.

Also candied Ginger, and Nutmegs preserved are good to corroborate the
Stomach; a little of either of them may be eaten before the taking of the
Diet-drink.

You may anoint the Stomach with Oil of Mace by expression; after which apply a
Plaster Stomachicum magistr. to the Region of the Stomach.

CHAP. IV. Of the Hicket, or Hiccough.
THE Hicket is called in Greek (...), and in Latin singultus, ex (...) cum, and
gula, quod fere gula fiat; vel a sono gulae.

It is called in English a Sobbing or Yexing, being something like the Clocking
of Hens with Chickens.

This disease was thought by the Ancients to be a depraved motion of the
Stomach only, by which it striveth to expel something which is hurtful; but
experience does manifest, that it is a convulsive Motion of the Midriff, and
not of the Stomach, because in this distemper, expiration is depraved; and this
is chiefly perfected by the Muscles of the Belly, both by drawing down the
Breast, and compressing all that is contained in the Belly, and driving them
forward toward the Midriff, and so compelling it upward (its proper motion
together concurring) by which a greater straitness is made in the Breast, which
causes the Lungs also to be straightened, and consequently the Air contained in
them to be suddenly expired.

It Is true, in this distemper, the Stomach is primarily affected by sharp
Vapors, Wind, or humors whencesoever proceeding, which piercing to the
membranous Center of the Midriff, provoke it by pricking, or corroding, to
perform that convulsive motion; in which the Diaphragma is contracted with a
great force toward the Region of the Stomach, which suddenly and violently
drives it forward and outward, the convulsive Motion soon ceasing, and again
often repeating.

The causes of the Hicket are either external, Cause.
or internal.

The external are hurtful, sharp and poisonous food, or medicines, taken into
the Stomach, by which the Midriff is soon affected, and compelled to this
violent, and presently interrupted convulsive Motion.

The internal cause rises up out of the small Gut, by the vicious
Effervescency of the humors there meeting; from whence sharp, halituous or
windy Vapors are raised to the upper Orifice of the Stomach, by which it is
soon corroded; and thence the sharp flatuous Humors, or Vapors, are presently
carried through the Vessels of the Diaphragma, and sticking in its substance,
do corrode its sensible parts, and compel it to that Convulsive repeating
contraction of it self.

When the Hicket is the Symptom of any other grievous disease, as an acute
Fever, Inflammation, Progn.
etc. it is dangerous, and sometimes mortal.

In most ordinary Hickets, the party is easily Cure.
restored, either by stopping the Breath, or by suddenly surprising them with
fear.

But as often as sharp poisonous Food or Medicines, or any flatuous humors be
in the Stomach; etc. causing the Hicket; they must be presently expelled by an
Antimonial Emetick, which will not only empty the peccant humors upward and
downward, but will correct and amend the hurtful humors in the Body.

After the Operation of the Emetick, the following Cordial Opiate will conduce
to dissipate the molesting Vapors, which remain about the Mouth of the
Stomach; and will stay the Hicket, and mildly procure sleep.

Take the Waters of Treacle, Cinnamon, Cordial Opiat.
Syrup of Mint, of each one ounce; the Waters of Baum and Mint, of each two
ounces; Coufectio Alkermes two drachms; Laudanum opiatum six grains; Spirits of
Hartshorn, Niter dulcified, of each twenty drops; mix it.

Let the sick often take two spoonfulls of this Opiate, till they be disposed
to rest.

If this distemper be obstinate, and yields not to the aforesaid Medicine, it
shows that over-viscous Humors are conjoined to its Cause.

Therefore in an obstinate Hicket, it is better that the peccant humors be
emptied downwards, with such Medicines as will both cut, and educe them. For
which I commend these Pills.

Take pil. foetidae, ex duobus, of each fifteen Purging Pills.
grains; Oil of Hartshorn four drops; make it into Pills; take them in the
Morning fasting.

Let these or the like Aromatic Pills with gums be taken at least twice a
week; which will not only educe the hurtful humors, but discuss Vapors, and
Wind.

In the interim, let not the frequent use of the aforesaid Cordial Opiate be
neglected, for it will wonderfully conduce to the Cure.

Sometimes it is good for the Patient to sneez, for it has often proved
succesfull.

Drinking of warm Milk from the Cow is also much commended, because it will
assuage the hurtful humors which remain about the Stomach, etc.

CHAP. V. Of Belching.
BElching is called in Latin ructatio and ructuatio esculenta, quae fit ab
homine saturo, because it comes most commonly after a full Stomach.

Any thing which breaks up from the Stomach in the kind of a rift, or windy
Vapor, and is expelled by the Mouth with noise, may properly be called
belching.

The cause of this distemper, is either outward, Cause.
or inward.

The outward is from windy food, or other flatuous things taken, as Beans,
Pease, Radishes, etc.

The internal cause is either from a phlegmatic viscous humor adhering to the
Stomach, where it is rarefied into wind by Aromaticks taken; or from the same
viscous humor in the small Guts, turned into wind by Choler over fat, and
volatile; and thence it is driven forward to the Stomach, whereby the
Fermentation of Food is depraved into a noisome Crudity; whence Belches like
rotten Eggs, etc. are raised, which does distend and gnaw the Stomach.

If the Phlegmatic matter, which cleaves Progn.
to the Ventricle, or small Guts, be very tough, the belching is more hardly
excluded; whence often a swelling, and troublesome Distension of the Stomach
follows; and e contra.

The Cure may be safely and happily performed, Cure.
only by correcting, and educing the Phlegmatic viscous humors abounding;
for which there are variety of Medicines prescribed in the third and fourth
Pages in the Cure of the Headache.

CHAP. VI. Of Vomiting, and of the Choleric and Iliack Passion.
VOmiting is called in Greek (...), ab (...) vomo.

It is a depraved motion of the Stomach, and a certain sign of health weakened;
for in perfect health nothing is wont to be expelled out of the Stomach by the
Mouth.

In vomiting, sometimes food, (either crude, or more or less fermented) is cast
out by the Gullet and Mouth; sometimes Blood, sometimes Choler, and other times
manifold humors and matter of diverse Colors, Taste and Consistency; and
sometimes the Excrements returning to the Stomach (as in Iliaca passio) is
expelled by that preposterous way of vomiting, wherein, omnia naturae
praepostera legibus ibant.

All the differences occurring in several sick People, are very difficult to be
numbered, or reduced into a certain order; and much more to make an exact
Examination of all the Symptoms, and thence to give a solid Judgment of every
one.

In this distemper the Stomach is either primarily, or secondarily affected.

The Stomach is primarily affected to vomit, when the cause is in it self.

As by taking a Vomit, or when there is an Inflammation, or Exulceration of it;
for then it is easily stirred up (by food, or any other thing swallowed) to a
violent and preternatural Contraction, and turning of its motion, whereby it is
compelled to cast out whatsoever is contained in it.

The Stomach is secondarily affected, when it is drawn by consent of other
parts first distempered; as by the contracting motion of the Guts, either in
part or wholly, in that most grievous disease called Ileos, or Iliaca Ileos.
passio; or by the vehement shaking of the Midriff, together with a potent
Contraction of the Muscles of the Belly, caused sometimes in a grievous Cough:
By which all the Bowels contained in the Belly are compressed upward, toward
the Breast, and urge the Stomach to change its natural motion.

As often as Choleric humors are plentifully voided out, as well upward, as
downward with great force, accompanied with troublesome Anxieties of the
Midriff; it is Choler. Cholerica passio.
called in Greek (...) bilis. And in Latin cholerica passio.

When there is a forcible pouring out of Blood by vomiting, it is called in
Greek (...), and in Latin vomitio sanguinis. Hoemoptysis.


The Cause of Ileos, or Iliaca passio, is an Cause of Ileos.
excrementitious viscous matter that does adhere unto the Gut called Ileo;
which in time is coagulated into a very hard substance, almost in the form of
Bullets; (of which I have had large experience) whence all passage through for
the excrements by siege is stopped, and anon their regress and ascent to the
Stomach follows, with a miserable vomiting of them.

The Rupture of the Peritonaeum may be also the cause of this grievous disease,
especially if it be so great, that not only the small Guts, but the great ones
also fall through the lacerated hole, either by reason of their weight, or else
by the perpetual approaching of what is contained in them, which renders them
incapable to be reduced, or put back through the same hole; whence the
excrements, (having not passage downwards) are more and more hardened to that
degree, that they can hardly be dissolved, so that a hard and unsupperable
Tumor does soon follow, which hinders the reflux of blood, and causes an
inflammation, and consequently a gangrene of the Guts, attended with a violent
vomiting of the excrements, 'till death do put a period to the Patient's misery.

These evils are often increased by fomentations too hot applied, as also by a
preposterous and strong rubbing of the swelled part, and violence used to
repel the Guts.

The immediate causes of the choleric Causes of the choleric passion.
passion, are sharp, putrid, choleric humors collected in the Stomach and
Bowels, because of external errors committed in diet, or by the taking of
poison uncorrected, which does immediately disturb and corrupt all the humors.

The cause of vomiting blood, is to be deduced Causes of vomiting Blood.
(most commonly) from the Pancreas, by reason of some vessel opened by its over
sharp juice, caused by a vicious effervescency with Choler, from whence most of
it is driven up to the Stomach to be vomited out; whilst some of it may descend
downward to be voided by stool.

This distemper may also be caused by blood flowing out of the vessels of the
Stomach or Guts, either broken by vehement Coughing, or corroded by sharp
humors.

1. If vomiting be from repletion, or be critical, Progn.
it is a good benefit of nature, and therefore must not be stopped: but if it be
symptomatical, it is an ill sign, especially if it be caused by inflammation of
the Stomach, or adjacent parts, or by poison taken.

2. If the cause of Ileos, be from excrements indurated in the Gut Ileon, it
may be cured, if taken in time; but if it be from a Rupture of the Peritonaeum,
it is dangerous, and for the most part mortal, especially if there be
inflammation and Tumor of the Guts, etc.

3. If the sick vomit blood, it is dangerous: neither is the choleric passion
without danger.

The Cure of this manifold vomiting, may Cure.
be performed diversely, according to the variety of each cause.

If vomiting be raised too much by an Emetick, or any other nauseous thing
taken, it may be represt by this aromatic Opiate, or one like it.

Take of Mint-water, four ounces; Tincture Cordial Opiate.
of Cinnamon, half an ounce; Syrups of Mint, Erratick Poppies, of each six
drachms: Laudanum opiatum six grains; Spirit of Nitre twenty drops; mix it.

Let the sick take a spoonful of this every quarter of an hour, till the
vomiting cease.

If a Catarrh be the cause of vomiting look for the cure in its proper Chapter.

If the choleric passion be caused by Cure of Choleric Passion.
poison, or plentifulness of choleric humors in the Stomach, etc. then
nothing hinders but that a gentle Antimonial Emetick may be given, to which may
be added those things which will temper the too great effervescency of the
aforesaid humors. For example.

Take of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum, Vomit.
Mint-water, of each six drachms; Cinamonwater, two drachms; Syrup of Erratick
Poppies, half an ounce; Laudanum opiatum, two grains; mix it.

After the evacuation of the peccant humors upward, and downward, an Opiate
may be profitably used; because it will not only temper the Acrimony of
Choler, but assuage the acid juice, and stupefie the outward sense, and procure
rest, which will be very grateful to the sick.

Take the waters of Fennel, Plantain, Mint, Cordial Opiate.
Purslain, of each two ounces; Cinamonwater, Syrups of Myrtles, Purslain, white
Poppies, of each one ounce; Confect. de Hyacintho, Diascordium, Venice-treacle,
of each two drachms; Laudanum opiat. eight grains; Spirit of Niter twenty
drops; mix it.

Let the sick take two Spoonfulls of it often, which will conduce to amend the
faultiness of any humors, whether acrimonious, salt or sour; for in the
disease of Cholera, it will powerfully assuage the too much effervescency that
is raised in the small Gut, staying the fierce motion of the troubled humors.

A bloody vomiting requires speedy help, Cure of bloody vomiting.
whence soever the blood comes.

The following Astringent medicine will wonderfully conduce to the cure.

Take the waters of Plantain, Comfrey, Astringent Iulep.
of each three ounces; Cinamon-water, distilled Vinegar, of each an ounce and
half; Syrups of Mirtles, Quinces, of each one ounce; Powder of Dragons-bloud
half a dram; Laudanum opiatum six grains; mix it.

The sick may take two or three Spoonfulls of this Astringent Julep every hour,
with good success, for it will cure the most ruptions of Vessels, and stop the
flux of blood beyond expectation.

After Vomiting is suppressed, if the Patient be troubled with belching of wind,
etc. in this case, the following exemplary mixture may bear the praise; for it
does not only conduce to curb and discuss wind, remaining as well in the
Stomach, as Guts; but it does temper and correct both Phlegm and Choler, and
hinder wind in its rise, and will dissipate it, when it is bred.

Take the waters of Mint, Fennel, of each Carminative Iulep.
four ounces; the Carminative water of Sylvius, Syrup of Mint, of each two
ounces; Spirit of Niter twenty drops; Chemical Oil of Mace ten drops; Laudanum
opiatum ten grains; mix it.

Let this be taken by Spoonfulls, often or more slowly, as pains or stretchings
do more or less urge.

If blood be thought or feared to be clotter'd in the cavity of the Guts; to
dissolve it, you may add to the above mentioned Carminative Julep, pull. ocul.
Cancror. Antimon. Diaphoret. Sperma Coeti, of each one dram.

The voiding of matter by vomiting and stool, is not to be staid, but mildly
promoted, seeing it is wholly unnatural, and hurtful to the Body: but its new
rise is to be hindered as much as may be, seeing it is bred of blood, which is
the fuel of our vital fire, and the sustenance of all parts of the Body.

Among all the medicines that move or promote the voiding of matter, and hinder
the continual breeding of it, out of corrupt blood; I prefer and commend
Antimonials, rightly prepared; as well Emeticks, as other preparations of it,
as Antimonium Diaphoretic. and above all, a Balsam made artificially of its
flowers, which will powerfully conduce to alter and correct the harms befalling
the Body by matter, and hinder the new producing of it.

Also Balsam of Sulphur with Oil of Aniseseed is excellent to cleanse and
consolidate any inward Ulcer; if two or three drops of it be taken often in a
day in any pleasant healing vehicle.

In all preternatural vomitings keep the Belly open, so that the sick may have
(at least) every day a stool, either by Nature or Art; and let the peccant
humors remaining be emptied out by siege, with these or the like Pills.

Take Extract. Rudii half a dram; Resin Purging Pills.
of Jallop, Salt of Wormwood, Tartar vitriolated, of each ten grains; Oil of
Cinnamon three drops; mix it for two doses, to be taken in the morning.

The cure of Ileos, or Iliaca passio, may Cure of Iliaca passio.
(for the most part) be performed by the aforesaid medicines.

But for the sake of young Practitioners, I shall add some few directions for
the cure of this lamentable contracted motion.

Wherefore to appease the troublesome irritation of the Guts, let fat Broths be
often taken in at the Mouth, and also injected into the Fundament as a Clyster;
but if an emollient Clyster can conveniently be made, let the following be
prepared and often used, the Decoction of which may be also taken at the Mouth,
with a few drops of Oil of Anise-seed.

Take the Roots of Marshmallows two ounces; of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Mullein, Clyster.
of each two handfulls; the Seeds of Anise, Sweet-fennel, Coriander, Flax,
Faenugreek, of each two ounces; let them be cleansed, bruised and boiled in a
quart of Spring Water till half be consumed, then strain it, and add oil of
white Lillies, the Fat of a Hen, of each one ounce; mix it for a Clyster.

Of which ingredients you may also make Fomentations and Cataplasms to be
applied to the region of the Navel, moderately hot, adding Swines or Goats dung
to the Pultess.

The following Emulsion will conduce not only to allay the irritation, and
temper the sharp humors, but will make the passages slippery, and (by degrees)
moisten the hard Excrements contained in the small Gut, and in the mean time,
will mildly procure rest, and stop vomiting.

Take of sweet Almonds blanched, white Poppy-seeds, of each two ounces;
Frenchbarley Emulsion.
boiled four ounces; the waters of Fennel, Plantain, Roses, of each half a
pint; Barley-water a pint, let it be made an Emulsion; to which add Syrup of
Violets three ounces; confectio Alkermes de Hyacintho, of each two drachms;
Laudanum twenty grains; Spirit of Niter forty drops; mix it.

Let the sick take three Spoonfulls of it often.

In this grievous Disease, nothing is to be neglected, either outward, or
inward, that may procure ease to the Patient.

The intrails of Animals, as sheep, etc. applied very warm in hot clothes, and
often repeated, are very effectual.

Also Ventoses applied to the Navel have proved succesfull; after which let a
little Civet wrapped in Cotton be put to the Navel, and upon it apply a Plaster e
Cymino, or Sylvius's Carminative Plaster; or else let the aforementioned
Pultess be applied warm.

Golden bullets swallowed are excellent, but for want of them, leaden bullets
may serve.

Some give great Pills of Antimony; and crude Mercury or Quicksilver well
depurated is also highly commended, to be given to three pound at a time, and
walk or ride after it, to agitate the Body; but before you give either of them
let the sick take an ounce of oil of sweet Almonds or Sallet oil, and likewise
after it: and be sure that no acid thing be given after the Quicksilver till
it be evacuated, lest it coagulate the Mercury, and hurry the Patient to the
grave.

CHAP. VII. Of pain in the Stomach, and of various pains of the Guts, as
Cholick, etc.
THE pains of the Stomach may be distinguished or divided into two sorts, viz.
of the upper and lower orifice.

If the upper orifice of the Stomach, (which is of exquisite sense, by reason
of the intertexture of Nerves with which it is wonderfully furnished from the
vaga sexta, whereof branches are also communicated to the Heart) be affected,
it is called in Greek (...), vel (...), ex (...), Cor.

It is also called in Latin Cardiacus dolor, cui os Ventriculi dolet, and per
consensum cordis, ergo vocatur affectio Cordis, seu oris ventriculi. For the
Mouth, or upper orifice of the Stomach being primarily affected, the Heart
suffers by consent.

If the lower orifice, called Pilorus, be affected, it is called dolor seu
colica ventriculi; especially if it come of wind.

The pains of the Guts may also be distinguished, because one while the small
guts, and other whiles the thick guts are grieved.

As often as the upper part of the small gut, (nearest the Stomach,) is pained,
because that part of the gut is over the right Region of the Lions, it makes
the Patient (and sometimes the Physician) think that the pain is in them.

But if that part of the small gut which rises up from the Loins and
Mesenterie, (Toward the left Hypochondrium) be afflicted with rendings and
distensions, with a notable hardness, this is attributed to the Spleen, even by
some Physicians, although without any solid reason; when indeed this distending
pain is altogether Hypochondriacal.

If the pain be in the Gut Ileon, it is thence called Iliaca Passio, which has
been already treated of.

Whatsoever pain is raised in the Gut Colon, may be called Colica Passio.

These may be distinguished from one another, chiefly from the situation of
either Gut.

For the Gut Ileon is for the most part contorted hither and thither, up and
down about the region of the Navel, and from thence a little upward; but the
Colon from the Navel downward, the pain of the Cholick generally pressing to
the bottom of the Belly, as well as to each side, and the Back, etc. according
as the Gut is writhed which is almost in the manner of a Roman S. being rolled
to the Navel, and from thence with a remarkable winding through the middle of
the Belly, it is writhed to the left kidney, and groin, and so down to the Os
sacrum, and bladder, and ends in the right Gut, whence the pain rising in the
circuit and circumference of the Belly below the Navel may truly be called
Cholical.

Sometimes there is a hot distending pain Cholica Passio.
with pulsation and inflammation in the latter part of the thick Guts called
Rectum; and this is either with a troublesome rending, as in the internal or
blind Hemorrhoids; or else it is a corroding pain, accompanied with more or
less itching, perpetually provoking to siege as in the Tenesmus, which often
times Tenesmus
follow a Dysentery or bloody flux.

In these various pains of the Guts, there Signs.
is one while a hot burning with pulsation, and other whiles a cold chilness
seems to be fixed; pricking, and (as it were) boring the bowels; sometimes
there is a distension of the bowels, pressing them with a sense of weight,
wonderfully writhing and contorting them with such a tearing corroding pain,
that the sick cannot give an explanation of the grief, and misery which they
endure.

The causes are either external, or internal. Causes.


The external are wounds or contusions, caused by external violence.

The internal causes are diverse; sometimes Worms may be the cause.

But a burning pain is produced either by an obstruction of the Capillary veins
of the Stomach or Guts, by which the blood is forced to stand still in the
vessels till at length (after a great distension) the vessels burst, and the
blood is effus'd, which breeds an inflammation, and a manifest pulsation
about the part affected, by which it may be distinguished from any other Kind.

But for the most part, a burning and corroding pain rises from Choler too
fat, powerfully and vitiously raising an effervescency with the juice of the
Pancreas too acid; as experience teaches in outward things; for if you pour
Spirit of Vitriol to oil of Turpentine, it will presently raise an
effervescency joined with a notable heat and burning.

This burning pain is chiefly felt in the region of the Loins, because there is
the conflux of Choler, and the juice of the Pancreas; and from thence arises
vicious sharp vapors, which produce griping pains of the Stomach, and pricking
pains in the Guts, as also other wandering pains therein.

If the pain be chill and cold, it is caused from the juice of the Pancreas
very acid and sharp; which raises a vicious effervescency with Choler (not
oily) and phlegm together, as we may observe, if we mix Spirit of Vitriol with
any volatile Salt not oily, how it will raise an effervescency, coupled with a
notable Chilness, and Coldness only sensible; hence we may conclude, that the
operation of the acid Spirit in producing cold, is much promoted by phlegm.

The cause of the Colic is over viscous Cause of the Colic.
phlegm, mixed with Choler, peccant both in its Saltish acrimony, and volatile
oiliness; by which the viscous phlegm is rarifi'd into Wind; and if the
excrements are contained beyond their course, they harden, and adhere to the
Gut, whereby the natural ferment is vitiated, and the windy blasts are more and
more rarifi'd, and being shut up and remaining in the Cavity of the Gut Colon,
it causes a violent distension and contraction of it.

But if the aforesaid humors be mixed with the juice of the Pancreas over
sharp, acid and harsh; then there is a wonderful sense of contortion in the
part affected, urging and writhing from place to place, according to the
winding or rolling of the Gut.

If this wind pierces through the Guts, Observation.
into the Cavity of the Belly, it expandeth the Peritonoeum, and so inflateth
the whole Abdomen, and causes a Tympany. Tympany.


These Distempers are all dangerous, and Progn.
sometimes mortal, especially if a violent Fever be complicated with them.

We must vary the cure according to the diversity of the causes. Cure.


A burning corroding pain may be cured, by tempering too fat Choler with Acids,
as Spirit of Niter, etc. being mixed with Opiates. For example.

Take the Waters of Fennel, Fumitory, Iulep.
Sorrel, Succory, of each three ounces; Cinamon-water, distilled Vinegar,
Syrups of Violets and white Poppies, of each two ounces; Laudanum opiatum ten
grains; Spirit of Niter twenty drops; mix it.

Let the sick often take a Spoonful of this Julep, till the heat and pain be
diminished, and sleep be procured.

The following Emulsion is also profitable, and therefore may sometimes be
given for a change.

Take the four greater cold Seeds, white Emulsion.
Poppy-seeds, of each one ounce; French Barley boiled four ounces; with two
quarts of Barley water; let it be made an Emulsion; and add to it Syrups of
Violets, and white Poppies, of each two ounces; Salt prunella half an ounce,
Spirit of Niter thirty drops; mix it, and give four Spoonfulls every two or
three hours.

If Choler be two plentiful, let it be educ'd with this or the like mild
Cholagogue.

Take Damask-rose water two ounces; Purging Potion.
Manna, Diaphaenicon, Electuary of the juice of Roses, of each two drachms;
Tartar Vitriolated ten grains; mix it, and take it in the morning.

The Cholagogue Electuary of Sylvius is also excellent, of which you shall have
the receipt at the latter end of the Book.

Chilness and cold pains may be cured by tempering the over sharp acidity of
the juice of the Pancreas.

Lixivial Salts both fixed and volatile are excellent in this Case, as also any
Aromatic Spirit of wine, Treacle water, etc. with which may be mixed Coral,
Pearl, Crab's-eyes, Antimon. Diaphoret. etc. and let the body be composed to
sweat.

The following forms may serve for example.

Take the waters of Treacle, Fennel, Syrup Cordial Diaphoretick.
of the juice of Carduus, of each half an ounce; powder of Crab's-eyes, Antimony
Diaphoretick, Salt of Wormwood, of each ten grains; mix it, and give it the
sick to cause sweat.

You may also give some of this Cordial Julep, to uphold the Spirits when they
sweat.

Take of Tincture of Cinnamon, the Carminative Cordial Iulep.
Spirit of Sylvius, of each half an ounce; the waters of Mint, Baum, of each
two ounces; Syrups of the juice of Oranges, Clove-gilliflowers of each one
ounce; Laudanum opiat. four grains; Oil of Cloves six drops; mix it, and give
two or three spoonfulls of it often.

Let Sylvius's Carminative Plaster be spread on Leather, and applied to the
region of the Stomach and Navel.

As for the cure of the Cholick, let an Emollient Cure of the Cholick.
Clyster (which discusseth wind) be given often, at least twice in a day.

Take the roots of Marshmallows one Clyster.
ounce; Pellitory of the Wall, Mallows, Marshmallows, the Flowers of Melilot;
Chamomel, of each two handfulls; the Seeds of Anise, sweet Fennel, Dill, the
Berries of Bays and Juniper, of each one ounce; let them be cleansed, bruised
and boiled in two quarts of Whey till half of it be consumed; then strain it,
and add Electuary Diaprunum, Cariocostinum, Benedicta laxativa, of each half an
ounce; Oils of Dill, Chamomel, Roses, of each six drachms; Oil of Hartshorn
ten drops; mix it for two Clysters.

The smoke of Tobacco may be blown into the Clyster-bladder, and given with it,
with good success.

Besides, a Clyster may be made of Canary wine, or warm Cows Milk, and a little
Honey, or Malossus, and given sometimes to soften the hard excrements, and to
dissolve those that are too viscous, whereby they may be the easier evacuated,
and also Wind invited to an easy outlet.

To drink the Decoction before prescribed, will much conduce to ease the sick;
also of the same ingredients, you may make fomentations and Cataplasms,

But if the Patient do not care for the trouble of such medicines; you may
anoint the Belly with this ointment.

Take Ointments of Marshmallows, Martiatum, Ointment.
Oils of Capers, white Lillies, of each one ounce; Oil of Bricks half an ounce;
mix it.

After which apply a large Plaster of Sylvius's Empl.
Carminative Empl. to the Belly.

The following Julep taken often by spoonfulls will much conduce to ease the
pain, and discuss the wind.

Take the Waters of Mint, Scurvigrass, Fennel, Carminative Iulep.
Lovage, Pennyroyal, of each one ounce; the carminative Spirit of Sylvius,
Tinctures of Cinnamon and Castor, of each half an ounce; Syrups of Mint, Fennel
and Mirtles, of each six drachms; Oil of Mace distilled ten drops; Spirits of
Hartshorn and Niter, of each twenty drops; Laudanum opiatum ten grains; mix it
for a Julep.

The Oil of Hartshorn is a very Potent, though ungrateful remedy in this
disease.

Also the Balsam of Sulphur made with Oil of Anise-seed, Amber, or Juniper is
excellent in vanquishing this rebellious distemper.

After the violence of pain is abated, you may purge the Body with this
following Decoction.

Take of Guiacum four ounces; Roots of Purging Decoction.
China, Sassafras, Lovage, of each one ounce; Seeds of Anise, sweet Fennel,
Berries of Bays and Juniper, of each two drachms; let them be cleansed, bruised
and boiled in two quarts of Fountain Water till half be consumed, strain it,
and add of the best Manna, Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, of each four ounces;
Cinamon-water two ounces; Spirit of Niter two drachms; mix it, and take two
ounces of it every Morning and Evening.

The following Pills with Gums will be also very useful, and potent to educe
the viscous Phlegm, etc.

Take Galbanum prepared with Vinegar of Purging Pills.
Squills two drachms; Resins of Jallop and Scammony, Powders of Castor,
Mastick, Mirrh, Vitriol of Mars calcined to whiteness, of each half a dram;
Saffron ten grains; Powder of Troches, Alhandal two Scruples; Oils of
Hartshorn, Cloves, of each ten drops; beat them all into a Mass for Pills.

Let the sick take three or four of these Pills in the morning fasting, which
will kindly expel the vicious humors.

After which let them take some of the aforesaid Julep to procure rest and
ease. Oily volatile Salts, and Spirit of Niter are excellent, not only to
correct Choler, and other peccant humors, but do potently discuss wind.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Worms.
WOrms may be generated in all parts of the Body; those which are bred in
Ulcers, may more fitly be called Maggots, in Latin termetes; but I shall only
treat of those which are bred in the internal parts of the Body.

Every man living in all places, and climes, does more or less suffer by the
frequent generation of these little intestine Enemies; especially the weaker
state of Man, as Infants and the female Sex; whose ferment, or digestive heat
being not sufficiently master of their great moisture; part of it is turned
into putrefaction, which corrupts the humors.

Wherefore it is no wonder that active Nature (being never at rest) by the
quickening animating heat, which causes Concoction, does frequently generate
Worms either in the Stomach or Guts, according to the various occurrences of
matter, and seminal dispositions.

There are three or four kinds of these inbred disturbers, which we may take
notice of.

The first are called in Latin Teretes, a terendo, quod quasi terendo rotundum
sit, vel ex Teretes.
(...), i. e. terebrando.

They are long and round like Earthworms but whiter; they are more common than
the rest, and are bred in the Guts, but do sometimes get up into the Stomach.

The second are called lumbrici Lati and longi, because they are broad and long.

They are also called (...), and (...), ex Taenia.
(...), tendo. i. e. fascia extensa. Because they are something like a woman's
Head-band.

This worm is full of joints, and is a native of the Jejunum, which is a fit
place to nourish these Milk-suckers, or craving Vermin; there being the most
supply of milky Juice, by reason of the numerous lacteal Vessels.

Some of these worms have been of an incredible length. Pliny lib 11. not.
hist. cap. 33. affirms that some have been thirty foot in length.

If you peruse Schenckiu's his observations, lib. 3. page 411. you may read
variety of such Histories.

The third are called in Greek (...), a Ascarides.
(...), salio.

In Latin they are called Vermes exigui intestinorum, quod ex (...), e sordibus
nascantur.

They are little and slender; some call them Arse-worms, because they commonly
lie in the Intestinum rectum, near the Sphincter Muscle.

There is another kind of worms (though seldom seen) in the Colon, like the
Botts in Horses; they may be called in Latin Vermina, Vermina.
ex vertendo, quod rependo torqueant sese, and vertant cum quodam minuto motu.
Ex (...) serpo.

The material cause of all worms is (most commonly) the inconcocted part of the
Chylus which is produced of such nourishment as easily putrifieth in the
Stomach; as green fruit, etc. which gives sufficient matter to these intruding
Vermin.

This part of the Chylus being crude, and unfit for sanguification, is left
(undrawn by the lacteal Veins) in the intestines, where it is mixed with
pituitous humors, and elaborated by the temperate heat of the guts, which is
the efficient cause of such like generations.

The form which lay hid in this matter before, is afterward generated by the
temperate heat of the Bowels, and according to the diversity of the latent
forms, sundry sorts of worms are bred.

In the aforementioned title of Schenckius, you may read of the stupendous
Figures of Worms, set down by learned and famous Men in their Monuments.

The signs of worms are many.

If they be round, there is a pinching or Signs of Teretes.
gnawing pain in the Belly, especially being hungry; also a stinking Breath, a
frequent dry Cough, Loathing, and sometimes Vomiting and Looseness, with
distention of the Belly, and a symptomatical Fever; the sleep is often
disturbed with horrible Dreams, and starting and gnashing of the Teeth; the
Face is pale the Nose itcheth; wherefore Children that have them, do often rub
and pick their Nose.

If the long broad worm be in the small Signs of Taenia.
guts, the party has an insatiable Appetite, the Body consumes, having quick
stools after eating, in which there is often a substance like to the Seeds of
Cucumbers.

If the small worms called Ascarides, be Signs of Ascarides.
bred in the intestinum rectum, there is a painful itching in Anus with
provocation to stool, in which they often come away.

If the short thick worms like Botts be bred Signs of Vermina.
in the Colon, there is a wringing troublesome pain, and they often come from
the Patient night and day, without any Excrements, or motion to stool.

These last mentioned, are of all others the worst, and most difficult to
destroy, especially Progn.
if they continue long, and grow numerous, because they enclose themselves in a
Cystis or Bladder for shelter, which they run out and in to, as a Coney into
her Borough, whereby they defend themselves from the power of those things
which are given to kill them.

The broad long worms are also hard to destroy; and if the round ones continue
long, and are many, they cause Convulsions, and sometime Epilepsie; and if they
come out alive in acute Fevers, it betokens great Malignity of the morbifick
matter, which they labor to shun.

The Ascarides are not dangerous, for they may be easily killed with Clysters.

As for the Curation, it is performed by two Cure.
indications; the first is by killing of them, the second by expelling of them
when killed

And here the place or residence of the offending Vermin is to be considered,
viz. whether it be the Stomach or Bowels; if the Bowels, whether the most
external, as the Rectum, or more internal, as the Colon, Ileon, or Jejunum; and
according to the different seat of such internal offensives of life, we must
differently level our remedies, and manner of Cure.

If the Stomach be the residence of these notorious offenders; they may then be
killed, and pumped upwards by an Antimonial vomit.

But large worms, which are not natives of the Stomach, but (as is said before)
of the Jejunum, or other next productive guts, may be most properly conveyed
downwards by the force of Aloetick and Mercurial Medicaments.

And for as much as the passage is tedious for such slow marchers as worms are;
which being but sick it may be with one dose, and loath to be dislodged;
therefore they must be often stimulated to their exit (at least five or six
days together) by protruding Medicaments, till they be all destroyed, and
evacuated.

The following Pill is excellent.

Take Extract. Rudii, pil. Ruffi, of each one Scruple; Mercur. dulcis sixteen
grains; Purging Pills.
Oil of Juniper three drops; make them into eight Pills.

A young Child may take a small Pill of this every day, and those that are
adult, three or four of them, for five or six days, till all the Vermin are
killed and ejected.

And to render the whole Region of the Bowels an uneasy residence to such
unwelcome guests, an Aloetick Plaster applied to the Navel is never to be
omitted; and farther to specificate the same, and all other Medicines, either
internally exhibited, or externally applied; I advise you to mix some of the
Powder of the ejected worms (of what kind soever) with them, which you will
find most effectual to destroy the living Vermin.

Also all medicaments which partake of mercurial irradiation are destructive to
Worms wherever they are.

Our common Quicksilver, if boiled an hour or two in fair Water, renders the
whole (without communication of taste or scent, and also without any loss of
weight) a certain destroyer of Worms in humane Bodies; which may be either
given at the Mouth, or sweetened with Sugar, and given as a Clyster; after which
give two or three doses of the aforesaid Pills to expel the dead Vermin, and
verminous matter.

CHAP. IX. Of a Looseness, or flux of the Belly.
AS often as the expulsion of what is contained in the Guts, happens quicker,
oftener, and more plentifully than is natural, it may be called a Looseness; of
which there are diverse sorts, which may be distinguished according to the
different things voided.

1. If Food be evacuated crude and undigested, Lienteria.
it is called in Greek (...), and in Latin also Lienteria, i. e. levitas
intestinorum.

2. If the Food be fermented in the Stomach, and the Chyle passes into the
Guts, and the nutriment of the Chyle be not there separated from the Excrement,
but is voided whitish like a Pultess, much like the Excrements of those that
have the Jaundice, it may be called in Greek (...), and in Latin Coeliaca, i.
e. alvinus, vel ventralis dispositio; Coeliaca.
of which there is another kind, which for distinction sake may be named the
Chyle-like Looseness; wherein the Food is both fermented, and severed into
Chyle and Excrements, and yet are voided confusedly together.

3. If not only Food, but waterish and choleric humors are often and
plentifully voided, it is called in Greek (...) Diarrhoea.
fluo.

It may be called in English a Choleric Looseness.

There are diverse other kinds of Looseness, which may be called Diarrhoea; for
if thick and viscous Phlegmatic humors are frequently and plentifully voided,
it may thence be called a Phlegmatic Diarrhoea; if the humors be serous, it
is a serous Diarrhoea; if fat and oily Excrements are frequently evacuated, it
may thence be named an unctuous Diarrhoea, etc.

4. If the dejection be purulent, corrupted, excrementitious matter, together
with pure Blood, it may then be called in Greek (...), Dysentery.
(...), quod hic non tam difficultatem quam detrimentum notat, and (...)
intestinum, ab (...) intus.

It may be called in Latin Tormina quod dolor torquentur intestina; In English
it is vulgarly called the Bloudy-flux.

If there be a perpetual endeavor to go to stool, and nothing but a little
mucous purulent matter voided with great pain and straining, it may be called
in Greek (...), vel (...), ex (...) tendo. Tenasmus.


In English it may be called a neediness, there being a continual need and
desire to go to stool.

This Distemper properly belongs to a Dysentery, because it does most
commonly follow it, and sometimes with a procidentia Any.

To a Bloudy-flux may also be referred the Hemorrhoids.
immoderate flux of the Hemorrhoids, which may be known from a Dysentery, both
from the place affected, and the great quantity of the bloody purging.

It is called in Greek (...), ex (...), sanguis, and (...), profluvium.

Also the flux of the Liver (if there be any such Disease) may be referred
hither, in which the excrementitious liquour ejected, is like the washing of
bloody flesh.

This Distemper is called in Greek (...), qui ex hepate laborant.

In Latin it is called Hepaticus affectus, vel fluxus est serosi et sanguinei
humoris per alvum excretio, propter Hepatis imbecilitatem.

The causes of all fluxes of the Belly, are Causes.
either external, or internal.

The external, are any of the six non-natural things immoderately used, which
weakens the Stomach, also the taking of any venomous thing, as Arsnick, Mercury
sublimate, etc. which presently destroys the ferment of the Stomach and Guts.

The internal cause of the Lientery, is weakness Causes of Lientery.
of the Stomach, that it cannot retain any food received into it, but striveth
to expel it.

The Jaundice-like flux is caused by the sluggishness Cause of the
Iaundice-like flux.
of Choler, so that it is not carried down to the Guts, to promote the
separation of the useful, from the unusefull parts of the Chyle.

The Chyle-like flux is also caused by the Cause of the Chylelike flux.
same, so that the straining of Chyle through the spongy crust of the Guts into
the Lacteal veins is hindered; the orifices or pores tending to the Lacteal
veins, being obstructed by over thick and viscous phlegmatic humors.

A Choleric Diarrhoea is caused by oversalt, Causes of the diverse kinds of
Diarrhoea.
sharp and serous Choler; together with phlegm, and the juice of the Pancreas
too watery and fluid.

A phlegmatic Diarrhoea is caused by such things as do breed much viscous
phlegm.

A serous Diarrhoea arises most frequently from Spittle, and the juice of the
Pancreas too Serous.

A fat, oily, or unctuous looseness, does follow the over much use of too fat
food.

A Dysentery does proceed either from the Cause of a Dysentery.
thickness of the blood, by reason of over viscous phlegm, being mixed with
Lympha, or the juice of the Pancreas too acid, accompanied with sorrow of mind;
whereby the blood does become too gross for its wonted circulation through the
Capillary Vessels of the Guts; wherefore it causes a great distension of them,
till at length they burst, and pour out the blood into the cavity of the Guts.

Or else it may be caused from Choler too salt, sharp and plenteous in the
blood, whereby it does become extravagantly serous, and eager, through
extraordinary fermentation, extremely agitating the humors to a Colliquation,
especially where fierceness of anger or great heat of mind do concur; by which
the blood is the more rarifi'd to pierce through the tender restraint of the
vessels, and does flow out by indirect ways, sometimes by great loss, to the
endangering of life.

A Tenasmus is caused by a phlegmatic viscous Cause of Tenasmus.
humor, joined with a sharp acid humor, which does fret the Gut about the
siege, stirring up a troublesome Ulcer there.

The flux of the Hemorrhoids, and of the Cause of Hemorrhoids, etc.
Liver, is to be deduced from much serous matter mixed with the blood, and also
relaxing the vessels.

The Hemorrhoids are either critical, which uses to ease the sick; or
symptomatical, and much weakneth them.

The signs of Fluxes are manifest, from Signs.
what has been said.

1. If any looseness continue long, with loathing, Progn.
it is an ill sign, especially if it be with a Fever.

2. If the small Guts are affected, the pain is sharper than when it is in the
thick Guts.

3. In the Dysentery, if the dejections be very bloody, or black and fetid,
with great Thirst, Hicket, etc. for the most part they are mortal signs; but if
the erosion be only in the internal membrane of the Gut, and there be no great
pain, nor other bad symptom, there is great hopes of recovery.

If the blood and humors be too thin and Cure.
serous, they must be corrected, and evacuated.

Chalk, and Hartshorn, (or any other burnt bone) reduced to powder, and given
often in a small quantity, does imbibe and correct watery moisture, and also
over much fatness, which may be the cause of a looseness.

After which the peccant humors may be evacuated by stool with Hydragogues,
and by sweat and urine, with Sudorificks and Diuretics.

Toasted Rhubarb will satisfy to many indications, seeing that it does not
only evacuate water together with Choler abounding, but will soon correct the
over-loose body, by its mild tartness.

Wherefore when the Blood does abound with much serous liquour, let the sick
take this Powder in a little Broth.

Take the Powder of Jallop, Cinnamon, of each fifteen grains; Powder of Rhubarb
Purging Powder.
tosted half a dram; mix it

After the operation of it, you may give the following Cordial by spoonfulls.

Take the Waters of Plantain, Comfry, Cordial Iulep.
of each two ounces; Cinamon-water half an ounce; Syrup of Mirtles one ounce;
Confectio de Hyacintho, Diascordium, of each one dram; Laudanum opiat. four
grains; mix it.

It will be also convenient sometimes to educe the humors by urine and sweat;
for which I commend the following Decoction of China, etc.

Take the Roots of Burdock, the five opening Decoction.
Roots, Sarzeparilla, Contra yerva, of each one ounce; China four ounces;
Gromwell-seeds, Juniper Berries, of each half an ounce; let them be cleansed,
bruised and boiled in two quarts of fountain water, 'till half of it be boiled
away; then strain it, and add Syrup of the five opening Roots six ounces;
Spirit of Niter one dram; mix it.

Let the sick take a quarter of a pint of this warm, twice or thrice a day, and
especially in the morning fasting, which will the easier procure a breathing
sweat, or else urine more plentiful, by which the serosity of the blood will
be consumed by little and little, so that the blood and humors will thereby
become more pure.

If a Dysentery, or Bloudy-flux arise from a sharp humor corroding the
Vessels; it may be cured by correcting, and tempering the sharp acid humors,
and consolidating the Vessels fretted.

The following Powder is excellent to correct and amend the aforesaid acid
humors, and stop all fluxes of blood.

Take the Powders of red Coral, Pearls Powder.
prepared, white Chalk, Dragons blood, of each half a dram; mix it for six
doses, which may be taken in three spoonfulls of the following Julep, every two
or three hours.

Take the Waters of Plantain, Comfry, of Astringent Iulep.
each two ounces; Tincture of Cinnamon, Syrups of Quinces, Mirtles, of each one
ounce; Laudanum opiat. ten grains; Oil of Juniper ten drops; mix it.

If there be an Ulcer in the thick Guts, and Clysters can come to the part
affected, let the following be often injected, and instruct the sick to retain
them so long as they can.

Take new Milk wherein Steel has been Clyster.
quenched one pint; Honey of Roses one ounce; Venice Turpentine half an ounce;
the Yelk of one Egg; Balsam of Sulphur four drops; mix it.

The following Bolus may be sometimes given in the Morning fasting.

Take the Powder of Rhubarb tosted two Purging Bolus.
Scruples; Nutmeg one scruple; make it into a Bolus with Conserves of red Roses.

And this Bolus may be given at Night going to bed.

Take Diascordium, Conserves of red Roses, Bolus. Opiat.
of each half a dram; Laudanum opiat. three grains; mix it.

By the frequent use of these choice Medicines, the Ulcer will be cleans'd, the
Gripes asswag'd, and the Consolidation of the ulcerated Gut (both in the
Tenasmus and Dysentery, etc.) will be wonderfully promoted.

But if the Ulcer be in the small Guts, the following vulnerary Decoction will
more conduce to the Cure.

Take the Roots of Comfry, Plantain, Knotgrass, Decoction.
of each two ounces; the Tops of Saint John's wort, Sanicle, Germander, red
Roses, of each one handful; Shavings of Hartshorn, Cinnamon, of each half an
ounce; let them be cleansed, bruised and boiled in three quarts of
Fountain Water wherein steel has been quenched, till half of it be boiled
away, then strain it, and add Syrup of dried Roses, Tincture of Cinnamon,
distilled Vinegar, Syrup of Marshmallows, of each two ounces; mix it, and give
the sick four spoonfulls every two or three hours.

If you add two or three drops of Balsam of Sulphur, made with Oil of
Anise-seed to every dose of the Decoction, etc. it will be the more effectual
both to cleanse and consolidate the Ulcer.

The flux of the Hemorrhoids, if it be symptomatical, and weaken the sick, is
then to be hindered, which may be effectually done by the afore-mentioned
Medicines.

If much serous Liquour can so dilute the Blood, and relax the Vessels, that
part of it may be carried out of them into the Guts, and produce a Flux like
the washing of Flesh, commonly called a Flux of the Liver; it may be cured by
driving forward the serous Liquour out of the Body, by Sudorificks, and
Diuretics; and also by tart strengthening things that repair the hurt of the
loosened Vessels.

The Diuretic decoction of China, before mentioned, is excellent in this case,
to be taken as is there directed.

Also the following Diaphoretick may be sometimes used with good success.

Take the Waters of Treacle, Cinnamon, of Sudorifick.
each half an ounce; Plantain-water two ounces; distilled Vinegar three
drachms; Confectio de Hyacintho, Diascordium, of each one dram; Powder of
Crab's-eyes, Antimony Diaphoretick, of each half a dram; Syrups of Mirtles,
dried Roses, of each six drachms; mix it for two doses.

Also the Powder and astringent Julep prescribed in page 192, 193. is excellent
to corroborate the loosened Vessels, etc.

Anoint the Belly with the Oil of Quinces, Mirtles, Roses, Wormwood, etc. mixed
with unguent. Comitissae; which is also good in all Fluxes of the Belly.

CHAP. X. Of the dry Belly-ach.
THIS cruciating disease may be called in Greek (...), and in Latin Spasmus
Abdominis, quod sub umbelico est ad Pubem; and because of the additional
Torments, it may be also named Tormen Abdominis, quod dolor torquetur Abdomen.

This disease does also need as well the Name, as the invocation of Miserere
mei Deus; the sick being in such extreme misery, that it is incredible to all
but them that have endured it.

The most urgent and exquisite pain under this affect, being in that most
tender and sensible part, viz. the Belly, may seem to have some Alliance with
the Iliack or Colic passion; and indeed they are sometimes its Concomitants,
but much different from it.

The causes of this lamentable Distemper, Causes.
are either external, or internal.

The external general occasional cause is contracting Cold in the Region of the
Belly, etc. which does cramp not only the Muscles of the Abdomen, but also the
tender Fibers of the Intestines, cruciating all the affected parts with
obdurate Contractions; which is more aggravated when the Moon does come to
opposition with the Sun. Which may be also observed in all Spasms and
convulsive motions, that about the full of the Moon, the tide of such nervous
diseases does rise highest: Especially in those places where the direct aspects
of the nocturnal luminary have the most power; which demonstration will evince
to be between the Tropicks, which many of our Mariners, (who have sailed that
way) can tell by woeful experience.

Another external procuring cause of this grievous disease is a mineral Gas
ascending from the Caverns of the Earth, infesting the Air with its poisonous
Fumes, whereby not only the tender fibrous, and nervous parts of the Belly are
often times crampt with Convulsive spasms; but the mineral Fumes being inspired
with the Air into the Body, produce most eminent apparent evils, as the
Corruption of the Chyle into porraceous and adust Choler, from whence follows
irritating Vomitings, and the Constipation of the Belly, with obdurateness of
the excrements, which inflames the Bowels, and entails Signs.
a Symptomatical fever, with a heavy and slow pulse; and as the pain does
aggravate more and more, there is want of sleep and rest, with other
uneasiness, and commotions of Body and Mind; as the Operatours in Chemistry
have sometimes experience of (to their cost and trouble) in mineral
preparations; for if a Vessel chance to break, the sharp and acid Vapors, or
Gas of the mineral, immediately seiseth the Animal spirits of all that are in
the Elaboratory; by which they are moved unequally (against the will) through
the Nerves to the Musculous parts, which causes Convulsive motions, with
trembling and shaking of the Limbs, and other accumulated evils.

The like grievous Symptoms (though not so violent) happen to many People that
inhabit near the mineral Mines in Hungaria, and also in some Places of England
as Derbyshire, etc. Where there are Lead-works, from whence mineral Fumes
continually ascend from the separating Oar, which infesteth the Air, and is a
great producer of such Convulsive effects.

At the first seizure of this evil, the Muscles of the Abdomen, and sometimes
those of the Breast and Back, (through contractions) prove hard and painful,
as in our ordinary Cramps; which Symptoms will evince, that these Vapors are
peccant in an acid Acrimony.

The internal Cause, is also sour Vapors arising most commonly out of the
small Guts; which the concurring symptoms (considered and weighed with an
attentive mind) will confirm; for these Vapors being sharp, are driven forward
into the Nerves, and gnawing them with great pain, aggravate and produce this
Convulsive spasm.

1. If this miserable and afflictive Distemper Progn.
has continued to a long durance, it causes such obstructions in the fibrous
and nervous Passages of the Muscles, that thereby Lameness and an Atrophy soon
succeeds, increasing the Weakness of all the Members of the Body, till at
length it ends in a Paralitical resolution of them.

2. If a pregnant Woman, or a Woman after Abortion, be afflicted with this
grievous evil; it is very dangerous, and many times mortal.

As for the Cure, we must endeavor to Cure.
ease the pain, and strengthen the weak parts with all expedition,

The pain may be eased, and diminished as well by internal, as external
Anodynes and Narcoticks; to allay the violent Motion of the Animal spirits, and
abate the grievous Spasms succeeding.

The following Cordial Diaphoretick opiate is excellent in this Case.

Take the Waters of Fennel, Peony, Treacle, Diaphoretick. Opiate.
of each one ounce; Syrups of Stoechas, Peony, Scurvigrass, of each half an
ounce; Powder of Crab's-eyes, Antimony Diaphoretick, Bezoar-mineral, Salt of
Tartar vitriolated, Salt of Amber, volatile Salt of Hartshorn, of each one
scruple; Tincture of Castor two drachms, Spirit of Salt Armoniack, Oil of
Cloves, of each four drops; Laudanum opiat. six grains; mix it, and give four
spoonfulls every three hours.

By the frequent taking of this Volatile and Anodyne Sudorifick, the peccant
humors will be tempered and diminisht, and the inordinate, involuntary, and
impetuous motion of the Animal spirits will be reduced, and brought to
tranquillity, by which the binding Constrictions of the Belly-ach will be the
easier removed.

Bathing in this distemper, has been often used with admirable success; for by
the frequent use thereof, the cutaneous and muscular Fibers will not only be
relaxed from contracted Spasms; but the pores will be also kept open for the
constant discharge of transpiring Particles.

A natural Bath, such as is in the City of Bathe, is excellent; but when it is
not to be had, an artificial Bath may be very useful for the ends proposed.

For example.

Take of Elder, Dwarf-elder, Vervain, Betony, Chamomel, Bays, Rhue, Time,
Hyssop, Bath.
Ground Pine, Organ, Pennyroyal, Sage, sweet Marjoram, of each six handfulls;
Flowers of Stoechas, Chamomel, Melilot, of each four handfulls; Roots of
Pellitory of Spain, Briony, Master-wort, Virginia Snakeroot, of each four
ounces; Spicknard, Berries of Juniper and Bays, of each two ounces; Brimstone
six pound; Salt Niter two pound; let them be cleansed, bruised and boiled in
twenty Gallons of Fountain Water, till a third part be boiled away.

Let the sick be well bathed in it, as often as strength will permit; and let
them sit therein, as long as they may well bear the same.

Then let them be rubbed dry, and removed into a Bed; and let the affected parts
be well anointed with this (or the like) fragrant Ointment.

Take Oil of Earthworms, Ointment of Ointment.
Orange-flowers, Jessamy, of each three ounces; Oil of Mace by expression one
ounce; Oil of Juniper, Bricks, of each two drachms; mix it.

As often as the Body is costive, let a Suppository, or carminative Clyster be
administered to make it soluble.

Let the weakened parts be fortified with the aforesaid unguent; upon which
apply a Plaster of Sylvius's carminative Emplaster spread on Leather, which you
may remove once in twenty four hours, using warm frictions to the pained parts,
and apply the Plaster again; and over it you may apply a Fox-skin dressed, which
will keep the parts warm, and conduce to the cure, which course may be
continued 'till strength be restored to the grieved Limbs.

CHAP. XI. Of the Yellow Iaundice.
THE Yellow Jaundice is called in Greek (...), ab avicula quoe (...) dicitur,
Icterus.
quod ea oculos flavi vel aurei coloris habet.

It is also called Icterus in Latin; it being a spreading of a yellowish Color
over the whole body.

It was the common received opinion of the Ancients, that the chief cause of
this Disease, is an obstruction of the Cystick passage to the small Gut, so
that Choler is thereby wholly hindered in its natural descent; wherefore it does
ascend to the Liver, and so to the Blood, with which it is transferred to the
habit and superficies of the body, where it does show it self in its colors.

But it may be manifested from many observations, and experiments, both
Anatomical, and Practical; that the Jaundice may be produced without an
obstruction of the passage of Choler.

Although I suppose that the Jaundice may probably be raised by an obstruction
of the Meatus Hepaticus: for if there should be a great stoppage in this
Vessel, by any glutinous or lapidescent matter, the Choler that is generated in
it may possibly regurgitate (there being no Valves to hinder it) and thereby
become mixed with the Blood, by which means it may (in a short time) be
conveyed over the whole Body.

But if the Meatus Cisticus should be stopped by a small stone, etc. as I have
sometimes seen in dissecting Icterical Patients, where I observed that the
Excrements were not dyed so yellow as usual: yet it is impossible that there
should be any regurgitation of Choler to the Liver out of the Gall, by reason
of the three Valves looking from without inwards, which do potently hinder the
recourse of it: and although the Meatus Hepaticus is without Valves, yet seldom
in a Jaundice, is either that passage, or the Ductus Communis obstructed, but
many times wider, as the most ingenious Salmon has accurately observed.

Wherefore that we may the better judge Cause. I.
of the true Cause of this Disease, let us first consider that Man's Body
abounds with an Animal salt, which does circulate with the Blood through the
whole Body, so that not only the internal, but superficial parts are
replenished therewith.

2. Secondly, it is the Nature of Volatile and Animal salts to sublime, and
upon their mixture with other fit Bodies to excite or stir up new appearances
of Colors according to the Nature of the Salt; for if a solution of Salt of
Tartar be mixed with a solution of sublimate in fair Water, it gives in a moment
a reddish, yellowish or orange tawny Color, although both the solutions be as
clear as Cristal, and with Armoniack salts in proper liquors, may be made many
Colors to appear.

From whence we may judge, that if the Animal salt of Man's Body become too
volatile, or be too much sublimed: which may be done, either by the biting of
an enraged Viper, or by the power of poison, or from the over heating of the
Body by violent exercise, or by exceeding sorrow of mind, or great passion, or
by excessive drinking of hot liquors, or from burning Fevers; whereby the
universal Body comes to be inflamed, the Spirits vehemently agitated, and
thereby the Volatile saline Principle to be violently moved out of its Place or
Domicil, to the Circumference of the Body; but meeting with the viscous Juice
of the Cutis is there hindered from flying away; and being dissolved and mixed
with the Cutaneous Humidity it excites the Jaundice, whether yellow, black or
greenish, according to the Color of the Poison which the Patient has casually
taken, or predisposition of the Body to so notable a mutation. Hence it is that
many (who have been in perfect health) have been suddenly invaded with this
Disease: some by the biting of an enraged Viper, others by running a race, etc.
who immediately after were all over as yellow as if they were dipped into the
Juice of Saffron; and yet notwithstanding it could not be judged that the
Gall-juice was either affected or disaffected in the least measure: for it
cannot in reason be supposed, that the Venom or Poison of the Viper should be
so particularly directed to the Gall, to work such an effect in so short a
time, as to distribute that viscous heavy Juice so universally over the whole
Body: much less can any one imagine, that either the drinking of strong
liquours, or any violent exercise, etc. should any ways so operate upon the
choleric Humor, as to volatize it, and so immediately disperse it universally
over the whole humane Frame; for it is impossible that the glutinous Substance
of Choler should be dispersed in so short a time to all the superficial Parts
of the Body.

Therefore it is more probable, that the volatile Animal salt of the Body,
being moved, and carried out of its Domicil, by the extreme heat of the
internal Parts, and violent Motion of the Spirits, and being mixed and dissolved
with the cutaneous Juice (as is before mentioned) does not only excite the
Jaundice, but may possibly be the Cause of Purple Spots in the Spotted Fever:
as also of many other sudden and great Changes in the Bodies of humane kind.

The Jaundice invading a Patient in a Fever (before the seventh, viz. the
Critical Progn.
day) is dangerous: if it comes upon an Inflammation of the Liver, or a Schirrus
and the Cure be not hastened, a Dropsy, Cachexy, or deadly pining will in a
short time succeed.

If it be critical upon acute Fevers nature Cure.
effects the Cure: if it be symptomatical, the Cure depends upon the Cure of
the Disease by which it comes.

If it be essential from the obstruction of the Meatus Hepaticus, the
obstruction must be opened.

If sorrow of mind or great passion be the Cause, it ought to be prevented as
much as may be, both by Philosophical and Theological reasons about any
troublesome matters, and by confirming the mind, whereby the sick may be the
better enabled to bear and suffer stoutly any adversity.

This ought to be observed also in all other Diseases.

If Ebriety be the cause I commend Sobriety to cure it. Sublata causa tollitur
effectus.

If the humors be over viscous or glutinous, the following Decoction will not
only alter and correct, but mildly educe the peccant humors, by which the
Jaundice may in a short time be cured.

Take of Rhubarb, the Roots of Madder, Smallage, the greater Celandine, of each
Decoction.
one ounce; the Flowers of Broom one handful; Hemp Seed two ounces; the Seeds
of Anise, Parsley and Columbines, of each half an ounce; Saffron two drachms;
white Tartar three drachms; let them be cleansed, bruised and boiled in
White Wind, and Fountain water, of each three pints, till the third part be
boiled away, then strain it, and add the best Manna, Syrup of Succory with
Rhubarb, of each three ounces; mix it.

Let the sick take four spoonfulls of this three times a day, till the viscous
phlegm and Choler be sufficiently evacuated, and the natural color of the body
restored.

As often as the Jaundice is caused by the poison of a Viper, or any other
venomous thing whatsoever, you must administer (as soon as possible) a volatile
sudorifick to correct and expel the venom.

The following will serve to both indications.

Take the waters of Carduus, Fennel, Fumitory, Sudorifick
of each two ounces; Treacle-water, Syrups of the juice of Carduus, red
Poppies, of each one ounce; tincture of Saffron two drachms; Venice-treacle
half a dram; Bezoar-mineral, Antimony diaphoretick, Salt of Hartshorn, of
each one scruple; Spirit of Salt-Armoniack six drops; Laudanum opiatum six
grains; mix it, and give three or four spoonfulls to provoke sweat, and after
it breaks forth, give a spoonful or two, now and then, to promote it.

Also this Decoction, or one like it may be prescribed for the Icterick
patient, it being both Sudorifick, and Diuretic.

Take the Roots of Scorzonera, Juniper, of Diuretic Decoction.
each two ounces; Roots of Master-wort, Sassaphras, of each half an ounce;
Berries of Juniper and Bays, of each one ounce and half; Seeds of Nettles, Hemp
and Columbines of each one ounce; shavings of Hartshorn three drachms; the
tops of Carduus, Scordium, Scabious, the lesser Centaury, of each one handful;
let them be cleansed, bruised and boiled in two quarts of Fountainwater, till
half of it be boiled away; then strain it, and add Syrup of the juice of
Carduus four ounces; Treacle-water two ounces; Salt of Tartar vitriolated two
drachms; mix it, and give four spoonfulls every two or three hours.

Soap of any sort, conduces to the cure of the Jaundice, upon a twofold
account, both by reason of its fixed lixivial Salt, and also by reason of its
fatness or oil; for the Lixivial Salt does correct and diminish the over
volatileness and spirituousness of the vitiated Choler, and the oil does blunt
the sharpness of the volatile and spirituous Salt ruling in Choler.

The following mixture is very effectual.

Take of Hemp Seed two ounces; Soap two Opiate.
drachms; bruise the seed, and boil it in half a pint of new Milk, till half of
it be consumed; then strain it, and add Syrup of Saffron half an ounce;
tincture of Saffron two drachms; Laudanum opiatum four grains; mix it, and give
half of it in the morning fasting, and the remainder at night, going to bed.

CHAP. XII. Of a Cachexy.
AN ill Habit of Body is called in Greek Cachexia.
(...), ex (...), malus, and (...), habitus.

It may be called in Latin mala corporis habitudo.

There are many causes of this Distemper, which may be distinguished according
to the diversity of the conjoined Symptoms.

It does accompany all Chronical Diseases, as Dropsies of all kinds,
Hypochondriack suffocation, Scurvy, Pox and Gout, etc. for it does spare none,
neither Peer nor Peasant, of any age or sex; but it most frequently seizes on
Women when their monthly terms are suppressed.

The cause is either external or internal.

The external cause is either bad Diet, a long time received, or for want of
good refreshing Food after sickness, for the Stomach being weak cannot digest
course Diet, by which the nutriment of the Body does by degrees become peccant
in quality, vitiating the humors, and Blood it self, so that an ill
nourishment of the Body does follow.

The internal cause may be the suppression of the Terms in Women, which is more
or less corrupted about the Womb, having not its natural evacuation, from
whence the whole mass of Blood is endued with a vicious quality, by which the
nourishment of all parts of the Body is depraved.

Also Choler, and the juice of the Pancreas (which are always confused with the
Blood) being alike vicious or peccant in quality, do not only corrupt the
separation of useful and unusefull parts, but by the vicious effervescency of
these humors manifold flatuous vapors are raised, which do not only increase
anxieties about the Midriff, but being carried to the Heart, there follows a
pressing pain and palpitation thereof; and in circulating through the Lungs, it
causes a Dyspnoea, or difficult breathing; and being thence transferred every
way throughout the Body, it does breed a general weariness in all parts.

But when the vicious humors abound together in plenty, then several kinds of
the Dropsy at length succeed; if not the universal Body grows lean by
degrees.

From what has been said, the production of every Cachexie may easily be
deduced by a judicious Physician.

The signs are paleness of the Face, shortness Signs.
of breath, palpitation of the Heart, and often apressing pain of it,
accompanied (for the most part) with a lingering Fever, either continual, or
intermitting, or compounded of both, in which the Urine is crude or watery; at
length there is a weariness of the universal Body, which in some does pine and
become lean, but in others the Body does swell, and is turgid.

If this Disease be not helped in time, it will become by degrees so stubborn
and rebellious, Progn.
that it will puzzle the wisest and most experienced Physicians to cure it; for
by the long continuance thereof, phlegm becomes very tough and glutinous, on
which all Chronical, or prolonged Diseases depend; besides, all the other
humors are by degrees vitiated, which incorporate with the Blood, and diminish
its effervescency, so that the separation and excretion of the excrementitious
parts (to be voided together with Urine) do not follow, from whence many
grievous symptoms succeed, which often proves mortal.

The cure of every Cachexie will consist in Cure.
the correction and amendment of the Blood any way vitiated.

If phlegm be tough and glutinous, it must be corrected and evacuated, for which
there are variety of choice medicines prescribed in the fourth page, of the
cure of diseases of the Head; in the use whereof you must persevere for some
time, or else the laudable success, and happy wished for cure will be expected
in vain.

Any other humors that are peccant in quality (by which the blood is vitiated)
must be altered and reduced to their natural Constitution by selected
Medicines, which will amend and empty them out by degrees.

In the interim good Food (which is easy of digestion, and wholesome
nourishment) must not be neglected, whereby nature may be cherished, and health
by degrees procured.

Those Medicines which are prescribed for the Cure of the Dropsy and Scurvy,
are proper for this Disease, wherefore I shall forbear prescriptions here.

CHAP. XIII. Of Dropsies.
THE Dropsy is called in Greek (...), Hydrops.
ab (...) aqua, quod nomen sumpsit ab aquoso humore Cutis.

The Ancients have assigned three sorts of Dropsies.

1. The first is called in Greek (...) Ascites.
uter, pellis.

It Is called in Latin aqua intercus, ex inter and cutis, because the Water is
between the Skin and the Flesh.

This is the most proper Dropsy, in which the Abdomen, Secrets, Thighs and
Legs are affected.

2. The second is called in Greek (...), quod tumor est ad similitudinem
tympani, vel tympani sonum referens.

As this is the most rare, so it is the most cruel and afflictive.

3. The third is called in Greek (...), ab (...) per, and (...) caro, quod
hydrops toto corpore diffusus; It is also called in Greek (...), ex (...)
album, and (...), phlegma vel pit uita; because it is caused of white Phlegm
gathered in all parts of the Body.

Some Authors make a difference between Anasarca, and Leucophlegmatia; that
Anasarca is caused by a serous humor, and Leucophlegmatia by a phlegmatic and
more viscous humor; but all Dropsies except Tympanies seem to me, to be little
less than a distinction of degrees of one and the same Disease. Cause.


The Ancients did take the Liver to be the chief part male-affected in these
distempers; but Helmont (who was happy in a remedy to cure it) does severely
reprove them, and is so bold to tax the whole Schools with the ignorance of
Anatomical dissections; he having inspected many Carcases of dropsical Persons
(of whom he makes distinct mention) does assert the Livers of them all noway
vitiated, and therefore he concludes the Liver faultless in dropsical affects;
and he derives the Cause of Dropsy to be an obstruction of the Kidneys with
the Stone or Gravel; and so the water which should be transferred through the
Kidneys, to the Bladder, (to be evacuated by pissing) is forced into the Cavity
of the Abdomen.

But experience teaches that Dropsies may be caused many ways; wherefore I
shall betake my self to a more evident description thereof.

The causes of Dropsies are either external, Cause.
or internal.

The external Cause is the Constipation of the porous Skin, impeding
transpiration, whereby the discharge of sweaty Vapors through the Habit of the
Body is lessned and interrupted; hence what moisture is usually carried off by
sweating, does rebound inwards, and condense into an Ichorous water, and is
there (by degrees) aggravated and increased, through the hindrance of the
necessary transpiration; till at length a great quantity of water is
accumulated, and stagnating in the affected parts, in time may work farther
alterations on the subjected Bowels.

Matter of fact has evinced this to me, having cured several Hydropical
patients only by sweating, and external applications.

The internal Cause of the Dropsy, may be over viscous Chyle, or Phlegm of the
Guts, coagulated in the lacteal Veins, and causing an obstruction in more or
fewer of their Branches, so that the Liquour rising either from the continual
Conflux of Choler, the Juice of the Pancreas, and the Phlegm of Spittle; or
else from Chyle, or from drink plentifully drunk, being stopped and intercepted
in its motion, it does by degrees more and more distend the Vessels, that at
length they burst; and the moisture received into them, is poured out between
the Membranes of the Mesentery, and presently after into the Cavity of the
Abdomen.

This disease is sometimes suddenly produced by much drinking in a burning
Fever, joined with an urgent and permanent Thirst.

After the same manner (though difficult to be known) may a Dropsy of the
Breast be caused, viz. by an obstruction of the lateral Lymphatick Vessels, by
glutinous Phlegm carried together with Lympha into the said Vessels, and there
coagulated, by which the motion of Lympha is hindered, so that the Lymphatick
vessels being much distended, by the great quantity of Lympha gathered in them,
at length they burst, and the Lympha piercing (through the Pleura) into the
Cavity of the Breast, procures a Dropsy in it.

The cause of a Tympany is wind, together Cause of a Tympany.
with a serous humor piercing through the Guts into the Cavity of the Belly,
and being there detained, it is more and more rarefied, by which the
Peritonoeum is not only expanded, but the whole Abdomen inflated, and
violently distended.

The signs of Ascites, are swelling and Signs of Ascites.
fluctuation of the Belly, difficult breathing, a dry Cough accompanied
sometimes with a symptomatical Fever, and great Thirst.

The signs of Anasarca are weakness, faintness, Signs of Anasarca.
and swelling of the whole Body, which being pressed with the Finger, it does
pit, and leave an impression, breathing is also difficult, with a continual
Fever.

In a Tympany the Belly is distended, and Signs of a Tympany.
being struck upon, there is a noise like a little Drum.

1. Every Dropsy is difficult of Curation, Progn.
especially if it has been of long continuance.

2. If the Hydropical persons have a good digestion, and void more moisture
both by stool and urine, than they either eat or drink, it is a hopeful sign
of recovery, and e contra.

Dropsies may be cured by strong Hydragogues, Cure.
Sudorificks, and Bathing, and sometimes by a Paracenthesis or boring the Belly.

The Best Hydragogues are prepared of Elder, Dwarf-elder, Jallop-roots,
Elaterium, Gum-gutty, Crystals of Silver, etc. of which you may prepare purging
Infusions, Pills, etc. for example.

Take the Roots of Flower-de-luce, Dwarf-Elder, Purging Infusion.
Madder, Liquorish, the five opening Roots, of each one ounce. the tops of
Saint John's wort, Centaury the less, Agrimony, the best Senna, of each one
handful; the Barks of Capers, Ash, Tamarisk, Cinnamon, of each six drachms;
Flowers of Beans, Elder, Dwarfelder, Broom, of each half a handful; seeds of
sweet Fennel, Parsley, Gromwell, Juniper Berries, of each one ounce and half;
Cloves, Salt of Tartar, of each half an ounce; let them be cleansed, bruised
and infused in two quarts of White Wind, for two or three days; then strain it,
and add Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, six ounces; mix it, and give four ounces
of it in the morning fasting.

If any like Pills better, I commend the following.

Take the Resins of Jallop, and Scammony, Purging Pills.
Tartar vitriolated, Mercur. dulcis, of each half a dram; Oil of Juniper one
scruple; make it into Pills with Venice-Turpentine, of which you may give
twenty grains at a time, in the morning fasting.

The following Pills are also very effectual.

Take of Elaterium, Gambogia, Resin of Jallop, Pills.
of each ten grains; Oil of Nutmegs six drops; make it into Pills with
Venice-Turpentine for two doses.

The obstructions in the Lacteal veins, or Lymphatick vessels, may be cured by
Medicines that do powerfully cut, and happily open the said obstructions.

This Aromatic Sudorifick may be commended for these intentions.

Take the waters of Treacle, Scurvigrass, Sudorifick.
Fennel, of each one ounce; waters of Parsley, Fumitory, of each two ounces;
distilled Vinegar half an ounce; Syrups of the juice of Carduus, and the five
opening Roots, of each six drachms; Powder of Crab's-eyes, Antimony
Diaphoretick, Salt of Amber, Beans, Wormwood, of each one scruple; Spirits of
Salt Armoniack, Niter, of each twenty drops; mix it, and give four spoonfulls
of it every two or three hours.

After the Vessels are freed from the noted obstruction by the medicines
beforementioned, or such like; they will be easily consolidated again by
conglutinating food, in which you may boil the Roots of Comfry, Plantain, and
Solomon's Seal, for the more quick and easy cure.

In a Tympany, the dulcifi'd Spirit of Niter is excellent, being taken in Broth
or Sack, three or four times in a day, from six to twelve drops at a time, for
it does correct both Phlegm and Choler, and hinder Wind in its rise, and
dissipate it when it is bred.

Also the following exemplary Julep does curb and discuss Wind, remaining as
well in the Stomach as Guts.

Take the Waters of Mint, Fennel, of Carminative Iulep.
each four ounces; the Carminative Spirit of Sylvius, Syrup of the juice of
Mints, of each two ounces; Laudanum opiat. eight grains; Spirit of Niter one
dram; Salt of Amber half a dram; Chemical Oil of Mace ten drops; mix it,
and take three or four spoonfulls every three hours.

You may prepare a Medicinal Wine for the rich, very beneficial in Dropsies.

Take the Seeds of Anise, Fennel, Caraway. Medicinal Wine.
Coriander, Berries of Bays, and Juniper, of each two ounces: Salt of Tartar
half an ounce; let them be bruised, and infused in three pints of White Wind,
for three days, then strain it, and add Spirit of Niter half an ounce; Salt of
Amber two drachms; Syrup of Mint three ounces; mix it, and take four or five
spoonfulls of it often.

Sweating is very profitable in all Dropsies, either in Bed, with the
forementioned Sudorifick, or in a Bagnio, or Hot-house, by which the water
standing beside nature in any part of the Body, will (by degrees) be emptied
through the pores of the Skin.

Also it may be necessary, especially in persons more elderly, to use warm
Baths. That which is prescribed for the cure of the Belly-ach in page 201, 202.
is also very profitable in Dropsies; into the which it may be agreeable to
descend at evening, before Bedtime, and there to continue so long as the
Patient can well endure without fainting; after which Frications may have their
proper use, and great benefit.

And to strengthen the cutaneous Fibers, and restore their true tone, for their
better service of the offices of Nature: let the affected parts be anointed
with the following fragrant Balsamic Ointment.

Take of Flanders Oil of Bays, Nerve-oil, Ointment.
Oil of Earthworms, of each two ounces; Oil of Mace by expression, half an
ounce; mix it.

Galen commends a Cataplasm of Snails bruised with their shells, and laid
upon the Navel.

But a Pultess prepared of the ingredients of the Bath, and applied to the
affected parts, will be more effectual to discharge the Ichorous water.

Or you may make a Cataplasm after this manner.

Take the tops of Elder, Dwarf-elder, Vervain, Pulcess.
Wormwood, Chamomel, of each two handfulls; Horse-radish-roots four ounces;
let them be cleansed, bruised and boiled in two quarts of the juice of
Wildcucumbers, till they are very tender, then strain it, and beat them very
well, and add Barley-meal, one pound; and with the same liquor boil it into the
consistence of a Pultess.

Let the Patients diet be drying, and let them drink moderately; you may infuse
Juniper Berries, Tamarisk and Elicampaneroots in their ordinary drink.

And for the benefit of those Physicians and Surgeons, that live in the
West Indies; there grows (almost every where in moist places) a large Cane,
much like the Sugar-cane; the Planters generally call it the dumb Cane, because
they that taste it, are presently dumb, and unable to speak for two or three
hours; after which the Tongue returns to its former use and volubility without
any prejudice.

The reason why this remarkable Plant does so affect the Tongue upon the touch
of it, is its power of attracting such plenty of moisture into it, as does
distend all the Vessels thereof, and render it immovable, till the crowded
moisture be gradually discharged.

Hence we may conjecture, and indeed experience teaches, that of this Plant
may be prepared diversity of medicines as Cataplasms, Oils, Ointments, etc.
Which will be effectual to attract, and easily and kindly discharge the swollen
part of the Ichorous water; which may be used for some time after the
evacuation of it, the better to prevent a farther accumulation, or return of
the Disease.

Likewise may medicines be prepared, (by a skillful Artist) of this Plant, very
effectual to be taken inwardly, not only against Dropsies, but the Scurvy,
Gout, etc.

If these choice medicines are not to be had, and nothing be effected by other
means; A harmless Paracenthesis may be instituted in the Dropsy of the Breast,
or Abdomen; provided the Apertion be made by such a little hollow instrument as
is described in page 81, 82. of the Cure of the Pleurisy, for by such a small
wound, there is no danger to the sick.

But this operation must not be delayed, lest the humor collected, get an
hurtful Acrimony, and by degrees corrode and corrupt the Membrane, and hence
the substance of all the parts contained, and so make the Disease incurable.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Scurvy, and Hypochondriack Suffocation, commonly called the
Fits of the Mother.
THE Scurvy being a Hypochondriack disease, it will not be amiss to treat of
them together.

The Scurvy is called in Latin Scorbutus; it is a Complication, or
Concatenation of Diseases, generated by the Conjunction of diverse Causes
contributing to a scorbutic Deformity.

The Scurvy is generated, or planted essentially in the vital Principles, or
digestive Offices, and therefore it is not discerned by sense, but the effects
are distributed throughout the Body, and are augmented more or less, according
to the strength and debility of parts, to resist or consent and be depraved.

The Hypochondriack suffocation is called in Greek (...), vel quod
Hypochondriacus.
ad Hypochondria pertinet, vel sub cartilagine fita fit.

It is called by the Latins Hypochondriaca melancholia.

The Ancients thought that this was an uterine disease, in quibus mulieres
uteri fuffocatione laborant; and therefore it was called (...), and in Latin
morbus Hystericus, vel Hysterica passio; and in English it is called Fits of the
Mother; it being most subject to Women, from the suppression of their monthly
Courses.

But because men are also molested with longing, and suffer often both the
Sense and Disease of Suffocation, especially when they become Cachectick, or of
ill habit of Body: and also they are cured with the same medicines, that Women
are cured with, when they are vexed with this distemper, therefore I think this
suffocation may be more properly called Hypochondriacal.

It may be called the Mother of the Scurvy, because the vital Principles (in
this disease) are seduced to declension and deviation from their rectitude, the
digestive offices being all depraved.

The causes of these diseases are either external, Causes.
or internal.

The external, are sometimes a sedentary studious, and melancholy life, by
which the vital Principles do receive much prejudice, decay and fall off from
their functions, and become languid and feeble; also the Air being infested
with noxious Vapors, is a procuring cause of these distempers; for such Air
being drawn into the Body by inspiration, does commix with the spirits, and
debilitate and deprave the faculties, from whence Scorbutic and Hypochondriack
effects do ensue; and as the Body is perspirable or impervious, these diseases
are more or less varied, and remitted in their Symptoms; and therefore the
constipation of the pores, prohibiting transpiration, is a partial organical
cause of preternatural Spots in the Scurvy, which appear chiefly upon the
Thighs and Legs; not from the gravity of the material cause, and ponderous
propension of gross matter downwards; but because those parts are more weak in
their assimilation, being remote from supply of vital Spirits, therefore they
have the first tokens of defection.

The internal Cause is a vicious quality of all the humors, and also of the
Animal spirits, which are confused with the blood, and communicate their
faultiness to it, by which the blood is also vitiated, so that the nourishment
of the Body is depraved several ways, according to the variety of the quality
peccant; in which the color of the native Skin, and especially of the face
languisheth, and is changed pale.

In these diseases, not only the appetite of food, but its fermentation is
also depraved; wherefore Anxieties about the Midriff and Hypochondries, and a
pressing pain of the Heart will soon follow.

For when the food is ill fermented, and driven forward through the small Gut,
it is confused with the Juice of the Pancreas and Choler, which are a like
vicious, the Pancreatick juice being too sharp and acrid, and the Bile over
thick and salt; from whence the separation of useful and unusefull parts, is
not only corrupted, but also by the vicious Effervescency of these humors,
are raised manifold halituous Vapors, which do not only increase the fore
described Anxiety, but being carried to the Heart do breed a Palpitation of it,
whence it circulates through the Lungs, and causes a difficulty of breathing,
and thence being driven every way, it causes a weariness in all parts of the
Body; and if an Acrimony of the humors do concur, then it is manifested
internally with pain.

The cause of the inordinate effervescency of Blood, in the Hypochondriack
suffocation, is not only the unequal flowing of Lympha, but also of the
Liquour rising out of the threefold humors, vitiously effervescing in the
small Gut, from whence vicious Vapors are sent to the right Ventricle of the
Heart, and procure a great Confusion, and disturbance in it; hence follows a
notable Palpitation of the Heart, by which sometimes the Effervescency of Blood
seems to cease in the right Ventricle for a time, with its motion and pulse,
and also respiration is taken away to outward sense.

The symptoms and signs of these diseases are very many, yet are never seen to
concur in one and the same Body.

The usual signs are pain of the Head, palpitation of the Heart, puffing up of
the Stomach, Loathing, Vomiting, Belching, Hicket, Cough, Tumor and
Putrefaction of the Gums, with much spitting; looseness and blackness of the
Teeth, and sometimes great pain in them; the breath stinketh, and is sometimes
fetched with much difficulty; also Convulsions, Palsy, Gout, Dropsies, and all
other obstructions; sometimes the Colic, and trembling and looseness of the
Lims, with red purple spots dispersed; also the Pleurisy, pain of the
Hypochondries, and also of many of the external parts, as the Neck, Arms,
Hands, Thighs, Legs, Feet and Anckles, with laziness, and often faint sweats;
there is also sometimes malign Ulcers, dry hard Tubercles, Erisipelas and
Edematous tumors with many others, which to enumerate, were to comprehend an
universal Genus of Atoms, within a very narrow Limitation.

1. These diseases (for the most part) are of long continuance, and are seldom
cured, Progn.
and therefore may be called the disgrace of Physicians.

2. If the Patient has a continual pain and giddiness of the Head, it does
threaten an Epilepsie, or Apoplexy.

3. The more aged the sick are, the more grievous are the Symptoms, and the
more dangerous and difficult to be cured.

4. Vomiting, Flux of the Belly, and Hemorrhoids, if they are moderate, are
hopeful signs of recovery.

In some Regions, these diseases are complicated with most other distempers, or
at least do easily degenerate into them, by which they are rendered the more
difficult of curation.

As for the Cure of these stubborn and rebellious Cure.
diseases, the sick must observe a good diet, without which Physical means will
profit but little; and here we may also observe, that no Aliments, or Medicines
(whether altering or purging) will be very profitable, unless specific
Antiscorbuticks be mixed with them.

The best Antiscorbutick simples, are the Roots of Horseradish, Butter-bur,
Liquorish, Dandelion, Scorzonera, China, Zedoary, Angelica, Elicampane,
Polypodium, the five opening Roots; the Wood and Bark of Guiacum and
Sassaphras, the Herbs Scordium, Scurvigrass, Brook-lime, Watercresses, Sorrel,
Rue, Fennel, Golden-rod and Pennyroyal; Fruits of Oranges, Limmons, Pomcitrons,
Pomgranates, Apples, etc. Seeds of Mustard, Angelica, Radish and
Juniper Berries, cum multis aliis; of which may be prepared diversity of good
medicines both Chemical and Galenical.

The volatile Salts both of Animals, and Vegetables, are excellent to open all
obstructions, and temper the humors; Also Elixir proprietatis, the Spirit of
Salt Armoniack, Horseradish and Scurvigrass, the Spirit of Niter and of Salt
dulcified, Salt of Steel, Wormwood, and Tartar, Oil of Juniper, Cloves, and
Cinnamon, are all Specific Antiscorbuticks.

The Hypochondriack suffocation having great affinity with the Scurvy, the same
medicines are proper for both.

The following Julep is both Diaphoretick, and Diuretic, and very profitable
for the sick in these diseases, to be taken two or three days in a week.

Take the Waters of Pennyroyal, Scurvigrass, Iulep.
Treacle, Syrup of the juice of Fennel, of each two ounces; Tincture of Castor,
half an ounce; Oils of Amber, Mace, and Cloves, of each six drops; Spirit of
Salt Armoniack, twenty drops; mix it, and give three spoonfulls every two or
three hours.

This Electuary may also be preferred.

Take of Conserves of Scurvigrass, three Electuary.
ounces; Confectio Alkermes, half an ounce; Powder of Crab's-eyes, two drachms;
Flowers of Salt Armoniack, Tarter vitriolated, of each half a dram; Spirit of
Castor one dram; Oil of Cloves twenty drops; mix it, and give two drachms
morning and evening.

After the frequent use of this Electuary, you may purge with this Powder.

Take Powder of Cream of Tartar, half a dram; Salts of Wormwood, Amber,
Purging Powder.
Scurvigrass, Resin of Scammony, of each ten grains; mix it for two doses.

If the Patient like Pills better, these may serve. For Example.

Take Extract. Catholicon, Rudii, of each ten grains; Resin of Jallop, Agarick,
Salt Armoniack, of each six grains; Oils of Amber, Cloves, of each two drops;
make it into eight Pills, for two doses.

A Medicinal Wine may be prepared very effectual in these distempers.

Take of Watercresses, Brook-lime, Scurvigrass, Medicinal Wine.
Rue, of each one handful; Roots of Polypodium, Jallop, Horseradish,
Angelica, Cream of Tartar, of each half an ounce; white Nettle-seed, one ounce;
Orange-peel, Cinnamon, Salt of Tartar, of each two drachms; let them be
cleansed, bruised and infused, in three quarts of White Wind, for two or three
days, then strain it, and give four spoonfulls in the morning fasting.

In the Hypochondriack suffocation, you may often hold to the Nostrils, a glass
with a narrow mouth, containing the Spirit of Salt Armoniack; for by its sharp
smell, the sick for the most part are wont to be raised, both from that
suffocation, and from the Epilepsie.

If the Gums are putrified, let the mouth be washed with the following
Tincture, mixed with some Plantain water, and Syrup of Mulberries.

Take Powder of Gum Lacca, one ounce; Tincture.
burnt Alome half an ounce; the small Spirit of Salt Armoniack, one quart; let
them digest together 'till it be of a red color, then filtrate it through
brown paper, and keep it for use.

If the sick has a costive Body, you may administer a Carminative Clyster once
or twice a week.

In pains of the Belly and Hypochondries, this linament is effectual.

Take Oils of Earthworms, Scurvigrass, Linament
Chamomel, of each one ounce; Oil of Mace by expression half an ounce; mix it,
with which anoint the parts affected.

This Antiscorbutick water will be very profitable, to be taken two or three
spoonfulls at a time, morning and evening.

Take the Barks of Ash, and Capers, the Roots of Tamarisk, Polypodium,
Horseradish, Water against the Scurvy.
of each three ounces; Watercresses, Scurvigrass, Brook-lime, Sorrel, Centaury
the less, Hearts tongue, of each four handfulls; Berries of Bays and Juniper,
Goose-dung, of each one ounce; the Seeds of Citrons, Mustard, Carduus
benedictus, Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each half an ounce; let them
be cleansed, bruised and digested, in one Gallon of White Wind, and two quarts
of Spirit of wine, being close covered for three days; then distill them with a
glass Still according to art, and keep it for your use.

Frictions, Ligatures, Ventoses, Sternutatories, etc. are all profitable to
stir up the sick in the Hypochondriack suffocation.

CHAP. XV. Of the Green Sickness, and Suppression of the Courses.
THE Green Sickness is called in Latin Icteris, and Febris alba; In English the
Virgin's Disease, the White Fever, and the White Jaundice; because in this
disease the native color of the Face is pale.

This disease is caused either from defect of Blood, or it proceeds from
plenty of Cause.
crude, viscous, phlegmatic humors, obstructing the veins about the Womb, by
which the courses are suppressed; the veins of the Matrix being obstructed, that
superfluous Blood which nature has ordained to be evacuated that way, having
not passage, does return to the greater Vessels, and is circulated with the
whole mass of Blood and humors, by which they are in time vitiated, and a
Cachexie or ill habit of body is thence caused; for the Blood and natural
humors, being endued with a vicious quality, the nourishment of all the parts
of the body will be depraved several ways, according to the variety of the
quality peccant; whence likewise not only the fermentation of Food, but also
the Appetite of it is depraved; wherefore Anxieties and Palpitation of the
Heart, etc. troubles the sick, as well before as after Food taken in.

This distemper may be also caused by external coldness of the air, etc. and
sometimes great fear, and sudden shame may be the cause of the suppression;
also aliments, and medicaments that are too astringent taken inwardly.

In these diseases the Urine comes away Signs.
crude, thick and less colored, because the phlegmatic, watery humors
abounding, incorporating with the Blood, do diminish the desired effervescency;
so that the separation, much less excretion of the excrementitious parts, to be
voided together with Urine, does not follow.

If the Hypochondries be afflicted, and the veins of the Womb obstructed, there
will be great loathing of wholesome Food, and a desire after those things which
ought not to be eaten, as Ashes, Salt, Coals, etc. which is called Pica, and in
Women with Child Malacia, of which we have hinted in the Chapter of Hungar
Vitiated, page 145, 146.

1. These distempers are sometimes of long Progn.
continuance, causing much weakness, and often times barrenness in them that have
been so afflicted: and if they do conceive, they bring forth weak and sickly
Children, and those that are very melancholy, are in danger of falling into
madness, or other grievous affects, as Palpitation of the Heart, Swouning,
Vertigo, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, etc.

2. If the obstruction be only of the vessels of the Womb, and have not been
of long continuance, it may be easily cured.

3. Bleeding at the Nose, is sometimes beneficial, but if the Blood does
disburthen it self by the Eyes, Ears, Mouth, or Bladder, it is preposterous,
from whence may arise other bad Symptoms.

In the cure of these distempers such medicines Cure.
are to be selected, which will mildly (and by degrees) alter, correct and
evacuate, tough and glutinous Phlegm, seeing that all prolonged diseases depend
on it, either wholly, or at least in part; for by the frequent use of such
medicines, the Blood and peccant humors will be the easier reduced to their
natural constitution; especially by the help of good Food, easy of digestion:
in the mean while, not neglecting the moderate use of the rest of the
nannatural things.

An obstruction of the Vessels by viscous Phlegm, may be cured by the frequent
use of such medicines as have power to loosen the peccant humors, and again
make them fluid.

All fixed metallic and mineral Sulphurs, and also volatile Salts, prepared not
only of several parts of Animals, but also of scorbutic Plants, (such as are
the juice of Hedgemustard, Scurvigrass, Garden and Watercresses, Dandelion,
etc.) conduce before all others, to loosen and dissolve Phlegm coagulated, or
Blood clotter'd, as having an egregious power of dissolving all things
coagulated, and conglutinated in humane bodies, and of reducing the same to
their wonted fluidity, and moreover to move sweat, which together being mildly
promoted, the desired dissolution of the aforesaid viscous humors, etc. will
be obtained much easier, and sooner.

An example of such a Sudorifick I have here set down for the sake of young
Practitioners.

Take the Waters of Treacle, Dandelion, Cordial to cause Sweat.
Parsley, Scurvigrass, Fennel, Syrups of Hedge-mustard, white Poppies, of each
half an ounce; Spirit of Salt Armoniack, Hartshorn, of each ten drops; Laudanum
opiatum, four grains; mix it.

The following is also very effectual.

Take the Waters of Fennel, Hyssop, of each two ounces; distilled Vinegar six
drachms; the Carminative-water of Sylvius half an ounce; Syrup of the five
opening Roots one ounce and half; Powder of Crab's-eyes one dram; Sperma
Coeti, Mummy, Antimony Diaphoretick, of each one scruple; Laudanum opiat. four
grains; mix it.

Let the sick often take two spoonfulls of either of these mixtures, especially
in bed, to promote the power of the medicine, and to facilitate a sweat; by the
help whereof the mentioned power of the Sudorifick will the better come to the
place of obstruction, and will attenuate, loosen, and make fluid the matter
obstructing; the whole Mass of Blood will also become more fluid and moveable,
being rarefi'd by the volatile Salt of the medicine.

If the Patient be plethorick, let the Saphoena vein be opened, for by opening
and breathing a Vein, the motion and circulation of the Blood will be the
better restored; for a larger space being made for the universal Blood, it will
circulate more swiftly and potently.

The phlegmatic viscous humors must be corrected, and evacuated by
Phlegmagogues.

The following medicines are of great efficacy.

Take of Salts of Mugwort, Ash, Amber, Tartar vitriolated, of each ten grains;
Powder Powder.
of Cream of Tartar, white Sugar Candy, of each half a dram; mix it, and give
it in white Wine in the morning fasting.

The next day you may administer the following Pills.

Take of pil. foetidoe, ex duobus, of each half a dram; Amber, prepared
Steel, Borax, Purging Pills.
Mercur. Dulcis, of each one scruple; Mirrh, Castor, Saffron, of each twelve
grains; Oil of Cloves, Spirit of Salt Armoniack, of each six drops; make it
into ten Pills for two doses, which may be taken in the Morning fasting.

If a medicinal Wine be acceptable to the sick, the following or one like it
may be used.

Take the Roots of Horseradish, the five opening Roots, of each one ounce;
Savin, Medicinal wine.
Vervain, Pennyroyal, Hyssop, Calamint, Mugwort, of each one handful; Senna,
Cinnamon, sweet Fennel-seeds, Juniper Berries, Orange-peel, Liquorish, of each
half an ounce; let them be cleansed, bruised and infused in one Gallon of
White Wind for three days, then strain it, and keep it for use.

You may add more wine to the ingredients so long as there is any Aromatic
taste.

Four or five spoonfulls of this Wine may be taken two or three times a day,
with which you may mix Salt of Tartar vitriolated ten grains; Elixir
proprietatis six drops.

If you expect a laudable success, you must persevere awhile in the use of
these, or such like medicines.

CHAP. XVI. Of the immoderate menstrual Flux, and the Whites in Women.
THE monthly terms being immoderate, may be called in Latin mensium fluxus
immodicus.

And the Whites in Women Alboe mulierum fluxiones.

The causes of too many Courses are either Cause.
external, or internal.

The external Causes may be by an Ulcer in the Matrix, or some outward
Violence, and sometimes by too much Coition.

The internal Causes are either a sharp serous humor abounding in the Blood,
increasing its fluidity, or else an over great heat in the Womb, stirring up a
more potent, and therefore a swifter rarefaction of Blood, provoking an
expulsion of it, either by breaking, (or some other preternatural opening) of
the vessels of the Womb.

The white Flux of the Womb, is an excrementitious humor flowing from it.

This distemper is subject not only to Women, but sometimes to Maids also.

These humors may be bred in the Cause of Whites.
Womb, either by a cold or hot distemper therein.

The cold does render it unable to digest its nourishment.

A hot Distemper corrupts it, hence comes this excrementitious humor.

Also Abortion, Contusion, Inflammation, Imposthume or Ulcer in the Womb, may
weaken and dispose it to breed such humors.

The signs that distinguish between this Signs.
Distemper, and an Ulcer in the Womb, and Gonorrhoea, are these.

1. If there be an Ulcer there, the Womb will not admit of Coition, without
pain, and the matter which flows from her is stringy, and more digested, and
sometimes bloody.

2. In the Gonorrhoea, the seminal matter comes in a small quantity, and
seldom, except it be gotten by acting with an unclean Person, then the Urine is
sharp, with many other malignant Symptoms.

All long Hemorrhagies of Blood are dangerous, Progn.
especially those of the Womb; If it be caused by exulceration, and be in
elderly Women, it is incurable.

The white Flux is not very dangerous, but is often difficult of curation,
especially in old Women, because they abound with Phlegm; and it is hard to
divert the humors from this Chanel, it being the sink of the body, through
which the superfluous humors of a healthy Woman are every month evacuated.

If this distemper continue long, it may breed great evils, as Barrenness,
Falling out of the Womb, etc.

These diseases may be both cured by the Cure.
same medicines.

If the courses have continued too long, the following mixture will soon stop
the flux of Blood, and will cure most ruptions of vessels.

Take the Waters of Plantain, Comfry, of Astringent Iulep.
each three ounces; Cinamon-water, Syrups of Mirtles, Quinces, of each one
ounce and half; distilled Vinegar one ounce; red Coral prepared one dram;
Dragons Blood one scruple; Laudanum opiat. six grains; mix it, and give three
spoonfulls every four hours.

When the flux of Blood is stopped, you may purge with the following.

Take of Manna one ounce; Powder of Purge.
Rhubarb tosted, Cream of Tartar, of each half a dram; Resin of Jallop four
grains; mix it, and take it in broth.

If the Patient like Pills, I commend the following.

Take Resins of Jallop and Scammony, extract of Rhubarb, Agarick, Salt of
Amber, Purging Pills.
Powder of Dragons-bloud, of each ten grains; Oil of Mints six drops; with
Syrup of Rhubarb, let it be made into twelve Pills for three doses.

After purging, these Astringents will be profitable.

Take of Cinnamon, the Roots of Bistort, Tormentile, Astringent Electuary.
Rhubarb, Seeds of Plantain, Dill, Flowers of red Roses, Balaustins, red Coral,
sealed Earth, whitest Amber, Hartshorn, Gumdragon and Arabic, of each two
drachms; Saccharum Saturni, Dragons-bloud, Salt Prunella, of each two scruples;
Laudanum opiat. Camphire, of each ten grains; let them be all finely powdered
and searced, and with Honey of red Roses, Syrups of Quinces and Comfry, of each
equal parts; let it be made into an Electuary according to Art.

Let the sick take the quantity of a Nutmeg of this Electuary, every morning
and evening, either upon the point of a knife, or dissolve it in two or three
ounces of red Wine, to which you may add a few drops of Tincture of red Coral,
and drink it.

This Julep is also of great virtue.

Take the Waters of Comfry, Plantain, Astringent Iulep.
Oak-buds, Knot-grass, red Wine, of each four ounces; in which infuse red
Rose-buds, Balaustins, Flowers of Comfry, Bugloss, of each one handful, for
the space of twenty four hours, then boil it gently for half an hour; strain
it, and add Tincture of red Coral, Syrups of dried Roses, Comfry and Mirtles,
of each two ounces; Oil of Vitriol twenty drops; mix it, and take six
spoonfulls every three hours.

Let the Region of the Womb be anointed with this Linament.

Take Unguent. Comitissoe, Oil of Mirtles, Linament
of each one ounce; Saccharum Saturni one dram; Camphire ten grains; mix it.

After the part is anointed, let this Plaster be applied.

Take the Plaster against Ruptures, Diapalma, Plaster.
of each one ounce; the carminative Plaster of Sylvius half an ounce; mix it,
and spread it on leather, and apply to the region of the Womb.

In the Whites, let this be used for a Fume.

Take of Olibanum, Amber, Cloves, of Fume.
each half a dram; red Rose-buds, Balaustins, of each two drachms; beat them
all together into a gross powder; put a little of it at a time upon a pan of
coals, and let the Woman sit over it.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Falling Down of the Womb and Fundament.
IF the Womb falls down, it may be called in Latin Procidentia Matricis. So
likewise if the Fundament comes down, it is called Procidentia Any.

The Causes of these distempers are either Cause.
External or Internal.

The External Causes may be any violent exercise, with much striving, also
falls or blows, on those parts; also bathing in cold water, etc.

The Internal Causes are serous and phlegmatic humors, a Dysentery with a
Tenasmus, the Whites continuing long, a violent drawing the Child, or
Afterbirth out of the Womb; also much Sneezing or Coughing, especially in
Childbed; to conclude, all things that may cause a Rupture or relaxation of
the Ligaments of the Womb, or sphincter Muscle of the Anus, may be the cause of
these griefs.

In a Procidentia Any, there is always a Signs.
mucous and purulent dejection, from a phlegmatic, viscous, and sometimes also
a sharp acid humor adjoining about the seige, which often causes a
troublesome Ulcer by fretting.

In young people these distempers may be Progn.
easily cured, if they have not continued long, and do not come very far out,
and be not ulcerated.

But if there be a Rupture of the Ligaments of the Womb, it is incurable;
likewise great pain and inflammation are very difficult; and if either the
Matrix or Anus be Gangrenated it is mortal, without speedy amputation.

You must begin the Cure with removing Cure.
the symptoms and discharging the Guts of their Excrements, either with
Clysters or Lenitives.

Then anoint the part with some astringent Oils, and endeavor to reduce it
gently by degrees.

The manner of the reduction every ingenious Artist knows, and therefore needs
not any directions.

When the Womb is reduced it may be kept with a Pessary framed of Cork as thick
as necessary, and covered with Wax mixed with a little Castor, and Assafoetida,
which may there continue.

If there be pain and inflammation, let the part be bathed with this.

Take the Flowers of Chamomel, Elder, of Bath.
each one handful; Marsh-mallow-roots one ounce; Seeds of Flax and Foenugreek,
of each half an ounce; boil it in two quarts of Milk till half be consumed,
then strain it, and add Malaga Wine one pint; mix it.

Let Stuphs be moistened in this and wrung out and applied hot; after which
apply a Plaster of ad herniam to the lower part of the Belly.

Before you reduce the Anus, anoint it with Oil of Mirtles and bestrew it with
Powder of Album Groecum, or the following.

Take of red Roses, Pomgranat-rinds, Cypress-nuts, Powder.
Mastick, Crocus Martis, burnt Lead, of each half an ounce; beat them all into
a fine powder.

A Bag quilted with the following astringents, and applied hot to either
grieved part three times a day, will conduce much to keep it up.

Take of Plantain, Sanicle, Buds of Oak For a quilted Bag.
and Medlar, red Rose-buds, Balaustins, of each one handful; Roots of Comfry,
Tormentil, Bistort, Cypress-nuts, Seeds of Anise, sweet Fennel, of each one
ounce; beat them all into a gross powder.

Inwardly may be given Astringents and Strengthners, but not in time of the
courses; those prescribed against the immoderate flowing of the Terms are good.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Barrenness.
BArrenness is called in Latin Sterilitas. It may be called in English
Unfruitfullness, it being an impotency of Conception.

We read in the Scripture that the Women of old did think it a reproach to be
Childless; and therefore when Elizabeth had conceived who before was Barren,
she said the Lord has taken away my reproach among Men; as you may read at
large in the first Chapter of Luke's Gospel.

Very few Women in a Marriage state but desire Children, yea some would give
all they have in the world for a Child, and are very impatient if they do not
Conceive.

Rachel said to Jacob in Genesis 30 ver. 1. give me Children, or else I dye.

I will now briefly show you, what may be the cause of Sterility.

1. First, want of Love between a Man and his Wife, way hinder Conception.

2. Any malignant distemper in the womb, may corrupt the Seed, and be the cause
of Barrenness.

Some are of opinion that Witchcraft may be the cause.

But to conclude, the Whites or any moist distemper of the Matrix, may be the
cause of Barrenness.

Sometimes the cause is in the Man, for if he does want Sperm, or is unable to
erect his Genital by reason of any weakness or distemper in his Secrets; or if
he be effeminate and takes little or no delight in the act of Venery, he is
not fit for Venus School.

There are some Rules left by the Ancients to try whether a Woman be naturally
Barren or no.

Hippocrates advises to put a Clove of Garlic or a little Galbanum into her
Womb, and if her Breath do smell of it, be sure she is fruitful.

If Barrenness be caused by any Disease afflicting either the man or the woman,
then Progn.
there may be hopes of Conception when health is procured; but if it be evil
shape of of the members in the woman, or the man not fit for Venus-School,
patientia est optima virtus.

In the cure, you must endeavor to remove Cure.
whatsoever hinders Conception.

Many things are antipathetical to fecundity, as Jet, Glowworms, Saphires,
Smaragds, the Matrix of a Goat or Mule, likewise Vinegar, Mints, Watercresses,
Beans, etc. all which I advise you to avoid, and make use of those things which
have a peculiar virtue to help or cause Conception, and remove Barrenness.

The Afterbirth of a Woman dried and powdered, and taken often a dram at a
time; also the Stones and Liver of a Borepig, the Juice of Sage, the Roots of
Satirion and Eringo candied, are all good.

There are many medicines prescribed in Authors to help Conception.

Quercetanus does commend this infusion.

Take the Matrix of a Hare and the Stones of a Ram prepared with Whitewine, of
Cinnamon, Infusion.
Ginger, Mace, Cloves, Seeds of Bishops-weed, of each half an ounce; Saffron
two drachms; Kernels of Fistick-nuts one ounce; let them be all bruised and
infused in a quart of Muskadel-wine for two or three days; then strain it, and
add more Wine to the ingredients for a second infusion.

The following Electuary is also excellent.

Take the Roots of Satirion and Eringo Electuary.
candied, of each one ounce; candied Ginger and preserved Nutmegs, of each two
drachms; Kernels of Hazle-nuts and Fistick-nuts, of each half an ounce; Powder
of a Bull's-pizle, of Ivory, Seeds of Rocket, Bishops-weed, of each one dram;
Species Diambroe, Diamosc. dulcis, of each six drachms; Confectio Alkermes one
ounce and half; with Syrup of the juice of Citrons; make it into an Electuary
according to Art.

Let the Woman take the quantity of a Nutmeg of it every night going to bed,
and drink a glass of Sack or Muskadel, or of the aforementioned Infusion after
it.

If a cold and moist distemper of the Body and Womb, accompanied with the
Whites be the cause, look for the cure in its proper Chapter.

If it be caused by Witchcraft, there are some things commended by Authors to
be worn about the party against Fascination, viz. the Pizle of a Wolf, a
Diamond, a Jacinth-stone, Rue, Squills, Sea-holly, Sagapenum, Amara dulcis,
Hypericon, etc.

But above all, let fervent and devout Prayers be put up to the Throne of grace
for help; and reject and despise Incantations or Charms, and all other
Diabolical means.

CHAP. XIX. Of Abortion or Miscarriage.
ABortion is called in Latin Abortus, vel intempestivus foetus. Because it is
an untimely Birth; the Child being brought forth, either dead or alive before
its fit time of deliverance.

This is the worst Symptom, that attends breeding Women.

It may happen from the first Moment of Conception, to the end of the sixth
Month; but it is most usual in the end of the third, or the beginning of the
fourth Month.

The causes are either external, or internal. Causes.


The external Causes are a great excess in things nonnatural, as too great
Anger, Fear, and other Passions, or else it may be through defect; for if the
Mother undergo Penury or Famine, or lose much Blood, the Child wants
Nourishment.

Many times things longed for, and not obtained, kill the Child.

Also strong purging Medicines, that provoke the terms, and all fetid smells,
falls, blows, lifting, carrying, dancing, running, riding or any other outward
violence, may be the Cause of Abortion.

The internal Causes may be the depravedness of the humors, by which the Mass
of Blood becomes vicious; also Acute or Chronick diseases, especially of the
Womb; and also violent Coughing, Sneezing, Vomiting, Convulsions and Fluxes of
the Belly, may loosen the Ligaments of the Womb, and so cause miscarriage.

The signs of Abortion at hand, are great Signs.
pain about the Loins, and Share-bones, sometimes with shivering; the Breasts
growing little and flaggy, the Situation of the Child changed toward the
Bottom of the Belly, with a bearing down, and evacuation of Blood, etc.

1. Women who have moist and slippery Progn.
Wombs are most subject to miscarry, but with little danger, except it be the
first Child, and that very big.

2. Much bleeding, with fainting, raving, or Convulsions is for the most part
mortal.

To prevent Abortion; if there be an evil Cure.
disposition of the Body, or Womb, you must endeavor to remove it; if the
Woman has a plethorick Body, let a Vein be opened in the Arm, especially in
the first six months.

If ill humors abound, purge often with gentle means.

This purging Infusion may serve.

Take of Cinnamon, Rhubarb, Anise-seed, of each two drachms; let them be
bruised, Purging Infusion.
and infused in four ounces of Plantain-water very hot, for the space of a
Night, then strain it, and add Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, the best Manna,
of each half an ounce; mix it, and give it in the Morning fasting.

Also the Pills prescribed in page 240. may be used in this case.

If the Woman be troubled with a Rheumatick distemper, accompanied with Wind;
and if she be pretty strong, you may sweat her gently sometimes with this or
such like Cordial Diaphoretick.

Take the Waters of Treacle, Carduus, Fennel, Cordial to cause sweat.
of each one ounce; Cinamon-water two drachms; Syrups of the Juice of Carduus,
Coral, of each half an ounce; Confectio de Hyacintho half a dram; Spirit of
Niter six drops; Oil of Cinnamon two drops; Laudanum opiatum three grains; mix
it, and give to provoke sweat.

Let the Womb be strengthened with Cordial Astringents: Those prescribed in page
239. 240. are excellent.

CHAP. XX. Of hard Travel in Childbirth.
HArd labor may be called in Latin partus, vel enixus laboriosus; quod ipse
nitendi and pariendi actus.

The time of a natural Birth ought to be accomplished in the space of twenty
four hours; if the Woman's travel continue longer time with vehement pains and
dangerous Symptoms, it may be called hard labor, or difficult Travel in
Childbirth.

There are various Causes of hard Labor, sometimes tender Women by reason of
pain, Causes.
are very fearful, and do endeavor to hinder pains, and consequently the
Birth also.

Sometimes the Child being weak or dead, and not following the Water in
Due-time, before the passage be too dry may be the Cause; especially if the
Mother be weak, by reason of any Disease afflicting her, or by too much
Evacuation of Blood, or there be not sufficient Motion of the Womb, and Muscles
of the Belly.

Sometimes the Child's head may be too big, or the passage too strait.

Also the Child may be turned in the Womb, and the Hands, Shoulders, Back,
Belly, or Buttocks, etc. may come forward to the Birth, and then the endeavor
to bring forth will be painful and difficult.

The signs of hard Labor are easily known; Signs.
if the Child do stir, and there be strong pains, and no water appear, the
Secundine is strong.

If pains be weak, and long before they return, and more in the Back than
Belly, the Infant is weak.

If the Woman be little, and her Husband big and full shouldred, then there is
a great Child, which will cause tough work.

1. Hard travel in Childbirth is very dangerous, Progn.
for sometimes the Mother, sometimes the Child, and many times both do lose
their Lives.

2. If the Woman be in Travel above four days, the Child can hardly be alive;
and therefore must be drawn away before it be too late; for if it be neglected,
it will cause Fevers, Faintings, Convulsions, Sleepiness, etc. which are the
Forerunners of Death.

3. If sneezing comes of its own accord, it is a good sign of deliverance.

First give this Cordial to strengthen both the Mother and Child. Indications.


Take Waters of Baum, Vervain, Cinnamon, Cordial Iulep.
of each two ounces; Syrup of Clovegilliflowers, Saffron, of each six drachms;
Spirit of Saffron, Confectio Alkermes, of each one dram; mix it.

If the Child be situated on Os pubis, it must be removed, and all other unfit
Postures must be rectified.

Then such things as hasten the Birth may be safely administered.

To increase the Pains, and further the Woman's Labor, I commend sneezing, and
also the following Medicines.

Take the Livers of Eels prepared with Cinamon-water, Powder.
and dried, one dram; Powder of Borax, whitest Amber, Mirrh, Saffron, Dittany
of Crete, round Birth-wort, of each half a dram; mix it, and give a Scruple
of it at a time, in three spoonfulls of this Julep.

Take the Waters of Vervain, Mugwort, Iulep.
of each two ounces; Syrup of Saffron one ounce; Confectio Alkermes one dram;
Extract of Saffron six grains; Oils of Cinnamon, Amber, of each three drops; mix
it.

Some things have a peculiar property to help the Birth; as the stone Aetites,
Loadstone, Storax, the Eyes of a Hare, etc. held near the privities.

The time being come, the Woman must be put into a posture, (which every
Midwife does understand) and let her not labor too much, till strong pains
come; and then let her resolve on patience, and not be disorderly in the time
of her Travel.

If she be faint, you may give her some of the formention'd Cordial Julep to
comfort her.

Let your hands be anointed with some Anodine Ointment.

After the water is broke, if the Head comes with the Face toward Anus
receive it; if not endeavor to place it right: Then turn your Finger round
about the Child's head gently, to make way for the Birth.

If the Child comes any other way, you must endeavor to gain the Feet, and
bring it away with the Face toward Anus, as before mentioned.

The Child being born, you must bring away the Secundine gently by degrees,
after which put a Closure to the Woman to prevent Cold from entering the Womb.

Then prepare her for the bed, and give her some Sperma Coeti, or Irish-slate
in a little burnt White Wind with Cinnamon.

If the Woman does flood much, or be troubled with after-pains, give her some
of the following Cordial Opiate.

Take of small Cinamon-water, the waters Cordial Opiate.
of red Poppies, Baum, of each two ounces; Syrups of Clove-gilliflowers, white
Poppies, of each one ounce; Laudanum opiat. three grains; Oil of Cinnamon two
drops; mix it, and give three spoonfulls of it often.

If the Child be born alive, after the Navel string is secured, give the Child
ten grains of prepared Coral in a little Breast milk, or black Cherry-water
dulcifi'd with Syrup of Peony, to which you may add a little Oil of sweet
Almonds new drawn.

If the Child be troubled with gripes, you may give it a little Powder of
Anise-seed in the Pap.

But if the Child be dead, and the Labor gone; or if the Child's head be very
big, and the passage too strait; so that the Midwife cannot do her Office; you
must then speedily implore the help of the Man-midwife, as we are called.

If a Woman in Childbed has a costive Body, give her a Suppository of
Castile-soap, or Honey boiled; and after three or four days, you may
administer, an emollient, carminative Clyster. Clyster.


If a Woman (after hard Travel) cannot hold her Urine, bathe her secret Parts
and Region of the Womb with this or the like Decoction.

Take of Plantain, Comfry, Shepherds-purse, Tops of Brambles, Pennyroyal,
Rosemary, Fomentation.
Sage, Stoechas, of each one handful; let them be cleansed, bruised and boiled
in a Gallon of Smiths-water, till half of it be boiled away, then strain it,
and bathe the parts affected very warm with woollen Stuphs.

Afterward anoint the grieved parts with this Linament.

Take the Ointment Comitissoe, Oil of Mace by expression, of each one ounce;
Oils of Earthworms, Foxes, Lillies, Goose-grease, of each half an ounce; mix
it.

CHAP. XXI. Of Nephritick pains, and of the Stone in the Reins and Bladder.
DIseases of the Reins are called in Greek (...) Ren.

In Latin they are called morbus Renum, which comprehends not only any Ach in
the Kidneys, but also the Stone and Gravel in the Reins.

Nephritick pains may be caused diverse Cause.
ways.

1. First by a sharp salt matter, or a sharp and serous Lympha in the Kidneys,
which does easily concrete into a Stone, especially when the Ferment of the
Reins is much vitiated; which may be known by those cruel torturing Fits, that
come by intervals.

2. Worms in the Kidneys, which for the most part arise from Blood there
corrupted, may be the cause of pain.

3. An Abcess or Tumor in the Kidneys, following an Inflammation, does hinder
the passage of Urine, and is always accompanied with great pain.

4. It may also be caused by glutinous Phlegm, obstructing the fleshy parts of
the Kidneys, and hindering the separation of Urine; so that it is not strein'd
into the Funnels of the Reins as usual, but is depraved and vitiated: Whence
the natural descent of the Urine, through the Ureters into the urinal Bladder
is also hindered.

The same also may happen sometimes by Observacion.
a stone sticking in the Funnel, and stopping the entrance of the Ureters.

Although I think that Stones sticking in the Ureters themselves, cannot long
hinder the passage of Urine; because it has been found by experience, (in
dissecting of dead Bodies) that Stones near the bigness of a Doves-egg; have
been sticking in the Ureters; by the sides of which Stones, Urine descended
freely, which was evident, because the Ureter was no were distended, unless
where the Stone did stick: Neither was there any Urine contained in the Ureter,
above the obstruction; besides when the Party was living, there was no stoppage
of Urine.

Those fits which come by intervals, are caused by a debility or vitiousness of
the Ferment of the Kidneys, which generates crude, salt and sharp matter, which
causes those cruel Tortures; and should all the Gravel and Stone come away,
the pain would not be the less, until the Kidneys themselves be reduced to
their right temper: For many in perfect health have voided much Gravel at a
time without the least pain, and therefore it is evident that Gravel is only
the product, and not the producer or primitive cause of this pain.

The Symptoms of Nephritick pains are Signs.
so much like that caused by the Stone, that they cannot be easily
distinguished; for the signs of both are great pain of the Loins, loathing or
vomiting, there being a great consent between the Reins and Stomach.

The Patient often pisseth bloody water, and when the Reins are ulcerated, the
matter is often evacuated with the Urine.

Wherein the force of concreting or growing Cause of the Stone.
together of Stones (in diverse parts of the Body) consists, is not enough
known; I will freely declare what I conjecture in this obscure matter, whereby
I may (according to my power) the more help others (that are ingenious) to
search out this hidden truth.

All the Stones that are generated in the Body, may be dissolved in the sour
Spirit of Salt Peter or Niter; whence I conclude that the Coagulation of Stones
cannot be expected from an acid Spirit as such, therefore from another somewhat
contrary to it in part at least.

If any consider the several things, that promote the growing together of
natural things, they will find that such force is in tart things; whence the
Glutinousness, and Toughness of fluid things is wont to be produced; to which
if earthy, and volatile salt parts be joined, something will be produced not
much unlike Stones.

I incline therefore to this opinion, that an earthy and salt matter, joined to
that which is glutinous, grows together into Stones by help of a tart humor.

Also Gravel of all kinds (that is usually seen in the bottom of Urine)
testifies that the conglobated Glandules are all affected, by a frequent
external Cold, or else by sour things taken in, and when the Gravel is great it
is then near to the Nature of Stones, yea sometimes grows together into
Stones, especially in cold phlegmatic Bodies, where (for the most part) it
gives Stones their first rising, and daily cherishes their production, and
increases them; and the more especially where a glutinous, stone-making
faculty does concur in the Body.

Many Histories mention, that Stones are produced from a stone-making Spirit,
or Histories.
Breath out of the Earth, which has turned the Bodies of Men, Beasts and other
things into Stone.

Riverius, (in his last edition) quoteth Aventius Annal. Bavar. lib. 7. Anno
1343. who says, that above fifty Men, with many Cattle were turned into Stone.

Ortelius tells the like story, that whole Herds in Russia have been turned
into Stone.

And Camerarius reports, that in the Province of Chilo in Armenia, at the
blast of a South Wind (which happens four times in a Year) whole Troops of
Horse have been turned into Statues of Stone, standing in the same warlike
Posture, in which they were marching.

Children are most inclinable to this Monster in Nature, because they have much
moisture, and weak digestions, which generate Crudities.

Stones are generated in many parts of the Body, as the Gall, Reins, Bladder,
etc.

I once opened a Woman that had sixty History.
four Stones in her Gall.

I also dissected another whose Ureters were stony; and out of her Gall I took
out a large Stone, and a small one (about the bigness of a Hazle-nut) out of
the Neck of the Gall.

1. These distempers are very dangerous, Progn.
and bring many sad Symptoms to the afflicted Patient; as great pain,
inflammations, exulcerations, long watchings, weakness, fevers, suppression of
Urine, and Death it self.

2. Pain from acrid Lympha, etc. may be cured in those that are young, if the
strength be not too much dejected, nor the Disease hereditary.

That we may now address our selves to Cure.
the Cure of these grievous Diseases; I would advise those who are not very
skillful in the Art of Physic, to forbear giving of any thing in these
Distempers, without the Advice of an experienced Physician; for I believe many
Stones have been bred in those Bodies (who before were free from it, and were
only troubled with Nephritick pains) by the frequent taking of ill Medicines;
for many Remedies have been invented to dissolve the Stone; but experience
teaches that they are most of them inimical to the Reins and Bladder, and
debilitate their Ferment.

The solvent of the Stone ought to be homogenious, and so singular, that it
submit not to any digestions, or fermental Powers, through which it passes in
its way to the parts affected; for the Virtue of all common Remedies taken at
the Mouth, are altered and transmuted in passing three digestions: For acid
things, (from which much has been hoped) as soon as they are past the Stomach,
lose their acidity, and are converted into a saline Nature, so that the
dissolving Power of the acid is wholly transmuted before it gets either to the
Reins or Bladder.

Likewise those Medicines which are injected into the Bladder with a Syringe,
ought to be agreeable to its Ferment, that it may not be painful thereto; for
if but a small quantity of any sharp Medicine be injected, it stirs up an
intolerable Strangury, it being wholly foreign to the Ferment of the part.

And seeing the Stone, and all other Distempers of the Reins and Bladder, are
wont to be bred, and increased in length of time; the Remedies which you
administer must be long used, before you may have experience of their effects.

I will here set down some choice Medicines, not only to hinder the increase,
but to dissolve small Stones in humane Bodies, if they be long enough used.

Amongst which we may deservedly attribute the first place to Spirit of Niter
(seeing Stones of any kind are so easily and manifestly broken and dissolved by
it) which may commodiously be mixed in any ordinary Drink, or Wine and Broths,
etc. to a light acidity; whose excellent effects all may admire.

If the Patient have a costive Body, you may give the following Lenitive three
or four times in a week.

Take of Cassia newly drawn one ounce; Venice Turpentine half an ounce; Crystal
Purging Bolus.
prepared, Salt of Tartar vitriolated, of each one dram; Oil of Juniper,
Spirit of salt Armoniack, of each four drops; Spirit of Niter twenty drops; mix
it for two doses.

The following is also very effectual.

Take of Cio-turpentine half an ounce; Powder of Rhubarb one dram; the Yelk
of one egg, mix it for two doses; give it in the morning fasting, and drink
four ounces of this Julep after it.

Take the Decoction for Syrup of Marshmallows Iulep.
one quart; the waters of Horseradish, Pellitory of the Wall, Speedwell,
Winter-cherries, Syrups of Marshmallows and the five opening Roots, of each
two ounces; Crystal prepared, Salt Prunella, of each half an ounce; tincture of
Salt of Tartar two drachms; Spirit of Niter twenty drops; Laudanum ten grains;
mix it and give four or five spoonfulls of it often.

This Powder is also excellent.

Take Salt of Tartar vitriolated two drachms; Powder of Crab's-eyes, Salts of
Powder.
Pigeons-dung, Broom, Beanstalks, Wormwood, of each half a dram; mix it, and
give twenty grains of it every morning and evening in the forementioned Julep.

If the Patient be plethorick, Phlebotomy may be used with good success.

If a Stone chance to stick in the Ureter, which causes numbness, by its
pressing upon the Muscle Psoas, and the Nerves,

In this Case, apply a Ventose on os Ilium, which may bring the Stone by
degrees into the Bladder; afterward anoint the parts grieved with Rabbets fat.

If the Stone in the Bladder be very big, there is little hopes of dissolving
of it, wherefore if the Patient (being in continual pain) be willing to submit
to Lithotomy; I advise them to make choice of an experienced Artist; lest by
Precipitancy the Operatour neglect to cleanse the Bladder, after the Extraction
of the Stone; by the neglect of which, many have generated the Stone again, and
have been forced to endure that dreadful operation the second, and sometimes
the third time, under which many have died, and others who recovered, have
never held their Urine.

In other Nephritick pains, if the fleshy parts of the Kidneys be obstructed,
they may be opened by Diuretics, that cut, attenuate, and make glutinous
Phlegm fluid. For example,

Take of Eringo-roots, the five opening Roots, of each one ounce; the Tops of
Agrimony, Decoction.
the greater Celandine, of each two handfulls; the Berries of Juniper and
Winter-cherries, of each two drachms; let them be cleansed, bruised and boiled
in two quarts of Fountain Water, till half be confumed; then strain it, and add
Syrups of Marshmallows, and the five opening Roots, of each two ounces;
Tincture of Salt of Tartar two drachms; Spirit of Niter twenty drops; mix it,
and give four spoonfulls of it every morning and evening.

They who like Juleps better, may use this or the like.

Take the Waters of Fennel, Parsley, Pellitory Iulep.
of the Wall, of each two ounces; the carminative Spirit of Sylvius, Syrups of
Marshmallows, the five opening Roots, of each one ounce; Oil of Juniper,
Spirit of Salt Armoniack, of each ten drops; Spirit of Niter twenty drops,
Laudanum opiat. four grains; mix it, and give three spoonfulls every three or
four hours.

The Patient may also drink freely of the mineral Diuretick-waters of
Tunbridge, etc. which will conduce much to the Cure; especially if some old
Diuretick-wine, and a little oily Volatile Salt (made of Diuretic, Vegetables)
be mixed with the water.

When the glutinous Phlegm is prepared, and loosned, it may be educ'd with some
convenient Phlegmagogue, either in the form of Pills or Potion, of which there
are variety mentioned in page 3. and four, etc.

The fixed Sulphurs of Minerals and Metalls, exalted to their highest
perfection, do (before all others) mildly temper all the humors; next to which
oily Volatile Salts come, and Aromaticks next to these: By the force of which
(prudently used) not only an effervescency of somewhat contrary Humors (most
agreeable to Man's nature) is bred in the small Gut, and afterward in the
Heart; but the preternatural growing together, and uniting of the more sharp
humors (being first moderated by them) is again dissolved in the Blood.

I speak these things by experience, and because it is of great moment in
practice, I commend them to the truly Studious of Physic.

If the Urine be bloody, it testifies the opening of some Vessel of Blood in
the Kidneys, Ureters, Bladder, or its Neck.

To heal and consolidate this harm the following is excellent.

Take the Waters of Parsley, Plantain, of Cordial Astringent.
each two ounces; Cinamon-water, Syrups of Mirtles, Comfry, Marshmallows, of
each half an ounce; Powder of Dragons-bloud, red Coral prepared, of each ten
grains; Laudanum opiat. three grains; Spirit of Niter ten drops; mix it, and
give three or four spoonfulls every two hours.

If there be an Ulcer in any of these parts, it may perhaps be more happily
cured by the daily taking of Balsam of Sulphur (made with the Oil of Amber,
Juniper, Aniseseed, or Turpentine) in any convenient Vehicle, than by any other
Medicine hitherto known.

In all suppression of Urine, the following is very effectual.

Take the Waters of Chamomel, Goldenrod, Iulep.
Winter-cherries, of each four ounces; Syrups of Marshmallows, the five
opening Roots, of each two ounces; Powder of Eggshells calcined one ounce;
Tincture of Salt of Tartar two drachms; Spirit of Niter twenty drops; mix it,
and give four spoonfulls every three hours.

CHAP. XXII. Of Extraordinary Pissing, etc.
THIS Distemper is called in Greek (...) i. e. pertransire, quod urina
ureteres, and urethram subito pertransit.

It being a quick or plentiful pissing or making of water.

The cause is either external, or internal.

The external, or primary efficient Cause, Cause.
is an immoderate drinking of stale Beer, Sider, or acid Wines, either French
or Rhenish; by which an incurable Diabetes has been ofttimes suddenly
contracted.

The internal Cause of this Disease, is sharp, serous humors abounding in the
Blood, by which not only the whole Mass of it does in time become too thin,
but the nervous Juice is also thereby ill affected, and consequently the Reins
inflamed, by the continual flowing of the over acid serous humors: Whence the
attractive faculty of the Kidneys is increased, drawing the serosity of the
Blood more potently from the emulgent Vessels into the Funnels, and provoking
the expulsive faculty, it is soon sent (through the Ureters) to the Bladder,
from whence it is often evacuated by pissing.

The signs are a continual pissing, so that much more moisture is voided, than
is taken Signs.
into the Body, by eating and drinking.

It is always accompanied with an extraordinary Thirst; the sick is also
feverish, something like a Hectic.

If it continue long, it will decay all the Progn.
radical moisture of the Body, which will render it incurable, but if it be
taken in the beginning, and the Patient be young, it may be easily cured.

All things which have power to incrassate Cure.
the thinness of the Blood, and temper the over acidity of the humors, may be
administered in this Distemper.

In the beginning of the Cure, after a stool has been procured by an emollient
Clyster, you may open a Vein in the Arm.

The next day a gentle Purge of Rhubarb may be administered; but if the Stomach
be foul, and the sick can vomit easily, you may give an Antimonial Emetick with
good success, because it will potently draw the sharp peccant humors from the
emulgent Vessels and Reins, and evacuate some of them both by Vomit and Stool.

After the Operation of the Emetick, let the sick take two spoonfulls of this
Cordial Opiate often, which will ease pain, and thicken the humors.

Take the Waters of Barley, red Poppies, Cordial Opiate.
of each four ounces; Cinamon-water, Syrups of Coral, and Comfry, Penidies, of
each one ounce; Gums Arabic and Dragon, of each half an ounce; Powder of
Dragonsbloud, red Coral prepared, of each one dram; Laudanum opiatum six
grains; let the Gums be dissolved in the distilled waters, and strained, then
mix all together according to Art.

You may prescribe this, or such a like Decoction, for the Patient's ordinary
drink.

Take the Roots of China, Sarseparilla, Decoction.
Comfry, Plantain, red Sanders, of each two ounces; Liquorish, red Roses,
Hemp Seed, of each one ounce; Raisins of the Sun stoned four ounces; let them
be cleansed, bruised and boiled in a Gallon of Fountain Water, till half of it
be boiled away, then strain it, and keep it for use.

Let the Diet be cooling, and thickning Broths and Jellies made of Knuckles of
Veal, with the Roots of China and Comfry boiled in it, is excellent.

You may also make Panado's of the aforesaid Broth, with a few Crumbs of
Whitebread, and the Yelk of an Egg.

Also milk (wherein the aforesaid Roots are boiled) will be very effectual.

CHAP. XXIII. Of involuntary Pissing, commonly called pissing in Bed.
WHEN the Urine flows involuntarily (which in Children is vulgarly called
Pissing in Bed.
pissing in Bed) it may be called in Latin urinae incontinentia, pro impotentia
sive imbecilitate retinendi.

The causes are either external, or internal. Causes.


The external Cause is a large Wound in the sphincter Muscle of the Bladder,
which sometimes happens in Lithotomy; for by extracting a great Stone, the
sphincter Muscle may be so much lacerated, that it cease to be contracted,
and the Orifice of the Bladder to be shut, wherefore the Urine distilleth of
its own accord.

It may be caused internally by the Palsy, Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Syncope, etc.
Sometimes Ebriety may be the Cause of the Resolution of the Nerves, which from
the Loins are inserted into the Neck of the Bladder, and so render the
sphincter Muscle incapable of Contraction; hence the Urine is involuntarily
voided.

In Children, this Distemper is curable, if Progn.
taken in time; but if it happen to old Folks, or if it be caused by a Wound in
the sphincter Muscle of the Bladder, it is incurable.

That which is caused by the Palsy, Epilepsie, Syncope, etc. look for the Cure
in Cure.
their proper Chapters.

If it be caused by Ebriety, Sobriety may be commended to cure it, especially
by the help of inward means to strengthen the parts affected.

Many things have been given to Children, that have been troubled with this
Distemper; the most effectual are these.

Fried Mice, the inner Skins of Hens-gizzards, Cocks-weasands, Pudenda suilla,
Stones of a Hare, Snails with the shells, all or any of these dried and
poudred; also the Powder of Agrimony, Egg-shells, the burnt Ashes of an
Hedgehog, etc.

Any of these may be given in red Wine, or in Limewater chalibeated, which may
be dulcifi'd with Syrup of Comfry.

If Phlegm do abound in the Body, you may purge it with Phlegmagogues.

Also sweating with gentle Diaphoreticks, is very effectual.

Those already mentioned are proper, only consider the Age and Strength of the
Patient.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Stoppage of Urine, and the Strangury.
THE Stoppage of Urine is called in Greek (...), ab (...) comprimo, and (...)
Urina.

It Is called in Latin Urinoe suppressio.

The Strangury is called in Greek (...), i. e. urinoe difficultas, vel urinoe
per guttas excretionem. Ex (...) stilla, and (...) urina.

These differ only in degree, for when the Urine is totally obstructed, it may
be called Ischuria, but when little is voided, and by drops, it may be called
Stranguria.

These distempers may be caused by viscous Cause.
Phlegm, or coagulated Blood in the Ureters, or Urethra, especially if a Stone,
or some Gravel do also stick in the Passage, by which the obstruction will be
more strengthened.

Sometimes it is caused by a schirrous Tumor, or other excrescency of Flesh,
as a Carbuncle, etc. growing in the Urethra, or Chanel of Urine.

Sometimes it is caused by a preposterous holding in of the Urine, either, for
shame or want of opportunity to evacuate it; so that the Bladder being
extremely filled and distended, it has not power to contract it self, hence
the voiding of Urine is suppressed.

It may also be caused by sharp humors, fretting and ulcerating the internal
Superficies of the Bladder, by which it is continually stirred up to contract
it self, and expel the Urine which is in it; so that the Bladder is empty,
having little or no Urine in it, as I have known by experience.

This may be called a Bastard Ischuria, which may be also caused by some hurt
in the attractive or expulsive faculty of the Reins.

If the aforesaid Causes be violent, it causes an Ischuria, but if remiss,
then a Strangury is stirred up, in which there is a perpetual Irritation to
extrude the Urine, although slowly; and by drops, with exceeding pain and
trouble.

Suppression of Urine is dangerous, and if Progn.
it continue long, it is mortal; especially if the Patient's Breath stinck of
Piss, or has a Hiccough, or Tenasmus.

If the Cause be in the Neck of the Bladder Cure.
or Urethra stopped, you may clear it, and draw away the Urine with a Catheter,
as I have often done both from Men and Women with good success.

If the Cause be from the Reins or Ureters, seek the Cure in the Chapter of
Nephritick pains, etc.

Glutinous Phlegm, and coagulated Blood, may be cut and attenuated with
Aromaticks boild in Water or Wine, and mixed with oily volatile Salts, Spirit
of Niter, etc.

Stone-Horse dung is rich in Volatile Salt, wherefore if you mix the Juice of
it with Rhenish-wine, and drink it often, you will admire its wonderful
effects, in curing not only Stoppage of Urine, but most other obstructions.

Those Diuretics prescribed in page 266, 267. are also very effectual here.

Let the Belly and parts affected be anointed with Dears-suet, which will
conduce much to give ease.

When the Urethra is obstructed by a Caruncle, etc. You must gently thrust in a
hollow Instrument made of Lead or Silver, being first anointed with some
consolidating Ointment.

You may leave the Instrument in, till the fear of a new Closing of the Passage
be removed.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Scalding or Sharpness of Urine.
THIS Distemper is called in Greek (...), and (...) Urina.

The causes are either external, or internal. Causes.


The external Cause may be by the Application of Cantharides, or some other
stronger Poison.

The internal Causes are sharp, salt and acid humors mixed with the Urine,
which do corrode, and ulcerate the internal Superficies of the Bladder, and
sphincter Muscle.

Sometimes it is caused by sharp Stones, occasioning an Ulcer.

If the Bladder, or sphincter Muscle, or the Progn.
Urethra be ulcerated, it is hard to be cured; especially if the Patient be
old, and the Distemper has continued long, and e contra.

If the Bladder or urinal Passage be ulcerated, Cure.
it may be effectually cured by the Balsam of Sulphur, made with the Oil of
Aniseseed, Amber, or Juniper, taken to two or three drops, twice or thrice
daily in any convenient Vehicle, especially a vulnerary Decoction, which is
most effectual.

The salt, acid, corroding humors may be corrected with Crab's-eyes, Perle,
etc. and also all volatile oily Salts, taken often (in a small quantity) in any
refrigerating Diuretic.

This Decoction is effectual.

Take the Roots of Mallows, Marshmallows, Decoction.
of each two ounces; Lettice, Endive, Purslain, Violets, of each one handful;
Jujubes, Sebestins, of each one ounce; Winter-cherries half an ounce; the four
greater Cold-seeds, of each two drachms; red Roses, Waterlillies, of each half
a handful, let them be cleansed, bruised and boiled in two quarts of
Fountain Water, till half of it be boiled away; then strain it, and add Syrups
of red Poppies, Violets, of each two ounces; Laudanum opiat. ten grains; Oil of
Vitriol ten drops; mix it, and give three spoonfulls every two hours.

An Emulsion of the Cold-seeds, or Chamomel-flowers boiled in Milk, is also
very effectual.

If the Patient be costive, give emollient Clysters, or gentle Cholagogues, and
Hydragogues, to evacuate the peccant humors.

Or else you may give a gentle Emetick for Revulsion.

If the pain be very great, you may inject an Emulsion (made of the Cold-seeds)
into the urinal Passage, and anoint the Privities with unguentum Populion, etc.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Venereal Affects.
THIS Scourge of transgressing Humanity, being as it were a Murrain, or common
Destruction to venereous Persons, may be called in Latin Lues venerea, a (...)
solvo, vel quod Corpus omnino dissolvit, vel quasi luens usque ad nihil. Lues
enim ista, pestis est species, vel qualiscunque contagio, quoe homines Lues
venerea.
inficit, debito supplicio scelus luere.

The first Knowledge of this pocky intestine Enemy (at least in the European
parts of the World) was at the Siege of Naples, by the French; being brought
thither (as some Authors affirm) by the Spaniards, that came with Christopher
Columbus from the West Indies, and they like plaguey Persons that crowd to
infect others (contrary to their reserved temper) being inflamed with a
venereal Itching, and being also free of their flesh, they communicated (as a
great rarity) this new found foul Distemper, to the Italian Women, which among
others they had engrost to themselves from the Animal Indians, in their
American Tyrannical Conquests.

Many of those poor Creatures being deeply infected with the monstrous Yaws (so
called by the Indians) from whence this foul Distemper had its first original.

Hence it was first called the Neapolitan, and afterward the French disease;
since which time, many of the precipitant youthful Europeans (to their great
Costs and Pain) have been punished with this impure venereal Affect.

This Itch in spite of Mortals will be catching, (where there is no fear of God
to restrain) but the beginning natural momentany Pleasure, will often urge a
smartfull end; so that this is the product of that sin of uncleanness, for
which God has pronounced, Hebrews 13. 4. Whore-mongers and Adulterers God will
judge.

To describe this virulent contagious Disease, It is an universal sour taint of
the spermatick parts; the seed in the spermatick Vessels being first corrupted
with a cold indigested Putridness, is sometimes conveyed outward to the groins,
infecting the obscene parts with a filthy eating Crusty scab.

But if the poisonous malign quality (gotten by impure Coition) be transferred
to the Liver, which is the chief Subject of its more easy invasion, and its
special residence; it must necessarily suffer egregious corruption, from whence
the afflicting taint is dispersed into the whole habit of the Body, vitiating
and corrupting the Nutrition of every part; by which the sick becomes wholly
cachectick, and the filthy Pox (without speedy help) tyrannizing with many
malign Symptoms, and afflicting both the body and mind, does at length hurry
the Patient into the pit of silence.

The cause is chiefly, the carnal use of Cause.
venereous Persons.

Also Children sucking of those Nurses that are infected, may receive the
pollution from the poisonous malignity of the milk.

It may also be Hereditary, the seed of venereous Parents being polluted.

The most apparent signs, are a dullness of Signs.
the whole Body, white face, intolerable pain between the joints, especially in
the Night, which hinders sleep; sometimes Buboes in the Groins, etc. As is
before mentioned, also Ulcers, and hard Pustules in many parts of the Body, as
Head, Chin, etc. there is sometimes a relaxation of the Uvula, with Hoarsness
and Corruption of the Palate, and Tumors of the adjacent Glandulous parts,
there is also sometimes a Cariosity of the Skull, and other Bones. Cum multis
aliis.

1. It is difficult of Curation, if it has Progn.
continued long, or the Patient be consumptive; or if it be in a sucking Infant.

2. If it be Hereditary, it is incurable; but if the Patient be young, and newly
infected, it may be easily cured.

As for the Cure of this filthy Disease, first Cure.
I advise the Patient to repent from the bottom of the Heart, for this great
sin of uncleanness, etc.

Then make choice of an honest Physician.

The Cure is easiest effected in the Spring, or Fall of the Leaf; but if
necessity urge, you may begin the Cure at any time.

First let the Body be prepared,

The following Apozeme may serve for Example in most constitutions.

Take the five opening Roots, Liquorish, Apozeme.
China, of each one ounce; Cinnamon, Aniseseed, Senna, of each half an ounce;
Agarick, Rhubarb, Cream of Tartar, of each two drachms; let them be cleansed,
bruised and boiled in two quarts of Fountain Water, till half be consumed; then
strain it, and add Syrup of Roses solutive four ounces; Salt of Tartar
vitriolated two drachms; Spirit of Niter twenty drops; mix it, and give six
spoonfulls every two hours.

If the Patient be Plethorick open a Vein; after which you may purge with these
or the like Pills.

Take of Extractum Rudii, one scruple; Purging Pills.
Mercur. dulcis, Salt Armoniack, of each half a scruple; make it into four
Pills, and take them in the Morning.

If you perceive by the Excrements, that the Patient's body be very foul, you
may administer another Dose of Pills after two days intermission.

Then you may prepare the following Decoction, or one like it, to cause sweat,
etc.

Take of Guiacum, the Roots of China, Sarseparilla, Decoction.
of each one pound; Raisins of the Sun stoned, Hermodactils, Polypodium, Barks
of Guiacum and Sassaphras, of each four ounces; Juniper Berries, Anise-seed,
Liquorish, Elicampane-roots, of each one ounce; let them be cleansed, bruised
and infused in four Gallons of Rainwater, very hot for the space of a Night;
then boil it gently till a third part be boiled away; strain it, and keep it
for use.

Let the sick take four spoonfulls of it, with ten grains of Antimonium
diaphoret. every Morning and Evening, for four or five days following, and
sweat after it in Bed, or in a Hot-house, or Bagnio, so long as can be well
endured.

Then omitting a day or two, you may take another Dose of Pills; then sweat
seven days more, after which purge as before; this do for forty days, or till
the Cure be perfected.

You may make a second Decoction of the Ingredients, for ordinary drink.

But if the sick have extreme Pains in the Night, ten grains of the following
Pills may be given to bed-ward instead of the Decoction.

Take Gum of Guiacum two drachms; Antimony Diaphoretick, Bezoar-mineral,
Purging Pills.
Flower of Brimstone, Diagredium, Mercur. dulcis, humane Bones calcined, of
each one dram; Saffron, Laudanum opiatum, of each half a dram; with Syrup
of Saffron, make it into a Mass for Pills.

If there be a Defluxion of Rheum on the Lungs, you may give ten or twelve
drops of Balsam of Sulphur, in a little of the Decoction every Morning, and the
like quantity with half a dram of Venice-treacle every Night; after which
drink four ounces of the aforesaid Decoction, to promote a gentle sweat.

You may also make Fontinels in the Arm and Leg with good success.

But if the sick be of a hot Constitution, and the Disease be inveterate, and
stubborn; the shortest and best way of Cure will be by salivation.

I do not approve of unction with mercurial Ointments, to raise the Flux, nor
Turbith-mineral to be given inwardly; but the safest way is to administer
Mercur. dulcis, but let it be well prepared. Then you may give twenty grains of
it with a little Diascordium, or Conserves of Roses: give it three or four
Mornings successively, and drink a draught of the Diet-drink after it.

Also the second Decoction may be sometimes made use of for ordinary Drink, all
the time of the Cure; and warm Possetdrink at other times, when desired.

When the Salivation is raised, let the sick have a piece of Gold between the
teeth; and keep warm, and continue spitting till the Spittle become insipid,
which is commonly in twenty days.

In the mean time, wash the Mouth with Plantain-water, and Syrup of Mulberries.

When you would abate the spitting, administer a Carminative Clyster, or a
Clyster of Milk and Sugar every Night; and after its operation, give the
following Bolus.

Take of Diascordium half a dram; Gascoigns Bolus.
powder fifteen grains; Oil of Vitriol two drops; with Syrup of Poppies make it
into a Bolus; give it at Night going to bed.

Pustules, Tumors and Ulcers of the Mouth, Tongue, Gums, or any other Place,
will be all easily cured, when the Salivation is over.

You may dress the sores with the following Ointment, which is very effectual
to cure all Pocky ulcers.

Take of Verdigreece, and common Salt, of each two ounces; powder them, and
Ointment.
calcine them together; then mix it with eight ounces of Unguentum Enulatum.

When the filthy Enemy, or Neapolitan disease, is cast out by Salivation, you
may sweat the Patient with the Decoction of China, etc. before mentioned, for
sometime, as is there directed.

Let the Diet be drying; roast Meat is better than boiled.

Mutton, Chickens, Partridges, Rabbets, etc. are all good Food.

When strength does begin to increase, Bread and Raisins may be eaten.

The greater Symptoms of this Disease, are the Running of the Reins, Nodes,
Caruncles, etc.

The Running of the Reins is called in Greek (...), ex (...) semen, and (...)
fluo, it being a Flux of natural Seed of Man or Woman unwittingly.

If the Gonorrhoea be virulent, it is a praeludium to the Pox, and must be
cured the same way; but if it be newly contracted, it may wholly and most
safely be absolved by purgation.

The same Apozeme, and purging Pills, before mentioned, are very proper, which
must be continued till the Running of the Reins cease.

If the Patient be plethorick, let a Vein be opened.

To strengthen the spermatick parts, the following Balsamic Pills are
effectual.

Take of Mummy, Bole Armenick, Gums Balsamic Pills.
Dragon and Arabic, of each one ounce; Balsam of Sulphur two drachms; with
Syrup of dried Roses, make it into a Mass for Pills, of which you may give half
a dram every Morning and Evening.

If there be Nodes, Caruncles or Ulcers in the urinary Passage,

The following Medicine may be daily injected.

Take the Water of the Spawn of Frogs Injection.
four ounces; Honey of red Roses one ounce; white Troches of Rhasis one dram;
powder the Troches, and mix all together for an Injection.

After injection, put in an hollow Instrument made of Silver or Lead, being
first anointed with some consolidating Ointment, as was directed in the
Stoppage of Urine.

I do not approve of Astringents in the Beginning of the Cure of a Gonorrhoea,
till the Patient be well purged, and the running begin to cease; because all
Astringent means conduce to prolong the Distemper; but after the Cause is
eradicated by purging, then they may be safely administered, if the Cure be not
effected without it.

To prevent the Return of the Distemper, I advise the Patient to purge, and
bleed every Spring and Fall.

Also keep a good Diet, be moderate in Exercise, and all other of the
nonnatural things.

When thou art recovered, give God the Praise; and have a care of committing
the like sin again, lest a worse thing befall thee; for it is a fearful thing
to fall into the Hands of the Living God. Hebr. 10. 31.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Rachites, or Rickets.
THIS Disease may be called in Greek (...).

It may be called in Latin morbus spinalis, it being a Disease of the Spine of
the Back.

This spinal Disease is commonly called in English Rickets.

It is peculiar to Children, because they abound with a crude phlegmatic
matter; for if they labor under a cold moist Distemper, there is presently a
Penury and Paucity of the Animal Spirits; for the Brain, cerebellum, and
spinalis medulla, being more compact than is wont, is unfit for percolation, so
that the most spirituous part of the Blood cannot pierce, or be strein'd
through it: Hence the separation of the Animal Spirits is diminisht.

For the aforesaid cold, moist, phlegmatic Humors, compacting the soft
substance of the Brain, etc. it is thereby too much thickened and straightened in
its porous passages.

The coldness of Air, Water, or Snow, vehemently affecting the Head, seems to
confirm and prove this opinion; because when the Glandules of the Brain are
affected and thickened by a stuffing of the Head with Coldness, then a more
sparing production of the Animal Spirits uses to follow.

The essence of this Disease consists not only in the Animal, and vital, but
natural Constitution also, all the Functions being (in time) vitiated: For the
spinalis medulla being primarily affected, all the Nerves which proceed from it
(in its passage through the spina Dorsi) must of necessity be stupifi'd, and
vitiated with a loose Feebleness; hence also all the nervous, membranous, and
fibrous parts, through which those Nerves are carried, or inserted into, must
consequently be vitiated with an inward weak Slipperiness; so that the very
ends of the bones, as well as all the Faculties of the Body, bear a share in
this Distemper.

When the Rickets is confirmed in Infants, it seems to have some affinity with
diverse other Diseases, viz. a Chronical fever, an extenuation or leanness of
the Body, and an Hydrocephalus, and many more, which are frequently complicated
with this affect.

And indeed not only this, but most other Observatio.
Diseases (in process of time) do unite unto themselves other affects of a
different kind, and therefore (for the most part) there is a complication of
Chronical diseases before Death.

The Causes are either external, or internal. Causes


The external may be any of the Nonnaturals exceeding, either in excess or
defect.

All things cold and moist do powerfully contribute to this Disease, especially
an over cold and moist Air, which is most frequent in the Spring; the Air being
then cloudy, thick, rainy, and full of vaporous Exhalations.

Hereupon the Children of those which inhabit near the Banks of the Sea, or
great Rivers, Ponds or Marshes; (that are obnoxious to too much Rain, or are
fed with a great Number of Springs) are more or less subject to this affect;
for by the Continuance of such cold and moisture, the Blood and Humors becomes
too slippery, and therefore (in their Circulation) they must unavoidably cause
a softness and looseness in all the parts.

Also experience testifies that those Children which are born, and nursed near
the Lead-mines in Derby-shire, etc. are generally affected more or less with a
languidness of the Limbs.

For the Air being infected with noxiousmetalline Exhalations, which (for the
most part) fight against the inherent Spirits of the parts, by a kind of
venomous malignity; by which the spirituous pulsificative Force of the external
parts is extinguished, and the strength of the Limbs, and whole Body much
weakened and diminished.

Hither we may also refer fine soft Linen, applied actually cold and moist,
(being not well dried by reason of the moistness of the weather) to the Spine
of the Back, which is near the Original of the Nerves; the use thereof being
too long continued, it cherishes the Roots of this Disease in that tender Age.

Likewise Aliments of any kind, which are too moist and cold; or too thick,
viscous and obstructive, do manifestly cherish this Distemper.

And I am induced to believe that Ebriety in English people, especially the
Gentry; and eating of much Flesh; and not using frequent labor, or exercise,
may be a reason why this Disease is more common and natural to Children in
England, than in other Regions, perhaps far exceeding it both in cold and
moisture; as Scotland, Holland, etc. wherein this affect has not been observed
to be very common.

And therefore ebriety and eating of much Flesh, and defect of motion, and want
of exercise does most frequently, and most effectually concur to the production
of it; because the inherent heat (in stupid and sluggish People) is not
sufficient to resist and expel the superfluous moisture by a due
transpiration: By which means the Circulation of the Blood is become slow and
lesned, and the production of the vital heat very feeble, and weak; so that
nature is thereby forced to permit all the parts of the Body to be affected
with a certain softness, looseness, and internal lubricity, more than is meet;
which do sufficiently evince, that this is an efficacious cause, and a part of
the essence of this Disease.

Hence we may easily infer that the Children of such Parents are more inclined
to this distemper, than others who drink moderately, and eat less Flesh, and
are more active and lively.

The internal Causes, are excrementitious Humors luxuriant in the Body,
especially Phlegm and serous humors retained, and vitiated, being naturally
cold and moist, and little spirituous, and affected with an internal
slipperiness, wherefore upon a superfluous accumulation of these humors, the
production of this affect succeeds; because thereby a Colliquation of the
parts, and a dissipation of the inherent Spirits will be easily introduced;
whereby all the parts will afterward be rendered obnoxious to this cold and
moist Distemper.

Many diseases preceding this affect, may be the cause of it; especially those
which do extenuate, and much weaken the Body, as all Fevers, etc. And also all
cold and moist, phlegmatic, and cachochymick Distempers, which will induce a
stupour and dullness in the affected parts, and cause obstructions.

Also any great Pain, Inflammation, Tumor, Fracture, Luxation, or any other
preternatural affect, that hinders the standing and playing of the Child, may
be some cause of this Disease.

Presently after the beginning of the Disease, Signs.
a kind of slothfulness and numbness does invade the Joints, and by little and
little is increased, so that daily they are more and more averse from motion;
besides in the beginning of this affect, there is usually observed, a certain
laxity, softness, and flaccidity of all the first affected parts; after which
follows a great debility, languidness, and enervation of all the parts
subservient to motion; so that (for the most part) they speak before they walk,
which is vulgarly held to be a bad Omen; and if it vehemently increase, they do
not only totally lose the use of their Feet, but can scarce sit with an
erected posture, and their weak and feeble Neck can hardly sustain the Burden
of the Head.

In the progress of the Disease, the Head and Face increases in bigness, but
the fleshy parts below the Head, are daily more and more worn away.

There is also observed in this affect, certain swellings, and knotty
excrescencies about some of the Joints; these are chiefly conspicuous in the
Wrists, and somewhat less in the Ancles, and in the tops of the ribs; the Bones
in the Arms and Legs, and sometimes the Thighs, and Shoulder-bones wax
crooked; the Teeth come forth slowly, and with greater trouble than usual, and
at length the Breast becomes narrow, and the Abdomen swollen, with an extension
of the Hypochondriacal parts, which hinders the free motion of the Diaphragma
downwards; and by consequence does somewhat interrupt the breathing, so that
respiration becomes difficult, accompanied with coughing, the Pulse being also
weak and small; and in the increase of the Disease, all these signs become more
intense and evident, and many, and more grievous, are daily accumulated.

1. If this Disease be light and gentle, the Progn.
Children affected therewith may be easily restored to health; sometimes by the
sole benefit of Age, the vital heat being increased, and summoned forth to the
external parts by the force of frequent exercises.

But if it so vehemently prevails, that the increase thereof cannot be
prevented by the best internal means, and also most prudent applications, then
there is imminent danger.

2. If it proceed from other Diseases, or be complicated with them, it will be
the more difficult of curation; especially if the Bones of the Arms, and Legs
be crooked, and there be great bending and tumor of the Joints of the Wrists,
Ancles and Ribs.

But if the Symptoms decline, and the Child do easily endure agitation, and
have often eruptions in the Skin, as Wheals, Pimples, or Itch, then there is
great hopes of recovery.

3. If they be not cured in five years, they will grow deformed and crooked,
and (for the most part) will become dwarfs, and live sickly, being either
Cachectick, or Phthisical, till death do put a Period to their miserable Life.

As for the Cure of this disease, both the Child and Nurse must keep a good
diet Cure.
which is easy of Concoction.

In the mean time you must not neglect the best Chyrurgical and Pharmaceutical
means which will most conduce to the speedy recovery of the weakly Infant.

Universals being premised, the most effectual and approved Chyrurgical means
in this affect, are Incision or Scarification of the Ears, and little Fountains
or Issues; although many more may be used, viz. Frixions, Blisters, Ligatures,
etc.

Incision or Scarification in the Ears, is to be performed on the Ridge, in the
inside of the Ear above the hole; which must be stopped to hinder the Blood
passing into it.

This Operation must be often repeated, at least once or twice in a month;
which has proved successull when many other remedies have been ineffectual.

And here it may be noted, that Scarification being made in that place, must
needs be of greater efficacy than if it were instituted in any other part of
the Ear, or elsewhere.

1. First, Because the beginning of the fifth pair of Nerves is near that
place, many of their Branches being distributed through the hollow of the Ear,
and are thence conveyed into the Spinalis medulla, from whence it shoots out
little Branches which accompany the Nerves of the marrow of the Back, to the
ends of the very Legs and Feet; as many ingenious Anatomists have accurately
observed.

Wherefore Scarification being there made, it is probable, that the matter
(which commonly oppresses the very beginning of that Nerve) is immediately
evacuated, by which it is freed from obstruction; and having also gotten vigor
(being excited by the pain and Inflammation) it drives out all stupidness from
within it; by which means the Branches of the Nerves from thence arising, which
are communicated to the Spinalis medulla, and many other parts may be in some
measure excited also.

2. Because by this means, there is a particular evacuation of the Head, which
is wont to be oppressed with fullness in this affect.

Besides, the Blood being somewhat lesned, the thickness and toughness thereof
must thereby be corrected; and (by consequence) an equal distribution of it
promoved to a more regular nourishment of the parts.

Issues in the Neck are also much approved in this disease, because they very
much conduce to lessen the unusual magnitude of the Head, and to evacuate the
superfluous watriness thereof, and repress the inordinate increase of the
bones; also it manifestly dries up the too much humidity of the spinal Marrow,
exciteth heat, strengthens the Nerves, and expels the astonishment.

As for the Pharmaceutical or Physical means, you must be sure to cleanse the
first passages either by Clysters, Vomits or Lenitive purgations.

When the Belly is Costive and the excrements are hardened, or some flatuous
humors afflict the Bowels with vehement pain, then Clysters are chiefly
required; and they may also be injected before any preparation, Vomit or
Lenitive purgation.

I need not prescribe any forms, because a little Milk and Sugar, with a few
Aniseseeds boiled in it may serve.

Also an Emollient or Carminative Clyster (that is gentle) may be injectrd when
there is occasion.

Emeticks if well prepared, and prudently administered are very efficacious, and
will conduce much to the Cure.

And here I again commend Antimonial Vomits before all others.

1. First, because they not only powerfully evacuate Crude or corrupt humors,
and all manner of impurities contained in the Stomach by Vomit; but by an
agitation and commotion, raised in all the parts, especially in the Bowels,
they loosen the gross and viscous humors adhering to the Guts, and convey them
through their many involutions and labyrinths, by which they are expelled by
Stool; in which respect they are also profitable against torments of the
Colic, and very conducible to unlock obstructions.

2. They most effectually irritate the expulsive faculty of all the parts of
the Body, by which they compel forth the hidden and unappearing causes of
diseases, especially of intermitting Fevers; for by the very straining to
Vomit, the Guts are also instimulated to cast out by siege; the Liver pours
away the Choler by the Biliar pore; the juice of the Pancreas is voided into
the small Guts; the Spleen perhaps does unburthen its excrement into the
Stomach; the Kidneys exern through the Ureters; the Lungs by a strong Cough
eject their Phlegm through the Windpipe; the Head emptieth it self of salt
waterish Rheums by the Palate, Nostrils and Eyes; finally the whole Body (for
the most part) is rendered more prone to a Diaphoresis, either by a manifest
sweating, or else by insensible transpiration.

If any are afraid of Antimonial preparations (though most safe and potent)
they may administer Salt of Vitriol, from five to ten grains, either in
Posset Drink or any other convenient Vehicle.

Also the following may be safely administered.

Take the clarified Juice of Asarabacca half a dram; Syrup of the Juice of
Sorrel Vomit.
two drachms; mix it, and give it in the morning fasting.

But here we may note, that vomiting is Observatio.
not to be provoked in very weak Children, unless they are naturally apt to
Vomit, and the humors tend upwards of their own accord, and they easily endure
it; and then they ought to be gentle and given in a small dose.

Those that are averse to vomiting may take lenitive Catharticks, which must be
made pleasant and potable, that the young Patient may not loath the taking of
them.

Manna, Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb, Syrup of Violets and Syrup of Roses
solutive are all good pleasant medicines; which you may mix according to your
discretion, in any proper distilled water, or in the decoction of sennoe
Gereonis.

The following drink is of excellent virtue, and will conduce much to the Cure
of this disease.

Take of Anise-seed, the Barks of Ash, Ivy, Infusion.
Tamarisk, Shavings of Hartshorn and Ivory, the Roots of Sassaphras,
Liquorish, China, Sarseparilla, Butterbur, of each half an ounce; Mace one
dram; let them be cleansed, bruised and infused in two quarts of small Ale
for two or three days; then strain it out very strongly, and bottle it up for
the Child's ordinary drink.

In the Cure you must endeavor to resist all symptoms, as Fluxes, Worms,
Venereal affects, breeding Teeth with great pain, etc.

In any Flux, Gripes or urgent pain, you may give half a grain of Laudanum
opiat. dissolved in any convenient Vehicle, so often as necessity urges.

If Worms or venereal affects be feared, you may sometimes adminster this
gentle purging Bolus.

Take of Mercur. dulcis six grains; Diagredium, Purging Bolus.
Rezin of Jallop, of each three grains; with Syrup of Roses solutive, make it
into a Bolus; give it in the morning fasting.

In your Broths and Panadoes, you may boil Hart's-tongue, Ceterach, Liver-wort,
Maidenhair, Sage, the Bark of Tamarisk, red Sanders, Saffron, the Roots of
China, and Sarseparilla, etc. but let all things be made acceptable to the
Palate.

All kinds of exercise unto which Children are accustomed, may be useful in
their time and season; as Rocking, Going, Swinging, Playing, etc.

Also Frixions are excellent, in which begin at the Spina dorsi, and rub with a
course warm linen Cloth, and also under the Short-ribs, and afterward all
other parts; let it be done gently, to cherish and incite the natural and vital
heat, and attract the Nourishment to the affected parts.

External Medicines may be also applied, to strengthen the weak parts, as
Emplasters, Ointments, etc.

These forms may serve for Example.

Take Ointments of the opening Juices, Linament
Tobacco, Marshmallows; Oils of Capers, Wormwood, Elder, Earthworms, Bricks,
Balsam of Peru, of each half an ounce; mix it.

With which let the weak parts be anointed with a warm hand, before a Fire.

Take the Plasters Nervinum, De minio, ad Plaster.
Herniam, of each one ounce; the Carminative Plaster of Sylvius, Balsam of
Peru, of each two drachms; mix it, and spread it on thin Leather.

It may be applied to the Back, or any other weak part after anointing.

If the Lungs be affected, anoint the Breast with the following Ointment.

Take the pectoral Ointment two ounces; Pectoral Ointment.
Oil of Mace by expression, Oil of Violets, of each half an ounce; mix it.

After which apply a Plaster.

They that desire more variety of Medicines, etc. let them peruse that
excellent and learned tract of the Rachites written by the famous Doctors and
Fellows of the College of Physicians at LONDON.

Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Gout, and Rheumatism.
THE Gout is called in Greek (...) ab Arthritis.
(...) Articulus, quod Articulos infestet; hence it is called in Latin
Articularis morbus, it being a Disease of the Joints.

This is a general Name for all Gouts, or when all or most of the Joints are
affected.

But when any particular Joint is infested with a Gouty distemper, it does from
thence take its denomination.

For if it invadeth the Jaw-bones, it may be called in Greek (...), ex (...)
maxilla, and (...) soevio, quod maxillarum usum impediat. It being (for the
most part) accompanied with a fierce and cruel Pain.

And so likewise if it invade any of the rest of the Joints.

If the Vertebroe of the Neck, etc. be affected, it may be termed (...), ex
(...) collum, vel cervix, etc.

That which molests the Shoulders, may be fitly called (...), ex (...) humerus.
etc.

If it affects the Collar-bones, you may call it (...), ex (...) clavis, vel
clavicula, etc.

That in the Elbow may be termed (...), ex (...) cubitus, etc.

The Gout in the Hand is called (...), ex (...) manus, etc.

That in the Hip may be called in Greek (...), ab (...) coxa, etc. quod ab
(...) lumbus.

In Latin Coxendicum dolor, quod coxendices proecipue infestat.

If it be in the Knee (...), ex (...) genu, etc. If in the Foot (...), ex (...)
pes, and (...) soevio, Quod pedum usum impediat, which may be added to every
particular.

This and all other Gouts are most commonly accompanied with a fierce, cruel,
tormenting pain; and thus much, if not too much of the Names of the Gout.

The Causes are either external, or internal. Causes.


The external Causes are Gluttony, Drunkenness, immoderate Venery, Idleness,
external Cold, and excess or defect of any of the non-naturals.

The internal Cause of all Arthritick pains, is the Juice of the Pancreas too
acid and sharp, which raises a vicious Effervescency with Choler, etc. whereby
a Fermental sharpness is increased; and when it is exorbitant, it is sent forth
into the extreme parts, and meeting with that seedy Glue, which is between the
Joints, does not only affect it with its fermental Acrimony, but is also the
grand Cause of the virulent tormenting pain and inflammation in the part
affected.

But seeing the pains are different, not only in diverse People sick of this
Distemper, but also the Pains of the Gout are diverse in the same sick party, we
must therefore, as well by reason as experience, search into the true Cause
thereof.

Therefore in as much as the present molesting pains, are not always freed with
the same medicines, no not in the same fit; much less all that are Gouty.

We may hence consider that diverse humors, as Choler, Phlegm, etc. are
diversely mixed and fermented with the Juice of the Pancreas, which is peccant in
a sour Acrimony, being the primary Cause of all Gouts.

And here we may note, that this over acid Observatio.
humor does molest the sick (chiefly in the beginning of the fit) with a
corroding pain; but after a while, when Choler (by its exceeding heat) has
gotten the Predominancy, it causes a diverse burning pain, according to the
diversity of its faultiness.

But if viscous Phlegm be predominant, the pain is much dulled, and the motion
of the part hindered with a phlegmatic Tumor, rather than an acute pain;
which ought to be accurately observed by every ingenious Artist.

When the Gouty humor has invaded Signs.
any joint, there is presently an unusual heat, and more exquisite sense in it,
than formerly, so that the least touch of any hard thing does hurt the part;
and the longer it continues, the more the Pain increases, with redness and
swelling of the part affected, and most commonly attended with a Symptomatical
Fever.

1. The Gout is a Chronical disease, attended Progn.
with violent Pain, but is seldom mortal, except in very weak Bodies that are
much decayed by Sickness, or old Age.

2. If it continue long, till the Joints are knotty, it is incurable, according
to Ovid, Tollere nodosam nescit medicina Podagram.


But if there be no Knots in the Joints, and the Patient is laborious, and the
Body is (for the most part) soluble, and there be swelling of the Veins called
Varices, then it may be happily cured.

3. If it becomes habitual to the sick, the morbifick Idea is implanted in the
vital Spirit, and transferred through the seed, which makes it Hereditary.

The Cure of the Gout will consist, Cure.


1. First in defending the afflicted Joints, as well against future Pain, as
freeing them from that which does molest at present. 2. In the universal
amendment of the juice of the Pancreas. 3. In the correcting and evacuation of
the vicious Choler. 4. In the altering and diminishing of Phlegm any way
peccant.
To assuage the present Pain I commend the following Medicaments, which will
conduce much to mitigate the sharpness of the acrimonious humors in all Gouty
people, and ease the part affected.

When there is excessive heat, you may bathe the Gouty part with this
Fomentation very hot, with woollen Stuphs, which must be often renewed.

Take the Waters of the Spawn of Frogs, Fomentation.
Fumitory, Elder, of each one quart; Vinegar of Mary-golds one pint; Opium,
Camphire, of each half an ounce; mix it according to Art.

But when the Pain is more corroding than burning, I commend the following to
be used as the former.

Take of Treacle-water half a pint; the Waters of the Spawn of Frogs, Parsley,
of each one quart; Opium, Camphire, of each half an ounce; mix it.

After Bathing with either of these; apply this Cataplasm.

Take Powders of the Roots of Marshmallows, Pultess.
Flax-seed, Barley-meal, of each four ounces; new Milk three pints; boil it to
the Consistence of a Pultess, and add Oils of Flax-seed, Earthworms, the
Ointment Martiatum, of each three ounces: Camphire half an ounce; mix it
according to Art.

Where exceeding heat does concur, and the Body abounds with sharp Choler;
instead of sweet Milk, you may substitute Buttermilk.

Also a Pultess made of the Crumbs of White-bread, new Goats or Cows milk and
Saffron, with Oil of Lin-seed, and Earthworms, may be deservedly commended, to
assuage any Pain.

If the sick be very phlegmatic, and impotency of motion does afflict, more
than pain; then Opiats may be omitted, and things more Aromatical may be used
in all external Applications.

The following Pultess, or one like it, may serve for Example.

Take the Powders of Orris-roots; the Cataplasm.
Flowers of Chamomel, and Elder, Cummin-seeds, Barley-meal, of each four
ounces; the Tops of Wormwood, Mints, of each four handfulls; boil them in two
quarts of water of the Spawn of Frogs, to the Consistence of a Pultess; when it
is almost cold, add Treacle-water, Oils of Chamomel, Earthworms, of each three
ounces; mix it.

Also the Root of Briony, and Cuckowpintle bruised, and made into a Pultess
with Cow Dung is excellent.

If you add Volatile Salts of Animals, or Vegetables to your Medicines, whether
Fomentations, Cataplasms, or Ointments, they will be the more effectual.

You may prepare an excellent Volatile Salt of Earthworms (of great Virtue)
for the Gout, which may be resolved into Liquour by fermentation, and
putrefaction.

If the Gouty Patient do abound with Phlegm, or the Juice of the Pancreas
exceed in an acid Acrimony causing a corroding Pain; it may happily be
mitigated and removed with Balsam of Sulphur made with Oil of Amber, with which
let the grieved part be embrocated, and it will forthwith raise a very hot
Effervescency, which will presently cease again, and remove the great Pain in a
moment, even to admiration.

After the pain is over, you may apply one of the former Cataplasms, or some
Anodyne Ointment, to comfort, and (by degrees) restore again the membranous
parts.

The following Linament may serve for Example.

Take Oils of Earthworms, Scurvigrass, Linament.
Saint John's-wort, of each one ounce; Chemical Oils of Rosemary, Rue, of each
twenty drops; mix it.

Afterward, you may apply a Plaster of De minio cum sapona.

In the mean time, inward means (to take away the Cause, and ease the pain)
must not be neglected.

If the Patient have a plethorick Body, after a Stool has been procured, by a
Carminative Clyster, with Electuar. Caryocostinum, etc. Let a Vein be opened.

Blood drawn from the Vena poplitis, or sciatica Vein, has been succesfull in
the sciatica.

But Leeches applied to the Hemorrhoidal veins, are effectual in all Gouts.

Two or three days after bleeding, you may administer the following Pills.

Take of Pills Hermodactils, faetidae, ex Purging Pills.
duobus, Mercur. dulcis, of each one scruple; mix it for two doses, and give
them in the Morning fasting.

Or you may give half a dram or two scruples of pull. Arthriticus in any
convenient Vehicle.

But if the sick be inclining to vomit, administer an Antimonial Emetick.

You may purge and bleed so often as you see occasion.

Issues near the part affected, and also to raise Blisters upon the part, have
been found by experience to be very effectual.

Also bathing and sweating in nitrous or sulphurous Baths, either natural or
artificial, are much approved of.

That which is prescribed in the Chapter of the Belly-ach, is very effectual,
which may be used, as is there directed.

I might fill a Volume with receipts against the Gout, but I shall only
commend the following water or spirit to be often taken inwardly in any fit
Vehicle, the quantity of half a spoonful at a time.

Take the Roots of Orris, Angelica, Saffaphras, Water against the Gout.
of each two ounces; the Tops of Ground Pine, Pennyroyal, Sage, Mother of
Time; the Flowers of Saint John's Wort, Chamomel, Prim-roses, Rosemary,
Lavender, of each three handfulls; the Berries of Bays and Juniper, of each one
ounce; Castor two drachms; let them be all cleansed, bruised and infused in six
quarts of Spirit of Earthworms compound for the space of twenty four hours,
then distill it in an Alembick according to Art.

The Rheumatism is called in Greek (...), Rheumatismus.
ex (...) fluo; it being a distillation of Rheumatick humors, not only
affecting the Joints, but the adjacent parts, yea sometimes the whole Body;
especially the Muscles, Membranes, and Periostium of the Thighs, Legs, and
Hip-bones.

The humor is of a very malign Nature, and soon causes a Cariosity of the
Bones, if it be not prevented.

The Cause is the same with the Gout, but sharper. Cause.


It Is seldom mortal, but may be of long Progn.
continuance, with great Pain, so that the Sick cannot endure to be touched.

In the Cure of this Distemper, Phlebotomy Cure.
must be often repeated, and carminative Clysters often administered.

Foment the pained parts with stale Urine (made very hot) wherein Castle-sope
is dissolved; after which anoint with this following.

Take Spirit of Salt Armoniack, Oils of Linament.
Guiacum, Bricks, of each two ounces; in which dissolve Opium one ounce;
Spanish Soap four ounces; then add Oil of Roses six ounces, and make it a
Linament according to Art.

If you would have it for a Plaster, you may add so much Empl. de minio to it,
as will give it a sufficient Consistency.

The Medicines and Directions prescribed in the Cure of the Gout, are also
proper here.

From these few observations, it will not be very difficult to select other
choice Medicines out of the writings of Practitioners, to cure both the Gout
and Rheumatism.

To prevent a Relapse, purge and bleed Spring and Fall, and keep a good Diet,
and use moderation in all things.

I have now finished this little Tract, or Manual of Physic, which I have
written for the common good; not only to serve young Beginners of the Art of
Physic, but also for the sake of the sick themselves.

GOD grant that it may prove succesfull, and tend to the good of them both.

Now unto the only wise God and our Savior Jesus Christ with the Holy Ghost
our Comforter; three Persons, and one God, be ascribed, and given all Laud,
Honor, Glory and Dominion, from this time forth, and for evermore.

Amen.
POSTSCRIPT.
HAving often prescribed the Carminative Spirit of Sylvius, and also his
preservative water against the Plague, and his Carminative Plaster, etc. I will
here give you the Receipts of them in English, that you may make them for your
own use, as you see occasion.

The Carminative Spirit of Sylvius.
Take Angelica-root two drachms; the Roots of Masterwort, and Galangal, of each
three drachms; the Tops of Rosemary, sweet Marjoram, Garden-rue, Centaury the
less, Basil, of each one handful; Bay Berries six drachms; the Seed of
Angelica, Lovage, and Anise-seed, of each an ounce; Ginger, Nutmegs, Mace, of
each half an ounce; Cinnamon one ounce and half; Cloves, Orangepeel, of each two
drachms. All these things being grossly bruised, pour thereon Spirit of Malaga
or Spanish-wine six pints.

Digest them two days in Balneo Marioe, and draw off all the Spirit.

You may pour upon what remains the same quantity of Spirit of Wine; and after
two days digestion, draw it off as before, which may be kept apart, as weaker
than the former, but of much virtue to discuss Wind.

Aq. Prophylactica, or the Preservativewater against the Plague.
Take the Roots of Angelica, and Zedoary, of each one ounce; Roots of
Butter-bur two ounces; the Leaves of Garden-rue four ounces; of Baum, Scabious,
Marigold-flowers, of each two ounces; unripe Wall-nuts cut two pound; new
Pome-citrons cut one pound; bruise them all together, then pour on twelve pints
of the best Wine-vinegar, distilled by it self to three fourth parts in Sand in
a Glass cucurbit, then digest them all Night, in the Morning distill the water
with a slow Fire.

This grateful Medicine may be mixed with ordinary drink, broth or any
decoction or Cordial Julep, etc. to a grateful acidity, for any that are sick,
to take away thirst, and to promote a mild Sweat.

The Plaster of Sylvius discussing Wind.
Take gum Galbanum, Bdellium and Amoniacum, of each half an ounce;
Male-frankincense, red Mirrh, of each two drachms; Opium of Thebes one dram;
dissolve them in Vinegar of Squills, and when they are again thickened, add
yellow Wax, Coloph^ny, of each three drachms; natural Balsam, Oil of Bricks, of
each one dram; Oil of Earthworms half a dram; distilled Oil of Caraway a
scruple; Venice Turpentine what suffices to make it into a Plaster according
to Art.

This egregious Plaster may be spread upon soft Leather, first formed according
to the shape and greatness of the Tumor to be dissolved.

The Cholagogue, Electuary, or Diaprunum of Sylvius.
Take the Pulp of Prunes sourish-sweet, ten ounces; Powder of Cream of Tartar,
best Scammony, of each two ounces; Powder of Rhubarb ten drachms; Cinnamon half
an ounce; yellow Sanders two drachms; refined Sugar a pound; make it into an
Electuary according to Art.

The Hydragogue Electuary of Sylvius.
Take of Juniper Berries boild in water expressed, and reduced to the Consistency
of a Pulp; the Pulp of Tamarinds, of each four ounces; Powder of Jallop-root
one ounce and half; Diagredium one ounce; sharp Cinnamon, sweet Fennel-seeds, of
each two drachms; clarifi'd Sugar ten ounces; make it into an Electuary
according to Art.

The Dose of either of these Electuaries, is from two drachms to half an ounce;
they are gently effectual, and no ungrateful Medicines; they may be dissolved
in any convenient distilled water, as Parsley, Fennel, etc. or it may be taken
by it self in the manner of a Bolus.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THIS is to give notice to all Persons, chiefly country Physicians and
Chyrurgeons, that all the Medicines prescribed in this Book, are faithfully
prepared by the Author hereof, and may be always had of him at reasonable
rates, without Adulteration, or any other Deceits.

ALL sorts of Chemical preparations, are faithfully prepared without the least
Sophistication or Adulteration, and to be sold at reasonable rates, by
Christopher Pack Chemist, at the Globe and Furnaces in the Postern, by
More-gate, where a Catalogue may be had Gratis.

An Interpretation of certain hard Words, which you shall meet with unexplained
in this Treatise.
A.
ABdomen, All that part of the Belly, which is between the Ribs and the Privy
members, consisting of Skin, Fat and Muscles. Abcess, an Impostume, or
gathering of ill Humors to one part of the Body, and there drawn to a Head.
Abstersive, a cleansing Medicine. Acerbity, Sourness. Acid, eager, sour, or
sharp. Acrimony, Sharpness. An acute Disease is a sharp Sickness, which does
quickly either dispatch or deliver the Sick. Aetites, the Stone with Child,
found in an Eagles-nest. Affected part, the part grieved, or distempered.
Alchimy, the Art of melting or dissolving Metals, etc. and separating the pure
from the impure. Alexiterion, Alexipharmacum, a preservative Medicine against
Poison, and Infection. Amputation, the cutting off of a Member. Amulet, any
thing hanged about the Neck. Anatomy, the Trunk of a dead Body, from whence all
the Flesh, Sinews, etc. is cut off, and nothing remaining but the bare Bones.
Anodyne, appeasing Pain. Antidote, a Preservative against Poison and Infection.
Antimonial, made of Antimony. Anus, the Fundament. Apertion, an Opening.
Apophlegmatism, a Medicine which chewed, draws Phlegm and other Humors out
of the Head, and voideth them at the Mouth. Apoplexy, a general Palsy of the
whole Body. Apozeme, a thin Decoction of Herbs. Aromaticks, Medicines made of
Spice. Arteries, hollow Vessels, wherein the vital Blood, and Spirits are
contained, which causes the Pulse, as you may feel at the Wrists, etc.
Arthritick pains, the Gout or any other Pain of the Ioints. Aspera Arteria, the
Windpipe. Astrictive, Astringent, which has Power to bind.
B.
BAlneo, Bath. Balsamic, Healing, of the Nature of Balsam. Bechical, easing
the Cough. Bile, Choler. Bolus, a Lump, a Morsel. Bronchia, the Gristles of the
Windpipe. Bubo, a Sore about the Groin.
C.
CAchexy, ill habit of Body. Cacochymy, ill Juice in the Body. Calcinate, to
burn into Ashes. Capillary, as small as a Hair. Carbuncle. a Plague Sore.
Cardiack, Cordials. Cariosity, Rottenness. Carminative, that cleanses the Body
of Wind. Cartilage, a Gristle. Caruncle, a little Piece of Flesh. Catagmatical,
Medicines to cure broken Bones. Cataplasm, a Pultess. Cataract, a Disease of
the Eyes. Catarrh, a Rheum. Cathartick, a purging Medicine. Catheretick, a
Medicine to consume supersluous Flesh. Cauterize, to burn or sear. Cephalicks,
Med. for the Head. Cerebellum, the little Brain. Chalybeate, red-hot Steel in
any thing. Chylus, a white Juice coming of the Meat digested in the Stomach.
Cholagogue, a Medicine that purges Choler. Chronical, staying long. Coliries,
Medicines for sore Eyes. Colliquation, a Dissolving. Coriza, a snottish Rheum.
Crisis, Judgment. Cuticula, the Scarf-skin. Cystick passage, the Passage of the
Choler from the Gall.
D.
DEfluction, a flowing down of Humors, Delirium, Dotage, Lightheaded.
Desiccative, a drying Medicine. Diaphragma, the Midriff. Diaphoretick, a
sweating Cordial. Diaphoresis, Evaporation by sweat. Diarrhea, a Flux or Lask.
Diastole, Dilatation of the Heart, etc. Diuretical, causing Urine. Dormative,
to cause sleep. Ducts, little Pipes for Water, etc. Dura matter, the strongest
Skin encompassing the Brain. Dysentery, the Bloudy-flux. Disuria, scalding of
Urine.
E.
EFfervescency, a working, a fermenting. Elixir, a Quintessence. Embrocate, to
bedew. Embryon, an imperfect Child in the Womb, without shape. Emetick, a
Vomit. Emplastick, a clammy Medicine. Emulsion, a Medicine like milk.
Epilepsie, the Falling Sickness. Epidemical, Ill, the Plague. Epispatick, a
Medicine to raise Blisters. Epithems, are certain Powders, put in little Bags,
and wet in Wine, etc. and applied to the Regions of the Heart, Liver, etc.
Errhines, liquid Medicines to snuff up the Nose. Escharotick, a potential
Cautery. Exulcerate, to blister.
F.
FAscinate, to bewitch. Fibers, small hairy strings. Fistula, a hollow Ulcer
with Callocity. Filtration, a straining fire. Foetus, the young. Fomentation,
an asswaging Bath.
G.
GArgarism, a Liquour to wash the Mouth. Gargarise, to wash the Mouth.
Gangrene, an Inflammation tending to Mortification. Gonorrhaea, the Running of
the Reins.
H.
HAemorrhage, an excessive or continual Flux of Blood. Haemorrhoids, the Piles,
also the Veins in the Fundament. Hepaticks, of or belonging to the Liver.
Hernius, broken Bellied. Homogeneous, Homogeneal of one Kind. Hydromel, Water
and Honey. Hydrocele, a waterish Rupture. Hydrocephalos, a Dropsy in the Head.
Hydragogue, a Medicine to purge water. Hydropical, that have the Dropsy.
Hypochondries, the forepart of the Belly about the short Ribs.
Hypochondriacal, a windy Melancholy. Hysterical, of or belonging to the Womb.
I.
ICterical, having the Iaundice. Icchorous, waterish, mattery. Jejunum, the
hungry Gut. Ileon, the third small Gut. Iliack passion, a grievous Disease in
the Gut Ileon. Impostume, vide Abcess. Inflammation, an hot angry Swelling.
Ingredients, that which goes into the making of a thing. Intercostal, between
the Ribs. Ischuria, Stoppage of Urine. Jugular vein, in the Throat.
L.
LActeal veins, milkie Veins. Lethargy, a slothful sleepy Disease of the Head.
Lientery, a Looseness, caused by undigestion. Ligament, a bond or binding.
Linament, a kind of hard Ointment. Lipothimy, fainting, sounding. Lithotomy,
cutting out of the Stone. Lixivial, made of Lie. Lixivium, a Lie made of Ashes.
Lympha, a waterish Humor.
M.
MAsticatory, a Medicine to chew in the Mouth. Medicinal, of or belonging to
Physic. Membrane, a thin Skin. Menstruous, a Woman having her Menses, or
monthly Terms. Mercurial, made of Quicksilver. Mesentery, the thick fat
Membrane, that fasteneth the Guts, etc. Muscle, an Instrument of voluntary
motion in the Body.
N.
NArcotical, stupefactive, that has power to stupefie, or make the Body
insensible. Neopolitan disease, the Pox. Nephritick, of the Reins. Nitrous,
made of Salt Petre.
O.
OPiate, made of Opium, to cause sleep, and give ease. Ophthalmy, Inflammation
of the Eye. Optic nerve, the Sinew which brings sight to the Eye.
P.
PAlate, the hollow of the Mouth above. Panchymagogon, a Medicine which purges
all Humors. Pancreas, the Sweetbread. Paracenthesis, a tapping for the
Dropsy, etc. Pralitical, that have the Dropsy. Pectoral, of or belonging to
the Breast. Pericardium, the Membrane involving the Heart. Periosteum, a thin
Skin enwrapping the Bones. Peripneumony, an Impostume of the Lungs.
Peritonaeum, the inner Rim of the Belly. Pest, the Plague. Pharmacy, Medicine.
Phlegmagogues, Medicines that purges Phlegm. Phlebotomy, Bloodletting.
Phrenetical, that has the Frenzy. Pia matter the tender Skin enwrapping the
Brain. Pituitous, Phlegmatic. Pleuretical, that has the Pleurisy.
Plethorick, fullness of Blood. Prohylactick, a Preservative against the Plague,
etc. P^isan, Barley-water. Pulsation, a beating. Pulverize, pulverate, to beat
into Powder. Puncture, a Pricking. Purgative, which has virtue to purge.
Purulent, full of matter. Pustule, a Wheal or Blister.
Q.
QUartan ague, that comes every fourth Day. Quintan ague, that comes every
fifth day, but seldom observed. Quotidian, that comes every day.
R.
RAdical, of or belonging to the Root. Rarefaction, a making thin of what was
thick. Rectum, the Arse-gut. Respiration, fetching of breath. Rupture, a
breaking.
S.
SAline, saltish. Salivation, spitting, or fluxing at the Mouth.
Sanguification, the changing of the Nourishment into Blood. Saphena, the Vein
by the inner Ancle. Scamoniats, Medicines made of Scammony. Scarifie, to cut or
lance. Sceleton, a dry Carcass, of Bones only. Sciatica, the Hip-gout.
Scorbutic, that have the Scurvy. Scrofulae, the King's Evil. Secundine, the
Afterbirth. Seminal, of the Seed. Serosity, the wheyish, or waterish part of
the Blood. Sphincter muscle, the round compassing Muscle of the Fundament, etc.
ordained to prevent untimely excretion. Soluble, Loose. Solvent, that has
Power to melt or dissolve. Soporiferous, causing sleep. Spasm, the Cramp, or
Convulsion. Spermatical, of or belonging to the Seed. Spina dorsi, the
Backbone. Spinalis medulla, the Marrow of the Back. Spirituous, full of
Spirit. Spissitude, thickness. Sternutatory, to cause sneezing. Sternon, the
Breast Bone, where the Ribs meet. Sterillity, Barrenness. Strangury, a pissing
by drops. Sudorifick, that causes Sweat. Suffocate, to choke. Suffumigate, to
smoke underneath. Sulphur, Brimstone. Superfetation, a conceiving the second
time. Suppuration, a gathering to matter. Symptom, any grief following a
Disease, or sensibly joined with it, as Headache with an Ague, etc. Systole,
contraction of the Heart, etc.
T.
TEnasmus, a Neediness to go to stool. Tenuity, Smallness. Thoracick, of or
belonging to the Breast. Torsions, gripings of the Guts. Trachea, or Aspera
arteria, the Windpipe. Transfer, to carry from one place to another.
Transmute, to change. Transpiration, sweaty Vapors coming forth of the Pores
of the Skin. Tubercles, Pimples, Wheals. Tumor, a swelling. Turgid, after a
swelling manner. Tympany, the windy Dropsy.
V.
VAperous, full of Vopours. Varices, swelling of the Veins in the Legs.
Vegetables, Roots or Plants. Vehicle, any thing that carries, etc. Ventoses,
Cupping-glasses. Verntricle, the Stomach, etc. Verminous, full of Worms.
Vertebra, the Backbone. Vertigo, Giddiness. Vesiccatory, a Medicine to draw
Blisters. Virulent, deadly, poisonous. Viscous, clammy like Bird-lime. Vitiate,
to corrupt. Volatile, that flies.
U.
ULcerate, to blister, to break out into Sores. Unguent, an Ointment. Ureters,
the Vessels by which the Urine passes from the Reins to the Bladder. Urethra,
the passage of Urine from the Bladder, through the Yard, etc. Uvula, a fleshy
substance, hanging down, like a Grape, from the Roof of the Mouth, toward the
Root of the Tongue.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A New Idea of the Practice of Physic; written by that famous Franciscus
De-le-boe Sylvius; late chief Professor of Physic in the University of
Leiden. The first Book; of the Diseases either constituting, producing, or
following the Natural functions of Man not in Health. Wherein is contained,
beside a new Method in General, a Vindication of the Spleen and Mother from
fits attributed to them. As also a new Discovery of intermitting Fevers, the
Yellow-jaundice, and other Diseases, never before discovered. All cleared by
Anatomical experiments, and Chemical demonstrations; as also by their Cures.
Faithfully translated by Richard Gower, formerly Student under the Author.
Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill. in Octavo.

THE END

