GOOD and TRVE NEVVES FROM IRELAND.

In a Letter sent to Mr. Francis Clay in Lumber-street, and by him received
January 24. 1641.

With a Confirmation of another Letter to the same effect; by the relating the
late Exployts of the English Forces there.

LONDON, Printed for H. Blunden. 1642.

Good Mr, Clay,
AFter my kind love presented unto you and your good wife, with desire of your
healths. I have received your Letter and the news, for which I kindly thank
you, and will give satisfaction, for what you lay out; For news with us there
is very good, for that Regiment which went from hence under Sir Simon Harcot,
has done much good: for he and Sir Charles, issued out of Dublin with two
thousand and set upon a Town called Swords, some eight miles from Dublin, which
the enemies had taken, and were there encamped about five thousand of them, our
men set on them and slew three hundred of them with the loss of three men, and
put the rest to flight; and took, as the report is, spoil worth six thousand
pound, and set fire of the Town. Also Captain Bartly with a ship of War, and
four other small ones, has relieved Tradarth, as he went up the River he
played with his Ordnance on both sides, fifteen Pieces on a side; and when Sir
Henry Titsburn heard him, he issued out to meet him for joy, and when he was
gone out, the Rebles marched toward the City; but he returned back before
them, and he bid them come, he would deliver the Town to them, and set open the
gates. But when some eight score of them were come in, Captain Jaxe one of
their Captains kissed his Sword and said, God be thanked the Town was theirs.
But presently they discharged two pieces of Ordnance, and a bullet hit him and
dashed out his brains, and they shut the gates, and shot off the walls at the
rest, and put those eightscore all to the Sword, and when the rest saw them
shoot they fled; but they slew some three hundred of them off the walls.
Captain Bartley as he came home he battered a Town called Skerries, by the Sea
coast, and fired it where the Rebels lodged. And very lately Sir Charles Coote
and Sir Simon Harcot issued out of Dublin again (they were striving a day for
pre-eminence) and cast lots, and Sir Charles Coot got it, whether should lead
them to Dunboyne: and if they had gone that day before, they had taken the
Lords of the Pile there, but they took the Town, and got great spoils and fired
it: they brought with them four hundred head of cattle, besides other
victualling. The Lord Dungarbar is arrived in Ireland safe, he has taken
Dungar now and victualled it. Thus being in haste, I rest,

Your thankful friend to command, Richard Johnson.

SIR,
YOur kind Letter by Mr. Ralinson I safely received, and whereas you desire to
hear of our present state in this poor Kingdom of Ireland, I shall in brief
relate unto you our latest Occurrences.

Three days since Sir Charles Coote, and Sir Simon Harcotte sallied out to
Swords, six miles from Dublin, where the enemy had their Camp, and there had
entrenched themselves. By break of day our men set upon them, drove them out of
their Trenches, and put them to rout, they ran away, about 120 were slain,
diverse taken prisoners, four of their Colors, Drums, and Arms, our men
brought away, who are safely come again, blessed be God, only we lost four
men; whereof the chief was Sir Lorenzo Carry, brother to the Lord Faulkland,
shot in the head, as it is thought, by one of his Soldiers; he was brought to
Dublin on horseback, his footman behind him holding him up in the saddle, which
an Irish woman on the Key seeing, said it was pity that no more were served
so, which the Soldiers hearing, in a rage threw the woman into the River,
where she was drowned.

The Rebels have burned all the Plantation Towns in the County of London Derry,
but Derry and Colraine stand out stoutly.

The last night they went out toward the Mountains beyond Tallow, and burnt
two or three Villages, whereby those Rebels should not have any shelter so
near us, but when our men came, they ran away, and would not abide above two
shot, so that till we have supply from England and Scotland, no good is to be
done with them, whereby we may follow them to the full; notwithstanding, many
Papists curse the Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, and say in plain terms, they
have been the cause of all this; and no question to the contrary; the Lord in
mercy convert or confound them.

We are all much bound to God for our Gracious King, the Honorable Parliament
of England, the merciful and pious City of London, and the whole Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, for their care and pity upon us, although as yet we
have but little help to this great work, but of that which we have received, we
are much comforted, and we do not doubt of the rest, which does not a little
strike to the hearts of our enemies, as we hear; by this you may see in part
our calamities; but blessed be God, our Lords, Justices, and Council, have
provided for this City, that under God, we hope to be safe as you in London,
and so we hope of Drohedah, where a worthy Governor Sir Henry Tichborne holds
out valiantly, although the Rebels have made many assaults upon the Town.
Provision is sent by Sea to Drohedah, and we trust in God, it will be safely
delivered to them, but if not, they will be hard besteed, but if it please God
to send us more strength, we make no question by Gods assistance but to clear
the passage by land to succor them.

These miseries are great the Lord be merciful unto us: but this is not all,
the most of our rich men and great men are fled from us into England, and have
carried their estates with them, they have not left one penny to succor the
poor distressed stripped people who are come hither for relief, whereof we have
at this present near three thousand, besides many hundreds are starved to death
since they came only with want, for we are not able to do more then we do, we
do relieve them far beyond our abilities; for my own part, I pay much weekly
for billiting money, besides what I give to the poor; the rich being gone,
left their houses without any help at all unto us, not so much as common
charges for the safety of this City, but all lies upon the poorer sort: The
Lord in mercy forgive them this sin, this great sin, that the blood of so many
hundreds which have perished by want be not required at their hands. Thus with
our best respects unto you, I rest

Your assured friend, S. G.



