AN ACCOUNT Of the Late Bloody Sea Fight, Between Part of their Majesty's
Fleet, Commanded by Sir Clovesly Shovel, And that of the FRENCH FLEET,
Commanded by the Sieurs Turville and Ampheville, With the Sinking of Three of
the French Men of War, one of which was a Vice Admiral.
Printed according to Order, Sept. 27. 1690.



In a Letter from Plymouth.
SIR,
ON Monday was sevennight, Sir Clovesley Shovel Sailed out of this Harbor with
the Squadron under his Command, consisting of Twenty Two Capital Ships, with
Six Fireships and several Tenders, the Wind at East North-East, and by Seven a
Clock in the Evening, the whole Fleet was out of sight, Steering their Coast
Westward, directly for the Ports of either Cork or Kinsale, upon which Coast
have been seen Crusing by some Ships put into this Port, near Forty Sail of the
French, under the Command of the Sieur Turville, the next Morning by Three a
Clock, came in here Six Dutch Men of War, in order to join Sir Clovesly Shovel,
but understanding Sir Clovesly Shovel was Sailed before, they immediately
Sailed after him without casting Anchor.

And this Morning came in here a small Pink from the Coast of Ireland, the
Master whereof gives an Account, that on Saturday, being the 20th. Instant,
early in the Morning, one of Sir Clovesley's Advice Ships brought him an
Account, that they espied at the Head of them, from their Top Mast, about 27.
Sail of Ships, which they supposed to be the French, upon which Sir Clovesley
made all the Sail he possibly could after them, and about Nine in the Morning,
both Fleets came in sight of each other, upon which Sir Clovesley caused his
Fleet to be drawn up in a Line in order to Engage, the exact form of an
Half Moon, but while this was doing, they espied several Sail of Ships at their
Stern, which at first put them into some amazement, thinking they must be more
French, but coming nearer, they plainly descried them to be the Six Dutch that
should have joined them at Plymouth; upon the Arrival of whom, Sir Cloudsley
changed his order of Battle, dividing his Fleet into Two Squadrons, one of
which, that consisted of Fifteen Sail, all English, led the Van, The other
consisting of Thirteen, Dutch and English: And by this time they could perceive
Four more join the

The Squadron of all English, under the French.

Command of Sir Cloudsley, as aforesaid, bore to the French, and the other
Thirteen followed them in a Line; Sir Cloudsley with the English (himself being
in the Monk) Attacked the French Monsieur Turville and his Squardron with great
Resolution, standing himself upon the Quarter Deck, with his Hanger drawn all
the Engagement, encouraging the Seamen, and giving necessary Orders The other
Thirteen Dutch and English Behaved themselves to admiration; the whole
Engagement lasted from One in the Afternoon till Six, during which time, scarce
any thing else was heard but the loud Mouthed Engines of Destruction, and
nothing seen but the dreadful appearance of Smoke and Fire: Sir Cloudsley, in
the Monk, being Engaged with Turville (who was on Board the Ship called the
Terrible, of 80 Brass Guns) with a Chain'd-shot, brought Monsieur's Mainmast
on Board, and killed her a vast number of Men, and was sending in Two Fire
Ships to her, had she not been Towed off immediately by Four French Ships that
came in to her Assistance. The Magnificent, Commanded by the French
Vice Admiral Ampheville of 72 Guns, with the Agreeable a Ship of Fifty Four
Guns, and the Seahorse of Forty Two Guns were Sunk, and Seven or Eight more
much disabled: About half an hour past Six, the French drew off, and made all
the Sail they could with a great deal of Precipitation; and the Night coming
on, favored their Flight; so that our Fleet could not pursue the Engagement;
In this whole Action our Fleet have not lost one Ship, and but few Men, but
several Ships are disabled, chiefly in their Rigging. This is all at present
that occurs from,

Your Friend and Servant, Nich. Jackson.


London, Printed for Joseph Robinson, near St. Paul's-Church.


