Balsamum Britannicum, Britains Balm: OR, The means of recovery for a
languishing Kingdom.

Preached in a Sermon before the Honorable Judges for the Northern Circuit,
at the general Assizes holden in the City of York, 21. March, 1647.

By John Johnson Mr. of A. and Minister of Methley in Yorkshire,

Prove. 14. 34. Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach to any
people. Prove. 16. 12. It is an abomination to commit wickedness; for the
Throne it established by righteousness. Printed at York by THO: BROAD, 1648.

To the Right Worshipful, and his much honored friend John Savile of Methley
Esquire, and High-Sheriffe of the County of York.
SIR,
ONe being friendly chidden, that he did not write Books, made this answer, ut
libet non licet, ut licet non libet; As he would he could not, and as he could
he would not. I confess I have been often expostulated withal by some
particular friends and relations, (who usually over rate whom they love,)
(...)hy in this scribbling age, wherein the Pen is so Rheumatick, I have never
appeared in Print ^ but my answer is made before; I attest the searcher of
hearts, never thought any light that shone from my darkness, worthy to be set
on so public a Stage, especially in this censorious age, which like August^
Caesar, Taxes all the World wherein (by reason of the contrariety of men's
judgments and affections) Sermons are made b^^ the Whetstones for men to
sharpen their tongues upon.

The causes which move me a^ this time to be more public besides the
importunity (...) friends, (the ordinary Midwif^ of the Press) are these,
first that I might once in my life bestow a small Token on the Spou(...) of
Christ; and secondly, that might in a slender gift, give a testimony of a not
slender affection toward you, not having wherewithal further to honor you.
The State has put the white Rod in your right hand, let me take the boldness
to put a Role in your left.

It was the custom of the subjects of Artaxerxes King of the Persians, to
present him something in his travel; a poor laboring man having nothing else,
brought him a little water from the River that ran by, and presented it with
both his hands; which the King did with a cheerful countenance accept,
esteeming it as honorable to receive small things, from a large heart, as to
impart great. If my abililitie were as large as my heart, I would do more to
honor you; be pleased therefore to accept what I can, since I cannot do what
I would.

These poor thoughts of mine must needs redound upon your self, for every
thing must acknowledge its first Spring and rise; they were yours in service to
your desire, be pleased to let them be yours in acceptance and Patronage. The
God of truth and peace give you to be famous in Ephrata, and do worthily in
Bethlehem, that you may lay out all your power and affections in a flaming zeal
of the glory of Gods truth and the Kingdoms peace, which is the constant prayer
of him, who is,

Your Worships affectionate servant, John Johnson.

Zach. 8. 16, 17.

And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbor, and
love no false Oath, for all these are things that I hate, says the Lord.


three Crowns, say they, that of the Law was most glorious: To say nothing of
other Crowns, which are Noli metangerees; it is no small comfort to us to see
the Law wear its Crown again; there is an unavoidable interruption and silence
of Law, (inter strepitum armorum) when the beat of the Drum drowns the voice of
the Crier; where the Sword is rampant, Laws are dormant, and errors and
licentiousness are passant; yet it is our comfort, that now again we see
judgment run down our streets like water, and righteousness as a mighty
stream.

The Magistracy and the Ministry are like Rachel and Leah, which two do build
the house of the Lord, and their administrations should not interfeer, but
mutually accord and lend strength each to other; Verbum informans, and virga
reformans, The informing Word, and the reforming Sword suite Weemes Synagog.
page 170. Amos 5.
very well together. Jewish antiquity tells us, that though the inferior
Courts of Justice sat in the Gates of their Cities, yet the great Sannedrim sat
in Atri(...) Templi, near the Porch of the Temple, in a place called Gazith,
The Pavement. We are not so presumptuous as to thrust our Oar into your Boat,
or put the least of our fingers into your affairs of state, out of the sphere
of our Callings; yet the Lamps of the Temple may give light to the House of
Judgment: and though I do not doubt, but that, though neither I nor any other
had spoken at this time, yet your affairs would be both regurall and
honorable, yet your speed will not be worsif your Chariot* Wheels be axelled
or Oyled, for a whet, is no let.



If this Text be sharper Steeled then some would, and speak out more then some
would hear, or have heard, (for I would not muzzle its mouth) I hope you are
wiser then to think every word of advice a stain to your Authority: I know
none so great but God may have leave to speak to Ezra 5. 1.
him; I come not to weaken your hands* but to strengthen them to
righteousness. It is not my intention to cast the least spott upon any man's
face, I know who has said, Thou shall Exodus 22. 27.
not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people; my heart and tongue does honor
your persons and places; I had rather go backward and cover a bewailed
nakedness. I know, as Micha says* my Mich. 2. 7,
words shall be good to them that walk uprightly, it will be the comfort of
the faithful, when his ways shall be laid to this Rule, and his
righteousness to this Plummet, and shall find his soul answer to this Text
as face to face in a glass, with a spiritual Echo, Lo I come to do thy, will,
O* Lord.

I would not be so unfaithful to God, as to be frighted unto a mealymouth'd
baseness, I have not been a Courtier to complement with men in the things of
God; seria serio, in weighty things we must deal in earnest; neither would I be
so injurious to man, as to cast any dis-respect on them who are beyond my
suspicion, much more my accusation: but if in such a numerous multitude, my
tongue shall find out any that does but cut off the lap of justice, I will say
with Bernard, [Correctio est attractio, non detractio] A seasonable advice is
the part of a friend, not of an aceuser.



The dependence of the Text is thus, For the many sins of Israel and Judah,
especially these two divorcing fins of Idolatry and Oppression, in which they
had forfeited the trust of their Espousals, the jealous God had cast them out
of his presence, as out of a Sling, spread them abroad to the Zach. 2. 6.
four winds of heaven, had given them up to 70 years captivity in Babylon. The
Chaldeans had been as Horns to scatter Israel and Judah, but after the
fulfilling of the days wherein they had suffered adversity, God (that will
not chide for ever, nor keep his indignation Psa. 103. 6.
for evermore) stirred up the Persian Monarchs to be Carpenters to Zach. 1. 21.
break these Horns; and he that rules in the kingdoms of men, and gives them
to whomsoever he pleases, gave to the Medes and Persians the Conquest of
Babylon; and that God that rules the Spirit of Princes as the Rivers of
waters, inclined the hearts of the Persian Monarchs to give Israel leave to
return to their God and their Country; so that the daughter of Zion was to be
delivered out of Babylon as out of a pit in which no water is: And because the
people that had now feathered their nests, were slow enough to return, God
sends Haggai and Zachary to summon them to return, to edify the Temple, and
re-establish his pure worship, and that by a Proclamation to excite their
dullness, Zachar. 2. 6. Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the
North, says the Lord, deliver thy self, O Zion, that dwell with the
daughter of Babylon. Like that of Micha 2. 10. Arise and depart, for this is
not your rest, it is polluted. This Haggai does in plain words, Zachary in
mystical Visions, Sic ludit nobiscum Spiritus Sanctus. And now being returned,
he shows them here, one means of their re-establishing, that they might be
moved no more, he prescribes to them this analeptick in their neutralitate
convalescentiae, as a principal means to repair their breaches, and restore
them a path to dwell in, to glue again their broken staffs of bands and
beauty, These are the things ye shall do, etc. So that the Text may be called
The Balm of Giliad for Isreal's recovery.

Thus I have brought you to the Text, the God of power and profit bring it unto
you.

Synthesis and D^a^resis, the composer of things disunited, and the division of
things conjoined: The Kingdom has long enough smarted under divisions, I could
wish there were no more; the Text and the times require rather composure, I
will not therefore crumble my Text into fyllabicall Atoms, least I should
verborum minut is rerum pondera frangere, least it should befall my Text as it
does some Aromaticall druggs of thin and aereall substance, by over fine
pouthering, and over exact searching* lose of their spirits.

Well is the Commonwealth compared to a musical Instrument, and the Text suits
not ill with our present condition, and this present occasion; for here is the
tuning of three principal strings in your present employment, the Tongue, the
Hand, the Heart; the Tongue, Speak the truth, etc. the Hand, Execute the
judgment of truth and peace in the gate; the Heart, And let none of you imagine
evil in your Heart, etc. and all this armed with Gods antipathy, For all these
things do I hate, says the Lord. So that this Text like a well made Picture,
does eye all on the Theater of this intended administration, and like John
Baptist, stands at the River of Jord^n, to answer every one according to his
station.

If the Tertullian Orators and fiduciall Witnesses shall come and say, What
shall we do? the answer is ready, Speak the truth, etc. declare the truth,
witness the truth, plead the truth. If the Honorable Judges, and the
inferior Jurers shall say, And what shall we do? the same Oracle gives the
answer, Execute the judgment of truth and peace. If the wrangling
contentioners (under whose multitude the Bar and judgments seat does groan,
that they might even break the Axletree of Justice, were it not made of good,
wood, and whose Supernumeraries stand need of disbanding, as well as the Army)
would hear their portion, it is at hand, I would it were also at the heart,
Imagine no evil in your heart, etc.

And least the errors in any of these should seem of no weight, it is enforced
with an argument clothed in fire, All these are things which I hate, faith the
Lord.



These things shall ye do, not say, like some Mills, that clacke much, and
grind little: never was there a more seasonable word. The Laws speak as much,
as well as ever, but I know not how it comes to pass, the hand of execution is
withered. Andracles said of the Athenian laws, that there needed one to mend
all; mending is above my cognizance; but this I am sure of, we stand need of
another Law to put all the rest in execution: the sword of the Magistrate
should not be like that of Goliahs, wrapped in a cloth and laid up behind the
Ephod; nor Magistrates themselves like George on horsback, (the emblem only
of a Magistrate, as Christopher of a Minister) his hand armed, but never
striking a stroke, God expects doing; up, and be doing, and the Lord be with
you.

These things, not some, but all; for, as Chrysostom well observed, neither in
music nor justice the striking of one string makes harmony: God expects ye
should execute all the decrees of righteousness.

Speak the truth, not lies; a lie is a Monster begot by the Devil on a wicked
heart, and if the speaker of lies, much more the swearer of lies, as the very
succubus of the Devil. It was the old Proverb, Christianus est, non mentietur,
He is a Christian, and therefore will not lie: I would it were true in these
days.

Every one to his neighbor: let me not straighten this word from its
universalitie, every Informer, every Witness, every Pleader speak the truth,
let your Bills and declarations speak the truth; if there were an index
expurgatorius to pass on them, they would not swell to such voluminous and
lying aggravations Witnesses, speak you the truth. The Cretians were
proverbially noted for great liars, and no wonder. for amongst other lies, they
said, That the great god Jupiter was dead. I wish we had no Cretians amongstus,
that esteem swearing but a blowing on a book, Linguas habent jurutas, mentes
injuratas; that swear lies as desperately as if God were dead, and conscience
hanged? What a shame it is, that men will call God to witness that, which they
would be afraid to call their neighbor for?

Lawyers, plead the truth, I am no enemy to your honorable rewards, answerable
to your birth, breeding, place and pains; but let not the ordinary accusation
be true, That you care not what your Cause be, so your Fee be good. S. Isodor
was wont to say, That he who [ sua suaviloquentia adornat mendacium, in aureo
vasculovenenum miscet] by gilded cloquence adorneth a rotten lie, he does but
mix poison in a golden Cup: or as Diogines said of a beautiful man that spoke
filthily, Draws a Leaden Dagger out of a Silken Sheath. I honor that man whose
tongue is loosed, not by the largeness of the Fee, but by the justness of the
Cause; and to whom, not the smalnesse of a starved Fee, but the conscience of
the badnesse of his Cause makes his tongue cleave to the roof of his mouth.
Both God and my Text abhors to see the worst causes often clothed with most
boldness and verbosity, because it comes in a vesture of Gold. Imitate therefore
that brave Lawyer Papinian, in ripening good Causes, and rejecting bad. Prove.
12. 19. The lip of truth shall be established, but a lying tongue is but for a
moment.

Execute the judgment, not decree them only. We have many good Decrees of
justice formed in the Womb, but they are not executed (except it be in the
worst sense) like Ephraim, they stay too long in the place of the breaking
forth of children. Our Zarah of Peace and Truth has been long ago ready to
be delivered, and had the red thread of our joyful hopes upon it; but I know
not how they are shrunk back again into the womb, and I pray God that a Pharez,
a breach in our truth and our Peace be not the firstborn of our long
travelings in Birth; but I hope better things: you are the Midwife of the
Parliaments conceptions, what they have wisely decreed, do you magnanimously
execute.

Of Truth and Peace, the two Twinns of God; let them be separated from under
Heaven that would divide between these two Sisters, either to take Truth from
Peace, or Peace from Truth; whom God has conjoined let no man separate: these
are the two Nails on which the Vessels of the Temple hang, the two Poles of the
Republique, the two shoulders of Atlas that bear up our little World, the two
Pillars of the Temple Jachin and B^az, the two Supporters of the Throne of
Government, the two white Kine that carry the Ark of God to its resting place;
these two strengthen the stakes and lengthens the Coards of God Tabernacle,
like the two solding doors of the Temple, I wish they may be ever [ se invicem
tenentia] even folded together: I wish a firm marriage between these two as
long as Sun and Moon endures, and let him be Anathema that forbidds the Banes;
as they are both in my Text, so I wish they were both written in every man's
heart, Zachary 8. 19. Therefore love the Truth and Peace.

But observe the order, Truth and Peace, Truth before Peace; both Sisters, like
Leah and Rachel, but the younger must serve the elder: many would marry the
beautiful Rachel of Peace, but cares not for blear-eyed Truth; a peaceable
civil Government is the Roof and Rasters of the House, but Religion and Truth
are the Pillars and Posts. Truth has here the front, I wish it had had so in
all our Designs, I wish that the building of the Hoose of the Lord had at
least gone on [ pari passu] with the building of the House of the Kingdom, or
our own Houses; but it is according to the Proverb, Primum in intention
ultimum executione; if there had been a readier passage to the establishment of
Truth, our Peace would not have stood on such uncertainties.

But perchance the Word has transported me beyond the limits of its sense,
there is a double judgment of Truth, [ jus coeli, jus fori] A spiritual, a
political Truth; the first stands in the symmetrie of our Religion with the
golden Standard and Beam of the Sanctuary, the Word of God; the other in a
conformity of the ways of justice with the sense of the Laws of a Kingdom: I
do not think the Prophet excluded the former, for they were to build the Temple
as well as the walls of Jerusalem, yet in this place, by the thread of it, I
think political truth is principally meant; this also must be executed, for
oppression and injustice are the Horsleeches Daughter, that both suck blood,
and brings blood.

And let none of you imagine evil in your heart: here is the heart as well as
the tongue tied to the good behavior. Prove. 4. 23. Keep the Heart with all
diligence, for thereout are the issues of life; this is the very focus where
the calenture of contention is bred, the Furnace where all the flames of
wranglings are kindled; if Hellfire were quenced in the Heart, there would not
be so many sparks of it at the Bar. What a pity it is, to see so much spent
as would make a livelihood for a widow, or a portion for the Fatherless, upon
some two -- penny trespass, for the wantonness of a man's Horse, or the
weakness of his Halter.

Love no false oath: a false oath is that which wants any of the ingredients
mentioned Jerem. 4. 2. Truth, Judgment and Righteousness; truly, for the
matter, considerately for the manner, justly and righteously for the end and
performance: Love it not, hate the false Oath as well as the false person; if
this were so there would not be such buying, such selling, such borrowing, and
such lending of oaths.

For all these do I hate, etc. God is the God of truth and justice, and hates
all that is contrary to himself; it will not only bring the hatred of good
men, but the hatred of God; and if the Heavens fall on a Worm it must needs be
crushed.

I have now shaken the Tree, let us gather the fruit, and let me draw all the
light of this Text into one point, as boys with a Burning-glasse, that all its
Beams concentrated unto the ^onus and angle of one observation, it may set
your hearts on fire in execution of what is here commanded. The Point is thus:
The right administration of Truth and Peace, is a maine help to the right
flourishing, and the due recovering of a languishing Church and Commonwealth.
It would require the hand of a master of assemblies to sharpen this Goad, and
to fasten this Nail, but according to my measure let me first explane it a
little.

The right administration, etc. that is, when every one according to their
office lifts up pure hands to God and the Law.

Of Truth, first, spiritual, not an intolerable toleration of all error.
Proverb. 24. 3. Through wisdom a house is built, and through understanding it
is established; and the Lord tells Hezekiah, Esa. 33. 16. That wisdom and
knowledge shall be the stabilitie of his times, his strength and salvation, and
the fear of the Lord his treasure. Machevell could say, The way to conquer a
Kingdom, is to lay the reins on every ones neck; if we prove falsehearted to
Gods truth, the Lord may prove slow-handed to our Peace.

Secondly, political; Solon being asked when a Commonwealth most flourished,
answered, when the people obey the Magistrates, and the Magistrates obey the
Law; and one wiser than he, said, Proverb. 14. 34. Righteousness exalts a
Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people. Then is a Commonwealth in its
solstice, when righteousness and peace kiss each other, and it serves also
for its recovery; Phinehas executed judgment, and the Plague stayed, Psalm,
106. 30.

And peace. There is a deserved honor due to them that have been faithful in
administration of war, but as peace is the end, so it should be the aim of
war: peace is a mother blessing that has all other in its womb, and blessings
are on the head of peace makers, for they shall be called the Children of God:
they are but (...) of blood, that like flesh-flies would keep the soar
perpetually green, that they might feed themselves on our distempers. After the
long use of the weapon-salve, God grant us the healing Balsom of a firm and
well-grounded peace, that there may be no more leading into captivity, no more
complaining in our streets, Psalm. 144. 14.

A principal means of the right flourishing and due recovering. This will
prove both a Prophylactick and an Analeptick, both to preserve us in
neutralitate deridentiae, and to recover us in our neutralitate
convalescentiae, as Physicians speak: This will give us a Lamp in Jerusalem,
and fasten us a nail in a sure place. 1 King. 15. 4. and 22. 23.

Of the Church and Commonwealth; I put them both together, the Commonwealth is
the Inn of the Church: these two are like Hyppocrates his Twinns, they both
live and die, languish and recover together. On the contrary, the
maladministration of these two is both Legis, Regis, or Gregis excididum, the
leveller of all our glory and greatness, what unhedged, untowred, unpressed,
unclouded the Vineyard of the Lord, Esa. 5? it was these sour grapes that set
Gods teeth on edge, For the vincyard of the Lord of Host is the house of
Israel, and the men of Judah are his pleasant plant; he looked for judgment,
but behold oppression, for righteousness, but behold a cry: therefore said
Augustine, Civitatis eversio non est murorum, sed morum casus; It is not the
weakness of our walls, but the wilfulness in sinning, especially against truth
and peace that will be our overthrow: for as the voice is storied to speak to
Phocas the Emperor, Were our walls towred to heaven, the sin that is within
will destroy all.

In the mouth of two witnesses only let this truth stand, and let the wisest
Statesman that ever was, who had more Kings-craft then ever any before or
since, be the foreman to bring in the verdit; Solomon, Prove. 29. 4. The King
by judgment establishes a land, but he that receives gifts overthrows it,
Establishes it: as the Vine said to the Marble Pyramid about which it grew, so
may the Commonwealth to justice, [ Testante virebo] If thou stand I shall
flourish; and he does not say, The unjust overthrows it, but he that
receives gifts, a man of oblations, as in the Original, because most of the
Wheels of unjustice move on this Axeltree.

And for the recovery, see Amos 5. 15. Hate the evil, love the good, establish
judgment in the gate, it may be the Lord will be gracious to the remnant of
Joseph.

As every Word of God, so this is profitable to inform, rebuke, instrnct.
First, it informs us who are the ruiners of a Commonwealth, that bore the Ship
they sail in, that demolish the house they dwell in, that lop the tree they
stand under, that undermine the wall they lean on, that break the staff that
supports them, to say nothing at this time of other sinners, they are the
unfaithful of the Land. Prover. 25. 5. Take away the wicked from before the
King, and the Throne shall be established in righteonsnesse.

Secondly, it informs us who are the Stakes in our Hedge, the pillars of our
house, the Pilots of our ship, the faithful in the Land, faithful to God, to
the Law, to their Trust, faithful Magistrates as well as faithful Ministers
are the Horsemen and the Chariots of Israel.

Secondly, this point sharpeneth its eyes, and spits fire in the faces of two
sorts of people.

First, the wrongers of Truth, and secondly the wrongers of Peace.

And first, the wrongers of spiritual truth: For Zions sake I will not hold my
peace, and for Hierusalems sake I will not be silent; this is a lamentation,
and shall be a lamentation with me, that the heritage of the Lord is become
aspeckled Bird, no Leopard so full of spots as we of damnable Heresies. How is
the faithful City become a Harlot in strange attire? how is our wine mixed
with water, our silver mixed with dross, our Gold become Copper, and Tin^^,
and Lead? Who shall give me water to my eyes, to bewail that England is become
the wagging of the head, and the pointing with the finger, the grief of the
godly and orthodox, the scorn and reproach of the Popish and profane, and the
shame of our neighbor Churches: O that it might not be told in Gath, nor
published in the street of Askalon, least the daughter of the uncircumcised
rejoice. There be that take away our Scripture, our Baptism, our Law, our
Gospel, our Ministers, our Christ, and yet ask us what we ayle? We have
escaped the Bear, and overcome the Lion, and shall we be consumed with the
Moath? To these I say no more but this, It cannot be but that offenses will
come, but we to them by whom they come. Matthew. 18. 7.

Secondly, the wrongers of poltick truth and justice, Jus fori, and these are
of three sorts, I wish I could say, Triasunt omnia.

First, the sellers of Justice for fear, or flattery, or friendship, or gifts,
for there are more sorts of Bribery then one; there is fear-bribery,
friendshipbribery, honour-bribery, sin-bribery, and gift-bribery; if I thought
there were any such here, I would tell them that whatever the price is, the
pennyworth will be dear, when their soul shall feel the sting, and lie under
the scalding drops of vengeance, which is in my Text, All those do I hate, etc.
sed Cynthius aurem vellit. But somebody pulls me by the sleeve, and says,
enough of that.

Secondly, wresters of Justice, who make the Law a Nose of Wax, to be set to
the right or wrong side, according to their partial affections, that purposely
shuffle plainness into difficulties, and raise such dust that the Pearl of
Truth may not come to the right owner; that are witty to find one trick or
other to tripp up justice, that righteousness cannot stand, and equity cannot
enter, Esa. 59. 14.

Thirdly, the delayers of Truth, who set men forward and backward, as their men
on Chesse-boord. O! how many remoraes has the ship of Justice? It may be
called the delay, rather than the speed; a motion this Term, an Order next,
and then a a Writ of Error unravels all again. Jethro, Exodus 18. 14. was not
well pleased to see Causes hang from morning to evening, but what would he have
said if he had seen ours depend from Term to Term, Terminos sine termino,
from year to year, yea Saboaths of years, that sometime Justice does but bring
forth as the Elephant, once in ten years. I know the Intricacie of some Causes,
requires more deliberation, the deeper the well, the longer of drawing: But
what shame and pity it is to see the plainest causes used as deceitful
Chirurgions deal with soar legs, held long in hand, not for the difficulty of
the Cure, but the advance of its gain* so that the shortest plea is a plea of
endurance, and a (...) at law out-lasts the best Buffe: to see the oppressed
run from Term to Term until the webb of his Cause be grown so long that
he has no weft left to make it up; like the sheep that runns to the thicket,
but comes off with scarce any wool on her back; and though their Suits begin
not, yet they are (...)e to end in forma pauperis. What is the turning of
Justice into Wormwood, Amos 5. 6. and the turning of righteousness into Gall
and Hemlock, Amos 6. 12. if this be not it? Quando major est expensarum sumptus
quam sententiae fructus; when a man may buy beggary cheaper at home than he can
buy justice at Westminster, as if the Law had been made to undo men rather than
relieve them, that before a man's sentence come, either his days are done, or
his estate undone. It would move a heart like a nether Millstone to see and hear
the sighs and groans of some distressed families, that has to deal with
oppressing greatness at the end of fruitless and sumlesse Terms, that how
many Terms soever they pass, they never have a Hilarie Term. Themistocles
was so wearied with the Law that he protested that if there were two ways
showed him, one to the Bar, another to Hell, he would choose that to Hell
rather; I suppose in this he overspake himself. but this I am sure of, there
are many so discouraged, from seeking the face of the Ruler, that they had
rather sit down under three injuries, than require satisfaction for one, the
remedy being worse than the disease. To these I say no more but this, He that
in this kind hides his face from the cry of the poor, he also shall cry
and not be heard, Prove. 21. 13.

II. Wrongers of peace. Secondly, this Point speaks to the wrongers of peace,
and they are of two sorts.

I. Peacehaters. 1. Peace-haters, like Toads full of poison, that are ready to
burst with envy, because God has given us rest round about, in whose hearts
the fire of malignitie boil has much as ever, and whose hearts murder the
Parliament every day, though their hands be bound. How many be there that
desire, wish for, long for, (if not lust for) a new breach, watching for our
halting, hoping still upon their rotten grounds, to see the day that Joseph's
Coat shall be again tumbled in blood, and the Kingdom set on a new flame, that
they may scramble in the smoke, either for their advantage, or their malicious
revenge? To these I say, if the lovers of Zions peace shall prosper, the haters
of it shall be confounded; when God shall make Jerusalem Zach. 12. 3.
a burdensome stone, all that lift at it shall be broken in pieces, Zach. 12. 3.

2. The underminers of our peace, 2. Peace underminers. ^. The Schismatic.
and these are also of two sorts:

First, the Shismatick, rending the Seamlesse Coat of Christ, that will hazard
the tearing of all up by the roots again, rather than their Plants, though
never of Gods planting, shall want setting and watering. Did I see in them that
are contrary-minded a modest humility, reserving their minds to themselves,
and impartially studying for satisfaction, I should esteem more moderately of
them, and hope that after they had wearied themselves in seeking the door, and
run themselves into a loss, they might be again led to the fold, where Christ
feeds at noonday: but when I see many to be such agitators in seducing (for
set Heresy as well as beggary on horsback and it will ride) I can quarter them
no where but amongst the enemies of peace, and hinderers of the flourishing of
this Kingdom: State-busines is not meat for Mowers, but, if I have any
foresight in me, if arbitrary Prerogative was a rod, arbitrary Religion and
liberty will be a scorpion; if the one slew its thousands, the other will slay
its ten thousands, if not in body, yet in soul; for the Apostle calls 2 Pet. 2.
1.
Heresies damnable; and surely some of these errors (that look as contrary one
to another, as Samsons Foxes, but that they agree in their Tails to carry the
firebrand) must be Heresies, except we will agree with that monster of Heticks
Carpo^rates, that held that there was nothing true or false, good or evil in
themselves, but according only to the opinion of man; so that whatsoever a man
fancied, that was lawful, how false or bad so even. They that make our Sunn as
sackcloth, cannot but endanger, at least, to make our Moon to be turned into
blood.

The second underminers of our peace, are the profane; Is it peace o^ shall it
be peace, cries every profane Varlet, that is every day waging war with
heaven, as Jehu said to Joram, What peace can there be as 2 Kin. 9. 22
long as Whoredoms, and witchcrafs are so many; as long as there is so much
gluttony and drunkenness* chambering and wantonness, strife and envying, and,
which grieves me most, even amongst them that have covenanted otherwise
solemnly to God? When I looked upon a great many of this nation entering into a
solemn League, Oath and Covenant of Salt, for purity of Doctrine and purity
of life, to me it was like Noah's Rainbow, a sign from God that he would no
more destroy us, as the Paschall blood on our door posts, a Seal that God would
not let the destroyer enter; but when I see the Covenant, even in this point,
made but an old Almanac, but that I know God does many things for his own
Names sake, I should prognosticate that God would revenge the quarrel of his
Covenant, with more fury powered out than ever. Had I Stentors voice, or could
my tongue reach to every such in the Kingdom, I would tell them they are the
troublers, the murderers of England, that are thrusting her head again under
water, that she might be no more a Nation.

the recovery, glory and well-fa^re o^ this Commonwealth? would you see this
Nation, (which, if your Sunn will go but a few degrees backward, you saw a
Golgotha, an Aceldama, a field of Blood and Skuls) rejoice again and Isa. 35.
1.
blossom as a Rose; our withered Olive to grow green, and fear no more the
year of drought? would you see this shattered Kingdom made the praise of the
whole earth, this little Isa. 67. 7. and 2. 2.
Hill advanced above all hills, that the people might flow unto it; that every
one might take hold of the skirt of an Zach. 8. 23
Englishman, and say, We will be called by thy name, for the Lord is with
you? Would ye see our breaches repaired, and our borded enlarged, and Zion to
shine forth in perfect Deuteronomy. 11. 20. Job 29. 3. Job 29. 6.
beauty? Would ye have the Candle of the Lord to shine on our head, our steps
washed with Butter, and the Rocks to power out rivers of Oil? Would ye lie
down in green pastures, Psa. 23. 3.
and none to make you afraid? would ye have her that hathlyen amongst Psa. 98.
13.
the Pots, have the wings of a Dove that is covered with silver, and her
feathers as gold? Would ye have blessings on the head of Joseph, and to rest on
the top of the head of him that was Deuteronomy. 33. 16.
separated from his brethren? Would ye have the Island compassed about Ps. 32.
10.
with mercies, as it is with water? Would ye be built and not pulled Ier. 24.
6.
down, planted and not plucked up? would ye be as a defenced City, an Eze 28.
13
iron Pillar, a brazen wall, the garden of God, where every precious stone may
be your covering? O thou afflicted, Eze. 54. 11
tossed with tempests and not comforted? Would thou have thy stones laid with
fair colors, thy foundation with Sapphire, thy windows made of Agate, thy
gates of Carbuncle, and all thy border precious stones? he that would not have
these things, let him be as Admah and Zeboim, as the dung of Endar; let his
name be written in the dust, or in the Gadarens Swine-Coat. If ye would then
take home this council of the Prophet, let me unbutten your Velvet Coats, and
unloose your Scarlet robes, that I may anoint this Balsome on the region of
your hearts, Execute the judgment, etc.

I look upon you as upon edged Pictures, one way I see you as gods, and on the
other side I see you as men, but a little higher dust: let me awhile lay aside
your greatness, and deals with your goodness, if there be any love to God,
any bowels of compassion to our distressed mother, any respect to a languishing
Commonwealth, think on these things: God has after a sort put the welfare of
England in your hands, you are eyes to the blind, ears to the deaf, tongues to
the dumb, supporters to the weak, shelters to the oppressed; you are as
Constantine said of himself, Bishops without the Church, as Ministers are
within, employ your greatness for God, for the Commonwealth; advance Truth
and Peace, Truth will make you free, and Peace will make you great.

First, advance spiritual truth, you I. 1 Timothy 2. 2
are to see that we lead a godly life, as well as a quiet, honor the Gospel
with your greatness, else how will you be provided to answer God when he
shall call for an account of your Stewardship, and shall say, For all the
blessings I have heaped upon you, and for all the powers that I have put in
your hand, what has my glory, the purity of my Worship, what has my Law, my
Gospel, my Day, my Ministers been the better for you? Of all the power that
ye have exercised, how much for me? Buy the truth and Pro. 23. 23
sell it not, the Merchandise of it is better than salver, and the gain
thereof better than gold.

And for this purpose let me in Gods stead beseech you to employ your parts and
power,

First, to purge out the old Leaven; shall it be said of this Reformation, as
it was of that, when we first came out of Babylon, that we swept the house, but
the house sweepings were but cast behind the door, that a Hen might scatter
them abroad again? Is this the Reformation of England, that we should be as a
Beggars Cloak, for one piece of new, three patches of old? for one Minister
that walks according to the Directory of Gods Word, and the States, three
that keep in still the Onyons and the Garlic of traditionary Ceremonies? Is
this the fruit of our Oath to God, to bring all to one uniformity?

Secondly, to keep out the new Leaven, to stop the spreading of the Gangrene;
can you be nursing fathers and mothers to truth and error at once? Has a
Magistrate power to keep our daughters from being ravished, and not souls from
being seduced? to keep our heads from being broken, and not our souls from
being wounded? to punish them that shall put Ratsbane in our meat, and not them
that corrupt the bread of our life? To confine a man that goes about with a
running Plague-soar, and not to stop their mouths that by seducing poison
souls? Are they under the Magistrates cognizance that shall say, There is no
King, no Parliament, no House of Lords; and not those that say, There is no
Law, no Christ, no Ministers, no truth of God nor Church of God in the earth?
Is this the Reformation we have covenanted for, fought for, prayed and fasted
for, an intolerable toleration? Were Heresies and their growth worthy to be
fasted and prayed against, and are they now fit to be connived at? Have we cast
out the etc. -- Oath, and bring in an etc -- toleration, a new fyled Key for
the bottomless Pit? God forbid that our Reformation should prove to be but a
League with the Devil.

Secondly, advance political truth in the due exercise of justice and
judgment. Prove. 31. 9. Judge righteously, plead the cause of the poor and
needy. Isa. 28. 17. Lay judgment to the rule, and righteousness to the
plummet. Levit. 19. 15. Do no unrighteousness in judgment, respect not the
person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but in righteousness
judge your neighbors, else thoughye Psa. 82. 6.
be gods, remember ye shall die like men; let not the hight of your places
raise you out of the fight of God and your end.

Secondly, advance Peace, pray for it, live for it, judge for it, that the
sword may be beaten into Ploughshares. And for this purpose let me commend
three things to you as furtherances to this, and though in this I shall be
perchance construed as one that heaps Coals on the fire of strife, I have no
such aim, God is witness.

1. Wave masterfull standing upon your particular ayms and ends; I shall
account him a man of peace, that will say as Jonas, Cast me over-boord rather
then I should breed or continue a storm; and who will, as the Roman Worthy,
cast himself into the Hiatus rather then it shall be unclosed.

2. Lend your aid and help to the setting up of the Government of Christ, bring
Christ to his Throne according to the decrees of State; his Scepter is a
Scepter of righteousness, and a Scepter of peace: How long shall we be as a
sister without breasts? do not use Christ as the Jews, who in stead of a
scepter put in his hand a reed

3. Preserve and observe the bond of our peace, the Covenant, it was our
beauty and our bands, we never did thrive before, ever after: dear brethren,
let us not forswear our selves for ill will. If some of those Worthies that
lost their lives in the high places of the field, were risen again from the
dead, in what amazement would they stand, and say, How is the S(...)ene
changed? Where am I, in the Tents of the Amalekites, or in the Camp of Israel?
is that which was the Characterism of friends now turned to the badge of
Malignitie? No power on earth can grant us a dispensation from that oath; the
earth will not cover that blood that has been shed in it, and for it: and, to
say no more, God will not hold him guiltless that thus takes his Name in
vain.



That you may righteously execute the judgment of Peace and Truth, take heed
of these hindrances following.

Prove. 4. 26. Ponder the path of your feet, and let all your ways be
established. A Cause is sometimes like the Cloud of the Israelites, if you look
on the one side it may seem white enough, but black on the other* Proverb. 18.
7. He that is first in his own Cause seems just, but his neighbor comes and
searches him. The Omniscient God himself said, Genesis 18. 21. I will go down now
and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it which is
come up unto me, and if not, I will know it: not that he needs information, but
to teach all titular gods to take heed of rash judgment: Therefore Judges must
do as Alexander the Great, of whom it is said, That in judgment if one party
only were present, he would listen with the one ear, stopping the other, as
reserving it impartially for the other party. As there is injury in delay, so
there is injustice in overmuch haste; and therefore said Seneca of such, Licet
aequum statueret, non tamen aequus est: A rash sentence may sometimes stumble
upon justice, it decrees it not. Magistrates must sometimes be Cunctators, as
well as Dictators.

Is^odore, Et pudore, and blanditiis, and metis major, have his mind as high
as his Seat, beyond either flattery or fear: He knew what he said, that said,
The fear of a man is a snare. Pilate stumbled at this stone, in Pro. 29. 25
condemning of our innocent Savior as soon as he heard the sound of, Thou art
not Caesar's friend; down fell Pilates courage, as thunder-strucken, and lost
three friends at once, God, Caesar, and his Conscience. The emblem of the
Law-giving Tribe was a Lion, and Salomons Throne was supported by Lions, a
courageous fearlesse creature, that is neither taken with the gazing, nor
feared at the barking of any the beasts of the Forest, to instruct Magistrates
in valor for God. The Athenian judges sat in Mars-street, to tell Magistrates,
that they should have hearts of valor under robes of peace, (for there is
fortitudo togata, as well as fortitudo bellica) inermes togas, armatos animos,
Purple Coats, but hearts of steel. The pillars of the house had need to be of
the heart of Oak, the sphere of Justice must know no motion of trepidation,
nor its compass know variation; like Papinian, that would not defind Imperial
and Arbitrary exorbitancy, though he should die for it.

Tam malum est, said one, Judicem caepi suadela, quam munere; It is as
dishonorable to be complemented out of justice, as to be bribed out of it: Let
it be with you, as it was said of Cato Fabricius, that the Sun might sooner
be stayed in its course from East to West, than he in the course of justice.

Fourthly, Covetousness, this was the fault of the Judges of Israel, Hosea 4.
18. the Rulers with shame cry, Give ye. It has been a complaint ancienter
then any of us, [ Iustitia non datur nisi vendatur] that justice has been made
a hackney for money, and that a golden spurr would make it ride either to the
right or wrong, according to what side it was most plied on. Pope Pius the
second, (a bitter enemy to contention says Platina) was wont to say,
Litigatores sunt aves, leges rete, forum arca, a(...)upes patroni; which if you
would have englished, was thus much, That the Courts of justice were but Trapps
to catch fools in. Well, let it remain with them, let it be the brand of
Antichristian times, places and persens, but let it not be named (much less
practiced) amongst reformed Christians. Let it be the voice of a Judas to say,
What will you give to betray the innocent; Let it not be said that a
well-monyed man, though his Cause be never so bad, is too heavy to be cast; he
is a Magistrate of gold that understands neither the language of the Bottle,
nor the Basket, and whose eyes (in point of justice) look neither to the right
hand of friendship, nor to the left hand of revenge, nor before him to the
applaus of men* nor behind to a subsequent (though not an anticedent) gift, but
inward to his conscience, and upward to his God, facile deviat a just in* said
Chrisoligus, qui in causis non deum s(...) hominum ogitat: I never read of any
but one that had his eyes opend with Clay, many have had their eyes put out
with it. A gift blinde^^ the wise. Exodus 23. 8.

Fifthly, partiality, Prove. 18. It is not good to accept the person of the
wicked, nor to overthrow the righteous in judgment. Well is justice painted
blind, to know neither friend nor foe, rich nor poor, high nor low, kindred
nor alien: Solnon est alius pauperi, alius diviti, sed omnibus communis:
Justice is like the Sun, which lends her beams to all alike, without
respect of persons. Nihil est quod magis reddit vacillantem Iustitiae la^^em,
quam judicare secundum hominum non rerum pondera] There is nothing that
declines the balance of justice from the aequilibrium of righteousness more,
then when men are weighed, and not their causes; This will make the friend, the
kinsman, the rich heavy; and the poor, the stranger, the enemy light, when yet
his Cause is ponderous, Amans de amante judicans [saith one] non judicat; and,
si male Iud^cet amor [said another] multo pejus odium; neither love nor hatred
are good arbitors in the cause of justice; therefore as righteousness it self
said, John 7. 34. Judge not according to outward appearance, but judge
righteous judgment.

Miscend* est lenitas cum severitate, (said Gregory) si^ amor sed non
emoliens, sit rigor sed non exasperans; Lenitas si sola sit, nimis oltusa est,
severitas si sola nimis acuta est, said another, Vespasian was wont to say,
That it was the cause of Nero his ruin, that though he could tune the Harp
well, yet in government he did either wind up the strings too high, or let them
down to low; both are too blame. I confess, that such is the impudency of
sin, outfacing in these days both the Sword and Word, that it requires a
three stringed whip of severitie; and sin has so much indulgence that we
may justly cry to Magistrates, as the Smith in his own language to the
Lantgrave of Hassen and other Magistrates going through the streets, durescite,
durescite, Be hardened, be hardened; of all swords the sword of the Magistrate
would not be of too soft and base a temper, that the devil himself may sit
quietly under his nose; yet let mercy and justice kiss each other, strike
deepest in those faults where the honor of God is most wounded, and when you
cut off a worker of iniquity from the City of the Lord* do it as ye would cut
off one of your own joints; in justice to the sin, but with sympathizing mercy
to the person.

quicquid faciunt precipere videntur, the very example of great men has
something of command in them; Quo grandius nomen, eo grandius scandalum, by how
much you stand on higher ground, by so much are your falls more shameful to
your selves and hurtful to others. How does God pull down the flag of vicious
greatness, Isa. 1. 10. calling them Rulers of Sodom, and Princes of Gomorrah.
They will never be zealous reformers of others that are not reformed
themselves. And this is the reason why justice dwells in such a frigid zone,
many are afraid to meddle with other men's sins least they should hear of their
own. Let it not be said of you as one wittily of a Lawyers study, Video hic
multum juris, sed parum carnis, That you have much law, little conscience: let
me therefore take the modest boldness to entreat you, as ye are preservers of
the Laws of God and man, by your power, be observers of them by a personal
practice; study Gods Statute-Book, as well as that of the King and Parliament;
be Clients to God before you admit Clients to you; let your thoughts be in
heaven before they be in the Hall; consider you are called gods, but what a
repugnans in adjecto is it, to say, a vicious, an unjust god: ye are called
gods, live as Saints to be a real Saint is more honorable, then to be a
titulary god: Let it therefore be with you as it was with Nebuchadnezzars
Image; though Bailiffs, and Sergeants, and Clearks, and such inferior
pettitoes of justice should be faulty, partly Iron, partly Clay, yet let the
head be of Gold. Salomons Throne was of Ivory, let your Seats, your sentence,
your hearts, your lives be of pure integrity.

caring whether the ship of the public welfare sink or swim; therefore as
the lesser rivers lose their names in the great Ocean, so let all particulars
be swallowed up in the public good.

Romans 12. 8. Let him that rules (says the Apostle) do it with diligence:
bold sinners and cold Magistrates suit not well. I shall think the service of
this day worth all the service of my whole life, if I could but stir you up
from driving heavily for God, so that the wheels of justice and judgment might
be as the chariot of Aminadab. Let it be a Pharisees part to Tithe Mint and
Cummin, and neglect the greater things of the law; to take order for clean
streets, mended canswayes, and scoured ditches, and do nothing for the
eleansing of men's ways in godliness and honesty: Let it be Gallio's part to
be careful for a Act. 18. 14.
three halfpenny trespass, and count religion only a question of words and
names. When Philip of Macedon told a poor woman that he was not at leisure to
hear her just complaint, she makes a bold answer, If you be not at leisure to
hear, O King, be not at leisure to reign. I will not speak so roughly, but
thus, As you do possess the honor of your places, which we envy not, so also
take up the burdens of them; every dignity requires duty: you stand on
higher ground then others, you may see more, do more, and God requires more:
Laws without execution, says the Dutch Proverb, are like Bells without a
Clapper; look but upon your Robes and learn, you wear Scarlet, as the emblem
of your zeal, O let your hearts be clothed with Scarlet zeal for God.

1. Fright the idle and vagrant, (who are Gods curse, and the Kingdoms shame)
unto a Calling.

2. Scatter the drunkards from the Alebench, those christened Atheists, that
live vitam ranarum, non hominum, that Crown the day with riots, and to morrow
with promised surfetts, come let us fill our selves with strong drink, to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant: quorum vivere est bibere.
Discourage that base sin, heretofore the shame of Beggars, now the glory of
gallantry; heretofore a work of darkness, [1 These. 5. 7. They that are drunk
are drunk in the night] now a noonday devil; restrain that beastly sin: but
I speak under it, why call I it beastly? beasts will not be beaten into
excess, I may rather say as Bernard, Ebrietas manifestissimus damon, for it
casts some into the fire, and some into the water. Augustine thought in his
time that drunkenness was grown to that hight that nothing could cure it but a
general Counsel; but O unto what hight is this inundation of drunkenness
grown to now, that it overtops all the mountains of power raised against it!
grown to such a Gyantlike greatness, that though we have law upon law,
precept upon precept, Parliament upon Parliament, yet it still reels and
staggers in our streets, the Island swimms in drunkenness, as it does in
water; its a wonder that a land so full of drink does not spue us out: O that
you would put down the supernumerary nests of these Vipers.

3. Conjure the roaring swearer into silence; it loosed the tongue of Craesus
his son, before dumb, to see his fathers life in danger; can our fathers blood
be in our veins, and hear Gods name torn worse than one would do their old
shoos, and yet neither have our hearts loosed to grieve, nor our tongues to
reprove, nor our hands to punish or restrain! One cries blood, another cries
wounds, another cries heart, thus they crucify again the Lord of glory; in
some companies you shall have vollies of oaths, oaths by wholesale, by the
dozen, by the gross, men swearing before they can pray; children swearing by
Gods name before they can tell their own. Its a wonder the Sun shrinks not up
into heaven, and covers it self with darkness as at the passion of Christ, to
see such monsters.

4. Vindicate the Lords days, and fastdayes from contempt; Is there never a
zealous Nehemiah to shut the gates of Jerusalem, that there should not be
such walking, such riding, such carrying of packs, such driving of Cattle?
shall the Lords day be no way known but by shut-shops, and finer clothes? if
there be laws against these things and others, (for I cannot instance in all)
why not execution in these as well as in others? if not, but that every one may
do as he list, then write A Lord have mercy upon our Englands Head.

zeal has transported me into more boldness then you think convenient, know,
that as you judge, so we preach not for men but for the Lord. Let this Text
therefore be as a phylacterie on the garments of your honor, write it on the
table of your hearts, let it be ever in your eyes, in your ears, in your
hearts, let it eat with you, and drink with you, let it sleep with you, and
wake with you, let it sit with you, and judge with you; let conscience which is
the cud of the soul, preach this over again to you, when my voice shall be
buried in silence. I adjure you by the love of God by the honor of names, by
the judgment of the last day, when you that now sit in judgment shall also stand
at the Bar; by your loyatie and love to the Commonwealth, think of what has
been said, and accordingly execute the judgment of truth and ^eace in your
gates. Now the God of truth and peace grant you to be thus minded. Amen.

FINIS.

