AN ANTIDOTE FOR Troubled Souls. Or, The Fruit of Repentance.

Taken out of the Word of God, and Delivered to Thomas Jones of the City of
Hereford, who was many years afflicted both in body and in mind, for
violating or profaning the Lords Sabbath day: And thinking this Antidote to be
part of the Talent which the Lord gave him since he repented for the same,
being commanded in his sleep to give an account thereof, he has thought it
requisite to publish it for the good of all penitent Sinners.

Published with License.

Romans 8.18. I account the afflictions of this present life not worthy of the
glory which shall be showed unto us.

2 Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for as a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

London, Printed for John Wright, at the sign of the Kings head in the Old
Baily. 1646.

The Fruit of REPENTANCE.
Acts 2.38. Then Peter said unto them, Repent and be baptized every one of you
in the Name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
Holy Ghost.


WE heard in the former verse the question of these pricked hearts, to Peter
and the rest of the Apostles. Men and Brethren, What shall we do? Teaching us
how much it imports every Soul to seek for the was and means to Salvation. We
proceed now to the answer given from the mouth of Peter, prescribing the means
of salvation in this verse now read unto you: which are two: first Repentance,
then Baptism, afterward he persuades them to the practice thereof, in the
next verse. At this time only of the first means of Salvation, that is,
Repentance.

The Doctrine is,
That he that will be saved, must repent. Men and brethren (say they) what
shall we do? meaning, to be saved, as the Jailer expresses himelf. Repent.
says Peter: as if he should say, If ye repent, ye shall be saved; but if ye
will not repent, ye shall not be saved. Except ye repent, says our Savior, ye
shall all likewise perish. Luke 13.3.

The reason is, First, because we are all by nature sinners, and consequently
under the eternal wrath of God, children of wrath, and there is no means to
avoid Gods eternal curse and wrath, without repentance. O generations of
Vipers, says John the Baptist to the Pharisees, Mat. 3.7. Who has forewarned
you to flee from the wrath to come, bring forth therefore fruit meet for
Repentance. As if he should say, You think your great holiness that was shall
save you, but who has taught you to escape the wrath of God thereby? Let me
teach you, if you will escape the wrath to come, trust not to your holy
religion, but see you make good your repentance.

Secondly, on the condition of repentance God has promised what Christ has
merited, that is, pardon of sin, Esa. 1.16. The Prophet exhorts, Wash you,
make you clean, put away the evil of your doings, cease to do evil, learn to do
well, that is, Repent: And then in the eighteenth verse he promises, Though
your sins be as scarlet, yet they shall be as white as snow; though they be
as red as crimson, yet they shall be as wool, Act. 5.13. The Apostle says,
They God of our Fathers has exalted Christ to be a Prince and a Savior, to
give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Pardon of sin, upon
repentance. So then, without repentance, there is no means possible to escape
the wrath of God. Upon repentance, God has promised pardon of all sins, even
as Christ has merited. If any might be saved without repentance, then Christ's
disciples might be saved: but our Savior tells them. Except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish. And if any might not be saved with repentance, then those
murderers of Christ would not be saved. Yet Peter says, Repent, and ye shall
be saved. Upon this string all the Prophets harped, Repent, Repent. This was
John Baptists first Sermon; this was the thing that Christ did preach first,
and this must be the burden of our song unto the end of the world, Luke 24.37.
It is necessary, says our Savior, that repentance and remission of sins be
preached to all Nations. We preach nothing without repentance, yea, there is no
salvation without repentance. Now it will be necessary to show what repentance
is: The nature of repentance is a large thing, much has been written of it. I
will give you therefore briefly the chief part of repentance. In repentance
there is the work of God, and the work of man: Gods work is Regeneration a new
creation, which makes a man a new creature, by taking ^way the stony heart, and
giving him a heart of flesh ^n the place of it: and this is done by a twofold
grace.

First, Preventing grace, which pricks and breaks the heart. Herein he is a
mere patient.

Secondly, Subsequent grace, enabling a man to the practice of repentance.

Man's work in repentance stands chiefly in two things, Mourning and Turning, as
the Prophet Joel expresses it, Joel 2.12. Turn to the Lord with fasting,
weeping and mourning, rent your hearts, and turn to the Lord. There are the
principal parts of repentance expressed.

First then, in repentance there must be a mourning of the heart with godly
sorrow for sin, chiefly because God is offended, and Christ pierced, otherwise
it is not godly sorrow. This the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.10. makes the first and
chiefest wheel in the clock, or the first mover to repentance. Godly sorrow
causes repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of. If thy heart be first
broken with godly sorrow, thy repentance is from the heart; else howsoever it
does appear, it is but hypocrisy, it tends to thy greater damnation.

Secondly, after mourning there must be a turning, Act. 3.19. Repent and be
converted. This conversion must be from sin to God.

First, it must be from sin. Repent, and turn your selves from all your
transgressions, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 18.3.

Secondly, this turning must be to God. Repent and turn to the Lord, says the
Apostle, Act. 26.20.

Now this turning or conversion must have three properties.

It must be 1 Inward. 2 Outward. 3 Universal.


First, it must be an inward turning, a change of the heart, Joel 2.12. with
all your heart, Ezekiel. 18. Make you a new heart and a new spirit. This inward
change must be by mortifying our concupiscence, by purging out corruption,
hiding the Word in our hearts, cherishing the motions of the Spirit. Truth in
the inward part, hating sin, and delighting in holiness.

Secondly, it must be outward. Cast away from you all your transgressions
wherewith you have transgressed, Ezekiel. 18 31.

Thirdly, this turning must be universal, as with all the heart, so likewise
from all sin: As the Prophet requires, Ezekiel. 18.30.31. Turn your selves from
all your sins, and cast away all your transgressions Secondly, it must be a
turning to all good works, Jam. 2.10. If a man keep the whole law, and offend
in one point, he is guilty of all. Thus you see the hate of it: the Definition
is this: Repentance is the work of the Spirit of God, whereby a sinner mourns
for his sin, and turns to God in all holy and hearty obedience.

The use is first for trial. Thou hopest to be saved, and who does not? But if
thou will be saved, thou must repent. Art thou regenerated? Have thou releived
the Spirit of grace? Art thou become a new ^reature? Have thou mourned in
secret with godly ^orrow for sin? Is there no sin that thou love or ^lowest?
Is there no sin but thou hate, no duty but thou do (or desire to do)?
Then thou have ^epented, else no repentance, no hope of salvation.

The second Use is for repro^^e and terror to all ^mpenitent persons, who had
never the grace to mourn for their sins, or turn from them to God. Do we not
see that the most live in abominable sins, ^wearing, drunkenness, whoredom,
fraud, lying, ^osenage, contempt of Gods word, profaning of the Sabbath,
drinking iniquity, as the Axe drinks wa^er, thinking they shall never have
enough? And ^ow few of these repent? If without repentance, ^o salvation: what
will become of these wretches that live in open practice of abominable sins?
Others ^hink themselves in a good estate, because they are not so bad as
others, they are honest civil men need^ng no repentance, they know no hurt they
have done, what shall they repent of? they do no man wrong, ^hey keep the
Church, are good natured and bountiful. But what are all these but splendida
peccata? And what is their reward but the wrath of God? Others are so pure in
their own eyes, that they think themselves past repentance, so clean, as they
need no repentance. But Publicans and sinners shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven as soon as they, and sooner too. And by how much the more cleaner they
are in their own eyes, by so much more hateful are their hearts to God. Like
Baalam they will cry, O let me die the death of the Righteous; but never, let
^e live his life. They will fast and put on mourning countenances; in time of
judgment they will seem to mourn, but the oppressed feel no ease from them:
when the storm is past, they are even as Ahab, more wicked then before. Some
talk of repentance, but know no more then brute beasts what repentance means.
Some, yea the most, in time of sickness ^alk of it: O, if they should live,
then they would become new men; if they die, then surely because of ^his they
must go to heaven, charity thinks the best: But if they live, with the dog they
return to their ^omit, and with the swine to her former wallowing ^n the mire.
Some indeed will mourn, and seem to ^epent and make restitution: but remember
Judas, ^ll this he did, yet he hanged himself. It is either ^hame, or to quiet
a brawling conscience or the praise ^f men that makes them do s^. They sorrow
not for ^in, because they have grieved God: they return from ^ne sin to
another, from prodigality to covetousness. ^f such repentance, which is but
only a show, were ^rue repentance, then we should have many Repentants; But who
can find one true Repentant in his daylight of the Gospel? But behold thou
^retched sinner, the gate of hell opens for thee, Gods ^urse hangs over thy
head, thy life i^ short, and Gods ^^dgement sharp, thy conscience shall be
ransacked, by thoughts and deeds laid open, thy self accursed to the pit of
Hell, where thou shall have easelesse, endless, and remediless pains. If one
be rewarded with that curse, if one sin deserves the curse, what will all thy
cursed sins deserve?

But God is merciful, and Christ died for sinners, that is my comfort, say
many.

Answ. Yea, but God is just likewise, merciful indeed to the Penitent, but
just to the impenitent: And Christ died only for the penitent. God has been
merciful unto thee, he has given thee means of repentance, and called thee to
repentance; but if thou repent not, the mercy of God which thou have abused,
the blood of Christ which thou have despised, and the Word which thou have
neglected, shall rise up in judgment against thee, and a thousand millions
that have not grace given to them, as it has been offered to thee, they shall
rise up in judgment against thee. Therefore it is better (if thou could) to
say, Christ did not die for thee, and God is not merciful. Know that thou
treasurest up wrath against the day of wrath. And if thou do give us the lie,
Moses proviseth, Deuteronomy. 29.19. When he shall hear the words of this curse, he
shall bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk
according to the stubbornness of mine own heart: Thus adding drunkenness to
thirst, the Lord will not be merciful unto him, but the wrath of God and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, and every curse that is written in this
book shall light upon him, and the Lord shall put his name out from under
heaven.

The third Use is, to exhort us, as we hope to be saved, to apply our selves to
the practice of repentance, to mourn with hearty sorrow for sin, to return
from all sin to God, to the conscionable practice of all good works. Does not
every soul desire to e^cape the wrath of God? (without repentance, if it were
possible.)

Quest. But what shall we do to repent?

Answ. It is God that works it in us. Therefore seek to him for it. Now the
means that he uses in working is his Word, his Spirit, and correction. By his
word he teaches and works repentance in the heart. Thus Paul tells us, that
his preaching was to turn the Gentiles from darkness to light The Word is a
hammer to break the stony heart, it is a fire to purge out dross and
corruption, of force to convert the Soul, as David says, Psalm. 19. It
regenerateth, sanctifies, and quickneth the soul to newness of life.
Whosoever then will repent, must lend (...) diligent ear to the Word of God,
and they that despise it, must never look to repent: Did men consider this,
they would either give off hope of their repentance, or be more constant in
hearing the Word then they be.

Secondly, Gods spirit is the means whereby repentance is wrougyt in the heart
Repentance is the work and gift of the Spirit. Therefore while we hear Gods
word, we must pray, sigh, groan, and cry unto him for his Spirit, acknowledging
we can do nothing of our selves, but his Spirit must work every grace in us.

Thirdly, Gods corrections are an ordinary mean, not of themselves, but by the
blessing of his Spirit, whereby he works repentance in the heart. Thus Manasses
brought to chains, was brought to repentance: Thus the Thief crucified with
our Savior, learned to repent. Hos. 6.1. Come (say they) let us return to the
Lord, he has smitten us, he has torn us.

First therefore, if we will repent, we must be diligent in attending to the
Word, and praying for his Spirit, so to make good use of corrections, to take
notice of Gods end, and hand in them, and learn to see the cause of them, which
is our sin; That we sorrow for those sins which have brought such
correction upon us.

Secondly, if we will repent, we must labor for a through knowledge of our own
estate, What we are of our selves by reason of our sins, and likewise the
curse of God that is due unto us. To that purpose we must examine our selves by
reason of our sins, our hearts and lives, by the law of God, and then we
shall see our sins, the number of them, and the heinous nature of them. After
I was instructed (says Ephraim) that is, after I came to the knowledge of my
self, I repented, not till we be brought to the sight of our miserable estate,
till we be brought to this perplexity, with these pricked hearts, that we know
not what to do, can our hearts repent.

Thirdly, labor for faith to apprehend the promises and mercies in Christ
Jesus: for though Repentance and Faith grow together in time, yet in nature
faith is the moving cause of repentance; Faith and confidence in Gods mercy
that he will receive us, is a moving cause of Repentance.

Till a man believe the promises of God, and apprehend the mercies of God in
Christ by faith, though he be terrified by judgment, yet he does grow
obstinate, and never humbles himself by Repentance.

Motives to persuade us to Repentance.
What needs more then this? He that will be saved must repent, without
repentance nothing can be expected but damnation: more particularly consider,

1. Motive.

First, Gods mercy and love: God is a merciful God; and that should draw our
hearts to repentance, Joel 2.12.

The Prophet uses this argument, Turn unto ^he Lord with all your heart, rent
your hearts, and not your garments, etc. for he is a merciful and gra^ious
God. There is mercy with thee that thou may^st be feared (says David) as if he
should say, if thou were not a merciful God, to what end were it to ^epent?
But seeing thou art a merciful God, it is ^o some purpose to repent: great is
the mercy and ^oue of God to penitent sinners: Let the gift of his ^nly
begotten Son to the cursed death of the Cross witness: Is God so merciful to
us, and shall we ^ffend him still by our sin? shall we be so hard and
unmerciful to our own souls, to whom God has ^een so merciful?

The second Motive is, The consideration of Christ's death and passion should
move us to Repentance: Was he pierced for our sins, did he suffer the curse
of God for our sins? How then should our sins that pierced him, pierce our
hearts with grief? Z^ch. 12.10. As he did those.

Beloded, has Christ suffered such things for us, and shall we crucify him
afresh with our sins? Shall we trample his blessed Body and Blood under feet,
and contemn so great a salvation?

The third Motive may be taken from the means and gracious times we enjoy.
This argument Christ and John Baptist in their preaching used to move the
people to Repentance. This is the time of grace and salvation, now is Gods
grace plentifully powered out; if these times and means will not move thee, it
shall be easier for Tire and Sydon at the day of judgment, then for thee.

The fourth Motive may be taken from the consideration of the Cvils of
impenitencie, even in this life.

First, Temporal Judgment that God has in store for the impenitent and
hard-hearted persons that go on in their wickedness. Rev. 2.21, 22. I gave her
space to repent, and she repented not* What then? Behold I will cast her in a
bed, and them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they
repent of their deeds. And look thou impenitent heart for the like. This I will
do (says the Lord) Amos 4. And because I do thus unto thee, prepare thy heart
to meet thy Lord, O Israel.

The second evil of impenitencie in this life, is either hardness of heart, or
horror of conscience: For an impenitent person, when he has much offended his
conscience with long custom of sin, must needs be filled with great horror. As
Cain and Judas, which made them desperately cast away themselves. And if he be
not thus filled with horror, yet he is possessed with great hardness of heart,
which is the greatest judgment that he can have inflicted upon him in this
life.

And it follows in the third place, why thou after the hardness of thy
impitent heart treasurest up for thy self wrath against the day of wrath. The
more sin thou committest, the longer thou live in sin and impenitency, and
the more wrath do thou treasure up for thy self.

The fifth motive is taken from the benefit of Repentance in this life, first
it obtaines an assured pardon of all sin, which is the chiefest happiness in
this life: thy sins shall be washed away by the blood of Christ. Thus says
Christ to the penitent woman that washed his feet with her tears, Thy sins
are forgiven. Of the penitent Publican he says, This man went home justified.
So the penitent person ever obtains pardon and remission of all his sin, and
is justified in the sight of God.

The second benefit is the removal of all afflictions, Jer. 18.7, 8. I will
speak suddenly against a Nation or against a Kingdom, to pluck it up and
destroy it: but if this Nation shall turn from their wickedness, I will repent
of the Plague I thought to bring upon them. If thou repent, God will repent of
the evil. Thus Ninive found by experience. When wicked Ahab did but
hypocritically humble himself before the Lord, the Lord was pleased to defer
the Judgment threatened. How much more when a man applies with a sincere heart
to repent of his sins before God? Y^a, it will remove Judgment already fallen.
This the Lord promises, Chron. 7.4. If God has smitten thee in thine estate,
or otherwise for thy sin, yet humble thy self, and the Lord will pardon thee,
and heal thoo, or at least, if he remove not thine affliction suddenly, it
shall be for thy good, for he will sanctify them unto thee. Thus did God to
David, when he had afflictions: which because they were scandalous, could not
be easily and suddenly removed: yet, says he, it was good for me that I have
been afflicted.

3. It is a means to obtain temporal blessings* Joel 2. The Prophet exhorts
them to repentance, and adds in the 14. verse, who knows if God will return
and leave a blessing behind him? The Prophet seems to make it doubtful, yet it
is without all doubt, all question: and in the 18. verse he says* If they
repent, he will be jealous of their land, and pity his people: yea, behold I
will send you Corn, Wine and Oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith and I
will make you no more a reproach among the Heathen. So repentance is a means to
obtain temporal blessings in this life for the maintenance o^ our estates.

Lastly, it is a means to obtain increase of grace with peace of conscience,
and increase of joy and comfort. Thus Saint Peter exhorts, Repent (says he)
and then he promises the gift of the Holy Ghost should flow forth to them, and
after grace follows peace and spiritual joy, Christ will make thee par: taker
of true joy, he will dwell with the humble, and revive their spirits. The sixth
Motive to persuade ^is to Repentance, may be taken from the consideration of
our baptism, we have set our hands to the ^eal of baptism to bind us to the
duty of repentance, therefore we are bound to it by our own seal, our own
p^omise and vow.

Again: Repentance makes our persons and works ^cceptable to God, the broken
and the contrite heart is acceptable to God. A broken heart (G Lord) thou will
not despise.

Another Motive may be taken from the considera^ion of the last judgment. Now
God wishes all men to repent, because he has appointed a day wherein he will
judge the world with righteousness says Saint Paul. Then shall their sins
be laid open. O let us bethink ous selves in what estate we would be found
before the great Judge at the last day, whether with our sins remaining, or
pardoned and forgiven.

Lastly, consider the woeful estate of sinners in hell, and the blessed estate
of the paitent in heaven. Let the consideration of all those things move us to
turn to God by repentance, and make conscience of a new life.

But some will say, repentance is a bitter thing.

But he that will taste of the sweetness of salvation, must partake of the
bitterness of repentance.

Is repentacce a bitter thing? know then that the fruit of impenitency is more
bitter. Nay, though repentance be bitter to flesh and blood, yet God havei^g
^^fused grace into the repentant soul, it does becomen weet unto him But some
will say, it I should set my self to the practice of repentance, it will be my
undoing. I should lose my gain. But tell me, what will it avail thee to win
the whole world, and to lose thine own soul? Now if thou will believe Christ,
thou shall gain an hundred fold, Mat. 19.29. The gain that thou have by
impenitency* what is it but the cause of Gods judgments against thee? Go too
now ye impenitent wretches, weep and houle, your garments are moth-eaten. You
treasure up riches here to increase Gods vengeance hereafter. But repentance
gains Gods blessing in this life, and a Kingdom in the world to come.

Now some will say, I would feign repent for my sins, but I am s^^umbred with
the things of this life, that I cannot apply my self unto it.

But cast of the encumbrances of this world first, and know that repentance
will not hinder thee in t^y honest calling.

Some other would say, I am willing to repent, but I am ^o entangled with
carnal friends, that I shall displease them, and I shall have a weary life
with them. But he that forsakes not father and mother, and brother and sister,
and all things else for my sake (says our Savior) is not worthy of me. Will thou despite God and Christ, and thine own soul for thy carnal friends?
Repent; then God and Christ, and all the Saints and Angels will be thy friends.

Now others will say, I purpose to repent, and cannot yet apply my self unto
it. But when do thou purpose to repent? Is the time in thy hand? Thou know
not how suddenly thou shall be cut off, therefore defer not the time o^ thy
repentance. Do we not see many in their youth, health, and weal^h quickly
gone? And do not thou bid l^y make the burden heavier? increasing thy s^^^e?
Is not the work harder when thou do perform it then? In the mea^e while
thou art the Devils slave. Yet suppose thou do intend, according to thy
promise to repent in thy sickness, or in old age, thou shall find as the
burden is greater, so the task to be more hard and difficult, when sickness
comes, and old age is burden enough of it self and needs not any greater.

Lastly, consider, the gift of Gods grace is not in thy power.

Now is the day of grace now is the appo^nted time, and if thou will not now
accept his grace offered unto thee, when thou call hereafter upon him, how
know thou if he will hear thee, seeing now thou refusest grace when it is
offered thee? If ever thou meanest to repent, now is the tim^, slight not the
grace of God, now it is offered unto thee.

Some will say I h^ve repented already: but if thou have, thy repentance must
be perpetual and ^o^tinuall, it is not the work of a day, but o^ a^ise. As
long as thou bre^the^t thou do sin; therefore ^epent as often as thou
sinnest. Betake the self to a more deep search renew thy repentance daily,
look back to thy former sins, and life, to thy birth and corruption, and
know that the more thou repentest, the more sweet and easy will thy repentance
be, and at last nothing will comfort thy soul so much as repentance.

The last use is for comfort to all those that have repented indeed, they shall
be saved: thou shall lose nothing by thy repentance, thou shall have great
recompense, thy prayers shall be acceptable to God, thou shall have peace in
death, boldness in judgment, and glory in Heaven.

GENERAL RVLES Of a Godly Life.
He Is only wise, who God does know,
And does by life his knowledge show.

EVery day thou drawest nearer to thy Death, Judgment and Eternity. Therefore
think every day how thou may be able to ^and in that most strict and severe
Judgment, and so live for ever. Look diligently to thy ^houghts, Words, and
Deeds, Every evening ^hink thou shall dye that night, Every mor^ing think thou
shall die that day. Do not defer thy conversion and good works till to
Morrow; because to morrow is uncertain, but Death is certain, and hangs over
thy head every day. Nothing is more contrary to Godliness than delay: If thou
contem^test the inward calling of the Holy Spirit, thou shall never attain to
true conversion. Defer not thy conversion and good works till thine old age,
but offer unto God the flower of thy youth It is uncertain whether the young
man shall live till he be old: But it is certain that destruction is prepared
for the young man that is impenitent. No age is fitter for Gods service than
youth, which flourishes in body and mind. For no man's sake undertake an evil
cause, for it is not man, but God that shall hereafter judge thee; do not
therefore prefer the favor of men before the grace of God. In the way of the
Lord either we go forwards, or else we go backwards. Therefore examine the
life every day, whether thou go forwards or backwards in the study of piety;
to stand in the way of the Lord, is to go back; Delight not then to stand
still in the course of godliness, but study always to walk in the way of the
Lord, let thy conversation be evermore courteous unto all, grievous to none,
familiar with few. To God live piously, to thy self chastely, to thy neighbor
justly. Show favor to thy friend, Show patience toward thy enemy, Show thy
good will toward all, an^ thy bounty to whoml thou art able. In thy life die
daily unto thy self, and unto thy vices. So in death thou shall ^ive unto God.

FINIS.

