AN ASTROLOGICAL SPECULATION Of the late PRODIGY.

OR A Clear discovery of the approaching Miseries signified by that Comet, or
Blazing Star, Which has so long been Visible, to several Countries and Nations
in November, December and January; in the Year 1680. Being a full account of
the Manner or Nature of its Effects, and in what Countries they will be Exhibited.

ALSO The true way of Judging the Effects, of all other Comets, and such
apparitions, carefully collected from the best experimental Judgments of the
choicest Aphorisms, and according to their Fundamental, and Methodical Rules;
now in a seasonable time manifested in a plain and homely Style; fit for the
understanding of mean capacities.

By Thomas Jones a lover of Learning, and Student in Astrology; and
Autodidactus.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are sold by him, in Paul's Alley, in
Redcross-Street, 1681.

To the Courteous Reader.
THough this be the third time I have presented my Service and weak endeavors
to thy use, yet is this the first time I have appeared in this language, or in
this nature, as touching Comets: I must confess that I never wished from my
heart, that my opinion in Judicious ways should prove false and fail, until
this time: But now I do heartily wish that I may be mistaken therein: Here is
nothing but mischief and tribulation threatened, and truly had I not seen such
great mischiefs and afflictions hanging over our heads for our sins, I had at
this time been silent: But since by these signs we are forewarned of
approaching evils, I hold it not meet to be silent at such a time; although I
know it unlikely for any one in this way of writing to please all people: Yet I
desire, and hope that my honest endeavors may not prove Offensive to any. We
find that the old Students in this way are very backward in publishing their
Judgments on that wonderful Star, as we suppose, either because they feared to
err therein; or that it would incur the displeasure of some one that might
return them an unwelcome reward; therefore if I do err at my first step on the
Stage in this Judicious way, I hope I may be the more excusable, or if I speak
darker, or shorter than I might, I desire also to be excused, in regard that
the pleasing of others to my own prejudice would avail me nothing. I had
adventured to publish this small Treatise of mine some months sooner, had not
my time been taken up in other concerns; the further we are from the time that
the Star appeared, the nigher we are to the miseries threatened by it.
Therefore I think it not unseasonable to move the minds of sinners to consider
it; and all that I shall now say to the purpose is no more mine than the Rules
of the Ancients, and the words of my Authors. I have done nothing here with an
intent to displease any one: But if any will be offended without a cause let
them not blame me but their own ill nature, that will be angry with me for
endeavoring to please them. I am sure there is none more diligent or willinger
to please you, than

Your painful Servant, THO. JONES.

To his Friend the Author
Among those noble Souls that yearly write
Do thou appear, my Friend, and cast thy mite?
Go on, and exercise thy pregnant wit,
There Is them will venture that are not so fit;
Clearly to the World thy parts display,
Which long lay clouded to this very Day.
I wish Urania had more such Friends,
And less pretenders for their own self ends.
Go on, Tho. Jones, Let the flowing Spring
That is in thee tell's News of every thing,
So shall thy Fame, when Death has closed thine Eyes,
Extend his splendor to the spangled Skies.
Not to commend the Author is the least
Of all my thoughts, his work will do it best;
Nor yet to vex the prying Readers sense
With humble words in stead of Eloquence:
Herein I crowd these rude unpolisht lines
To inform the Reader of these Giddy times,
How much they are indebted, what they ow
To him who does his Labor now bestow;
And eke his skill that by his piercing sight,
His bright example may give others light.
It Is now a crime and quite grown out of fashion
To encourage Art amongst the English Nation;
Tell some of this, or other mysteries
They Will not regard it; but will soon despise
The Author and his works, tho'nere so good,
And this for not being better understood:
They Will not allow the Planets to fulfill,
As Instruments, Gods high Decree and Will;
Nay some there are that never will, nor can
Attain such knowledge as belongs to man
What wondrous Volumes is there to Epsy
In that most Various and bright shining Sky.
Bark black mouthed envy, carp at what is well done,
His works shall be my choice companion.
The Welsh from Age to Age will give thee praise
For what thou'st done for them within thy days;
When thou art dead thy Rules of Art will be
A Competent portion to Posterity:
Through thine Industry, what they wanted long
Is now prescribed in their own Native Tongue.
Thou have sent forth thy Rules for them, to manage
Arts and Sciences in the British Language.
Why take I Pen in hand to write thy Praise?
Why hold I Torch in clear bright shining Days?
Had I the skill or wisdom of Appollo,
Or could I Tullies Eloquence but follow;
Yet still should I want words and wit to tell
Thy real worth how much thou do excel
And for that cause least I detract from it
Ple cease and make my humble Strain submit.
W. R.

The Authors Imploration of Divine Assistance in this Work.
OHeavenly Father do me help,
Disclose these Doubts to me;
Then virtue will not labor fear,
Nor yet the way, though hard it be.
With Aganippe's wholesome food
Replenish thou my days,
Thy Temple eke to come unto,
Do thou direct my ways,
Defend me from the Common sort
That seek me to dispraise;
From Brutish Clowns deliver me,
Be thou my Guide always;
Not worse unlik't then shall I be,
If that thou will me bless,
That I, that is young and unknown, may
My self to labor dress.
Thou liftest men from low Estate,
And do to honor great them call:
Without thy grace the wit of man
Would perish soon and fall;
His voice and all would wax full hoarse,
Nothing would sweetly sound,
All sweet and pleasant melody
Would fall unto the ground.
If thou will me favor now
I will ascend the Skies,
And there thy high and Goodly works
Consider with mine Eyes;
Teach me figures fair to frame
Of sundry sorts in sight,
That I may ascend the Heavens high,
And bring hidden things to light.
T. J.

HEre in the night appeared a flaming Spire
Like a fiery Dragon folded all in fire
A bright Comet with a fiery Stream
Or a flying Lance with a burning beam
Here appeared a horned Monster, environed round
With fiery Flakes about the Air so bound
With a long bloody hair a blazing Star
Threatening the World with Famine, Plague and War
To Princes death, to Kingdoms many Crosses,
To all Estates inevitable losses,
To Heards-men rot, to Plow-men hopeless seasons,
To Sailors storms, to Cities civil Treasons.
Dubartas.

To know the significations or Effects of Comets or Blazing Stars by those
following Rules of Art viz.
First, By a figure erected on their first appearance. Secondly, By their
position and motion in Signs. Thirdly, By their Color and Complexion.
IN unfolding the significations or Effects of Comets or Blazing Stars, I am
forced here to make use of some terms of Art; being such words as every Reader
is not acquainted with; yet for the better understanding and benefit of mean
capacities I shall endeavor to Explain them as clear as I can, within the
limitation of my liberty, and thus do I now adventure to speak what I may to
the purpose, wishing my self one that might verify those Scripture words.
Amos, 3, 7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing: But he reveals his secrets
unto his servants. Rev. 4, 1. I looked and behold a door was opened in Heaven,
and the first voice which I heard was as it were of a Trumpet talking with me,
which said, come up hither and I will show thee things which must be hereafter.
14. 13. And I heard a voice from Heaven saying unto me write, blessed are the
Dead, etc.

It was ever counted by all Students in Astrology, the best and properest way
of Judging the effects of all Eclipses, and Conjunctions of ponderous Planets
by a figure erected on the exact time of their first appearance or coming
together. Also for Comets or Blazing Stars if possible might be found the first
time of their appearance or congealing together, I am sure there is no Student
in this way will deny, but this same way is best and properest to judge their
effects also: Therefore I choose it my first rule to give my approbation of this
Comet, by this figure erected on the time of its first appearance to England,
or according to the first relation we had of it from Falmouth in Cornwel.

Chart of the night sky, showing the position of the comet in relation to
various constellations, as described in the text on pages 2-4, images 5-6

There are four ways to judge of Comets or Eclipses by a figure of Heaven.

1. By the nature of the Signs where they happen therein.

2. By the nature, disposition and position of the disposer of them, or the
Lord of the Sign where they shall happen.

3. By the nature, disposition and position of the Ruler of the Scheme, or the
strongest planet therein.

4. By the nature and signification of the Houses where they happen.

The first thing that we are to observe by this Scheme is the position of the
Comet so near the Cusp of the ascendant and in the Sign Scorpio, the night
House of Mars, and of Nature Cold, watery, Nocturnal, Phlegmatic, fixed, and
Northern, Also near some fixed Stars of the Nature of,, and.

According to these testimonies it threatens War and great alterations in the
World, animosity about Religion, and Chiefly amongst men of Martial Discipline.

Secondly, We are to consider the position of the disposer of the Comet in the
tenth house and in the House of and in partile conjunction with the Back of the
Lion, a fixed Star of the Nature of, and in Nature cold, earthly, Melancholy,
barren, Nocturnal.

By these Constellations it signifies, that much wit and policy will be used
amongst men, and with much business employed about vile, Treacherous
consultations to corrupt and Stifle good Laws, and to change governments; by
their plotting and invading of Nations, and if questioned for the same, they will
pretend to be as innocent as Lambs; and truly so they may as Romish Lambs,
which are always of a more infernal quality, than heretic Lions as they call
them.

Thirdly we are to consider the Nature, disposition and position of the Ruler
of this Scheme, or the Strongest Planet herein; as we find here and to be
Strongest, and of an equal strength also wants but one Testimony of their
dignity and therefore seems to put in with them for a share: Here we find Lady
of the ninth posited in the third House, and afflicted with an * of retrograd
in the ninth House, a strong argument that Religion will Suffer a great
detriment by those that never had any. Also being retrograd in the eighth
House, and afflicted with a of from the Tenth House, and with an opposition of
his disposer from the Second House; an argument that Gentlemen or Persons of
quality in some Countries, for showing themselves active in regulating State
Affairs, will come off with the loss of their lives. although one of the
strongest Planets in the Scheme, seems not to be concerned with any, neither of
one side nor the other.

Fourthly, we are to consider the nature and signification of the House where
this Comet is posited, in, we find it within three degrees of the Cusp of the
ascendant, and ascending into the 12 House which signifies much Sorrows,
Tribulations, Imprisonment and all manner of afflictions effected by private
enemies, also self undoing to those who maliciously undermine their Neighbors,
and secretly invent false accusations against them.

Mr. Wm. Lilly in his guide to Astrologers gives us this account of Comets; A
Comet immovable signifies Seditions; But this Com^t was movable and very Swift
in motion; such he said denotes foreign Wars, and one Nation invading another.
A Comet in the 12 House as this is, threatens great pestilence and Scarcity of
Corn.

To know the signification or Effects of this Comet by its moving in Signs.
This Comet whilst it appeared to us had its transitory motion through these
Signs,.. *....

A Comet or a Blazing Star in threatens many wicked actions among men, as Wars,
Contentions, Controversies, Alterations and Changes in the World, and chiefly
among men of Martial discipline, also scarcity of Waters, and scarcity of the
Fruits of the earth, and famine.

In it denotes evil to great men, Controversies about Religion and Laws, also
fevers and other dangerous diseases.

In * they foreshew many inhuman actions as Murders, Massacres, Wars, Death to
great men by poison or other Violent means, persecution of many for Religion,
and contempt of Religion it self, plague and famine in many places. Great
Frosts, Snow, Hail, troubles and calamities to most sort of people.

In a Comet or Blazing Star signifies long lasting Wars, Terrible Slaughters of
men; also a great mortality by a Sweeping pestilence, dark obscure Air, great
Winds; Much Thunder and Lightning.

In they signify much Strife and contention about Religion, division among
Relations, and former friends, great troubles amongst great and potent persons.

In, a Comet or Blazing Star is the forerunner of much mischief, as Wars,
dreadful fires; The ruining of Cities and Towns by Treachery; The death of many
eminent Commanders: Sharp diseases in the heads of People.

To know the significations or Effects of this Comet by its Color and
Complexion.
The Colors of this Star has been so various as to represent at some times
the complexion of all these four Planets viz.,,,, therefore we may conjecture
its effects to be according to the Nature of the said Planets, which is as
follows.

A comet or Blazing Star of the Nature of, signifies many frights and fears
among People, murmuring and repining, Exile or Banishment to many; scarcity of
food, penury, grievous Sicknesses, tempestuous Winds, Shipwracks, great Frosts
and Snows, a destruction of Fruit by Worms.

Of the Nature of, denotes much Struggling amongst men for matters of Religion,
Laws and privileges.

Of the Nature of, it Threatens much Wars, Quarrels, Sea Fights, Bloodshed,
great slaughters, Massacres in some places; Change of Governors and Government,
Pestiferous Winds, Terrible Thunder and Lightnings, Tempests, Ship-wracks, much
Robbery by Sea and Land, Excessive hot weather at some times drying up Rivers
and Fountains, Scarcity of the Fruits of the Earth: The burning of Towns and
Cities, and violent fevers amongst the People.

Of the Nature of, They signify much Wit and Policy among men, and as much
business to employ it about, many sly and evil consultations, and Chiefly
among men of Learning; Corrupting of of Laws, false Doctrine deluding the
People in some Countries; also scarcity of Food, and Famine.

All these forementioned miseries, and Calamities are by this Comet threatened
to the World in some parts or other.

To know in what parts of the World the Effects of this Comet will be Exhibited.
It has plainly appeared to the students in this Art that the Eclipses of the
Luminaries, the Conjunctions of ponderous Planets, The Comets or Blazing Stars
have operated their Effects in those Countries or Nations, subject to the Signs
where they happen therein.

This Comet made its progress as before mentioned, through these Six Signs
viz.,, *,,,, and therefore according to the rule of Art, and the experiences of
the Ancients, we must expect that the Effects of this Comet will be manifested
with some of the forementioned mischiefs in all those Countries Governed under
those Signs which he passed through.

A Catalogue of those Countries I shall give as follows.
Under are governed these Countries. The North part of Bavaria, The Woody part
of Norway, Barbary, The Kingdom of Fez, Cattalonia in Spain, Valentia, Vrbine
and Forum Julij in Italy, Vienna, Messina in Italy, Gaunt, Frankford upon Odar.

Under are Governed the Countries of Spain, Hungary, Slavonia, Moravia,
Dalmatia, Buda in Hungary, Toledo, Narbon, Cullen, Stargard.

Under *, are Governed these Kingdoms, Countries and Cities, Thrace, Macedon in
Greece, New Turkey, Albania, Bulgaria, Saxony the South-west part, West Indies,
Stiria, the Isles Orcades, Hassia, Oxford, Mecklin, Cleves, Brandeburg.

Under are Governed these Kingdoms, Countries and Cities, Tartary, Croatia,
Valachia, Muscovia, Westphalia in Germany, Piemont in Savoy, the West and South
parts of Bavaria, Media, Arabia, Hamborough, Breme, Montferrat and Pisaurum in
Italy, Trent, Ingolstad,

Under are Governed these Kingdoms Countries and Cities, Calabria in Sicilia,
Portugal, Normandy, the North of Egypt, Alexandria, Rhemes, Worms, Ratisbone,
Compostella.

Under are Governed these Kingdoms, Countries and Cities, Germany, Swevia,
Polonia, Burgundy, France, England, Denmark, Silesia the higher, Judea, Syria,
Florence, Capua, Naples, Ferrara, Verona, Vtrecht, Marselles, Augusta, Cesarea,
Padua, Bergamo.

The demonstrations of this Comet has been so large, that I think it needless
to trouble the ingenious Lover of Arts, with my farther Treatise on the
significations of Comets or Eclipses, that may happen in other signs of the
Zodiac; or in any other House of the Scheme, or of any other Color or
Complexion.

Now finding our approaching woes to be many, and threatened to many parts of
the World; and the greatest testimonies herein denotes, That terrible and Cruel
mischiefs will be done about matters of Religion: The consideration of it moves
me to pray heartily to God, that I may not live to see those days, which the
holy man Bishop Usher foresaw through inspiration, as he said with his eyes
lifted up to Heaven and the tears running down his Checks, That his thoughts
were taken up about the miseries and persecutions that were coming upon all the
Protestant Churches of Christ through all Europe, which would be so sharp and
bitter that the contemplation of them, had fetched the tears from his Eyes, and
that it would be done by the hands of Papists, and in the way of a sudden
Massacre: And that the then Pope would be the Chiefest instrument of it;
Therefore take head (said he) that you be not found sleeping and unprepared;
for it is even at the door: Where we Suppose his meaning was that we should be
prepared to die; or else he saw it a seasonable time to demonstrate unto us the
Words of a Prophet, Joel 3. 10. Beat your Ploughshears into Swords, and your
pruning hooks into Spears, let the weak say I am Strong. He said also that
there would be one great difference between this approaching persecution and
those already past: For in the former the most eminent and Spiritual Ministers,
and Christians did generally Suffer most and were most violently fallen upon:
But in this approaching persecution, the best of People will be preserved by
God as a seed to partake of that glory which shall immediately follow and come
upon the Church, as soon as ever that Storm shall be over. For as it shall be
the sharpest, so it shall be the shortest Persecution of them all, and shall
only take away the Gross Hypocrites and formal Professors, But the true
Spiritual believers shall be preserved till the Calamity be over past.

Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prcphecy, and
keep those things which are written herein, for the time is at hand, Rev. 1. 3.

Since that God has been pleased to foreshew us his approaching judgment, by a
token of his fierce anger fixed in the Heavens as a torch or a fiery Sword,
visible to many sinners that would not behold the brightness, and beauty of his
Laws, and Statutes; Now seeing that the Sword of God, is ready drawn and
hastening to destroy and weed the World of the rebellious People, who went on
raging in no less disobedience, than if they had proclaimed open Wars against
God. It is now high time for them to awake out of Sleep, and consider and lay
to heart, how near they are to fall over the brink of their pleasures, and how
dreadful a condition they will be in; when their deserved calamities shall
overtake them, as Solomen tells us, Eccl. 9. 12. Man knows not his time; as
the Fishes that are taken in an evil net; and as the Birds that are caught in a
Snare: so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly
upon them. Let us Praise His Clemency, who, seeing we are sinners, reproves
our Sluggishness, by these Signs. When God goes about to punish a City or
Nation, he is pleased first to foreshew it with Signs and wonders; therefore
let us fear the maker of this Comet, and not the Comet it self; whosoever
fears God let him say with David, Come and see the works of the Lord, how
terrible he is in his doings toward the Children of Men, Psalm. 66. 5. Now that
Gods wonderful works would Surprise us with such fear as may lead us unto God
himself is the hearty Prayers of

T. J.

ADVERTISEMENTS
To all Booksellers and all other Dealers that deal or shall deal in Welsh
Almanacks within the Kingdom of England and the Dominion of Wales.
Gentlemen,
I Thought I had mentioned enough in the Epistle of my Almanac for the year
1681. to acquaint all that could read Welsh, that the whole Liberty and License
of making, and setting forth of Welch-Almanacks, belongs to my self only, being
settled upon me, by his Majesty's Pattent, and favor; Also by Covenanting with
the Company of Stationers of the City of Lon^^n for the full time of my natural
life; Notwithstanding all this, several dealers in North -Wales have presumed
to deal and traffic with another Welch-Almanack made by another person, which
was not discovered to me, until the time of sale was over, or else they that
dealt in them had been better acquainted with me before this time: Had I any
way been deceitful or unkind to my Country, either in not taking care and pains
to write as near the truth as another could by rule of Art; or in holding the
rates of my books higher than Ordinary, or above the Common price of others;
they might have had something to say for themselves; But seeing that I have
first manifested my love, and respect to my Country, in letting them enjoy
plenty of that which none other would under take for their sake, until I showed
them the way, and that I have also sold them at as easy rates as any one could
afford them, I cannot conceive what interest or reason should any one have in
stifling my endeavors, unless it be to show their voluntary disobedience
toward the King and his Laws. I thought fit once more to repeat unto you in
public Print as I told you before, that the whole liberty and license of
making, and setting forth of Almanacks in the Welch-tongue is settled upon my
self alone, all the days of my life by his Majesty, and by the Company of
Stationers of the City of London, and they straightly charge, command and
prohibit, all other Writers, Printers, Booksellers and all other dealers, and
all Subjects whatsoever, that they nor any of them at any time or times, shall
not Print, nor cause to be Printed, nor receive from any parts beyond the Seas,
any other Almanac or Almanacks, nor yearly Calender of what title soever in
the Welch-tongue, but what is written and set forth by me, during my natural
life. Having thus far certified you of the truth, had it been untruth I durst
not have published it in Print, therefore I desire and advise you, not to abuse
him who never abused you, and who has also showed his best endeavors to serve
you for your good, but if any do hereafter during the time before mentioned,
deal, trade or traffic in the aforesaid prohibited goods, I do hereby assure
them, that I will speedily come my self, or send my Order; not only to seize
on the goods, but also on them that Traffic in them, and will proceed against
them according to Law, and not only my self alone, but also the Company of
Stationers of the City of London, as they are bound in Articles to it, will
assist me in prosecuting and subdewing of all them. It may be that some will be
loath to let the Country enjoy the benefit of this small Book for fear it
should discover their former transgressions: to those I say that they shall not
be questioned for what is already past, unless they show their unkindness in
stifling of this also. I hope there is none that can take offense at what I
have written here unto them. I am sure that no rational man will be angry at me
for forewarning him of the danger that might befall him. But if any one be so
resolute as to disregard forewarning, and do what may cause him to repent of,
let him not blame me but himself, as for my further information I shall refer
it to the reader as follows.

Faithful Reader,
WHosoever thou art that have received any benefit or pleasure by a Welsh
Almanac, thou art heartily desired by him that made it first for thy sake,
that thou will not conceal from him the abuses put upon him by Such as presume
illegally to scatter abroad their seditious Libels under the Title of a Welsh
Almanac, merely for the Lucre of thy money, at what time soever hereafter thou
shall see or understand that any Booksellers, Shopkeepers, Pedlers, or any one
else whatsoever do deal or traffic by retayl or wholesale in any other Welsh
Almanac or yearly Calender in the Welsh Tongue besides mine; My humble request
is that thou would be pleased to show me so much favor as to send me a
speedy account of it: viz, the name of him or her that sells them, and the
Town or Village where he or she lives in, in a letter directed to me in Paul's
Allcy in Redcross-Street, London.

To him or her that will give me the first information of the above mentioned,
I do hereby promise and engage my self to pay unto him or her the full Sum of
20 s. in Lawful money for his reward, and that within three weeks after I
receive his letter, and to defend him from the ill will and malice of his
neighbors, I will send him my direction and Order to receive the said 20 s.
about 15 miles from his home, or in what Town himself shall desire it, that his
neighbors may not know the discoverer thereof.

TO all Dealers that deal or shall deal with John Braynton, or John Jackson
partners and Haberdashers of small Ware, at the sign of the George in Cateaten
Street, London.
TO prevent your disappointment of Welch-Almanacks by writing for them to the
foresaid John Braynton, or John Jackson, I thought fit to acquaint you that the
said John Braynton, and John Jackson, shall not henceforth Correspond any
farther with me, and that, because I was forced to sue to an Execution before I
could recover my Money for the parcels of my first Almanacks which they had of
me to furnish their Country Customers.

FINIS.

