A SERMON OF ANTICHRIST, Preached at Christ-Church, DUBLIN, November. 12. 1676.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY, Lord Bishop of MEAD.

The Second Edition Revised and corrected by his own hand.

Reprinted at LONDON for Nathaniel Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultry. 1679.

Imprimatur,
Jan. 13. 1676.

Ja. Armachanus.

March 4. 1679.

H. London.

To His Excellency ARTHUR Earl of ESSEX, Viscount Malden, Baron Capel of
Hadham, Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of His Majesty's Kingdom
of Ireland, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Hartford, and one of the Lords of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council of both Kingdoms.
Most Honorable,
How much Ireland (happy in your Government) is above all other Nations in
Europe, influenced by the power of Rome, is to Your Excellency well known, as
to the world, and by themselves also acknowledged, and gloried in.

But unhappy is it in being thereby, and by Romish Emissaries (of malevolent
and factious principles promoting other interesses) carried on fatally, to the
disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom. Of this we have had Memorials of
former Ages, some of them fresh and bleeding; nor are we even now without
jealousies of what may yet be, were there opportunity for it.

This is not to be ascribed to the stars, or clime, or nature of the people,
who have had of old the character, justly, of a people peaceable, harmless,
affable to strangers, and in themselves, and to all, pious and good. So was it,
while the Religion professed by their Forefathers was according to the
primitive faith of purer times of the Church (although not then without some
soil.) And thus find we it even now in those of the Nation who are of reformed
and purer principles.

But being in after times corrupted in Doctrine and Discipline, and that the
now Religion of the Irish is quite another thing from that of their forefathers
(of whom yet they boast themselves Children, both as to faith and blood) we now
find the Change great, as in Religion, so in disposition and manners:

On which we collect, that the grounds of our peace from those, must not be
Extirpation, but Reformation, by removing those their false Teachers, who
mis-inform and mis-lead the Nation; and our withal instructing the people in
the ways of peace and truth.

As to the latter I have observed, no people more desirous than are these to
hear and to be instructed, nor any better, being so educated.

In which I cannot but mention and recommend as a president to others, the zeal
of a pious and learned Prelate, the present Archbishop of Cashel, who has set
himself on that work industriously by instructing the Irish in their own
language; and has already gathered the comfortable fruits of his godly
labors, drawing in and retaining many of the Nation firm in the faith, the
number also of such increasing.

The means for that in former times, and in some of our own memories, was the
translating and Printing our English Lyturgy, and the New Testament into the
Irish tongue, that testifying our care of their salvation, and giving them
thereby to understand in their own language the truth we profess and teach,
contrary to the misinformation of others concerning us.

And to this purpose that learned Prelate Doctor Bedell late Bishop of Kilmore
(happy in his Zeal and labors that way) to that of the New Testament and
Common Prayer before translated and Printed in the Irish tongue, did add the
Translation into Irish of the Old Testament also, with David's Psalms in meter.
This I have in my hands in the manuscript, and wish it were for such a public
good, printed and published.

In the mean time, to give some stop, if it might be, to the Current of Popery,
I conceived in might be convenient and necessary that it be known and declared
to this mis-lead people, as to others, who that is whom they so follow, that he
is that very Antichrist, by whom they may be carried away by that deluge of
Apostasy into perdition, whereby these may by grace be brought to consider their
ways.

This is that which is in the following Treasise intended, and is, I hope to
some evidenced, which appearing, other points and erroneous Doctrines of Popery
will fall, depending on that the principal.

Of this in my late preaching it, I had the honor of your Excellencies being
then an hearer; and being prevailed with after for publishing it, I thought it
fittest for your Lordships Patronage, in whose hands is the Government of that
people for whom this is particularly designed. it was a confident presumption
in him, who under the letters I. S. (it may be, far from his name) did offer to
your Patronage an invective against that Church of which you are, The Church of
England your Mother, as not being the Church of Christ, nor any part of it;
which had its full confutation by a learned piece, Doctor Andrew Sall, I hope
the contrary may find better acceptance from your Excellency, this showing that
the Church of Rome, of which J. S. shows himself to be, is ANTICHRISTIAN, and
communion there to be unto some dangerous, and damnable to others.

It is in this my Comfort, which was St. Paul's speaking before King Agrippa)
that I speak to one who knows these things. And from whom I am persuaded
(none of these things are hidden, Acts 26.3.26.) For your Excellency is not a
favourer only of Learning, but you your self also learned eminently, and
particularly versed in Church-Antiquities, on which most of that here spoken,
is depending.

Which your affection to Learning appears in your large collection of Books,
with which that your rich and complete Library in England is stored. The same
of which has crossed the Seas hither, as elsewhere abroad There may the
learned find knowledge in variety, beside what concerns Records both of England
and Ireland, such as are not otherwhere, where, unto which recourse may be had
as to a VATICAN.

And as to Ireland, considering the few years of your Government over us, I
dare confidently aver, that none, so as your Lordship, knows so much of the
Kingdom, People, Manners, and several Interesses there, and understands better
the Measures, for governing answerably; and such a person so knowing, this
Kingdom requires.

In your Excellency shines the Heroic Virtue and Courage of that renowned
Martyr for King and Country, your illustrious Father; and that well tempered
with your own personal Affability taking with, and obliging all; yet to each
with a becoming distance of state and place, so as none to presume on more than
just favor in Judgment, Justice being to all, and any without difference
dispensed.

Tros Tyriusve tibi nullo discrimine habetur.

This is now testified in the present Connaght Court of Claymes under your
Government the Irish in that Province, having therein their help, as had before
the other parts of the Kingdom their distribution of Lands in former Courts of
like nature. In which those of Connaght having been post-poned, they were given
over as remediless, until by his gracious Majesty's continual care of his
People they were thus considered, and that by your Lordships procurement and
management.

God multiply his blessings on you in your Person, and in your Excellent Lady,
and Noble Progeny; and make us happy in the continuance of your prosperous
Government, generally desired; which are the prayers of

(My LORD) Your Excellencies Most devoted Servant, HEN. MIDENSIS.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THat between the first and second coming of Christ the Church being settled
and propagated by the Apostles and their Successors, there should arise a
certain person notoriously wicked, an adversary to Christ, and a cruel
persecutor of the Church, whom the Scripture 1 John 2. and 4. calls Antichrist,
is by Scripture and Apostolical Tradition among Catholics most certain, and
not to be doubted, Say the Romanists Guil. Estius Tom. 4. in l. 4. did. 47.
sect. 6.


And whereas the Apostles speak of a Mystery of iniquity even then in those
very times, working (2 These. 2.7.) and that many Antichrists were then in the
world (2 John v. 7.) and that there was one other not-yet-come, but in his time
to be revealed (2 Thessal. 2.5. 1 John 2.18.)

These together give us to understand Antichrist considered in his several
Ages, and gradual appearings ( for Rome was not built in a day.)

The knowledge of which Gradual Coming of Antichrist leads us to the better
understanding him as to his Person and Appearing: Herein therefore consider,

1. The Preparations to Antichrists Coming.

2. His after-appearing in the world.

1. The Preparations to his Coming, or his being conceived, and but yet an
Embrio in the womb's, may be those first times, when that iniquity did work but
in a Mystery that is not yet so openly, as after, and Antichrist not himself
yet appearing, but by others his forerunners: called Antichrists: and from
their number many Antichrists; and from their chief called also, the Spirit of
Antichrist who was to come, ( John. 2.7.)

This period of time may be extended to the first 600 years of the Church, of
which although the first 300 be acknowledged the purer, yet do the later 300,
and the whole 600, pass generally under the name of pure, compared with the
following.

In which 600 years it is granted, that many Errors did creep into the Church;
For while the husband men slept, or were less vigilant, the enemy sowed Tares
among the Wheat, both growing together, as our Lord had forwarned, ( Matthew.
13.24, to 31.) yet is it notwithstanding confidently averred, that within those
600 years there was not one in the whole world might be properly called a
Papist, says our most learned ( after Primate) Usher Jac. Usher^ Christ.
Eccles. suc^es. c. 1 p. 18.
For as the Title of Pope was not yet appropriated by and to the Bishops of
Rome, nor the name Papist from them derived to their followers; so those
Errors before stolen in, and crept into the Church, were not then received,
nor passed for Truths; some of them being taken notice of, were opposed both in
the Eastern and Western Churches, particularly in France, Germany, and even in
our own Britain also Id. c. 2.


And long after were those erroneous Doctrines of Popery no other among the
learned of that side, than Points disputable pro and con, which were after in
the Council of Trent, and some others before determined as de fide, to be
thenceforth no more questionable.

This was not to be expected within those first 600 years of the Church when
was wanting an Universal Bishop and Pope, by whose power a Council might be
ordered to adopt those growing Errors for Truths, which after followed. For at
the end of that sixth Century, and in the entering on the seventh in the year
607. we then begin to hear of Antichrists appearing in the world. But, 1. In
Infancy. 2. After in full age, growth, and strength.


1. Antichrists Infant age, is what next follows, and may be stated in the
year 607, Boniface 3. who by favor of Phocas the Emperor obtained and assumed
the title of Universal Bishop or Pope, which had been ambitiously sought after
by John Patriarch of Constantinople, as what he thought was belonging to the
chief seat of the Empire Constantinople, which his so invading that proud title
was, by Gregory the great Bishop of Rome, declared a sign of Antichrist's being
then at hand, and that whosoever assumed that title was Antichrist or a
forerunner of Antichrist: not dreaming how near that by him so spoken was to
himself. For while he was eyeing another person, and place this was soon after
found in his own See of Rome, and, there, in his very next successor but one,
Boniface. 3. he Arrogating that high name of Universal Bishop, not content with
Primacy without Supremacy: not satisfied with being first among the five
Patriarchs, but to be above them also, and they subjected to him, and his rule,
so he to be over all Bishops, and the Church throughout the whole World
subjected to him as chief.

And here see, how near the Pope's two so contrary Titles came in, and began
almost together, that of Servus Servorum Dei by Gregory; and Universal Bishop
by Boniface his successor.

That also Antichrist had scarcely begun to show himself in this Western part
of the World at Rome, as now in Boniface when near upon that time Mahomet the
false Prophet began to appear in the East, both to the bane of the Church: the
famous Churches in the East suppressed by the one; and those in the West
corrupted by the other.

2. Yet was this but Antichrist's infancy; we have yet to see him in his full
growth of strength and stature under following Popes, especially in Gregoy 7th.
before called Hildebrand, who enlarged the Papal power above all spiritual and
temporal, not only Bishops, but even Emperors also being, brought under him.

As to the time of Gregory the 7ths Papacy, which was about a thousand years
from the destruction of Jerusalem and Temple, by the Romans: In which time of
the destruction of Jerusalem was that Fullness of Christ's Kingdom, and its
coming in power; That is, the Gospel preached to other Nations, and Jerusalem
trodden down of the Gentiles, ( Luke 21.24.) Thereby also were the Temple,
Jewish service, worship and sacrifices taken out of the way, which, for a time,
were hindrances to the course of the Gospel.

In this Christ's Kingdom of the Gospel so come there was to be also a binding
up of Satan for a thousand years after, so as the Devil should be restrained,
not in that time, to seduce the world so freely, and so generally as before,
Rev. 20.1, 2, 3.) after which thousand years, Satan was to be again at liberty,
for mischief, which loosing of Satan was the period of Antichrists being also
at liberty, he coming with the working of Satan (2 These. 2.9. Satan and
Antichrist working by and for each other) Which thousand years were then
completed in the Papacy of Gregory the 7th. mentioned.

And it may be observed in this, what is also found in other great Prophecies,
that about the time of their fulfilling men's minds have been then stirred up as
by instinct to enquire after that which was to be about that time expected.

So was it about the time of the 70 years captivity, which when at hand, Daniel
is then more than before inquisitive and looking after it is accomplishing: Dan.
9.23)

So also when the fullness of time came for Christ's coming into the world ( Gal.
4.4.) how were men then more especially awakened for looking after any waiting
in Jerusalem for the salvation of Israel, ( Luke 2.25.38.) so as when any
eminent person appeared that might carry any likelihood for it; as John B. he
was sent unto, solemnly to satisfy whether he were the Christ ( Joh. 1.19,
20:) so when the thousand years for Satan's loosing, and Antichrists
consequently appearing, were expired, the expectations of some were then
greater, they earnestly enquiring whether Antichrist was yet come? or when? As
to the letter (says Rioh^rdus Victorinus) these thousand years are already
expired, yet when Antichrist shall come, and Satan be loosed, we know not Rich.
Victor. in Apocal. ^. 6. c. 7.


Which men's not knowing Antichrist when come; and present, and seen, and (by
the time for his coming elapsed) concluded as come. In that we see but what
was, as to Christ himself. For the time for his coming being fulfilled and he
present in the world, and seen and speaking daily with them, yet was not known
( Joh. 1.10, 11.) but still expected. So was it as to Christ's Kingdom also; he
himself being interrogated, when the Kingdom of God should come, he answered
that the Kingdom of God is within you, that is among you; that which they saw
not, was even then present, and with them, ( Luke 17.20, 21.) meaning his
Kingdom of the Gospel: so were enquiries after Antichrists comings when he was
already come, yet not observed.

But although some were then so to seek, as to Antichrist, not knowing or
seeing him when present and to be seen, yet was it not so with all; he being
understood of others otherwise, so as even to be pointed at, and declared as to
his place and person.

Particularly, as to Gregory the 7th. or Hildebrand, of whom Eberardus in
Aventinus thus speaks. Hildebrand one hundred and seventy years since, was
the first, who under color of Religion laid the foundation of Antichrists
Empire. Those Babylonian Priests would reign alone, an equal they cannot
endure, they cease not to trample all under foot; they sit in the Temple of
God, and are exalted above all that is worshipped; he who styles himself Servant
of Servants, is Lord of Lords, as if he were God. He frames to himself an
Empire changing Laws; he establishes his own, he corrupts, robs, spoils,
defrauds, kills, that man of perdition whom they are wont to call Antichrist,
in whose forehead that name of contumely is written, I am God, I cannot err;
he sits in the Temple of God ruling all and everywhere; many say that
Gregory is Antichrist Avent. Annal. Boiorum. l. 7. c. 47. Bin. conc. genesis par.
2. p. 438.


Also in the Papacy of Paschalis 2. a. 1105. Fuentius Archbishop of Florence
declared publicly that Antichrist was even then come, and that he did sit
openly in the Church, pointing at the Pope; at which the Pope was so nearly
touched, that in a Council at Florence of 340 Bishops, silence in that was
imposed on that Archbishop.

This is that Pope Paschal, who contended with the Emperor Henry 5th. for
wresting from him that privilege concerning Investiture of Bishops, which the
Emperors for 300 years had possessed as their right, but the Pope finding
himself over powered by the Emperor, who was then with an Army in Italy, he did
withdraw that his challenge, leaving the Emperor in possession of that
privilege as before. And at a solemn Mass administering the holy Supper, the
Pope said, my Lord the Emperor, This body of our Lord born of the Virgin Mary,
and which suffered on the Cross, as the holy Apostolic Church professes, I
give in confirmation of this sincere accord between us ( and breaking the Host,
keeping part for himself, and giving the other part to the Emperor, he added)
as this body of our Lord is divided, so let him be divided from the Kingdom of
Christ our Lord, who shall attempt the violating this covenant between us, to
which Anathema, so pronounced, all said Amen: Notwithstanding which, the
Emperor being returned to Germany, that very Pope dissolved all in that done,
and called that privilege which he so confirmed to the Emperor praevilegium,
not privilegium ( Sigebertus aliique apud Magdebur. Cent. 12. c. 8.

Baronius also thus mentions ( a. 1170.) Alexander 3. and his Legates Letter
to the Pope his Master Baron. Annal. T^m. 12. a. 1170. Sect. 9.
Be pleased most holy Father, to hear patiently what we say, for my soul is in
bitterness; both your devoted Son the most Christian King of France, and the
whole Gallican Church are troubled at the scandals, which in the days of your
Apostolat are given by the Sea Apostolic, insomuch as our own say, that there
Satan is let loose to the destruction of the Church, and that Christ is again
crucified, and a manifest Sacrilegious person discharged.

Also Joachimus Abbas, a. 1190. says, that Antichrist is now born in the City
of Rome, and is advanced into the Sea Apostolic Roger Hoveden. Annal. Ricar.
1. p. 388.


It were endless in this to run through the several ages before and until
Luther, God having then in those former times discovered Antichrist to some
here and there; but more plainly and more generally on the preaching of the
Gospel in the Reformation, on which followed that so general a departure as we
see at this day from that Babylon, as by that voice from Heaven, Come out of
her my people, ( Rev. 18.4.)

Considering which clear evidence, and light of this great and so important
truth, so generally diffused throughout the Christian Hemisphere, which all may
see that will see; it is greatly to be wondered at to find notwithstanding at
home, some excelling in knowledge and learning to grope in this, in midst of
light, as in darkness, we having the general consent of Reformed Churches
abroad.

Having also within our selves the concurring Judgment of famous Bishops and
learned men, among whom are our Whitegift, Abbot, Jewel, Andrews, Morton,
Davenant, Bilson, Hall, Prideaux, Fulke, Reynolds, Whitaker, and our Judicious
Hooker above many. And in Ireland also had we our Usher, Downham, and Bedell,
(not to mention others) and the suffrage also of twelve Bishops together
delivered by Bishop Downham, desired in the name of the rest to declare their
Judgments in it in his Sermon in Christ-Church Dublin, on the 22d. of April,
1627. This was subscribed Nov. 20. 1626. by Ja. Armachanus, Malcolm Casselen.
Anth. Midensis, To. Dunensis, Rich. Cork, Cloyne and Rose, Thomas Kilmore and
Ardmagh, Mich. Waterford and Lismore, Tho. Fernes and Laughlin, Geo. Derensis,
Andr. Aladensis, Tho. Dromor. Fra. Lymerick.

These are here named for their lasting honors; besides whom are others of
former times, and of the present also, not mentioned.

Add our English Book of Homilies approved and published by authority, in which
is sufficient to show the Doctrine of the Church of England to the same purpose.

But what needs more than that Excellent Paraphrase on Rev. 20. by the most
Learned among Kings, King James of ever blessed memory, proving and concluding
the Pope Antichrist, etc. in that his learned Pen and excellent Work, leaving a
lasting monument to the World of his being defender of the Faith; A glorious
Title descending to him, and to this Royal Family for ever.

By which Learned work of that Great Prince, that Roman beast felt it self so
wounded, that their greatest Champion Bellarmine (but under a disguise) was
enforced to run in and help; but with so bad success, that thereby occasion was
given to Learned men to clear up that Truth, as we find at this day, above
contradiction, other than cavilling.

And yet strange it is notwithstanding to see (as was said) some of excellent
parts in knowledge and learning among our selves now sticking here, some being
in that led by a reverend esteem of some others of another Judgment, but so few
as to be numbered, and not to weigh in the balance. Of these, some labor to
stave off Antichrist from Rome, for avoiding what they suppose inconvenient,
our deriving our Church and Holy Orders from an Antichristian state, which
needed not to trouble them.

But some out of a peaceable inclination, designing the reconciling Rome and us
in one, or at least not so far to offend that party, as if Rome were to be
complemented and obliged thereby to favor our cause or persons the more, were
we in their power.

Whereas by such our connivance and silence, not speaking out what is truth,
that Rome is Babylon, the Pope Antichrist; and that communion there is
dangerous to some, and to others damnable, and by our tender forbearance in
this, Popery and that Church does pass for Catholic, Ancient, Holy, and the
very way to Salvation. Whereby not few have been seduced and drawn away from
the Truth professed, as others may be, who hear of nothing to the contrary;
thereby are also those of that communion fastened there, they being confirmed
by this our silence.

On which consideration, and that this strikes at the root of Popery; I have
been led to this subject.

Which as first was intended but for that Honorable Auditory and place only
where it was preached, but by multiplied importunities of many, and being
awakened by an imperfect Copy, taken while it was in speaking, which I
understood to have been dispersed, and I know not how far, and might be (I
feared) to the prejudice of the Truth, and to the advantage of adversaries, I
therefore consented to the revising and publishing thereof for avoiding those
inconveniences, declaring this, and none other, to be what I own.

In which as now set forth, are some things more than were delivered in
Preaching, yet what was intended, had time permitted; something also is added
for further enlargement, which might better pass (I conceived) in writing than
in speaking.

And although that called a Sermon be swollen hereby above its ordinary bulk, it
is notwithstanding still short of what may be necessary for the clear opening
of this great Point; yet do I stop there notwithstanding at present, supposing
there may be an opportunity after offered for defense of that delivered by that
opposition, which is not to be doubted this may find from the adverse Party.

Whatever this is, all is submitted to the judicious Reader; desiring Gods
blessing it to all, particularly to those, who yet hear not that voice from
Heaven, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her Plagues, ( Rev. 18.4)

A SERMON of Antichrist Preached at Christ-Church, Dublin, November. 12. 1676.
2 Thessalonians. 2.3. to 13. V. 3. There shall come a falling away first, and that man
of sin shall be revealed, the Son of Perdition.

v. 4. Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that
is worshipped; so that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God.

v. 5. Remember ye not that while I was yet with you, I told you these things.

v. 6. And now ye know what witholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time.

v. 7. For the mystery of iniquity does already work, only he who now lets
will let, until he be taken out of the way.

v. 8. And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with
the Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.

v. 9. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and
signs and lying wonders.

v. 10. And with all deceivablenes of unrighteousness in them that perish,
because they received not the love of the Truth that they might be saved.

v. 11. And for this cause, God shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe a lie.

v. 12. That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth but had
pleasure in unrighteousness.


THE words read exceed much the now ordinary bounds of a Text, yet being all of
a piece, nothing could be well omitted.

The words are a Prophecy of evil times to the Church, and to the World, by one
here termed A man of Sin, ( v. 3) and who that man of Sin is, is now the
enquiry; and well worthy our enquiry, the import of the matter, and its concern
generally considered.

The discovery of this man of Sin, will appear in the description here given of
him, both in his

Rise and Fall His Fall, v. 8. His Rise before, v. 3. These make up the parts
of my Text.

His Rise is here under four considerations, by which brought together, this
M^n of Sin will be discovered who he is.

1. Here is the character, condition and quality, what kind of person he is, a
Man of Sin, v. 3.

2. He is also considered as to the place, where he is to be found, Sitting in
the Temple of God.

3. Here is also the time when he is to appear in grandeur, when he that did
then let or hinder should be removed, then shall that wicked be revealed.

4. His actions in the world, when he should be revealed, and by which he
should be known above others, he opposing and exalting himself above all that
is called God, etc. v. 4.

He to whom all these agree, and in whom all meet together, is that Man of Sin,
this Son of perdition whom we now seek after.

I.
His condition and quality is herein to be first considered; that he is a Man
of Sin.

A Man of Sin is a Scripture-form of speaking for one above others sinful. The
word sinner, sometimes imports the greater sort of sinners; and where the word
sinners is first found in Scripture ( Genesis ^ 3. ^ 3.) it is said of Monsters of
sin, those of Sodom who were sinners before the Lord exceedingly. And surely a
Man of Sin, intends something more than a sinner. Beza renders it merum scelus,
mere or very wickedness. A Man of Sin (says Grotius) signifies some person
notably and above all others wicked.

And accordingly is this Man of Sin here one above others sinful, both in life
and profession. Therefore called spiritually Sodom, ( Rev. 11.8.) and as to
Faith and Doctrine; An Apostate (and what is in that kind worse?) falling away
( v. 3.) departing from the Faith (1 Timothy 4.1.) denying the Lord that bought
them, and bringing in damnable Heresies (2 Pet. 2.1.) and Doctrines of Devils,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, etc. (1 Timothy 4.1, 2,
3.) we know who do so. Of these Apostate Professors are those also of whom St.
John speaks who deny that Jesus is the Christ; adding, he is an Antichrist
that denies the Father and the Son, whosoever denies the Son has not the
Father (1. John 2.22, 23.) And every spirit that confesses not, that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God; and this is that spirit of
Antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come, and even now already, is
it in the world (1. John 4.3. Not that Antichrist, or every Antichrist, denies
Christ come in the flesh; Some did so; nor do all heretics speak the same
thing, but whosoever shall say that Christ is not come in the flesh is an
Antichrist.

In all is to be observed,

1. That all false doctrines and heresies, whether against the doctrine and
truth of Christ, of which the Apostle S. Paul speaks (1. Tim. 4.) or against
Christ's person or Natures, of whom St. John speaks; both these are against
Christ, and such as so teach and believe, are therefore (because against
Christ) Antichrist, so as every deceiver is an Antichrist (2 John v. 7.) I Judge
says St. Hierom) all chief heretics to be Antichrist, under the name of
Christ teaching contrary to Christ. S. Hier. in Mat. 24.


2. Hereby we find that there are many Antichrists (1 John 2.18) and of those
many that some were then, in the Apostles* days, in the world. (1. John 4.3.)
Apostates from the faith before professed; They went from us, but were not of
us says the Apostle (1. John 2.18, 19.

3. Observe, that among those many Antichrists there is one chief Antichrist,
see both in 1. John 2.18. little children, it is the last time, as ye have
heard, that Antichrist shall come; even now are there many Antichrists.

In this we find those two sorts of Antichrists distinguished. 1. In number:
Antichrists plurally, And many Antichrists; the other but Antichrist singly:
one among many. 2. These two also are distinguished in time, Of those many some
already come, and then in the World; but that one Antichrist then not yet come,
yet expected (2 Thessalonians. 2.) the revealed in his time (v. 7.8.) 3. see that one
and chief Antichrist above the rest pointed at Emphatically, by an Article
which is in the Greek, not expressed in our English (...) that Article (...) or
that Antichrist (says Grotius) points at some one Antichrist among those many
more noted. And with like Emphasis is this man of sin, in the Text expressed by
that man of sin, The Son of perdition (v. 3.) That wicked (v. 8.) and even him,
whose coming is after the working of Satan (v. 9.)

4. Observe that great Antichrist in S. John, and this man of Sin in S. Paul to
be intended of the same Person; none can doubt but that St. Paul does speak
these things of Antichrist says S. Augustine. S. Aug in 2 These. 2.7 de civit.
dei 1.20. c. 19.
where and else where we find the same person under several names, under
diverse considerations, so called Sodom and Egypt ( Rev. 11.8. the great whore
( Rev 17.1.) Babylon v. 5. and here that man of sin (5) and by St. John,
Antichrist. In which variety of names, some one is at present to be principally
used, for avoiding confusion; in which I shall choose that of Antichrist, as
being a word both Scriptural, and Ecclesiastical, frequently occurring in the
Fathers, and Ecclesiastical writers, ancient and modern.

5. Observe that man of Sin or Antichrist, although singularly, and
Emphatically, and as it were, personally pointed at, is not notwithstanding to
be understood as terminated in any one individual person whatsoever; but as
those many Antichrists make up that wicked society of Apostate Heretics, of
what kind soever; so is this great Antichrist A chief of this great Apostasy,
but as one in succession, though diverse in persons, so it is said of the Pope
and Papacy Aug. triumph. de potestate, Ecc. q. 3. Art. 7.
That as to the place and office of the Papacy 'all Popes from first to last,
are but as one Pope, so when they say, the Pope is head of the Church, that is
not intended of any one Pope alone, but of any and all in that succession.

Thus of Antichrist, as here considered in his person, condition and quality. A
man of Sin, one in profession and faith, also in life and manners sinful
exceedingly; and how that is, will appear after in particulars.

II.
We have next to see this man of sin, as to his place, where he should appear,
and is to be expected; sitting in the Temple of God.

Which words The Temple of God, some appropriate to Jerusalem, and the Temple
there, so understood properly (says Grotius) in both Testaments Grot. de
Antichrist
It seems also to make for this; what is instanced of Cajus one of the Roman
Emperors, who caused his Image or statue to be placed in the Temple at
Jerusalem to be worshipped: which agrees (say some) with the Text literally,
This man of sin, sitting in the temple of God etc.

But this man of sin, or Antichrist, is intended of an Apostate Christian
fallen away (v. 3.) such as was not Caius, a Pagan, and never otherwise,
therefore not he this Antichrist.

2. Nor is Antichrist one individual person, but a chief in succession; heading
an Antichristian State and Faction, therefore not Caius nor Simon Magus, or any
other such whosoever; which will after appear more fully.

3. The Temple of God in the Text is interpreted the Christian Church, by the
Fathers St. Augustine, Chrysostom, Hierome, Hilary, Theophylact, Theodoret, and
others; also by Thomas Aquinas and others of the Schoolmen.

4. Notwithstanding what is confidently averred by some, that in both
Testaments, the Temple of God is intended of that Temple in Jerusalem, the
contrary appears; and that the Christian Church is also in that pointed at in
both Testaments. So in Zech. 6.12, 13. Behold the man whose name is the Branch
(meant of Christ, Zech. 3.8. Isa. 14, 1. Jer. 3, 8.33.15.) he shall grow out of
his place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord, even he shall build the
Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon
his throne. In which is not intended the Temple of Jerusalem, as if built by
Christ, whose destruction he declared; those days also of its destruction
being the time of the Lord's coming to Judge that People, and then setting up
his Temple of the Christian Church, where he would be worshipped in spirit and
in truth; not any longer in Types and Sacrifices, as in Jerusalem ( John
4.20.21.23.) And the Christian Gospel Church taken as Catholic, and of both
Nations, is called the household of God, built on the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all
the building fitly framed together grows unto an Holy Temple in the Lord, in
whom they are also builded together for an habitation of God through the
Spirit. (Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21.22.)

And as by the Temple, so by Jerusalem also is the Gospel Church of Jew and
Gentile signified, and that also, as the Church is Militant and Triumphant;
Jerusalem which is above being mother of us all, (Gal. 4.25, 26, 27.

In which it is to be observed that the state of the Christian Church is set
forth in the Revelations by 2 Visions of 2 Women.

One, the Holy Christian Church, represented in a Woman clothed with the sun,
and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of 12 stars, she
travailing with Child (showing her numerous Issue) who was before barren ( Isa.
54.1.) she also, and hers prosecuted and persecuted by the dragon, but
preserved (Rev. 12.1, 2, 3.6.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.)

But the other woman, signifying the Church Antichristian, persecuting the true
Professors, and drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus (Rev. 17.1, 2, 4, 5, 6.)

Observe also that these 2 women (or the Church under these 2 states and
conditions) are also represented by 2 Cities, the great City Babylon and
Jerusalem: that City named Babylon (Rev. 17.5, 18.) being for that
Antichristian state: but the other City Jerusalem (Rev. 20. and 21, and 22.)
for the Church of God, the new Jerusalem and Temple; no wonder then if by
Jerusalem and the Temple the Christian Church be signified.

5. And, that Jerusalem and the Temple there, could not be the place where that
man of sin or Antichrist was to sit, appears, in that Babylon, the city
contrary to Jerusalem, is declared Antichrist's seat: Also, that the
description given to that City (the seat of Antichrist) no way suits with
Jerusalem, see for that ( Rev. 17.6, 7, 8, 18.) where, by Babylon, the
Romanists (we need go no further) intend Rome, and for that the Rhemists
earnestly contend in their Annotations on 1 Pet. 5.13. The Church that is at
Babylon saluteth you (says St. Peter) which is their Scripture Proof for St.
Peter's being at Rome. Also Cardinal Baronius speaking of the name Babylon in
the Revelation, Certissimum est, etc. it is most certain (says he) that by the
name Babylon, the City Rome is signified; Annal. a. 45.
and Cardinal Bellarmine, by Babylons description, agreeing to Rome, concludes
out of Turtullian, Notissimum est, etc. (says he) It is most evident and
acknowledged, that Rome is built on seven hills, nor was there any other city,
which in the days of St. John, had dominion or reigned over the Kings of the
earth, but Rome only: De Romans Pont. l. 3. c. 13. and l. 2. c. 2.
Rome (says he) and no other city; not Constantinople, which although after
styled Rome, or new Rome, being also seated on hills, yet did not that then in
St. John's days reign over the Kings of the Earth. And as to Jerusalem, nothing
of all that could be said of it, neither that it was so situated on seven
hills, nor then reigning over the Kings of the earth, Jerusalem being then with
her children in Bondage (Gal. 4.25.) and that to the Romans; and by the Romans
soon after destroyed.

And if Rome be the City for that malignant state, then must the Temple of God
be understood to be there, and Rome to be the place for Antichrist's sitting.
But it is objected, how the Church of Rome should be then called the Temple of
God where Antichrist sits.

Res. So was Jerusalem also once the Faithful City. And even when at worst,
after their crucifying the Lord, it was then called the Holy City ( Math.
27.53.) having that name from what before it was. So was Rome once famous over
the World for its faith ( Romans 1.8.) and the Church there was the Temple of
God. And it was an honor to the Church of Rome, that it held out longer than
some other Churches, and opposed the Heresies rising and prevailing in the
Eastern Churches; yet as those famous Churches of Asia, fell from their Purity
(particular Churches may fail) so did Rome it self after, and that once
faithful city became an Harlot (Rev 17.5.) as was said of Jerusalem, and their
silver was become dross, and their wine mixed with water (Isa. 1.21, 22.) once
Pure, now Mixed and Corrupt with Errors, and they even Apostate from that Faith
professed by their Forefathers; yet from what once was, and from what is yet
there left of Good (though mixed and corrupt) that Church is called by the
Apostle here The Temple of God and there Antichrist sitting.

The sum of all is, that Babylon, which is acknowledged to be Rome, and the
Temple of God there, or the Church of Rome Apostate from the Faith formerly
professed, is the place where Antichrist is to be expected and found, which was
the 2d circumstance here considerable for Antichrist's discovery: his place:
sitting in the Temple of God.

III. The Next is that of time, when he should appear.
Little difference is between the Romanists and us, as to the place; but the
question is of the time, for as the Jews speak of Christ yet to come, so do
they of Rome concerning Antichrist, and that he is expected about the end of
the World and at Rome, when Rome shall turn Apostate, but we Assert that
Antichrist is already come; and that long since; and that he is even now in the
World acting as is said of him: which is to be now examined.

The time for Antichrist's appearing is thus in the text expressed (v. 5, 6, 7,
8.) Remember ye not, says the Apostle, That when I was yet with you I told you
these things? and now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his
time, for the mystery of Iniquity does work already, only he who now lets,
will let, until he be taken out of the way, and then shall the wicked be
revealed.

Unto this is to be added that in Rev. 17. (both places joined, making up this
whole matter) For in Rev. 17. we read of a woman sitting on a beast with 7
heads (that woman being that great City Rome, and those 7 heads interpreted
both 7 hills, on which that city is seated, And also 7 Governments called 7
Kings; Kingly or supreme.

Of which 7 Governments of Rome, it is said that 5 are fallen, and one is, and
the other not yet come; and that when he comes, he must continue a short
space, and that the beast that was, and is not, and yet is, which is added (v.
8.) even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and goes into perdition v.
10.11.

For opening both which Texts together,

1. It is granted, that Rome is that great City seated on seven hills and
ruling over the Kings of the earth.

2. That these seven heads or governments, are Romes seven Governments also.

3. Of those seven Governments of Rome, it is said that five are fallen: so in
St. John's time were those first five fallen, that is, 1. Kings, 2. Consuls, 3.
Dictators, 4. Decemvirs, 5. Tribuni militum (those vested with Consular and
Supreme power) which five are so by Livy distinctly mentioned; What (says he)
the Romans did, first under their Kings, after under their Consuls, Dictators,
Decemvirs, and Consular Tribunes, whether as to wars abroad, or suppressing
troubles at home, I have (said he) set forth in five books. (Tit. Live. lib. 6.)
All which their first five chief Governments were fallen away, and not then in
St. John's time of writing, in Being.

4. Where it is said, that one is; In that is Romes sixth form of Government,
next following those five before fallen, this sixth being that of Caesar's, or
Emperors, which is, or then was, when this was written, the Roman Emperors
then, and hundreds of years after, reigning in the world, and over the Kings of
the earth.

5. That there was another yet to follow, being Romes seventh form of
Government, not then yet come, when that was written, but expected: concerning
which I shall show,

1. What kind of Government this is, and how distinct or differing from the
former.

2. That for introducing this seventh form of Government, the last foregoing,
the sixth, was to be removed; and was removed accordingly.

3. That on the removing of the sixth, this seventh succeeded.

2. What kind of Government this seventh is, and how distinct and differing
from the former: As to Romes former six Governments, they were all civil and
military. This seventh is principally Hierarchical or Pontifical. Such a kind
of Government was that Priestly and Macchabaean, among the Jews after the
captivity, which continued until near the time of Christ's coming; about which
time it was by Herod suppressed.

And that Antichrist's dominion in Rome should be such, is employed in his
sitting (that is in-chief) in the Temple of God, the Temple of God denoting as
the place, so the person also as to his condition and quality, that he should
be Clerical. He shall attain Ecclesiastical dignities, and in the Temple of God
shall he sit, holding there the seat or chair of Eminency, says Radulphus
Flaviacensis de Antichristo (Levit. c. 1.) apud Magdeburg. ( Cent. 10. c. 4.)
Also Pope Gregory the great styles Antichrist, Sacerdotem Vniversalem, the
Universal Priest, for whom (says he) an Army of Priests is prepared, 6. Ep. 28.
showing his Army and Arms spiratual, other than before.

Of which Romes Pontificality, it is said ( Rev, 17.8, 11.) that it was and is
not, and yet is, and that being an eighth, it should yet be of the seventh,
that is,

1. That this Ponticality was, as is said, that which is now in Rome, is what
was also there before under former Governments.

For as to matters referring to Religion, the Romans had of old, instituted by
Numa Pompilius, their Pontifices or Under-priests; and over them a chief Priest
called ( Pontifex Maximus) which lower Priests were exempt from civil
jurisdiction, and only ordered by him who was Pontifex Maximus, he himself not
being accountable to any. Dionys. Halicarnass. ant. To. 12. God-win's Romans
Antiq. l. 2. sect. 2. c. 15.


2. Of this Roman Pontificality which was of old under the first five
Governments; It is said also, that it is not: ( Rev. 17.8.) i. e. then under
the sixth Government, that of Caesar's (which was that in Being when that was
declared to St. John) then was it said that this is not, or then it was not;
for the Roman Emperor conceiving the Privileges of the Pontifex Maximus
overgreat, and not safe in any hand but his own, it being independent:
therefore he assumed and annexed it to the Imperial Crown; so as it became one
of the Imperial Titles, to be Pontifex Maximus, thus continuing until it was
by Gratian a Christian Emperor altogether abolished; so as that office of
Pontifex Maximus which was under the 6. Government was changed from what it was
at first by Numa Pompilius, Swallowed up in the person of the Emperor, and
after quite abolished, therefore that which was, now is not, or then was not,
when that was by St. John written.

3. Yet is it added ( Rev. 17.8.) that what was, and is not, and Yet is, there
the present is for the future, as is usual in speaking of things to be, It is,
i. e. it shall be again, or as now to us, it may be said that it is: being in
the Romish Pontificate restored; not as before; before it was an honorable
office among the first 5. Governments; they were supreme, under which this was,
although independent. Nor is it now as it was after under the 6th Government,
that of Caesar's: it having been then annexed to the Imperial Crown; but now in
the Romish Pontificate, this that was, and after was not, now is, being
restored and created supreme, where we find even the very Title of Pontifex
Maximus retained, and the privileges also, which the Pontifices, or
underpriests, had of old, now again to them reserved; they being, as much as
may be, exempted from civil power, and only accountable to him the now Pontifex
maximus, and he himself to none other.

4. It follows to see, how this becomes an eighth head in that Government,
yet but of the seventh ( Rev. 17.11.) That is so by the Pope's advancing his
spiritual dominion and title above all Powers, the Emperor not excepted, and
being in his spiritual capacity the seventh, he becomes now in that exalted
Power an eighth, the Priesthood the seventh, being in his exalted Power raised
to an eighth head, yet of the seventh, being in his exalted Power raised to an
eighth head, yet of the seventh notwithstanding; as to nature and kind this is
the seventh, but an eighth, also in degree and power.

But to the introducing this seventh head in the Government of Rome, was the
last foregoing ( the sixth that of Caesar's) to give place, and to be first
taken out of the way, This is next to be considered, see it so in the text (v.
5, 6, 7, 8.) which now come in.

This required wary expressions, not thereby to raise persecutions to the
Christians from the Emperor; that being a crime Laesae Majestatis. This the
Jews objected to Christ. John the 18. 12, 15. and to his Apostles. ( Acts.
17.7.25.8.) Therefore we find the Apostle here very circumspect in declaring
himself in it, not speaking all, but referring to what he had before told them
in the ear, Remember ye not what I told you of these things when I was yet with
you? (2 Thessalonians: 2.5.) and being now to write of the same thing, how darkly is
that done? not nameing Emperor or any thing that way, only when he that now
lets shall be taken out of the way, which indeed was the Emperor, by whom
that former office of Pontifex Maximus was taken out of the way, and the
Emperor also being likely to oppose any other over topping power in that kind;
Therefore in order to Romes 7th. head or Government was the sixth to be
removed, and that it was so accordingly we find it.

1. In Constantine the Great, (the first Christian Emperor) his changing the
seat of the Empire, which was Rome Anciently, and removing to Constantinople;
thereby leaving the City of Rome, as it were vacant.

2. When by succeding Emperors the Roman Empire was divided, and the Roman
Eagle before under one head, having after 2 heads: and spread into Eastern and
Western Empires, and that also the seat of the Western Empire was other where
than at Rome, thereby was that place left to the Bishops of Rome in a yet
farther degree than before.

3. But yet more, when ann. 475. the Western Empire had quite expired, and
indeed in Augustulus (as it began in Augustus) the Empire having bin invaded by
the Goths and other Barbarous Nations, by whom also Rome it self was taken, and
possessed about 50 years, the Pope himself being also expelled and put to seek,
for a time, another habitation, Hereby was the Western Empire determined, and
so continued 325 years.

This was the 2. head proposed, the first removeing him that did let, for
making way for him that was to succeed.

III. It follows to show the others succeeding accordingly, and that gradually
comeing on according to the steps of the former's receding.

1. For on Constantines leaving Rome, and making Constantinople the seat of
his Empire thereby (Sede vacant) the. Bishop of Rome entered on the possession
of the City of Rome; (the Romanists add): by donation from Constantine, with
addition of other large Territories, held in Fee, and in Demeasn for ever. This
I pass; it not being my work at present to examine it. In this state things
stood about 300 years, Romes Government being in that time by its Bishops, yet
subjected to the Emperor, by which they were kept within their bounds, for Rome
being but one of the 5 Patriarchs, although chief among them, was not yet above
them.

2. So continued it until the Empire determined in Augustulus, an. 475. after
which An. 607. Boniface. 3. obtained from Phocas Emperor of the East, that not
the Patriarch of Constantinople (who contended for being Chief) but the Bishop
of Rome should be universal Bishop. This Gregory. 1. Bishop of Rome had before
condemned in John Patriarch of Constantinople, and by his but attempting it,
concluded him, or any so doing, to be Antichrist or his forerunner, and that
Antichrist himself was not far off. And now was the Title of Pope appropriated
to the Bishop of Rome, which was before communicated to other Patriarchs, and
Bishops also indifferently.

And hitherto reached Romes Episcopal and Patriarchal Government, of which it
was said that it should continue a short space, Rev. 7.10. which was about 300
years, that being but short compared with what followed from Boniface 3. when
the Title began to swell to its greatness, they being thenceforth Universal
Bishops, and Popes above all.

3. But after Boniface 3. Pope Leo. 3. an, 800. made a farther Essay of his
power, in deposing the Lawful King of France, and advancing Pipin his Subject
to be King, and after created Charlemaine Emperor; both as Champions for the
Church, to Expel the Barbarians. who had invaded Italy, out of whose hands
Rome was recovered, and restored to the Pope, with addition of other large
Territories.

4. But all this while, the Popes power, was in some things restrained by those
Emperors of their own making, who reserved to themselves the choosing and
placeing of Bishops, and the approbation even of the very Popes also.

In this, Gregory 7th. contended with Henry the 4th. Emperor, whom he
Excommunicated and Deposed, stirring up against him his subject Rodulphus,
naming him Emperor, and giving the Crown, with PETRA DEDIT PETRO, PETRUS
DIADEMA RODULPHO.

Of the troubles, blood, and destruction to Germany in that, I speak not, only
that to this Gregory 7. is by Popish writers that glory given, that he was
Imperii Pontificii fundator; others his Predecessors attempted the reaching at
the temporal power, but was not till now attained.

And after, the Emperor Henry 5th. coming to Rome to be Crowned by Pope
Paschalis 2d. the Pope would not consent to his Coronation, he first did give
over all Right of Election of Popes, and of Investitures of Bishops by Staff
and Ring; In which although that Pope failed then of his end, yet was that
after attained.

5. And although, In all this the Pope had gained the point of temporal
sovereignty, and the gaining also out of temporal hands into the Popes power,
the Investitures of Bishops, by which he was in that kind absolute, yet could
not that satisfy, while the Pope was over-topped by a General Council, By
which he had been often threatened, awed and sometimes deposed.

The removing this therefore, was to be next attempted, and was at length also
by Pope Leo 1Oath. compassed, so far as the Popes Council at Lateran could do
toward it; of which Bellarmine thus Triumphantly; The last Lateran Council
under Leo 10. expressly and professedly teaches that the Pope is above all
Councils, and reproves a contrary decree in the Council of Basil, ( citeing
the words of the Council, to which he adds) To this nothing can be answered,
unless it be that this was no General Council, or that it was not received by
the Church, or that this was not their decree de fide. Belarm. de council. l. 2
c. 17.

6. But one thing yet remained (showing, as the Popes power, so his being in
that, very Antichrist) which is the confirming those Romish erroneus positions
which had been long creeeping into the Church, as Tares mixed with the Wheat:
and had long passed loose, and undetermined, being only disputable,
controverted, and often opposed.

These were after, in the Councils of Constance, Lateran, and of Trent,
concluded and decreed for Doctrines, and Articles of Faith; and an Additional
Creed of 12 Articles of them composed, which were by Pius 4th. his Bull imposed
to be subscribed or sworn unto.

In all see,

1. The Removal of Romes 6th. Head or Government, that of Emperors.

2. See also the introduceing and growing up of the 7th. from its infancy to
its full growth; The Church of Rome being before, but as others, a Branch only
of the Catholic Church, now it self passing for The Catholic Church, and she
the root out of which all other Churches derive and spring, others on this
depending, and by that influenced: so does that Church now boast of her self,
of which the Apostle St. Paul in his Epistle to that Church had forwarned them,
( Romans 11.18, 19, 20.) Boast not against the Branches, but if thou boast thou
bear not the root, but the root thee; Thou will say, the branches were
broken off, that I might be graffed in; well, because of Unbelief they were
broken off, and thou stand by Faith, be not high-minded but fear, For if God
spared not the natural branches, take heed that he also spare not thee.

In which is the Apostles prophecy concerning that Church.

But before this be shut up, one doubt is to be removed, of the Empire being
not yet taken out of the way, which we now see in Being.

Res. 1. Of that Empire which was in the Apostles days, is that by the Apostle
intended, that it should be first taken out of the way, the standing of that
being an hinderance to the Succeeding Government. But that Empire was long
since extinguished.

2. The present Empire is of another kind, being of the Popes own erection, for
restoring, promoting and preserving his greatness; His hand being in that
thoughout.

So Bellarmine writing of the Translation of the Roman Empire in 3 books, he
makes the sum of his first book, The Roman Empire being by authority of the
Pope, translated from the Graecians to the French. And the sum of his 2d.
book, The Roman Empire passing from the family of Charles the Great, and the
French, unto the family of Otho, and the Saxons, by Authority of the Bishop of
Rome. The Title also of his 3d. book is, The 7 Electors of the Empire to have
been instituted by Pope Gregory 5th. See the Popes hand in all; he also even
now approving and Crowning the Emperor elected.

And therein we find that fulfilled which was prophesied of this Second Beast
(the Papacy) Its setting up an Image of the former beast which had a wound by a
Sword, that it should live, speak and be worshipped (Rev. 13. 12, 14, 15.) For
that first beast (the Emperor) having in Augustulus, the last Emperor of that
race, received that i's deadly wound; It, was by the 2d. beast that succeeded
(the Pope) again restored, and an Image of the former, made by him an Empire,
set up; to which he gave life, so as to speak, and be worshipped, that is,
honored and followed.

But 3dly. observe, that this is but an Image: so is the now Roman Emperor,
compared with what was.

The now Roman Emperor is but an Image of the Ancient Empire, (says Salmeron)
and the Majesty of the People of Rome, by which the World was of Old Governed,
is now taken away from the Earth, and the Emperor is now but an empty Title,
and is but a shadow only; So Eberhardus in Aventinus Avent. Annal l. 7.
The Emperor of Rome is now but a bare Title without Substance. Ibid l. 5.
Neither indeed is that his Title, he is not now Styled Emperor of Rome, but
What is, Is only of Germany; Rome being left for the Pope.

I shall, before I conclude this, add a little touching the greatness of this
7th. Head, or Government of Rome, the Papacy, And that it falls not short of
the Greatness of the former Emperors of Rome, according to the Estimate made
of both by the Romanists.

For whereas Justus Lipsius his book of the greatness of the Roman Empire,
meaning that of old, is styled Admiranda: Thomas Stapleton, (professor at
Lovaine) Tho. Stapleton: t. 2.
intitles his book of the Papal greatness, Vere Admiranda; showing that for
extent, strength and power over Princes, the greatness of the Papal Empire, is
far surpassing; for no marvail (says he) if the Roman Emperor armed with 30 or
40 Legions, had many Kings at Command; but that the Pope a person unarmed
should give Laws to the World, and even to Kings, advancing and deposing them
at pleasure, this is indeed marvailous. He instanceth in Leo 3d. his giving the
Empire to Charles the Great.

Leo 1. called the Great, Bishop of Rome, speaks thus of the greatness of Rome
then, compared with what was before under the Caesar's, and its former
Governments.

Thou art (says he of Rome) a Royal and Priestly City; By the seat of St.
Peter and Paul in thee, thou art become the head of the world; thy Rule is more
by Religion than by Earthly Dominion. For although thou did formerly Extend
thine Empire by many Victories by Sea, and Land, yet is that less which was by
warlike prowess subdued, than what is by Christian peace subjected to thee.
(Leo. Sermon. 1. in natali Apostolorum Petri and Pauli:)

And Prosper (1 de ingratis)
Seeds Roma Petri, quae pastoralis honoris,
Facta caput mundo, quicquid non possidet armis,
Religione tenet --
In all:

1. We see the Papacy, Romes Pontifical head raised above it self, and from a
7th. raised even to an 8th. head.

2. See the 7th. head immediately succeeding the next preceding (the Emperor)
to be the Pope.

3. That this 7th. head so next succeeding, to be that Man of Sin, that Wicked
(So says the Text, v. 8.) that he who lets or hinders being taken out of
the way, then shall that wicked be revealed (2 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8.).

On which thus St. Chrysostom: when the Empire of Rome is dissolved or removed,
Antichrist shall invade that vacant place, and snatch at the Empire both of God
and Man (Chrysostom in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Hom. 4.)

4. If the Emperor be removed, and that long since, and that man of sin was
next following; Therefore must Antichrist be already come, and that long since,
and is now in the World.

5. Therefore who would not conclude the Pope next succeeding the Emperor to be
that man of sin, and Antichrist?

Which will appear yet further in the next circumstance.

IV.
Antichrists actings in the world when appearing, by which he might be known
among and above others: of that we read here (in v. 4.9.) He opposing and
exalting himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped. So that
he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, whose
coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying
wonders.

These with others mentioned are signs given for Antichrists discovery; when in
the world, which are to be considered particularly.

1. Antichrist sitting in the Temple of God.

2. Exalting himself above all called God.

3. Showing himself that he is God.

4. Concerning after the working of Satan.

5. Showing himself to be Antichrist, an opposer.

6. And in all to be that man of sin, that wicked, that son of perdition. Some
may think the Pope not concerned in these; but what if he be? what if these
taken together are all to be found in him; and in him alone, and in none other?
then surely will appear, This man of sin, this Antichrist who he is.

I. As to Antichrist sitting in the Temple of God: of that I have spoken; his
sitting there speaks him as chief there, which being by the Pope challenged,
and asserted by his, as his propriety, of that needs no more to be spoken, the
Popes so acting; and he alone, and no other in the world beside him.

II. As to his exalting himself above all called God.

And who are they that are called Gods? This is in Scripture said of Princes
and Magistrates, I have said that ye are Gods, but ye shall dye like men (
Psalm. 82.6, 7.) they are but called Gods, not so indeed, for they die like men,
and that I have said ye are Gods, shows their Title to that their high name of
Gods, that it is, from God, who says it so of them, that is, from his word; he
calls them Gods to whom the word of God came ( John 10. 34, 35, 36.) that is,
by God commissioned and ordained ( Romans 13.12.) standing in his place, and
so, to be subjected to, according to their degrees in Government, whether to
the King as supreme, or unto Governors under him (1 Pet. 2.13, 14) and from
this subjection are none exempted; let every soul be subject etc. The Apostles
were not exempted, nor is the Pope: This God Commands; yet see in this, The
Pope exalting himself above all called Gods, even Emperors as vassals to him,
causing them to hold his Stirrup, and Kiss his feet; Celestine 3. crowned the
Emperor, Hen: 3. with his toe; Popes also setting their feet on the necks of
Emperors, as did Pope Adrian 4. and Alexander. 3. Also disposiing crowns, and
deposing, and advancing at pleasure; which by Aventinus is said of the Popes
from Gregory 7th. to his time Avent. annal. Boyor l. 5. p. 447.
Hildebrand who is Gregory 7th, first founded the Papal Empire, which his
successors for 450 years carried on, notwithstanding the oppositions of the
world, and Emperors resisting, so as high and low were brought under and
subjected to their yoke; According to their will they cast down from heaven to
hell, and exalt from hell to Heaven again.

And what in this they practice they avow as due and proper to them, and to
them alone; of which therefore I need say no more. In the Pope therefore, and
in him alone, and in none other is this sign of Antichrist found, that he
exalts himself above all called Gods.

III. It follows, His sitting in the Temple of God, showing himself that he
is God: Tu es alter Deus in terra, Thou art another God upon earth. was the
speech of Christophorus Marcellus in the very Council of Lateran to Pope Julius
2. the Pope himself being present, (Council. Lateran. Sess. 4.)

And in the Gloss on the Canon Law he is called our Lord God the Pope Extra.
Joh. 22. deverb. signif. cap. cum ^^ter.
And whereas the word God, (so said of the Pope) was by some thought too much,
and in some Editions omitted, we find the censure of the Gloss by Pope Pius 5;
and the Gloss of the Canon Law revised by Cardinals and learned men deputed for
it by Pope Gregory 13. in both, the word God before omitted, to have been
restored and put in again, and that by the Popes allowance: now it being what
was, our Lord God the Pope.

Nor can it be otherwise intended, but that the Pope should be so esteemed,
while they stick not to ascribe to him Attributes proper to God, as Omnipotence
and Infiniteness. The Pope (say they) may do whatsoever God does; nor can it be
known what the Pope can do, for the power of the Pope is infinite, and what is
infinite is not known; Antonin. p. 3. t. cap. 22.5.. 6.
and what the Pope does is reputed as done of God, for what the Pope does, he
does as God, not as man. Decius in cap. Can. de constit. n 16.
Which the Popes Omnipotence is by them averred by Scripture; all Power in
Heaven and Earth is given me; which was said by Christ of himself. ( Mat.
28.8.) and that is said of the Pope also; that Power of Christ being challenged
by the Pope his Vicar; nor that as to Heaven, and earth only, but (beside their
Purgatory) even to Hell also; so as his power seems to extend so far as to
deliver from Hell (whence is no redemption) and to forbid and command, when
they please, and whom they think fit to be kept from thence, Bulla Cle. 6.
Nolumus -- We declare it our pleasure, that the Punishment of Hell be not
inflicted on such as are signed by the cross (those employed by the Pope on his
business.)

And as Omnipotence and Infiniteness, Gods attributes, are attributed to the
Pope; so is Adoration also, which God challenges as proper to him self only.
I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give to another,
neither my praise to graven Images: God speaking of his Worship ( Is. 42.8.) He
only is to be served, or worshipped (Math. 4.10.) but to the Pope are Religious
adorations given in a most solemn manner, while the new elected Pope is placed
on an Altar: and there seated in his Chair, with his Crown, and in his
Pontificalibus, adored by all present Cardinals, Ambassadors of Princes, and
all of all degrees descending from their places, and with prostrations
worshipping him Lib. cerem 1.. 1. fol. 16.
And is not this a sitting in the Temple of God, as God, showing himself that
he is God?

IV Further, a mark and sign of that wicked one is, that his coming and Acting,
is after the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders; and
with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that Perish, because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved; for this cause
God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a Lie. 2 Thessalonians.
2.9, 10, 11.

This (say some) shows Antichrist to be a Conjurer and Compactor with the
devil, and such (says they) was Simon Magus, and he Antichrist. But such we
knew were Popes also, as (to mention no more) Sylvester. 2. Benedictor 9th.
Gregory. 7. which I pass at present.

Neither insist I on those wonders by these acted, whether seeming real by
Satan's working with them or for them; or that they be lying wonders, whether
feigned, or imposed as true; or lying, serving for confirming lies and untrue
doctrines of men; nor speak I of those ridiculous fables, with which their
Legends of Saints are stuffed, such as may be wondered how learned and prudent
men should give credit to them (if they do.) And if they do; it must be surely
from Gods giving them over, Judicially to believe a lie; they not receiving the
love of the truth (so is the Text:) The seat of the beast on which the Angel
poured out his vial, and his Kingdom is full of darkness ( Rev. 16.10.)

But I look on this here rather as a sign, and mark of Antichrist by which he
should act, and be known in the World, his Antichristian Church boasting of
wonders, making miracles a sign of the true Church, and upbraiding us with our
want (they say) of Miracles.

To which we say. 1, That for the first introducing of truth, miracles might be
necessary, but that truth being once received, such miracles were after
unnecessary; such were in the first planting of the Gospel, done by Christ and
his Apostles, which we challenge as ours. But that truth then delivered to the
saints being received and believed, what now need we more, or any renewed
miracles? For, miracles and wonders, as tongues, etc. are for unbelievers, not
for them that believe, (1. Cor. 14.22. and it shows a novelty in those Popish
Doctrines, that need fresh confirmations, and shows them unbelievers that seek
such. But in this is a proper mark of that Antichristian Church, that and no
other sort of professors or People in the world, but Rome only and the Pope,
adhereing so to miracles.

V. But to proceed, Another mark of this man of Sin, by which he is known, is,
that he opposes himself; that is, to Christ; therefore called Antichrist.

Obj. But how, can that be said of the Pope; he being for Christ, and his
Vicar: for him, and not against him?

Resp: But the word Antichrist may signify both pro and con, for and against;
and both here applicable.

1. For Christ; (...) sometimes signifies for, or in the place and room of
another; so Archelaus reigned (...) in the room of his father Herod ( Mat.
2.22.) So pretends the Pope to be for Christ, in his place and stead, his Vicar
on earth.

This is agreeable to what we read of Antichrist, what kind of adversary he is:
not such as is the Turk, an open and declared enemy to Christ and Christians;
but such an one as sits in the Temple of God; professing to be for Christ, yet
to him an underhand enemy; so says Anselm: they seem or pretend themselves
servants of Christ, and of his Family, when in truth they are the Ministers of
Antichrist ( in 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. they therefore who contend earnestly for the
Turks being Antichrist, must be greatly mistaken.

2. And yet while this Antichrist pretends himself Thus for Christ, and for
being his Vicar, see him even then opposing, he that opposes, is his
description 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. under the name of Christ acting for Antichrist, as
was said of Gregory, 7. who was pointed at as Antichrist. As has been showed
out of Aventinus.

And to show the Pope to be this Antichrist opposing Christ and contrary to
him, see him contradicting and countermanding Christ's Will and Commands: I
instance only at present in those Christ's two ordinances, his Word and
Sacraments.

1. His word. We are by Christ our Lord commanded to search the Scriptures, for
in them we have eternal Life ( John 5.39.) unto which ye do well that ye take
heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place; says S. Peter. (2. Pet. 1.19)
and we find Timothy commended by St. Paul, that from a child he had known the
holy Scriptures, which are able to make wise to salvation, they being
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction, in
righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works (2. Tim. 3.15, 16, 17.)

Hear now the Pope in this; search the Scripture (says Christ) do not search
them, says the Pope; It is well done that you do it, says St. Pet. It is not
well done says the Pope. They are profitable, says St. Paul, they are
dangerous says the Pope. They are a light shining in a dark place, says St.
Pet. they are dark says the Pope. St. Paul commends Timothy for being from a
child acquainted with the Scriptures, they are not for Children, says the
Pope, And much more of that kind; see him in this Antichrist opposing Christ
his Word and Commands, contradicting and countermanding, And whom in this we
should obey, God or man, Judge ye.Acts 4.19.

2. As to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, our Lord gave the bread broken, a
sign of his body broken, and after that the cup; the wine poured out being his
blood in his death shed for us, commanding so to do till his coming again: and
as to the Cup particularly (foreseeing what would be after by opposers to the
contrary) our Lord added in that ministration, Drink ye all of this (Math.
26.27.) it being said, that accordingly, they did all drink of it, (Mark
14.23.) which, all to drink; and all drinking, is in the wine expressed; and
employed only in the bread. Which Institution and command of Christ our Lord in
that, being his will and testament left to his Church, is to be as his last
will, observed to the last, and ought not to be changed in the least, no,
although it had been but man's Testament only (Gal. 3.5.) yet see Christ in
that by Antichrist opposed, Take the Bread, and also the Cup (says Christ) not
so says the Pope, the Cup may be spared; for Christ's blood is in his Body by
concomitancy; and taking his Body, ye have by consequence his Blood: But here
it is understood that his Body is given broken, and his Blood shed, both
setting forth the Lords death, and not otherwise; which countermand to Christ's
command in that, is with a non obstante; licet --. Although that Christ and the
primitive Church did administer the Sacrament in both Kinds; notwithstanding,
is this custom of but one Kind to be held for a law unreproveable. (so is it
ordered in the Council of Constance. Sess. 13.) and the Council of Trent after;
This Synod being taught by the Holy Ghost; and the custom and Judgment of his
Church does declare and teach that the Laiety and Clergy not celebrating, are
not obliged to take the Sacrament of the Eucharist under both Kinds,
notwithstanding that Christ did institute this Sacrament under both Kinds, and
so gave it to his Apostles (Council. Trident. sess. 21. c. 1.)

And is not the Pope in this an Antichrist? to Christ an opposer? he that
opposes? Text v. 4.

VI. Rightly therefore is this that man of Sin, that wicked here intended,
which is his next mark here: and how agreeing to the Pope, notwithstanding his
Holiness, remains now to be showed.

1. And that the Pope is that Man of Sin, and wicked exceedingly, even above
others, appears in his mouth of Blasphemy; though looking like a Lamb, or
like Christ the Lamb, yet speaking as a Dragon, Rev. 13.11. or as that Dragon
the Devil; what else is that his showing himself as God, exalting himself above
all called God, etc. before mentioned? what other is his Antichristian
Commanding and opposing contrary to Christ's will and Commands?

2. And as speaking like a Dragon, so acting also like him in all cruelty,
drunk with the blood of Saints and Martyrs of Jesus; particularly of the
Waldenses, Albigenses, and others, long before Luthers opposing Popish Errors,
and with their lives witnessing for the truth against Popery. There are extant
accounts of above one hundred thousand of them (that number is by some doubled)
suffering by the Tyranny and cruelty of Pope Innocent. 3.

Vergerius also, well acquainted with the method and actings of the
Inquisition, speaks of one hundred and fifty thousand in less than 30 years so
suffering.

And from the first rising of the Jesuits, to the year 1580, about 30 years,
are about fourscore and ten thousand Protestants said to have been destroyed.

In France alone, in the Massacre of Paris and elsewhere, an. 1532. The French
Kings Letters to the Pope, glories of 70 thousand (he said) Heretics slain in
few days; but to the lasting shame of Popish cruelty and persidy to Generations.

And can the bloody butcheries of poor Protestants by the cruel Irish in
Ireland be in this forgotten, when about one hundred thousand perished anno
1641? yet to that Impudence is that now risen, as to disavow any such Rebellion
of the Irish, or such their murders of the innocent Protestants in Ireland; but
daring to averr on the contrary, that they themselves were the sufferers, and
that by the English and Protestants: Of which, if there shall be opportunity
offered by an answer to this subject, which is expected, this shall be then
verified to the World.

And if the Invasion, anno. 1588. or the horrid Gunpowder-Treason, Nov. 5.
1605. had taken effect, more of their cruelty would have appeared.

Such is that Antichristian cruelty; and that yet worse, in its being grounded
on their very Doctrine, Religion, and Faith; they being taught, that they ought
so to do: thereby thinking that they do God service (John 16.2.) and that to
themselves also, in so acting Meritoriously.

Which Bloodthirsty cruelty against the Worshippers of Christ, sticks as a
distinguishing mark of this Romish and Babylonian Antichrist, in being drunk
with the blood of the Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus. Which is peculiar to those
alone, not to be found in any other party of the Christian World beside. In
that is this a man of sin above others, and wicked exceedingly.

3. Add that the being a man of sin, is as it were fixed to the very Papacy it
self, so as even its very Office, incapacitates to Goodness. They cannot do
good if they would, in reforming what they are convinced is evil.

Adrian 6. Convinced of the Corruptions objected by the Germans to the Court of
Rome, and resolving to reform, at least in part, and in some; and declaring
himself for it, was by Franciscus Soderinus, Cardinal of Preneste, called
Cardinal of Volaterra, diverted from attempting any thing in that kind, but
directed rather to the ways of his Predecessors, with Fire and Sword to
prosecute those, who objected those Errors to the Court. His Oration to the
Pope to that purpose is extant.

On which, Pope Adrian discoursing after, privately, with William Excourt, whom
he after created Cardinal; and Theodorick Hesius, his familiar and trusty
Friend, said, That the condition of Popes was miserable, seeing it was plain
that they could not do good, though they desired and endeavored to do it.
Piatro. Suav. Polon Histo. Tr. p. 24.


Which agrees with what Onuphrius writes of Pope Marcellus 2. who on something
a like debate with his Cardinals, and they dissenting from what the Pope
proposed for good, he striking the Table with his hand, said, I see not how
those can be saved, who are in this high place in which I am.

Platina also writes of Pope Celestinus 5. that he deposed himself, and gave up
the Papacy, Vt salvus esse possit, that he might be saved; which was said to
have been cunningly suggested to him, as by a voice from Heaven by the Artifice
of Benedictus Cajetanus, who thereby made way for succeeding him as Pope, by
the name of Bonifacius 8. Plat. in Vit. Celest. 5. and Bonifac. 8. Also Pius V.
Cum essem Religiosus sperabam been de salute animae meae; Cardinalis factus
extimui; nunc Pontifex creatus pene despero. Council. e Legist. com. in Number.
11.11


4. And lastly, As to Holiness, which is the Popes Title, let no man think of
finding Holiness among them; For if they prove but indifferent good, or not so
evil as other mortals use to be, they are accounted most holy, says Papirius
Massonus (De Episc. Urbis l. 6. in Julio 3.)

To which add what Sir Edwin Sands observes of a Proverb in Italy, (and
proverbs founded on observation, have a strange tendency to truth) That of the
Italians, the Romans are the worst Christians; of the Romans the worst are made
Priests, of the Priests the worst chosen Cardinals, and of Cardinals the worst
commonly elected Popes. (Spec. Europae.

In which we see him, as Antichrist, so a man of sin also.

The sum of all is,

I. That what that great City Babylon of the Chaldeans was, as to oppression
and cruelty, to Gods people of old ( Jer. 51.34, 35.) That should be to the
Christian Church, another great City called also in a Mystery Babylon the
mother of the Abominations of the Earth, drunk with the Blood of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus. (Rev. 17.5, 6.)

II. That this great City Babylon, described a woman sitting on 7 mountains,
and reigning over the Kings of the Earth (Rev. 17.9, 18.) is acknowledged to be
Rome. They therefore who send us to Jerusalem, or Constantinople for the place,
put us out of the way in that enquiry.

III. That in Rome, should sit one, by whom (after the Faith there settled) the
inhabitants of the earth should be seduced, and drawn into damnable Heresies:
and that he the author of those miseries and mischief^ to the Church, should
be a man of sin commonly called Antichrist. This the Romanists themselves
acknowledge.

IV. That in so doing, this Antichrist should sit in the Temple of God, as
being of the Church, and over the Church in chief, pretending for Christ, he
the while acting against Christ. A seeming friend, but secret enemy; a secret,
not an open, declared and professed enemy to Christ and his followers.
Therefore cannot this be the Turk, or any such.

V. That this Antichrist, sitting in the Temple of God, should be in the
capacity of a seventh head of the Government of Rome, next succeeding the sixth
head or Government there, ( that of Caesar's) This brings it home to the Papacy,
That and none other being the 7 th. and that also long since on the Emperors
removal settled. Vain therefore are allegations for any others being this
Antichrist, not being of Rome, nor there so qualified.

VI. That the Pope sits in the Temple of God, as God, showing himself there
as God, and exalted above all that is called God, and worshipped.

VII. Here is to be added what is (in Rev. 17.3, 4.) said of that woman, that
great City, and Babylon: That she did sit on a scarlet colored Beast: and that
she (the woman) was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with Gold.
In which she is described as to her very Habit; the proper attire both of Popes
and Cardinals.

VIII. Nor is to be omitted; what is ( Rev. 17.5.) said in a way of further
description of that woman; that upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery,
Babylon the great, the mother of harlots, and Abominations of the Earth.
Concerning which is observed, that as the High Priest under the Law, had in the
Front his Miter engraven, HOLINESS TO THE LORD ( Exodus 29.36, 37.) So the
summus Pontifex, the Pope, had also in his Tiara, that name, Mystery. Which
having been observed and objected by King James of blessed memory, in that his
Excellent Work on the Revelation, Lessius, his Antagonist, denies it not, but
labors to put it off slidingly: nor could it be denied, there being many
Eyewitnesses to aver it Down. de Antichr. l. 1. c. 7. which his name of
mystery, well agrees with that mystery of iniquity, by which his evil and
secret workings are described, (2 Thessalonians. 2.7.) one (not unlikely) referring to
the other. But from God it is (surely) providentially, that that word mystery
should so be seen in the whores forehead, showing who she is; notwithstanding
that they who contrived it, might have had other ends in it; as that the Popes
Triple Crown, pointed to that mystery of his Triple power and dominion in
Heaven, and in Earth, and in Purgatory.

So as in the Papacy concur all these Scripture-marks of Antichrist, And
although some may be applicable otherwise, yet are the principal proper to the
Pope alone; and taken altogether, not meeting in any other but in the Pope
only. Therefore on the whole, who would not conclude the Popes being
Antichrist; the man of sin; and son of Perdition.

II. By which last, His being said to be a Son of perdition, I am brought from
Antichrists Rise, to the last consideration here concerning him, Antichrists
down fall, which follows on the other necessarily; for if he be a man of sin,
he must be a son of perdition.

Of this his fall it is here said, that the Lord shall consume him with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy him with the brightness of his comeing
(v. 8.) that they all might be damned who believe not the truth. (v. 12.) where
is destruction 1. To him. 2. and to his
1. To himself 1. His being consumed 2. Destroyed



1. That he consumed by the breath of the Lords mouth; The breath of the Lords
mouth is the preaching of the Gospel which is the word of God so Generally
interpreted; And to be consumed implies a lingering wearing away, and by degrees
wasting, and decaying; not a violent and sudden destruction, such as was
Simon-Magus his downfall, said to have been on St. Peter's breath or prayers
against him.

Of this Consumption of the Papal power and greatness by the preaching of the
word and Gospel in the world, we have apparent evidence. I shall give it as by
Bellarmine expressed, he by that waining in the Papacy, arguing, against the
Popes being Antichrist, Antichrists greatness and prevailings in the World,
being much spoken of, whereas his fall and declining state, is also described
as si his greatness. Bellarmines words are these:

Since that time when ye (Protestants) say the Pope began to be Antichrist, the
Papal Empire was so far from increasing, that thenceforth it every day more and
more declined, And (as you would have it) Antichrist reigning, the Roman See
has by little and little decayed, it having lost almost all Africa, a great
part of Asia: all Greece and even in our very days a great part of Germany,
Sweden, Gothland, Norwey, and all Denmark, A good part of England, France,
Helvetia, Poland, Bohemia, and part of Hungary are fallen away. (Bellarm: de
Rom: Pontif. l. 3. c. 21.) This way by Bellarmine written an. 1577, as appears
in the Preface to that work, so as that decay in the Papal Empire was then
within the space of 60 years, accounting from the year 1517, the time of
Luthers Preaching (of which he speaks) declaring the Pope to be Antichrist:
What then may be the consumption and decay there at this time, being 150 years
since?

2. But that Consumption of this son of Perdition, shall end also in
destruction, utter and irrecoverable: whom the Lord shall destroy with the
brightness of his coming.

See this Rev. 17, where the ten horns of that scarlet colored beast, on which
that woman Rome sits, are expounded, ten Kings which had not then received
their Kingdom, but were to receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast (v.
12.) These were states of the Western Empire, which on the decay of the Empire
did setup for themselves, all with one mind giving their power and strength
unto the beast, and making war with the Lamb, who shall overcome them (v. 14)
But those ten horns shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked, and
shall eat her flesh and burn her with Fire (v. 16.) For God has put in their
hearts to fulfill his Will, and to agree and give their Kingdom unto the Beast,
till the word of God should be fulfilled (v. 17.)

Which fall of Antichrist in several degrees is declared by several Angels in
that employed.

1. An Angel preaching the everlasting Gospel ( Rev. 14.6.) the beginning of
Antichrists fall, and gradual consumption.

2. Another Angel declaring the downfall of that Antichristian state. ( Rev.
14.8.)

3. An Angel forbidding the worshipping the beast or his image, and receiving
his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, denouncing judgments on such ( Rev.
14.9, 10, 11.)

4. An Angel calling out of Babylon, and to separate from her, not to partake
of her sins and plagues, ( Rev. 18.4, 6.)

5. And another Angel giving a sign of irrecoverable destruction, by casting as
it were a millstone into the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great
City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all, ( Rev. 18.21.)

Thus of Babylon, Rome, and Antichrist's fall, as to it self considered.

II. See that also as to their Adherents, in which our charitable thoughts of
them have been by wrong measures mistaken to some disadvantage: that which we
say in that, is:

1. That there was a time when Antichristianism was a mystery, not understood,
Antichrist not being yet so declared as after.

2. And that after Antichrist was pointed at in the Church of Rome, yet while
erroneous doctrines there were but disputable, not imposed, as after in the
Council of Trent, to be de fide, with an Anathema to such as thought of them
otherwise, and to such as did not understand the reach and depth of those
evils; and where the light of the Gospel is shut out, as in some places, and
the knowledge of that denied, and persecuted. For these, is our charity
grounded, to say well of them, as of those of Thyatira, who had not known the
depths of Satan, as they speak ( Rev 2.24.) and those of Pergamus, dwelling
even where Satan's seat is; yet (says our Lord) thou have held fast my name,
and have not denied my Faith, even in those days wherein Antipas my faithful
Martyr was slain among them where Satan dwells (v. 12.) To be among
Heretics, and not to believe Heretics, or not being led by them, is St.
Augustine's distinction in that case; such ignorance may excuse.

But as to ignorance affected, having Light, and means of knowledge, and when
called on to come out of Babylon, its ruin being declared, and communion there
declared perilous; To such we say, that their continuing so in that state, is
hazardous and full of danger: Nor can such rely on ignorance, it not in that
case excusing. For in this is condemnation, where light is come; and men love
darkness rather than light ( John 3.19.) and where the leaders of the People
cause to err, they that are led of them are destroyed ( Is. 9.16.) and the
blind by them so led; both fall into the Ditch. ( Math. 15.14.)

4. But as to those who are knowing and who defend and plead for Baal,
seducing, and being seduced, and so continuing, the state of such is declared
damnable; that they all may be damned, says the Text who believe not the truth
but have pleasure in unrighteousness (v. 12.) and to such belongs that evil by
the Angel declared, if any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his
Mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the
wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his
indignation, and he shall be tormented etc. Rev. 14.9, 11. let such consider
their State seriously and seasonably.

And now to conclude with a word to our selves, that as we are to bless God for
calling us out of that Sat of evil, so to be confirmed in the truth, and not
to fall back, whatever the Temptation be, good, or evil, saving life, or
loosing it; and that we desire the Lords grace in that for help and support.

All which I shall shut up in the words of the Apostle, next after my Text (v.
13, 14, 15, 16, 17.) We are bound to give thanks always to God for you,
brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you
to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth
whereunto he has called you by our Gospel to the obtaining of the glory of our
Lord Jesus Christ: Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions
which ye have been taught, whether by word or by our Epistle: Now our Lord
Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, who has loved us, and given us
everlasting consolation, and good hope through Grace, comfort your hearts, and
stablish you in every good word and work: Amen.

FINIS.
These Books are lately Printed for, and published by Nathaniel Ponder at the
Peacock in the Poultry.
(...), Or the Causes, Ways and means of understanding the mind of God; as
revealed in his Word, with assurance therein. And a declaration of the
perspicuity of the Scriptures, with the External means of the Interpretation
thereof: by Dr. John Owen D. D.

The Church of Rome no safe Guide, or Reasons to prove that no Rational man who
takes due Care of his own Eternal Salvation, can give himself up unto the
Conduct of the Church in matters of Religion.

(...); Or a Declaration of the Glorious Mystery of the person of Christ, God
and Man; With the Infinite Wisdom, Love and Power of God in his Contrivance and
Constitution on thereof; as also of the Grounds and Reasons of his Incarnation,
the Nature of his Ministry in heaven, the present state of the Church above
thereon and the Use of his person in Religion: with an account and vindication
of the Honor, Worship, Faith, Love and Obedience due unto him, in and from the
Church.


