OF THE Rule of Faith A SERMON, At the Visitation of the Right Reverend Father
in God, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of Lincoln, holden at Bedford August 5. 1674.

By William Iackson D. D.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes for Henry Dickinson in Cambridge, And are to
be sold by R. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St Paul's Churchyard in London.
1675.

St Jude verse 3.
Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common Salvation,
it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that ye should
earnestly contend for the Faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints.
OF how fatal consequence to the Peace of the Church, and the Purity of our
Christian Faith the Licentious Preaching of Dissenters has been, we have had a
late, and a woeful experience; (Warning enough surely not to trust them again:)
Having seen, not only the Government, and Discipline of the Church broken
down, and all the Articles of our Creed battered by whole Legions of Heresies;
But also the first Article, the very foundation of all Religion taken away too;
That it has been by wise men of late thought a necessary work to prove that
there is a God; and to resume the Primitive Employment of writing Apologies,
and defenses for the Truth, and Excellency of Christian Religion, as if we had
been reformed into the Heathenism of our Forefathers.

And, though by the mercy of God, and the presence of his Anointed, we have for
some years had the Government of the Church restored, and the Solemn Worship of
God returned to our Public Assemblies, yet we do not see, that the minds of
the People generally, are resetled upon that firm basis of the Ancient,
Catholic and Holy Faith, from which they were once so tumultuously removed:
Those contrary winds of Doctrine, that raised that heavy storm, are not yet
laid; and so long as men take so much liberty of Indulgence, God knows when
they will: But till then, it can never be unnecessary, or improper, especially
in such an Assembly as this, to make use of this verse of St Jude with the
variation of one word only, Beloved, when I gave all diligence to preach unto
you of the common Salvation, it was needful for me to preach unto you, and
exhort you, that you should earnestly contend for the faith which was once
delivered unto the Saints.

The Text is plain enough to the meanest capacity, only some, that think they
have a peculiar interest in the word Saints, may be mistaken; for by that word
is meant in plain English, Christians, those that are baptized into the faith
of Christ; for so the word (...), spoken of persons in this life generally
signifies in the new Testament, and in the Text, being used in the plural
number, seems to denote the Collective body of them, the Church. And then faith
being taken Objective, for the matters or things to be believed, The faith once
delivered to the Saints is those Doctrines, which it pleased God in one set
time to reveal, and to deposite as a standing Rule of Faith in the Church for
ever.

There are in the words three things generally observable.

I. The nature and immutability of the Rule of Faith; the Faith once delivered
unto the Saints.

II. The way and means to preserve this, as it was first delivered; that ye
should earnestly contend.

III. The Importance and necessity of so doing; Beloved, when I give all
diligence to write unto you of the common Salvation, it was needful for me to
write unto you, and exhort you --

1. For the Rule of Faith. This must needs be the word of God, in what manner
soever revealed, by what means soever made known to us to be such; as might
easily be proved to any that do believe there is a God. And therefore it is,

1. A word, that is some Doctrine or Divine truths, that we are to believe. For
it is an Sure Foot. Disc. 1. Para. (...)7.
Intellectual Rule, or a Rule to the understanding, which is to suspend or
give assent to the Doctrines of Religion, so far as they disagree, or accord
with this Rule. Now, seeing there is no belief, but of something that is
affirmed or denied; there can be no Rule of this, but only some Doctrines, or
propositions presupposed as true, and taken for granted before hand. And this
is the way of all Arts and Sciences, which contain such diversity of objects
for our belief, and understanding; Every one of them has some fundamental
Maxims or Propositions, upon which the whole body is afterward raised, and in
Contradiction to which nothing is to be taken for true in the respective
science. Now the Doctrine of Christian Religion being the most reasonable
Doctrine in the world, is questionless also the most regular and Methodicall,
has in it as much certainty and evidence of a regular Method, as is in any
science, and more; and would so appear to us, had we as clear a comprehension
of it, as we have of other doctrines. And therefore agreeably, this Phrase The
Rule of Faith, is not to be taken Causally or Formally, as if we sought for a
Measure antecedent to the fundamental points of our Belief, to try them by;
but it is to be taken SubIective, or Materially, that is, a Rule consisting of
the fundamental points of Faith, and a formal Rule to determine
controversies, and to condemn Heresies by. This was the sense of it, both name
and thing, when it came first into use among the Fathers in the Primitive
Church, as may be seen by Lib. 1. capp. 2, 3.
Irenaeus, De Praescript. Regula est autem fidei, ut jam hinc, quid credamus
defendamus, illa scilicet, qua creditur unum ominino deum esse -- Haec regula a
Christo -- Instituta nullas habet apud nos quaestiones, nisi quas Haereses
inferunt, and quae Haereticos faciunt. Ceterum, manente forma ejus in suo
ordine, quantum libet quaeras and tractes -- Fides in regula posita est --
Cedet Curiositas Fidei -- Certe aut non strepant, aut quiescant adversus
Regulam. Idem de Veland. Virg. Regula quidem fidei una omnino est, soimmobilis,
and irreformalis, credendi scilicet in unicum Deum omnipotentem mundi
Conditorem --
Tertullian, Sermon. de temp. 119. Symbolum est breviter complexa Regula fidei --
Idem de fide and symbolo. Idem de Genesi ad literam. Catholica fides -- Est
haec Deum Patrem omnipotentem universam creaturam fecisse. Idem similiter
pluries alibi.
St Austin, Adversus Valentin. (...) -- Contra Marcosios versus finem. In
Ancoratu versus finem. In compendiaria vera doctrina. De fide Catholicae and
Apostolicae Ecclesiae. In Marcelli fide conscripta.
Epiphanius, Ad Cledonium adversus Apollinarium Orat. 52. Fidem Nicaenam vocat
(...). Vide sequentia ibid. Idem Contra Julian. Orat. 3.
Nazianzen, Epist. ad Pulcheriam August. Siquidem ipsa Catholici Symboli brevis
and perfecta confessio -- Tam instructa sit munitione coelesti, ut omnes
Haereticorum opiniones solo ipsius gladio possunt detruncari: Hujus symboli
plenitudincm si Eutiches --
Leo, and the rest of them that treat of the Christian Faith; Till of late upon
the Popes pretensions to an infallible Judicature, the words have been wrested
from their primitive sense, to signify the arguments and motives that persuade
us to entertain the Christian Doctrine it self in gross, or more especially the
chief parts of it; for this seems to be the meaning of them in the Controversy
at this day. But these Arguments, or Motives, whether from Reason or Authority
are antecedent to this Rule, the ground and means of coming to it, not the Rule
it self; otherwise we should have as many Rules of Faith, as we have arguments
from reason or authority, why we believe. Indeed, if we take the word Faith for
our Act of believing, a Christians Faith has this in Common with all other
belief, that the Rule, and the object matter of it are the same thing: For the
immediate limit, and measure of all belief, is, and must be the apparent truth
of the thing proposed; beyond which our assent cannot go without Error, or
believing a falsehood; nor can it fall short of it without infidelity, or want
of due belief: and these two properties make a Rule in the most adaequate, and
exact sense. But then, nothing can have this apparent truth rightly, and
Regularly farther, then as it is consonant to those propositions, on which the
truth of it depends, and by which it is to be tried, as by a Rule: So that if
men would speak properly and distinctly, as certainly they ought to do in
Controversies, especially of this grand importance, by this question, what is
the Rule of Faith? can only be meant, what, or where are the points, articles
or Propositions, that are fundamental in the faith of the Church? For, as to
points not fundamental, they depend upon those that are, and therefore do not
come primarily into the question. I would not trouble you with so much
Metaphysics, but that they are of so necessary use to clear the foundation of
our Faith from that rubbish, and confusion, which the sophistry and petulancy
of our Adversaries have thrown upon it; who in this point make it their
business to confound the Notion of a Rule, and a Judge; and then all those
arguments that prove the necessity of an infallible Rule, are easily brought to
prove an infallible Judge, a Viva regula fidei which some of them make such a
noise and a clamor with; as if a person and a proposition were the same thing.
This gives also an easy answer to those of them, that tell us, The Apostles
went not with books in their hands to preach and deliver Sure foot. Disc. 4.
Par. 5.
Christ's doctrine, but with words in their Mouths, that the Scripture is a dead
letter, and much other civil language of the like nature, as they are pleased
to give it. It is not, you see, either the letter of Scripture, or the sound of
the Apostles preaching, which is the Rule of our Faith; but the great
Doctrines, which they preached, which were afterward written; and is the same
Rule of faith, I trow, whether conveyed to us by writing or without it; as
Irenaus tells us of some Christians, that had no written word Lib. 3. Cap. 4.
at all.

2. The Rule of Faith is the word of God, who is our Creator, and supreme
Lawgiver, and the Author, and object of that immortal happiness, to which true
faith leads us.

The word of God is indeed a glorious Title, and therefore no wonder that so
many have laid claim to it. It would, I confess, look something like an
adventure, to range at large through the history of all times and places, in
quest of that, which was but once delivered: And yet did the time give us leave
to be exact, it would be necessary to examine the claims of, at least, the most
vogued, and considerable pretenders. There was never yet any Lawgiver in the
world, that did not bear the People in hand, that his Laws were dictated an^
given, at least ratified and auth orised by the Deity: But of all these, there
is none, except them whose history is in the Bible, that have not been known,
and laughed at for fables by the most able, and greatest maintainers of them.
Those in the Bible are chiefly two, which make up the two volumes of it
respectively; The one, a Revelation made to the Jews by Moses, the other, to
all Mankind by Christ Jesus. The first of these appears to any understanding
Reader to be wholly relative, and prophetical; consisting of Prophesies, and
other Praesignifications of a great Lawgiver and Prince, that was not to
appear, till the world had attended his coming 4000 years. The second volume
contains the historical relation of the life and gesta of that great Prince,
and the travels of his Ministers: And therefore our Faith was not, nor could be
delivered sooner, because the chief contents, and matter of it are the
conception, birth, speeches, actions, and sufferings of this Great One. And so
S. Iudes phrase of once delivered is to be understood, of that one age, whvn
this Divine Person the Son of God, was incarnate, suffered death, rose again
from death, and did actually perform, and transact all those passages and
events, which are the object matter of our Faith, and Creed; and also when
this, and all the rest was preached, and attested by them, that had seen these
things done, and had Especial Commission from him to propose them, as matters
of Faith to all the world. And therefore our Rule of Faith is contained in the
Narrative of Our Saviors pilgrimage, and his Apostles preaching; that is, in
the four Gospels, in the Epistles, and Acts of the Apostles; which were all
extant in St Iudes time in writing, and this writing taken for an undoubted
Rule of Faith by the Church, and therefore alone called Canonical: and so
continued, till the many and monstrous changes made in the Faith by the Church
of Rome made it necessary for them to look out for another Rule: Wherein how
well they have acquitted themselves, shall be seen by and by.

In the mean while, her single testimony ought not to overballance so great a
cloud of Witnesses, as have deposed, even life it self for the Scripture, and
against her own Judgment for much above 1000 years. Especially, if it be added
what arguments the present Church of Rome affords, to prove that the Rule of
Faith is contained in the Holy Scripture.

I. In the Judgment of the Church of Rome it contains all necessary points of
Faith, and therefore contains the Rule of Faith. Look over their
Divinity-writers of all Sorts, Especially of Controversies and bodies of
Divinity, The decrees and Catechism of the Council of Trent; You will find
them, as well as we, laboring to prove their main points out of this written
Word; Yea, the very infallibility of the Pope, and such other doctrines, as
they set up against the Scripture.

And this they do in the first place, as may be seen in Bellarmine, and other
their best writers, as fetching their prime foundation from thence. Nor have
they been so bold as to say, that they make use of Scripture only ad hominem,
and not that they believe it; For however they may deal with us in
Controversy, it is to be hoped they are more faithful to the Souls of their
own People. So that, would they be true to their own Consciences, and the
Consciences of their flocks, they must return to the Rule of Faith contained in
Scripture, and confess with the said Bellarmine, that Sacra Scriptura is Regula
Verbo Dei. (...) 1. cap 2.
credendi certissima and tutissima, The most certain and safe Rule of
believing: That so all Christendom might once again, if possible, have one
Faith.

II. The Rule of Faith in the Church of Rome is contained in the Holy
Scriptures, or else they have none; Yes, may some say, The Church of Rome in
full Council teaches us, that her Faith is contained in libris scriptis, and
sine scripto traditionibus, in the Council. Triden. Sess. 4.
written word, and in unwritten traditions; But then they must mean, either,
that some of their Articles of Faith are contained in the written word, and
othersome in unwritten traditions only; or, that all their Articles are
proved, partly from the written word, and partly from unwritten traditions. Not
the first, for they endeavor to prove all out of Scripture, as was showed even
now; Not the second, for Divine warrant from the written word (if they have it)
is surely a sufficient Basis for any, or all the Articles of their Faith; and
tradition or the voice of the Church, being but an humane testimony, cannot
cause a Divine infallible Faith. Yes, The testimony of the Church, say they, is
divine and infallible. But here they lie cross one to another: For, by the
voice of the Church, some of them mean a traditional delivery of the Faith from
age to age without writing, as the Roman Catholic writers of England
especially: Others mean the voice or sentence of the present Pope or Church, as
the great Pontiff and Court of Rome with the Jesuits, and other their close
Adherents: And these are as professed adversaries to one another, as they are to
us: Those laying the stress upon the indefectibility of Oral, and Practical
tradition: These upon an infallible assistance given to the present Pope, or
Church. And so far has the opposition between them proceeded, that our
Countrymen have been, about twelve years since, condemned at Rome of Heresy
by a solemn censure of the Inquisition, for their stiff maintaining tradition
in opposition to the present Infallibility: And on the other side, they of Rome
have been condemned by them in England, for their illimited Pretenses to
Infallibility. And which is worst of all, both have forsaken the Faith of their
Trent-Fathers; For they profess to receive the written word, Ibid.
and unwritten traditions pari Pietatis affectu, and Reverentia, with equal
devotion, and submission; But our assertors of Tradition are for it alone in
opposition to the Scripture; and the pretenders to a present Infallibility
think themselves able to overrule both Scripture and Tradition. Whereby you may
see, that since they have quitted the old foundation, they have not been able
to fix any, that all their members can agree in: And withal may be seen, how
necessary an implicit Faith is for those, that will be of the Romish
Communion; since, did they use but half an eye, they must needs discover,
instead of A Guide in Controversies, an endless Maze: wherein, it is no wonder,
that many, even of the greatest Wits, lose all Religion, and take up in Atheism.

But we have many and greater arguments for this point; more, and more
convincing, then for any one point, either in Reason, or Religion, except it be
for the Existence of a God. It will be impossible to speak to all, and it will
be too great an ingratitude to the goodness of God to omit all: I shall
therefore mention two or three of them.

I. This book alone contains a Doctrine, and institution without error, and
which therefore by virtue of that qualification can alone be an infallible Rule
of our Faith. It is strange to consider, that for so long a time as it has
been in the world, so much read, and canvass'd, and written upon, more then any
other book whatsoever; nay, I might say, but that it would look like a
solaecism, more then all other books put together, so many Commentaries,
Annotations, Paraphrases, Versions, Animadversions, Scholia critica, and
Anticritica, Collationes, Lucubrationes, Diatriba, Exercitationes, Myrothecia,
Antitheses, and a hundred more sorts of disquisitions, and discussions of the
truth of it: Yet not the least error, or misprision of error has been found in
it. An abundant proof, that there is none in it, that it is the dictate of an
infallible understanding, which could not be put forth into the world for any
other end, then to be a standing, and infallible Rule to Mankind, who is of
their natural condition confessedly overrun with Error.

II. The Scripture contains the only doctrine, that ever could prevail upon
Mankind in that way, which the Rule of Faith only does, and can prevail; And
that is, by the strength and power of the light and truth, that shines in it;
and by the assistance of that Almighty arm, which never vouchsafed to give the
Testimony of a Miracle to any thing, but to Truths of the greatest Consequence.
Did it not, think you, seem strange to those that lived in the times, when it
was first published, and did observe a doctrine so unlikely to take, either
with the weakness and humor of Mankind in General, or with the pomp and
powers of the world in Particular, as the worship of a poor beggarly Jew, which
was our Saviors condition while he lived, and a crucified and derided
Malefactor, which were the terms, whereon he suffered? That this weak, and
creeping pretender unarmed, and unattended by any, but poor and ignorant men,
that in worldly respects were indeed (as they confessed of themselves) the very
refuse of Mankind, like Master, like Apostles; That 1 Cor. 4. 13.
it should notwithstanding, in less then fifty S. Mar. 13. 10.
years, obtain so great and universal an Interest in all parts of the world,
as to shake, and in few years after to overthrow all Religions, that had had so
long undisturbed, and unquestioned possession; Maugre that multitude of
Priests, and Demons by which they were maintained, and all that might, and
opposition which the supreme Powers of the world, the malice and cunning of the
devil, yea, the very bent, and inclination of all Mankind could set against it;
And this without any humane helps, but only the bare preaching and proposal
of it; Which from the mouths of such ragged, and forlorn Commissioners, as were
employed, must, and did much prejudice the promotion of it. Especially,
considering what absolute obedience it required of bringing down, even every
imagination; and what hard terms is proposed of mortification, taking up the
Cross, and forsaking all that was before counted dear in this world; and, which
is hardest of all, requiring self condemnation, and that in instances of
greater and more pungent concernment, then the world had before been acquainted
with. What could any sober man in those days Judge from these things, and many
more of the like Nature, but that it was a Doctrine given by the Supreme Lord,
and Lawgiver of the World to be an absolute Rule, both of Faith, and practice
to all the World?

III. The Scripture contains that doctrine, which alone of all doctrines, that
ever were published, does entirely agree with the Soul of Man, and with the
principles of reason within him; And which consequently can alone be an
infallible help to his understanding, and propose a Rule of Faith to him. It
teaches us the same lessons, that we learn from the light of Nature; that there
is a God, that he made the World, and governs it, that he punishes the Evil,
and rewards the Good. It instructs us in the knowledge and belief of these, and
many more such doctrines, more clearly and convincingly then all the Philosophy
in the World; so fully and undeniably, as force the Soul to have what arguments
and discourses she draws from her own bottom, and to betake her self to this
word, as the only safe and impregnable rock, and hold of Truth. It informs,
and extricates our Souls from those errors, and perplexities concerning our own
nature and condition, which reason makes us sensible of, but can neither
remedy, nor clearly discover. In all the infinitely various, and entangled
Cases, wherein men are concerned, it never so much as once crosses their reason
or understanding, but always helps it forward. It is the only Doctrine, that
ever taught mankind to abstract from the world, to disengage Religion from
worldly designs, and temptations; without which it is impossible, that our
understanding should attain the full liberty of Judging, or the true measures
of believing. It calls up the mind to those sublime and heavenly
contemplations, to that divine and inflaming ardour; as force reason to stand
at a distance, and acknowledge, that her most refined and studied wits, her
most severe Stoics and Recluses had not so much, as the husks of that fruit,
which this Tree of knowledge and life affords; That the strength of all her
productions, were they never so genuine, cannot enrich her votaries with so
true and solid learning, with so pure and charming a holiness, with so firm and
delicious a happiness, as the meanest of the students of this Book are enabled
to attain. It propounds mysteries of so high and glorious a nature, with so
much Naifvetie, so much clear and native perspicuity, and so much commanding
and dreadful Majesty, as cannot be communicated any whence, but from that
infinite and eternal Wisdom, who is alone able, as to discover and reveal, so
to comprehend fully the Mysteries contained in the Scripture. Mysteries so much
above our weak reason, so attractive of it, and so healing to it; as may from
their own nature and merit claim and exercise the Energy, and Authority of a
Rule of Faith.

IV. Lastly, Scripture contains the only doctrine, that ever could obtain to
give law to all the world, and the first that ever pretended to so large a
Jurisdiction. But the Rule of Faith, as it is absolute, and admits of no
appeal; so the extent of it is illimited and universal, over all Persons to
whom it is made known, of what nation, age, quality, or pretense soever: And
that, both in respect of the contents of it, which are of a like importance to
all to receive, and believe; as of that power by which it stands, which is a
like Soverain over all. Now call to mind what was done in the world for the
first 4000 years, at the end whereof this Doctrine was revealed, and you will
find as many Lawgivers, and Masters of Religion almost, as Countries; Nor have
there been since any pretenders to an Universal Monarchy in Religion, besides
his Infallible Holiness of Rome, and the Seraphick Author of the Alcoran; But
S. Jude tells us, this Faith was delivered when he wrote his Epistle, and
therefore both these are cut out by a far elder claim. And the Ancients made
use of this very Topic, viz. The universal extent of the Gospel, to prove
that main point of Faith, on which the rest depends, namely, the Divinity of
Christ the Author of it.

No Book ever came near that high pitch of historical credit, that this has
had ever since it was published: And he, that brings but that belief with him
to the reading of it, cannot upon reading, but believe it is Divine, and look
for a Rule of Faith in it.

In a word, it has the two Essential properties required in a Rule, Certainty
in it self, and Evidence to us; both which appear a Posteriori, from the
constant Consent of all Churches in one abstract of things fundamental to
Salvation taken out of it: And we have as much proof, that it is to be such, as
we can possibly have, suppose it were so.

And now surely it may seem a strange presumption in flesh and blood, to
attempt to put down this Oracle from that praeeminence, and power over the
Faith of Christendom, wherein the Almighty did at first place it, and wherein
it has by undoubted possession prescribed for so many ages since. An attempt,
that could not have entered into the hearts of men; if extreme, and overgrown
corruption both in Faith and manners, had not first thrown out all fear of him,
who has threatened utter excision to all them, that dare add to, or detract
from his word. To him we must leave them, who will stand by his own word, and
bring to light the hidden things of dishonesty; and consider what returns of
duty become us, and they are especially three.

I. The first is that, which is to appear in us in the first place upon the
receipt of any mercy, or blessing whatsoever; and that is thankfulness, and
gratitude, that we offer up a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and that
for this it be a daily sacrifice, because this word is of more necessary, and
frequent use to us, then our daily bread.

II. A cheerful, and absolute resignation of our Faith, and Understanding to
it.

III. A zealous, and unwearied endeavor to keep, and maintain this Faith
whole, and untainted in all trialls and oppositions.

The third we are now to speak to, expressed by S. Jude, in these two words,
Contend earnestly, which Jointly employ these two things.

1. The use of all means necessary to attain so noble an end.

2. Zeal, and perseverance in the use of them.

I. The means most likely to preserve our Faith are, I conceive, these that
follow.

1. The Preservation of the letter of Scripture entire and incorrupt, and a
diligent study of the literal meaning of it; For we do not by the Scripture
understand the bare characters abstracted from the sense, as a bold SerIeant of
the Church of Rome is pleased to say of Sure foot. Disc. 2. para. 2.
us, but by what Authority appears not; Possibly it may be some remnant of his
weak Faith before his defection, which by his defection seems to have gone no
farther, then the bare characters, never to have been well grounded in the true
sense and meaning of it. We mean by Scripture the literal sense of it,
especially in the points fundamental to Salvation; which are the very points
of Faith, not, as he says, of which this Rule of Faith is to ascertain Ibid.
us, but of which it consists, which make it up, as the parts make the whole.
These, we say, are contained in the first, and most obvious sense of the words
of Scripture; God being graciously pleased to lay them open to all capacities,
and so making it a common Salvation, as S. Jude here calls it: As common reason
will teach us, that any Writer, that would be understood, will endeavor to
deliver the main parts, and substance of his discourse most plainly, and
expressly. And therefore it is no wonder, that the mystical exposition of plain
Scripture proved so mischievous to the Faith of the Ancient Church. But so long
as we have the letter of Scripture whole, and understand the literal meaning
of it, so long we have our Rule of Faith safe. I shall not need to tell you,
how both the one, and other are best done: by a study of the Originals of both
Testaments, by comparing the several ancient Copies, Versions, and
Paraphrases, especially the Septuagint, and the Chaldee Paraphrast; by
observing the various readings and applications of places, as we find them
scattered in the writings of the Fathers, and many other ways, wherein you are
better experienced then my self.

2. To preserve the Faith, it is necessary to distinguish in the Scripture
points fundamental from those which are not so. This was proposed by the wise
and learned King James, as the best expedient for ending the Controversies of
Christendom. For as no book or doctrine; so especially, not the doctrine of the
Scripture can be well understood, much less maintained, without an Analysis,
separation, and digestion of the parts of it: It being a Collection of the
writings of so many Penmen, and those written upon several occasions, no one
regularly delivering the whole Faith. Now by Fundamental points we do not mean
necessary for all to know and believe to Salvation: for to some more, to some
fewer, are necessary, according to their several abilities, and opportunities;
But we mean points principal, and most essential in respect of the whole
System of the doctrine of Salvation, such as are necessary to make up the Unity
of the Faith, and so constitute a Church. A perfect Catalogue of these we have
in the Apostles Creed, so called, as the Fathers generally tell us, because
made by the Apostles before their dispersion to be a Rule in their preaching.
And therefore we need not go so far for a Rule of Faith, or look upon it as so
strange a thing, and so difficult to find, having it in our daily prayers. For
this Creed is I conceive Edw. and. Injunct. 5.
proposed in the Church of England to her Sons, and Daughters as a Rule of
Faith, and was Q. Eliz. Injunct. 5.
therefore in the beginning of the Reformation enjoined to be taught the People
in English, together with the Pater Noster, and Ten Commandments, the Breviats
of our petenda, and agenda respectively, as that is of our Credenda; And has
been therefore commanded ever Rubr. before the Apostles Creed.
since to be repeated twice a day, that we might not, if possible, be to seek
in so necessary a thing, as the Rule of Faith. This Creed the Ancients appeal
to, as to their Rule of Faith, and thought their Faith sufficiently secured, so
long as this was stuck to: Especially, as it is opened in some parts by the
Catholic Creeds of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and Athanasius.
This way they took to defend the Faith, and with good reason, for the defense
of the Articles of our Creed involves the defense of all the Catholic
Doctrine; As in all sciences, the principles Justify those Conclusions, that
are truly made from them.

3. For the defense of the Faith it is necessary to study the old
Ecclesiastical Writers, Fathers, Councels, Historians, or whatsoever other
they be; For a great part of the points of our Faith being matters of fact,
such as our Saviors Birth, Death, Resurrection, etc. And our knowledge of the
rest, that are not matters of fact, depending upon those that are, they must in
reason be best learned from the study of those books, where they are best
delivered historically; whereof Scripture is the first, and most Authentic
record: And next to it, are the Christian writers of the eldest times; For what
is not recorded in Scripture cannot now be expected any where but in their
writings. Tradition, (whatever some men would make of it) having so early, and
so grossly failed in the business of Easter, admitting infants to the Eucharist,
and some other things. Besides, the many and great conflicts that they had with
the Heretics, who oppugned the chief points of Faith, give us a sight of all
that can be objected against them, and of enough, though not all, that is to be
said in defense of them. We do not say, they are to be read with an implicit
Faith, as the Scripture is; The infallible Inspiration of the Holy Ghost being
withdrawn, when the first Planters of the Gospel had finished their course, and
left the Word written; Yet, it seems, the Holy Spirit did not take away all his
extraordinary light at once, having guided them to profess, defend, and deliver
to us a more pure, and unmingled Faith, and this embraced with a more fervent,
and divine Love, then the following ages could boast of.

How carefully the Church of England has followed the ancient Fathers in this
matter of Faith, how much she relies on their Judgment herein, appears from
the constant allegations of her ablest defenders since the Reformation, and
from her own act in Convocation, 1571; where she forbids her public Preachers
to propose any thing to the People, as matter of Faith, but that, which
Catholici Patres and veteres Episcopi ex S. Scripturae Doctrina collegerint,
Canon. de Concionator page 19
which the Ancient Pastors, and Catholic Doctors of the Church have drawn out
of the Holy Scripture.

And it were no great boldness to challenge all her adversaries to show, where
she has once swerved from this Rule, or owned any one point of Faith, which
she has not proved (after Scripture) from a full consent of the Ancient
Church. To these must be added the study of the Schoolmen, and of the chief
writers of all Christian Churches that are, or have been: Since, what is
confessed, that there always has been, and now is one Catholic Church,
therefore one, because professing this same Rule of Faith, is to be
demonstrated from the records of the several Churches in the volumes of their
Writers.

4. The fourth means is the often teaching, and explaining these chief
articles, and other approved, and authorized forms of sound words to those,
that are most apt to learn, and use best to remember what they learn; And they
are the younger sort, to whom these points are made most intelligible by the
familiar way of Catechizing. This is doubtless, next to the inward operation of
Gods grace, the best and most effectual preaching, and planting the Faith in
any Soul. To these it is commonly delivered in the most plain and free manner,
without any false glosses, or sophistry, which may hide or adulterate the light
of it: And in these tender and untainted minds it finds the least enmity, and
opposition, obtains an easy quiet, and secure possession, and growing up with
them becomes a rock, and shelter against the winds of strange doctrines:
Whereas on the other hand, even the reading of the written Word of God, and
much more the hearing of it paraphrased upon in popular discourses and sermons,
is of far less use, often of dangerous consequence to those, that not only
want their first principles, but it may be are leavened with false ones. And
therefore it is necessary, that this be done, as was said, with approved, and
authorized forms of words: For as the wisdom of the Church is best able to
prescribe, what is generally necessary for all her members to know, and believe
for their souls health; So the interest, that both Church and State have in the
right principling of Youth, make it our necessary duty to teach what they
prescribe: Otherwise we can never answer it to God, who has made us
accountable to them; nor can we give them any security that their people shall
be brought up Orthodox in the Faith, or obedient and peaceable in the State.
And it proves the better defense of the Faith, the more eminent they are, whose
tender years are well seasoned; as those of the best strength of natural
parts, and quickness of wit, and inclination to learning. Those that are
naturally disposed to be religious, lest they prove Zealots in a wrong way;
Those that are likely to become Ministers of holy things and Stewards of this
Faith; Those that are of more then ordinary quality, even in worldly respects,
as Birth, Riches or Favor, especially the families of Grands, and Princes.
What advantages the Jesuits, above other Orders, have made of this, is not
unknown; and any one may see, that so long as these are made sound, and
resolute for the Faith, there is the less danger of error in the rest.

5. The fifth means is by conflicting with, and suppressing all Heretics, and
Dissenters from the Faith, and extinguishing their Heresies, and Errors. This
is properly to Contend, because it is against the adversaries of the Faith: And
is done three ways especially.

I. By confutation of their errors; And that first, by Personal Congress, and
disputation. This way our adversaries have of late been a little shy of; having
found, that neither their art, nor their zeal will maintain a bad cause before
Judges, who are not aforehand at their devotion; which they of Rome are not to
expect in a Reformed Church, and I hope the rest will no longer find in the
Church of England. And secondly, Their writings are to be answered with
writings. And this way, their Arguments have been so sifted, and run so far,
that controversies are on both sides drawn to the very dregs of opposition, and
nothing new has been objected of late, that is material: Yet, so long as they
continue their batteries, we are not to sit down in silence, but to stand upon
our Guard, lest we should betray that Faith to their importunity, which has
been so well defended against their arguments.

II. The second way to suppress Heresies, is by acts of Convocation, and solemn
Censures of the Church. This was the way of old; The Fathers met in Synods, or
General Councils, as the cause required; to make provision against Heresies,
as they rose, and infested the Church.

But the late Disciplinarians have, it seems, thought the preservation of the
Faith an easier work, and not of such Public and Catholic concernment; and
have therefore in their new Model ordered Heresy to be Judged in the
Kirk-Session or Consistory, where are no more True relation of the Form and
Government of the Kirk of Scotland. 1640.
then the Minister of the place, and one Lay Elder or two: As if Heresy were
so small a crime, as to be fit for the cognizance of two, or three no better
Judges: Or, as if any but the Clergy had power to Judge of it; This is utterly
a great mistake, and miscarriage; for Heresy, being at least a perversion, and
so in effect a denial of some point of Faith, is a crime of the highest nature,
as striking at the Churches foundation: And the Ministers alone are the
Guardians of the Faith: And the Clergy in Convocation (next to a General
Council of the whole Church) are the supreme Judges of all Controversies about
it. So God himself ordained in that Church, which, of all the Churches of the
first Plantation, was most troubled with Heretics, and that was the Church of
Corinth. 1 Cor. 14. 32. The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets. That is, the doctrines of private Teachers in every Church are to
submit to, and so to be allowed, or condemned by the concurrent Judgment of
all the Pastors of that Church; which is not to be had, but in a Council of
that Church, or a Convocation. As in all sciences, and callings, the concurrent
Judgment of those, whose proper employment and study they are, is the most
likely, the most legal and authentic, and the derniere determinations. The
King only calls the Clergy together, and proposes to them, leaves them to
debate, and determine: And though the Statute Law set the temporal penalty for
Heresy, yet it takes from the Judgment of Primo Eliz. cap. 1.
the Church, what Doctrines are Heretical. A prudent, and a Christian
constitution: For should the secular Power undertake without the Church to
Judge what is Heresy, it would give the People Just reason to suspect, that it
was not matter of Faith, but reason of State, that swayed the determination,
which is the next way to cast all Faith and Religion out of their minds.
Whereas on the other hand, a public condemnation of Heretieall doctrines by
the Joint voices of them, whose cure and calling it is, must in reason have the
most universal influence in any Christian Church, that is not near its
Apostasy. What is the cause, why nothing has of late been this way done
against the many Sects and Heresies, that trouble us, I may not say: but I must
needs think, that the want of it is a main reason, that they are not lessened,
but rather increased: And, if this want continue long, will be followed with a
diminution, and decay of the Churches power; of the purity, and stability of
the reformed Religion professed in the Church of England; and in fine, if not
redressed, with the ruin of both.

III. The third way for the suppressing of Heresy is the making, and executing
of good laws for the silencing of Heretics, and Dissenters from the Faith, and
hindering their practices. And herein the secular Arm is to interpose as the
nursing Father of the Church, and Defender of the Faith. For though the Church
solely denounce Heretics, yet she has no power now to punish them temporally,
but what the Civil Magistrate invests her with; who is therefore constantly to
assist her. And this not without absolute necessity; for they are a sort of
People, that have obstinacy in their very Nature, and definition, and are
generally insensible of spiritual coercion. In this work the Godly Emperors of
old were very diligent, as appears by several of the ancient: Laws, especially
in the first book of the Code. And, how the rules of Government come since to
be so much changed, that the giving liberty to the inveterate, and avowed
enemies of the Church, and Religion established, shall be now thought the best,
and only way to make them obedient, and fit to be trusted in the Church,
deserves well to be considered. Certainly, had their practices been as well
obstructed by the execution of good laws, as their opinions have been fully
confuted by the writings of learned Men, there had been by this time no
pretense for a debate about Indulgence to Dissenters. And what ever event may
in point of prudence be expected from this; It cannot be thought, but that the
many extravagant and blasphemous fancies, so freely published, in Print, in the
frequent Meetings of Dissenters, and other ways; Opinions so repugnant to the
Christian Faith, and destructive of true Piety, will now have the same
malignant influence, and effect upon both, which heretofore they used to have;
And will diffuse a venom too strong for any help, but that Power, which planted
the Faith in its first Purity. And withal, it is to be feared, that the great
dishonor done to the Majesty of God, the injuries done to our meek and most
blessed Savior, and to the most holy and sanctifying Spirit, by these
blasphemous opinions, and by that wanton liberty they have of walking abroad
with Public connivence, will bring upon us a guilt and wrath from God, not to
be expiated by another twenty Years suffering.

VI. The sixth means to defend the Faith is, by a daily and constant confession
of it, in all times and trials, even of death, and Martyrdom. We are taught to
profess our Rule of Faith twice a day in our public prayers: And upon good
reason; For as all truth desires nothing more, then that beauty that is native
to it to commend it to our belief, and best defends it self against all
contradiction, when it appears most naked: So certainly, truths of so
illustrious a magnitude as the Articles of our Creed, cannot be better
preached, and maintained, then by an open, hearty, and constant profession of
them. The most difficult service, which they require of us in the greatest
opposition, is then but to own them, with which alone we gain an absolute
Conquest over all the World, 1 John 5. 4, 5. This is the victory, that
overcomes the world, even our Faith. Who is he, that overcomes the world, But
he that believes, that Jesus is the Son of God? Our Faith is the purchase of
His exinanition, and therefore the Cross the inseparable badge of it; not to be
laid aside when God puts it upon us, without certain loss of those Heavenly
Ioys, that attend patient suffering for the truth, and Martyrdom; which, as it
is of peculiar benefit to those, that faithfully wade through it, sanctifying
that death, which we owe to Nature for sin, and raising it as a gift of Faith,
and Patience offered up acceptably to God; So it did of Old, and always will
give the greatest renown to the Christian Faith and Name; being, next the
Miracles wrought by God himself, the most pregnant, and visible testimony of
the Power of the Holy Ghost going along with the Faith. And of this the first
ages of the Church are a sufficient proof. These are some of the proper and
direct ways of contending for the Faith; There are others, that come in as
Auxiliaries, and serve only by consequence. The chief of which are these two.

1. Holiness of life, Purity of mind and conscience. This is the proper vehicle
of true Faith, 1 Timothy 3. 9. Holding the mystery of the Faith in a pure
Conscience, Cap. 1. 19. Which some having cast away concerning Faith have made
shipwreck. Long gathered habits of virtue, or vice insensibly cast the Soul
into a settled state of good, or evil respectively. In which case, from the
dictate of selfpreservation, as all things else, it naturally seeks, and
adheres to such principles, as will make good, and maintain the condition it is
possessed of. If the condition be good, it appeals to Faith, as the author, and
refuge of it, in the strength whereof it stands, and in the increase of it does
triumph, and glory: If the condition be evil, then Faith appears as a witness
against us, and a tormentor; and the Soul cannot contemplate it without horror,
but must turn aside, and betake it self to the refuge of lies, some doctrines
however false, yet plausible, that may help it at present to silence the fear
of a Judgment to come; Which Article, and several others, as remission of
sins, the resurrection, and eternal life are absolutely inconsistent with a
continuation, and security in evil courses. It is true, Faith is supernatural
Grace, infused into our Souls by God himself from above: Yet it is liable to be
disturbed, yea, and ejected too by the strength of our own corruptions, and the
powers of darkness reigning in us. These stifle and extinguish those motions
and illuminations, whereby the holy Spirit does usually work Faith in us; Who
though he delight to dwell in Tabernacles of Clay, in the hearts of the Sons of
Men, yet abhorrs and flies from the tents of the wicked, especially the proud,
and the sensual. And it is notorious in the history of the Church, that the
great Heresies, that troubled it of old, had their birth from one of these,
either the Ambition, or Debauchery of their first Broachers.

2. The next means, Is to preserve the dignity of the Ministers of the Gospel,
who are the Dispensers of this Faith. Did Christians generally found their
belief, and practice upon those rules, and principles, by which they are to be
measured, there would be the less need of this; But it is obvious to be
observed, that men commonly begin with the esteem of a Person, or Party, and
then raise their Faith according to the dictate of that Person, or Party. This
the Heretics of all ages have seen, and therefore made it their first business
to worm themselves into vogue, and credit; being sure they must needs be
Masters of their Faith, whose understandings their reputation had first
blinded. And indeed we cannot reasonably expect, that our Doctrine should gain
much upon the minds of those, that despise our Persons, or Callings: which, God
be thanked, at present is not, nor lightly can be done by any, but such, in
whom Atheism, or Fanaticism has smothered, if not destroyed the power of
Religion. All Nations not wholly barbarous have looked upon it, as both the
security of their Religion, and Glory of their Country, to have the estate of
their Priesthood maintained in honor, and plenty; And it were much to be
wished, that the Reformed Churches of Christendom had not been in this point
more sordid, and sacrilegious, then all other Christians, not to say Nations,
in the World. We have seen verified in England, what was upon this miscarriage
in the Reformation foretold by the most learned, and Judicious Writer of his
rank among Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. par. 79.
the Protestants, That the time of Religion, and the Service of God would
likely fall, as the age of Man, within seventy or eighty years; and what
followed, would be small Joy to them that beheld it. And we are yet to pray and
hope, that the little, that remains may escape, if possible, all fears and
Iealousies from the luxury, and profaness of the Age; The natural issue of
which vices in conjunction is the devouring of holy things, and then an open
Apostafie from the Faith: Unless Gods mercy make them childless, as unlawful
embraces often prove.

I have now sufficiently tired you with a lame account of some things, in the
right management whereof the continuance of our Faith is greatly concerned: And
had we hearts to make use of them with that Zeal, and constancy, which the
greatness of the Cause it self, and our unchangeable concernment in it require;
(and was the second part of our earnest Contention proposed) they would not
fail through Gods blessing, who never deserts the Cause of Faith, to make our
Church, and People happy. But they have generally had that bad fortune, that
other good things have, to be better known, and valued from the want, then from
the enjoyment, and benefit of them. A miscarriage, which surely we have since
his Majesty's most happy Restoration been guilty of. A miscarriage, that must
from the notion, and nature of it make Mankind miserable: (all happiness
consisting in the right apprehension and enjoyment of the good we are possessed
of) And the more extremely miserable, the greater Importance and Necessity the
things themselves are of: which was the Third member of the Text, and has two
parts; First, the importance of our carnest contending for our Rule of Faith;
It is the securing of the foundation, and the very Being of the Church, and the
Pillars of our future Happiness, and undoubtedly of the greatest consequence.
Secondly, the necessity of it, now the Greater, because of the restless
importunity, and unrestrained licenciousness of our Adversaries; which is so
visible, and causes so much complaint already, that I shall not spend time in
speaking of it, nor I hope need to caution you to defend yourselves against it.
Yet must not forget to put you in the right way to do it; and that is, by
laying at home in your own Souls a good foundation of this Ancient, and Holy
Faith, by a diligent learning of, and resolute adhering to these Articles, to
this Rule of Faith; as it is literally delivered in the plainest places of Holy
Scripture, and comprised and explained in the three Creeds; and the Church
Catechism. If we forsake these holds, there is nothing in the Christian World
can secure our Faith: These we are therefore constantly to teach our Flocks,
and they diligently to learn, and to consider that exhortation of the Apostle,
Hebr. 13. 7, 8, 9. Remember them, which have the rule over you, who have spoken
unto you the Word of God, whose Faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation; Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: And be
not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines.

FINIS.

