Imprimatur Mich. Dublin. Canc.

A SERMON Preached at the Consecration OF The Right Reverend Father in God
AMBROSE Lord Bishop of KILDARE IN Christ-Church, Dublin, June 29. 1667.

BY The Right Reverend Father in God HENRY Lord Bishop of MEAD.

DUBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castle-street. 1667.

To the Most Honorable JAMES, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of Ormond, Earl of
Ossory and Brecknock, Viscount Thurles, Lord Baron of Arklow and Lanthony, Lord
of the Regalities and Liberties of the County of Tipperary, Chancellor of the
Universitie of Dublin, Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of His
MAJESTY'S Kingdom of Ireland, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Somerset, the
City and County of Bristol, and the Cities of Bath and Wells, one of the Lords
of His MAJESTY'S Most Honorable Privy Councils of His MAJESTY'S Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, Lord Steward of His MAJESTY'S Household,
Gentleman of His MAJESTY'S Bedchamber, and Knight of the Most Noble Order of
the Garter, His GRACE,
My LORD,
WHat of Ecclesiastical Government in the Christian Church, has passed our
forefathers unquestioned more than One thousand five hundred years, from the
Apostles downward, that, is become the unhappy Dispute of this last Age, both
as to Pen and Sword.

This had its Rise at Geneva, Anno 1541. Ric. Hookers Eccles. Pol. Pref.
the people having thence tumultuously expelled their Bishop, and being thereby
without Government, and to seek for the way toward it, thereupon did Calvin put
himself on them, finding, in that, a fit introduction to greatness, and by his
prudence, and learning, (in both which he excelled) became he there an Oracle,
and his will a law. Of that made he use in meditating, forming, and proposing a
Model of Church Government, (it being desired of him by the people;) which he
well ordered to his ends, and interests; intermixing Church, and Lay Elders;
(those fixed, these yearly elected) appointing a double number of the Laity, to
what was of the other; Ep. p. 2^ Beza de grad. Min. c. 11.
That is, six Ministers, and twelve others, chosen out of their three Councils
of State, viz. Six out of their Council of two hundred, and four out of that of
sixty, and two out of the twenty five; wherein (for pleasing the people) the
advantage of major Votes was given them in decisions; and in that, most of
power in them (seemingly) placed; whereas, indeed, all was thereby in himself,
and in his Church-Elders principally, well judging, that the fewer (being
learned, leading, and lasting) might easily influence, and overbear a greater
number not so reaching, and changing, whose election also might be by the other
so ordered, as to serve a Church-interest. And least (on consideration,) this
might be (oversoon apprehended and avoided. Therefore had Calvin (undertaking
that form of Government, desired of him) first, politickly, obliged that people
by Oath to receive and submit to what should be so proposed; Provided, it were
agreeable to Gods Word, and to the approbation of such of the Reformed Churches
as should be thought fit to be therein consulted. And accordingly, did he
carefully hold, in that, to Scripture-names and words, knowing, that this could
not but sound well howsoever, and that it might take with the less discerning,
and would certainly pass with those, whose interest it was to be so satisfied.
In which, he fixed principally on the name of Elders; a Scripture-name, of
which much is spoken in both Testaments, but in the New Testament sounding
toward the frame of Government in the Christian Church: yet, in the New
Testament was found the word Bishop also: and this, as considerable, for Church
government as could be pretended to, in that other of Elders; and yet, must not
(notwithstanding) the name of Bishop be in this new Model mentioned: for, the
Name would mind the injurious casting off of their Bishop, and the Thing stood
in the way to other grandeures; therefore with the person must the name of
Bishop be shut out also. But how may that be without force and wrong to
Scripture? where, of the Name and Office of Bishops, is mention frequent and
honorable; As to that, the expedient is ready and easy. It is but ordering
the Text to the gloss, and framing such an Interpretation for that
Scripture-name Bishop, that thenceforth (although never till then) by Bishops,
Elders be understood: so as, whatsoever is in the New Testament said of
Bishops, should be of Elders only, and that Bishops and Elders be as the same,
not distinguished in office or work. But such avoiding of express Scriptures by
private constructions, could not satisfy all: therefore, what is short in
that, is to be supplied otherwise; that is, by the sense and approbation of
other Reformed Churches: and to that is this new Lawgiver put (unexpectedly)
by a reluctance found in the people, they beginning to resent the design, and
desiring (if possible) to get off, and loose from that, in which they now saw,
(but too late) themselves entangled. And whereas their late obligation of an
Oath, could not but stick close, it behoved to seek their liberty some other
way, and no other way appeared so ready, as that part of the mentioned proviso,
the sense of other Churches in the case, by which was hope for evading, it
being observed, that no other Church was then so modelled in Government; and
therefore, was it hoped they might be inclined not to favor this, being new
and strange. This, the people now press, and to four of the Helvetian Cities
and Churches is by them addressed, with which Calvin closes readily; that
being what he expected, and for what he was prepared, and of which he had
already assurance. For, (all that having been foreseen) he had before
(underhand) by Letters, dealt with the principals of those Churches, that they
would not fail to declare for that form of Government, in which he had so
labored for Geneva, (saying) That Religion, and piety, and the welfare of that
Church and people depended on it. Whereby when that business was by all parties
laid before those Churches, the Answer was ready; which was, That they had
heard of those Consistorial Laws, which they acknowledged for godly Ordinances,
and drawing toward the prescript of Gods Word: therefore did they think it
good for the Church of Geneva, not to change the same, but rather to keep as
they were. Thus, is Calvin's Work done, and settled, and the people brought to a
succumbency; only, it remained, That whereas it had been by those compromising
Churches, more warily delivered concerning those Laws of Government, that they
were godly Ordinances (which might seem a lean expression) and that they did
draw toward the prescript of Gods Word, (which was short and diminishing)
therefore was something to be declared more absolute and positive in the case.
And seeing it was not to be expected from other Churches, it was thus therefore
otherwise ordered (and as effectually) First, that this Discipline be cried up
(as it was industriously) for ancient, Apostolical, and wholly Scriptural; and
so, above all other forms whatsoever, and therefore, to be that to which other
Churches should conform; and Geneva (as to Church and Government,) to be
esteemed of all, and above all best reformed: unto which, in that cursed
National Covenant in England, was respect had particularly.

Wherein is to be observed the prodigious growth of this last nights mushrom;
that this, but just now, standing on its good behavior, and beholding to
others votes and approbation (and that begged) for introducing it, and needing
an Oath (slily imposed, and inconsiderately taken) for holding the people to
it, it self also looking on it self jealously, whether to be or not; yet should
it now from a politic Government start up in a moment, and be transformed to
what is Divine. And therefore no longer begging, but commanding; nor to be now
confined to Geneva, (where first imposed,) but Geneva in that, giving Laws to
the world, and expecting from other Churches conformity to that as the
principal. By all which (notwithstanding) although other Reformed Churches had
been in all this time, little influenced; yet (surely by some fatality) has it
been with us in these Kingdoms otherwise. For this Geneva form well pleasing
our English, fled to Geneva in Q. Mary's Persecution was by them brought thence
in their return; by whom it having been for a time hatched in private
Conventicles, at length was it brought forth, and after by strong hand imposed
on our Churches for imitation: as was that Idol-altar at Damascus patterned for
Jerusalem. 2 Kin. 16. 10, 11.
This began in Scotland, where Episcopacie was cast off by the Reformers (
Geneva Principled) and that (as in Geneva,) in a way popular and tumultuary so
imbibing Reformation with Schism. And although in the other Kingdoms Episcopacy
still held, and many years flourished after the Reformation, (to the glory of
our Church above all others reformed) yet was that sacred Hierarchy, in that
time, by that Party often pushed at; and at length, (they getting head and power
in our late dismal times) our very foundations of Government, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical, Regal, and Episcopal, (as by a general earthquake) were at
once, and together, overturned, and in their ruins buried: under which
universal desolations lay these Kingdoms, miserably, when (as by miracle) all
were again raised and restored to their former beauty and luster, by His Sacred
Majesty's glorious and happy Restoration. (And next and unto His Majesty) does
Ireland own Your GRACE in its Settlement, both as to Church and State, our
general settlement of the Kingdom by your great Hand, speaking Your glory to
generations. And whereas all these mentioned evils and miseries, had been
occasioned by schism, and by that particularly concerning Church Government,
and that this present generation has been (in a great measure) bred and
educated in an Age, where that truth has been silenced, and nothing heard but
what has been loudly against it, and the contrary magnified, as what only is
according to Scripture: and considering, that this, (we must now say)
controversy, being cleared, men's minds (or some of them) might be satisfied in
the truth, and thereby settled in obedience; therefore (occasion being for it)
did I take up this subject, in which Episcopacy is asserted as Apostolical, and
the contrary examined, so far, as the short time then allowed me would admit;
which being by Your GRACE commanded from me, it is thus in due obedience
presented; yet in some particulars here and there enlarged, above what was in
public delivery, what is so added, being what was intended to have been then
spoken, had I not been enforced by the time, and work of the Day, to contract.
All which is now laid at Your Excellencies feet, and under Your great and
piercing Judgment, there, leaving it humbly, and ever praying for Your
Lordships happiness every way; and that the Lord would remember You according
to the good by You done for the House of our God, and for the Offices thereof.
Neh. 13. 14.


Your GRACES In Duty and Service. Henry Midensis.

Dublin, 16. Aug. 1667. My LORD,
I Have more than once read your Lordships very excellent Sermon, and do think
it not only so convincing in what it aims at, but so prudent and seasonable,
that with your good leave, I wish it may be printed, and to that end have left
the Copy you sent me in my Lord Chancellors Hands. What you are pleased to say
of me, in your Epistle to me, is the only questionable part of the Work; and if
I have not been what you say, you teach me what I should be, and I receive the
Instruction as I ought, and remain.

Your Lordships most Affectionate humble Servant, ORMONDE.

For the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of Mead. These.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHat is here withal now published, was at first intended to have been no
farther public, then as spoken. But it being since then, otherwise ordered,
and concieving that so necessary a Truth (now dark and controversal,) might
require more for its Explication and Proof, then was, or could (circumstances
considered) be, at that time, in speaking allowed. Therefore is this intended
in way of Supplement at present, which may be hereafter farther enlarged, as
opportunity shall be for it; if not, perhaps, thereunto provoked by
Gainsayers, whom I expect and provide for.

The asserting the Episcopal Office and Calling, and in that, the Government
Ecclesiastical of the Christian Church, is that now before us, concerning which
that may be found true, which God speaks of some other his Truths, in corrupt
times. I have (says he) written to them the great things of my Law, but they
were counted as a strange thing. Hos. 3. 12.
And what is now so strange, as to hear of Episcopacy, that it is the true,
ancient, and Apostolical Government of the Church? And on the contrary, That
the Government without Elders ( Lay or others) is but feigned, and novel?

Yet, is this a great Truth, Episcopacy having been received, both in
profession and practice in all Ages of the Church, from the first of
Christianity unto (...) last Age, whereas now we find this Truth, not so much
antiquated or forgotten, as utterly denied.

But comparing Scripture, and authentic Records of ancient times (...)
evident, That Episcopacy is so far Apostolically Divine, 1. That Bishops were
in the (...) times of the Apostles. 2. And they by the Apostles themselves
ordained and appointed. 3. And that in those very times of the Apostles, in the
Apostolical Churches (such as were by the Apostles themselves planted, and
settled,) there had been an approved succession of Bishops. 4. And that in all
the following P^^^^tive Ages of the Church, the (...) by Bishops, so
Apostolically ordered, had been accordingly received, and continued, no one
Church contradicting in word, or practice. 5. Lastly, nothing heard, in all
that time, of a Government by Elders, Lay, o^ other.


For manifesting which, briefly, in particulars, it appears, (...) (Taking that
unto the death of (...) John, an. (...))

1. That St. James, (not the Son of (...) who was killed by Herod Acts 12. 2.
but (...) killed the (...) and the (...) the (...) brother Gal. 1. 19.
or kinsman) was (it may be on such respect^) appointed by the Apostles, Bishop
of Jerusalem. He was there, therefore resident, while other the Apostles were
other where on their work. And on that account might he be (probably,) pointed
(...) as principal among the (...) Acts 12. 17.
(...) (faith he) show these things unto James, and to the brethren, speaking
of his miraculous deliverance from Herod, and from his prison. And after, in
the great Council (...) Jerusalem (the greatest that ever was in the Christian
world, all the Apostles being present;) St. James appears there as Principal
and President, by whom (as (...) by such usual) the Resolve of the Council is
last, and definitively declared. Acts 15. 13, etc.
Also to St. James, is by St. Paul at Jerusalem expressly addressed. (...)
And again, and again is he honorably mentioned among, and above others, (...)
in which he was considered as Bishop of Jerusalem, which I need not prove, it
being by the other (...) (...) ^ledged, and proved also, although with some
tenderness, as to be willingly passed over. It seems (say the Authors of the
Annot. on the Bible Printed an. 1651.) that he was assigned to stay at
Jerusalem. Annot. on Acts 21. 18.
But on what account was that? They test us, Annot. on Acts 12. ^7.
Antiquity (say they) took him, (James) to be superintendent, or Bishop of the
Church of Jerusalem, Chrysostom. hom. 33. in Act. Jerome. to 1 Catal. ser. Eccles.
These are their words and proof for it, of that therefore I need not (I hope)
say more.

After St. James (who governed that Church thirty years) his brother Simon or
Simeon succeeded in that Bishopric; Hiero. Catal. Scrip. in Sim.
He, living until he was 120 years old, suffered under (...).

2. By appointment of St. Peter, St. Mark was appointed Bishop of Alexandria,
and the first there. He died five or six years before S. Peter or S. Paul, and
almost 40 years before S. John: Him succeeded Anianus, then Abilius, and after
Cerdo, all in the Apostles time. Niceph. l. 14. (...) Eusebius. l. 2. c. 24.
Doroth. in Synop. Hie. proem. in Math. and in catalog (...) Marco, and ad Evagr.


3. By S. Paul was Timothy made Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus Bishop of Crete.
The Postscripts to those Epistles style them Bishops; which beside the
Antiquity of that testimony, is otherwise averred, for the Authors of the
Centuries Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10. in Joh. Evang.
say, That it is evident that Paul appointed Timothy Pastor, and that he was
(...), or President, which is with Beza a Bishop. Beza in 1 Timothy 5. 19
Timothy had first the Bishopric of the Church of Ephesus, and Titus of the
Churches in Crete: so Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 4.
also Jerome, Hier. catal. sc.
Timothy was ordained of S. Paul the Bishop of the Ephesians, and Titus Bishop
of Crete: And Oecumenius on these words, 1 Timothy 1. 3. I be sought thee to abide
still at Ephesus, (...). Here (faith he) he appointed him Bishop. Oecum. in 1 Timothy 1.
And of Titus, Oecum. in Tit. 1.
That Paul left him to ordain Bishops, (...) having first made him Bishop.

As for Timothies Successors In the Apostles times; you have the Angel of that
Church mentioned by S. John, Re^. 2. 1. Also Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus
Contemporary to Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, ordained by S. John.

And of others his successors after, we read in the Council of Chalcedon; where
Stephanus Bishop of Ephesus being deposed, and it being debated by whom the new
Bishop should be appointed, whether by the Council, or by the Provincial Synod
of Asia; thereupon Leontius Bishop of Magnesia (of the Province of Asia) said,
Thatfrom S. Timothy to that time, there had been 27 Bishops of Ephesus, all
ordained in the Province. Conc. Chalce. act. 11.


As to Crete, and of Bishops, succeeding Titus; we read, that Basil Bishop of
Gortyna (the Metropolis of Crete) was present at the Council of Trullo. Theod.
Balfamo.


4. The Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul, about the year 45. appointed Evodius
Bishop of Antioch, who continued there Bishop 20 years. Him Ignatius succeeded,
and sat there 30 years; both of them in the times of the Apostles. Eusebius. l.
3. c. 22. Ignat. ad Anti chapter


5. In the year 56. the same Apostles ordered Linus Bishop of Rome, who is
mentioned 2 Timothy 4. 21. after whom followed Anacletus, and Clemens, Eusebius. l.
5. c. 6. and l. 3. c. 4. etc. 13. etc. 22. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Hie. cata. in
Clement.
in the Apostles times also. Clemens did see the Apostles, and conversed with
them, says Irenaeus (l. 3. c. 3.)

6. S. John ordained Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Eusebius. l. 3.
c. 35. Hier. in catal. sc.
And after his return from exile, he appointed several Bishops in diverse
places. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 23.


And as we find it thus in those Apostolical Churches (by themselves, ordered)
so in others also has it been in like manner, as to Apostolical Ordination and
succession: Of which Tertullian: As the Church of Smyrna had Polycarpus placed
there by S. John, and the Church of Rome Clement ordained by S. Peter, so the
rest of the Churches also did show what Bishops they had received by the
appointment of the Apostles, to traduce the Apostolical seed to them. Tertul.
de praescrip. c. 32. and l. 4. contra Marcione. 5.


In all which are seen, Bishops ordained by the Apostles; with their
succession, and that, even in the times of the Apostles, together with their
times and places, ascertaining the truth of it.

Add, the universal practice after, of all Churches, both Orthodox, and
Heretical; (for even the Novatians, Arians, and Donatists, etc. retained the
true Government of the Church by Bishops.)

But on the contrary, No instances out of Councils, Fathers or Histories, can
be given (in all that time) of Churches ordered without Bishops by Elders, of
which kind soever; allowing the time when Churches were first constituted; they
being then under the immediate tuition and care of the Apostles themselves
respectively, until by their removal or otherwise, they found it necessary to
appoint others in their places, in which case, the Apostles being themsel^es
Bishops, they then stood in that capacity, which Bishops after supplied.

That general consent therefore of all Churches from the beginning, evidenceth
the Truth in this undeniably; if it be not supposed, that all those holy
Fathers and Councils should join in one, throughout all those ages, (no one
contradicting,) in setting up a Government in the Church (Episcopal,) contrary
to what was by the Apostles appointed; and utterly silencing (without the least
memory) what the Apostles had ordered (if so it were) of a Government by Elders
without Bishops. But that, were to suppose a conspiracy and combination, as to
those holy men uncharitable, and in it self irrational and impossible.

This I rather choose to give in the very words of his late Majesty Charles I.
(the Royal Martyr for this Church truth, as for the essential privileges of
His Crown and Kingdoms) that, being by him delivered in answer to certain
Papers of the Divines attending the Commissioners of Parliament at the Treaty
of Newpors in the Isle of Wight anno. 1648. His Majesty's final answer
concerning Episco pac i. Nov. 1. 1648 p. 9.
He that shall find by all the best records extant, that the distinction of
Bishops from, and the superiority over Presbyters was so universally and
speedily spread over the face of the whole world; and their government
submitted to so (...) by the Presbyters that there never was any considerable
opposition made there against before Aerius (and that cried down as an Hereste)
nor since till this last age, And shall duly consider withal that if
Episcopal government had not had an indubitable Institution from the authority
of Christ and his Apostles; or if any other form of Church government could
have pretended to such Instruction, it had been the most impossible thing in
the world, when their neither was any outward certain power to enforce it, nor
could be any general Council to stablish it, to have introduced such a form of
government so suddenly and quietly into all Christian Churches, and not the
spirit of one Presbyter for (...) that appears for above 300. years to (...)
been provoke either through zeal; ambition or other motive to stand up in the
just defense of their own and the Churches liberty against such usurpation.

These are his Majesty's words. Thus does Episcopacy derive from the first
times, and shows it self generally received, and continued by a Succession of
after ages, in the Christian Church. Which that by Elders without Bishops,
cannot show. By this Tertullian concludes for the Catholic Church against
Heretics. Let them (says he) show the beginning of their Churches, let them
run over the Succession of their Bishops, so as the first of them, may have one
of the Apostles, or Apostolic men, to be a founder, or predecessor. So
Apostolic Churches derive themselves; So does the Church of Smyrna show
Policarpus placed there by John: and Rome, Clements, ordained by Peter; so have
other Churches those, who were by the Apostles appointed Bishops by whom the
Apostolic seed (or race) is derived, or continued (so Tertullian, de
Praescript. advers. Haeretic. c. 33.) thus was it of old, and from th
beginning, unto these later times; when the change of that ancient form of
Church Government began; that being occasionally brought in (it troubles to say
it) with the Reformation. (Then I say) was that occasioned, rather than
designed, or approved by the first Reformers.

For, the truth and purity of the Gospel, being then opposed and persecuted by
Popish Bishops, thereby were those Reformers enforced to act in that work of
Reformation without those Bishops, whom they could not gain, and who were to
them so contrary.

Yet did not those Reformers in that, cast off Episcopacy, with aversness to
the Order; but only in respect of those individual persons of the Popish
Bishops oppressing, they the Reformers in the mean time professing for
Episcopacy, and greatly desiring it, if it might be.

It is (...) by us endea^oured (say they) that Bishops be deprived of
Government, or Power, but it is desired, that they suffer the Gospel to be
purely preached: Hist. confess: August per ^hytraeum
and we have often protested, That we do greatly approve the Ecclesiastial
Polity and degrees in the Church, and as much as in us lies, we desire to
preserve them. We do not dislike the authority of Bishops, so that they would
not compel us to do against Gods commandments: ibid pa. 109,
and yet again, We do here protest, and we would have it to be recorded, that
we would willingly have the Ecclesiastical and Canonical Polity, if the the
Bishops cease to tyrannize over our Churches. This our desire shall excuse us
with all posterity, both before God and all Nations. Apolog, Confess, August per
Pap P, 137,
All which we have in that famous Augustan confession of the Reformers, who
from the word protest, so frequent there, had then and thence the name of
Protestants, they being there first called Protestants, as first Christians at
Antioch Acts, 11. 26.


This Augustan Confession, or Profession, or Protestation, was signed by the
more eminently Learned in that age, and work of Reformation: Among whom, even
Calvin was a Subscriber.

Yet did others of the chief Reformers, adhere to their professions made
concerning the right of Episcopacy, both as to Order and Jurisdiction,
concluding, that in Justice it ought not to be violated. Hist. August. confess.
per chytr. p. 389.
By what right or Law (says Melan^thon to Camerarius) may we dissolve the
Ecclesiastical Polity, if the Bishops will grant us what in reason they ought
to grant: and though it were lawful, yet surely it were not expedient. And he
writing to Luther, You will not believe how they of Noricum and others hate me,
Propter restitutam Episcopis Jurisdictionem, for restoring the Jurisdiction of
Bishops. Hist. August. confess; p. 406.
And Camerarius in the life of Melancthon* says thus of him, ( h) Melancthon
non modo adstipulatore sed etiam authore ipso Luthero etc.) Melancthon not
only by the consent, but even by advice also of Luther persuaded, that if
Bishops would grant free use of the true doctrine, the ordinary power, and
administration of their several Diocesses should be restored to them; and even
Beza who succeeded Calvin in Geneva for the space of ten years in like
authority, duering which time, he was strict in his Judgment as to his
discipline; Yet after Danaeu's his comeing thither, whereby that course of
continueing long in that place, was altered, and Beza laid by; Then could he
find those inconveniences in that course, which he could not now remedy,
only, wishing it were otherwise. So speaking of the 34th Canon, of those
called, the Apostles Canons, concerning the power of Metropolitans over
Bishops, Quid aliud (says Beza) hic statuitur, quam ordo ille, quem in omnibus
Eccles^is restitutum cupimus: what is in this appointed, but that order, which
we wish maybe restored, in all the Ghurches? Beza de gra^minist. c. 20.
I shall but add that of Zanchius, (one of the most learned of that side.) He
in a confession, or profession of Faith by him composed, speaking of Church
Orders, and saying that Arch bishops and Patriarchs may be defended, Hier.
Zanch. de relig. cap. 25.
And sending that his confession to others for their approbation, and consent
in it; he found exceptions taken at that said by him concerning those Church
Orders: his words are. observat in c. 25. Apho. 10. 11.
A certain eminent person, did write to me thus: what you write of your
confession, has been by me, and by N. and others received with great delight;
it being learnedly written, and in an accurate method, with which I was greatly
pleased, if you except what in the end you add of Archbishops and that
Hierarchy. On which Zanchius makes for himself this Apology; when (says he)
I wrote this confession of Faith: I did write all things out of a good
conscience, and as I believed so did I freely speak. Now my faith is grounded
chiefly and simply on the word of God; something also, in the next place, on
the common consent of the whole Ancient Catholic Church, if that be not
repugnant to the Scriptures. I do also believe, that what things were defined
in Councils and received by the godly Fathers, gathered together in the name of
the Lord, by common consent of all, without any gainsaying of the holy
Scriptures, that those things also, (though they be not of the same authority
with the holy Scriptures) proceeded from the holy Ghost. Hence it is, that
those things that ^e of this kind, I neither will, nor dare with a good
conscience dislike. But what is more certain out of History, Councils, and
writings of all the Fathers, then that those Orders of Ministers, whereof I
speak, were established, and received by the common consent of all Christendom
(Quis autem ego? etc) And who am I, that I should disallow, what the whole
Church approves: nor date all the learned men of our times oppose it; knowing
that it was both lawful for the Church so to order it: and that those things
proceeded, and were ordained for the best ends, and for the edifying of the
Elect. (So Zanchius*) he, in that, agreeing with the sense of the moderate sort
of Reformers.

Notwithstanding which, as a little stepping out of the right way, and so
proceeding, makes (in long running) the return more difficult, so those
Reformers stepping so, out of the right path of truth, in acting (as they did)
without Bishops (although thereunto enforced) thereby was occasion given to
those following, to proceed in that error, and so far, as not only to be
without Bishops, but to be also to them ill spirited; which their leaders, were
not, and that, at length, ending in Schism, and Separation.

But let such consider, that for that very thing was Aerius by the Fathers
branded with haeresie (as was before mentioned? He, as an Arian first opposed
Christ; and after, his Church, in its government; and that obstinately, and
Schismatically; the occasion whereof would be considered. It was his standing
for a Bishopric, in competition with Eustathius, both of them Arians, and in
an Arian Church; (For very Arians also held the true Government of the Church
by Bishops) But Aerius being put by what he so ambitiously desired, and
Eustathius preferred to the Bishopric, thereupon discontented, (discontent
proyeing often, a rise to haeresies, and schisms) Aerius did first, set himself
against Eustathius: and after against the whole Episcopal Order; teaching; that
between a Preshiter, and a Bishop there is no difference: That the order is the
same, and the honor alike in both etc) (The very doctrine of our late Aeriaus)
But in that was he opposed by St. Augustine Aug. haeres. 53.
And by Epiphanus. Epiph. haeres. 75.
both censuring that his opinion for heresy; Nor was he by them alone
oppugned, but (as Epiphanus, who lived in the same times with him, adds) All
Churches both in City, and Country, so detested him, and his followers, (which
were many) that being abandoned of all they were forced to live in open fields,
and woods Id. ibid
which opinion of Aerius against Bishops being so by the Fathers adjudged
heresy it was, in that, judged to be contrary to Gods word (for there is no
heresy) that is not contrary to Gods word.) And let those in his case among
us, se to this: and how far they are gone in this separation, casting of the
Sacred order of Bishops utterly, contrary to the sense of the first Reformers,
who would have bad Bishops if they might, but these will not, though they may;
and those such Bishops as are affectionate to them in the truth. And ready to
receive them, (returning) with embracements of love in Christian Communion.

Which spoken of the Reformed Churches, acting in the first Reformation without
Bishops, is not to be understood, as if they after continued without Bishops;
for as soon as could be, they did, (many of them) set up that holy Order of
Bishops and Archbishops in their Churches, Yet (I know not why) with change of
those good ancient names for worse; In Ecclesijs protestantium non desunt
reips^ Episcopi, and Archiepiscopi, quo^ mutatis^onis graecis nominibus in male
latina, vo^ant Superintendentes, and generales Superintendentes, (says
Zarichius) The Protestant Churches, (understand many of them.) want not Bishops
and Archbishops, having them in effect; whom changing good Greek names, into
bad latin names, they call Superintendents and general Superintendents. Zanch.
observe. in c. 25. Aphor. 10. 11.
And when it is said, that of the reformed Churches, retaineing Episcopal
government, there are many; understand those many, for the more considerable.
Some of them holding to that Order, in substance, but under varied names, (as
was said) others, under the proper appollations of Archbishops and Bishops and
that in their primitive luster and dignity. Among these, and above all, are the
Churches of great Britain and Ireland, in this, emmently glorious; where,
that Apostolical government is here held up, in name, and form, in title, and
substance; to the lasting honor of those our Princes: who in that, as
otherwise, well merited the Title of Defenders of the Faith; (A glorious gemme
in the Royal Diadem) an honor (I may say it) peculiar to His Sacre^d Majesty
Charles the (...) above all his (...) Progenitors they having but maintained
what of this they found, and had been delivered into their hands in a long
settlement, but He restoring what had (...) by a stool of iniquity, as by ( a
law,) Psalm. 94. 20.
(...) out (as they intended) Root and branch.

The praise of the reforming Princes of Juda (such were Asa, Jehosaphat,
Hezekiah, and Josiah) was next those, by whom Gods worship was first Settled (
David and Solomon) and in that above all others, although other ways good, in
maintaining Gods worship as they found it delivered to their hands.

Among these, Hezekiah was eminent; for he found all in confusion ((...) 29.)
the Temple defiled, Profaned, and Shut up, and its Service neglected, and
interrupted. He opened the doors of the house of the Lord. (v. 3.) and ordered
the carrying out the filthyness out of the Sanctuary (v. 5. 15. 16.) after,
settling those, appointed for the holy Service, together with then work (v. 18.
etc,) and all that by him early begun, and soon perfected. For the first (...)
and first month of his Reign (v. ^) and the first day of the month (v. 17.) he
immediately on his comeing in, was this begun* and so was it industriously
followed, as that in sixteen days the work was finished* (v. 17.) that
expedition, showing it to be from the ( Lord, so is it observed (v. 36.) that
God prepared the people, for the thing was done suddenly: and (Ch^^^^ (...) it
is said, That in Judah, the hand of God was to give the^ one heart, to do the
Commandment of the King, and of the Princes, by the word of the Lord: On all
which followed, great joy in salem; for since the time of Solomon, the Son of
David King of Israel, there was not the like in Jerusalem (2. Chr. 30. 36.)

So was it in Hezekiahs reformation. In which we see his Sacred Majesty our
dread Sovereign, in his glorious work of Reformation, lively portrayed.

1. As to the greatness of the work all was among us in greatest confusion, and
deformation, by a pretended Reformation* Gods houses profaned, his holy
Service neglected, interrupted, and despised; and the Sacred Office, and
Officers of the Church cast off, and (...) on: and (in order to their (...))
were the ample (...) of the Church (the Lords portion) ^acrilegiously invaded,
and designedly alienated into (...), great, and many thereby engaged to oppose
the very Office for ever.

2. And as wene the proceedings in Hezekiahs reformation, so were they (...) of
His Majesty's, answereably (...) that work did he set himself early, even the
first year, the first month, and the first day of the month, that is,
immediately after His Majesty's happy entrando among his people, and before his
own Solemn Settlement on his Royal Throne, then, were the doors of the Lords
house by him opened, and the Sanctuary purged from filth, and profanation!
Then the holy offices of the Church in Gods Service Settled. And our Apostolical
Church Officers, ( Archbishops and Bishops) set in their respective places.
And soon after, were also restored the just possessions of the Church, for
support of those attending that Sacred work.

And all this done, as it were, on a sudden silently, and cheerfully, even to
astonishment that, showing it not to be from men, but from God* who, as he
^owed the hearts of the people as one man to His Majesty's own Royal Person; as
to David 2. Sam. 19. 14.
so the hand of God was on the people, that he gave them one heart, to do the
commandment of the King, and of the Princes toward this Royal reformation as
in Hezekiah (s) and that as there, (...) with a general rejoyeeing: For the
like thing had not been in England since the beginning of Christianity.

In all which, as we have to bless God greatly for such his goodness to his
people: so to beg daily his preserveing to us his Sacred Majesty (as our
nursing Father of his Church,) together with such of the Princes, who (under
his Majesty) have been in this great work, eminently instrumental.

Tit. 1. ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Ver. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that
thou should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in
every City, as I had appointed thee.

6. If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children, not
accused of riot, or unruly.

7. For a Bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God: not self-willed, not
soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre.

8. But a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy,
temperate.

9. Holding fast the faithful word, as he has been taught, that he may be able
by sound doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers.


THat, is here verified, which the great Apostle of the Gentiles S. Paul
speaks of himself, his being daily pressed with the care of All the Churches;
2 Cor. 11. 20.
that his care began in planting; and was followed in watering, and continued
in settling the Churches planted and watered.

First, Planting where yet none were: In which his pains were great, labors
indefatigable, and endeavors succesful; so that from Jerusalem, and round
about unto Illiricum, I have (says he) fully preached the Gospel of Christ.
Romans 15. 15. unto 22.
In which round about, are Arabia, Damafeus, Antiochia, Seleucin, Cyprus,
^amphilia, Pisedia, Licaonica, Siria, Cilicia, ^hrygia, Galatia, Misia, Troas,
Achaia, Epirus, and many more; over all which he passed in few years, in all,
powerfully and effectually preaching the Gospel of Christ; so were those
Churches planted.

Secondly, After that, was his care also in watering and confirming the
Churches so planted. And that did he: 1. By personal visits (where it might be)
and staying with them also (while it was permitted him;) so find we him
wintering at Nicopolis of Macedonia, whence this Epistle is sent, Acts 3. 12.
and in the proscript.
and continuing about Ephesus the space of three years. Acts 20. 31.
2. Also, sending others for that work, where he himself could not be: So in
Corinth, where himself had planted, there Apollo after watered 1 Cor. 3. 6.
and thither sent he also Timotheus, That (says he) he should bring you into
remembrance of my ways which be in Christ, as I teach every where in every
Church. 1 Cor. 4. 17.
3. Further also confirming, in appointing some to be more constant and
resident, for instructing and ordering the Churches; so Timothy at Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1. 2.
and Titus in Crete. Tit. 1. 5.
4. That also by writing, where there was occasion: such are his Epistles,
whether to those appointed in chief over the Churches respectively, as to
Timothy and Titus, or to the Churches themselves; so to the Romans, etc. hereby
confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the
faith, and that we must through much Tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God.
Act^ 14. 22.


Thirdly and lastly, His care was in settling the Church planted and confirmed.
In that, was his care (as was said) continued. This Settlement of the Church,
was 1. By Order and Government there appointed; (without that, were no
settlement) for that, is Titus left in Crete, to set in order the things there
wanting, etc. 2. In appointing persons fitly qualified for that work; for which
is here also provided ( v. 6, 7, 8, 9.) where you see those qualifications in
such required. 3. In both, providing for the future, as for the present; and
that, by Ordination, ordaining Elders in every City. Ordination is a standing
Church Ordinance; answering mortality, supplying vacancies, and extending to
all in holy Orders; not to those of lower rank only, to whom (in common
speaking) Ordination seems to be now almost rest ained; but rising to the
higher also, even to Bishops, in respect of whom, it is now termed, commonly,
Consecration. Consecration is the highest act of Ordination. Ordination
includes Consecration; so are Bishops ordained, as Timothy ordained Bishop of
Ephesus; 2 Timothy postscript.
and, Titus ordained Bishop of Crete. Tit. Postscript.
This is the work of this day; for which, and for what concerns it, are these
words now chosen.

In which words you have the persons in this sacred Ministration considered, 1.
In their place, order and work, (v. 5.) 2. In their qualifications, apting and
fitting for that work ( v. 6, 7, 8, 9.)


1. As to the persons in this great work of Church Settlement; see them here
considered as chief and subordinate: first, the Apostle, next, and under him,
Titus; and by Titus, others ordained and ordered: So was it there, so in other
Churches; so was it then, and to be so in the Church successively for ever;
which gives us this Doctrinally,

Doctr.
That in Order and Church Government, is Church-Settlement.

In which, speaking of Order, are excluded Parity and Community.

1. Parity; That, and Government, are inconsistent; for, if all equal, Who then
ruling? who ruled? Who ordering? who ordered? Inter pares non est potestas;
Government there cease. 2. Community: That also is here excluded: Community
as to Government, is but confusion. Let Quakers, and such, see to this; among
whom (in Divine things) is no distinction of Offices, or persons, no, nor of
Sexes, even very women) to whom it is not permitted, but expressly forbidden, to
speak in the Church, the Apostle crying shame on such so speaking, 1 Cor. 14.
34, 35.
yet even women so speaking, are among these allowed.
Lastly, All with them depending (in Divine duties) on uncertain Impulses,
whenever, and from whomsoever: Wherein, let them see, if such Impulses be
(what they pretend) from God; God disowning confusion, and that in the Church
especially: God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all the
Churches of the Saints. 1 Cor. 14. 33.
And what greater confusion, than for a body to be all in a heap and lump,
without head or foot, or distinction of members? So is it there.

Levelling Parity therefore, and confused community, are in this, excluded, as
contrary to Order, Government and Settlement.

Therefore Order here intended, is that wherein is distinction of Offices and
persons, and degrees, in way of Superiority and Subordination: This Nature, and
Reason, and Scripture show to be necessary.

1. So is it in the body natural; where the the members are distinguished in
order and use; which is by the Apostle excellently expressed, 1 Cor. 12
showing, that the body is not one member, but many; Ver. 14
and, if the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing, and if the whole
were hearing, where were the s^elling, Ver. 17.
and if they were all one member, where were the body? but now are they many
members, yet but one body; Ver. 20.
showing after, the use of that distinction, in the usefulness thereby of each
member to other, and of all, to the body; Ver. 21.
and that thereby, there should be no schism in the body Ver. 25.
applying all that to us; that as the body is one, and has many members, and
all the members of that one ^od^ being many, are one body; so also (says the
Apostle) is Christ (ver. 12.) that is, Christ Mystical, considered as complete
in head and body, he the head, we (taking in the Church Catholic, or
Universal) being his body, and each of us distinct members in that body under
him the head. Lastly, all that, is applied to the present business; God (says
he) has set some in the Church, first, Apostles, secondarily, Prophets,
thirdly, Teachers, after that, miracles, then gifts of healings, helps,
governments, diversities of tongues? (adding) are all Apostles, are all
Prophets, are all Teachers, are all workers of miracles, have all the gifts of
healing? do all speak with tongues, do all interpret? (ver. 28, 29.) so there.
In all, you see a distinction of members in the body natural, distinct in order
and use; and that, every way, necessary.

2. See it so also in the body Politic, in all civil Societies of men in
every condition, whether in families or corporations (a word borrowed from the
body;) or in States. In any of which, if no distinction of persons, or of
callings, if not difference in place or degrees, how, in reason, can that
family, city or Kingdom subsist?

3. And if so elsewhere generally, (in the Body Natural and Politic) then so
in the Church, (Christ's Mystical Body) and there especially, the Church being
in this, leading to others. God (says the Apostle) is not the author of
confusion, but of peace, As in all the Churches of the Saints 1 Cor. 14. 33.
And in that, has Gods care appeared particularly, as is evidenced. 1. In the
former Ministration and Government of the Church under the Law; where God
appointed, 1. One in chief, an High Priest, Superior to all in Divine things;
he overseeing, ruling and judging Gods House. Zac. 37.
Gods house is his Church. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
2. Under him the High Priest, were Levites, the lowest in that Ministration,
and more restrained in duty and at distance in the service of the Tabernacle. 1
Chro. 23. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
3. From among the Levites were Priests chosen: who were, as to Order, higher
than Levites, and in service more full, and nearer the Altar, Tabernacle or
Temple. 4. And whereas there were of these Priests several courses (24 in
number) we find each of these 24 courses of Priests to have had an Overseer 1
Chro, 24. 7. to 19.
or chief Priest; of which chief Priests, much is spoken in the New Testament.
These chiif Priests were in degree and dignity, next the high Priest, and above
all others. Number. 13, 14



Thus, and so, was the Church then ordered, in way (you see) of preheminsnee
and subordination: God himself so appointed it.

But is it not now, under the New Testament, otherwise? Is not that distinction
now removed, all Gods people being holy, Numb. 16. 3.
and all now a Royal Priesthood? which is spoken of Saints in a generality. 1
Pet. 21. 9.


It is indeed what some would have; therein, giving a general liberty to all,
for acting in holy things in common, one as another; or where that is by others
restrained, they notwithstanding allow not in the Church, government in chief,
but taking that from others, that they themselves might rule.

In which, as to that general liberty for acting in way of Parity or Community;
that is already cast off, it being inconsistent with Order or Government (as
has been showed.)

And as to that said of all the Lords people being holy, therefore none to
assume a Propriety in Divine Offices more then others (which is the consequence
by such contended for) there needs no more to be said of that, but to know
whose reasoning that was; Was it not Corah and his factious Crew, by whom that
was urged, against Aaron and his Numb. 16. 3:
Priesthood, which had been by God himself appointed? that, therefore I (hope)
will not be now again insisted on.

Lastly, To what is said of all Gods people, that all are a Royal Priesthood 1
Pet. 2 5, 9.
therefore all to act accordingly; (which is by some inferred) 1. What
privilege is in that now, which had not been before, under the Old Testament?
for of them also is that spoken, Exodus 19. 6.
and yet none then so acted notwithstanding, who had not been thereunto
peculiarly called. 2. All Gods people are said to be Kings also, as Priests; (a
Royal Priesthood, or a Kingdom of Priests.) Exodus 19 6. Rev. 1. 6. 15. 10.
And are all Kings? in a sense they are so; and in that sense and not
otherwise, are all Priests also. All, that are truly Gods, are Kings, but that
spiritually, and in a private capacity, as to our selves only; so are we Kings
^ver our selves, ruling over our own hearts and passions, the greatest rule;
Prove. 16. 32.
He that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty; and he that rules his
spirit, than he that takes a city; so, are we all Kings. And so, are all of
us, Priests also; that is, spiritually; so as are our Sacrifices, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
All of us are also Priests in our private capacities, all praying for our
selves and others, and exhorting each other to good: this is incumbent on all
Christians, as Christians, in way of private duty, not of Office: For as to
public Office, that appertains to such only as are thereunto expressly
called, and peculiarly appointed; No man takes this honor to himself, but he
that is called of God, as was Aaron: So also even Christ glarified not himself
to be made an high Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my son, to day
have I begotten thee (as says the Apostle, Hebr. 5. 4, 5. and if not Christ,
until called to it, then surely none other; therefore, was King Vzziah
sacrificing, justly of the High Priest reproved, and by God himself punished: 2
Chro. 26, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
To all it is given to be Priests in way of private privilege, not as to
Office publicly.

Such were Gods Appointments in this, under the Old Testament; nor is it now
under the New Testament otherwise: And so far is it from such a change now,
that the New Testament Ministration may be observed, to be modelled to that of
the Old Testament; yet, with allowance of necessary variations, according to
the change of times and things: This appears in both Testaments, both as to
Service and Government.

I. As to Service: See ours under the New Testament, answering that of old
(although not the same.)

1. For as there was then a Priesthood, so now also: So was it prophesied of
the Gentile Christian Church, Isa. 66. 21.
I will take of them for Priests, and for Levites, says the Lord: the
admitting Gentiles into the Priesthood was new, to what was formerly; that is
here promised. And see that expressed in an Old Testament style, by Priests and
Levites, showing a conformisy in both Testaments, in that, to each other.

2. As then were Priests, so an Altar, at which those Priests officiated; so
now also have we our Altar. Let not this offend any; it should not, they being
the Apostles words: We have (says he) an Altar, whereof they have no right to
eat, which serve the Tabernacle: Heb. 13. 10.
The words We, and They, distinguish persons, and times, and service; yet both
agreeing in an Altar for each: But not now as then; for otherwise, the right of
those Priests would be to this Altar, as to that, but in that, the former
Priesthood is here excluded.

3. And as to the Sacrifices on that Altar; Bullocks, etc. were then offered;
Psalm. 51. 19.
so have we ours also: but, the Calves of our lips Hos. 14. 2.
prayer and praise, the fruit of our lips (that is our Sacrifice to God) giving
thanks to his name. Heb. 13. 15.


4. Maintenance also for those serving at the Altar, is new, from what was
formerly: Do ye not know (says the Apostle) that they which minister about
holy things, live of the things of the Temple; (so then:) even so has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. 1 Cor.
9, 13, 14.


5. And even our very Sacraments also are (in matter) from the Old Testament,
although not now as then; 1. Our Baptism is borrowed from their Legal Washings.
2. And our bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, from the Passover rites; but,
as to nature, use and efficacy. vastly differing: So, have you seen the New
T^stament Service (as to so much, and so far) ordered and conformed to that
before under the Old Testament. (The time will not allow me to instance further
in it.)

II. See it so as to Church Government also, ours and theirs: Ours being now,
in substance, modelled to the form of the Old Testament.

1. For as then there was an High Priest over the House of God, Supreme and
ruling all there; so is it now; and such to us, is Jesus Christ our great High
Priest; Heb. 10 21.
of him, and of his Priesthood and work, were those High Priests, in their
Person, Office and Work, types and shadows; therefore, they, and all that, to
cease and give way, Christ, the true High Priest being manifested, and his work
finished.

2. Under that High Priest were Levites (as you heard) and they, lowest in that
service, and more at distance, and short in ministering. To these answer our
Deacons, an Office Apostolically appointed, Acts 1. 6. 1. to 7. (...) Tim. 3.
10.
and a name from Ministering; these, are with us lowest in Office, and
restrained in work, not admitted to all sacred duties (for a time) as it was
with the Levites of old.

3. As out of those Levites, Priests were called; these being in degree higher
and nearer the Altar in their ministrings: So among us, are also Priests;
(called so as formerly) or if called Elders (a name by some rather delighted
in) yet is even that, an Old Testament name also, 2 Ki. 19. 2 Ita. 37. 2.
thence borrowed, and derived, and continued to us. These our Priests, or
Elders, are (as those before) chosen out of our Levite-Deacons; (so from their
conformity may I call them:) And these our Priests, as the other, are in order
above Deacons, and more enlarged in work and duty.

4. And as there, among those Priests, there were some above others, who
although of the same Order (both being Priests) yet were they in degrees
differing, one being to the other Superior; therefore termed Overseers, and
Chief Priests: These were as to place, next to the High Priest, and above all
others: And such with us were the Apostles of our Lord, they being (in the Rule
and Government of the Church) next unto Christ the High Priest, and above all
others: Hence, first Apostles, is the place given them, 1 Cor. 12. 28.
they are first, and among all other Officers in the Church the principal.

In which Apostolic order and work, were some things Extraordinary, and some
things Ordinary.

1. Extraordinary: (for among the Extraordinary Offices in the Church are
Apostles reckoned 1 Cor. 12. 28.


That (I say) in this their Office Extraordinary, was their measure of gifts,
infallibility of their doctrine, and the extent of their charge, their
universal care of all the Churches throughout the whole world; for although
some of them were for the Circumcision, or for the Jews principally; and others
for the Uncircumcision, or Gentiles more especially, Gal. 2. 7
yet was not the extent of the Apostolic power of either, in that limited,
neither their universal care of all the Churches; the care of all the Churches
was on S. Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles: 2 Cor. 11. 26.
These things in the Apostolic office extraordinary, were fixed to their
persons, and with themselves expired and determined. In that had they no
Successors; therefore Romes pretense to an universal Bishopric, and Supremacy
of care, and rule over all the Churches in the world, and that, as S. Peter's
Successor, is but Usurpation, as the pretense to Infallibility is also
evidenced to be otherwise.

2. But in the Apostolic Office and Work, was something also Ordinary: Such
was their Overseeing, Ordering, Ordaining, Preaching and Baptizing. This part
of the work is lasting; this is now, and ever holding in the Church to all
generations; which is intended in their Commission given them by our Lord, Mat.
28. 19, 20.
Go ye and teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. and teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever, I have commanded you, and lo I am with you always (says
Christ) to the end of the world. But how that to the end of the world? of the
Prophets it is said, that they are dead, Zech. 1. 5
and that is true of the Apostles also. S. Paul the aged, Phile. 9.
had his time at hand in which he was to be offered up; 2 Timothy 4. 6.
so was S. Peter's tabernacle to be put off shortly; 2 Pet. 1. 14.
how then to the end of the world? Both are true; for that which failed with
their Persons, lasts in their Office, and in their Work, and Successors: So had
the Apostles Successors. And accordingly do we find them providing for
Succession, both as to persons and work. For that, were Timothy and Titus drawn
in, and ordained by the Apostle S. Paul, to be then, his Assistants, and to be
after, his Successors, for supplying his place, care, and work in their
Churches respectively; he appointing them also to ordain others with, and under
them, and others after to succeed these; so, to generations unto the end of the
World: Of which, and of the correspondence of both Testaments S. Hierom speaks
thus, Hi^r. ad Evagr.
That we may see Apostolical Traditions to be taken out of the Old Testament,
look what Aaron and his Sons, and the Levites were in the Temple, the same let
the Bishops, Priests and Deacons challenge in the Church: And Idem ad
Nepotianum.
We know Bishops and Priests to be what were Aaron and his Sons; And S. Cyprian
calls Bishops the Apostles Successors: Cypr. l. 4. epist. 9.
All Bishops are the Apostles Successors, says S. Hierom. Hier. ad Evagr.


And as so, do we find the Apostles name, place and work, to have been by the
Apostles given to these their Successors.

II. As to the Name: The very name of Apostle is so given to Epaphroditus
Bishop of the Philippians, as Bullinger calls him; Bulling. in Philip. 2.
him does S. Paul call their Apostle, Philip. 2. 25. so is it in the Original,
whereas in our English (it would be enquired how well) it is rendered Messenger.

For S. Ambrose on those words, Ambros. in Phil. 2.
He (Epaphroditus) is by the Apostles made their Apostle. And S. Hierome
writing on those words, My Fellow Soldier, and your Apostle: Fellow Soldier
(says he) by reason of his honor, because he also had received the Office of
being an Apostle among them Hier. in Phil. 2.
Again, By those chosen by our Lord, were others ordained Apostles, as appears,
in that to the Philippians (Phil. 2. 25.) Epaphroditus your Apostle, so S.
Hierom. (Coment. in Gal. 1. 19.) But that name Apostle was not intended for a
lasting name, as Theodoret observes, Theod. in 1. Tim.
In time past they called the same men Presbyters and Bishops, and they who are
now called Bishops, they named Apostles; but in process of time they left the
name Apostle to them properly called Apostles, and the name of Bishop they gave
to them who had been Apostles. Apostle was their name, and even that name of
Bishop (now more fixed) is what they had from the Apostles; from whom they
derive their Office, that of Bishop, was the Apostles own name of Office. So
Judas numbered with the Apostles, and obtaining part of the same Ministry with
them the Apostleship Acts 1. 17.
that his Apostleship is called his Office (so we read it) but by the LXX, it
is rendered, his Bishopric) let another take his Office or Bishopric; Psalm
10^. 8.
which word Bishopric is is used by the Apostle S. Peter, citing that in Psalm
109. 8. according to the LXX, Acts 1. 2^.
and what is there called by the name of Bishopric, is after called
Apostleship: Acts 1. 25.
The Apostles were Bishops, which are the words of S. Ambrose (in Ephesians. 4. 11.
and 2 Cor. 12. 28.) And that name of Bishop was derived to the Apostles from
those from whom (under the Old Testament) they derive (if I may so say) I mean
these Chief Priests, called in our English, Overseers, but by the LXX Bishops:
Nehem. 11. 14.
Overseers and Bishops are the same; Acts 20. 28.
the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, (so in our English) but in the Greek,
Bishops: which the Apostles name Bishop is thus given (you see) to their
Successors Bishops to this day. Thus as Christ the High Priest has the Name of
Apostle ( Heb. 3. 1.) and Bishop (1 Pet. 2. 25.) and as they sent by him (his
Apostles) were so also called; so are in like manner they who are by the
Apostles substituted, as you have seen.

II. And as the Apostolic name, so, the same work also, (as, Teaching,
Ordering, Ordaining, etc. is by the Apostles committed to their Successors; for
this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the things
that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every city, as I had appointed thee,
says the Apostle here to Titus his Successor. Tit 1 5.
The same work being in all others in like place and trust in the Church for
ever.

III. And for carrying on that great work and name, had these, the Apostles
Succssors, the Apostles place and degree also in the Church; in being above
others, and to be accordingly respected and esteemed. Apud Nos Apostolorum
locum tenent Episcopi, apud Eos, tertius est Episcopus; quod apud nos primum,
apud illos est novissimum. Hieronim. Ep. 54. ad Marceliam adversus Montanum.
Among us (says S. Hierome) Bishops have the place of the Apostles: which his
Expression, Among us, shows how Bishops were esteemed among Oxthodox
Christians; other, than was among Heretics, such as Montanus, and his
followers, against whom he there writes; blaming them, for so depressing and
vilifying that sacred and high Order, as they did; And what is among us, chief
and first (speaking of Bishops) that is (says he) last with them: (with
Montanus and his Faction;) with them Bishops are in the third and last place.
So, S. Hierome; on whom I fix rather then on many other, to that purpose, he
being understood by the contrary side, not to have been of the best friends to
Bishops, yet in this, is the privilege and pre-eminence of Bishops by him
acknowledged, asserted, and even (you see) contended for. Thus was it in S.
Hieromes time, 400 years after Christ; it having been so continued to his days
from the times of the Apostles: so also after S. Hieromes time, through all
ages of the Church, until that Schism raised about 126 years since, in Geneva,
An. 1541 (a year to us, in the next Century, 1641. on the same account fata^:)
whereby, we find this Sacred Hierarchy trampled on by inferio^ Elders, by whom
(although the name of Bishop would be forgotten) yet is the place and power,
and work of Bishops by them notwithstanding ambitiously sought after, and
sacrilegiously usurped, and to themselves alone appropriated; affirming, all
spoken of Bishops to be intended only of Elders, and making Elders and Bishops
the same, without difference of degree, or pre-eminence in any kind. Some
Community there is indeed between Bishops and Elders, yet so, as that even in
that, there appears sufficient to preserve to Bishops their Being, Work and
Dignity, distinct and above those, who would themselves have all without
sharing.

Let this be considered distinctly in that community, which is by these Elders
challenged with Bishops both in Name and Work; by which they conclude Bishop
and Elders the same, and themselves all.

the names of Bishops and Elders promiscuously 1.
used: for that, are these places of Scripture, among others, by them,
insultingly, insisted on particularly, Acts 20. 28. where the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus ( v. 17.) are v. 28) called Overseers, or Bishops (so in the
Greek.) Also Phil. 1. 1. the Apostle saluteth the Saints at Philippi, with the
Bishops and Deacons: See (say they) Bishops (plurally) many of them in the same
City; therefore intended of Elders, not Bishops, and that there also Bishops
and Deacons only are named, not Elders; Elders notwithstanding being intended;
therefore concluding, that in that of Bishops, Elders are understood, and not
Bishops.

And even this Text also ( Tit. 1. 5, 7.) is by them urged to that purpose:
where are Elders in every City ( v. 5.) and those Elders ( v. 5.) called
Bishops ( v. 7.) 1. Therefore (say they) to be meant of Elders properly, and
not of Bishops; on all, concluding that Elders and Bishops (so promiscuonsly
used) are therefore the same, and not distinguished; and therefore no
pre-eminence in Bishops over Elders: These are the Allegations and inferences,
in this; which are to be examined.

But, the promiscuous using of those two names of Bishops and Elders (the
principal ground of these reasonings) is far from such conclusions; that
because Elders are called Bishops, or Bishops Elders, both therefore to be the
same, without priority or subordination; whereas on the contrary, we find
usually in Scripture, the names of one degree given to another, without
confounding them as the same; or, in that, abating any way the dignity of the
higher. See this in the name of Deacons (a name from ministering;) and that an
order lowest in our Ministration: yet, is that given to higher Orders: So of
Timothy, Bishop of Ephesus, says S. Paul. If thou put the brethren in
remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good ( Deacon;) we render it
Minister: 1 Timothy 4. 6. (...).
so speaks the Apostle of himself, I Paulam (...) a Minister (Col. 1. 23 and
the whole Apostleship is also called (...) a Deaconship, or Ministry Acts 1, 17.
; and even Jesus Christ himself the great High Priest, is called a Deacon:
Jesus Christ was ((...)) a Minister of the Circumcision; Romans 15. 8.
or, ministering to those of the Circumcision. Math. 15. 24.


But because our English readings in this, and in the Original are diverse;
therefore not so clear to every apprehension; let this therefore be considered
in that other of Elder, where it is more plain. In that, we find the Apostle
S. John terming himself an Elder, more than once, the Elder to the elect Lady,
2 John. v. 1.
and the Elder to the well beloved Gaius 3 John v. 1.
: So S. Peter of himself, The Elders which are among you, I exhort, who am also
an Elder 1 Pet. 5. 1
. You see in that, the Apostles called Elders; yet does not that conclude,
Apostles and Elders to be the same. For how often do we read of Apostles and
Elders as distinct. Acts 15. 2, 4, 6, 22, 23 and 16. 4.
Nor does it conclude, Apostles and Elders to be equal, because Apostles are
Elders; but, this it shows, That all Apostles are Elders; not, all Elders
Apostles, and that notwithstanding that community of names, they still are
distinguished in Degree and Dignity. So is it as to Bishops and Elders in like
manner, the name of Elders is given to Bishops, and of Bishops to Elders, both
are true; For in the Bishop (says S. Ambrose) are all Orders, because he is
the first Priest, that is, the Prince of the Priests Ambr. in Ephesians. 4.
. Again, Id. in 1 Timothy 3.
of a Bishop and Presbyter, there is one Order for either of them as a Priest,
but the Bishop is the first; so that every Bishop is a Presbyter, but not every
Presbyter a Bishop. So S. Ambrose. Thus all Bishops are granted to be Elders,
and some Elders are Bishops, but all Elders are not Bishops. They who say they
are, must prove it, before they can conclude any thing to purpose: Nor will
that do it, which they allege out of Acts 20. where the Elders of the Church
of Ephesus, (v. 17.) are termed Overseers, or Bishops: ( v. 28.) for those
Elders were indeed Bishops; if not all, yet some of them, and to those some for
all, is there spoken as Bishops. This appears in that, Ephesus was a See
Metropolitical, comprehending Asia the less (a large Jurisdiction.) So in the
sixth general Council of Constantinople, Theodorus Bishop of Ephesus thus
subscribes, S^n^d. Constantin^. Action 17.
Theodorus by the mercy of God, bishop and Primate of Ephesus, the Metropolis
of the Asian Province, or Diocese: Act. 18.
Also of Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, Eusebius says, that he was Ruler or
chief of the Bishops of Asia; Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24.
and that by his Authority he did assemble a Provincial Synod to discuss the
question about Easter; Ib. c. 25.
and that he did write a Synodical Letter to Victor Bishop of Rome ( Eusebius. l.
5. (...)) we find also in the (...), or distribution of Churches by Leo the
Emperor, that Ephesus was a Metropolis, having 36 Suffragane Bishops; Iur.
(...) 90.
and so is Ephesus to be understood in Acts 20. as Metropolical; and that
meeting of Elders, or Bishops there as Provincial: For it is there called not
the Churches, but the Church of Ephesus, Metropolitically; yet, Elders
(plurally) implying. more than of one Church: And as in a Provincial meeting of
the Bishops of Asia, together with other Elders, (both usually conveening on
such occasions,) might the Apostle call those Elders, literally, Bishops.
Irenaeus says as much, that Bishops and Presbyters were there convocated from
Ephesus, and other adjoining Cities, etc. Iraen. l. 3. c. 14.
And ( Acts 20. 28.) The Holy Ghost has (says the Apostle) made you Bishops
(so in the Original) or Overseers (so in our rendering:) If therefore the Holy
Ghost had made them Bishops; and the Apostle call them so accordingly, we may
then acquiesce in it, rather than to mince the matter according to pe^verse
glossings, it being to so great a prejudice as the disturbance of the peace of
the Church; (so precious)

In this, have we to answer, what is alfo objected out of Phil. 1. 1. the
Apostle sa^nting the Saints at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons, wherein
the Authors of the larger Annotations on the Bib^e, busy themselves
exceedingly Annat. on Phil. 1. 1.
in proving out of the second Council of Nice, and by Cornelius Bishop of Rome
(there cited) that there should be but one Bishop in one City; thence
concluding, in favor of those times, that there being many Bishops in
Philippi, therefore were not they Bishops, but Elders.

But all this is grounded on a supposition, that Philippi is restrained to that
City of Macedonia so called, whereas Philippi was a Metropolis in Macedonia;
Acts 16. 12.
and we read of the Churches of Macedonia; 2 Cor. 9 1.
and of the brethren in all Macedonia; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 10.
And why may not Philippi a Metropolis, include its Province? and this Epistle
to the Philippians be to that Church at large, where many Bishops were to be
saluted, without those narrow inferences in confining Philippi to a City within
its walls, and the Bishops and Deacons at Philippi, to those only in that City
inhabiting; As to that farther objected from that Text, Phil. 1. 1. of Bishops
and Deacons only named; and that Elders being intended* therefore, by Bishops,
(say they) Elders are to be understood, and not Bishops. But how follows that?
For, 1. May not Elders be as well included in, and with that of Deacons? You
have seen the name of Deacon to have been sufficiently comprehensive of more,
and greater than they. 2. Or if Elders be supposed to be included in that of
Bishops: Let that suffice and satisfy, without excluding Bishops: For shall
Elders included, and not named, exclude Bishops, which are expressly named? 3.
Or if Presbyters be there signified in those many Bishops yet was there one
chief Bishop over all, which was Epaphroditus their Apostle ( Phil. 2. 25.) Of
which Theodoret Theod. in Phil. 2.
he calls him Apostle, to whom the charge of them was committed; Wherefore
(says he) it is manifest) that they who in the beginning of the Epistle were
called Bishops, were under him, they having the place of Presbyters.

But this Text also, ( Pit. 1. 5. 7.) is pressed in favor of Elders against
Bishops; for Elders (so named, v. 5.) are ( v. 7. termed Bishops, adding, that
there being Elders in every City, therefore is that intended of Elders
properly, and not of Bishops, who are not for every City. (thus they)

1. It is true, that in every City are to be Elders, wheresoever is a meeting
of people to be provided for; so, are Elders properly to be understood; and the
word City to be, in that case, strictly taken.

2. But as referring to Bishops Seats, the word City is to be understood more
enlargedly; not for every city, but such only as are fit for it; as places of
note, and such as are extended in jurisdiction: We use to say ( traditionally)
that a Bishops Seat should be a city; i. e. a place of note: so does Leo
expound this very Text, writing to the Bishops of Africa, Leo ad Episc. Afric.
Epist. 87. c. 2.
To appoint Bishops in every City, or Town, is (says he) in the greater citres
to place Bishops, in the less to place Priests: He in that, speaking according
to the Council of Sardis; It is not allowed says that Council) that a Bishop
be appointed in every village, or smaller city, where one Presbyter may
suffice, for there, a Bishop needs not be, that the name and authority of a
Bishop be not vilified: ( Con. Eard. c. 6.) In every city, therefore, are to be
Elders; and in every city fitting for it, a^e be to Bishops. So, has this been
understood in the practice of the Church accordingly.

And well might Crete be capable of many Bishops, being an Island of great
extent, and populous. And Titus his enlarged Jurisdiction there, over many
Bishops, ( ordaining and appointing them where necessary,) shows his power to
have been Archiepiscopal, a though he be styled only Bishop of Crete, as
Timothy Bishop of Ephesus; (so, in the poscript to those Epistles;) and usual
it is in the Councils and elsewhere, to find Archbishops and Patriarchs, under
the name of Bishops. And that Cre^e had its Archbishop and Suffragans we also
find. The Archbishop of Crete was nominated from Gortyna its Metropolis.
Dionysius of Corinih (who lived in the next age to the Apostles) writing to the
Church of Gortyna, together with the rest of the Churches of Crete, commends
Philip (...), their Bishop, for his singular piety and virtues Eusebius. l. 4. c.
21. and 23 and 29.
. The City of Gnossus in Crete, had Pintus its Bishop: And (says Theodorus
Balsamo) I have perused the ancient code of Councils, and defind by the
subscriptions, that Basiil Bishop of Gortyna was present at the Council of
Tru^lo.

On the whole, therefore, from the community of the names between Bishops and
Elders, is no ground for what is thence inferred, That therefore Bishops and
Elders are the same, without dictinction of Persons, Offices, or Degrees; for,
Bishops are Elders, and some Elders are Bishops, and both distinct, in Degree,
and Dignity.

But the the strength of the Objection is it what concerns the work, common to
Bishops and Elders: For if the same work be common to both, so as, what a
Bishop does, that an Elder does also; then what needs a distinction of Persons
and and Offices? These are not to be multiplied without necessity. And that the
work is common, and the same, both to Bishops and Elders, is (by that side)
instanced, in 1. Ordination. 2. In Overseeing, (under this of Overseeing, all
the other pa^ts of the work are comprehended, as Preaching, Baptizing, etc.)
Let these two, be therefore distinctly considered and examined; Whether in the
work common to both Bishops and E^ders, there be not sufficient to differente
each from other.

1. As to Ordination: To this, Elders or Presbyters pretend; grounding on that,
1 Timothy 4. 14. where the Apostle exhorts Timothy, Not to neglect the gift which
was given him by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.
Here (say they) Presbyters Ordain.

1. But ^et them take all together; for does not the same Apostle say also to
Timothy, I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God which is
in thee by the putting on of my hands? (2 Timothy 1. 6.) here, we find another
hand (the Apostles) beside those hands of Presbyters imposed on Timothy;
therefore, not the hands of Presbyters alone: where therefore their hand only
is in the work, there is another yet wanting; and the work short without it;
(the case of necessity excepted.)

2. Ordination, must be granted to have been in the Apostles primarily, and
principally; and not in Elders or Presbyters principally; (they but acting with
the Apostles, and that but subordinately:) By my hand, says the Apostle ((2 Timothy 1. 6.) with the hands of the Presbytery (1 Timothy 4. 14.) It is by the
Apostles hand principally, and but with the other, in way of approbation.
Therefore, is the charge of Oedination given principally to Timothy, that he
lay not hands suddenly on any; so not to be partaker of other men's sins 1 Timothy,
5. 22.
: there, Presbyters are not named, not as not assisting, but as only
assisting, and not as principals. It is, be not thou partaker of other men's
sins; not, be not ye, (speaking of Presbyters.) So, you find it here also as
to Titus; to him is that work committed principally and in chief: I left thee
(Titus) in Crete, that thou should set in order the things that are wanting,
and that thou should orvain Elders in every City, as I have appointed thee
Tit. (...). 5.
. So is it to be understood, as to others, in like place with Timothy and
Titus. Bishops ordain others joining with them. Bishops will not do it without
others; and others must not do it without Bishops; concur Elders may, but act
in it alone, they must not: the contrary (where necessity is not) is an
unwarranted usurpation. Yet in giving but an hand in the work, they will have
All. Such notwithstanding are to know, that there is another hand in that work,
as beside theirs, so before theirs, and above them: theirs is only with, not
without Bishops; and Bishops in that principally. So, for Ordination: in which
work ( common both to Bishops and Elders) is (you see) sufficient,
notwithstanding,) to difference both, in Degree and Office.

II. See it also in the other part of the work, in which Bishops and Elders act
also in common; as Preaching, Baptizing, and ordering the flock committed to
them; so, are both Overseers. This is granted in common to both Bishops and
Elders; yet so, as that this is in both, differently: and, so in Bishops, as
not in others. 1. It is true, that Preaching, Baptizing, Ordering, and
Overseeing the flock, are incumbent on all; but in inferior Elders more
restrainly; with respect to place and persons; they acting within Precincts,
and Parishes, among their own people, and within their own districts only. To
these, and there, are they Overseers; and not otherwise: so as, for any such to
take on him to Oversee, and see what others without, do, or do not, is to be
(...). Pet. 4. 15.
a Bishop in another D^ccess, or a busy body in other men's matters (so is
that in our English rendered;) whereas, the same work is in the hands of Bishops
far otherwise; who as they do it themselves, so is it in them, in way of
Superintendency, to see it done by others also. So the chief Priests under the
Law (whom the Apostles, and afther them, Bishops, represent;) they were
Overseers to others, that the work be done in manner and order, as did become.
Thus are Bishops overseers to those other Overseers; the care of many Churches
being on them, as was the cure of all Churches on the Apostles; whereas the
care of particular Churches (this or that) is only on others.

Presbyters have power to preach, 2.
and do what belongs to their Function, yet are they in acting that power,
limited and ordered by the Bishop. Wherein, we are to distinguish (as in the
Schools) between Power of Order, and of Jurisdiction; Power of Order,
Presbyters receive in their Ordination, to do what belongs to their function,
to which they are thereby qualified: but the Power of Jurisdiction to act that
their power of Order as ^astors, that, a Presbyter has in his Institution from
the Bishop, being, thereby, appointed to a charge and place, and licensed to
discharge the duty of his calling, to which he was before qualified, and now
enabled. Tertullian says, Tertul. de Bapt.
That the chief Priest (which is the Bishop) has the right of giving Baptism,
and then the Presbyters and Deacons, but yet not without the Authority of the
Bishops. So also S. Hierome; Hier. adver. Lucif.
Without power from the Bishop, neither Presbyter nor Deacon has right to
baptize. Every Presbyter therefore has power in common with a Bishop, to
preach and administer the Sacraments in fullness, (which an inferior Order, a
Deacon cannot do;) yet, the exercise of that power, is subjected to, and
regulated by the Bishops authority, to be permitted, directed, restrained or
suspended, as should be necessary. In which the Bishops privilege of
Jurisdiction over Elders, is he from them eminently differenced. It was said of
Elders, that they have a power of Jurisdiction; (understand it, of a power of
spiritual and inward Jurisdiction, in foro conscienciae, in the Court of
Conscience) so, as Pastors of the flock, is committed to them, the seeding,
ruling, teaching, reproving, binding sinners notoriously scandalous; by
denouncing Gods judgments in the Word, and (while unreformed) excluding from
the Sacrament; and again loosing, and releasing penitents, by applying the
gracious promises of the Gospel, and readmiting them to the use of the
Ordinances.

But, that Jurisdiction which is in Bishops, is more extended, and that, even
over Elders themselves. For as Presbyters are in their Ordination, qualified,
and by their Institution authorized, to their work; so, are they, after, to
behave themselves in that as becomes. It is in Bishops (who are overseers of
those Overseers) to expect and exact that from them authoritatively; and on
failing in duty, or manners, (as to life, and conversation,) to reprove and
punish also. In this, is Episcopal Jurisdiction given them Apostolically, and
over inferior Elders particalarlarly, to which they are subjected. Such was
Timothies power in Ephesus; 1 Timothy 5. 1, 19, 20.
Rebuke not an Elder; and, against an Elder receive not an accusation, but
before two, or three witnesses, them that sin rebuke before all, that others
may fear: Which words, Rebuke not an Elder; is not a restraining, but an
ordering that rebuke, that it be not lightly, or on slight grounds (as in 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20.) by which appears a Jurisdiction in Bishops, above Elders,
directive, coercive, and corective: which is Epiphanius his interence on these
words, against a Presbyter, etc. Therefore (says he) Presbyters are subject to
the Bishop as to their Judge Epiphan. Haeres. 75.
. He is their Judge, as to Doctrine; that thou may charge some that they
teach no other Doctrine, says the Apostle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1. 3.) and to
Titus (Tit. 3. 10.) A man that is an Heretic ofter the first and second
admonition, reject; judge also, as of their Doctrine, what they teach; so of
their Conversation, how they live, as you have heard in that of 1 Timothy 1. 5,
17, 20, 21. Therefore is the Angel of the Church of Ephesus ( Timothies
Successor) commended, that he could not bear with them that are evil, and had
tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and had found them liars
(Rev. 2. 2.) On the contrary, the Angel of the Church of Thyratira is reproved
for suffering such ( Rev. 2. 20.)

So as, although there be a Community of names, (in some cases) between Bishops
and Elders (Bishops are called, Elders and Elders Bishops;) and notwithstanding
that the work also, be (in a kind) common; yet is that community so
differenced in both, that all pretenses of Elders, in that, for casting of
Bishops, as to their Office, or divesting them of Jurisdiction and Dignity, is
apparently inconsequent, and evil. For although the names of Bishops and
Presbyters were confounded, and the work (in a sort) common to both, yet were
not the Offices of Bishops and Presbyters ever confounded until now.

1. And now to sum up al^; you see the Church under the New Testamen ordered as
before, in way of Superiority and Subordination; and that Apostolically
appointed. So Timothy in Ephesus; and Titus in Crete; and others elsewhere in
like manner; they ordering persons and things appertaining to that sacred work,
within their respective Jurisdictions.

2. See those Apostolically ordered to that care and charge in the Church above
others, to be by the Apostles, dignified with their own name, (that standing
name of Bishops.) they standing also in their place and stead, and acting in
their work, ( Ordaining, Overseeing, Ordering, and Correcting as is necessary.)

3. What has been by the Apostles so ordered in the Church, (whose words
Christ would have to be observed as his own; If they have kept my saying, they
will keep yours also, John 15. 20.) that, in this particularly, has been by
Christ himself, the High Priest approved. For, as the High Priest, did Christ
appear habited, being clothed with a garment down to the feet, and girt vbout
the paps with a golden girdle, Rev. 1. 13.
and also visiting his Church Ecclesiatim: each of the seven Churches
particularly, being by him inspected: Rev. 2. 3
In that reproving what was amiss in any, and allowing, what was right.
particularly, See that Government which was ordered in each of those eminent
Churches, (in Ephesus and the other six) under their respective Angels, or
Chiefs, or Bishops; see that order (I say) in the Church, approved of Christ:
for, the Seven Stars, (the seven Angels Angels of those Churches, their
Bishops) were in Christ's right hand (Rev. 1. 16. 20.) that is, under his care,
and protection. And to those Angels of the Churches does our Lord direct
himself principally in behalf of all under their charge; expecting from them an
account of the Churches within their respective Jurisdictions, each of them
being responsible for all that was there, well, or otherwise.

4. Lastly, What had been so ordered by the Apostles, see it by the Church
received, and after continued throughout all ages from the beginning: whereby,
what might (seem) doubtful in the first Institution, may be cleared by
observing what was of that understood, and after practiced by the Church
accordingly: The Church is the pillar and ground of truth; 1 Timothy 3. 15.
and what (grounding on the Scripture) the Church in all ages has held from
the beginning, that we may rely upon for truth. And how did the Church
understand the Apostles appointing Bishops and Elders in the Church for its
Government? Did they not understand it of Bishops distinct from Elders, and
Superior to them? Did they ever understand it of Elders without Bishops? or of
Elders ruling in chief? much less of Lay Elders? (of which, is nothing to be
found any where, in Scripture or Antiquity.)

Let the constant practice of the Church throushhout all ages be Judge in that,
how the Apostles were therein understood. In which I shall use the words of
Judicious Mr. Hooker, Rich-H^oker, of Eccles. Pol. Preface n. 4.
Very strange it is ( says he) that such a Discipline as ye (Elders) speak of,
should be taught by Christ and his Apostles in the word of God, and no Church
have found it out, nor received it till this present time; contrariwise, the
Government against which ye bend your selves, be observed every where
throughout all generations and ages of the Christian world, no Church ever
perceiving the word of God to be against it; ( adding) We require you to find
out but one Church upon the face of the whole earth, that has been ordered by
your discipline, or has not been ordered by ours, (that is to say) by
Episcopal Regiment Sithence the time that the blessed Apostles were (...)
conversant. This was Mr. Hookers challenge to that side in this case, and that,
many years since: which has never been to this day answered, only by the
sword; and so, was it, indeed, put home to us perilously: Antiquity is not to
be despised, but that to be advised with, and submitted to in such cases.
Enquire of the former Age and prepare thy self to the search of their fathers
(for we are but of yesterday and know nothing) shall not they teach thee and
tell thee, and utter words out of their hearts: said Bildad, to Job. 8. 8. 9.
10. So the Lord directs by the Prophet, thus says the Lord stand ye in the way
and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way and walk therein and
ye shall find rest for your Souls: but they said we will not walk therein
Jer. 6. 16.
which is even what these say in this; refusing any such trial in this
dispute, well knowing themselves cast in it. But in matters of antiquity to
deny the credit of Antiquity in what is not contradicted by Scripture,
discovers One addicted to Noveltie and singularity rather then to truth.

Let therefore our Church Levellers se to this; who in such their Schism tear
and rend the seamless garments of the Church, and as a generation of Vipers eat
out, and through the bowels of their Mother; disturbing Church unity and peace,
drawing into factions, and filling all with confusions. Herein let them see
themselves in their forefathers; for, such there were of old, under both
Testaments.

Se some under the old Testament setting themselves even against what God
himself had expressly ordered concerning the high Priesthood in Aron Numb. 16.
1, 2, 3, 9, 8, 9, 10.
There, Corah of the tribe of Levy, raised a party and faction of 250 Princes
of the Assembly against Moses and Aron, having the confidence thus to tell
them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy every one
of them, and the Lord is among them, wherefore then lift you your selves above
the congregation of the Lord; but Moses returns it to them again: ye take too
much upon you ye Sons of Levy, seems it but a small thing unto you that the
Lord God of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel to bring
you near unto himself to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, to stand
before the congregation to Minister unto them: And he has brought thee near
unto him: and all thy brethren, the Sons of Levi with thee and seek ye the
Priesthood also, so was it then.

2. And such Corahs we find under the new Testament also, of whom the Apostle
S. Jude speaks with a woe Jude 10.
woe to them for they have gone in the way of Cain and ran greedily after the
error of Balaam and perished in the gainsaying of Core. Where se them ranked
with three notoriously wicked; Cain, and Balaam, and Corab: with Cain for
blood; with Balaam for Covetousness, and with Corah for faction, Cain the
accursed murderer of his brother, righteous Abel: so was he the first
persecuter of the Church Math. 23. 35.
Balaam called on to curss the people of God. Nam. 22. 56.
and Corah, a factious schismatique, to Corahs schism, are they moved, by
Balaams Covetousnesss and ambition; and to that, going on in the way of Cain,
in blood and cruelty. And for that see woe, and destruction; beginning with woe
( Judgment denounced) and ending with destruction ( Judgment executed)
perishing in the gainsaying of Core; Core (or Corah) of all that faction, is
alone mentioned; others being but his followers in that wicked cause: his
destruction being also more remarkable, whether as to those with him in that
rebellion; or as to those other two, notoriously wicked, ( Balaam and Cain,)
whose ends were not as of others, Corah and his followers perishing not by an
ordinary Judgment like other men, the earth opening its mouth and swallowing up
them, and theirs alive, in sight of all the people. Number. 16. 20, 31, 31, 32,
33, 34.
By the dreadfulness of the Judgment, let the hainousness of the sin be
estimated.

3. And, such have been our Corah^ also, (authors of our late confusions and
evils in Church and State.) By whom has been in the Church, and Inlet and
overflowing of blasphemies and of monstrous and pernicious doctrines (horrible
to be mentioned and not, in very confutations, to be remembered) as if hell it
self had broken loose (The title of a book in which many of those abominations
are Collected.) And no wonder it should be so, Church order and Government
having been, (as it was) cast off and trampled on. While that stood, all was
well withus; the face of our Church was comely: and truth and peace secured,
and the enemies to both, error, and schism, not daring to show themselves
among us, The Church is here Militant; So is it described Cant. 6. 4, 10.
terrible as an army with banners; with banner i. e. in order: So it is by the
LXX. rendered (...) An army under its banners is in order: and in that order is
both beauty and terror, and in that, security; ( Church security and Church
beauty is in order:) thou art beautiful O my love as Tirza, comely as
Jerusalem terrible as an army with banners (Cant. 6. 4.) how pleasant is an
army ranged under its banners! so the Church under its colors, leaders and
officers, each in their place order, and degree. And as in that is beauty, so
also, security; security is implied where it is said to be terrible, that is,
to enemies, (to errors and heresies, enemies to truth; and to schism and
faction, which are contrary to order and unity:) These dare not appear while
the Church is under its government and in order; each under his banners, in
their order and place, being thereby ready to oppose what shall be contrary. It
is otherwise, where order is not in the Church but our banners cast down, and
our chief leaders taken off; what can be then (...) deformity for beauty and
for order (...)on? what then but terror? terror to our selves: (so is, an army,
in confusion, to it self terrible;) and thereby have enemies their advantages,
about, and within; therefore says S. Jerome. Here advers. Lucifer.
the safety of the Church depends on the dignity of the chief Priest (meaning
the Bishop) to whom if power be not given, there must be as many schisms in
the Church ^s there are Priests. So S. Cyprian. Cypr. (...). 1. epist. 3.
Heresies or Schisms have no other beginning but this, that Gods Priest
(meaning Bishop) is not obeyed. Again; Id. l. 3. epist. 5.
These be the beginnings of heretics, these the risings and endeavors of ill
minded Schismatics, that they please themselves and contemn their Bishops with
swelling pride, So do men depart from the Church etc. And Id. Scr. 2. de zel^
and li(...).
hence do men rush into heresies and schisms when they speak evil of Priests,
and envy their Bishops. All which we have found sadly in our late miserable
Church distractions.

2. And by those evils in the Church did follow on our state also confusion and
destruction. If the Church be borne down, let not the State think to stand; And
we have seen evils designed to the State, carried on by attempting, first, on
the Church Corahs opposition pretended principally against Aron, rests not
there, for others with Corah, had their designs in that, against Moses also:
and in that against Aron, came in Moses immediately, they gathered themselves
against Moses and Aron. And (say they) to Moses (even in a breach) will thou
make thy self altogether a Prince over us: Numb. 16. 3. 11. 13.
Therefore are both joined by the Apostle S. Jude Jude v. 8. 11.
with the gainsaying of Core is a speaking evil also of dignities. In both,
have we seen and felt the dismal effects of this Church Schism.

But blessed be God by whom: these breaches are now all made up and repaired
both in Church and State, by the happy Restoration of his Sacred Majesty to
his Royal throne and government.

1. hereby, is Settlement to the Kingdoms. Our Judges being restored as at the
first and our Counselors as at the beginning. Is. 1. 26.


2. And thereby is our Church also settled: so as at this day (even this very
day) we have, and our eyes do behold among us here, such in the Church, who sit
and rule in chief, setting in order the things that are wanting and ordaining
Elders, ( Bishops) Successively, as has been Apostolically appointed. In that,
see we our Church Settlement. In Church order and Government, is Church
Settlement; which was that, in the words, first propounded with which I have
now done.

As to what remains of the Text ( the qualifications of those persons to be
called forth to this high and Sacred calling and work; (of which you have much
here v. 6. 7, 8, 9.) of that I may not now speak; time will not admit it nor
needs it at present; where, in the person now before us, and to be admitted
into this Sacred function, these qualification; are already; nor were it for me
(for me I say) to show it so. Flaternam ut propriam tacere gloriam est modesty
Senec.


I shall therefore conclude with the Apostles Clerum (Acts 20.) wherein we have
(to our purpose,) both exhortation and valediction. First exhortation: you have
heard your place and honor asserted, see now your office and work: and in that
your care and charge. Acts. 20. 28.
Take heed unto your selves and to all the flock, over the which, the holy
Ghost has made you overseers (or Bishops) to feed the Church of God which he
has purchased with his own blood. In that you have your charge; (see you now
to the discharge.) Next, and last, follows an Apostolical valediction,
benediction, and prayer; which shall be mine also, and with that I now
conclude; v. 32.
And now Brethren I commend you to God and to the word of his Grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all which are
Sanctified.

FINIS.
Errata.
Epistle.
P. 3. margin ep. p. 2. dele. p. 10. line 6. first dele p. 13. line 19. and
dele p. 14. line 3. for the read this

Preface.
P. 9. marg. (z) for contra marcione. 5. r. contra marcion. c. 5. p. 10. l. 2.
for Bishops r. being Bishops p. 11. l. 20. for their r. there p. 12. l. 20.
for Policarpus r. Polycarpus l. 22. for Clemets r. Clemens p. 15. marg. (g) for
406. r. 306. ibid. marg. r. (h) Camorar. in vita phil. molaneth

Sermon.
P. 2. l. 7. for Licaonica r. Lycaonia ibid. marg. for Act. 3. 12. r. Tit. 3.
12. p. 7. marg. (x) for Zech. 37. r. Zech. 3. 7. p. 9. marg. (d) for Nunb. 16.
3. r. Numb; 16. 3. ibid. marg. (g) for Rev: 1. 6. 15. 10. r. Rev: 1. 6: p: 11.
l. 28. legal dele p. 12. marg. (r) for Acts. 1. 6. r. Acts. 6. 1. p. 14. marg.
(a) for phile 9. r. philem v. 9. p. 15. l. 26. for II. r. I. p. 16. l. 1. sor
For r. So l. 2. for Apostles r. Apostle l. 29. for is is r. is p. 17. l. 2. for
in r. on p. 21. l. 29, for as r. (...) p. 22. marg. (f) for Synod r. 6: Synod
p. 23. l. 4. for conveening r. convening p. 25. l. 28. for conc. Eard. (...).
conc. Sard. l. 30. for be to r. to be p. 26. l. 13. for nominated r.
denominated p. 32. l. 18. for ofter r. after.


