TO SIONS LOVERS, BEING A GOLDEN Egg, to avoid Infection: OR, A SHORTSTEP
INTO the Doctrine of laying on of hands, to provoke such as have time, heart,
and parts to prosecute resting upon the promise, the tongue of the stutterers
shall speak plain, and out of the mouths of babes, Jehovah shall have praise.

Look not to Scottish, nor Dutch, New England, nor Old, Behold the pattern,
the Apostles fellowship and so go up by the Tents of the Shepherds.

Printed in the year 1644.

Worthy D. Gouge,
REmembering your ancient acquaintance with me and my Father long since at
rest, I presume to father this naked child Without Scholasticke phraises, or
School learning to dress it and garnish it, and so bring it forth to further
view, knowing by experience, and also you were well reported of for the opening
of Doctrines, seeing you have had a word of knowledge to preach the Doctrine of
Repentance from dead works and faith toward God, and have sweetly taught
Christ in his Priestly Office, I beseech you leave some good savor of your
name before the close of your eyes concerning Christ's Kingly Office; open the
Doctrine of the laying on of hands, and rest not in the ceremony which has
been used by the laying on of hands of bloody persecutors, I hope you will be
wary of new inventions, to lay on foul hands again, lean not to their
wisdom that have so long erred, take the advice of the Assembly of the
Saints, and so of the spouse of Christ who washes her hands in innocence and
compasses the Alter, let her have her due benevolence and so her right; as she
is the Eldership to lay on hands by whom she shall appoint.

Sir, there was much jelosie of you in the time of the Prelates, that you were
too full of fears, And now the Lord has shortened those days of persecution;
and you have a prise in your hand, being one of the Masters of the Assembly,
fasten some nail concerning the Doctrine of laying on of hands, which will
clear up holy fellowship and take off that aspertion laid upon your
congregations, that they are false; none of Christ's, but Antichristian: Though
I do not for my part say so of them, yet the Doctrine of Baptism and the
Doctrine of laying on of hands is left out of them, notwithstanding the
ceremonys have been of Baptism and laying on of hands with more then needed
which makes some to go to a second Baptism. And on other form, some are
seekers out of a Baptism looking for Elyas as John the Baptist to bring it
from heaven, forsaking all fellowship till Christ shall send forth new Apostles
to lay on hands; All this is (as I conceive) is for want of the knowledge of
those two middle principalls, seeing these things are come to pass in your
days, before your end; labor in the word and doctrine to clear up those two
principalls, so to our great Doctor I leave you to teach you the mysteries of
the Kingdom, resting ever to love the Saints.

S. Jones


I Printed a few for my own use, because I would not loose my thoughts, and
for such as shall council me for the best; for without council the thoughts
perish. If herein I have failed, I hope it will be easily passed by being the
first fault upon that subject of laying on hands desiring to provoke to love
and goodworkes, so to him that has loves to bestow upon his beloved, who is
the wonderful councellor. I leave all the work.

TO SIONS LOVERS, Being a Golden egg to avoid Infection, etc.
CHristian Reader, I thought to have been silent, but this is a time of war,
the war increases not only in earth but also in heaven, when the Lord will
destroy his enemies, he provokes them to come out against his people; and the
Saints are as a mark for many to shoot at, but this is the comfort of the
Saints, the Prince of peace, his Angels the Ambassadors of peace fights for
Sion and the hill thereof, against the Dragon and his Angels, blessed those
that help the Lord against the mighty, the Lord takes part with those that
helps the Saints, Psalm.118.7.
wherefore let those that are against the Saints hold there peace; I will
speak come what will; The enemies of the godly are forgers of lies, Ioh.13.13.
and the Saints become their enemies because they tell them the truth;
wherefore dear friends of Christ, Ierem.2.8.
harken not to lying vanities and so forsake your own mercies; join to the
Saints in holy union, as Jehovah says to the Prophet let them return to thee
but return not thou to them, Ier.15.19.
though it be hard to go against the flood the Dragon casts out of his mouth,
yet look to him that guides the stearne the Captain of our Salvation,
Ier.51.15.
remember that the destroying mountain Babell is rolling down as a burnt
mountain, and the beast and the false Prophet is coming also with the ebb
into the lake, Rev.12.20.
wherefore let the Saints take heart, though they go against the stream of the
times, for their way is one high, and it will be easy for they of the world to
go down the stream with the liars their companions, wherefore comfort ye my
people, comfort ye my people says our God, though there be pleaders against
Gods people, and they are not suffered to plead for themselves, yet the Lord
will plead their cause; Esa 51.12.
the spirit may depart from seven and sevens, but he that has the seven
spirits will never depart from his spouse, he will be with her to the end of
the world, walking in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, all the
congregations that puts away all abominations so far as they know and mingle
not with dross, what is not declared by letter, must be cleared by the word
that was before the letter; Christ manifest in all his offices, and so measure
the Temple, the Altar, the worship, and the worshippers, put away all human
inventions that agree not with that rule; and so in his arms I leave thee that
love Sion.

Exhortations to Gods people.
GIve glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness; and before your
feet stumble upon the dark mountains, Ier.13.16
while you look for light he turned it into the shadow of death and make it
gross darkness.

Heb.12.6.13.
Let that which is halting be healed, least it be turned out of the way, Come
out of her my people least your hearts faint when you see the judgment:
Ier.51.16.
It is commendable for Gods people to abide steadfast in the Apostles doctrine
and fellowship. Acts.1.42.


Observations for Gods people.
Eze 10.15.
They that be ashamed of the iniquities, shall see the pattern of the house of
Jehovah, The labor of the foolish weary every one of them, because he knows
not how to go to the City.

Comfort to Gods People.
Esa. 41 15.
Behold I will make thee a new threshing instruments having mouths wherewith
thou shall thresh the mountains and beat them small and make the hills as
chafe, Psalm. 149.8.9.
this honor have all the Saints they shall have a two edged sword in their
hands, they shall be terrible as an Army with banners; Cant. 6.4.
great are the Armies, many were the publishers all the Congregations of the
Saints; as she preachers hold forth Christ, Psalm. 68.11.
publish the Gospel, take in and cast out, exercising the power of Christ

Admonishons to such as go from mountain to hill forgetting their resting
place.
Mich. 2. 10.
Arise, this is not your rest, because it is polluted, Polluted Congregations is
not the rest of the Saints; Jer. 2. 36.
why gaddest thou so much to change thy way, thou shall be ashamed of Egypt as
thou wast of Assyria, It may be thou may be ashamed of the Presbytery as
thou wast of the Hierarchy.

Holy fellowships are fenced Cities, upon all the glory shall be a defense.
Why do we sit still? Assemble your selves and let us enter into the defensed
Cities, and let us be silent there, for the Lord our God has put us to silence
and given us water of gall to drink, because we have sinned.

Esaias 4 5.
Beware of dogs, for the leaders of this people cause them to err, and they
that are led by them are destroyed, they that posesse them, slay them, Jer.
8.14.
and their teachers have swallowed up the old path. Phil. 3. 2.


Good council to luke warm Congregations. Esaias 9. 16.

Zach. 11. 5.
I council thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire that thou may be rich,
and white raiment that thou may be clothed, Esaias 3. 11.
that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with
eyesalve, that thou may see, Revel. 3. 18.
such as see the evil of their way, will enter into holy fellowship with
silence and here the Saints: The Prelates in their time put the godly to
silence, and the time will come when God shall put many to silence, and then
they will hear what the spirit speaks to the Saints none dareing to speak
against them.

Q. What may be the dark mountains we may avoyde falling on them.
A. This is a begging age, and there is Physicians of no value that beg
questions but not for healing, but some have many questions to beg, but before
we fall upon querees, let us here what has been done against the Saints,
There have been counselors of state that have councelled for their hurt: I
hope better things of some that are now clouded with temptations; that they
will dote upon questions of no worth, and plead for a thing of naught, and
against the Saints, but were they grave councelors as healing Elders, they
would endeavor to heal Babell, she not being healed, or come out of her into
holy fellowship, as the straight gate by reason of persecution, Ezekiel. 42. 8.
and so shine forth to the consuming of Antichrist, Rev. 22. 2.
and their holy fellowship and godly conversation will be as the leaves of the
trees of the sanctuary for the healing of the nations. And if they were wise
pleaders, they would not plead against the Saints, who were companions with
them in sufferings, and in their adversity, gave themselves to prayer in holy
fellowship for them, which they called convinticles, who after the way they
called heresy worship they God abiding steadfast in the Apostles doctrine and
fellowship, and put away uncleanness from them so far as they know, they do
not separate with shame, as some Congregations like dark mountains, those
that abide in holy fellowship do not separate with whores, they do not
worship with harlots as the people that do not understand, but may fall upon
the dark mountains; If those pleaders that accuse the Saints of that they
know not, were they wise pleaders they would plead the cause of the dumb,
Hosea 14. 4.
who keep silence inevill times, the wicked being in sight: Psa. 39. 1.
If they would plead their own innoecncy after some that have been first as
seeming just, they are made dumb and put to silence, for none of their
Complaints shall pass the Press, but the Presses are filled with their
Letters, that open their mouths wide to smite the Saints with the tongue, and
wound them with the Pen, blotting them with their Ink, as if they would not
have the name of holy Ones among them; as in the time of the Hirarchie, the
precious were put out, and the unclean kept in, and compelled to come to
worship, though they relished it no more then the White of an Egg: But now
when the name of Antichrist should be raised out, now they have a prise in
their hand to set upon reformation, now the judgments of God are on the earth,
should not the Inhabitants thereof learn Righteousness; shall the hands of
the wicked be strengthened, and the hearts of the godly sadded, whom the Lord
has not sadded: Remember what is said, 2 Cor. 18. 22.
this is that king Ahaz that sinned more and more in the time of distress: Oh
that the Saints were wise to gather into holy fellowship, the root of Iesse
set up for an Ensign, and so Thrones set up for Judgment in the gates of
Sion, 1 Cor. 6. 5.
executing the power of Christ to judge each other; then there would be little
or no work for Lawyers, especially among the Saints; then evil reports of the
Saints would not be received, and such as bring up an evil report of the good
way of God, are not likely to see the pattern of Iehovahs house: Let such take
heed they fall not upon the dark mountains, as they fell in the Wilderness,
but give glory to God, confessing their sin, be ashamed of Iniquities, 1 Cor.
10. 5.
so shall ye see the Pattern of the House, and go not so much as near the
Corner of the Harlot, gad not from mountain to hill, forgetting the resting
place, days without number: Why gaddest thou so much to change thy way, If
there be another Lord-like power set up, Jer. 2. 36.
you shall be ashamed of it, as you were of the former Hirarchy, mark what the
wise Preacher says, Eccle. 10 15.
The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he knows not
how to go to the city. Is there not great labor lost in wrong reasoning,
strife about words, Presbitery and Independency which the Saints in fellowship
own not? is there not much weariness in reading many books to no profit, but
to please the flesh? is there not much wearying in carnal disputes, contending
for naught showing lust which should not be the custom of the Saints? the
reason of their weariness is, they know not to go to the city where the
Saints sit together in holy fellowship as in heavenly places, according to the
doctrine of laying on of hands, which has not been tought, so far as I know
in the confused congregations since the defection of Antichrist; the doctrine
of Baptism and the laying on of hands has been as it were lost, as the book
of the law which was found in good Josias time of reformation, such as desire
reformation now, 2 Cor. 34. 14.
may do well to put to pen, and press, pulpits and conferences to clear
those two doctrines, the doctrine, of baptism will clear the purities of the
ordinances, the doctrine of laying on hands will clear holy fellowship, the
laying on of foul hands, yea, bloody hands of the Prelates has been taken
for the doctrine of laying on of hands as if the using of the ceremony as a
shell to the kernel held forth in the doctrine, even as if the joining of the
lips which is the ceremony were all that is required to embracing by love. Romans
16. 16.


If there be another power out and above the congregation which is the Elder
ship above her stewards, Heb 7. 7.
for the less is blessed of the greater, so surely the congregations united
together in Covenant, by worship or agreeing in the name of Christ in time of
reformation having been back-sliders, such as the tipicall, national, great
congregation said, Psalm. 50. 5.
come let us join in Covenant, what was meet for the tipiall Church as the
general congregation of the first borne, Esaias 50. 5.
the same is meet for every visible congregation when they come to
reformation, uniting themselves together in holy union, to enjoy holy communion
and so shine forth to the consuming of Anticrist, electing, choosing out from
among thmselves, ordaining, investing by her own power given her from Christ,
she being in his stead the Eldership to appoint her Officers, as her maids to
kill her fatlings, Pro. 9. 1.
dwelling together in one Parish, is not from heaven to make one bread and one
body but of men, but many members becomes one body according to Gods, Ordinance
to have power to take in and cast out by uniting together by faith and order
agreeing in the name of Christ, and so we are endowed with power and order; as
two parties husband and wife becomes one by Covenant more of few partners
becomes one by covenant, civil fellowships many members becomes one
congregation by Covenant, so joining to Christ by faith gives us not a visible
right to the ordinances, but uniting together according to the mind of Christ,
Jer. 50. 5.
joining to the Lord in Covenant; so in times of persecution holy fellowship
will not falsefie their Covenant, though the Parish Assemblies turn with the
State in evil times, but this is too great a labor for my self, Psalm. 44. 17.
I do but hint it to the honored that labor in the word and doctrine as a
patient desire to be healed wherein I err, I earnestly beg these questions of
the wise and learned, by what name or title soever called or would be called;
for of them is precious Preachers concerning the doctrine of repentance from
dead works and faith toward God; but of them are those that have spoken evil
of the old and good way of them there is that have blasphemod the Tabernacle
and dwellers in heaven, of them there is hirelings to speak against the
gathering of the Saints in order, as Shemaiah was hired by Sanballat and Tobia
to hinder the building of Gods Temple, Neh 6. 10.
of them there is not any that ever I heard that opened the doctrine of laying
on of hands, wherefore though I honor them for the truth they teach, yet I
submitt not to them in that which is besides the text, wherefore turn my
questions to the more honored Christians, peculiars purchased by Christ's blood,
such as have the tongue of the learned to speak a word in season to the weary,
honored before such as ashame their name, as the righteous is better then his
neighbor, such as through believing out of whose bellies flow rivers of waters
of life, John 2. 38.
such as fear Jehovah, with whom are his secrets, Psa. 25. 14.
holy brethren such as are made partakers of the Divine nature, I know no other
Divines but brethren and sisters united together as godly Phyladelphian, Rev.
3. 8.
and sweet Smyrna dwelling even together in unity, Jer. 2. 8.
honored Saints with the double edged sword of those holy hearers, Psa.133.
I beg these questions following.

Quest. 1. Whether the Congregations that know not the Doctrine of laying on of
hands, that know not the power, or have given their power to the Beast, that
know not how to weld the two edged sword, that know not how to speak each to
other, 2 or 3 by course, and others to judge, that know not how to judge one
another, that know not how to deal with one another, Mat. 18. 15. 16.
1 by telling privately, 2 by two or 3 and then to the Congregation, whereof
they be members, that know not how to elect, choose, ordain, invest Pastors,
Teachers, Elders, Deacons, Male and Female, qualified according to holy writ,
whether such congregations as these may not be said to be dark mountains.

Q. 2. Whether such as be tontosticated with the cup of fornicators, rayging
and rangling drunk with pride and passion, also staggering are not like to
stumble and fall upon those dark mountains.

Q. 3. Whether the Saints that withdraw from all that walk disorderly either
brethren or congregations agreeing in the name of Christ covenanting to walk
with God, and one with another to walk with God in all his ways, so far as
they know or shall know be not the way and order of the Gospel.

Q. 4. Whether such Congregations as last aforesaid be not fenced Cities which
are walled by the power of Discipline, Esaias 4. 5.
upon all the glory shall be a defense, and such for whom the Prophet prays
the walls may be built. Psa. 51. 18.


Q. 5. Whether the mixed Congregations, that exercise not the power of Christ
that he has given them be not unfensed Cities.

Q. 6. Whether that now threshing instruments having mouths called new, as the
new commandment which was from the beginning be not the ordinance of
Dissipline to beat the mountains into chafe, the grain may appear, behold I
will make the tipicall congregation nation one congregation, behold I will make
thee a very visible congregation under the Gospel a new threshing instrument,
Esaias 41. 15.
so the power is given to her, not to her officers. Psa. 68. ^1.


Mat. 28. 19. 20.
Q. 7. Whether the Congregations be not the she preachers to whom the command
is given, to whom the promise is made, go Preach and Baptize, observe and do
all I command you, and I will be with you to the end of the world.

Q. 8. Whether all the Saints shall not have honor, the power as the two edged
sword, her overseers being one with her, not Lords over her.

Q. 9. Whether the Saints that would have healed Babell she not being healed
are not to come out from confusion and gather into order as flocks of sheep
go up from washing. Cant. 5. 6.


Esaias 11. 10.
Q. 10. Whether the Congregations that suffer Christ to reign over them, the
Root of Iesse set up for an ensign, exersing the power of Christ to take in
what is serviceable, casting out what is offencive, would not be as terrible as
an army with banners, comely as Jerusalem beautiful as Tirzah. Cant. 6. 4.


Q. 11. Whether the Males in every Congregation be not to lift up pure hands,
propheng one by another, two or three by course, the rest judging.

Q. 12. Whether such Preachers as speak against such as walk in order and are
of the quiet of the land, such counselors as advises to their hurt, such
pleaders as plead for a thing of naught shall not be called to the bar of
Gods judgment if they repent not. Ephesians. 5. 21.


Oh, that we might submitt one to another in all that is good. O that the time
were come that the wolf might be with the lamb and a little child should
lead them. Esaias 11. 6 etc


FINIS.

