SAINT PATRICKS Purgatory: Containing The Description, Original, Progress,
and Demolition of that superstitious place.

By Henry Jones Bishop of Clogher.

2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved: for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe a lie.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Royston, and are to be sold at his Shop in Ivy
Lane, at the Sign of the Angel. 1647.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. 1. THe description of S. Patricks Purgatory in Ireland. 2. The
customs and manners of that Pilgrimage. 3. The Author and beginning of it. 4.
And why it is called a Purgatory. 1. Chap. 2. The Progress and flourishing
estate of Saint Patricks Purgatory, in the esteem it had at home and abroad.
Whereof some probable conjectures. Some Pilgrimages thither set down. Together
with an examination of the truth of them. 54. Chap. 3. How this Purgatory did
begin to decline, and fall from its esteem, being first suspected, and found
fabulous, and lastly quite demolished. 116.
SAINT PATRICKS PVRGATORY.
CAP. I.
1. The Description of S. Patrick's Purgatory in Ireland. 2. The customs and
manners of that Pilgrimage. 3. The author and beginning of it. 4. And why it is
called a Purgatory.

IN the North edge of the Province Sect. (...).
of Ulster in Ireland, on The Descriptiion of the place.
the borders of Tirconnell, Fermannagh, and Donegall, there is environed with a
marvailous great waste of bogs and mountains, a certain Lough, as they term
it, or Lake of a great compass called Lough-Derge; a place famous, and
celebrated by the pens of many at home and abroad, as that which encloseth
and compasses within it, that, which is of greatest observation and use, I say
not only in this Kingdom of Ireland, but, if reports be true, in the whole
world beside, of which* I (...) (...) discourse, S. Patricks ^.

It (...) this Purga^, that tedious (...) concerning the name of Lough-Derge;
As that near that Lake, in the shin-bone of one that had been murdered, there
was bred a Serpent, which did grow to an incredible greatness: for ^o must we
believe, if it did (as they say it did) swallow down 2410. men at once. That
the Serpent being slain, and his blood running into the Lake, the complexion
of the water was changed, and continued Red for 48. hours; That hence it was,
that from Lough-^^n, or the White-logh, by which it was before known, it was
after called, as now it is, Lough-Derge, or the Red-Logh. For confirming
whereof, that there may not want something besides the bare name; among other
Relics, there did remain ready to be showed a great Knotty bone, said to be
one of the least joints of that Serpents Tail. A fable I confess not worthy
to take place in a serious discourse, did I not find it suitable to those
relations, we are hereafter to meet withal in our treating of this Subject,
they being, I doubt not, as true, and I assure my self no less strange and
monstrous than this is.

Within this Lake there are many small Islands, but two of especial note above
the rest.

The one is called the Island of S. Avoge or Abheoge, wherein that Saint is
said to be buried, Divi Abheogi sepulchro venerabilis. Phil. (...) Sullev.
Patri^. Decad. lib. 9. cap. 9.
or the Island of S. Fintanus, as others would have it. Roth. de purgatory S.
Patric. apud Thomam Messinghamum de purgator. S. Patric. cap. 2. page 95. number.
23.
In which Island, Est conventus Canonicorum Regularium S. Augustini, Subjectus
quidum (...) and Monasterio Apostorum Petri and Pauli ejusdem ordinis in
civitate A^chan a sito: sed tamen qui in ipso (...) Monachorum est P^aefectus,
honoratur Titulo Prioris Purgatorij, ex his monat his (...) inter (...)
vicibus, solent duo semper commorari in insula Purgatorij, con^ ill in tanquam
Pa^es spitituales ad adventantes expiandi se gratia suspiciendos and
instruendos. Pet. ^d. Hibern. de regno Hibern. cap. 20.
there is seated a Convent of Cannons Regular of the order of Saint Augustine,
subject to the Abbot and Monastery of the Apostles Peter and Paul, situate in
the Citti^ of Ardmagh: yet he who within the Lake is chief of the Monks, is
honored with the Title of Prior of the Purgatory: of these Monks by turns,
two are continually resident in the Island of Purgatory, to be there for the
entertaining and directing of such Pilgrims, as do come thither to be purged.
This is that which is called Iusula d^moniaca. for so we sometimes find it,
into which S. Patrick is said to pursue those evil Spirits, which he had
driven from the mountain Chruan in Connaught, yet did they possess one part
of this Island, Phil. (...) Sull. Pat^^^. decad. live. 9. cap. 9. fol. 110.
of which Nicholas Harpsfeldius out of Giraldus Cambrenfis, thus; Esse tradit
in ^^tonia insulam quandam lacu quodam insignem, cujus altera pars aspectu
pusthra, jucundaque sit, celebissque ob frequentiam Angelorum and Sanctorum ibi
apparentium: nec minus horrendam alteram, and a daemorubus infesta^; qui se ibi
saepe visibiles offerunt. Nich. Harpsfeld. Archid. Cantuar. Histor. Angl.
eccles. edit* (...)aci ann. (...). in sex primis saeculis cap. 25. de Patric.
etc.
He (Giraldus) reports that in Vlster there is a famous Island in a certain
Lake, the one part whereof is pleasant and delightful, and much spoken of in
respect of Angels and Saints there frequenting and appearing: the other part
thereof being no less terrible, as haunted with Devils, which are there often
seen, The truth whereof I leave to the Authors.

But there is nothing that does make this place so famous, as another Island,
not far from this, being something less than a mile, as may be supposed from
the shore, which by reason of the Cave that is in it (of which so much is
spoken) is known by the name of S. Patricks Purgatory. It is altogether rockie
from the one end of it to the other; exactly level it cannot be said, and yet
not very uneven: no one part thereof being much higher than another. The Figure
of it is Oblong, extending it self from South to North; unto which, the nearer
it runs, the narrower it grows: It does contain about half an Irish acre
and eleven perches, in all 41. perches and one half in circuit, each perch
being 25. f^^t; for thus was it exactly surveyed by that truly Honorable, the
Lord Dillon, Le. B^ of Kilkenny West, in whose presence it was (...) asured by
Anthony Lipset, whom for that purpose I brought with me into the Island, and
whom I accompanied into the Cave, and the rest of the places that were
measured, says he The ^o. Dillons description of S. Patrick's Purgatory, anno
1632.
The Map whereof, as it was then made, have I here unto pre^, acknowledging
my self here in bound to that Noble Lord, and his Lordships son Sir James
Dillon Knight, both curiously inquisitive in this; whose observations have been
imparted unto me.

Without the compass of this Island, and within the water toward the
North-east of the land, about two yards from the shore, do stand certain
Rocks or Stones, distant from each other, whereof two are of especial use in
this pilgrimage; The one which is the least and next the shore, is that
whereon, they say, S. Patrick was wont to kneel one third part of the night
(as he did spend one other third part in the Cell, which they call his Bed, of
which after: and the other third part in the Cave or Purgatory) In this stone,
there is a clift or print reported to be made by S. Patricks kneeling or
standing thereupon; This, it may be, is that which Lumbard means, (yet being
misinformed, writing by heresay) he placing it within the Cave, Pet. Lumbard.
u^i supra.
whereas indeed there is no such thing there.

The other Stone is much greater, further in the Lake, and covered with water,
called Lackevanny; this is esteemed to be of that singular virtue, that the
only standing thereupon does heal the soreness of the Pilgrims feet
occasioned by their going barefoote on sharp Rocks and Stones.

The entrance into the Island (for there is but one, and that about the
South-south-east point thereof) is narrow, rockie and rugged; this they report
(for thereis no end of such reports) to be the g^ts of that great Serpent
metamorphised into stones, the walking bareroot on which, and the like places,
is no small part of the penance which the pilgrims undergo.

In this Island there was a little Church dedicated to S. Patricke called
Reglis, covered with shingles, and being within the walls 40. foot long, and
nine foot broad; out of this on the South side, an Arch did give entrance into
a small Chapel, being ten foot wide, and fifteen foot long, the walls of both
being two foot and a half thick.

In the North-side of the wall, there was a Stone whereon, it is said, S.
Patrick was wont to rest himself, being of some use in this pilgrimage, as
after.

When M. Coppinger, a gentleman purposely drawn thither with the fame of the
place, did view it, the Church was thus furnished; M. Coppinger* description of
S. Patrlck's Purgatory.
At the East end with an high Altar covered with linen, over which directly did
hang the Image of our Lady with our Savior in her arms; on the right hand did
hang the picture of three Kings offering their presents to our Savior, and on
the left hand, the picture of our Savior on the Cross; near the Altar upon
the South side, there did stand upon the ground an old worm* (...). Image of S.
Patricks; And behind the Altar on the end of the Stoneworke, another of the
same fabric, elder in show called S. Avioge or Avogh, or Yavock, (for I
suppose them all one:) And on the right hand upon the Altar stood one like the
former, called S. Uoluscius. But all these soon vanished, not being observed
of any that since that time went to see the place.

On the North-side of the Church, and from it ten foot distant, appeared that,
whence the Island has the name, S. Patricks Cave, Pit or Purgatory, for by all
these names it is known. There is another Purgatory bearing the same name, but
differing from this, both in place and eminency, of which we shall have
occasion hereafter to discourse: But this, of which we now treat, is that which
we find every where so highly extolled, and to be above all the monuments of
Ireland, and places of note Ex quibus celeberrimus and sanctissimus est qui
Purgatorij S. Patricij locus appellatur. Lumbard. ubi supra.
the most famous and holiest; But he that shall take notice of the face and
complexion of it, shall find nothing to be more despicable. The entrance
thereinto was without any, or very little descending; the wall^ thereof being
built of ordinary stone, the top covered with b^^ad stone, and overlaid with
earth, being over grown with grass: It was two foot and one Iuch wide in most
places, and three foot high, so that they are enforced to stoop that go into
it, the length was sixteen foot undone one half, whereof right forward twelve
foot, and the reverse, or turning toward the Church, four foot and one half;
At the corner of the said turning there was a little Crevice, which as it
served to convey a little (and that but a very little) light into the Cave, so
served it for two other uses; the one, that Ut pater accedat aliquoties ad
r^nam quae est in speluncae latere, unde inclusos consolatur, praesertim si
intelligat quempiam tentatioone divexari: and in latere exigua quaedam rima
est, juxta quam collocari solet qui ex ingredientibus tenetur ad horas
canonicas recitandas Lumbard. ubi supra.
The spiritual Father resorting thither might comfort those who are shut in,
especially, if he understand that any of them be troubled with any temptation.
The other, that He might take his place there, who among them that are shut in,
is appointed to repeat the Canonical hours.

Into this Cave, not promiscuously, but men by themselves, and women by
themselves, were admitted. The incapacity of which place, because it could not
but hinder the dispatching of so many pilgrims, was supplied by the erecting
of a second Cave, the one being for men, the other for women; And thus were
they to be seen, when M. Coppinger was in the Island: But this Addition seemed
too much to differ from the first Institution; Therefore soon after, for
avoiding of offense, That, of the new erection, was taken away without being
obserserved in the after descriptions; whereof many have come to mine hands.
Neither does M. Richard Ash take notice of any such thing (who was in that
Island before M. Coppinger ibid quo supra.
M. Coppinger) he purposely going thither on his late Majesty's command: yet in
the relation given to me by Sir James Dillon, we find some provision intended
for this inconvenience, as Sir James Dillon his description of S. Patrick's
Purgatory.
That there should be many small Cottages built, that for such as with
convenience cannot enter in the Cave, these might serve the turn. But what
effect this had taken, I do not yet understand.

In this Island of S. Patricks Purgatory are not very many Trees, on one of
which (being a Yow-tree) did hang a Bell, usually rung at their Solemnities;
neither must it be imagined there being so few of them, and they in so holy a
place, they could be there without a miracle. It is therefore fancied, that the
yow-tree had been of long standing, but being out down by some wicked person,
and cast into the fire, part thereof was by a devout man snatehed out, and new
set, which is that now extant. But this seems to be lately done, it not being
above ten foot high, and about the thickness of a man's leg, which might
happen by being too much scorcht with the fire; neither are the rest of any
great growth.

Between the Church and the Cave there is a small rising of ground, and an
heap of Stones, with a little stone-crosse, part broken, standing therein; and
on the East End of the Church there is another heap, on which there was
another cross made of twigs interwoven: This is known by the name of S.
Patricks Altar, on which there does lie three pieces of a Bell, which they say,
S. Patrick used to carry in his hand. Here also was laid a certain Knottybone
of some bigness, hollow in the midst, like to the Nave of a wheel, out of
which do issue, as it were, natural Spokes. This was showed as a great
rarity, being part (as some say) of that Serpents tail which we have before
remembered. But others would rather have it be believed, In cujus ejectionis
memoriam ostendi solet in Insula nodus osseus, magnae molis diciturque frustum
Serpentini ossis ex illo genimine virulento quod Sanctus expulerat. D. Roth
apud Th. Messinghamum de Purgat. S. Patricij, cap. 2. number. 30.
That this is part of one of those Serpents which S. Patrick expelled out of
Ireland; in memory whereof this is usually showed. But I leave them to believe
either the one, or the other, as they shall find occasion.

Toward the narrowest part of this Island, and Westward from the Church, were
six Circles (as some call them) from their figure, or Saints beds, or beds for
penance. These were Mansions (for so also are they termed) dedicated to some of
the famous Irish-Saints; They were of Stone, and of a round building, being
about three quarters of one yard high, having a door or entrance into them; And
these Cells are of several capacities. That for Briget being ten foot over
within the walls, Collum-Kille nine, Katharine mine, Patrick sixteen, Yavock (or
Avogh) and Moloissny (or Blash) ten, these two last Avogh and Blash are placed
in one Cell, and that also joined to that other of S. Patricks. The fixed is
that which is assigned to S. Blenyn, or (as I take it). Brenyn, or S. Brendan,
which is ten foot over. To this S. Brendan, we read a peculiar Purgatory to
belong; of which M. Camden thus. Praeter hoc Patricij etiam aliud in hac insula
Brendani Purgatorium fuit, sed cum locum non invenerim, accipe quod solum
inveni Nechami de illo Tetrasticon.
Besides this of Patricks, there has been another Purgatory of Brendan in this
Island, he means Ireland; But seeing I find not the place, Take what I find
of it in this Tetrastick of Asserit esse locum sole^^is fama dicatum, Brendano
quo lux lucida saepe ^icat; P^rg^ndas animas datur hic transire perignes ut
digna facie judicis esse queant. Guil. Camden. descript. Hibern. edit. 1594.
page 671.
Nechams, which I reduce to this Disticke. For purging souls, and fitting them
for Heaven,
A place by fame there is to Brendan given.


Which not to be meant, as if it were placed in this Island of S. Patricks
Purgatory, whereof we now speak, as it is plain out of Camdens own words, he
not knowing where to place it; So shall we find it in a different quarter of
the Kingdom, if we believe Roth, a diligent writer of this Subject, out of
Radulphus. Estque ante omnia observandum apud exteros scriptores reperiti
mentionem duplicis in Hibernia Purgatorij: unum est S. Patricij, quod in
Aquilonari part regni positum est; Alterum S. Brendani quod in partibus
occiduis ejusdem regni Radulphus haberi asserit. Roth. apud Tho. Mess. de
Purgat. S. Patricij, cap. 1. page 91. number. 4.
It is, says he, to be in the first place observed, that amongst foreign
writers there is mention made of two Purgatories in Ireland: one is S. Patricks
in the Northern part of the Kingdom; the other S. Brendans, which Radulphus
says, ^s to be found in the Western parts of the same Kingdom. This, of
these two Purgatories, together with what I shall after have occasion to add
of a third Purgatory, is to be observed, for avoiding ambiguitie I return from
whence I made this digression.

These Cells or Beds serve for a great part of their devotions, who resort to
this Pilgrimage, about which, and in which, there are often pacings and
kneelings; to which end they are compassed with sharp stones and difficult
passages for such as go barefoot, as all must.

In the farthest part and Northward, there are in the Island where it is
narrowest, certain heaps of stones cast together, as Memorials for some that
have elsewhere been buried: trusting by the prayers and merits of those who
daily resort to this Purgatory to find some release of their pains in the
other Purgatory.

Lastly in the Island are several Irish houses covered with thatch, and but
lately built: together with a foundation for a building of lime and stone: And
another house for shriving and confessing of those that come thither, which is
on the left hand of the entrance into the Island. Among these, there are four
places assigned for receiving such as from the four Provinces of Ireland,
Leinster, Munster, Connaght and Vlster resorted thither.

Thus have we the perfect Description of this place, with all therein
contained, as it did stand but little before the demolishing thereof; The
Manner, Rites and Customs of this Pilgrimage offer themselves next to be
considered.

Wherein I shall follow those relations we find set out Sect. 2. The manner of
the Pilgrimage.
of it, in which no great choice is to be made: only supplying out of the best
and latest information that has come to mine hand, what shall be found not so
much omitted in the other, but (it may be) rather lately added: for in several
Ages it has received much alteration, as will appear upon the comparing of
them. Of the last kind, I esteem most, of that discourse given to me by the
Right Honorable the Lord Dillon: in the taking whereof his Lordship has been
most careful. The order of which Pilgrimage, to use his own words, The Lo.
Dillons description of S. Patrick's Purgatory.
I had from the mouth of an Ancient native there, who said, he had been the
guide and conductor of the Pilgrims for many years; which I the rather
credit, finding it to agree with what others have reported of it, in most
things. I will then begin with what has been of old herein observed.

Anciently, if any were desirous to enter into this Purgatory (as O Sullevan
observes, in the pilgrimage of The Spanish Uiscount, of which after.)
Principio a Pontifice vel Episcopo in cujus finibus Purgatorium continetur,
illud adeundi potestatem petit. Solet Antistes facultatem petenti ausa primum
non levibus Argumentis dissuadere rei periculum proponendo, presertim quod
aliqui fuerint ingressi, and nunquam regressi, si aute^ sentit homine incoeptis
constanter insistere, literas illi ad Praefectum Monasterij datas. Is autem cum
non minus ab incoeptis conatur avertere exorans ut alia potius suscepta
poenitentia peccata expiet. Sin illum a Sententia non potest deterrere, in
templum ductum precibus and poenitentia praescripto tempore facit incumbere;
deinde curat ^itimos sacerdotes convenire sacrum missae quod cum illo versu,
Requiem aeternam dona ijs Dom ne, pro vita defunctis offertur cantu and
solemnitate celebrari hominem viatico Sacrosancti corporis Domini refici, Aqua
sacra spargi, pompa Sacerdotum canentium Litanias, populi sequentis ad ostium
Purgatorij adduci, ubi iterum periculorum memoriam renovans, hominem rogat, ne
intret, quem tamen si constantem reperit sanctissimae crucis signo manens (quod
and reliqui Sacerdotes ad unum faciunt) apperto ostio intromitrit, and
obseratis rursus fotibus orantem relinquit, postero die ad eandem horam
rediens, si aperta janua hominem offendit, eadem pompa in Monasterium reducit,
hospitioque exceptum retinet dum illi placet. Sin hora solita in antro illum
non convenit, anima and corpore esse damnatum habet sibi persuasum. (...). O
Sull. hist. cathol. tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 2.
First he must have leave so to do of the Bishop in whose Diocese the
Purgatory did stand. The Bishop uses at first with weighty Arguments to
dissuade the adventurer, setting before him the danger; and that some have gone
in thither that never returned: But if he find the man firm in his
resolutions, he does recommend him by letters to the overseer of the Purgatory.
He also labors with the like earnestness to remove him, desiring him rather
by some other penance to expiate his sin. But if he be immovable, he leads
him into the Church, and enjoyneth the performance of his penance and prayers,
during the time prefixed. Then he calls together the Priests adjoining,
celebrating with singing and solemnity that Mass, Requiem aeternam dona ijs
Domine, usually said for the dead. The Pilgrim receives the Sacrament of the
Lords Body: He is sprinkled with Holy water, the Priests in procession singing
the Letany, and the people following to the door of the Purgatory to which he
is conducted; There again being forewarned of his danger, he is entreated not
to adventure: but if he be constant, he is signed with the holy cross, which
also all the Priests together do, and the door being opened he is let in, and
there he is left shut up and praying: The next day returning at the same hour,
if opening the door the man be found, he is with the same solemnity brought
back to the Monastery, where, while he pleases, he is entertained: But if at
the usual hour he be not found, then certain it is that he is damned both
body and soul; Si quando aliquid adversi accidat, tota religiosa societas per
integros quindecim dies Severa jejunitate corpora extenuant. Rich. Sta^hurst.
de vit. S. Patric. lib. 2. page 73.
and if any such disaster do happen, the whole religious Society do with
strict fasting macerate their bodies for fifteen days together.

Thus has it been Anciently: by which it does seem that the Resort to this
Purgatory was not then so frequent, and they that did come, were not so easily
admitted: but by all (at the least seeming) means to be diverted: The contrary
to both which is now practiced, no place more frequented; and the more the
welcommer, which being considered, and that there is much more stir in these
later pilgrimages than formerly had been, with an Addition of many more
circumstances; it will be therefore necessary to take a second view of the
particulars.

The time in these later times appointed for this work is the space of 9.
days, wherein they do prepare themselves, and observe all the Ceremonies
following:

First, the pilgrims being examined and admitted, their first flight is into
the Church, they being barefoot: and kneeling down before the Altar, they do
say a Pater, Ave, and Credo, Sacros obeunt circuitus introrsum septies in ipso
Templo, and extrorsum in coemiterio. Roth. ubi supra, cap. 2. page 95. number. 25.
and There they begin their holy Circuits seven times within the Church, and
as often in the Churchyard. At their coming out they kiss the Church-doore, so
do they the stone-crosse between the Church and the Cave; then Recipunt se ad
mansiones paenosas seu lectos quos vocant, aut cellas poenitentiales Sanctorum
quae in gyro sunt, singulas earum circumgyrant septies ab extra nudis pedibus,
ab infra flexis genibus. Ibid.
They betake themselves into the Penitential mansion^, Beds or Cells, as they
call them, of the Saints, which are round, every of which they compass seven
times, walking so many times without barefoot, and going about as often within on
their knees. Next go they into the water where the stone stands, whereon S.
Patrick was wont to kneel, which they compass thrice, saying five Paters and
Ave's, with one Credo: after, to the other stone called Lackevanny, where they
also say one Pater, Ave and Credo, of which stone and the virtue thereof it is
said, Tot circuitionibus confectis in aspersa and plerumque rupicosa semita,
veniunt ad Lacum, and in marmore subaquato plantas pedum laceras quandoque sed
semper lassas figunt, and uno minus medio quadrante horae, dum
recitantorationem dominicam and Symbolum Apostolorum persentiscunt tantum
refrigerij, and roboris ex subjecto pedibus lapide (in quo sanctus Patricius
ipse orasse dicitur, and vestigia pedum suorum impressa reliquisse) ut parati
essent e vestigio secundos circuitus facere, quod non licet tamen nisi
interposito aliquo temporis spatio. Ibid.
That after all these goings about, and that for the most part in sharp and
rugged ways, and coming to the Lake, they do fix there many times mangled,
but always wearied feet, on the stone covered with water; where in less than
one quarter of an hour, while they say the Lords Prayer and the Apostles
Creed, they do find such a refreshing and strength by reason of the stone
under their feet (on which S. Patrick himself was said to have prayed, and in
it to have left the impression of his feet) that they do find themselves
enabled to go those stations again: which yet they may not do without
sometime between. After this they come out of the water and return to the
Church, where they say before the Altar, the Bedes of fifteen hours, called
the Ladies Psalter: But here I had almost forgotten that which above all the
rest, must not be forgotten: Sir. James Dillon's description of S. Patrick's
Purgatory.
That provision must be made for the works of Charity, as well as of Piety;
there are Altars to offer upon, there are Friars to extend their benevolences
unto; nay, and both in this Kingdom and elsewhere, there are Convents and
Seminaries that must not be forgotten; by whose prayers a far larger
retribution and return is expected. This order in their pilgrimage do they
observe thrice each day, at Morning, Noone and Evening, for seven days
together: But Octavo die duplicant Stationes five circuitus; ut satisfaciant
pro eodem and sequenti die quo ingrediendus erit puteus, neque enim illo die
putuano circumite nedum quidem exire de speculo licet, Idem ibid.
On the eight day they double their circuits, that they may satisfy for that
and the next day in one; for then they are not to go out of the Cave, much
less to go about as they were wont. But if Quod si magna esset multitudo
concurrentium peregrinorum, ut tam numerosus coetus commodius expediri possit,
visitatio putei non affigitus ad certum and statum diem, sed pro arbitrio
praefecti dispensatur. Idem ibid. cap. 2. number. 30.
the number of Pilgrims be greater than can conveniently be dispatched; in that
case, no set-day is limited for the going into the Cave, but it may be
dispensed withal at the discretion of him who is the Chief.

And as nine days is the time commonly allotted for this work; so are there
nine persons set out, who according to the time of their coming thither, are
to go into the Cave together.

In all which time of their nine days pilgrimage, they eat but once in 24.
(some say 48.) hours, Sir James Dillon's description of S. Patricks Purgatory.
their diet being but oat-meale, or bread and water; yet have they liberty to
refresh themselves with the water of the Lake, Estque ea istius aquae vis, ut
quantum vis ex ea te velis ingurgitare, nullum inde gravamen senties, ac si a
vena metallica fluerat. Roth. ibid.
which also is said to be of that virtue, that although thou should fill thy
self therewith, yet would it not offend thee, but is as if it had flowed from
some Mineral: And thus being tired, at night Recubant in foeno and stramine
sine stragulo, pulvinari, culcitra nisi vel clamide se involvant, vel femoralia
capiti obstipent. ibid.
They lodge on hay or straw, without caddow, pillow, or paslet, tumbling
themselves in their mantles, or wrapping their heads in their breeches, or
trowses, as they call them; their lodging is in one of the cottages before
mentioned, Sir James Dillon's description of S. Patrick's Purgatory.
only That some one night of the eight, they take up one of the Saints beds,
such (I suppose) as they most fancy.

These eight days being thus spent in praying, fasting and Almesdeeds, they
go to be shriven, and do confess themselves on the evening of the said eight
day, being ready the next morning early to go into the Cave; when in
imitation of the old custom, the priest labors to divert them from going
forward; adding The Lo. Dillons description of S. Patrick's Purgatory.
That already two companies have been lost, that one more must be; and warns
them to take heed it do not light on them: But they not being to be altered,
toward the Purgatory or Cave they go, Praeeunte vexillo crucis. Roth. ibid.
With the Banner of the cross carried before them, together with other
solemnities; so that it may well seem to carry the show of some funeral
pomp, neither indeed is it otherwise esteemed, for being Quasi in transitu ad
alium orbem and e via ad terminum properantes, in agonio positos cernere est
gementes, suspirantes, veniam and pacem offerentes omnibus, and precantes sibi
ignoscentes toti mundo quicquid in se deliquisset cum singultu, fletu, lachrym
is, plerique subeunt speluncam and occluso de foris ostio, recedunt qui
comitabantur furtus. ibid.
As it were a passage to another world, and leaving this, in what Agony do
they go, groaning and sighing, desiring forgiveness, and forgiving all that
have offended them, in which manner for the most part they go into the Cave,
with sighing, weeping, and tears; and the doors being shut without, they that
waited on the funeral return, says Roth, whom, as the most exact I could
find in this part, have I followed.

Thus with some sprinkling of holy water are our Pilgrims shut up for twenty
and four hours without any repast, or cr^ of comfort other than Unde inclusis
consolatur presertim si intelligat ex ijs quempiam tentatione divex^^i.
Lumbard. (...) Supra.
some few good words given at the Crevice (before spoken off) through which,
the Priest does sometimes comfort them, if he find any of them to be troubled
with Temptations: but among themselves not a word, Illic^ interdictum
colloquium quod ^^l propter hoc mors traditur irrogari. Phil. O Sull. hist.
Catholic. Hibe^^. (...). tom. 1. lib. 2.
for conference is prohibited, while they are in the cave. This alone being
reported to bring present death with it, least perhaps there might be some
discovery of the Imposture.

Lastly, when the 24. hours are expired, for now are we come to the last Act,
They Revisuntur a praefecto peregrinantium and deducuntur ad marginem stagni
ubi se immergunt aquis lacustribus, and hac lustrati expiatione veluti novi
milites Christi e balneo poenitentiae renati purgatique progrediuntur ad
ecclesiam ubi pro more actis Deo gratijs pro expleta poenitudine renovantur ad
militiam Christianam intrepide prosequendam, and ad crucem Christi generose
portandum. Roth. ibid.
are revisited by the overseer of the pilgrims, by whom they are brought to
the waterside. where they duck themselves over head in that water, by which
expiation being purged as new Soldiers of Christ, and by the has of
repentance being borne again, they go into the Church, where according to the
custom, they give God thanks for the ending of their penance, being thereby
renewed to go forward boldly in their Christian warfare, and courageously to
carry the Cross of Christ. And thus is this great work finished.

A Pilgrimage certainly of very great solemnity and exceeding strictness; so
that I can easily be induced to credit him, who tells us how troublesome it
is: for Quae si fiat in aestate, quis nesciat quam penosa sit ^eclusio tam
arcta, tam obscura, tam diuturna, ab aestu solis de foris, and ab intro
estuaute habitu se mutuo constipantium, and suffumigantium in spelunca; Sin in
H^eme fiat quam difficilis sit immersio in aquam, ut immergas ad poenitentiam.
Et quocunque tempore demum fiat, quam dura sit discalceatio, pedum cruda
deambulatio in asperis and in Cellis, petricosis Stationibus, crebra genu*
flexio in cellis p^^^alibus, inedia Chameunia, insomnia, etc. Roth. ibid.
Whether it be in Summer, who can be ignorant how tormenting a thing it is to
be shut up so close, so obscurely, so long, and that troubled with the violent
heat of the Sun abroad, and the smoothering air of so many pressing one upon
another within. If in Winter, how difficult a matter would it be to endure the
ducking in the water, even to mortification? And what time soever it be, yet
how painful is the walking barefoot so many days, galling their feet in
those rockie Cells and rough Stations, and the often kneeling in them: Their
fasting, lying on the ground, dreams, and the rest; neither is that the least
which he so easily passes over, The great Fast imposed on them. If it were
only for three days, yet might it be ground enough to inspect what ^rasmus
does (speaking of this Purgatory) That Non desunt etiam ^odie permulei qui
descendunt, fed p^ triduano ^i jejunio, ne sano capite ingrediantur. (...)
A^ag. de A^t (...) Trophonis. page 440.
There do not want very many at this day who descend thither, but first almost
killed with three days fasting, least they should go in thither with their
wits about them. What then would he have said of our nine days fast? nay, what
of fifteen days? for so we find it used in the Ancienter pilgrimages, Ubi
p^ntem nullo terrore variari perspicit ei in mandatis totos quiadecim dies
jejunius vivere modo corporis infirmitas tantam iuediam patiatur. (...). St^
hurst (...) (...). S. Patric. lib. 2. page 73.
when he perceives that the penitent is not with any terror to be removed, he
commands him to keep a spare diet for fifteen days. Altogether, provided
that his body do give way to so great abstinence. So great an abstinence is
meant as may try the strength of the Body, and not simply A spare diet, of
which, indeed great Fast, we have in Jacobus de voragine an instance, showing
it not only ordinary, but to be by all observed, who should undergo that
Pilgrimage; his words are these, Post longum tempus mortuo Patricio, vir quidam
nobilis, nomine Nicholaus, qui peccata multa commisserat, cum delictorum suorum
p^^niteret, ut purgatorium S. Patricij sustinere v ellet (...). diebus, ut
Omnes faciebant, se jejuni^s macerasset, etc. Ja^oh. Vorag. in vit. S. Patri^
in (...). 49. sol. 33.
Long after Patrick's death, a certain Noble man named Nicholas, having
committed many sins, and repenting of them, resolved to undergo S. Patrick's
Purgatory. And when he had pined himself for fifteen days, which all are
wont to do, etc. Of which we have another example in Vincentius Belluacensis,
of a Knight Fecit eum pet quindecim dies exereitari in jejunio, and ^atione and
confessione, Vincent. Belluaccus. speculo morali. lib. 2. ^t. 11. part. 1. page
133.
that went that pilgrimage, who was commanded to continue in fasting, praying,
and confession fifteen days. To the same purpose also, Edin. Campion Jes.
Hist. Ireland. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Edmund Campion the Jesuit in his History of Ireland. The Pilgrim is (says
he) to begin with prayer, fast and vigill of fifteen days, so long as in
discretion can be endured: And yet how great soever this may seem to be, it is
notwithstanding nothing to what we find in Polychronicon, written by Ranulphus
Higden a Monk of Chester, and translated into English by John Trevisa, a
Priest that lived in Edward the Thirds time, Polychron. lib. 1. cap. 35. sol.
45. 2.
where it is said, that he that will go into this Purgatory (for of this he
speaks) shall be in prayers and fasting fifteen days, and after fifteen
days he shall be hanseld, and led to the door of the Purgatory, out of which
being returned, He shall be fifteen days in prayers and fasting. Here we see
not three days alone, as Erasmus supposed, thinking that also too long: nor
thrice three, as is common in these days, not five times three, as formerly,
but thirty days; whereof fifteen before the going into the Purgatory: of
which Vincentius, and the rest do speak, and that as commonly practiced; and
fifteen days after, not unlikely also to be used at the same time, as
commonly as the other: for so we see in that pilgrimage of the Knight, which is
the first, of which we do read, Matthew. Paris. H^. Angl. in Stephan. page 84.
and 87.
who before his going in was fifteen days in prayer, and after he came out, He
remained fifteen days in prayer, as we have it set out by Matthew Paris; under
Prayer comprehending all things required in that Pilgrimage. All which duly
considered, if I did concur with him, that thought such abstinence were
purposely enjoined, by causing a crazed brain to work a stronger work of the
Imagination, and to make Fancies real; I suppose, I should not be thought to
do any wrong, considering the relations and news brought back by such as
have gone that Pilgrimage, in which we shall after be larger. But that such
fasting might and would produce such effects, and work strangely on the
Imagination, is not to be questioned; especially the mind being before
prepossessed, and entertaining a prejudicate opinion of what it shall see. And
how greatly the Fancy can in this kind enlarge it self, and bege^ withal a
strange credulity, esteeming shadows (if so much) to be substances, there is
none that can doubt; Neither does that learned searcher of the causes of
Melancholy M. Burton of the causes of Melancholy, part. 1. memb. 3. subsect. 2.
p. 91. 92.
improbably attribute to the bare working of Imagination, Those relations of
Heaven and Hell, and what visions are there seen, as that of Sir Owen, in
Matthew Paris, that went into S. Patricks Purgatory. The first pilgrimage we
read of (as I said before) which of that kind may justly be ranked with those
Tales of witches, progresses, dancing, riding, transformations, in which mixed
with the Illusions of the Devil, the force of the Imagination does evidently
appear.

But being that in the following Chapter I am further to discourse of this, I
shall now pass it over, and proceed in the third place to a disquisition and
search after the. 3. The Author and beginning of this Purgatory.
Author, time, and manner of this strange Erection: for it being supposed to be
for the Manner miraculous, for the Time so ancient, and for the Author so
venerable, as we are made to believe it is, it is not to be wondered, if it were
so much as it was looked after; and yet again, even at this day earnestly to
be desired. This I say supposed. But if on the contrary, it shall appear to
fall short of all these, and prove to be but a mere impasture and fraud: how
much will the credulity of those ignorant, thereby formerly misled, be to be
pitied, and the cunning and coveteousnesse of the Leaders detested; which so
to be, I doubt not, will be seen in, the process of the ^nsuing Treatise.

And first for the Author, of whose Erection this Purgatory is; I know it will
seem to many to be a very needless Quaere; it carrying the Name of the Founder
in it self, S. Patricks Purgatory: and that also being by a long-received
Tradition, such as to question would hazard the censure of one either ignorant,
or too curious. For so it is told us, Purgatorium istud a Patricio fuisse
inventum, communis est Hibernorum sensus and Traditio, quam cum lacte nutrice
suxisse videntur, ut^si nicaris obtrudere contratiam sententiam, a summis, ab
imis, and omnibus, tanquam Novator, novarumque opinionum sator, exautoreris and
explodaris. Roth. de purg. S. Patric. (...) T^^. Mess. ^dit. page 91. number. (...)
It is the common opinion and Tradition among all the Irish, which they seem
to have sucked from their mothers breasts, that this Purgatory was found by
Patrick, insomuch as if one should press the contrary, he would be by high and
low, yea all rejected and hissed at, as a broacher of new opinions. And that it
is so generally received, is esteemed no small argument of the truth thereof,
for so it follows; Primum fundamentum receptae traditionis sit ista tam
constans and consona receptio ejus ab omni aevo and memoria hominu^ per
universam hanc nationem. Neque enimsine causa dicitur quod omnium fertur ore,
praesertim quando id ore piorum, eruditorum, prudentium, nemine pene
refragante, constituitur, ibid. n. m. 7.
Let the first ground of this received Tradition be the constant and consonant
assent thereunto in every age, and beyond the memory of man throughout this
whole Nation: Neither is it without ground which everyone says, especially
when almost without any contradiction it is allowed and settled in the mouths
of godly, learned and wise men. But what need is there of arguments, when the
matter is put out of all question? For now it is not to be received as the
opinion of private men, but of the whole Church; seeing in the Office and
Lyturgie of S. Patrick, Collumb and Briget, with other Saints of Ireland, set
out by The. Messingam, we thus find it: Antrum p^nitentiale etiamnum visitur,
quod de ejus nomine Puteus, seu Purgatorium S. Patricij vocatur. Offic. S.
Patr. etc. lect. 6. page 14. ed (...). Paris. an. 1620.
That Penitential cave is yet to be seen, which is called after his name, the
Pit or Purgatory of S. Patrick. And why is it called Patricks Purgatory? it
follows in the Hymn. Hic est Doctor ^enevolus Hib^^nicorum Apossolus, Cui
loca purgatoria Ostendit Dei gratia. Ibid. Hymn. page 19.
Irelands Apostle, and welwishing Teacher
This is, to whom those Purging places were by grace of God revealed*


And after in the Antiphone, Magni patris sunt miranda merita Patricij, cui
Deus ostendit locum Purgatorij, quo viventes se expurgent delinquentes filij.
Ibid. page 21. ad magnify at* Antiphona.
Wonderful are the merits of the great father Patrick, to whom God did show
the place of Purgatory where his sinful children, even yet living, may purge
themselves. And will you see of what force this argument is esteemed: take it
out of Roth, who does labor hard for it, I ertium fundamentum elicitur ex ipso
officio ecclesiastico and uniformi consensu ecclesiasticorum and ecclesiae
Sanctorum qui a multis saeculis inibi floruerunt, quorum omnium authoritatem
and mutuam consentionem, quae satis exprimitur in antiquis breviarijs and
Antophinarijs manuscriptis omnium provinciarum, quisque ille esset qui non
formidaret contemnere, Egoutique non excusa^em ejus temeritatem and audaciam.
Roth. ibid. quo sup. a page 92. number. 10.
The third ground (says he) is taken from the very ecclesiastical Office and
uniforme consent of all congregations and Saints of the Church, who have there
flourished (I suppose in Ireland) for many ages, whose joint Authority and
mutual consent being declared in the ancient Manuscript, Breviaries and
Responsals of all the Provinces, who is he that will not fear to contemn?
certainly, I would not undertake to excuse his rashness and boldness. To all
which, I will in the last place add one of the ancient Irish Rhymes concerning
this, supposed to be by S. Patrick himself, in a vision delivered to one
sleeping in this Purgatory, and that to this end, that it should be every where
divulged, which concludes with the former: the words are these. (...). MSS.
Hibern. Derm. mac Egan.
Awake thou man, and remember my Rhyme in haste. Let it al. be sown.
spread East and West, and be written with a pen. I am Patrick Chief, or head
of the Clergy, who have obtained from God no small thing: A gift large and
liberal which was never found till I did come to it; A Purgatory for
punishment here, and no other Purgatory to be after.

What boldness then? what rashness who but an Innovator? and one deserving to
be hissed out of the company dare question, who other than Patrick should be
the finder or founder of this Purgatory? It is, you see, concluded by a
general Tradition, by the common consent of the Church, and approved by a
Vision: an Argament in that Church, not inferior to any other, the thing (I
confess) do not deserve so much ink, but I have the rather observed it, that
the confidence of these men may be seen, imposing for undeniable verities,
matters doubtful and most uncertain.

For notwithstanding all these loud-cryes to the Contrary, we shall find this
not to be any new Question, whether or not S. Patrick were the Author of this
Purgatory, Hujus latibuliorigo nonnullam inter scriptores controversiam parit:
alij nobis negotium facescunt, negantque Patricium hujus monumenti vel authorem
vel inventorem fuisse. Rich. St^hurst in vit. S. Patrie. lib. 2. page 65.
The Original of this den has bred some difference among Writers, says a
most judicious Writer, and one favoring the cause, but this is too general:
Others find us work, denying that S. Patrick was either the beginner or finder
of this monument, says the same Author. And so obscure is the Question, that a
Jesuit finds such difficulties and improbalities in their opinions who
attribute it to S. Patrick, that he clearly conceives it cannot be. Edm.
Campion Jes. Hift. of Ireland. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Two things I muse at (says he) That neither the Time nor the Author of so
strange Erection was preserved: concerning the time, one Record puts it in
anno Domini 302. which is 128. years before Patrick converted Ireland, and
sixty and fix years before his birth.

So that it will not be (I trust) any absurdity in us to examine this, and
make some while a stand, before we rashly assent with the vulgar to a thing, it
may be, no less unlikely than Questionable; especially seeing Roth himself,
even there where he seems most confident of this, could not but tacitly
confess it not to be altogether so generally confessed, as men usually
esteemed it; that is to say, without Contradiction: but this he must have to be
understood with a Modification of Almost, Roth. supra page 14. li^. (u)
which we say uses to salve from a lie, speeches too far strained, such as
that is.

Neither is it without controversy, to which of the Three Patricks (if to any
of them) this Purgatory should be ascribed: But to the second of that name does
Ra^nlphus give it, Polychron. lib. 5. cap. 4.
whom John Brampton follows, Job. Brampton F^alen. H^^.
and both agree with Henry of Saltry; yet does not Henry mean him whom
Ranulphus calls the less, who flourished about the year 850. as the
Compiler of the Antiquities of Glastenbury has it, MSS. in Biblioth. Tho.
Alani Oxon.
as it is observed by the now most learned Primate of all Ireland. But he whom
Henry names, is that Great Patrick who converted the Irish to the Christisn
Faith, which no man will (I suppose) say was done (...) 850, being rather more
than 400. years before, that is to say, in the year 432. for this Purgatory is
said to be one chief means of the conversion of Ireland, to which end it was
supposed to be first instituted; for so Thyreus out of others, Effraenatos
animos infernalium poenarum terrore emolliebat, ut sic ad fidem vel invitos
compellaret, incredulis enim de damnatorum poenis ac supplicijs dubitantibus,
and visibile testimonium petentibus signum hoc (sicut traditio fidelis,
multique non ignobiles authors referu^t) ostendit: Circulu^ in terrra fecit,
inera cujus ambitum hiatus ingens, aspectu horribilis, apparuit, per cujus
occultos and sinuosos meatus, luctus, ejulatus and lamentabiles voces saepe
audiebantur. Guil. Thyraeus discurs. paneg. de (...). (...). Patrie. page 150.
He did mollify their unbridled minds with the terror of infernal pains,
that so he might as it were, force them to believe. For He (as undoubted
Tradition and many credible Authors report) did show this sign to those
incredulous men, doubting of the pains and punishment of the damned, and
thereof requiring some visible demonstration: for He made a Circle in the
earth, within the compass whereof there was an opening of the earth, great and
terrible to be seen, through whose secret and winding passages often times are
heard lamentations, wailings and doleful sounds; where we have S. Patrick, the
Author; the time, at the first conversion of the Kingdom; and the manner and
thing it self, wonderful and miraculous. But if we should call upon Thyreus
for a confirmation of these so confidently delivered Assertions, our best
answer would be, that we must rely on undoubted Tradition, and on the
testimonies of credible Authors; how undoubted the Tradition hereof is, shall
likewise hereafter appear. But who are these Authors? in this is he silent:
for in very truth, we find neither credible Authors, nor any Author at all,
that for more than 700. years after S. Patrick, does write one word of this
Purgatory, which will seem incredible to any that shall consider, either the
Times, or the Subject to be treated off.

As for the Times, whether we consider that in which S. Patrick lived, or those
next following; no ages were (if not this) more learned, and Christianity
planted here by S. Patrick had so good progress, that (if we believe Iocelin
Infra breve temporis spatium nulla eremus, nullus pene terrae angulus aut locus
in Insula tam remot^ qui perfectis monachis aut monialibus non repleretur, ita
ut Hibernia speciali nomine Insula Sanctoru^ jure nominaretur; vivebant enim
secundum Regulam illis a S. Patricio praefixam, mundi contemptu, coelestium
appetitu, sancta mortificatione carnis, ac abdicatione voluntatis propriae,
pares Egyptijs Monachis merito atque numero, ita ut exteras and longinquas
Nationes illustrarent verbo ac religionis exemplo. Jocel. in viti S. Patric.
cap. 174. page 75. edit. a Tho. Messing. in slorilegio.
writing of S. Patricks life.) In a very short time there was no wilderness,
nor almost any corner of the land, or place in the Island so remote, which was
not with perfect Monks and Nuns replenished, insomuch as Ireland was by a
special name and that deservedly called the Island of Saints: for they lived
according to the Rule by S. Patrick prescribed unto them, they contemning the
world, and desiring heavenly things with an holy mortifying of the flesh, and
denying their own wills: Equal were they both in merit and number to those
Egyptian Monks, so as by doctrine and life, they did inform and teach
foreign and far distant Nations. Thus Iocelin. And can it be imagined, that
among so many learned and devout men, living in the same, or the next following
ages to S. Patrick, there should not be so much as any one found, that does but
once mention this Purgatory, if then it had been? likely it is, it would not
have been hid, especially in the first rising of it; it being of so great
observation, that the whole Kingdom is pretended to be moved with it, and
converted by it.

Object. If it be said, that although those ages might afford learned men, yet
perhaps not many Writers; or if such there were, yet might their works not come
to our hands, and so This pass unobserved.

Reas. Which things were they so, and that many such writings might miscarry,
yet what shall we think of them whose works do appear? or, if no other
Writer would do it, why does not our great Patrick himself write of it; or but
glance at it, he having so fit an occasion to do it in his book entitled De
tribus habitaculis, said to be his? The words I do insert, Tria sub
omnipotenis Dei nutu habitacula quoru^ summum Regnum Dei ve^ regnu^ coelorum
dici tur: imum vocatur infernus; medium mundus praesens vel orbis terrarum
appellatur, quoru^ extrema omnino invice^ sunt contraria, and nulla sibi
societate conjuncta (que enim Societas potest esse Luci ad tenebras, and
Christo ad Belial?) medium vero non nullam habet similitudinem ad extrema, etc.
Commistio enim malorum simul and bonorum in hoc mundo est. In regno autem Dei,
nulli mali sunt, sed omnes boni; at in inferno nulli boni sunt, sed omnes mali;
and uterque locus ex medio suppletur: Hominum enim hujus alij elevantur ad
coelum, alij trahu^itur ad infernum, similes quippe similibus junguntur, id
est, boni bonis, and mali malis, justi homines justis Angelis, transgressores
homines transgressoribus Angelis, servi Dei Deo, servi Diaboli Diabolo,
Benedicti vocantur ad regnum sibi paratum ab origin mundi; Maledicti
expelluntur in ignem qui praeparitus est diabolo and angelis ejus. Patric. de
tribus habitaculis MSS. in ^bl. Regi^ observat a Revere^dissimo patre Jacobo
A^achane.
There are three dwelling places under the command of Almighty God, The
Highest, Lowest, and the Middle; whereof the highest is called the Kingdom of
God, or the Kingdom of Heaven; The lowest is called Hell; this present world
is the middle; of these the two extremes are to each other contrary, and by no
fellowship to be joined: (for what fellowship can light have with darkness? or
Christ with Belial?) but the middle has some similitude with both extremes,
etc. for in this world there is a mixture of good and bad; but in the Kingdom
of God are no bad, but all good; in Hell no good, but all bad; and both these
places are supplied by the middle: for of the men of this world, some ascend up
into Heaven, others are cast down into Hell, like are joined to like; that is
to say, good to good, and bad to bad, just men to just Angels, and
transgressing men to transgressing Angels, the servants of God to God, the
servants of the devil to the devil; The blessed are called to a Kingdom
prepared for them from the beginning of the world; The cursed are driven out
into the fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. In all which, you see,
there is not any mention of this, (suppose his) or any other Purgatory.

Neither (I confess) is it necessary that all Writers of that, no more than of
the after ages, should mention this Purgatory, perhaps it not being suitable to
their subject treated off; yet surely may it well be expected at their hands,
who have proposed to themselves to write of S. Patricks life, and who do
observe the memorable passages thereof; How this should escape their pens it
may well be wondered?

The first Author we find in this kind is Probus an Irishman: an author in
the Judgment of all men most worthy credit, if we credit Messingham, Probus
Hibernus Author omnium judicio, fide dignissimus, qui circa Bedae tempora, ut
videtur, flor* it, vitam S. Patricij Hibernorum Apostoli scripsit. Tho: Mess*
tract. praeamb. (...) nominibus Hiberniae.
He as it seemed flourished about the time of Be^e, (anno 731. being 299.
years after S. Patrick) and did write the life of S. Patrick the Apostle of
the Irish: I might well make a stand, and not pawn my credit with Messingham,
upon the truth of all that Probus does set down in that Treatise, and how
little cause I had to do it, I do refer to the Judgment of the Reader;
certainly, he that shall peruse that his book, may well imagine the whole
endeavor of the man, to be not to pass by any thing, although never so
trivial; and trivial matters to set forth to the best, sometimes beyond all
bounds. Yet of this Purgatory, although (as was said) one principal means of
the conversion of the people, it also exhibiting so many and wonderful things
to be seen and heard, being flocked unto from far and near, and so
strangely made or found, that also by S. Patrick himself. Yet of this
Purgatory (I say) we find not in Probus so much as one word, it is not once
mentioned by him, no not so much as by Heresay; Neither is this observation
mine alone, but we find it as a marginall Annotation to Antoninus Archbishop
of Florence in the life of S. Patrick, Vulgatam ha^c de Purgatorio S. Patricij
historiam author qui Bid assuitur non habet. Antonin. Archiep. Floren. Chron.
tom. 11. de S. Patrite. part. 2. ad anno 500. c. 18.. 2, p. 203. in margin
edit. Lugd. anno 1586.
The History so common concerning S. Patricks Purgatory is not in the Author
that is joined to Bid, he means this Probus, whose work we find in the
Volumes of Venerable Bede, in whose days, if this History had been so common
as in after ages, no man I think that reads him, will judge it likely to
slip his pen, or to be passed over in that deep silence that it is.

But that which may seem above all others most strange is, that Vitam S.
Patricij ab infantia, usque ad mortem exactissime descripsit, nec tameir ullum
verbum uspiam loquatur. ^oth. apud Tho. Mess. de Purgat. S. Patric. cap. 1.
page 93. number. 14.
Iocelin esteemed a most exact writer, Writing of the life of S. Patrick from
his infancy even to his death, and that most exactly: yet of this has not one
word any where, says Roth; and yet lived this Iocelin anno 1183. Reverend. P.
Jacob. Armach. de Eccles. Pri^ord. page 816.
being 751. years after S. Patrick, and after Probus 452. years, whose works,
whosoever shall take the pains to peruse, will perceive it impossible that a
Relation of this consequence should drop by; especially so many leaves being
stuffed with such matters as will be there met withal.

This so great an omission has been, and not without good cause, much taken
into consideration by later Writers, (the earnest defenders of this Purgatory)
who contend so much for the Antiquity thereof, as may appear by the
Apollogies made for Iocelin in this respect: And yet we find all of them to
come short of helping the matter, although some have practiced to insert more
than enough of it into Iocelins works.

As for the later: in a Manuscript copy of Iocelin, which I have seen in The
now most learned Primate's Library, I do find two Chapters of this Subject,
viz. Cap. 198. and 199. The words are these, p While S. Patrick preached Cum
(...). ^atricius per Hiberniam predicaret and fructu^ ibi permodicum faceret,
rogavit dominum ut aliquod signum ostenderet, per quod vel territi poeniteret.
jussu igitur domini in quodam loco circulum magnu^ cum Baculo Jesu designavit,
and ecce terra intra circulum se apperuit, and puteus maximus and
profundissimus apparuit, rolatumque est Bea^o Patricio quod ibi esset quidam
Purgatorij locus, quem quisquis vellet descendere alia sibi poenitentia non
restaret, nec aliud pro poccatis purgatoriu^ sentiret, plerique enim inde non
redeunt and qui redirent, eos a mane usque insequens mane ibidem moram facere
opporteret: multi itaque ingrediebantur qui de caetero non revertebantur.
Addit. focel. de vit. S. Patric. in Bibl. Reverendis. P. Jacob. Arinachan, cap.
198.
through Ireland, and had found but small fruit of his labors, he did beseech
the Lord to show some sign, by which, although by terror, they might be
brought to repentance. By the command therefore of the Lord, with the staff of
Jesus (a Rod, like that of Moses for doing Miracles) he did make a great Circle
in a certain place: And behold, the earth within the Circle did open of it
self, and there appeared a great and most deep pit in that place. It was also
revealed to S. Patrick that a certain place of Purgatory was there, into
which who so would descend, needed no other repentance for his sin, neither
should he feel any other Purgatory; whence many were never to return, and
they that did, must first continue there from morning to the morning of the
next day; many therefore went in that never came back. This is the 198.
Chapter, and in the next, ibid. cap. 119.
there is a Relation of one that did go into S. Patrick's Purgatory, telling
what there happened unto him, after which, within 30 days he dyed, what can be
more plain? could there any thing be more fully said? who then can say, that in
Iocelin we read nothing of S. Patrick's Purgatory?

But great cause have we to suspect, that these two Chapters are but a patch
pieced in, out of the Gold^ Legend, Jacob. de Voragine Legend. A^r. cap. 49.
and Petrus de Natalibus; in both which books, treating of the life of S.
Patrick, we have that discourse word for word. Besides, that in the printed
Iocelins, these two last Chapters are altogether omitted, as acknowledged to be
Matthew. 9. 16.
A new piece added to an old garment, which has made the rent worse, for in
the printed editions there are but 196. Chapters: Neither does Roth in his
Elucidations upon Iocelin, added unto Messinghams Florilegium, mention any more
Chapters, he shutting up the Book with the 196. Chapter containing S.
Patrick's burial in Down: but this was perhaps but forgotten, or rather put
off until the next Edition of Iocelin; in the mean time, trying whether that
manuscript might pass for Authentical and unexamined.

It is true indeed, and cannot be denied, that in the 172. Chapter of the
printed Book there is mention made of S. Patrick's Purgatory, but it is as
true, and most apparent that it is not the same, but far different from this
which we now look after: as also from that other Purgatory belonging to S.
Brendan, of which I have before spoken; Iocelins Words are these, Subijt in
montem excelsum Chruachan-aigle vocatum in Conacia constitutum. In cujus montis
cacumine jejunare and vigilare consuescunt plurimi, opinantes se postea nunquam
intraturos portas inferni, quia hoc impetratum a Domino existimant m^ritis ac
precibus S. Patricij. Referunt etiam nonnulli qui pernoctaverant ibi se
tormenta gravisssima fuisse perpessos, quibus se purgatos a peccatis putant,
unde and quidam illorum lo^ illum purgatorium S. Patricij vocant. Jocel. de
vita S. Patricij. cap. 171. and 172.
S. Patrick went up into an high mountain in Connaght called Chruaghan-aigle,
on the top of which mountain very many were accustomed to fast and watch,
thinking they should never after enter into the gates of hell, which they think
by the prayers and merits of S. Patrick to have been obtained from God. Some
also who have slept there report, that they have endured most grievous
torments, by which they conceive themselves to be purged from their sins;
whence some of them call that place S. Patrick's Purgatory. Thus Iocelin. And
who sees not here two distinct places? the one in Vlster, that which we treat
off; the other in Connaght, of which Iocelin; that in an Island within a lake,
this on the top of a mountain: So that it is most clear, that Iocelin has
not one word of this great Purgatory; which also will seem most strange, he
falling into a discourse of that other S. Patrick's Purgatory, which probably
evinceth that either then it was not, or not credited.

But how shall we help this? patching will not serve the turn, as I showed
before; how then? Messingham steps in here, and first seems to recall
something of that, which before, it may be unawares, he had granted: Cum
certissunum sit extraordinarium in Hibernia a Patricio inventum fuisse
purgatorium: certum item sit istud a Jocelino in ejus vita aut prorsus silentio
praeteriti aut levissime tactum deseri. Non ideo existimamus comunem
domesticorum traditionem ac exterorum hocce de purgatorio assertionem
debilitari. Aut Jocelinum imperfecti operis authorem debere appellari; cum and
ipsum sufficienter excusare and non incongrue supra relatum Johannis de Domino
dictu^ famulo domin^ Patricio accommodare possumus sic dicendo. Sunt autom and
alia multa quae secit Patricius, que non sant scipta in libro boc a Jocelino
composito, ob causasnimirum supra in explicatione textus Euangelici memoratas,
viz. aliqua immo plurima comemoratu digna a tali sancto patrata (...) penitus
ignoret aut cognita praetermittar. Deinde non sine magna probabilitate
assorimus ideirco de Purgatorio S. Patricij in libro ejus vitae non tractasse
quod e^ aliquorum opinione doceptus non Patricium Apostolum, sed alium
Pa^^icium, and aetare and dignitate ob hoc diversum, hujus Purgatorij
inventorem fuisle putaverit. The. Messingh. tract. de Purg. S. Patric. praefat.
ad Lectorem. page 86. and 87.
As it is most certain that there was an extraordinary Purgatory found out by
Patrick in Ireland: so it is also certain, that Iocelin in his life does
either pass it over in silence, or butlightly glance at it, (a Glance rather
than nothing.) But it is most certain that it is not so much, and that more
certain than that that Purgatory was found by Patrick. This is too plain to
be denied: and therefore, in the next place he does confess, or rather grant,
and avoid it; for notwithstanding this, (says he) Yet do we not therefore
think, that the Common Tradition of our own Contrymen and strangers
concerning this Purgatory is thereby weakened; how common the Tradition has
been since the time of Iocelin, I question not; but what Tradition was before,
I cannot see, when as there was not any memory of it extant, for ought
appearing, for more than 700. years after Patrick; it is true, that it did
begin to be on foot about 45. years, or less before Iocelin in Henry of
Saltry's time, but yet in all likelihood as soon rejected as it was moved,
which may well be gathered out of this our Authors silence: so that a plea of
Tradition here will scarcely be admitted, or if it be, where is your Authors
exactness you so much boast off? but notwithstanding, say you, we do not
think that Iocelin ought to be accounted the Author of an imperfect work, when
as we may excuse him sufficiently, and not incongruously by that speech of John
spoken of our Lord, which may fitly be applied to Patrick the Lords servant,
saying, that there are many other things that Patrick did which are not written
in this book, made by Iocelin, for the causes before remembered, in the
expounding of that text of the Gospel; and what are those reasons? Some yea
many things he either knew not, or he wittingly omitted them, as being before
known; but whether of these shall we stick unto? to say Iocelin did not know
of it, would too much discover the weakness of the cause: or if he did, yet
would pass this by, making choice of sleighter matters (I doubt not) better
known than this was, would question either his exactness, or blemish his
Judgment too much; what then shall we say? hear then the last evasion.
Besides, not without great probability do we say, that Iocelin did not handle
any thing of S. Patrick's Purgatory, in that book which he did write of the
life of S. Patrick, because he was deceived by the opinions of others, who did
think that it was not Patrick the Apostle, but another Patrick, both in time
and dignity to him inferior, that was the finder of this Purgatory. First then
we have it here granted, and that with great probability, that Iocelin does not
write of any such thing. Next for the rest, we have only confident surmises,
without any probability at all, that Iocelin was misled by any such error to
mistake the Author of this Purgatory, and consequently to omit it self, but
rather we find probabilities to the contrary: for whereas Iocelin does not
doubt to attribute to S. Patrick that Purgatory in Connaght, how should he
doubt of the Author of this other Purgatory? for there is none that I know, who
esteems them to come from different hands. And for this Thyraus shall be
instead of many, Hodierno die inter reliqua a Patricio poenarum loca inventa,
duo frequentibus Hibernorum peregrinationibus celeberrinia extant, unus in
Conacia, alter in Ultonia, de de priori in vertice asperi cujusdam and ardui
montis collocato libet Iocelini verba hic recitare. In hujus moutis cacumine,
etc. Thyreus discurs. pane^yr. de ^^iracul. S. Patric.
At this day among other places of punishment found by Patrick, there are two
extant, being above others famous for pilgrimages; The one in Connaght, the
other in Ulster. Of the first, which is placed on the top of a certain craggie
and steep mountain, I will here repeat the words of Iocelin, on the top of
this mountain, etc. the place before spoken off. So that we find but one
Author for both Purgatories: Neither is there any that does mislead us, but
Roth only, who would herein, if he could, deceive his Reader. It would be
therefore (by far) the fairer course to confess what cannot well be denied,
then to think by forgeries and frivelous evasions to delude us.

And this will yet seem more strange, if we but look back a little into the
time of Iocelin's writing. The first word that we hear of S. Patrick's
Purgatory is in Henry of Saltry, anno 1140. (upwards of 700. years, as was
said, after S. Patrick) in whose time the contention was great, and all means
used for setting up the credit thereof: yet notwithstanding all the noise and
bustling that then was, it was as soon hushed again, and within 45. years
after in the time of Iocelin buried in deep silence: so that either there was
no such thing then acknowledged, or otherwise it was as too too ridiculous by
Iocelin omitted. But I rather think the first, seeing he makes no great choice
of his matter, and stands not much on examining the probability of many
things he has written: wherein let me use Campion the Jesuits words, who (I
know not on what grounds) thought that Giraldus Cambrensis did omit to write of
this Purgatory, whereas we know he did; yet will I make use of the inference
thereupon, and may well apply the same to what now I have in hand. That Edm.
Campion Jes. Hist. of Ireland. lib. 1. cap. 13.
although a negative authority be not invincible, yet considering the property
of that man, and what a sort of trifles he takes pains to justify, it may
serve for a vehement suspicion, that the place was either then not found, or
not miraculous. Thus Campion of Giraldus, and thus we of the rest.

But from the Time, to come to the consideration of the thing it self; for as
I have showed it improbable, that in such learned times, among so many learned
men, and of them some writing purposely of S. Patricks Life, the mention of
this Purgatory should so pass as it has, if it had then a being, as we are
borne in hand: so will it seem much more impossible, if the nature of the
thing it self be looked into; for had it been a thing obscure, or of none
account, it would be the less wonder that it should be forgotten; but being of
all other things, that which is of greatest note, it could not be hid nor
neglected; nothing deserving to be more, or so much remembered as this. So O
Sullevan writing of Ireland, Superest adhuc omnium memorabilium reru^ Hiberniae
maxima, de qua principe loco fuisset agendu^ ea est D. Patricij Purgatorium.
Phil. O Sull. Hibern. Histor. tom. 1. lib. 2. page 14.
There does yet remain that which of all the memorable things of Ireland is
most memorable, of which I should have spoken in the first place, and that is
S. Patricks Purgatory, says he, Peter Lumbard also, the late popish Primate of
Armagh, writing of the places in Ireland of greatest note, does above all the
rest extol this Purgatory: Ex quibus celebertimus and sanctissimus est qui
Purgatorij sancti Patricij locus appellatur. Pet. Lumbard. Comment. de regno
Hibern. cap. 20. page 276.
Of all of them the most famous, and most holy is that which is called, the
place of S. Patricks Purgatory; and if so it were in those days esteemed, it
ought not, it could not be forgotten, as it was by all the writers of these
former ages.

Neither will it serve to say, that this Purgatory was then in the Infancy
thereof, and not well known or frequented, so as much notice to be taken of it,
at the least so much as in after times for to pass by, what before I touched;
considering it was supposed to be obtained by Patrick from God, for the
Conversion of the whole Nation, and that it did work that effect, by which all
must have taken special notice of it: we shall further find these men to
conclude, that even in S. Patricks own time, also pilgrimages were very
frequent thither; for so O Sullevan, In id Purgatorium cum Patricius vixit
multi sunt ingressi causa crimina purgandi, quorum nonnulli qui nu tantis fidei
fuerunt amplius non exstiterunt, at illi qui firma and immutabili fide
municbantur, reversi retulerunt se Orcum vidisse, ingentes cruciatus esse
perpessos, magnam quoque requiem and faelicitatem oculis lustrasse. Phil. O
Sull. Hist. Cath. Hibern. tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 2.
While S. Patrick lived, many went into that Purgatory for the purging of their
sins, whereof some, who were doubtful, never returned; but they who were
armed with a firm and unmoved faith being returned, reported that they had
seen Hell, and endured great Torments; that also they had seen great felicity
and rest. Many (says he) went in even in S. Patricks time: They flocked
thither by troops, (says another) by whom Ad hanc Cavernam aetate Patricij,
magna turba certatim confluxit, ab intrantibus multa miracula recitabantur ex
his nonnulla antiquitatis monumentis consignata. Rich. Sta^^hurst. de vita^ S.
Patric. lib. 2. page 65.
many miracles were related, of which some are recorded in the Monuments of
Antiquity, but where are these Monuments? Edm. Camp on I. suit hist. Ireland.
The Revelations of men that went in, S. Patrick yet living, are kept within
the said Abbey, says the third: but yet let the producing of them be pressed,
and no such can be found, such and more than enough of such may be easily found
of a late stamp, but far short of S. Patrick, or many ages after.

To come then to the time of the first discovery that we read of it, the
first news we hear of it, was in the age of Steven King of England, and that
by that Henry of Saltry, whom we have before named: who flourished about the
year 1140. many, even seven ages after S. Patricks conversion of this
Kingdom, which was about the year of our Lord 432. before which Henry, (and
he also a stranger to the Kingdom, and so taking it only on hearesay) we
find not any footsteps of it any where: and with him does Roth (one that has
swet in this matter) begin, as at the head, Domesticis Testimonijs
adstipulantur exterorum suffragia ut Henrici Salteriensis, and Matthaei
Parisiensis in visione Oeni militis, etc. Roth. de Purgat. S. Patric. page 9.
number. 8.
To our testi^ies at home, says he, late ones all, as may appear, We have
assenting the suffrages of Stangers, as of Henry of Saltry, and Matthew Paris
in that vision of Owen the Knight, where we find two Authors, reporting one
and the same history, it being the first we find commonly called the History
of the Knight; these Two again we must reduce to One, The one of these writers
borrowing from the other: Matthew Paris (being also a stranger) who lived about
the year 1245. relating, what he does, out of that Henry; after whom he lived
more than 100. years, and after Iocelin 60. years: a long time, especially in
superstitious times, for such a Relation to take head; and possible it is,
considering the times to find many reporters, and such also as might be more
ready to help it forward, by adding to it for the best advantage: of which
kind we find to be in the first place, these two first Henry and Matthew, as
may appear by the circumstances of the relation, of the grounds (I mean) and
inducements for our believing the thing; of which in the next place, without
touching upon the passages of that Pilgrimage, which well examined, would
afford abundant matter for its own confutation; but that I refer to the
following Chapter.

The proceedings in Matthew and Henry are these in substance, for the
particulars were tedious. That there was a certain Knight by some called
Egnus, Phil. O Sull. Patric. Decad. lib. 9. cap. 9.
but of others and more commonly Oenus, as in Matthew Paris, whom herein I
follow, Mat. Parisiensis Hist. Angl. in Stephan. page 83. edit. Tygur. 1606.
This Owen was borne in Ireland, and followed Steven King of England in his
Wars, from whom returning into Ireland his native Country to visit his
parents, and after some time, taking into a serious consideration the great
disorders of his ungodly life past, he does apply himself by way of confession
to an Irish Bishop, I know not whether Florentianus bishop (as I conceive) of
Clogher, (he who did labor so much with Salteriensis to work in him a belief
of this Purgatory, of which after.) This Bishop, whosoever he was, being about
to enjoy^e our delinquent his Penance, is prevented by Owen, of himself making
choice of going into S. Patrick's Purgatory, notwithstanding the earnest
solicitation of the Bishop to the contrary; but being resolved, The Bishop
dismisseth him with Letters to the Prior of that Purgatory, by whom after
fifteen days exercise and preparation, he is admitted and shut up alone in
the Cave: After whose return we have him the Author of a very strange
relation, the groundwork of all that followed in that kind; as that, through
that Cave, he did pass into many subterraneall spacious Rooms and Passages, by
which he is led into all the corners of that General Purgatory, as it is
called; this again guiding him into Hell it self, (these two supposed not to
be far distant) over which by the benefit of a bridge he passes into
Paradise, the same Paradise out of which our first Parents were cast, from
whence (and all this in a few hours) is he back again at the entrance of the
Cave. In all which what incredible and portentous reports we meet, shall be
referred to its own place, to be revised and examined. Our Pilgrim now
returned, goes another Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and thence back again into
England where he does certify the King of his resolution of forsaking the
World, and wholly addicting himself to a Religious life. At which time says
Matthew (or Salteriensis rather whose discourse is verbatim in Matthew)
Contigit aure^ eo tempore quod Gervasius Ludensis coenobij Abbas, Rege Angloru^
Stephano do^ante, locum ad Abbatiam construendam, in Hibernia obtineret qui
Monachum suum, nomine Gilbertum, ad regem direxit, ut ab eo locum susciperet,
and ibi construerer Abbatiam. At Gilbertus ad Regem venie^s conquestus est
ninus quod patriae illius linguam non novit. Sed inquit Rex, bonum tibi
interpretem Deo auxiliante in^eniam. Et vocato Milite Oeno, jussit Rex ut cum
Gilberto iret, and cum ipso in Hibernia remaneret. Quod Miles gratanter annuens
cum dicto Gilberto remansit, and satis eidevotus ministrans, monachalem habitum
suscipere voluit quia servus esset quem Dominus praeelegit, transcuntes autem
in Hiberniam Abbatiam construxerunt ubi Miles Ocnus interpres Monachi de votus
extirit, and in omnibus agendis minister fidelis, quandocunque vero Monachus
solus alicubi cum Milite fuit, de statu Purgatorij and poenis mirabilibus, quas
viderat and experto didicerat, curiose ab eo quaesivit, etc. Matthew. Paris. ubi
supra.
It happened that Gervasius Abbet of the Monastery of Luda, obtained leave from
the King of England for to build an Abbey in Ireland, and to that end he sent
a Monk called Gilbert to the King, that he might have the grant of a place for
the Abbey: Gilbert coming to the King did complain that he wanted the
Irish-tongue. To whom the King said, I will (God willing) find out for you a
good interpreter, and Owen being called, the King commanded him to go with
Gilbert that with him he might remain in Ireland, which the knight most
willingly assented unto, and continued with Gilbert, to whom he did carefully
minister, and was desirous to take the habit of a Monk, as being a servant
forechosen by the Lord. Into Ireland they went and built the Abbey, where the
Monk Owen was his interpreter and faithful servant, but whenever the monk
Gilbert was private with the Knight, he was very inquisitive of the state of
Purgatory, and the wonderful terments which he saw and by experience had
learned. And from this Gilbert Saltericusis receives the relation. Superiorem
narrationem cum saepe dictus Gilbertus coram multis me quoque audiente (...),
sicut saepius ab ipso Milite audietat. Hen. Salt. de Purg. S. Patr.
The aforesaid narration, the said Gilbert did often repeat in my hearing,
says Henry himself, according as he had often heard it from the Knight.

Where I pass over the ignorant and gross mistake of our Author in making
Stephen King of England to have any power of disposing of land in Ireland, as
by the most learned Primate is justly observed, Jacob. Armachan. de Primord.
Eccles. Brit. page 898.
whereas the succeeding King Henry the second, was the first who could claim
there: Let us proceed to view the several Actors in this Scene, and whom have
we in this Monkish age, but all Monks? as Henry, Matthew, Gilbert, and Owen, to
whom add Florentianus, whom anon we shall see enter, and act his part too on
this stage.

Of Matthew Paris I have not much to say, (he being but Henry's transcriber)
setting aside his affectionate manner of expressing the matter, suitable to the
superstition of his times and his order: setting aside also his partial taking
up ungrounded reports; and adding thereunto of his own many things in that
kind, besides what he has out of Salteriensis.

But our first Author is Henry of Saltry, if we allow it not rather to Gilbert
so stirring in the plot, of whom Matthew thus: Hujus Monachi industria and
diligentia, hujus Militis experientia redacta est iu scripturam, simul cum
relalatione Episcoporum regionis and aliorum religiosorum qui causa justitiae
pertribuerunt testimonium veritati. Matthew. Patris. ubi supra p. 88.
By the industry and diligence of this Monk he means Gilbert, and the
Knights own experience, this is reduced to writing: together with the relation
of the Bishops of that Region, and of other religious men, who to verify the
truth thereof, have thereunto given their testimony. How many Bishops, or
other hands, or votes were given to it we know not, no such thing being to be
seen: But, if any, I dare assure my self Florentianus would be one. For that
Henry of Saltry was wholly led, or rather misled by these two Florentianus the
Bishop and Gilbert the monk, Henry's own words will apparently discover.

Gilbert is Henry's first Relator, from whom he hears of this matter in the
presence of many others, as before was showed, in which number (says Henry.)
there was one present, who said he doubted much if any such thing had happened.
Affuit inter illos unus qui haec ita contigisse se dubitare dirit. Ego vero
postquam haec omnia audicram, duos de Hibernia Abbates ut adhuc certior fierem
super his conveni, quorum unus quod nu^quam in patria sua talia audierat
respondit, alius vero quod multoties hrc audierit, and quod essent omnia vera
affinuavit: Sed and hoc testatus est quod idem Purgatoriu^ raro quis intrantium
redit. He-Salter. Manscin Bibl. Reverendissimi Pat. Jacobs Armachani.
Neither is Henry himself fully satisfied in it, howsoever credulous enough,
but desires further satisfaction therein: Therefore, to use his own words,
when I did hear of all these things, I did confer with two Abbots of
Ireland, desiring to be better informed of these things. One of them answered,
that he never heard of the like things in his Country. But the other affirmed,
that he had often heard of them; saying, that all of them were true: and
further adding, that seldom any of those that went into that Purgatory did
ever return. Which last, were it true, we might well suspect some foul
dealing making some of the Pilgrims away secretly to confirm their fabulous
Legend.

And whereas this Relator strayneth so far as to say, that few of them
returned who went into that Purgatory: We must imagine that there were but few
that would adventure thither. For if many did go in and but few returned, how
comes that mincing of the number, before supra p. 8. l. t. s.
that some have gone in who never returned, or that other; sup p. 11. l. t. c.
that there were two companies lost, and that a third is yet to be taken away:
not two only, not a small' some, but most perished if this be true.

Yet before we proceed further, let us hear Thomas Messingam, how he does
render these words out of Henry. Ego vero (inquit) Salteriensis, postquam haec
omnia audieram duos de Hibernia Abbates ut adhuc certior fierem super his
conveni, quorum unus quod omnia essent vera affirmavit; sed and hoc testatus
est, quod multi qui intraverunt non sunt reversi. Roth. apud Thom. Mess. de
Purg. sanct. Patr. cap. 12. page 108. number. 63.
But when I (says Salteriensis) had heard all these things I consulted with
two Irish Abbots concerning the same, whereof one of them answered that all
these things were true; and testified further, that many who went in, did never
return: In Henry's words it is, that seldom any returned: in his, that many
returned not, by the ambiguity thinking to hide the other: But this is not all.
We did hear but one of those Abbots speak; what said the other? of that not a
word in Messingam: and why? because he did not speak to the purpose: For he
had said, that in his Country he did hear no such thing. This is omitted, and
silently passed over, as fearing it might raise some scruple in the business,
which he desired should run smoothly without any rub.

Henry proceeds, Nuper etiam Episcopu^ que^dam alfatus su^ Nepotem sancti
Pauicij sertij socij sancti Malachiae Florentinum' nomine in cu^us (...) patu
(...) livit (...) Purga^, de (...) curiorus ^e^, (...) pis^ Certe ^^ater versi
est: ^s autem ille in Episcopa^ meo ess, and multi pereunt in eodem Purgatorio,
and qui orte redeunt, ob innanitatem tormentorum quae passi sunt, languore,
sive pallore diuturno pallescunt. Henr. Salter. Mss^t supra.
Lately also did I speak with one who was Nephew of Patrick the third of that
name, the Companion of Saint Malachias, by name Florentianus, in whose
Bishopric as he said that Purgatory was. Hence we gather him to be Bishop of
Clogher, for there that Island is Infra cap. 2. p. 44. lit c
of whom having curious^y enquired, he answered, truly Brother that place is
within my Bishopric, and many miscarry in that Purgatory: and they that
perchance return (it was but a chance) did by reason of the extreamitie of the
torments which they endured always look pale, through a continual languor,
and wanness. Than which what more ridiculous? how many thousands have gone in
thither, that never saw any torment, or sight, other than what a fantastical
brain could present in a dream? or that ever changed color for the matter,
if they blushed not rather at the foolishness of the reports. Infra page 36.
(...). s.
But of this more hereafter.

Where we see Henry's grounds, he is first told it by Gilbert, and confirmed
in it by Florentianus; demand their cause of knowledge, and Gilbret tells you
the report was made to him by Owen himself; whom if you will believe you may,
for there are we at the height of our evidence. Now what reason Salteriensis
had to rely on the credit of these men, so much as he did, will appear, in
that these two were his Tutors and instructors, whose words he must not
question; Henricus Salteriersis Monachus Anglus, Ordinis Cisterciensis qui a
Florentian^ Hibernorum Episcopo, and Gilberto de Luda Cisterciensium Monachorum
Abbate, bonas litteras and op^^nabene vivendi praecepta didicit. Thom. Messing.
Prasat. ad Lectorem prefixa, tractat. de Purgatory sancti Patricij, page 87.
Henry of Saltry an English Monk of the Cistercian Order, was by Florentianus
an Irish Bishop, and Gilbert of Luda Abbot of the Cistercian Monks instructed
in learning, and in the precepts of good living, as it is in Messingam, with
whom agrees John Pits, Partim in suo Monasterio partim a Florentiano
Hibernorum Episcopo, and a Gilberto de Luda Cisterciensium Monachorum Abbate
bonas litteras and optima been vive^di praecepta didicit. Iohau. Pitsius de il
lustrib. Brit. scrip. aetate 12.
Partly in his own Monastery, partly by Florentianus an Irish Bishop, and
Gilbert of Luda Abbot of the Cistercians, he was instituted in learning and in
the rules of well living: of whom also Bale us thus: De ipso scribitur quod
fuerit cujusdam Florentiani hibernorum Episcopi imposturis delusus atque
Gilberti de Luda (o sancta societas) Abbatis Cisterciensis institutipraestigijs
doceptus, Johan. Balaeus Cent. de script. Brit. cap. 77. ^it. Hen. Salter. p.
189.
Of him (speaking of Henry) it was written that he was deluaed by the
impostures of one Florentianus a Bishop of the Irish, and deceived by the
cunning of Gilbert of Luda (O holy society!) Abbot of the Cistercian Order.
Neither, for ought I see, is he unwilling to be deceived in this point, it
being that which of all others best fitted his humor, and was most agreeable
to the imagination of the man, for Quia videbat homines plerumque magis poenae
timore quam virtutis amore a vitijs deterreri; populo inculcare consueverat,
nihil inquinatum intrare posse in regnum coelorum, atque adco omni peccato
debitam suam poenam and prius secundam divinam justitiam satisfaciendum pro
delictis vel in hoc saeculo been faciendo, vel in Purgatorio supplicia
patiendo, quam cuipiam qui peccati maculam aliquando contraxit pateat adirus in
aeternum celestis beatitudinis refrigerium; unde and scripsit ad Henricum
Abbatem de Sartis super Purgatorio sancti Patricij librum unum, de poenis
Purgatorij librum unum. Thom. Messing. ibid. quo supra
he did perceive that for the most part, men were rather terrified from vice by
the fear of punishment, than drawn by the love of virtue, and therefore was
he accustomed to teach the people that nothing defiled, can enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, and that punishment is so due to sin, that whosoever is
stained with any spot of sin must satisfy the divine justice for his fault,
either in this life by well doing, or in Purgatory by enduring punishment,
before he can have an entrance into that everlasting refreshing of heavenly
happiness. And hence it was that he did write unto Henry Abbot de Sartis, one
Book of Saint Patricks purgatory, and one other Book of the pains of
Purgatory, * says the same Messingam: you see the occasion, and that agreeable
to what Salteriensis himself writes to the same Abbot, Quoniam B. Papam
Gregorium legimus multa dixisle, de his quae erga animas fiunt terrenis exutas
corporibus ut and tristibus negligentium animos terreret and laetis justorum
affectum ac devotionem inflammaret, fiducialius quod jubes ad perfectum
supplicium perficiam. Hen. Salter. prelog. in Purg. sancti Patricij ad Henricum
Abbatenide Sartia.
Because we read that holy Pope Gregory has spoken of many things done to
souls separated from their earthly body; by which he would terrify the
minds of the negligent with fearful relations: and with the report of what
things are pleasant to inflame the affections of the just to devotion,
therefore will I perfect that more faithfully which you require for the benefit
of the simple. Fit indeed for the simple; so that I may easily be induced to
believe the Character of the man, aptly given by Baleus as most suitable to him.
Henry of Saltry Henric Salterienfis Benedictinus Monachus in Huntingdone^si
comitatu and natus and educatus, ab ipsis fere incunabulis totus superstitioni
deditus fuit, post sui Benedicti professionem Aristotelicas inventiones
edoctus, Chymaeram fabrica (...) ex ipsis Idais Platonicis affabre novit.
Purgatorij fulciendi gratia ingeniosus artifex factus, Gregorij magni
Dialogorun. quatuor libros, quatuor Evangeliorum loco (...), Aetnae (...)
montis adjutus incendio. Johan. Baelaeus ubi supr.
a Benedictine Monk, was borne and educated in Huntington-shire, he was from
his Cradle almost wholly given to superstition, together with his profession of
his Benedict, having learned Aristotle's inventions by the help of Platoe's
Ideas, he knew well how to frame a Chymera, by the assistance of the fire of
flaming mount Aetna, and the four Books of Gregory the great, which as the
four Gospels he esteemed, he did become a cunning maker of a Purgatory. Thus
you see how fit an Author we have found for this subject, to whom all appeal;
a fit scholar for two such Tutors, as Florentianus and Gilbert, he himself
being deceived; and of such that rule is true, nimis credulus minus credendus.
But yet he is not willing so to be, that he might deceive others. Yet must
not this be thought a fault in these men; these piae frauds being by them
esteemed of no small use in religion, especially toward the simple, and of
this sort does Stephanus Forcatulus account this Purgatory, making the thing it
self as it is, but a mere scarre-crow: Forte Patricius inter (...) and
efferatos populos lepido Commento usus fuerat, quo magis eos a peccatis
detereret ut ultricem adesse pene domi ostenderet. (...)* (...). de (...)*
(...) de (...)* 7.
It may be (says he) that among the fierce and wild people, Patricke used
this witty device, by which he might the better terrify them from their
sins, by showing that they had at their own home a Revenger. And indeed for
simple people (for whom Salteriensis says he intended it) who might be like
children affrighted with Bug-beares, there could not be a fitter subject
chosen, or invented than this Purgatory: If we could tell how to make truth
and falsehood consist: But as I said, here may be seen how partial an Author
we have met for this Purgatory; and his own affections occasioneth his
credulity, men easily believing what they would have to be; You see his
credulity, being a stranger, wrought upon by two cunning Impesters; he in the
mean time shutting his eyes, and not examining how probably it might be
questioned, as it was by those that did contradict it to himself, we see
lastly on how sandy a foundation all this is laid; the bare word (if not
fiction) of that Knight, I may well say in this case, Knight of the Post, who
after so much fasting and stir, and being shut up twenty four hours in that
Cave, might well be ashamed to return without some news, which he had time
and place enough to make; neither need he doubt to make them credible, none
being willing to contradict (if they could) considering the age it self most
addicted to the entertayning of visions and revelations, of which this
Purgatory affords matter more than enough. All which considered, it cannot be
wondered why Ioceline (of whom before) living after this Henry, yet would not
take notice of this Purgatory, notwithstanding all the noise and bussing at
this time for it. But the wonder still remains, if it were true that this
Purgatory was of Saint Patricks foundation, that it should not be spoken off
seven hundred years after: and when it was set on foot, being enquired after
on all hands what it was, and how true: there being at hand some who came out
of Ireland, and they religious men too; that did disavow there, so much as
hearing of any such thing in their country, as we have seen reported to
Salteriensis, whose voices must be cried down, and quite rased out of all
Records, as far as in these men does lie, as was showed before: Neither will
it suffice to say, that these contradictions have relation only to the history
of the Knight, without trenching on other Pilgrimages which might be besides.
For besides the sound of the words themselves, quod nunquam talia audierat,
supr. p. 28. li^. (...).
that he never heard the like things in his country: we shall find that the
things happening to this Knight are no other than what we read almost
verbatins in others, that were said since to have gone into this Purgatory:
and for the greater credit of the business, we are often told, that Matthew.
Paris. ubi supra.
in Saint Patricks own days many went in thither, who reported what grievous
torments they did suffer, and that they had there found joys great and
unspeakeable; whose actions being recorded in the Abbey of that Purgatory must
be supposed to be the ground on which they who instruct the Pilgrims tell
them, what is to be done, and what shall befall unto them, for so says the
Director of the Spanish Viscount of whom after: These things have we heard to
have happened to those who have returned from Purgatory. The instructions then
given, being the same here given by the Prior to our Knight in his pilgrimage
(if we think him not to be rapt with a Prophetical spirit, like one of
Apollo's Pristes) for we do not read of any of themselves that have undertaken
the labor to go into that Purgatory to tell us any thing by their own
experience; it being enough to make others ridiculous and not themselves, his
directions are these: Ecce nunc intrabis in no mine JESV Christi and per
concavitatem speluncae tamdiu ambulabis donec in campum exiens, aulam invenies
artificiossime fabricata^; qua^ cum ingressus fueris, statim ex part Dei
nuncios habebis qui tibi pie quid facies indicabunt. Mat. Pa^s. supra page 84.
Behold thou shall now enter in the name of JESUS CHRIST, and shall walk
through the concavitie of the Cave, until going out in a large field, thou
shall find an Hall most artificially built, into which having entered,
immediately thou shall meet messengers sent to thee from God, who shall tell
thee what thou have to do. What after-Pilgrimages report are such things, and
like things to these said to happen to the Knight, and what the Knight saw and
felt, are such things and like things to what others are said to see, and felt,
and reported themselves to have seen and felt before. And yet such things did
that Abbot with whom Henry consulted say he never did hear of in his country:
a matter very unlikely, if either they were so frequent, or at all; and if we
should restrain it only to this pilgrimage of the Knight, why should it not
rather be first known in Ireland before it did fly to foreign Nations, if
(which I rather believe) the Knight might not want confidence of opening
himself therein at home, and so nigh, where he might be laughed out of his
dream; and therefore rather chooses to begin abroad: that winning credit
there, the news might return more authentical: it being a shame to deny what
the world proclaymeth, and more wisdom (though otherwise) for the Natives to
dissemble it, then to loose the repute, the Nation may have abroad, by the
supposing of their having so admirable and strange a Monument among them, it
being the honor of the country: as after.

We loose time therefore, while we expect to find the original of this
Purgatory from Saint Patricke, or any of the Patricks. We have hitherto seen
nothing that could induce us to believe it: and it has appeared how
groundless their faith is, who are misled by so general a tradition, that it
is of Saint Patricks own Frection, which to contradict were the true Symptom
of a frenzy, if we should appeal to them. And yet notwithstanding all this
confidence, we shall see the cause shamefully deserted at last, for having
wearied themselves, laboring in vain to make Saint Patricke the Author of it,
they give over the search; miserably begging the question, that if we would
grant them the thing, they will not much contend for the founder. It is
Messingams last resolution, after he had put himself out of breath, Nisi
veritati indagandae studuissemus non esset quod tantopere de hujus purgatorij
Authorealtercare mur, an non satis nobis foret illud ab aliquo quisquis tande^
ille sit, inventu^ esse tam singulari Dei privilegio patriam nostram gaudere
tamque salutari beneficio nostrates frui? (...) Mess. praef. ad lect. praefix^t
^act. de Purg. S. Patr. page 87.
Had we not labored for sifting the Truth says he (which how happily he
has performed has been seen) We needed not to quarrel so much as we do
about the Author of this Purgatory: Is it not sufficient that we have it, by
whomsoever it were found out? And that our country dath enjoy from God, so
singular a Privilege, so saving a benefit? But speak freely without these
(...). Was Saint Patricke the Author of it, or was he not? he was not: For so
have we it at last confessed by the same Messingham. Hoc si ad veritate^
accedat ut locu^ esse demus ante Patricium natu^, quod etiam historia Militis
infra describe^da non obscure insinuat, quae sic habet. Vnde dum Patricius pro
salute populi in jejunijs, vigilijsque and orationibus positus Dominum
praecaretur perpensius; ^ius Dei filius appare^s ^i, du^c cum in locum
desertum, (...) ostendit illi speluneam (...) and obseur^m (...) insecu^, etc.
id. ib.
If it be true that we grant the place to have been before Patricke was
borne, which also the history of the Knight, to be after described, does
plainly insinuate. This is something plainer than before, although yet with
too much reservation: but let him go forward. The history is this: Wherefore
while Saint Patrick by fasting, watching, and prayer was earnestly praying; the
holy Son of God appeared to him, and leading him to a desert place, did show
to him a Cave, which was round and dark within, etc. Which has this marginall
note, Ergo ante factam in margin ibid.
therefore was it made before. And hear, that which before we heard (...) p.
20. l. (...).
of Saint Patrick's making a Circle with the staff of I^SVS within which the
earth did open, by which Saint Patricke was made the finder of this Purgatory:
This (I say) is now rejected, and justly, for the former reasons: But to shut
Saint Patricke thus out of this business will not do well, by leaving it
indifferent to some other to be the Author of it. ^or let this be granted, and
it will be demanded, Why then it should be called Saint Patrick's Purgatory, if
not so? And if it be not so: then, Why may we not as well doubt of the Truth of
all the rest of the reports as of that? For much, or most, of the reverence
this place has gained was from hence, that it was still esteemed to be Saint
Patrick's Purgatory. Was it not then high time think you, for him to run
hard that comes next in to help the matter: By whom, we are told, that
although the place were before Saint Patricke, and that he was only the
finder of it, Non (...) ad celebre^ religionis usum antea suit acco^modatus,
Rich. Stanihurst invitesanct* Pat. (...) 2.
Yet was not the place before then accommodated to any solemn religious use:
So that in respect at least of the use of it, Saint Patricks may be still
thought to be the Author.

But neither will this be allowed as altogether true if the religious use of
it be extended to superstition: In which sense it may perhaps be thought to be
as well before, as after Saint Patricke, frequented and esteemed; and the former
fictions to be the ground of what followed; for therewant not some, who make
Ulysses the founder of it, out of these Verses of Est locus extremum pandit qu^
Galli^ (...).
Occani praetent us Aquis, (...) Vly^
Sanguine ^ibate p^pulum m^c (...)
Illic umbrarum (...) ^dore ^tum
Flebi^ auditus questus: simul^ra coloni
Pallida, defunctasque vident migrare figur^.
Claudian. lib. in Russinum fol. 39. (...).
Claudian.

" A place near Gallia's utmost bounds with Seas
" Environed round there stands, Vlysles there
" With blood, it said, the s^ent Ghosts to appease:
" Where mournful plaints (scarce heard) yet men do^ hear
" Of slitting shades; pa^e images, there be
" And walking Farms of men erst dead, that see.
Into this place does Seephanus Forcatadus make Arthur King of the Britains to
enter when he says, Specum longo recess^ opacum Rex invisere non est
gravatus, and relicto spiritu libero in illum se dimittere, in quem nullum
discrimen diei and noctis perveniret, relicta in tergo luce descensu aspero,
de^llvi itinere and (...) assiduis diffuso natura prorsus and fabula memorando.
Ferebatur enim ad Manes pervius specus vel certe ad locum in quo animae eorum
qui dum viverent sese vitijs ac labe aliqua ^ibili inquinaverunt recocti
expolirentur ut purga^ and hilarts inde in caelum evolarent. Forte Particius
inter immanes and efferatos populos lepido commento usus fuerat, quo magis cos
a pecca^is deterreret, and ultricem a^ (...) do(...) ostenderet. Imbutus numiue
Merlinus specum Patricij Vlyssi in dec^ illis erroribus in Hibernia acto
adscripsit. Effo^^um quidem primum Vlyssis ense ad cubiti mensuram, (...)
circulum al^^ssime impressum successu temporis increvasse. Quod profecto non
(...) a (...) (...). N^m inferos allocuturum Vlyssem Homerus (...) (O^. (...))
(...) (...) Occani ivisse and foveam secisse memorabilem, (...)* id quod (...)
Cla^dianus, Est locus extremum, etc. Ex to ^egress^n. Furiam Mageram Poeta
(...) Ruffino dete^^ana persuasuram. Steph. Forca^. de (...). I^per. and
Philip. lib, (...)* (...). 1007. 1008.
The King did take the pains, to visit the Den, which ^at long and dark, into
which he put himself, having left the open air; There is not there any
vicissitude of light, and darkness, but the descent rough and steep, with a
continued darkness, as remarkable by nature as fabulous; For through that
Hole, there was a passage to the place of Spirits, or where the Souls of them
are purged, who whiles they lived, poluted themselves with vice, and such
stains as might be washed away: That being purged from all offenses, they
might thence joyfully fly into Heaven. In which words our Author, seems to
deliver only what the opinions of others were of this place: whereas he
himself esteemed it no otherwise than as a Bugg-beare, for so it follows. It
may be Patricke made use of this witty device, to terrify the cruel, and
fierce people from committing sin, showing them a Revenger to be so near at
hand. But to go forward that we may find out the Original of it, Forcatulus
brings in Merline the Welch-prophet, informing the King herein. Merline being
divinely inspired, ascribed this Cave of Patrick's to Ulysses being in his
travels so much spoken of driven into Ireland; As, that first, Ulysses had with
his Sword dug it about a Cubit deep, and that after in process of time,
the Hole was enlarged, is sinking to a great depth, of which Forcatulus thus.
And truly this is not far from truth, for Homer (Odyss. 11.) says, that
Ulysses being desirous to consult with infernal spirits, went to a place near
to the flowing of the Seas, and that there he made a memorable Pit, or Hole,
to which also Claudian has reference, Est locus extremum, etc. where the
Verses before are cited. Out of this place the Poet faigneth Maegera the Fury,
to come and persuade Ruffinus to unhappie courses. Hitherto Forcatulus to whom
let us add Johannes Camers on Solinus Sunt qui existanant hunc cum locum esse
quem specum D. Patricij ejus regionis incolae nominant, de quo mira, and prope
fabulosa narrantur. Ioh. Camers Con^ ad Solini Polybist. cap. 35. in An^ot.
page 165.
speaking of that place in Claudian. There are that think this to be the same
place, which the Inhabitants of that Region do name Saint Patrik's Purgatory,
of which strange things, and almost fabulous are reported. By which Solinus, as
Forcatulus before, would conclude that Ulysses had been driven into Ireland:
for the truth whereof I will not contend.

Yet how near these two, (I had almost said fables) do agree who sees not,
and that as in other particulars of which hereafter, principally in the manner
of the making of the place, both by Ulysses and Patricke, the one with his
Sword, the other with his Staff: Supr. p. 20. lit. m.
so near that the one seems to have been raised out of the other, to use
the words of one comparing this Purgatory with Trophonius his Cave, Erasmus in
Adag: de Antro Trophonij page 440.
which two, who so compares shall find no two things more like. We have the
fiction in Plutarch, of Timarchus his going into that place: Hic cum daemoni
Socratis quae vis esset co gnoscere gestiret in Trophonij Mante^ solennibus
peractis desce^dit, cum haesisset inspecu duas noctes and diemiac multi eum jam
pro deplorato habere^t, and co^plorarent familiares ejus, summo diluculo,
front perquam laeta prodijt, ac postqua^ salutaverit venerabu^dus Deum, and
explicuit se turba hominum, multa nobis vidisse se and audivisse miranda
memoravit. Narravit postquam descendit in Manteum effussum se primum multa
fuisse caligine, tum deorsum aciem demisisset vastum apparuisse hiatum rotundum
sicut Globi carinati mire horribilem and profundum -- unde exaudiri infinitos
rugitus and gemitus animantium, infinitorum ploratum, puerorum permixtorumque
virorum and foeminarum ejulatus, strepitus varios, and tumulius ex alto procul
obscuros sublatos, quibus se non mediocriter perculsum. Plutach. de (...).
Thebis, and Socratis Damonio, ex translat. Hermanni, Crus. Basil. 1573. page
778.
He desirous to know the power of Socrates his Demon -- went into Trophonius
his Den; all solemnity first performed, where having continued two nights and
one day, and many giving up for lost, his familiars also bewayling him; early
in the morning he came out with a cheerful countenance. And after he had
devoutly worshipped God, and rid himself from the throng of people, he told us
of many strange things by him seen and heard. He related that when he
descended into the Pit, he was at the first compassed with darkness -- that
after looking downwards, he saw a vast gaping, and that round like an hollow
Globe, but very horrible and deep -- whence were heard infinite roarings and
groanings of living creatures, Children crying, with Men, and Women pitifully
wayling together: noyses and undistinct tumults were heard a far off, by
which he said he was exceedingly terrified. All the passages are too many
here to be inserted, which if they were compared with some one of the
pilgrimages into this Purgatory, I needed not trouble the Reader with any
paral^ell between them, they would of themselves so plainly appear to be so
like, that he might well join in opinion with Erasmus: Plutarchus in
Commentario de Daemonio Socratis narrat Timarchum quenda^ in Trophonij specum
ingressum postquam illinc redisset, prodigiosa dictu narrasse sibi visa. Non
abhorrentia ab ijs quae Beda and nonnulli Christiani scriptores de infetis
proderant: Quae quidem Trophonij fabula mihi adeo videtur similis ei quae de
Pa^^icij Antro quod est in Hibernia fertur, ut altera ex altera nata credi
possit. Erasmus ubi supra.
Plutarch (says he) in his Commentary on Socrates his Demon, does tell of on
Timarchus, that entered into Trophonius his Cave, who being thence returned,
related himself to have seen many things, prodigious to be spoken: Not unlike
what Bid and other Christian writters report of those that have appeared: with
whom agrees that Caveat and Censure of Can^s. Lector admonendus est, ne illi
statim persuasum sit, omnia quae magni Authors scripserint, undique esse
perfecta: nam labuntur interdum and one^i caedant, vulgoque interdum indulgent.
Quae ego eadem de Beda and Gregorio jure fortasse dicere possum: quorum isse in
Historia anglorum, hic in Dialogis quaedam miracula vulgo jactata and credita
seribit; Equidem Historias istas probarem mag^, (...) eorum authors juxta
praefinitam normam sev^ ju^ij curam in eligendo majorem adjunxissent. M^.
Can^s, lot. Theol. lib. 11. (...). 6. page 337.
The Reader is to be admonished, not to take for granted that whatsoever
Authors of great est^eme have written is to be therefore absolute, for
sometimes they fail and fall under their burden: Sometimes also they give
themselves to please the vulgar. The which things may justly say of Bid and
Gregory, the one in his History of England, the other in his Dialogues writting
certain miracles commonly known and bele^ved. Truly I should have allowed
those Histories the more, had the Authors of them, according as they ought, to
the gravitie of their judgments joined care in making choice of their matter:
hitherto Ca^^s. But for that of Timarchus, Erasmus proceeds, which fable of
Traphonius cruely seems unto me so like to that which is of Saint Patrick's
Cave, that it may be believed, the one to have raised out of the other. Neither
will the conjecture seem unlikely, if we but compare them in one particular,
passing by, or rather referring the rest to another place.

Olim ^um est eum qui in Trophonij spec^ descendisset postea nunquam ridere;
hinc in Tro^ antro vaticinatus est de homine vehementer tristi ^que. Erasm.
ibidem.
It was anciently believed, says the same Erasmus, that who went into
Trophonius his Cave, would never after laugh; Hence to say of a man that he
has prophesied in Trophonius his Den, was in effect the same, art call him a
very melancholy and cra^^ed man; And do we not find the same reported of S.
Patrick's Purgatory? Qui de^dunt aiunt ^^bi ridendi libidinem in omni vir^
adempta. id. ibid.
They who descend thither say, th^^ all their life after they have no desire to
laugh, in which Erasmus agrees with that of Iacobus de Vitriace. In (...) ^
quidam (...) qui Purgatorium fancti Patriei^ nuncupatur, si (...) (...)
ingressus fuerte ni vere poenitens and contritus fuerit, statim a Daemonibus
captus and necatus, nunquam posse^ revertitur: qui autem vere co^tritus and
confessus ingreditur per ignem and aquam and mill genera tormentorum^
Daemonibus correptus, ibidem purgatur, qui autem amplius deliquie acerbius in
eodem loco punitur, qui autem^ praedicto loco purgatue regreditur nunquam
ridere potest, vel Iudere, vel aliqua quae in mundo sunt diligere, sed semper
lugens and gemens posteriorum oblitus in anteriora se extendit, Jacob. de
Vitriac^ in Hist. O^ cap. 92. page 216. 217.
There is a place in Ireland called Saint Patrick's Purgatory, he that (...)
into it not being truly penitent and (...), is presently snatched away, and
killed by devils, nover more to be seen: But being truly contrite and
confessed, he shall be there purged: being drawn through fire and water, and
a thousand kind of torments. And he that shall si^^e after this, shall in the
same place be more cruelly punished: But he that returns from that Purgatory
and is purged, can never after laugh, play, or ^^ve any thing in this world,
but always ^^menting and greaning, forgetting the things that were behind, he
wholly addresseth himself what is before. Thus Vitriatus: of which Roth gives
this Censure. Haec plerumque non esse veritate subn^ (...) de specu nun^
cognito and frequentato sermo fre^u^u quotidiano doc^ur. Multi enim qui
iteratis vicibus Purgatorij. Antrum subierunt, and (...) regressi ludunt,
rident, cha^ nantur in saeculo cum saecularibus versantur, tractantque negotia
hujus mundi non secu^ ac ingressi hunc locum na^ (...), (...) de ^^rg. S.
(...). edit a Them. M^. page 93. (...). 17.
That these things for the most part are not true: We are thought ^y common
experience, if he speak of that Cave which is not known and frequented; for
many there are who have gone thither again and again, who being returned
play, laugh, and that heartily too, they converse in the world with worldlings,
and go about their worldly affairs, (...) otherwise than if they had never
gone thither; Then which there can be nothing more certain; But why does he so
mince the matter, if it be so? Is it not true, for the most (...) says he, nay
not true a^ (...); which cannot be denied; See then his avoydance. Sin aute
Vitriacus loquatur, no^ de praesenti and conspicabili, sed de altero illo
delitesceti and abscondito purgatorio, etc. De re ipfa nihil statuo, id. ibid.
number. 18.
But whether Vitriacus does speak of this present and visible Purgatory, or of
that other which is hidden, etc. I will not determine any thing. It is not yet
determined that there is such an hidden Purgatory, and to suppose it, is to
beg the question of which more after, Sup. page 28. li^. (...).
Neither was it fit that he should determine any thing in this, for so in
confuting Vitriacus, he had fallen foul on Florentianus one of Salteriensis his
good Tutors, who taught the same that Vitriacus does here, as was seen before.
But, why spend we so much time in searching after the original of this
fiction? Fitter surely it is to be rancked, as it is, with heathenish and
Poetical figments, and with Fortunatus his Purse and Cap, than to be obtruded
to Christians to be believed. Where because we have named that Fable of
Fortunatus, if the Reader can with patience peruse it, he shall find his
going into Saint Patrick's Purgatory with Leopoldus his servant. There
Fortunatus his fabulous histor. cap. 15.
may you have the description of the place with the whole story of Saint
Patrick's finding it at first. The relations made to him of those that had gone
in before: his asking leave to enter according to the Custom with many other
Circumstances observable in that Pilgrimage: and what there happened unto him;
Also lively representing what we read of other Pilgrimages justly deserved to
be reserved in the Abbey with the rest of those Supia pa^.
who did enter, in Saint Patrick's own time. For I believe if the matter were
narrowly sifted, this and they will be found to be of one stamp, and done much
about the same time; a place also we may afford it in Ariosto in Orlando
Furiose where we find this memory of it.

Ariosto Orlando F^crieso li. 10. stave. 78.
" Where men do tell strange tales, that long age^
" Saint Patricke built a solitary Cave,
" Into the which they that devoutly go
" By purging of their sins their Souls may save,
" Now whether this Report be true or no
" I not affirm and yet I not deprave.
And here may M. Burton for his deep search into the secrets of Nature be
fitted with a place such as we could wish: M. Burton of the causes of
melancholy, part. 2. sect. 2. memb. 3. page 246.
I would (says he) have a convenient place to go down with Orpheus, Ulysses,
Hercules, Lucians, Menippus at Saint Patrick's Purgatory, at Trophonius den,
Hecla in Island, Aetna in Sicily to descend and see what is done in the bowels
of the earth. But I proceed to what remains: That seeing we cannot sinde the
Author of it, which Messingam conceives not to be so material, yet that we
see the use of it, and why it is called a Purgatory.

We have before seen the solemnity and strictness of Sect. 4. Why it is
called a purgatory
of the Pilgrimage, so great pains deserves some great and large benefit. And
greater cannot be, if that be true which Ranulphus reports (and yet but by
hear say) of it: Polychron. lib. 1. cap. 35 sol. 45. 2. translated by T^sa.
There is Saint Patrick's Purgatory, that was showed at his prayers to confirm
his preaching and his lore, when he preached to misbeleeved, of sorrow and
pain, that evil men should suffer for her wicked works, and of joy and
bliss that good men shall receive for her holy deeds: He tells that who so
suffers the pains of that Purgatory, if it be enjoined him for penance, he
shall never suffer the pains of Hell, but he shall die finally without
repentance of sin, as the example is set more fully out at the Chapters end.
Where he speaks of the History of Owen the Knight of whom before. But his
translator Trevisa teaches us better doctrine. John T^sa ibid. in Poly^.
But truly no man may be saved, but if he be very repentant whatsoever penance
he do. And every man that is very repentant at his lives end shall be sickerly
saved, though he never hear of Saint Patricks purgatory; What the effects are
of the suffering those pains of which Ranulphus did speak, we were before
told by Vitriacus. Vitria^^t ubi supra p. 47. lit. (...).
That it purges him that undergoeth them: But it was not for purging men that
Saint Patricke did intend it, for they of the ancientest, that make Saint
Patricke the founder of it, speak only of that infernal fire of the damned,
not of any purging flames, of which Giraldus Cambrensis thus. De infernalibus
namque reproborum p^nis, and de vera post morte^ perpetu a que Electoru^ vita,
vir sanctus cu^ gence incredala cu^ di putasset, ut tanta tam inusitava, tam
inopinabilis reru^ novitas rudibus infideliam animis oculata side certius
imprimeretur efficaci orationu^ instantia, magnam and admirabilem utriusque tei
notitia^ durae cervicis populo perutilem meruit in (...) obtinere. Giral.
^ambr. Topogr. Hiber. distinct. 2. cap. 5.
While the Holy Man disputed with that incredulous nation of the infernal
pain of the reprobate, and the eternal and true life of the Elect after
death, that so great, so unusual, so strange a noveltie might, by what they
should see, make a sure impression in the minds of these infidels, through
great feruency of prayers he deserved to obtain for that stiff-necked people,
the great, admirable, and profitable demonstration of both upon Earth; a
demonstration of both says he, that is of eternal bliss and joy, which who
will say is seen, or found in Purgatory a place of torment? And the torments
also of which he made demonstration, was of that which they doubted, the
infernal pains of the reprobate. And thus much did Thyraeus speak before:
Guil. Thyraeus (...) (...). de sancti Pa^ p. 150. de quo supra page 17. (...)
(...).
That these incredulous men doubting of the pains and punishment of the
damned, and requiring some visible demonstration of it, he made a Circle in
the earth, etc. As for that other, Supra page 25. lit. p.
That God had further revealed to Saint: Patricke, that in that place there was
a purgatory, of which before, it is but a late fancy, and on better
considerations brought in to help the matter. Now that the eternal torments
of Hell should purge, is surely a new thing, and such as none of them, I
suppose, will take upon him to defend. This is that (if any) that was showed by
Saint Patricke, neither did he but show it, to terrify those that doubted of
them, which needed not to continue, the work being finished, and they now
believing.

Yet let it be supposed, that in that place the pains of Purgatory may be
understood, and that not the reprobate, but the truly contrite is there
purged, being by Devils drawn through fire and water, and a thousand dangers,
as Vitriacus would have it. S^ (...). 47. (...). 1.
Yet I hope they will not say that this Fire or Water, or I cannot tell what
thousand dangers do purge them that suffer them not: And will they say, that
all who in our days go into this Purgatory, do lie frying in such flames,
or be frozen in water, or run any such dangers at all? Sure I think they
will not. And if any should, common experience would cry them down: Since the
writing hereof, says Campian the Jesuit, Ed^^. Campian Ies. Hist. Ireland
lib. 1. cap. 13.
I met with a Priest, who told me that he had gone that pilgrimage, and
affirmed the order of the premises, but that for his own part he saw no sight
in the world, save only fearful dreams when he chanced to nodd, and they
said he were exceeding horrible. Neither is it thus only in these days, but
if we look many ages before, it will be found no otherwise, and well may it
be doubted if ever it were more. John Stow in his Annals of England has a
discourse to this purpose of John Froissart the French Historian, who lived
Ann^ 1395. about 244. years since, and after Henry of Saltry 255. much al^ut
the middle time, it is this: John Stow Annal. of Engl. in Rich. 2. (...) 1395.
About this time, Sir John Froissart Chanon of Chymay in the Earledeme of
Heynault, as himself reports, came into England: He demanded of Sir William
Lisle, who had been with the King in Ireland (he means Richard the second)
the manner of the Hole in Ireland, that is called Saint Patricks purgatory, if
it were true that was said of it or not: Who answered, that such an Hole there
was, and that himself, and another Knight had been there while the King lay
at Dublin; and said, they entered into the Hole, and were closed in it at the
Sunne-set, and abode there all the night, and the next morning issued out
again at the Sunne-rising. He said that when he and his fellow were entered,
and past the Gate, that was called the Purgatory of Saint Patricke, and that
they were descended, and gone down three or four paces, as into a Cellar, a
certain hot vapor rose against them, and struck so into their heads, that
they were feign to fit down on the stayres which were of stone: And after they
had sat there a season, they had great desire to sleep, and so fell into a
slu^^ber, and slept there all night: In which sleep they had marvailous
dreams, otherwise than they were wont to have in their Chambers, but in the
morning after they had issued out, they had clean forgotten their dreams and
visions. Thus Stow of Froissart, whose own relation, if it be rather desired
is as follows. John Froissart (...). Hist. 4. vol. cap. 61. page 192
I John Froissart, knowing peace to be concluded by Sea and Land, between the
English, and the French, had a great desire to see England, toward which I
presently took shipping, where having been some few days, I went toward the
Court, and by the way chanced in an Inn to meet an English Knight. The next
day both of us taking Horse, we did ride together one days journey, and in our
way discoursing of many things, at last I enquired whether in the last voyage
into Ireland, he had accompanied the King: He told me he did: Then I demanded
of him, whether those things reported of Saint Patricks Cave were true: He
answering seemed to confirm all that others had reported of it, and that he
with another English knight (while they stayed some days in Dublin) went to see
it, where they were both shut up for a whole night. I asked him if he did see
any strange thing or spectar there. He replied, When I with my Companion had
entered the door of the Cave, which they commonly call aint Patricks Purgatory,
and descending three or four steps, so great and sudden an heat we found in
our heads, that we were enforced to lay us down on the stone stayres, where
sitting, a great drowsinesse took us, so that we slept all the night; I
enquired whether being in sleep, they did know where they were: and what
visions they saw: He answered, that he saw in his sleep many fantasies and
sights, and many other things which as it seemed to him are not wont to be seen
by him lying in his bed. All this he affirmed to be true; but when as early in
the morning the door was opened, and we were come out, immediately all these
fearful things seen in our sleep were quite forgotten. Thus he, so that
244. years since, we find none of those reports of going into, I know not
what places within this Cave, and tumbling in fire and water and thousands of
dangers: But for helping this, one bids us not to look so low, but rather
to Saint Patricks time for these things. Qui nostra memoria in hunc sese lo^um
compinguunt, nullum sibi terrorem inijci sentiunt, nisi forte arctior somnus
co^plectatur. Sed in prima Religionis consitura (quo tempore miracula ut
plurimum crebriora sunt) very quidem simile mihi videtur quam plurima Idola
truculenta and terribilia aspectu, solita fuisse poenitentibus ante oculos
observari. Rich. Stanib. in vita sancti Patricij lib. 2. page 65.
Such as in our memory go into this place (faith he) are sensible of no
terror, unless it may be they might be surprised with a sound sleep. But in
the first planting of Religion, (at which time Miracles are for the most part
most frequent) it seems to me likely, that there used to appear to those
penitents, many strange and terrible sights. It is but likely, you see, that it
might be so in the first age of it, and if then it were so, and that that time
might require that miracle for settling Christianity, yet is it not now
requisite: so that whatsoever it was in Saint Patricks time, it is confessed,
that now no news are to be found of Fire and Water and such grievous Torments
as we are borne in hand to be true, for the purging of those that go into
this Purgatory, which if now vanished, how then are the pilgrims purged? And if
they be not purged, why are they deluded as if they were? Why is this then
called a Purgatory? unless it be, as Campian tells us, Edm. Camp. hist. of
Ireland lib. 1. cap. 13.
That because devout men have resorted thither for penance, and reported at
their return strange visions of pain and bliss, and therefore they call it
Purgatory. As if visions of joy and bliss, of torment and pain may be said to
purge.

So that now to shut up this first part of this discourse, we have seen, how
into nothing this Purgatory is now shruncke and shriveled up: although esteemed
vener able for the Author Saint Patricke, and religiously respected for it
self, as being a Purgatory. But no Saint Patricke can we find to father it:
And for the Name of a Purgatory, we see it turned to smoke; if we may say
there is so much as smoke where no Fire is, for so is it here; Therefore no
purging, therefore no Purgatory.

Yet notwithstanding all which; wonderful it is to consider how much this
fiction, (for so we may now be bold to call it,) has prevayled, that the
whole world almost should be so bewitched, as to be deluded by so gross an
Imposture, and amazedly to run, as it were Hoodwinked after it so far as it
did: and how far it did so, is that which in the following Chapter, I purpose
to discover.

CAP. II.
The progress and flourishing estate of Saint Patrick's Purgatory, in the
esteem it had at home and abroad. Whereof some probable Conjectures. Some
Pilgrimages thither set down. Together with an examination of the Truth of
them.

IN the former Chapter, we labored to find out the beginning and Original of
that place, commonly called Saint Patricks Purgatory, Sect. 1. The flourishing
times of S. Patricks purgatory.
of which we could find no footesteps for for many ages together, and
howsoever it slept for 700. years, that is to say, from the year 4; 2. if we
begin it with Saint Patricke, to the year 1140. about which time we first
read of it in Henry of Saltry, from thence forward notwithstanding it did so
strangely rise by degrees, that all places were full of it, and that also so
suddenly, that Cujus loci fama sparsim peromnes Europae parts volare visa
est, etc. Gul^l. Thyraeus discurs. panegyr. de mirac. sancti Patr. discurs. 3.
page 151.
The fame of that place did seem to fly over all the parts of Europe, says
Thyraeus; and as readily did all parts of Europe fly hither unto it. Haec
spelunca ab exteraru^ ge^tium peregrinis, summa ja^ olim religione
frequentabatur Rich. Stanhurst. in vita S. Patr. lib. 2. page 65.
This Cave being of old, with the greatest devotion frequented by strangers of
foreign Nations: says another. Neither is it so much to be admired that
strangers and such as were further off, should thus be deluded, they trusting
to the relations of others herein: But that they who lived nearest to it, even
in the same kingdom, should not be able in so long a time to discover the
fraud, and find out the imposture, it is to me a thing of all others most
admirable; whereas on the contrary we find it countenanced with the greatest
Testimonies of credit, that either our Church or Commonweal could afford it:
and that for some hundreds of years after the first rising thereof.

For if a Man would search into the Records of England he might find
testimonials of this nature. I will instance in one which we meet in the
reign of Edward the third, the Tenor whereof is as follows. Rex universi^
and singulis ad quos literae nostrae pervenerint salute^. Nobilis vit Maletesta
Vngarus de Ariminio Miles, ad praesentiam nostra^ veniens, mature nobis
exposuit, quod ipse a terrae suae descendens laribus purgatoriu^ sancti
Patricij, infra terram nostram Hiberniae constitutu^ in multis corporis sui
laboribus peregre visitaret, ac per integrae diei ac noctis unius continuatum
spacium, ut est moris, clausum manserat in eodem; nobis cum instantia
supplicando ut in praemistorum veracius fulcimentum regales Literas nostras
inde sibi concedere dignaremur. Nos autem ipsius peregrinationis considerantes
periculosa discrimina, licet tanti Nobilis in hac part assertio fit accepta.
Quia tamen tam dilecti and fidelis nostri Almarici de sancto Amando Militis
Justitiarij nostri Hiberniae quam Prioris and Conventus loci dicti Purgatorij
and etiam aliorum authoritatis multae virorum literis alijsque claris
evidentijs informamur, quod dictus Nobilis peregrinationem suam hujusmodi ^ite
perfecerat, and etiam animose dignum duximus super his authoritatis nostrae
testimonium favorabiliter adhibere and ut sublato cujuscunque dubitationis
involucro praemissorum veritas singulis patefiat, has literas nostras sigillo
Regio consignatas sibi duximus concedendas. Dat. in Palatio nostro
Westmonasterij 24. Octobr. Ex Archivis Regijs in arce Lo^dinens. asservatis
patent. 32. Edw. 3. page 2.
The King unto all and singular, to whom these Our Letters shall come, sends
Greeting, Maletesta Ungarus, which I do rather think to be his Surname, than
that he was an Hungarian, both in respect of his Name, and the place Ariminum,
both being in Italy, he being A noble gentleman and Knight of Ariminum,
Coming to our presence declared to us, that he having left his own Country,
had with much labor gone in pilgrimage into Saint Patricks Purgatory in our
land of Ireland: And that he continued there shut up as the Custom i^, one
whole day and night, together: Earnestly beseeching us, that for the
Confirmation of the truth of the premises, we would be pleased to afford him
these our Princely Letters: We therefore taking into our Consideration, the
dangers and hazards in that his pilgrimage, and howsoever the report of so
noble a man might be to us sufficient, yet are we further informed thereof by
Letters from our Right trusty and welbeloved Almaricke of Saint Amand Knight,
our Justice of Ireland; and from the Pryor and Convent of the said Purgatory,
with others of great credit: As also by other clear evidences, that the said
Nobleman has duly and courageously performed that his pilgrimage, we have
therefore thought sit, favorably to give unto him Our Royal testimony
concerning the same: And to the end there may be no question made of the
premises, and that the Truth of them may more clearly appear unto all men,
We have thought good to grant unto him these our Letters, sealed with our
Royal Seal. Given at our Palace at Westminster the 24. day of October.

Like Letters, and of the same Date has Nicholas of Ferrara a Lumbard. See
here to what an height, from so obscure a beginning, it is now risen, not only
visited from all parts, but also Tested in so high and eminent a manner, and
that, as you have heard done with so great deliberation and advice, as a matter
of the greatest consequence. Yet how far the Test runs, you see, that it
is but only of The due performance of the pilgrimage. And here it is to be
observed, that in the times of Edward the third of England, the Esteem of this
Purgatory was at the height, after it had been rising thereunto 186. years; for
so long it is between Henry of Saltry anno 1140. and Edward the third anno
1326. And within the compass of this Kings Reign, we shall find much more
noise of it, and pressing to it, even from far, then either before or after:
as that of Ramon the Spanish Viscount, Anno 1328. (if we believe the date) in
the beginning of his Reign of whom we shall hereafter have occasion more
largely to discourse, together with that following, being 37. years after, Yet
in the said Kings reign also. That, I mean which we find Recorded in the
Registrie of Ardmagh, sent unto me by the now most learned Prima^te for the
furthering of this work; being Letters recommendatory from Milo Archbishop of
Ardmagh in the year 1365. on the behalf of certain Pilgrims: The words are
these.

Milo permissione divina^ Archiepiscopus Armachanus Hiberniae Primas, religioso
ac discreto viro Priori purgatorij sancti Patricij Loghderg Clogherensis
Diocesseos, ac omnibus alijs Clericis and Laicis nostrae Armachanae Provinciae
salutem in Domino sempiternam. Venientes ad nos Johannes Bonham and Guidus
Cissi asserentes se plurima sancta loca devotionis caesa peregre visitasse
locum qui dicitur Purgatorium sancti Patricij Patroni nostri Diocesi
Clogherensi praedicta devotionis causa pro animarum suarum remedio cupie^tes,
ut asserunt, visitare ad omnes and singulos per quos dictos peregrinos tra^sire
contigerit, suademus and vos hortamur in Domino quatenus ipsos peregrinos cum
per loca vestra transierint benign and favorabiliter admittatis, and de bonis
a Domino vobis collatis humanitatis beneficium and charitativum subsidium
eisdem impendatis, Non patientes eisdem inferri, quantu min vobis est,
molestiam vel gravamen, tam devoti laboris vos ex hoc participes fieri
nullatenus haesitantes. Dat. in Civitate Dunensi 15. die mensis Martij, Anno
Domini 1365. Et nostrae Consecrationis anno quinto. Ex Registro Milonis fol.
41. In Biblioth. Reverendissimi Patr. Iacobi Armacbani.
Milo by divine permission Archbishop of Ardmagh Primate of Ireland, to the
religious and prudent man, the Pryor of Saint Patricks Purgatory in Loghderg,
within the Diocese of Clogher, And to all others the Clergy and Laity
within the Province of Ardmagh everlasting health in the Lord. John Bonham and
Guidas Cissi coming to us, have related that they have for devotions sake gone
in pilgrimage, and visited many holy places: and that they are desirous for the
health of their Souls to see the place called the purgatory of Saint Patricke
our Patron, which is in the Diocese of Clogher aforesaid: We do therefore
entreat and exhort in the Lord all and every by whom these strangers shall
pass, that you would entertayne and receive them courteously: And that of the
goods which God has bestowed upon you, you would afford them some charitable
help, not suffering, (as much as in you lies) any molestation or disturbance
to be given them. By which means we doubt not, but that you shall be
partakers of that their devout labors: Dated in the City of Down the
fifteenth day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand three hundred
sixty and five. And of our Consecration the fifth.

It were easy to exceed in testimonies of this kind; yet will I add only
One more, being 120. years after This, in the year 1485. about the beginning
of the Reign of Henry the seventh King of England. That it may be seen how
long it held up in that great esteem. These are Letters Testimonial of
Octavianus Archbishop of Ardmagh given to certain French Pilgrims.

Vniversis almae matris Ecclesiae filijs ad quos praesentes literae nostrae
Testimoniales pervenerint, Octavianus Dei and Apostolicae Sedis gratia
Archiepiscopus Armachanus totius Hiberniae Primas, salutem in Domino
sempiternam. Et sequentibus in dubiam adhibere fidem. Cum pium and meritorium
existit testimonium perhibere veritati, praesertim cum Salvator noster Christus
Dei filius, de coelis adima mundi discendens venerit testimonium veritati
adhibiturum; Hinc est quod universitati vestrae praesentium serie innotescimus,
quod honesti viri Iohannis Garhi and Franciscus Proly presbyteri Civitatis
Lugdunensis, and Johannes Burges puer and famulus eorum praesentium latores,
pro salute animarum suarum pio ducti affectu Purgatorium Almifici Confessoris
sancti Patricij Hiberniae Apostoli quo in hoc saeculo purgantur crimina
peccatorum: Et montem in quo dictus Almificus Confessor quadraginta diebus and
quadraginta noctibus absque cibo temporali jejunavit, aliaque pia and
devotissima loca and mitabilia Hiberniae devote peregrinando visitarunt, and in
dicto purgatorio jejunijs and orationibus juxta loci illius ceremonias, prout
nobis ad plenum extat manifestum corpora sua, affligentes per nonnulla tempora
expectarunt ac armis Christi redemptoris nostri contra diabolicas frauds and
fantastica excitamenta contemplative certarunt, suas peregrinationes
devotissime implendo, ipsius Sancti suffragia and merita apud altissimum
impetrando: quos sub nostra Ecclesiaeque nostrae Armachanae, and ejusdem
Almifici Confessoris protectione suscipimus praesentium per tenorem. Quorum
biennali commensali conversatione freti pariter and experti moresque vitam and
perfectionem vestrae Universitati laudabiliter commendamus. Ex Registro
Octaviani in Biblioth. Reverendissimi Patris Jacob, Armachani.
Unto all the Children of our mother the Church to whom these our letters
Testimonial shall come, Octavianus by the grace of God and of the Sea
Apostolic, Archbishop of Ardmagh, Primate of all Ireland, wishes everlasting
salvation in the Lord, wishing you would without question credit what
follows. Seeing it is an holy and meritorius thing to give your Testimony
unto the Truth, chiefly seeing our Savior Christ the Son of God came down
from heaven into this world to bear witness of the truth: Hence it is that by
these presents we make known unto you that John Garhi, and Francis Proly of
the City of Lions Priests, and John Burgess their boy and servant (the
bearers hereof) Men of good repute and piously affected did visit the Purgatory
of the holy Confessor Saint Patricke, the Apostle of Ireland, within which the
sins of offenders are even in this world purged: And the mountain in which
the said holy Confessor did fast without Temporal meat forty days and forty
nights, together with other holy places of devotion, and things of greatest
observation in Ireland: And that afflicting their bodies in fasting and prayer
according to the Ceremonies of that place, they did for acertaine time remain
in that Purgatory, as it clearly appears to us: And that by the power of
CHRIST our redeemer, they did contemplatively encounter all the frauds, and
fantastical temptations of the Devil; devoutly so finishing their pilgrimage,
and desiring the merits and prayers of the said Saint to the most High, whom by
these presents we receive into the protection of us, our Church of Ardmagh, and
of the said holy Confessor; whose manners, life, and perfection, we do
recommend unto you all, of which we are confident having two years conversed
with them.

Which few among infinite others will sufficiently declare the wonderful
rising, and as strange continuance of this purgatory, and that from the times
of Henry of Saltry (that I may not with others rise higher) until this of
Octavianus Ann. 1485. that is, for 345. years. For after this did it begin to
Decline again: For we find it solemnly demolished within twelve years
after, in the year 1497. during the Reign of the said King Henry the seventh,
of which in its due place.

Yet if what has been said seem strange unto any, Sect. 2. Probable
Conjectures.
that either so obscure a thing should so befoole the world into so great an
admiration of it, or that so general a delusion, and of so long continuance,
should on so small, or no grounds, be mantayned, let him consider the slavish
fear, into which by the Popish Doctrine of purgatory, the world had bin
brought; with fear whereof many have all their lives long been held in
bondage: being told that all the sorrows in this life, labors, want,
banishments, prisons, shame, miseries, calamities, wounds, nay death it self,
are nothing to the pains of purgatory. All which, with how great cost men
seek to redeem, is not unknown. Hence those Masses and prayers for the
souls departed, that they might be eased, if not delivered of those pains.
Hence those large Legacies both of Lands and Annuities bestowed for the
continuance of that charitable work.

But the hazards are great, and much uncertaintie is there in this course: And
first for the Rich, and the most bountiful in this kind, it may happen that
the care of their successors may after a while abate, as unwilling to have
their estates too deeply charged: or these divine Offices may fall short of
performance, at the least sometimes, under the hands of the Priest who
undertaketh it, having already possession of all that can be expected: on the
other side, what poor hope The poorer sort of people may have, of being freed
from Purgatory, in whose scorching flames they are likely long to fry, they
see, who can well tell, that no penny, no Paternoster. These considerations of
impossibility in the one, and uncertaintie in the other, could not but be a
great burden to the minds of men, and the greatness of the burden could not
but work in them a desire of finding out some R^ (...), whatsoever it be, for
so great Evils: Neither can it be doubted that a Remedy could be more readily
propounded than in this case as readily entertained, and that, it may be with
little or no dispute, at the least with the most part of men.

If therefore such a course could be thought upon, whereby first men in their
own life time by themselves (not relying on the uncertain affections of
others) might if not altogether, yet abate much of the ensuing pains. That
secondly; if any thing were amiss or defective in the work, it might be
supplied by a future reformation of life, or by the continual use of the said
means: So in the latter amending any omission in the former. If lastly that
means, might be compassed by all, being within the Capacity of each man's
Abilitie^ the Poor as well as the Rich, being admitted to partake of the
benefit, certainly this could not but take under what show soever it were
offered.

And what could not Cunning heads, having their own Interests, joined withal,
find out for working this feate? And what I pray you could be more fitly
invented for this, than this, or some other such place of purgatory? with what
facility? with what easy charge at the least but answerable to men's
abilities, even of the poorest, may this be had? with how great hope of
relief? yea more than could be expected; certainly more than can be believed.

For thou art told that, Non est precator adeo magnus cui alia satisfactio
injungatur quam ut una nocte in eodem sit purgatorio. Gul. Thyraeus discurs.
panegyr* de mirac. sanct. Patricij.
That there is none so great a sinner, that needs to be enjoined any other
satisfaction than to remain but only one night in this Saint Patrickes
pargatory. The time, you see, is but short: yet perhaps the torments may be so
much the more raised; but for that also there shall be an help found; Qui vere
poenitentes iliud ingressi, and poenas illas atrocissimas sive per veram
passionem, sive pe^ imaginatiam, apprehensionem sustinentes a poenis omnibus
pro peccato debitis purgabuntur. Gul. Pennottus Histor. tripart. Cleric.
^anonic. libr. 2. cap. 34. n 2. col. 2. p. 363.
for they who being truly penitent shall enter into this purgatory, and do
suffer those cruel pains, whether by a real passion, or if only but by an
imaginaarie apprehension, shall be purged from all punishments due to them for
their sins. Thou can not, I hope, look to be more favorably dealth
withal, than if thou must be punished, that thou sleep and dream it out, it
being sufficient that it be but in imagination only. Neither is thy life
endangered in this, for into Saint Patricks purgatory thou may go and come
again, Nam qui de sancti Patricij purgatorio loquuntur, non dicunt illud
fuisse purgatorium animarum, in quo illae in altera vita de lege Dei ordinaria
purgantur, sed purgatorium speciale viventium in quo homines in hac vita
degentes, and vere poenitentes, pro poenis illorum peccatis in hac vita debitis
ex special Dei concessione satisfaciant. idem. ibidem.
None esteeming this to be a purgatory of Souls wherein by the ordinary
appointment of God, they are purged after this life, but that it is a special
purgatory for those that are alive, in which men living in this world being
truly penitent may by the special favor of God satisfy the punishment due to
their sins. So that now thou need not to trust the work to be done by
another, seeing it lies in thine own hand to do it. But what if thou shall
sin after this, and so incur another purging? If so; go but into this
place again, to which thou may resort as often as it shall please thee, which
may be done without any abatement of the comforts of thy life. Multi enim sunt
qui iteratis vicibus purgatorij Antru^ subirent, and tamen regressi Iudunt,
rident, cachinantur in saeculo cum saecularibus versantur, tracta^tque negotia
hujus mundi: non secus ac ingressi illum locum nunquam fuissent. D. Roth de
purgatorio sancti Patricij.
For there are many that have gone into this purgatory, and that again and
again; who being returned do play, laugh, and that with the greatest
expression of it; In this world they converse with men in the world, and look
after the affairs of the world no less, than if they had never gone into this
purgatory. But will this purgatory do all this? Yea, all this, and more too
(if you believe it) it freeth thee from that purgatory which thou so much
fear, For thou need no other penance, no other purgatory. I but the maine
thing, and of greatest difficulty, yet remains how men may be persuaded to
believe this. A matter of no great difficulty.

For first, Besides the facility with which men are drawn, to flatter
themselves with hopes, and the willingness to forget what is not desired. Let
secondly some one be packt that shall first go into this purgatory, who must
confidently report what he shall please to say he has seen. And then for
them that follow, if they see no such things, it is supposed that on their part
something is amiss in the work: which rather than it should be conceived, the
best course would be to say as others did before, rather than by coming so
far, and suffering so much without bringing back any News to make
themselves ridiculous, or loose the praise of the Action, like unto him in
Erasmus. Who Intentis in coelum oculis, signavit totam faciem ac scapulas
imagine Crucis, and vultu and stuporem composito, ita secum, Deum immortalem!
Quid ego video? rogantibus qui proxime equitabant, quid viderat, rursum
obsignans se majori Cruce, avertat inquit clementissimus Deus hoc ostentum. Cum
instarent aviditate cognoscendi; ille defixis in coelum oculis, ac digito
commonstrans coeli locum, nonne inquit, videtis illic immanem Draconem ignis
armatum cornibus, cauda in circulum retorta? Quum negarent se videre, atque
ille jussisset oculos intenderent, ac locum subinde commonstraret, tandem unus
quispiam ne videretur parum oculatus affirmavit se quoque videre, Hunc imitatus
est unus, item alter, pudebat enim non videre quod tam estet perspicuum. Quid
multis? infra triduum rumor hic totam Angliam pervasserit tale portentum
apparuisse, mirum autem quantum fama popula^is addidit fabulae. Non soleo
multum tribuere fabulis quae vulgo feruntur de spectris, suspicor enim de
hominibus credulis, multa pro veris prodita literis quae simili artificio sunt
adsimulata. Erasm. Colloq. Exo^c^s^. page 310.
earnestly fixing his eyes upon heaven, did cross his face and shoulders with
the sign of Cross, and looking a^ it were amazed, said to himself, O
immortal God! what do I see? They who did ride next to him, desired to know
from him what it was that he did see: But he again Crossing himself more than
before, Merciful God (says he) turn from us this ominous sign; They now
much more desirous to know what it was, he intentively looks up, and pointing
with his finger to the place, do you not see there (says he) A great Dragon
armed with fiery Horns and his tail wreathed upwards? they denied that they
did see any such thing: He still bids them look more earnestly, and withal
showed the place. At the last one of them least his eyesight might be
questioned, affirmed that he did see it, another follows him, and him
another: For now it was a sh^me not to see what was so plain: To be brief,
within three days, it was all England over, that such a sight was seen, and
strange it was to see, how much the vulgar in relating of it added to the
Fable. Thus Erasmus, these men's eyes being oftentimes like those eyes in the
Comedy, who see more than they do see. And so Oculi qui plus vident quam quod
vident. Terent.
Erasmus concludes: I am not accustomed (says he) to give credit to such
fables, which are reported commonly of Spectars, for I suspect, that many
things invented with like cunning are written for truth by credulous men. And
that by such as be, (it may be) of the honester sort.

But this does favor something of Combination in the Imposture which although
it may, and has often in many things taken: yet it may also fail. Therefore,
if thirdly you will have that first adventurer to deceive, in being deceived:
Feed him before hand with Reports of what things have been There done in
former times, and that hundreds of years since. Tell him that some have been
There, who have endured strange things, and seen stranger? some of them
Really, others only in Imagination. And least there might be any Discovery,
such a course may be taken with him that long fasting (as thirty or fifteen,
or but nine days) together with little sleep and much labor in rounding and
surrounding, before he shall enter into the place may make the matter sure: For
it is not to be doubted but Reason will thereby be weakened, the fantasy
awakened and they themselves likely cast into a deep sleep: when principally
they must be told that all their dreams are real, and then the work is done.
For that I may use the words of a Jesuit in this very point, Edm. Campian
Jesuit hist. Ireland lib. 1. cap. 13.
A man of indifferent judgment may soon suspect that in the drift and
strength of imagination a Contemplative person would happily suppose the sight
of many strange things which he never saw; only for the divulging it, it will
the better take, if it be first reported abroad amongst strangers, for if they
be (as they are easiely to be deceived) such as are nearest home will soon be
caught. Then be sure that the groundwork, and if it may be Presidents also,
of such Reports be as Ancient as may be; For besides the honor afforded
Antiquity, there will none be able to disprove thee, if the matter be but
cleanely carried. For effecting of all which* there cannot be wanting those who
are their own craftsmasters, both for Cunning in framing, and confidence in
imposing them on others for truth: and how great cause they have (if profit be
respected) to labor hard in this golden-mine, cannot be unknown to any that
shall consider the great benefit thence arising: which seeming little, yet
coming through so many hands does amount* insensibly to great sums; and that
whether we take notice but of the poor fraught and transportation of each
Pilgrim into this Island, for which each one pays for the most part eight
pence, S^ James (...) descrip. of (...) (...).
and what this may in time make up, can hardly be imagined. Yet if there were
no more at one time in the Island than what Sir William Stewart lately found
there, S^ (...). Stewart. Letter to the Lo^^* Iusti^ (...) Co^. (...) 8. 1632.
four hundred seventie and one Persons, it would amount to fifteen pounds
fourteen shillings in one day: But what then shall we say to that, (if that
be true) which D. Roth. the now Popish Bishop of Ossory reports of it, and as
he thinks on very good ground. Adhuc superest non nemo optimae fidei qui
nobis in verbo Sacerdotis asseruerat, (...) se visos mill quingentos homines
simul and semel in Insula. Quod si una vice tantus fuerit numerus peregrinorum,
quid censebimus de una aliqua aetate, praesertim quando liberior erat aditus,
quam nunc experimur, ob colonias Protestantium in circuitu. D. Roth. apud Tho.
Mess. de purg. S. Patr. cap. 1. number. 17. page 94.
There is one of very good credit yet alive, says he, who did aver in the
word of a Priest, that he had seen fifteen hundred persons altogether a^ on^
time in the Island: which makes up fifty pounds in a day, but as I will not
question this man's credit, by the (it may be supposed) impossibility of such a
throng in so small a room as half an Acre of ground, so will I not make this
to be such an estimate as should hold out constantly: It is sufficient what he
does there infer; If therefore there were in that place such a number of
Pilgrims at one time, what shall we think of one whole age, specially when
the access thereunto was more free than now it is, by reason of the Protestant
Colonies round about. And how great then shall we think the gains to be
that would be from the Concourse of people; yet is this but the least part, and
but the Pe^ce of this treasury, Eightpence is but a poor allowance for so
many attending priests to be relieved withal; Ecclesiastical Convents both
in Ireland and beyond the Seas, must besides the former partake of their
bounty, if they will share in their Prayers: All which no man can think would
be made up of small matters, nor being put altogether would make up slight
sums: So that all things considered, it is not so much to be wondered, if
these so advantageous Silver shrines should find so many Demetriusses, both at
home and abroad, who have magnified it as a thing descended from Heaven, and to
be of a divine institution: All of them as it were joined in one pack, and
made together in one tale, in setting forth the merit of this Pilgrimage set
forth by the most strange Relations thereof that is possible to be met withal.

From this Combination (I need not doubt to call it so) it is that among the
several Histories of Pilgrimages in ancienter times made into this Purgatory
(whereof Books of late so swarm) yet scarcely any one will be found to differ
from another, at the least wise in any material circumstance; which howsoever
to some, may seem rather a singular inducement to the Truth of the thing, yet
does it rather savor of fraud and fiction in the one, and to be received,
rather than tried by others.

I shall therefore single out some one of these Histories, 3. The Pilgrimage of
the Spanish Viscount into S. Patr. Purg. (...) refer a^ historiam quae ^^onis
Vite^omitis nobilis Hi^^ni prose^ in D. (...) purga^, (...) ca^ ^demque (...)
con^es memoria dignissi^m auditu ^ucunda and mi^^bili^ (...) peccantes ad
meliorem vitae frugem sequenda^ numinis observanda praecep^a, peccata vi^anda,
purga^orij cruciatus ^imendos miri^ice exhortans* (...) O Sulle^, histor. cath.
(...). tom. 1. libr. 2. cap. 1. fol. 14.
by that to judge of the rest in that kind: thereby also avoiding that
tediousness with which so great a number would overcome a very patient
Reader: one only being more than enough. Neither will I fix on the first
pilgrimage, of which we read reported by Henry of Saltry, of Owen commonly
called the History of the Knight, which we have before touched, matters were
than in their infancy: It is sufficient that then the groundwork was laid,
the first Inventors not being able to reach to that perfection, which
aftertimes found out: But I do make choice rather of a Relation which of all
others is most frequent in the mouths of this Nation: as it is at large set
out by * O Sullevan: who promises to tell u^* an History of one Ramon a noble
Spanish Viscount, that went into Saint Patrickes purgatory, relating what there
happened unto him, and his return thence, an History, says he, worthy to be
remembered being both delightful and wonderful, serving to exhort sinners* to
bring forth fruit in their lives, teaching them to observe Gods Commandments,
to avoyde sin, and wonderfully setting forth the pains of purgatory, and
that they are to be feared. This then shall be instead of many, nothing being
in the rest material, that is not in this one, in which respect I do desire
pardon if I be larger in it than the matter deserves; It is by O Sullevan
translated out of Spanish, and is as follows.

The History of the Spanish Viscount.
(...) Ramon by the grace of God Philip. O Sull. (...).
Viscount of Perels, and Baron of Ser^ta, was a follower of Charles King of
France, to whom my, Father (being intimate with him and Commander of his Army)
on his death bed recommended me, and with whom from my childehood I was
educated. The Court of this so great a Prince was famous for the resort of many
noble personages, as well strangers as subjects. Many of these did I often hear
discoursing of strange and memorable things in several parts of the world,
which I did earnestly desire to see. But I shall only speak of those things
which concern my going into Saint Patricks Purgatory. Neither will I divulge
all that there I saw, only those things which I might lawfully relate.

When Charles the French King was dead to whose care I was recommended by my
dying Father, I did repair to John King of Aragon in Spain, whose subject I
was by the law of Nations, my possessions lying within his Dominions. He did
always esteem of me as much as a King could a subject, and mine observance of
him was as great: He first made me Master of his Horse, and after gave me the
Command of three Gally^s for the service of Pope Clement. And after his death,
I served under his successor Pope Benedict the thirteenth, at which time the
news was brought to me of my Kings death, with which sad relation much
perplexed, I did earnestly desire to know in what estate the Kings Soul was,
or if in Purgatory it were, what pains it there suffered, whereupon I called
to mind what I heard reported of Saint Patrickes purgatory, and resolved to
visit it, that I might as well know some certainty of the King, as for
obtaining pardon of God for my sins.

And first fearing I might fail of my duty, if without leave from the Pope I
had undertaken that pilgrimage: to him I made known my resolutions, desiring
his favor that I might be gone. But he so mamely apposed himself to mine
intentions, that scarcely did I know how to gayne-say. But at the last by much
impo^itie I gained so far with Pope Benedict the thirteenth, that I was with
his blessing confirmed in it, and so departed from Avignion, where he then was
in the year after the birth of our Lord one thousand three hundred twenty, and
eight in the Month of September about the Even of that day, which is sacred to
the blessed Virgin.

First I went to the French Court in Paris, whence I departed with the Kings
Letters of Recommendations to his Son in law, the King of England of whom I
courteously was received: and with his Letters sent away into Ireland.

When I was come to Dublin the Metropolis of the Kingdom, I did address my
self to the Earl of March, brothers son to Richard, being then Deputy of
Ireland, he having received the King and Queens Letters, did receive me
honorably: But understanding my resolution, he labored by all means to
dissuade me, laying before me the great dangers of that Purgatory, in which
many had miscarryed: but prevailing with me nothing, he sent me to Drog^eda, to
the Archbishop of Ardmagh, to whom in matters of Religion all the Irish without
contradiction are subject: who having perused the King and Queens Letters with
those from the Earl of March he entertained me lovingly and freely: and
endeavored to divert me, showing how difficult the enterprise was, and that
many went thither who never returned. But seeing my resolution he did absolve
me, dismissing me with Letters to O Neyle the King, from whom with gifts I
departed to a Village called Tarmuin, that is to say, Protection or a
Sanctuary. The Lord of this place with his brother showed me great courtesies,
and in Ferryes wa^ted me and my followers into the Island, where the Purgatory
was, together with many others who from several Nations flocked thither to
visit this Purgatory.

I was conducted into the Church of the Monastery, and being by the Pryor in
the presence of many questioned, I showed the reason of my resolution that I
purposed to commit my self into the Purgatory, then he. Thou have undertaken a
difficult and dangerous thing, which some few have attempted, yet could not
compass. I do confess indeed that to descend into purgatory is easy,
but-the chief work is to return thence: For the torment of that place is
beyond all credit, in which men otherwise of good constancy, have so failed
that they have lost themselves bodies and Souls: To all which I answer, that
seeing I came thither purposely, and to that end, it was expedient I should
proceed. To which he: If such be your resolution, then does it be hove that
thou observe the rites of this place, in manner as they were by Saint Patricke
appointed, and by my predecessors observed.

Shortly after the Priests adjoining with all the Religious of the Convent,
being called together, that Mass was Celebrated with Music and solemnity,
which is used to be said for the dead: which being finished, and all Ceremonies
observed, the Priests being placed in order I was in Procession brought to the
Door of the Cave, where the Letanie being sung, I was sprinkled with holy
Water, and the Door being opened the Pryor thus said publicly.

Matthew. Paris. Histor. Angl. Stephan. de O^nno Milite p. 84.
Behold the place into which thou do desire to enter, but if yet thou wi^t
be by me advised, change yet thy resolution; yet if thou will needs go
forward; attend while I briefly tell what shall happen to thee.

First Gods messengers shall meet thee, and by them shall thou be taught what
to do. After shall thou see devils, who by all means will seek to deceive
thee, sometimes by flattering speeches, again by threatenings, other whiles
with tormenting thee, but thou shall be freed from all their cruelty by
pronouncing these words. CHRIST the Son of the living God have mercy upon me
a Sinner; These things have we heard to have happened to those who have
returned from purgatory. After this I kissed them all and bade them farewell:
So going into the Cave, after whom followed an English Knight, we were
forbidden to discourse, on which they report death to be imposed: So the door
being locked, the Pryor with the people returned.

Now when I was shut in, and had taken notice of the greatness of the Cave,
which I conceive to be about four Elnes; I found the inner part thereof to
turn, and extend it self a little to the left hand as I went in. Where I had
trodden, I found the ground under me so weak and shaking that it seemed as
though it could not bear a man; therefore fearing to fall into some unknown
depth, I did step back, and having settled my self in the Catholic Faith, and
being firm in my resolution I did cast my self on my knees to pray, supposing
there had been no more to be done.

But about one hour after, I did begin to tremble every joint of me, to sweat
and to be heartsicke, to vomit also, as if I had been in some long voyage at
Sea. In which troubles I was overtaken with sleep, but again rowsed up with
the noise of a great Thunder, which was not heard by me alone, but of as many
as were in the Island, with which they were the more astonished, in that it was
a clear and fair day.

The fear of which sudden thunder was not over, when a new and greater
terror seized on me, for scarcely was I awake when that I did slide downwards
about six Elnes, with which sudden fall notwithstanding that I were fully
awakened and affrighted, yet did I not recover my self until I had said those
words the Pryor taught me, Christ thou Son of God, etc.

After which, I did perceive the Cave to be larger and higher, and the further
I went (for now I went alone having lost my Companion) it was still more deep
and large; Neither rested I until I had entered into a place extremely dark,
and utterly destitute of any light: but the darkness soon passed. I did come
into a very Matthew. Paris.
large Hall, yet having no more light than is our Twilight in Winter. It had
not one continued wall, but was arched and stood on pillars: In which after I
had walked here and there, thinking I had been at my journyes end, I sat
down admiring the structure, Elegancie, and beauty of that strange work,
which in mine opinion surpasses all Humane skill.

Idem ibidem.
That Contemplation was interrupted by the entering into the Hall of twelve men
clad in white seeming to me to be Religious men, who courteously saluted me,
and when they drew nearer, one of them who it may be was chief, did speak in
the name of the rest, Let our great and good God be ever praised, to whose
command all things are subject, who has given thee such an incredible and
unheard off resolution, that thou should adventure to descend hither for the
purging of thy sins, thou have truly undertaken a very hard and difficult
enterprise, but yet such as shall be richly rewarded. For if thou go through in
it, that great God of mercies will forgive thee all thy sins past, but if
thou fall back, being terrified with fear or torment from evil spirits, or
otherwise be deceived by their fair promises, thy Body and Soul shall be
everlastingly tormented. Wherefore that thou might not be surprised by thine
enemy, we are come hither to tell thee before, that the Devils will in this
place set upon thee after our departure, etc. Which said, they departed.

Being thus left alone, and casting in my mind all the dangers I was to run,
suddenly followed a great noise, greater than any warlike Tumults, which did
pierce mine ears, when instantly a great and innumerable multitude of Devils
in several and horrible shapes did fill the Hall; All of them together saluted
me, not forgetting any manner of respects, Protesting that I was with great
error and madness drawn on to descend in a place not to be frequented by the
living: That howsoever such my boldness deserved death, yet had they regard
to my service done to them, while I was upon the earth: that therefore they
would spare me, and conduct me safe to the door of the Purgatory, so
delivering me safe to mine: promising withal that I should in the world live
long and happy. But if I would not hearken to them, but would press on to see
the Stygian Kingdoms, that then they would kill me, and after death I should
endure innumerable calamities; But I well understanding their craft, would not
hearken to them neither so much as answer, with which my patience they they
enraged, came running upon me with grinning and threatening countenances,
casting me bound hand and foot into a great Fire suddenly kindled in the
middle of the Hall, drawing me with Iron hooks to and fro, and terrifying me
with great Cries: But I remembered the directions of the Twelve men and the
Governor of the Convent, and did call on the name of JESUS, when presently the
fire was extinct, and the Devils being dispersed, fled away, I found my self
now at liberty, being freed from their Chains without hurt, by which I was
the more confident in undergoing the rest, seeing that so suddenly and with so
small labor, I had overcome mine enemies by the Name of the Lord.

The first field of Torments.
Notwithstanding some of the Spirits remained in the Hall, who drew me thence
through a long way set with Briars and thorns, being dark and full of wicked
Spirits, where also was so fierce and terrible a wind, that it took away my
hearing, and seemed to pierce even my body. Then came I to the Sunrising, by
which I perceived that I was not far from the extremest parts of the world,
whence came there to mine ears plaints, groans, and waylings from the places
about, and when I came nearer, I did plainly perceive it by the mournful and
lamentable spectacle which I did see, for I came into a spacious field, the end
whereof mine eye-fight could not reach which was all in a flame, being filled
with men and women of all sorts. The whole place sounded with the noise of
their crying, lamentation, and gnashing of Teeth: Neither was it much to be
wondered considering how they did lie along on the earth naked, their feet and
hands being fastened with hot Iron nails to the burning earth: on their backs
there fate horrible Dragons gnawing the necks of those that lay under them:
Great troops of Devils still filling the place, and with cruel stripes beating
those miserable men: striking terror into them both by their presence, and
their noise, in so much as miserable wretches, some of them cried up to heaven,
others did bite the earth.

The Devils threatened me with the same punishments, if I returned not, but
while they were fastening me with nails, I was defended by repeating these
words: Jesus. the Son, etc.

The second field of Torments.
Hence was I carried into another field, whose breadth might, but the length
could not be seen; It was also all in a Flame, and full of innumerable
companies of men, of all Nations, who like the former were fastened to the earth
without nails, and other kinds of torments, for some had their bowels pricked
with stings. Serpents horrible to behold did break up their veins and
arteries of the necks of others: In some Lizards and burning Moles with their
long and sharp snouts digging their breasts, and drawing out their hearts from
out of their torn bodies. The Devils did also beat them, so as the cry of
them was so terrible, that it cannot be conceived. The Spirits gave me my
choice, whether I had rather undergo all this, or return, but I answered them
not: And when they went about to torment me, they were frustrated of their
hopes: I calling as I was accustomed on the Name JESUS.

The third field of Pains.
I was carried into another field, most grievous for misery and pain, wherein
I saw such a multitude of men as could not be numbered, all prostrate on the
earth, their bodies thrust through with fiery Nails, yielding an hoarse and
indistinct voice, such as do they that are at the last gasp: There were they
also oppressed with a most violent Wind, and the continual stripes of Devils.

These wicked Spirits again profer me the choice, either of returning or
suffering those pains: But seeing me silent, they went about to torment me;
but in vain; I calling on that Divine Name.

The fourth field of Pains.
They notwithstanding did drive me into another field, fearful for exquisit
torments, burning with many fires, and full of men, some of them hanging by the
neck, arms, or Legs bound in steel-chains, with fire under them: Others burnt
on Gridirons, not a few thrust through with Spits, and Roasting at the Fire,
and basted with scalding and melting Mettle. Every one tormented with his own
Spirits. No wit so fluent, no tongue or pen so copious that it can relate, much
less at large express so great torments and pains: Woe to sinners, woe to
them that repent not in this world. All the sorrows of this life, labors,
want, banishment, prisons, shame, miseries, calamities, wounds, yea death it
self, are nothing to the panes in Purgatory.

He meets with his King.
In this field, I met many Men and Women whom I knew, and such as were allied
to me, here I met with John my King, of whom I demanded for what fault it was
that he was held there; although he did confer of many other things with me,
yet to this question he only answered: That it behoved Princes, and great men
of this world not to wrong any one in favor of others although never so near
to them. There also did I see a certain Religious man grievously punished for
some sin: for which it wanted little that he was not eternally punished in
Hell, and surely it had gone hard with him, had he not expiated his fault with
much grief at heart, many tears and strict penance. There also I met the
Lady Aldonsa Cawlea my kinswoman, of whose death I did not hear before: For
when I began my pilgrimage she was alive; She was chiefly punished that she
had spent so much time in Trimming and painting her face; yet were all these in
the way of salvation.

But I was delivered from these torments by the name of Lord, the Devils in
vain laboring to the contrary.

The valley of Pain, and the Wheel.
The same malignant g Spirits forced me into a large Ibidem. Hitherto Purgatory
is described. See if what follows be not Hell: For so it is in the Margent.
Valley, where was a great flaming Wheel, which together with the Axeltree and
several Spokes were thick beset with Iron-fiery-swords, and on every Sword
did hang a Soul miserably tormented; The wheel with a rappid motion being
turned with Devils, and the Fire being black as every where burning with
sulphur.

These tormentors cast me upon this Wheel also, but I was freed without hurt,
calling on the Name of Jesus.

The Furnace of Pain.
But I was forcible drawn into another Field, where was a great house smoking
like a Furnace, and darkening all about it, with clouds of smoke. Here, first
I heard the voices of many weeping and wayling: but coming nearer, I saw the
whole house full of melted mettle, as Gold, Silver, Iron, Lead, and diverse
others, with certain round leaves here and there cast in. In which Bath (as
the Furies call it) I saw infinite numbers naked, and driven to and fro with a
fierce Wind.

The River of Pain.
Being astonished with the horriblenesse of this punishment I was with the
Devils driven by a violent wind over a great mountain unto a great river
stinking, and extreme cold, where many were tormented with the smell, and the
cold, the Devils also forcing in, such as sought to avoid it, overwhelming them
in the deep P'oole. Which punishment I escaped by repeating the Name JESUS.

The Pit of Pain.
Then being by these Furies carried toward the East, I did see a far off a
flame of sulphurous Fire mounting higher than I could see it, carrying up with
it innumerable Companies of men and women, miserably burnt, and when the force
of the flame allayed, the Souls falling down again into the Fire, to which
coming near, I did perceive that flame to arise out of a great pit, which
seemed to me to be Hell. Then said the Furies; This is the Gate of Hell, in
which is our dwelling, and where we receive those who on earth fulfill our
commands: Seeing also thou have so done, there remains no more, than that we
should cast thee in thither: so to be in body and Soul at once destroyed.
Notwithstanding which, we commiserating the calamity of so diligent a servant,
have resolved to give thee leave to return. But if thou do refuse this fair
offer, thou shall have with us the same Common prison: To which I answered
nothing: therefore did the Furies cast me headlong into the Pit, wherein the
further I went, the more terrible it appeared, seeming still vaster and deeper,
and more and more horrible. Thus full of fear and terror was I left, having
forgotten that Divine N^, Wherefore I gave my self lost: But by the help of
the Deity I recalled my self, and cried JESUS: and instantly by the flame and
strong wind, I was lift up, and cast alone on the brinke on the Pit, remaining
sometime without sense, and not knowing where I was.

The Bridge of Calamity.
But other Devils coming out of the Pit say d thus to me: O man what do
thou do? Our Companions told thee that this Pit is Hell, with all casting thee
into it; thus we use to say to deceive men: But we will indeed cast thee into
Hell: immediately carrying me in great fear, far off into a very great
River, most deep, and noisome for stench, casting up flames of sulphurous
Fire, and full of Devils: Over which River there was a very narrow Bridge.
Then say they again: Thou must either pass this Bridge or return. To this
last we rather advise thee. Because this punishment as it is the last, so it is
inevitable; for as soon as thou do attempt to pass the Bridge, thou shall
by a strong wind be cast over into the water: wherefore that thou undergo not
a labor too hard for thee, cast first the danger in thy mind; seriously then
weighing all things: three difficulties did chiefly trouble me; first that the
Bridge was slippery and Icy, being withal exceeding narrow: Next considering
the height of the Bridge, with the high broken banks above the water, which
stroke great terror into me, and the third was the violence of the mighty wind;
Yet calling to mind the singular benefits of God to me, in delivering me from
so many dangers, I did set my self to go upon the Bridge, whereon the further
I went, the larger and safer I found it, and so at the last I got over. At
which the Furies greatly grieved that I was safely arrived on the other side,
thereby no power being left unto them over me.

He describes Paradise.
The Bridge being passed and, going forward and praising God, I did see a far
off high and well fortified walls, shut up with a gate seeming all of gold and
precious stones: But when I came nearer within two thousand paces of it, I
might perceive the Gate to open, and found thence proceeding a most fragrant
Odor, no less than if all the Spices in the world were burnt, I did also see
coming to meet me an innumerable company of men in a curious order, clad in
vestures of Golden palms, and carrying Crosses and burning Tapers: which
blessed Company received me with incredible joy and kindness, bringing me with
them into that Palace, praising God with a most heavenly harmony.

Afterward two Archbishops walking with me showed unto me the place, which
surpassed all imagination: For first I was taken with the Largeness of the
soil, the bounds whereof could not be seen, it being brighter than the
Sun, having green fields and here and there adorned with pleasant Gardens,
and many Trees placed in squares yielding most pleasant fruit, and watered with
pure Rivolets sliding by, with a pleasant murmr. The place was apparelled
with fragrant flowers in curious knots, fife Arbours and walks ingeniously
laid out. Besides, the very aspect of the men much delighted me, each like
Religious men placed in their ranks, and honored with many dignities. There
appeared in glory, Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops, and others innumerable
according to their places which each carried while they lived. There great
Companies of Women sitting in their seats. It was pleasant to behold Men
Crowned like Kings, and shining brighter than stars: Some according to their
Merits excelling others in glory, as one star does another: All of them
enjoyed great Felicity and pleasure, not only in themselves, but rejoyceing
in the happiness of their fellows, and receiving new content, that the
infernal Spirits were overcome by me.

Sometimes they walked together two, three, or as they pleased together:
Talking, Dancing, Singing always, praising JESUS their Creator and Redeemer:
So that I could never think that any thing were more to be desired than this
Happy place, either in respect of it self, or the sweetness of the smell, or
the pleasant fruit, or delightful Harmony or the variety and excellency of
all things. Here is no distemper of Heat or Cold, no sickness, no
perturbation of mind: lastly nothing but quietness and tranquillity.

Being thus refreshed with the sweetness of the place, the Archbishops spoke
thus unto me. This that earthly Paradise, whence our first Parents were
expelled, having disobeyed the Command of God, by whose sin we also their
posterity were defiled, and cast out of Gods heritage, until that great
Creator of all, the Son of the Eternal Father took upon him humane Nature,
and was made MAN of the VIRGIN MARY, and expiated the punishment due for that
sin of our first Parents. He himself being without any spot of sin, and
among other Sacraments he did iustitute Baptism, by which we are washed from
the spot of Original sinee; But because through our frayltie we fall often,
that we should not everlastingly perish, he ordained also the Sacrament of
Penance: by which if we do not satisfy for our sins in this life, he has
further appointed a Purgatory after, as thou now see. Yet herein also is this
help afforded us, that the more careful they that are alive are of us, in
their prayers for us, the sooner are we delivered from these torments, or at
the least the pains made easier which we suffer, and when any one is freed out
of prison, he is met and entertained in manner as thou have been.

After this the Archbishops brought me up to an high Mountain, whence they
commanded me to look toward Heaven, which seemed to me most pleasing to the
eye, being of a Gold and Silver color. Then they: This is the Gate of Heaven,
whence is sent down to us that Heavenly Manna, the meat which the Lord has
appointed for his Elect, sweeter than any Nectar or Ambrosia, which words
scarcely ended a great splendour like a Flame descended, filling all the place,
whose beams striking into mine head, I found an incredible sweetness in my
bowels, and in my mind a greater joy than can be expressed.

Then the Archbishops: Thou see what felicity the just enjoy, and what
calamities abide the wicked. It is now time that thou return again into the
world: where see that thou order the rest of thy life, that thou may obtain
blessedness: Nothing shall hurt thee in thy return, or cast the least fear
into thee: So they brought me out of the Gate of Paradise, I being very
unwilling, and shedding tears for grief.

He returns from Purgatory.
The same way therefore that I went thither, I returned back without any
terror or horror, the Devils as I went a long flying from me, so passing all
the places of Punishments, I came into the Hall where I first met those Twelve
Religious men, who there also now stayed for me, giving God thanks for the good
success I had in my journey, and telling me that now I was purged from all my
former sins, but bade me be careful for the future, and with all that I
should hasten to the Door of the Cave, for the hour drew near when the Pryor
would be present to open the Door: Here also my Companion both of us being
dismissed with the sign of the Cross by the Religious men.

But my Companion was so tired with labor and torments, that he would not
return without my help; when we had gone a little way, we found no way, nor
passage to get out, where with being much terrified, and on our knees beginning
to desire the Lord, that as he had freed us from former dangers, so he would
not now leave us: In our praying, we were overtaken with a deep sleep, being
wearied out with so much watchings, and so many temptations of the Devils, out
of this sleep we were awakened by a great Thunder, yet less than the former,
and we were lift up and laid in great astonishment at that place of the Cave,
whence we fell, and near the Entrance.

Now had the Pryor and the Priests with the rest who were present, opened the
Gate, and received us with great Joy, and gratulation, bringing us both into
the Church where we did give God thanks. Thence having saluted the venerable
Pryor, and the rest of the Religious, I went through England to Paris. And such
was my Pilgrimage into Saint Patricks Purgatory.

A Pilgrimage, The same almost in all particulars with 4. The examination of
the Truth thereof
that of Owen the Knight, of which before, as by the marginall references
thereunto, as it is in Matthew Paris; may appear; wherein we find no other
alteration than an omission of the Field of Torments, which we have here, being
the only thing not spoken ost in Matthew: For fit it was that something should
be never: To which add the difference in the number of the Religious men, who
in the Hall met this our adventurer, being Twelve; whereas the Knight was
encountered with Fifteen: If perhaps we take no notice of the different
judgments of these Matthew. Paris. ubi supra.
two Pilgrims in Coasting the place; That being Eastward in our Viscounts
survey, which the Knight places Southward, if one be true, the other is not:
But they are differences Matthew. Paris. ubi supra.
so slight; that but change the Names and these two Relations (and if these,
most then of this kind) will seem to be the same, And the same I had almost
said in words also, had not this of ours been of O Sullevans translation, as
he says, out of the Spanish Coppie.

To which the Translator of himself adds Haec vicecomitis historia si aliqa
in part creditu difficilis videtur; adcat studiosus vetitatis Lionysium
Carthusianum, qui opere de quatuor Novissimis and de judicio animae, de alijs
quiex hoc purgatorio reversi sunt, similes historias refert, and rem fuse
secutus argumentis, and difficultatibus respoudit, Ac ille ac alij authors
plura and multa purgatorij cruciamenta tradunt. Quod and Virgilius canit.
Philip. O Salle. hist. cath. Hiber. cap. 3. page 31.
If this History of the Viscount seem in any thing difficult to be believed,
let him who desires to be satisfied in it, read Dionysius Carthusianus in his
work of the four last days, and of the judgment of the Soul. Where he
does report the like history of others who have returned from this purgatory;
at large prosecuting the subject, and resolving all the arguments and
difficulties concerning it. And both he and other Authors relate many more
passages of the pains of Purgatory, of which also Virgil thus sings.

Non mihi si linguae centum fuit, oraque centum, etc.

If I had an hundred mouths, and as many tongues, etc. Where seeing he seems
to doubt; some question might be made of the Truth of this Relation, it will
not be amiss, if we examine what Probabilities there may be of it, all
gathered out of it self. And then what strong Arguments are produced for the
confirming thereof.

First then for the general, I will only propound the judgment of a Jesuit
writing of this subject, ^dm Ca^p^an Jesuit. (...) of (...). (...). 1. cap. 1^.
That if any be so delicate, that not a jot thereof will sink into his head:
Who shall control him? Neither he, nor we are bound to believe any story,
besides that which is delivered us from the Scriptures, and the consent of Gods
Church; Let the discreet Reader judge of it. But this will seem too general;
Let us therefore hear his own opinion of it. Touching the credit of these
matters (says he) I see no cause, but a Christian man assuring himself that
there is both Hall and Heaven, may without vanity upon sufficient information,
be persuaded, that it might please God at some time, for considerations to his
infinite wisdom known, to reveal by miracles the visions of joys and
pains eternal; But that altogether in such a sort, and that so ordinarily,
and to such persons, and by such means as the common fame goes, and some
Records thereof do utter; I neither believe, nor wish to be regarded. He
proceeds. It appears by Trevisa in his addition to Polychronicon, that a
superstitious opinion was then conceived of this purgatory, which he
disproveth. And a man of indifferent judgment may soon suspect, that in the
drift and strength of imagination; a Contemplative person would happily suppose
the sight of many strange things which he never saw. Hitherto Campian, part of
which discourse, I had before occasion to use. But where here he says, We are
not bound to believe any history; except what is contained in the Scriptures,
or strengthened with the consent of Gods Church: or delivered unto us upon
sufficient information: which agrees with that of Aquinas, Nititur fides
nostra Revelationi Apostolis and Prophetis facta, qui Canoni^es libros
scripserunt, non autem revelationibus (si qua fuerunt) alijs doctoribus factae.
Aquin. part. 1. q. 1. a^l 8. id secundum.
And so far is this from the two first kinds, that it sayleth of the latter;
for what is Recorded of it, neither he himself believes, nor would he approve
of his Judgment, that would; considering the foolery of imagination, and the
weak ground of an Argument concluding an act, from the possibility of it. Now
what reason Campian had, so to esteem of these kind of pilgrimages, and for
us to think no less of this of our Viscount, may be seen by a more
particular survey of the several circumstances thereof.

And first see the ground of it. This is laid for a position, Except. r.
Nefas est quempiam antrum introire, nisi ad expianda peccata. Ph. O Sull.
hist. cath. Hib. tom. 1. libr. 2. cap 2 page 17.
That it is not lawful for any man to enter into that Cave, but for to expiate
his sins. And would you know what it was that moved our Adventurer to this
pilgrimage? not Religion so much as Curiosity: Among other rules given by
Salmeron the Jesuit for judging of Revelations or visions; this is one. z
salmer. Jesuit comment. 1. Ioh. 3. dsp. 24.
Videndum an revelatio continet aliquidinutile aut curiosum, quia ex his facile
discer^i possit. But for our Viscount, I earnestly desired (says he) to know
in what estate the Soul of the King was (the King of Aragon his Master) And if
it were in Purgatory, what pains it there suffered. Which if it be not to pry
into Gods secrets, and to be wise above that which is written, I know not what
is: Neither so only but contrary to the Law of God Deuteronomy. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
does he consult and confer with him being dead, it being one of those
things that are abomination to the Lord. So Maldonat the Jesuit on Luke 16.
29. Vult Christus vivos Scripturarum testimonijs esse contentos, nec a mortuis
quid in alter a geratur vita audire velle (ut Isay. 8. 19.) Numquid inquit non
populus a Deos^io requiret visionem pro vivis a mortuis? ad legem potius and
testimonium. Yet notwithstanding, with what applause is this Adventurer
received by the holy Fathers, bothin Purgatory and in Paradise, It is
confessed, that it is also said that he went thither for to expiate his
sins, yet does not that excuse this sin, neither do we find this esteemed
to be a fault that required expiation. Besides out of the whole discourse, it
is apparent that the other was rather the moving and principal cause; For
News being brought unto him of his Kings death, I was (says he) with that
Relation much perplexed, and did earnestly desire to know in what state the
Kings Soul was; or if it were in Purgatory, what pains it there suffered;
whereupon I called to mind what I did hear reported of Saint Patrickes
purgatory, and resolved to visit it, that I might as well know some certainty
of the King, as to obtain from God pardon for my sins.

But we pass this and follow him into the Cave, where we will not stand on
that groundless relation, That the Except. 2.
place he stood upon, seemed so infirm as if it were not able to bear him:
This being but a fiction, or at the best but an idle fancy, as shall after
appear, when we shall see the foundations searched to the very bottom, but
let us see him going forward, and passing into A very large Hall, not having
one continued wall, but being Arched and standing on Pillars, in which after I
had walked (says he) I sat down admiring the structure, Elegancie, and
beutis of that strange work, which in my judgment surpassed all humane skill.
By which description I should have taken this place to have been the Palace
of the Sun set out by the Poet, Ovid. Metam. lib. 2.
had it not been that it is here added, that it had no more light than is our
winter twilight, where (...) Cant. relat. of the cons. with F^sh. r. p. 303.
a man would wonder how these Romish builders with untempered mortar found
light enough in that dark place to build as they have done. And indeed this
makes the wonder far greater, by no light, or as good as none, our winter
twilight, when the nearest objects are not discernable by us, yet to judge of
color, beauty and proportion so distinctly, as he says he did, by which
light he saw twelve Men come toward him cladin white, and all this at a great
distance, the Hall being exceeding large, and he sitting down at one part
thereof.

But it may be thought that when he sat, he did but in his mind contemplate
what in his going up and down before he had observed. Not so, for in the same
passage described by the Knight, the words are these, Ingressus ca^ and intus
sedens, oculos studiose huc illuc^ vertit, ad illius p^tudine^ and ^cturam.
(...) Paris. hist. Angl. in Stephano.
That having entered the Hall and sitting down, he turned his eyes carefully
up and down admiring the beauty and structure of the place. Yet may it not be
that all this was seen in an ecstasy, and so the credit of the Reporter
salved? we have the very same moved in Henry of Saltry our first Author in the
history of Owen the Knight, Sunt qui dicunt quod Aulam ingressus in exrasin
fuerat raptus, and haec omnia in spiritu viderat quod nequaquam contigisse,
Miles certissime affirmat, sed corporeis occulis se omnia vidisse and
corporaliter pertulisse constantissime testatur. Henry Saltry de purgatorio
sancti Patricij.
There are (says he) who say that the Knight being entered the Hall, was rapt
into an ecstasy, and that in the spirit he saw all these things. Some said so
who were willing to believe the story, and loath to be diverted by the gross
incongruitie of the circumstances. But this is resolved by the Knight, who can
best tell. The Knight confidently affirmed that it was not so, but that he did
see all things with his corporal eyes, and really felt what he did suffer; So
have we it also in Matthew Paris: where the Knight is brought in telling his
own tale. Matthew. Paris. hist. Angl. in Stephano. page 88.
To which agrees that of Dionysius Carthusianus discoursing of many Visions,
and descending of this Knight, Quicquid de visionibus praememoratis dicatur:
visio ista dici non potest imagine aria extitisse, sed exterior and in plena
vigilia, sicque taliter visa, realiter ita se habuerunt, ut videbantur.
Dionysius Car^^. de quatuor Noviss. in Colloq. de Iudic. A^im^ ar^. 25. page
438.
that howsoever we may think of those other visions, whether they were
imaginary or not; Yet this vision of the Knight cannot be said to be
imaginary, but was outwardly objected to his senses, he being fully awake, and
that as the things were said to be seen, so were they really in themselves.
This evasion then is fully disclaymed, and how all can stand together on those
grounds, let them see that can.

To which thirdly, add our Viscounts first meeting Except. 3.
with those twelve Men, who in the Hall thus accost him, Let our great and good
God be ever praised, to whose Command all things are subject, who has given
thee an incredible and unheard off resolution, that thou should adventure
hither for the purging of thy sins. How this his Resolution of going thither
could be either unh^rd off or incredible, seems to me incredible, if we must
believe that story of the Knights descending thither, which also many others
are said to have more than resolved, even done, both before and after, this I
see, that if that be True, this must be False, and so not deserving so high
and solemn an attestation of the blessed Name of God, which must not be taken
in vain, must less for countenancing of a ^ye also.

Fourthly, whereas our Viscount proceeding in his journey Except. 4.
under ground, says that he came to the Sunrising, and in several passages
discourses much of seeing f^rre and near, it may seem as difficult as his
before seeing so perfectly without light; for it may well be doubted how the
Sun and day light should appear so freely in subterraneall Den^es,
especially in that Kingdom described not only by darkness, but utter
darkness, Matthew. 8. 12. Jude verse. 13.
and blackenesse of darkness.

Like unto this is his looking over large fields, so spacious, Except. 5.
that his eyesight could not reach their bounds, and they also all on Fire and
^^aming, affording strange objects of torments, and of these not a few; if
through a ^laming medium our sight could pass to such a great distance: Yet
how can this agree with the Fire of Hell and Purgatory, not by any esteemed to
agree in light with our Elementary? We have heard it described to be black and
sulphurous rather, and no less is before said by our Viscount, describing the
Pit of pain.

Into this Pit of pain the Viscount is cast, being by the Except. 6.
wicked Spirits told that it was Hell, yet being drawn thence to another place
of torments, he is otherwise informed by others of that Crew in this manner, O
man what do thou (...) our Companions told thee that that Pit was Hell,
withal casting thee into it: Thus we use to say to deceive men: But we will
indeed cast thee into Hell: advising him rather to return. That they should
often use that fraud to deceive men, with the fear of Hell; We are yet to
understand; But this is added to make us believe the like pilgrimages to be a
thing often attempted, for to such only can it be applied: which yet crosses
what was before said by those twelve Fathers. Yet to what end should this fraud
be used? Why should those Murderers be now so tenderhearted, as to dissivade
his going into Hell body and Soul? Certainly, a thing incredible and unheard
off. Was it that they did foresee he should be thence delivered, as he was
said to be from all the former places of Torments? and no less is reported of
him. But hitherto we thought that the pains of hell were Eternal, and not at
any time to be released; of which those spirits could not be ignorant. Abraham
himself knew not otherwise, when he said, Luke 16. 25. 26.
That none can pass from thence to us. Neither is it any wonder it should be
then unknown, which came in long after, and then not only taught, but
defended by Salmeron the Jesuit out of Damascen, relating that fact of
Gregory's freeing of Trajan the Heathen Emperor out of Hell, Salmeron Jesuit
Comment. in. 1. Cor. 15. disp. 27.
Gregorius valida^ pr^c^s ad Dominum habuit, ut Trajani peccata remitterentur,
mox vox divinitus allata, audita est, preces tu as audivi, and veniam Trajano
do. To which the Jesuit out of Thomas and others adds the Circumstances:
Animam Trajani revocatam fuisse ad vitam, and ad poenitentiam ductam, baptismi
sacramento peccatorum remissionem and gratiam, deinde vitam aternam esse
consequutam. This was then thought to be but a singular fact, and no more to be
expected; To which purpose it is in Damascen cited by the Jesuit; adds as
spoken by God to Gregry: Tu vero deinceps pro impio hostiam ne mihi offeras:
Yet will not this content them, but the Jesuit undertaketh to show many others
the like examples: Ostendam illud contigisse multis Paganis and idolatris qui
dum in inferno torquerentur, legimus tamen per Apostolos sive apostolicos viros
ad fidei corroborationem miraculo fuisse ad vitam excitatos, in qua ad fidem
conversi conservati fuerunt. Certainly, if we can believe that, we may
easier credit this of our Viscount and others before him who tried it, being
tormented there and thence again delivered: for our translator concludes the
description of Purgatory with this Viscounts discoursing with his King, putting
a Quere, whether what follows were not Hell? If not, we know not what it is,
unless they will yet find more places of torments in those quarters than they
have yet assigned, wherein they may proceed infinitely. This place here
described for Hell, we have also in Bid, with the same circumstances; where
not by any evil spirits, the Soul in that vision is thus informed, Venera^.
Beda. (...). Eccles. Angl. lib. 5. cap. 13.
Porro puteus ille flammivomus and putidus, quem vidisti, ipsum est os
Gehennae, in quo quicunque semel inciderit, nunquam inde liberabitur in avum.
If this be true, what shall we think of the Viscounts saying that he was
freed from it? That must be false: Or if what the Soul is here told, be not
true, being so credibly informed, as by the circumstances is supposed, I know
not what credit can be given to any relation of that kind; Notwithstanding
this matter is colored with the difficulty of his avoiding these last
torments more than the former. Being left there and having forgotten that
divine Name, wherefore (says he) I gave my self lost; But by the ^elpe of
the Deity I recalled my self, and cried, Jesus, etc. Which forgetfulness the
Knight also was overtaken withal Matthew. Paris. hist. Ang. n Stephano page 86.
in his Pilgrimage, so that it seems to be a matter of course. But here we
crave the same liberty which Bellarmine takes to himself in that case of
Bellar. libr. 2. de purg. cap. 8. paulo post initium.
Trajan, Cum solius Damasceni authoritate nitantur, authors citati, qui
historiam hanc defenderunt, magis ego propendeo in sententiam Melchioris Cani,
qui simpliciter improbat hanc historiam ut confictam, and Dominici a Soto, qui
dicit hanc historiam sibi creditu esse durissimam. We have scarce so good
authority for this, as Damascen was, and if we had, you see how light it would
be made with your Cardinal, neither will we receive it, wanting so much as it
does of its just weight.

Besides how many Secrets has this discoverer at once Except. 7.
laid open unto us? For first, in searching for Saint Patrickes purgatory, we
have by chance met with that general purgatory of Souls, which has troubled
some where to place it, a purgatory of Souls: I say it has been esteemed,
but behold now men alive have way to be there purged, which is a further
addition to that new doctrine.

Here also have we secondly found that which none hitherto could tell, what
became thereof, That earthly Paradise whence our first Parents were cast. This
is it, say those two Archbishops, so that learned men need no further trouble
themselves in enquiring after it. Into this Paradise a bridge leads long and
narrow, that is, Dionys. Cart^. de judicio anim. ^t. 21.
two mile long and one palm broad, for so do we supply it elsewhere. Will
you see the description of the place? Green fields, pleasant Gardens,
delightful fruit, fine Arbors. And what not? The soil it self so large, that
the bounds thereof could not be seen. Which if his eye could not reach, I
wonder not at it; but do rather admire how see could see this or any of these,
if that be true which he adds that The soil was brighter than the Sun it
self: He had no more need of Owle-eyes in observing that dark Hall, than of
Eagles-eyes here: Neither will they serve in a light more glorious than the
Sun. And among other reasons this is one inducing Suarez the Jesuit not to
relish it: Ipsa descriptio loci amoeni, in qua dicitur nullam esse
obscuritatem, sed lucem maximam, and quae superat lucem Solis, nimiam videtur
prae se far absurditatem. Suar. Jes. tom. 4. in Thom. disp. 46.. 4. n^. 6.
and 8.. 1. n^. 12. 13.
For, so great is that exceeding great light of that flourishing field, that in
comparison thereof, what light does here appear, seems very little and most
dim, as we have it in venerable Bede. Sicut etiam lux illa campi florentis
eximia in comparatione ejus quae nunc apparuit lucis tenuissima, prorsus
videbatur and parva. Vener. Bid hist. Eccles. Ang. lib. 5. cap. 13.
Yet so quick-sighted is he notwithstanding all this, that further than two
thousand paces off, he could discern the Gate of Paradise: and within two
thousand paces he might see it open, and thence a most fragrant odor to issue;
But why thence rather than elsewhere? all places there being full of all
varieties of sweet sents; But his eye it seems did judge also of these
odours, which he saw proceeded out of the Gate of the City; where also we are
to omit the stately buildings in Paradise; since the casting out of our first
Parents: With the inhabitants thereof; Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops, all like
Religious men, according to the places and dignities each possessed being
alive. See also if this be not a New piece of doctrine, that the Honors we
enjoy on earth go along with us after; if we shall be worthy to enter this
Paradise: Hence it was that those two Archbishops are still known by that
their dignity: Hence also it may be that by Bellaer. libr. 2. de purg. cap.
7.. ^^artum ad pri^.
Bellarmine, the place is called carcer quidam Senatorius atque Honoratus, by
these holy fathers or Senators with innumerable others is our Pilgrim met, they
coming out of the Gate of the City with Crosses, and burning Tapers in their
hands, as if the Ceremonies of the Church Militant, to say no more of these,
were to be observed there: and as if the light of burning Tapers were either
useful, or to be discerned; and that two thousand paces off, especially in a
place whose glory surpassed the Sun. If it be enquired how all these do spend
their Time? we are told, that it is taken up in walking together, two or three
or more, as they please, talking, dancing, singing, and praising God: And which
would hardly be credited, if he himself had not tasted it, these happy
Companies are daily fed with Manna from Heaven, being a meat which the Lord
has prepared for his Elect, sweeter than any Nectar or Ambrosia, (say these
Archbishops) savouring of that heathenish Fable of the Gods, feeding on the
like. Certainly no Christian can be of so gross an imagination, that
understands any thing of the state of men after death, as to conceive any
such thing: For the Elect, as they marry not, nor are given in marriage after
this life, but in that respect are like the Angels of God, Matthew. 22. 30.
so also in this of not eating or drinking. We have hitherto supposed Mahomets
Paradise more than ridiculous, where is said to be plenty of Meat and drink,
walking, dancing, and all worldly delights: But it may be this is the Place.
Thus have we seen these strange places, of which Suarez the Suarez Jesuit
tom. 4. in Thom. d sp. 46.. 1. (...) 8. 12 13.
Jesuit: Distingunt nonnulli loca purgatoria, unum (aiunt) esse inferno similem
excepta aeternitate supplicij, in quo sunt qui diu in peccatis vivebant; alium
ab illo disjunctum, in quo solum dolor absentiae a patria coelesti anima
purgatur, quae imperfecte vixerunt: quae sententia fundatur solum in quadam
visione, quam refert Beda: quamvis non dicam fuisse confictam, aut mendacem,
nihilomirus aliqua proferam, propter quae mihi suspecta videtur, ut dare fidem
illi visioni non possim, ut sonat. For that the Reports of this Terrestrial
Paradise are vain, fictitious, and merely fantastical, shall be after more
fully delivered.

Yet here by these two learned Archbishops we are Except. 8.
taught Three points of Faith, which all the Scriptures could not afford us.

1. First, that Christ our Savior appointed the Sacracrament of Penance,
thereby to satisfy in this life for our sins, which if it be so well
grounded, Sunt etiam inter Catholi cos, qui putant nullsi esse praeceptum
divinu^ de confessione, ut omnes decretorum interp. etes, and inter
Scholasticos Scotus. Maldo^at. sesuit. in sum. q. 18. art. 4.
Why should any Catholic think that there is no divine precept for it, with
whom agree all the Interpreters of the Decrees, and Scotus among the
Schoolmen, says Maldonat the Jesuit.

2. But in case this Sacrament reach not unto all, then there remains a
Purgatory after death, appointed also by Christ, says these Fathers: But where
do we find it so appointed by Christ? and if it were, how comes it to
pass, That Legate qui vult Graecoru^ patrim Commentarios, and nullam ut opinor
aut ratissimam Purgatorij mentionem inveniet: Sed neque Latini simul omnes
hujus rei veritatem conceperunt, neque tam necessaria fuit Primitive ecclesiae
purgatorij sides atque nunc est; ex qua pendet omnis indulgentiarum estimatio:
his enim si nullum fuerit purgatorium, nihil indigelimus: contemplantes igitur
aliquandiu purgatorium incognitum fuisse; deinde quibusdam pedetentim partim ex
revelationibus cognitum, and receptum Ecclesie universae. Epist. Roffens. art.
18. contra Luther^.
in the Commentaries of the Greek Fathers we find little or no mention of it;
for ought I know, neither yet have all the Latins conceived the truth of it,
the believing of it not being so necessary for the Primitive Church, as now it
is, (says Fisher Bishop of Rochester) the esteem of Indulgences wholly
depending on Purgatory: for there were no use of Indulgences, if there were no
use of Purgatory. (He proceeds) Considering therefore how that Purgatory was
for a while unknown, and that some by degrees received it, partly by
Revelations, and partly by Scripture, and that it was so lately known, and
received by the whole Church, etc. But by his leave, not by the whole Church,
for neither the Greek, nor all the Latins believe it, as was before
confessed; and what ground in that kind it has gotten, was but of late days,
it neither being necessary, nor known to the Primitive Fathers, and yet with
what confidence do these learned Archbishops affirm that Christ himself
appointed it?

3. But they proceed: We in Purgatory are either altogether freed, or much
eased by the Prayers of men living: yet how that should be, we know not; Usque
in hodiernum diem nunquam in Ecclesia statutum fuit, quomodo nostrae preces
defunctorum animis prodesse possint. Cassand. de consalt, in art. de Missa.
For to this very day was it never determined by the Church, how our Prayers
could profit the dead; as Cassander confesses. But as Purgatory brought in
these Prayers, so do these Prayers uphold Purgatory. The great profit whereof
making it so necessary for these last times, which the simplicity of these
former ages could not dive into. But now these three points are fully confirmed
for true by these Archbishops.

And now is our Pilgrim returned into the dark Hall, Except. 9.
whereinto he first entered: a journey, if we consider it, no less wonderful,
than the rest: in twenty and four hours all on foot traversing more ground,
than can be well^ imagined, going over many large fields, the bounds o most
whereof could not by the eye of man be discerned, and passing to The extremest
part of the world. It is said indeed that those malignant spirits did further
him in his speed, and needs must he then go: but if it be so in his going
forward, what shall be said for his coming back? for then none of them could
so much as look on him, but fled at the sight of him. So that his own
footmanship must perform it, where also notwithstanding his swift going
forward, and the general Torments he suffered and saw; putting him besides
himself: yet is he so skillful in the way, that through all these dark and
unknown passages, he came back foot by foot, the same way that he went.

Neither is his eyesight any thing dazzled, or impaired Except. 10.
by the transoendent light in Paradise, surpassing the glory of the Sun. But
entering into that spacious and dark hall, of which before, he could by the
Twilight discern those men, whom he had formerly met there, distinguishing
their number, Twelve, and their Actions, signing him with the sign of the
Cross. Here also he met and knew his Companion the English Knight that went in
with him, who it seems, went no further than that Hall, being so tired out
with labor and Torments, that he could not return without the Uiscounts
help; where what Torments he endured more than the other, we hear not: And if
he were tormented, he had the same remedy propounded to him that was to the
Viscount, the pronouncing of the blessed Name of JESUS, by which he might be
delivered: of which it is supposed he did make use, otherwise he could not be
freed; and if he did, how came he to be so extraordinarily oppressed? or rather
whence was it that he did not utterly perish in not going forward? that being
the only thing those spirits are said to labor, to stop men in their journey
by fair or foul means, thereby to destroy them body and soul; as in the
former passages has been at large described.

But why dally we thus with this Counterfeit? whom Except. 11.
it is now time to unmask: and we shall fully discover the fraud by observing
the circumstances of the time, and persons, when, and with whom; which here for
the better coloring of the matter are very punctually described.

His own relation is in substance this: y When Charles the French King was
dead, this Viscount went to John King of Aragon his Sovereign, by whom he was
employed with Command of three Gallyes for the assisting of Pope Clement, and
after the death of Clement, he served his Successor Benedict the thirteenth,
during which time his king dying, he with Benedicts benediction left Avignion,
going on in his pilgrimage to S. Patrickes Purgatory: when? Anno 1328. in what
month? September, what day of that month? on the feast of the blessed Virgin:
about what time of the day? About the evening: Can anything be more punctual?
but behold further circumstances yet? From Paris he goes with the French Kings
letters to his Son in Law Richard King of England: by Richard he is sent into
Ireland with other letters to the then Deputy, the Earl of March, Richards
brothers Son; and from him he goes to the Lord Primate, and then into this
Purgatory. What can be more precise? We have the year, month, day, and almost
the very hour. The Places and Persons, we know: who could think the man meant
before so many witnesses to play his Legerdemaine tricks; like Iuglers, who
trusse up their sleeves before they begin their feats, and all this but to
avoid suspicion: now see him in his colors.

Know therefore first, that in the year one thousand three 1.
hundred twenty and eight, the time of this supposed pilgrimage, Benedict the
thirteenth was not Pope, neither of a long time after. But John the 21.
accounted also the 22. whom succeeded Benedict the tenth, Onuphrijpo^. Romans
Chron. page 45. 46. 47.
(or the twelfth as he is also esteemed) after him Clement the sixth, Innocent
the sixth, Urban the fifth, Gregory the eleventh, and Urban the sixth, with whom
stood in Competition, as Antipope, Clement the seventh, in the year 1389.
whom followed in that Schism this Benedict the 11. or the 13. in the year
1394. which two last are they who are here mentioned, of which the last, that
is to say, Benedict the thirteenth was before called Petrus de Luna, and an
Aragonoes, a motive for the King of Aragon to be an assistant unto him, Cujus
populi magna ex part Benedicto obtemperabant. Platina de vita Pont. Ioh. 13.
page 271.
whose subjects for the most part obeyed Benedict, says Plaitina; so that as
this pilgrimage was to be in the year 1328. and in Benedict the thirteenth his
time, Successor to Clement: it is apparent that by that computation, it should
have been before Clement sixty and one years: and before Benedict sixty six
years: An error so gross that it had need to have gone with our Viscount to
that Purgatory to be purged with him. But this is not all.

For secondly, after the decease of Charles the fourth 2.
King of France, there succeeded in the year 1328. Phillip of Valois, to whom
in England Edward the third was Contemporary, this Edward began his Reign anno
1326. two years before, and dyed in the fifty first year of his Reign. To
him succeeded Richard the second here spoken off: And in a Parliament held anno
1385. which was the ninth year of Richards Reign, John Stow Chron. Angl.
Richard 2. Anno 1385. page 347,
was Roger Mortimer Earl of March proclaimed Heir apparent to the Crown:
Shortly after which, this Roger sailed into Ireland where he was Deputy: at
which time this pilgrimage was said to be: for from the French King he brought
letters to Richard, and from Richard to the Earl of March then Deputy: But
deducting two years from the fifty and one years of Edward the third, the
remain is forty nine, to which add nine years of Richards Reign, at which
time the Earl of March was Deputy; it makes up fifty and eight years, so
that by this computation this Pilgrimage must have been 58. years before this
year of Richard, and as many before the Earl of March; for so long is there
between the year 1328. and 1386. The time of his being Deputy, and how these
things will hang together, I see not.

Neither can this be supposed to be such a mistake, as that the figures might
be mis printed 1328. for 1386. for in the Margent of that Legend the figures
are 1328. but in the body of the Discourse it is thus at large; Prosiciscor
anno post ortu^ Domini, vigesimo octavo supra millessimu^ trecentessimu^.
Philip. O Sull. hist. cath. Hiber. tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 2. page 19.
I did set forward in the year after the birth of our Lord, One thousand three
hundred twenty and eight. And the same Author in another book set out since
relating the same story, has it in the same words at large, Anno Domini
milessimo trecentessino octavo. Philip. O Sull. patr. decad. lib. 9. cap. 9
page 117
In the year one thousand three hundred twenty and eight, not in figures.

But it is yet more inconsistent. For Richard King of England, is said to be
Son in Law to the then French King, unto whom Letters recommendatory are
brought by the Viscount from his Father in Law. True it is that Richard was
affianced unto Isabell daughter of Charles the sixth of France, but that was so
far from being in the year One thousand three hundred twenty and eight,
that is was in the year one thousand three hundred ninty six that is sixty and
eight years after. Neither could it be when the Earl of March was Deputy of
Ireland, which was about the year One thousand three hundred eighty and five,
nine or ten years before: so that either Richard was not Son in Law to the
French King, or the Earl of March was not Deputy, when the Viscount came into
Ireland. Neither is it less absurd which is added, That the Earl of March,
the Deputy having received the King and Queen of Englands letters, did
honorably receive him. For what Letters could the Queen write? she was but
seven years old, when he was (as I said) affianced to Richard: and not full
twelve, when by the Lord Henry Piercy she was brought back into France after
Richards death. Neither could she write to the Earl of March being Deputy of
Ireland, unless we should suppose her to have written three or four years
before she was borne.

And as foolishly is the Earl of March made to be Richards brothers Son,
Richard having no Brother, he being the sole surviving Son of Edward the
black Prince: And Roger Mortimer being the great grandchild of Edward the Third
descended from Philip daughter of Lionell, third son of Edward the Third,
which Lionell was brother to that Edward the black Prince, and Uncle to Richard.

So that considering this Mass of absurdities from first to last, any one I
suppose may well guess how false this Legend is: and this Imposture may give
just cause to suspect this and all others of the like Fables. But I much wonder
that the translator O Sullevan, whose faculty was singular that way, did not
help out the matter better than he has done: but either he saw it not, or if
he did, he thought it dangerous to stir in it, and to raise up any doubts,
supposing it might as well pass after, as hitherto it had without discovery;
thinking it may be that none would so far question it.

Neither could O Sullevan be so simple, as to conceive such a childish dream
could pass without some observation: therefore to prevent it, he labors to
cast a mist before his Readers eyes. If this History, says he, be in any
thing, which we have showed in many things, if not in all, hard to be believed;
what then? Let him that desires to be satisfied read Dionysius Carthusianus,
who reports like Histories of others who returned from this Purgatory. But
what are like Histories to this? what if they be as false as this? But
Dionysius, says he, does prosecute the matter at large, answering all
Arguments and doubts that can be made against it. This indeed is to some
purpose if so it prove: but I rather suspect this to be O Sullevans cunning to
direct the Reader, and take him off from prying too near into that of the
Viscount, yet least we may seem to prejudicate him; let us hear what
Dionysius does say to this purpose.

First (says he) Dionysius confirms this by the like Relations. He indeed
among other Histories, proving that Souls departed are purged in such flames,
gives us one of Tondall an Irish Knight, who lived about Henry of Saltry's
days. Claruit eo tempore quo Tondalus in Hibernia Carthusianus a purgatorio
suscitacus ad suos redierat viliones enarrans. Johan. Balaeus de script. B^
C^nt. 2. cap. 77. page 189.
He (Balaeus speaking of that Henry) flourished then when Tondall the
Carthusian in Ireland being revived returned to his own from Purgatory
reporting visions; calling him a Carthusian, whom in others we read a Knight:
it may be as Owen the Knight putting himself into the Cistercian Order, so he
into the Carthusians. Neither were they far distant from each other; both
Owen and Tondall being in K. Stevens days, this last being about the twelfth
year of his Reign, both which administered abundant matter for Henry to write.

The Legend of Tondall is this in effect: that his Soul was separated from his
body three days; like that which we before did read of Tymarchus, whose
Soul was sent on the like errand two days and one night. In this differing
from that of Owen, whose body also went along. This Soul of Bestia
incredibilis magnitudinis cujus os videbatur posse capere novem millia hominum
armatorum, intia quam erant multa millia virorum and mulieru^ dira tormenta
luentiu^. Porro per lacu^ erat pons longitudinis duarum milliariu^, and
latitudinis palmae unius, cui inserta erat tabula clavis ferreis accutissimis
plena. Stagnus amplus and tempestuosus in quo erant terribiles bestiae
mugientes, nec aliud postulantes quam animas devorare. Dixi^ Angelus, oportet
te pontem istum transire, nec vacua ibis, sed vaccam indomitam quam (dum in
corpore eras) compatri tuo furata fuisti, oportet tecum ducere, and illaesam
mihi ultra pontem exhibere. Tunc anima ait, quomodo ego miserrima potero
transducere vaccam in tali periculo, ubi stare non possum omnino? Videns autem
anima, quod oporteret eam sic facere, coepit reluctantem trahere vaccam, and
cum ea ire per pontem. Et cum staret anima, cadobat vacca, and cum staret vacca
cadebat anima, sicque vice versa, modo stabant, modo cadebant, quousque
venerunt ad medium pontis, etc. Dionys. Carth. de judic. anima art. 21. page
418. and 419.
Tondall is by an Angel conducted into Purgatory, where it saw many strange
things, among the rest, a beast of incredible greatness, which may easily be
believed; whose mouth seemed capable of nine thousand armed men, just nine
thousand, within whom were many thousands of men and women grievously
tormented, this was a thing not observed by Owen the Knight, or that our
Viscount (for this Purgatory is beholding to these great Titles of Viscounts
and Knights for the upholding of the credit of it) but to go on. This Soul of
Tondall is brought to a place, where over a lake there was a bridge two miles
long, and but one palm broad, full of sharp iron nails, under this bridge
there was a large and tempestuous Lake, in which were terrible beasts roaring,
and desiring nothing more than to devour Souls. Then the Angel that did
conduct this soul, said to it; Thou must go over that bridge, neither shall
thou go empty, but must lead over an untamed cow which thou did steal from
thy Godfather, for which good service it may be he was knighted. Then said the
Soul. How I can I, miserable that I am, do this in such danger, and where I
cannot stand? how ridiculous? surely the Author forgetting he was discoursing
of a soul, but the Soul seeing that the thing must be done, began to draw and
struggle with the Cow, going therewith upon the bridge; for when the Soul
stood, the Cow was down, and when it was up, the Soul fell down; so by
turns, sometimes up and sometimes down, until they came to the midst of the
bridge, etc. whom we mean not to follow. Yet now we see the matter brought to
a good pass, for Cowes also go into Purgatory and Paradise.

And that this Fable may not want something, wherein to liken it to that of the
Viscount, let it be enquired, whether this Bridge be not the same of which we
before read, called the Bridge of Calamity, generally observed in pilgrimages
of this kind, leading from Purgatory over Hell, into Paradise; or whether both
of them be not the same with that which Philippus Lonicerus describes in the
Turkish Purgatory, and serving for the same use, Pontem que sera cuplissi, id
est pontem justitiae nomina^t fornicis instar convexum, etc ferro accutissimo
constructum transire coguntur. Ex altera part po^tis istius qui toti in
malitia fuer intsubmersi protinus in aeternas inferni paenas praecipitabantur.
Vbi igni consumpti, subinde ad novas in aeternum duraturas rem scetur. ^^x
altera vero part ij qui in malitia non omnino fuere indurati in ignem
purgatorium decide^t, ex quo pro peccatoru^ condition vel cirius vel tardius
liberati in paradisi gaudia suscipientur. Phil. Lonicer. Tu^c. Chron. lib. 2.
cap. 23.
called Sera cuplissi, or the bridge of Justice, contex like an Archor Vault,
and made of sharp iron, over which souls are compelled to pass: on the other
side, whereof such as are given over to malice are cast headlong into the
Eternal pains of Hell, where being consumed with Fire, they are again
renewed to new pains unto Eternity. But on the other part of the bridge, such
as are not indurate in malice, do fall into the fire of Purgatory, out of
which according to the nature of their faults they are sooner or later
delivered, and received into the joys of Paradise. So that O Sullevans words
are most true, that Dionysius does report like Histories, like unto that of
this Viscount. We have heard one. Another also you may there have of Nicholas
an English Monk, which seems to me to agree in all things with the vision of
Tondall, says Carthusianus. Quae videtur mihi per omnia visioni Tondali
consonare. Dionys. Carth. ibid. art. 23. page 427.
This is the same which we read in Petrus de Natalibus, and in the Golden
Legend, in the life of S. Patrick, if he whom Dionysius calls a Monk be the
same with him whom Iacobus de Voragine styles a Nobleman. Carthusianus has
there a third Narration (that there may be no want) of a certain Knight that
went into S. Patricks Purgatory: likely it is, he means that Owen, whom we
have so often mentioned out of Henry of Saltry, who also may be meant by
Dionysius, when he says, This History is commonly read in the book which is
entitled of S. Quae communiter legitur in libello, qui de purgatorio sancti
Patricij intitulatur. Dionys. ibid. art. 24.
Patricks Purgatory.

If these be the Histories which O Sullevan means that be like, and do
confirm that his Legend: I shall easily confess the likensse, and infinite
such like might he reckon up: but without any force, and to no purpose; all of
them rather arguing the Cunning, if not the childishness of the inventors, and
the blind superstition and credulities of the believers.

But O Sullevan adds. That Dionysius does satisfy all doubts, and answers
all the Arguments that can be brought against it; this would we gladly see. I
do pass by many objections there made, and will fix only on one of them.

Carthusianus sets forth a discourse between the Soul of Tondall and the
two Archbishops, who it seems are ex officio the common entertainers of the
Purgatory pilgrims. Nos omnes per loca paenarum ad requie^ istam transivimus ad
quam etiam venient omnes quos in Purgatorij paenis vidisti cum fuerint
expurgati. Nullus nostrum novit quamdiu hic crit, and licet ab omni hic liberi
sumus culpa, ad superna^ tamen sanctorum laetitiam nondum digni sumus
ascendere, quotidie societas nostra crescit and decrescit, dum singulis diebus
and e paenis ad nos and a nobis ad celestem ascenditur paradisum. Dionys.
Carth. ibid. fol. 436.
We all (say they) are come to this rest, having passed through those places of
punishment: whither also shall all those come whom in purgatory thou have seen
tormented? and that after they be purged, None of us knows how long he shall
continue here: and howsoever we are without any spot of sin, yet are we not
worthy to ascend into that felicity of the Saints which is above: Every day
our Society increases and decreaseth, some coming to us out of punishment,
and some ascending from us into that celestial Paradise. If these Archbishops
be the same who instructed our Viscount, they have made residence larger than
ordinary in that place, almost 200. years: whereas every day one or other
still ascends from them, which daily ascending from that Paradise is some
Modification of that which in Venerable Bede we read. Ven. Bid in hist.
Eccles. Ang. lib. 5. cap. 13.
That they were to continue there till the day of Judgment, which gave so
great cause of offense that it had gone near to question all. Of which Hae
revelationes Bedae and Carthusiani, nisi metaphoram aliquam contineant mihi non
faciunt fidem, quia illa visio apud Bedam dicit in illo loco amoeno maneri
usque ad diem judicij, quod incredibile est de omnibus affirmare, and contra
Ecclesiae suffragia. Suarez Ies. tom. 4. in Thom. disp. 46. sect. 4. number. 6.
and. ^^ium. 12. and 13.
Suarez the Jesuit, Those Revelations of Bid and Carthusianus, if they
contain not some Metaphor, cannot win credit with me, (says he) for in that
Vision in Bid, it is said, that Souls remain in that place of pleasure
until the day of Judgment, which is incredible, and contrary to the suffrages
of the Church. He lays at both Bid and Dionysius, yet seems only to
fasten on the former, for in that of Dionysius, neither are all Souls there
staid, nor so long a time as until the day of Judgment, but each day one or
other passing thence into the celestial paradise: yet it seems that this is
no less disliked than the other. For Dionysius himself brings one thus
disputing with him, Hic apertissime dicitur quod a Purgatorio non asceditur ad
Paradisum caelestem nisi per terrestre^, cujus oppositu^, sicut and tu certius
nosti, dicunt Doctores communiter, and qui multipliciter probant quod
satisfactione in purgatorio per soluta, animae mox volant in coelum Empyraeum.
Quod and rationabile esse videtur, cu^ milla sit causa dilationis a gloria quam
culpae reatus. Denique sicut praehabitu^ est. Sola dilatio que and p^na damni
dicitur, excedit in animabus seperati, omnem paenam vitae praesentis. S^ ergo
animae in Paradiso terrestri nondum Deo beatifice perfr^tur, ergo sunt ibidem
in gravissima paena. Dionys. Carth. ibid. art. 25.
It is here plainly affirmed that they ascend not from Purgatory to the
celestial Paradise, but by the terrestrial: The contrary whereof as you may
best know, the Doctors do commonly teach and many ways they prove, that
satisfaction being made in Purgatory, the Souls immediately fly into the
Imperial heaven; which also seems very reasonable, seeing there is no cause
hindering from glory, but the guilt of sin. Lastly, as before was showed, this
only delay and keeping souls from Glory, which is called the punishment of
loss, does in them exceed all the pains of this present life: If therefore
Souls have not the beatificall fruition of God in this earthly Paradise, then
are they in most grievous pain. Hitherto that Objection which seems to me at
once both to strike wholly at that Paradise, as a thing utterly unusefull, and
tacitly also to overthrow Purgatory it self; for the use of Purgatory is,
that satisfaction may be made for the punishment of sin, not for the guilt.
Satisfactio non offertur pro culpa, sed pro paena. Bellarm. lib. 4. de
Poenitent. cap. 1.
The guilt being in this life remitted: therefore according to the former
Conclusion, if no cause hinders Souls from glory, but the guilt of sin,
that being before remitted, why should they be arrested in any Purgatory by the
way? but this only by the way. We rather expect an answer to that Objection
made to Dionysius.

The question is discussed on both sides, Dionys. ^bid. art. 30. p. 458. 459.
460, 461 462. 463.
on the one part are brought the Testimonies of the Schoolmen and Fathers,
confirmed also with seven Reasons, proving that Souls thoroughly purged in
Purgatory, immediately ascend thence into Heaven: On the contrary are alleged
inducements, Ibid. art. 31. p. 463, etc.
drawn from Visions, such as were those, of which before: But where is the
determination of the question? Our Author professes he dare not undertake to
be a stickeler in it. His words are these, Veruntamen ^ee Doctoribus co^tradico
propter visiones, nec propter doctorum traditionem aud^o, tot sanctorum,
hominu^ visiones and revelationes appellare phantasticas aut mendosas, quandiu
Ecclesiae super hoc nihil determinat, nam and qui eas scripserunt and
approbaverunt, fuerunt religiosissimi and doctissimi viri. Idem. ibid.
I will not contradict the Doctors because of these visions. Neither for the
Doctors dare I call so many visions and revelations of holy men fantastical
or false; while the Church determines nothing of these things. For they that
have written, and approved of them were religious and learned men. Thus he,
wherein he seems to me like him of whom Canus speaks. Vidit aetas nostra
sacerdotem cui persuasissimum fuit nihil omnino falsum esse quod semel Typis
fuisset excusum. Canus loc. Theol. lib. 11. cap. 6. page 336.
There was a Priest. (says he) who was most certainly persuaded, that nothing
could be false that was once Printed. But is there no better to be found? None,
For being pressed with it, in the end of thirty Articles, this is all that can
be gotten from from him, and indeed it is sufficient, being that he makes a
question of it, whether it can be answered. Horum determinationem alijs magis
commitro, and si concordari haec queant peritis relinquo: quia nec tantis
Doctoribus, nec tot revelationibus contradicere audeo; determinationi Ecclesiae
haec tutius committuntur. Dionys. Carth. ibid. art. 30. page 467.
I leave (says he) the determination of these things to others, rather
referring them to the learned, if they can be accorded, for as for me I dare
neither contradict so great Doctors, nor so many revelations: But these things
would more safely be left to the determination of the Church. So that now we
are as far to seek as at the first: And let any one judge, whether O Sullevan
did not trifle with his Reader, when he sent him to this man for a Resolution.

Neither is this a new question; neither is it of small moment, and by the
Ancients this is esteemed a sufficient argument for the rejecting of this
fabulous Purgatory altogether, of which Vincentius Belluacensis who lived Anno
1240. contemporary with Matthew Paris, both of them living in the next age to
Henry of Saltry, Vincentius I say, shows this not to be his own private
opinion alone, but of many others. His words are these.

Verum historia haec a multis non recipitur propter illud maxim quod ibi
dictu^ est Animas a purgatorio liberatas no^ statim ad caelum evolare, sed in
Paradiso terrestri tanquam in loco quietis intermedio te^poraliter commanere.
Cum e contra nullus credatur locus esse medius animarum inter purgatorium and
caelestem paradisum. Vincent. Belluacen. speculo Histor. tom. 4. lib. 20. cap.
24. p. 270.
But this history is not by many received, chiefly because it is there said,
that Souls which are freed from Purgatory do not presently fly up into
heaven, but remain sometime in a terrestrial Paradise, as in an intermediate
place of rest, and that after a certain time they pass thence into those
heavenly Palaces; whereas on the contrary there is no middle place of Souls
acknowledged between Purgatory and the Celestial Paradise. Thus he, which
quite overthrows that fo^d dream and foolish invention of that Paradise
before, so much spoken off. Which words of Vincentius are cited by Antoninus
Archbishop of Florence, treating of Saint Patrickes Purgatory, where we have
this Marginall observation, Purgatorij sancti Patricij historia no^ recipitur.
Ant. Archi^p. Floren. Ch^on. tit. 1. ca. 18. 2. de Patricio Anno Domini ^00.
page 202. part. 2. opera and studio Petri Maturi (...) so^ate Ies^.
of Petrus Maturus the Jesuit. The history of Saint Patrickes Purgatory is not
received, but yet the matter must be by Antoninus salved thus. Sed si dicatur
(ut a quibusdam de illis partibus communiter asseritur) quod post mansionem in
isto loco purgatorij per aliquod tempus breve in quo sustinent magnas paenas
and laesiones a Daemonibus, tantum per imaginationem inde egressi in mundo
vivant ut alij, and per illas paenas purgatorij satisfaciant paenis debitis pro
peccatis nullum videtur sequi inconveniens. Idem ibid.
But if it be said, as commonly as it is affirmed by some of those parts, that
after some stay in that place of Purgatory, where they endure great pains and
hurt from Devils, which yet is only by Imagination, they do after return
into the world and live as others, and by these pains of Purgatory do
satisfy the punishments due for their sins, there seems none inconvenience
to follow. Thus Antoninus; which how it does reach Vincentius, I know not: he
only speaking of souls separated from their bodies, and freed from Purgatory.
To which this answer of Antoninus can no way serve: for to discourse of Men yet
alive going into S. Patricks Purgatory, and returning again; is quite another
thing from Vincentius his purpose: who by overthrowing the resting in that
earthly Paradise, would conclude the falsehood of those relations of men going
in S. Patricks Purgatory: For if Vincentius his opinion be true, then those
reports of Owen the Knight, this Viscount, and others that speak of that
Earthly Paradise, and the use thereof, for receiving souls freed from
Purgatory are utterly false: which if so; we have no great cause to trust them
in the rest. No more than that their sufferings while they were in Purgatory,
and those strange sights were things outwardly acted, and really felt; being,
if we believe Antoninus only Imaginary; surely too weak a foundation for so
great Devotion.

Neither does this doubt puzzle your Dionysius and Antoninus alone: but others
also, who have undertaken the Quarrel against Vincentius, have come off with
as little success, and particularly Gabriel ^ennottus, although he seems to
make no great matter of it; and professes purposely against Vincenti^. Nec
enim obstat quod loco citato Vincentius Belluace^sis contra (...)dictam
Historiam opponit illam a multis non recepipropter illud maxim, quod dicat
animas a purgatorio liberatas no^ statim evolate in cael^, sed in paradiso
ter^stri tanquam in loco quietis* intermedio te^pore commanere, and posteae
statuto tempore in patriam pervenire. N^ nullus est ex omnibus quos de hac
re^cribentes legere potui, qui dixerit illud fuisse purgatorium animarum
corpore solutarum quae a paenis purgatae, non statim ad caelum evolarent: sed
in quiunt fuisse purgatorium viventium qui vere poenitentes illud ingressi, and
paenas illas atrocissimas sive per veram passionem, sive per imaginariam
apprehensionem sustinentes, a paenis omnibus pro peccatis debitis purgabantur;
quemadmodum alij infiniti in hac vita degentes pro paenis iliorum peccatis in
purgatorio debitis, hic vel per jejunia, vel per alia poenitentia opera, vel
per indulgentiarum applicationem satisfaciant, qui nisi nova peccata
admiserint, ex hac vita migrantes ad caelum sine alio purgatorio statim
evolant. Quae sententia tam probabilis est and Catholica, ut non possit ab
aliquo nisi in hac part ignaro erroris insimulari. Gabr. Pennotus Hist. trip^.
Cleric. ((...). lib. 2. cap. 34. Col. 2. number. 2. page 363.
It nothing hinders (says he) that in that place cited Vincentius
Belluacensis opposes the said History for this cause principally, [That Souls
freed from Purgatory do not immediately fly into Heaven: but remain for some
time in the terrestrial Paradise, as in a middle place of rest, and that after
at the appointed time, they go into their Countrey] for there is none that I
could read, who have written of this thing, that make this to be a Purgatory
for Souls separated from their bodies, which should being purged presently fly
into Heaven. But they say that it is a Purgatory for the living, who being
truly penitent, and entering thereinto; suffering also the grievous pains
thereof, either by a real passion or imaginary apprehension, they shall be
purged from all the punishments due to their sins. In like manner as infinite
others in this life do satisfy for the pains which their sins deserve,
either by fasting, or other works of Penance, or by application of Indulgences:
who, if they shall not commit new sins, and should so go out of the world,
they fly immediately into heaven, without passing through any other Purgatory:
which opinion is so probable and catholic, that it cannot be accused of any
error, if not by him who is herein ignorant. Thus Pennottus, whereby it seems
that Antoninus needed not so far to have troubled himself to prove S.
Patricks Purgatory to be only for the living, and not for the Souls separated
from their bodies. And as little need had Pennottus to have taken so much
pains for it as he: yet not as he would have it, because none ever opposed it;
and therefore was it wisely done of him to restrain it to his own Reading:
for we find O Sullevan mainely contending for it, and indeed the very
relations of Pilgrimages thither import no less; For if they make S. Patricks
Purgatory to be only the Cave, on first Entrance, I suppose they will find
very few that will say, That to be the place of Torments, expiating the
punishment of sin: and therefore the Pilgrims were driven to go much further
into (I know not what) places of pain and torture, and there also to have
suffered corporally such punishments, as were thought sufficient for to purge
them; where I hope they will not say that these infinite numbers seen there
tormented, were all living men, but rather souls separated from their bodies;
how then is it only for the living? but in respect of Vincentius, both
Antoninus and Pennottus might have spared their labor as unnecessary:
Vincentius as was said, wholly opposing the staying of Souls in the
terrestrial Paradise after they be freed from Purgatory: and what else does
Pennotus conclude here? but at last he joyneth hands with him adding further,
that if men in this world satisfying for their sins by fasting, or other
works of penance; or having the benefit of indulgencies should immediately dye
without committing new sins, they immediately fly into Heaven; without
passing through any Purgatory, or staying in the terrestrial Paradise, which
must be if they pass forthwith into Heaven. And this he shows to be the
Catholic and soundest opinion, being without any error, not to be
contradicted, but by ignorant men: what then shall we judge of those
Archbishops in Paradise who taught the contrary? Shall we accuse them of
ignorance? or think their opinion neither probable nor Catholic; if we did it
were no more than could well be justified. And of what use should that Earthly
Paradise be, for receiving Souls purged; for if Souls be purged, by the
Catholic opinion, they fly immediately into Heaven in the instant of their
death, why not then as well being fully purged, as they say they are, in
Purgatory? which doctrine, if they will allow with Vincentius, which also none
but ignorant men will contradict, says Pennotus, That Paradise must vanish,
and all the dreams and Fables thereof must be foolish, fantastical, and all
to be rejected, and with it, those fictions and pilgrimages before spoken must
also of necessity fall with it to the ground, as Vincentius thence justly
concluded.

Hitherto have we heard only one Objection made against this Purgatory, and
the Legends of it: whereunto O Sullevan promised we should have received full
satisfaction from Dionysius, but if this be too hard, what does he then say to
the rest? many other doubts are moved to him: to which he ingeniously
confesses himself unable to answer, professing himself more desirous to be
taught by others than to teach. For (says he) answering his opposer, Fortia
sunc quae moves, and difficilia ad solvendum; mallemque super his instrui qua^
docere, unde nec de ista materia volo quid dicere cum assertione incauta.
Dionys. Cart. ibid. art. 25. (...) fine.
You move strongly, and such things as are hard to be resolved; wherein I
should rather choose to be instructed my self, than to instruct: therefore I
will not say any thing rashly. How warily? and yet could O Sullevan with his
wonted confidence, without blushing tell us, that if the Reader would peruse
Dionysius, he should be satisfied of all the Difficulties that might arise in
that history of the Viscount, surely a most subtle and cunning put off.

But although his first witness fall short, yet is not O Sullevan without
other pregnant Testimonies, able to confirm the Truth of that Legend; For
(says he) Et alij authors plura and multa purgatorij cruciamenta tradunt.
Philip. O Sull. ubi (...).
Other Authors relate many more pains of Purgatory, if these (who yet are not
named) speak as much as his other we have already more then enough. But he
adds, Virgill also sings of this, If I had an hundredth mouths, etc. Here, I
confess something may be found to this purpose. For in Virgill we have this
Pilgrimage of the Viscount, so sively set out in all the parts thereof, that as
was said Quod and Virgilius canit. Si mihi sunt linguae centum, etc. ibid.
of Trophonius his den compared with this Cave of S. Patricks Purgatory. The
Tales are so like, that one may well believed to have risen out of the other.

And herein O Sullevan, or any other cannot think any wrong to be to their
cause offered, out of Heathen Authors to prove their Purgatory: it is one of
Bellarmine's best Bellar. de purga. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Arguments, which O Sullevan himself makes use of, alleging Plato, Tully,
Claudian and Ovid O Sull. Patr. decad. lib. 1. c. 9.
. Yea, (says he) Illud etiam a Mahumetan. admitri Alcoranus Mahumetonae legis
liber monstrat. ibid,
The Alcaron which is the book of the Mahumetane Law, does show that
Mahumetans do admit of a Purgatory: Let us not therefore rob him of this
Testimony out of Virgill. Neither let the Reader think it tedious, that we
make the parallel between the Poets description of Aeneas his going to
Purgatory, Hell, and Paradise, with this our Viscounts pilgrimage into S.
Patricks Purgatory.

1. To begin with the description of the place, we have heard it to be a Rockie
place, environed with a Lake, about which were woods and mountains; in which
was a deep and dark Cave, agreeing with that in Virgill Vitg. Aencid. lib. 6,
.

Spelunca alta fuit, vastoque immanis hiatis,
Scrupea, tuta lacu nigro, nemeremque tenebris teneut media omnia silvae,
Cocitusque sinu labens circumfluit atro.
A deep vast yawning Cave, rough paved has been
With inky pooles and woods, thick shades shut in:
Between on every part great thickets grow,
And in blackbanks Cocytus round does flow.
2. What was it that moved the Viscount to undertake this pilgrimage, and
descend into this Cave? I earnestly desired (says he) To know in what state
the Soul of the King was; John King of Aragon his Sovereign deceased, whom he
saw and discoursed withal. And Aeneas his errand was to see and discourse with
his Father Anchises.

Vnum oro (quando hic inferni janua Regis
Dicitur, and tenebrosa palus Acheronte resuso)
Ire ad conspectum chari genitoris, and ora
Contingat, doceasqueiter, and sacra ostia pandas.
One favor I entreat (since that report
Speaks this the gate of the infernal conrt
And glooming fen of swelling Acheron)
Deigne me the happiness to look upon
My dearest Father, and my passage guide:
And those most sacred doors, set open wide.
3. What is the custom when any one is to enter into this Purgatory. He is
dissuaded from entering, the danger is propounded; and principally, that some
have gone thither who never returned. I confess says the Prior to the
Viscount: The descent into Purgatory is easy, but the dfficultie is in
returning. So is Aeneas told.

facilis descensus Averni,
Noctes atque dies patet atri janua Ditis,
Sedrevocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras,
Hoc opus, hic labor est: pauci quos aquus amavit
Jupiter, aut ardens evexit ad aethera virtus
Dijs geniti potuere.
To hell with ease we slide; early and late
Free entrance gives grisly Pluto's gate,
But to return from thence, and pass above.
Were work indeed, that would a labor prove.
Some few by Jove beloved have done't; or such
Whom virtue's fire has made the heaven to touch,
Of Gods begotten.
4. But what if disswasions prevail not? then is the Adventurer instructed,
and thus the Viscount; change yet thy mind says the Prior to him; But if thou will notwithstanding proceed, attend then while I tell what shall happen to
thee. So is Aeneas deal withal.

Quod si tantus amor menti, si tanta cupido est
Bis stygios lunare lacus, bis nigra videre
Tartara, and insano juvat indulgere labori,
Accipe quae peragenda prius.
If such desire such love thy mind possess
Twice to view Hell, twice Stygian lakes to pass,
And on thy rash attempt, art bent so far.
First learn what things to be performed are.
5. Now is our pilgrim on his journey: where see how, and whither within the
Cave he went. I entered into a place extremely dark, destitute of any light,
but the darkness, being passed over; I did enter into a large Hall, yet having
no more light then is our Winter twilight, (says he) not much unlike Aeneas
his passage.

Ibant obscuri sola sub nocte per umbras
Perquedomos Ditis vacuas, and innania regna,
Quale per incertam lunam sub luce maligna,
Est iter in silvis ubi coelum condidit umbra,
Jupiter, and rebus Nox abstulit atra colorem.
Blindly they pass in nights black shades, and through
The empty palaces of Pluto go.
Like as in woods by the Moons uncertain light
Men walk when colors are obscured by night.
6. What then happened to our Viscount? He is encountered with malignant spirits,
using all persuasions to make him retire: Protesting that: I went (says he)
with great error and madness drawn on to descend into a place not to be trodden
by living men. So is Aeneas entertained by Charon.

Navita quos jam inde ut Stygia prospexit ab unda
Per tacitum Nemus ire, pedemque advertere rip^,
Sic Prior aggreditur dictis, atque increpit ultro
Quisquis es armatus qui nostra ad flumina tendis,
Fare age quid venias, jam istinc and comprime gressum
Vmbrarum hic locus, and somni, noctisque soporae:
Corpora viva Nefas Stygia vectare carina.
When them from Stygian waves Hells Ferry-man
Passing the desert Groves to eye began,
And toward the slippery shore their course to take,
Thus without complement, to them he spoke.
Who ere thou art that with such bold aspect
Dare armed unto these floods thy steps direct,
Come, speak thine errand: wherefore camst thou hither,
That don, avaunt with speed, pass from the River.
This place sleep drowsy night, and Ghosts possess,
Live bodies to transport were wickedness.
7. But there are many dangers to be run through; how shall they be avoided?
the Viscount is to that end prescribed a certain form of words, by which the
evil spirits as charmed fly from him, and he is delivered from whatsoever
Torment. So has Aeneas a bough given to him to that purpose, by showing
whereof he appeased the Fury of Cerberus.

Si te nulla movet tantae pietatis image,
At Ramum hunc, (apperit ramum qui vest latebat)
Agnoscas tumida ex ira tum corda residunt.
If goodness move not then, this bough Adore,
(The bough she showed which had hid before)
No sooner seen his Choler rose no more.
8. What strange sights does the Viscount see? Dragons, Serpents, burning
moles, Lizards, and what not see there.

Terribites visu formae lethumque laborque
Multaque praeterea variarum monstra ferarum
Centauri in foribus, stabulant, Scyllaeque biformes,
Et centum geminus Briareus, and Bellua Lermae,
Horrendum stridens, flammisque armata chymara,
Gorgones, Harpiaeque, and Formae tricorporis umbrae.
Affrighting forms with death and labor there,
And monstrous shapes of beasts besides there were:
There Scylla's double-form'd, and Centaures rest,
Briareus hundred handed; Lerma beast,
Chymaera grinning armed with fire, strange sights:
Gorgons and Harpies, triple bodied sprights.
9. How are they punished there? Some hanging by the neck, arms, legs; some
in fire, others in water, each one according to his deserts. So in Aeneas his
Purgatory.

Exercentur paenis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt, aliae pendantur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos, alijs sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni.
Quisque suos patiamur Manes. --
Where worn with Torment, there the Soul well pays
For for faults committed in its living days.
Some suffer hanged in the air, others more deep
In water washed, or purged in Fire do keep.
As each man's fault, so suits the punishment.
10. In a word, No words, no tongue, no not an hundred in one can express the
kinds and manner of Torments there inflicted, which is expressed there in the
same words, as the same is in the Poet.

Non mihi si linguae centum fuit, oraque centum,
Ferrea vox, omnes scelerum comprehendere formas;
Omnia paenarum percurrere omnia possum.
Had I as many tongues as Argus eyes,
Mouths equalling, and voice that would suffice
Them all; the several kinds; I could not tell
What be the pains done or endured in Hell.
11. From Hell the Viscount passes into Paradise, so does Aeneas.

His demum exactis perfecto munere divae
Denere locos laetos, and amoena vireta,
Fortunatarum nomorum, sedesque beat as.
All done (the goddess satisfied) they come
To the pleasing places of Elysium,
To those blests seats, and to those delicate
Enameld Meades, and Groves most fortunate.
12. See the description of it, The air free, the soil pleasant, more
glorious than the Sun; the fields green, and the Company therein diversely
recreating themselves, walking, dancing, singing, etc. fully agreeing with that
other.

Largior hic campos ether and lumine vestit
Purpureo, solemque suum, sua sidera norunt.
Pars in graminijs exercent membra palaestris,
Contendunt ludo, and fulva lnctantur arena
Pars pedibus pandant Choreas, and carmina dicunt.
Fields freer air enjoy, and cleerer sky,
Know their own Stars, and Sols vicinitie.
Some in Green fields the Time in wrestling spend,
Some sport on Sand, some for the prize contend.
Some tripping foot it, and do lead the way
In dances, other chant a Rondelay.
13. In this place are received the Souls of those who are delivered out of
Purgatory, where they rest some while, being admitted to ascend into that
heavenly Paradise immediately, although without any spot of sin: each day
some going out of Purgatory into Paradise, and out of Paradise into Heaven. So
the Elizian fields, the Poets Paradise.

Exinde per amplum
Mittimur Elysium, and pauci lata arva tenemus,
Donec longa dies perfecto temporis orb,
Concretam exemit labiem, purumque reliquit
Aethereum sensum, atque aurei simplicis ignem.
Has omnes ubi mill rotam volvere per annos
Latheum ad fluvium Deus evocat agmine magno,
Scilicet immemores Supera ut convexa revisant.
Thus clens'd we pass into the Elizian plain,
Few do those defectable fields obtain,
Till tedious times full circled Revolution
Has purged away their black sins pollution,
And left the Ethereall foul in an estate
As crystal pure, divine immaculate;
Then when a thousand years are finished,
The Souls in troops by God are summoned
To Lethe flood, where loosing memory
of former things, they then shall mount the sky.
14. To conclude all, that it may appear all this to be but a dream and
fiction: our Viscount must begin and end, this is subterraneall Pilgrimage
sleeping. So is Aeneas said to return from his Cave, through one of the gates
of sleep, and of them that whence not true dreams but fancies are said to
proceed, as is there discribed.

Sunt geminae somni portae, quarum altera fertur
Cornea, qua veris facilis datur exitus umbris,
Altera candenti perfecta nitens Elephanto,
Sed falsa ad caelum mittunt insomnia Manes.
His ubi tum Natum Anchises, unaque Sibillam
Persequitur dictis, portaque omittit Eburna.
Two gates of sleep there were, of home one was,
By which men say, true spirits use to pass;
The other made of purest Ivory,
Whence by the ghosts, false dreams are sent on high,
Through this Anchises his discourse being done,
Dismissed Sybilla, and with her his son.
Thus have we seen, neither can it be denied, but that this is one of the most
pregnant proofs for this Purgatory, the description of the place, and the
several passages in the pilgrimage being so suitable.

To conclude then; as in the former Chapter it appeared, that the Reverence
gained to this Purgatory did first proceed from him, who was supposed the
Author of it, S. Patricke; and yet with what uncertainty that could be believed
was there showed, so here we find it much more esteemed for it self, out of
the opinion of the strange effects of it, (Certainly strange if true) and that
accompanied with so many strange sights, as were reported to be seen: both
strong motives to satisfy either Curiosity and Devotion; all which granted,
what wonder was it to find it so much looked after, and so much flocked unto
from far and near. And yet with what foppery? with how many contradictions?
with how great an heap of absurdities this was followed? has been in this
Chapter considered.

So that again and again I say it, it cannot be sufficiently admired, that not
only the multitude, but men otherwise rational and learned, should be so
drawn on, as to relish and digest such gross Fables and Fooleries, and still
to reverence so poor and base a thing as this Cave is: as if men were resolved
to be missed; or Romans 1. 18. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11.
Not receiving the love of the Truth, but holding it in unrighteousness, God
justly sending such strong delusions that should believe a lie.

But yet cannot we judge thus of all; as if all of them had purposely shut
their eyes, and captivated their Judgments, so to be led on blind-foulded, and
against Reason to believe all reports concerning it. For it cannot be thought,
that in so long a time and among so many thousands of Pilgrims, there being so
many eyes to pry into it, it should be possible but that some more ingenious
than others should at last discover the Imposture. And therefore as this
Purgatory did grow to that great height: so did it groan under its own
burden, being first discovered to some few, after to all; and lastly, (and
that more than once) deservedly demolished. Of all which more fully in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. III.
How this Purgatory did begin to decline, and fall from its esteem, being
first suspected, and found Fabulous, and lastly quite demolished.

HAving formerly sought after the beginning of this Purgatory, And after
observed the Rising and increasing of it; Order now leads to take notice of
its continuance: which if we should begin with the Time of Saint Patrickes
converting this Kingdom Anno 432. (unto which it is commonly referred) with a
supposed continuance thereof until the year one thousand six hundred thirty
two, the peryod of its dissolution; It would make up a computation of one
thousand two hundred years. A time surely wonderful (if true) for so gross
an Imposture to stand without discovery, even potent States having suffered
many alterations in a shorter time; and among others, none more than this
Kingdom of Ireland; which also makes the matter yet more strange, that this
Cave should notwithstanding subsist a midst so many combustions: But he that
shall observe the several passages, shall find it to have its sencible
declinings: and that, as it did please God to open the eyes of men, and to
disperse the mists of ignorance: So that now by the full Sunshine of the
Gospel, it is quite vanished without any memorial, which is the thing we are
next to search after.

Neither must the matter be so taken, as if all this were done in an instant;
but as it did rise, so fell it by certain steps and degrees: Yea the very
rising not being without tottering, and its progress followed with a
continual staggering, which notwithstanding it be evident out of what is
before declared, yet for the more clear manifestation thereof, I shall reduce
all that has been said unto these three heads, wherein as it were in one
view, the rising and falling thereof may at once be apparent.

The first step was out of the belief of having the Institution of it, from
Saint Patricke the Apostle of the Irish, as being a means of the conversion of
the Nation. Which were it true, deserved much of that respect and flooking unto
it which has been afforded it, and as a memorable and ancient monument and
memorial thereof ought it still to be preserved. But this has failed it.
Saint Patrickes age would not own it, neither had it a name for many ages,
even seven hundred years after. And when in the year one thousand one hundred
and forty it began to peep up, it would not be acknowledged by some eminent
persons of that time, by whom Henry of Saltry desired to be informed of it,
whereas his Relators for it spoke but by hearsay; and so weak was the
report, that howsoever it seemed then to get head, yet within forty five
years it is hushed again, and no more news for a while heard of it; I mean
in Iocelines times, in the year one thousand one hundred eighty five, of which
before at large.

Secondly it having notwithstanding these rubs again recovered its motion, and
gained a Name Vbi per diem naturalem paenite^s vere ab omnibus peccatis
purgaretur, and tormenta and gaudia videret. Ex Chro. Heart. sieve sch^del.
excus. Ann. 1495.
of thoroughly purging a penitent from all his sins in the Compass of a
natural day: where also strange sights of torments and joys should be
discovered to him; by which means almost from all parts the concourse thither
was so great, as scarcely to be credited; yet even in that very age was it as
confidently rejected, as a mere fable not consisting either with Reason or
Religion, as before we heard out of Vincentius Belluacensis, Anno 1240. being
but one hundred years after that Henry of Saltry: To which I will add that of
Bonaventure the Seraphicall Doctor within 25. years of Vincentius Anno 1265.
Bellarmin. de script. Eccles. ad Annum 1265.
esteeming it no other than a fable; his words are these, Legitur quod sanctus
Patricius impatravio cuidam quod puniretur in quodam loco in terra, ex hoc
fabulose ortun est, quod ibi esset purgatorium. Bonavent. in 4. lib. sent.
distinct. 20. q. 6.
It is written that I Patrick obtained that one should be punished in a
certain place within the Earth, and from hence it was fabulously reported that
Purgatory was in that place, which to be meant of this Purgatory, is by Gabriel
Pennottus acknowledged, by whom it is so far stretched, as to be a full
casting off of all things delivered of it, as Fables. Sane D. Bonevent. in 4.
d. 20. part. 1. q. ult. Etsi quae de dicto purgatorio dicti Patricij in
universum traduntur, fabulosa esse suspicetur, ait tamen D. Patricium
impetrasse cuidam quod puniretur in quodam loco in terra. Et ex hoc fabulose
ortum, quod ibi esset pu^gatorium. Vbi vides sanctum doctorem non negare quin
poterit sanctus Patricius pro aliquo impetrate ut in eo loco purgaretur. Sed
solum rejicere sabulam asserentium purgaterium ibi^loci esse, sicut merito
rejicienda est. Nam qui de sa^i Patri^ purgatorio loquuntur, non diount illud,
fuisse Del (...), quo homines hat vita degentes and vere poenitentes, pro
paenis illorum peccatis in hac vita debitis, ex speciali ^ne ^ant. Gabriel
Pennot. (...). Trip^. Cleric. Canonic. lib. 2. ^p. 34. Co^. 2. Number: 2. Rom^.
1624.
Truly (faith he) not withstanding that Bonaventure in 4. did. 20. par. 1.
quaest: ult. suspecteth all, reported of the said Purgatory to be fabulous, yet
he says that S. Patrick obtained that one should be punished in a certain
place of the earth, out of which it was fabulously reported that Purgatory was
there. This you see is confessed, but Pennottus his gloss follows. Where
(says he) you see that the holy Doctor denies not but that S. Patrick might
obtain, that one might be purged in that place: But only he rejects that
Fable of those, who affirm that Purgatory was there, as justly it was to be
rejected: for they that spoke of S. Patricks Purgatory, say not that it is a
Purgatory of Souls, wherein they, by the ordinary appointment of God, are
purged in the life to come; but to be a special Purgatory for the living, in
which men even in this life being truly penitent, may by the special favor
of God, satisfy the punishments due to their sins. Where, what Bonaventure
speaks only on report, without engaging his own Judgment, Pennottus
delivers confidently, as if the Doctor has granted it, that one should be so
purged. Neither is the word (as Pennottus would have it) purged, but punished;
agreeing better with that of Cambrensis before: that S. Patrick made request to
satisfy them who denied the pains of Hell, and that God would grant some
visible demonstration thereof to that people. Neither was that such as was to
continue in all ages; But as Bonaventure here terminating it in some one
person, who was so to be punished, as an example to others: Neither is this so
confidently delivered by the Doctor, as if it were done, but (as Pennottus
relates it) that such a thing might be done; and if it were granted to be
done; a particular fact would be far short for a perpetual establishment of
it for a place of penance, much less for a Purgatory. And for Pennottus his
evasion, that the Doctor did therefore reject all this as a Fable, supposing
that it was meant, that the Purgatory of Souls was there, where they say S.
Patricks Purgatory is: which Pennottus says, none does affirm. First, we have
no cause to think the Doctor so to have imagined, but rather that no Purgatory
was there, for the question is of one certain man then living, whom S. Patrick
is reported to have had punished in a certain place in the earth. Next
Pennottus does say no more here; then what he says of Vincentius in the same
case, of which before: for that the Purgatory of Souls is under or within the
Cave, has been showed to have been a received opinion among his Authors, Supra
page 108. See also the Epist. Dear. of O Sullevan not doubting of it, but
making it a thing very certain.
and agreeable with all the pilgrimages reported to be anciently made thither,
which, if they suppose them true, deliver no less; so that his saying, That
there is none that says so, will not pass: and therefore we take Pennottus
at his word, that he does concur with Bonaventure here, as before he did with
Vincentius, that is, That if so it be, it is worthily to be rejected as a
Fable. But how vain all these Authors, and how fondly vain the Relations of
those Pilgrims were in faigning such strange sights and apparitions, has been
before showed as utterly false. There being no such thing obvious to such as
went in thither in the year One thousand three hundred ninety and five, but
two ages after Henry of Saltry. As in like manner about the year One thousand
four hundred and ninety, we find related by Ponticus Virunnius In Hibernia
etiam est puteus sancti Patricij, in lacu est enim insula ubi puteus per sex
gradus in saxo descendit. Non ut Mythici canunt in foro. Ego ingressus omnia
vidi, inquit Briagus Po^tifici virumnij hist. Dritt. Epist. Dedica^* page 23.
of Blasius Biragus, who in the time of Lodowick Sforza came four times into
Ireland, and went also into this Purgatory: Of which, all that he could relate
was, That in Ireland in a lake there is S. Patricks pit, for there is (says
he) (...) Island in which (there is a Cave, having a descent of six steps, but
nothing agreeable to the Fables commonly related of it, for I saw all, says
Biragus, as the words are by Virunnius reported. And this suteth well with
Joachimus Vadianus his Annotations on Pomponius Mela, speaking of the Irish,
Clari Patricio^ sauctissimo viro a quo Christiani facti durat sui nominis
Antrum quod ingressos fabulantur ad manes venire, nec ridere ultra, cu^
redierint magna vanitate. Ioach. Vadianus in Annotat. in Pomp. Mela lib. 3.
page 171.
That famous they are in respect of Patrick an holy man, by whom they were made
Christians; and yet there remains a Cave of his Name, whereof they fable that
they that go thither, go into the place of Souls: and that being returned
they can no more laugh, which is extremely vain. No wonder therefore that
Nicholas Har psfeldius, Sed de hac re fidem meam non obstringo, (neque enim
hanc meam litem facere volo.) Sed ea Lectori nostro sub^^ahere nolo, quae
author noster, qui tam s^a tamque sacra se contestatione illigavit lectori suo
subijcere operae precium puravit. Nicholis Harp^s^ld best. Angl. Ecclesia sex
primis saeculis cap. 21. de sancto Patricio page 34.
speaking of it out of Giraldus Cambrensis. Notwithstanding his great author,
yet is so cautelous of pawning his credit on the Truth of it, which is to be
wished other Writers had with the same Judgment performed. But for this thing
(says Harpsfeldius) I will not engage my credit on the Truth of it, (for I
mean not to contend for it) yet will I not hinder the Reader of it, seeing our
Author Cambrensis is with so serious, and so sacred a contestation taken with
it, that he thought it worthy to be recorded. But much better does Abertus
Krantzius (esteemed by Bellarmine, Bellarm. descript. Eccles. ad A^ 1500.
a diligent Compiler of Histories, and living in the year of our Lord 1500.)
He (I say) does altogether rid his hands of it, ranking it with many other
strange relations of Spirits and Fantasies, passing them all over as unworthy
the relation. Hibernici purgatorium memoriant sancti aliquando Patricij, etc.
Somnia and monstra volitantia quae anilibus inanijs propriora sunt rerum
gestarum, ordini ^on putavi inserenda. A^ (...) histor. D^ lib. 2. cap. 24.
page 43. 44.
The Irish remember a Purgatory of a sometime Saint, called Patricke, (says
he) from whence passing to other the like fancies he concludes. These dreams
and flitting Monsters, I thought not good to insert in a discourse of things
done, being more like unto old wives Tales. Thus he, and thus many others whom
I spare here to repeat, having before touched them, thus I say did they in all
ages esteem of this Purgatory, and the Legends thereof, howsoever the
multitude were then by a seduced and blind Devotion otherwise led.

And that in the last place I may come to that I principally aim at, least
this might be thought to be but a causeless suspicion of Imposture in some
few, or at the best but an incredulity in these authors, see how their
opinions, and causes them thereunto moving gained with others, and did after
work with the multitude also, yea with all of all sorts. ^or within seven
years after Biragus his visiting of it, if we make it to be Anno One
thousand four hundred and nintie, we shall find the whole world sencible of
the fraud: crying it down, yea with the same hands pulling it down, that
before were lift up in adoration of it. For in the year One thousand four
hundred nintie seven, you have it demolished by authority from Rome the
Clergy and people assisting therein, and for the more solemnity this done on
S. Patrickes day. Which we find in the Irish Annals of Ulster in these words.
(...) Ex Annalibu^ ultoniensibus MSS. ad (...) Dom. 1497.
The Den of S. Patrickes Purgatory in Logh-deerg was in that year (to wit
one thousand four hundred ninety seven) broken by the Guardian of Donnegall,
and by some sent by the Bishop in the Deanrie of Loghearne by authority from
the Pope upon S. Patrickes day in the said year. The people understanding out
of the History of the Knight, and other ancient Books, that this was not the
Purgatory which Patricke had from God, although the people resorted from it.

Out of which may be more than probably conjectured, that before this Cave
there has been One more, or rather more than One of this kind demolished,
like Hydra's heads the cutting off of one being the reviving of another. Which
may yet further discover the Imposture: For if this were not that Cave which
Patricke had from God. We would know whether there were one before it that was
the true? If so; how came that to vanish into nothing? If it were taken away as
this is, the reason may be as probable that it was a counterfeite as well as
this: and all as truly of S. Patrickes erection, as any of them: And if all be
such, or at the least if we must with this uncertainetie receive them, what
cause have we with greater assurance to entertayne those vain Legends and
foolish dreams, going beyond all reason, or common sense?

Neither was the indiscretion of the Framers of those Fables (I suppose) any
small cause of this discovery. For in the history of Owen the Knight, as that
also of the Spanish Viscount, and of others said to be of the ancienter sort,
they over confidently reporting a subterrane all passage to be out of the Cave
into Purgatory; Hell, and Paradise, and that said to be so many hundreds of
years before: after-ages finding not the realitie hereof, had good cause to
suspect out of those histories and ancient Books, as they are called: The
present Cave not to be that which Saint Patricke had from God: Lombard called
it, Horribilis vorago sine abyllus. Petrus Lombard. Com. de regno Hiber.
An horrible gulf, and bottomless pit. Thyr^ describes it to be, Circulus
intra cujus ambitum hiatus ingens aspectu horribilis, per cujus occultos and
sinuosos ^tus, luctus and ejulatus and lamentabiles voces audieba^tur, sicut
traditio fidelis multique non ignobiles authors referunt. Thyr. disturs.
Pane^; de miracul. S. Patricij.
A round place, within whose secret and windings pussages were heard weeping,
waylings, and lamenrable voices: like as credible tradition, and many-not
ignoble Authors do report, (says he) of which Simon Mayolus also a Neapolitan
Bishop writing of Caves and great gapings in the earth, he ranketh this with
the chiefest; Est, and alius hiatus profundissimus sic nuncupare velimus Antrum
celebratissimum in Hiberni^, de quo meminisse libet antequam hinc abeamus. Cum
sanctus Patricius praedicaret Hibernis, nec eos per miracula, nec per
comminationem futuratum paenarum, nec per promiss^ celestium gaudiorum possit
convertere, Deus per ejus prece^locum (...) mirabili hiatu ac profunditare
inscrutabili, per quem in purgatorium descenditur. Simon Mayolus diebus suis
Canicularibus col. 15. de Anttis and (...), page ^37.
There is (says he) another most deep gaping, that famous Cave in Ireland,
which before we leave off, we will remember, when S. Patricke did preach to
the Irish, and could not convert them by miracles, neither by threatenings of
future pains: Or promises of future bliss, God by his prayers entreated,
showed him a place of a wonderful and unsearchable profunditie, through which
a passage leads into Purgatory. This I say, and such like discourses with
this great confidence delivered, howsoever they carry terror to keep back
(if possible it might be) any from being too quicke-sighted, or desirous
through curiosity to Try this vast profunditie, yet could it not but in time
^ay (...) open; when none in that age could so speak of it, as formerly, but
that it might justly be suspected, not to be the place so much spoken off, and
if it be not the same, justly deserving to be so (as it was) demolished.

And if thus it fared with that Purgatory, not to go higher, what shall we
think of this late upstart, the ruins whereof are yet fresh in our own
memory, which has occasioned this our discourse? A place carrying the name of
the same Founder, and by the cunning relators imposed on us, as if it had been
the same, which was said to be of the first Election; neither is it less
believed by the ignorant: surely if we look after the first rising of it, we
shall find it as obscure as was the original of that first Purgatory, were it
not that we have this general aim left us, that after the year One thousand
four hundred ninety seven it must have sprung up, that is about 142. years
since, men sleeping as formerly, and the place neglected, and as it is
solitarily seated, so fitter for any imposter in time convenient to appear,
when the memory of the former were somewhat worn out, which how much it has
gained we have seen; the glory of this last being little inferior, in their
relations, to the first: we have seen the concourse of the people to this,
nothing short, if not greater, supposing that to be true which we have heard
delivered of it; and notwithstanding the last dissolution thereof, it therein
laying it self open to all men most evidently, not to be that place which it
is pretended to be; yet is the desire of the people (being not yet rightly
informed of the reasons) bent unto it.

For all the Exceptions taken to the former, stand in their full strength
against this latter. If it be questioned whether or no this be the same place,
which was said to be showed to S. Patricke by God? it will be found (howsoever
others must not know so much) that it is a Qu^re so intricate, as that it
stands yet undetermined among the learnedest Writers of it, and some of them
despair ever of knowing of it. Let us here one of them, and that one of the
most diligent searchers of it. His words are these, Tertio notandum nonnullos
opinari ipsum antrum seu puteu^ sancto Patricio a Christo Domino ostensum vel
incognitum esse and in conspicabilem, vel saltem non eundem esse quem peregrini
ineunt, cu^ in specu excluduntur ad horas 24. sed vel subtus delitescere, vel
paucis deinde passitu distare. Ita ex veteri traditione retuiitnobis R. D.
Johannes Gameus Abbas de Leathra, and Johannes Furnus mac Kega^ sacerdos
septuagenarius. Alij opinati sunt ignorari paenitus locum, nec appariturum
hominibus nisi in fine saeculi, ut desepulchro Moysis veteres Haebraei, and de
Arca Testamenti ante regressum a Babylone. Sic de hoc puteo sentiendum esse.
Atque hanc opinionem Patri Eugenio Duffio ex instituto sancti Francisci vulgate
pietatis viro, me audiente tribuebat Toninus Mulchonrius rei antiquariae ex
officio deditus, and ipse dierum perantiquus. Roth. apud Thom. Mess. de
Purgatorio sancti Patricij cap. 1. number. 15. page 93.
It is thirdly to be noted, that some are of opinion that the Cave or Pit
snewed by Christ our Lord to S. Patrick, is either unknown, or not to be seen:
or at the least that it is not the same into which Pilgrims go, and wherein
they are shut up four and twenty hours, but that either it lies hid
underneath, or is distant some few paces from it. So out of ancient Tradition
has it been told me by the R. John Gamnhey (or Gaffne) Abbat of Leathra, and
John mac Kegan a Priest of seventy years of age, others think that the place
is altogether unknown. And that it shall not appear to men but in the end of
the world: That as the ancient Hebrews report of Sepulcher of Moses, and of
the Arc of the testament before the return from Babylon, so we should think
of this Pit. And this is by Tornius Mulchonry, one addicted to the study of
Antiquity, and one well stricken in years, said to be the opinion of F.
Eugenius Dusse of the Order of S. Francis. How great uncertainties? where the
place is, is not known, says one: or if it be known, yet it is not now
visible, neither shall be, to the end of the world, says another: howsoever
that now frequented is not it, says a third. How then does our Author satisfy
himself in this diversity of opinions? Hear him, Si vera sit Duffij,
Gam^ney, Contij, Kegani, and aliorum de hoc relatio, quorum tamen minus recepta
sententi^ est, de re ipsa in alterutram partem nihil nunc statuo, nec temere
putant recedendum iri graves a communiori opinione and persuasione.
Whether that relation of Duffe, Gamnhey, Conry, Kegan, and others be true,
(which yet is not that which is most received) for my part I will not now
conclude on either side. But grave men say, that we ought not rashly to leave
the common opinion and persuasion which all assent unto. That this Cave which
in the Island of Loghderrg is seen, and shut up in a low vault is the true
place, where the Pit is which we seek. You see how he will not say any thing
against the Vulgar opinion, that this is that place; so will he not conclude
against them that hold the contrary, how blindely therefore are the Ignorant
sort of people led with a certain persuasion that this, and no other, is the
very place. And for all trial by the History of the Knight, and other Ancient
Relations in that kind, it is now out of use, for (as it is confessed) there
is nothing in this Purgatory certain: and as for those subterraneall passages,
we are as far to seek for them here, as in the former demolished Purgatory:
the matter is to our hands confessed, Nostris diebus and ab omnium longissima
memoria fundus speluncae complanatus est and reliquae terrae aequatus. Sed in
prima ejus institutione profundior erat, ut traditio est, quorundam seniorum
Paulatim enim est elevatus sancientibus Episcopis, and annue^te sedeapostolica.
Et in Margin: Pavimentum Purgatorij elevatum authoriate Papae. Roth. apud
Messing. de Purgatorio sancti Patricij cap. 2. number. 28. and page 96.
That in our days, and in the farthest of man's memory, the bottom of the Cave
was levelled, and made even with the other part of the earth. Yet (says Roth)
when the place was first, made it was deeper. But how does that appear? It is
the Tradition of some of the Elders. and how comes it to be altered? It was
raised by directions of the Bishops, it may be, of the Diocese; And with the
consent of the Apostolical Sea. To which add out of the Margent. The pavement
or floor of the Purgatory was made up by authority from the Pope. Where the
cunning of these men is to be observed, who to conceal the former destruction
of the former Cave done by authority from the Pope, and by the Bishop of the
Diocese do make the Popes act to be a Command only for the levelling of the
ground, and taking away the passage into the lower Purgatory, which why he
should do, I cannot easily imagine, if the matter were of that consequence as
we have been borne in hand it was: unless he feared that the great merit of
that Pilgrimage might hinder the Mart of his Indulgences. But how miserable
these shifts be; who sees not? there is nothing here to give any certainty of
the place, or the pretenteded merits of it: and yet must this be still a secret
to the people; they must be told that this is the very place appointed by S.
Patricke, from whose time even until now it had continued: That the
frequenting of it is beyond all degrees meritorious, for which no labor,
watching, fasting or pain is to be refused, as we have showed to be used in
the latter Pilgrimages. Pity it is so great zeal should be so misguided for
the gaining a few, nay not a few pence into private purses.

Considering therefore the grossenes of this Superstition, and the blindness
by which so many poor souls were seduced, it suited well with the wisdom of
our state to look more narrowly into the matter, and to take away the occasion
of so great an error. I speak nothing, how dangerous in point of state it
might be to permit such frequent meetings in such a place. But in the former
respects, to take away the ground of so many errors at once, as it argued the
care of the Government, both of the estates and souls of the people; so in the
pulling down of all there was no new thing done, nothing but what was before
by themselves in the same case practiced, as was before showed.

I will therefore here insert an Historical Relation of the manner and
proceedings therein, by an Abstract thereof taken out of the Council book of
this Kingdom, that after-Ages may not be surprised with another Purgatory,
starting up they know not how, as formerly, and thereby men be deluded with
reports, of I know not what Antiquity. The words out of the Records are these.

The State observing the popish Superstitions used at S. Patricks Purgatory to
grow an insufferable height did by their Letters of the 21. of May 1632.
directed to the Lo. Balfoure, St. William Stuart, and others, require them to
seize it, and to make fast the doors and entrance into it, hoping that that
might take away the continuance of the abuse there.

To these Letters Sir William Stuart returns (Lucij 8. 1632. Answer to this
effect.

To the Right Honorable ADAM Lord Viscount of ELY, Lord Chancellor, and RICHARD
Earl of CORK, Lords Justices of this Kingdom, and to the Lords, and others
of his Majesty's Honourble Privic COUNCIL.
Right Honorable.
I Have received a Copy of a Letter sent by my Lord Balfoure, directed to his
Lordship my self and others, for seizing unto his Majesty's use S. Patricks
Purgatory, and his Lordship appointed me to meet him near the Lough the fifth
day of this month, whither I accordingly came, and staid in the comfortless
place almost two days and one night, none coming. And then I got
intelligence, that the Abbot, Priests and Friars, which were in the Island, had
gotten knowledge of your Lordships directions: whereupon in the night time they
stole out of the Island in a boat, which at the least would carry 40. persons.
Whereupon I sent to search for the said Boat, which was found and brought unto
me. And perceiving that none of the rest mentioned in your Lordships Letters
were likely to come, and being confident that you would take it in good part,
that I should rather upon such occasion vary from your directions, than leave
your intentions unperformed. I caused to land some men upon a little Island
where Friars do inhabit near unto the other Island which is called S.
Patrickes Purgatory, where I found four hundred seventy one persons doing such
fooleries as is not to be imagined could be done among Christians, a taste
whereof your Lordship may perceive by this enclosed description. All the fore
said number of persons, I have caused to be put safe to shore: which was done
without any kind of violence: For seeing the Priests and Friars had left the
Islland; and carried with them all manner of Provision and goods that therein
was, the people were willing and desirous to be put on shore. The which being
done, I did cause the Boat, which was the safeguarde of the Island to be
drawn on shore, and delivered the same unto the friends and servants of one
Master Magrath, unto whom the Boat, Island and Country does belong, and told
them that it was your Lordships directions, that the same should not be meddled
withal, nor the Island any more frequented until his Majesty's pleasure were
further known; And that your Lordships would signify the same more at large.
All things being thus fairly done, I hope your Lordships will not dislike that
I adventured my self alone to do that which was trusted unto me and others.
And I am well assured if I had slipped that occasion, your intentions should not
have been executed. So humbly desiring to be excused for what is done amiss,
I take leave, and will ever remain.

Your Lordships ready and humble servant. William Stuart.


September 13. 1632. An Order is made by the Lords Justices and Council, for
the demolishing of the place in these words.
By the Lords Justices and Council. Adam Loftus Canc. R. Cork.
FOr as much as the frequent and public resort of people in great numbers to
that place or Island called S. Patrickes Purgatory, there performing
superstitious ceremonies, pilgrimages, and offerings, is so extremely abusive
and superstitious, as is not fit to be endured. We therefore taking the same
into our due Consideration, and foreseeing that albeit there may be a seeming
cessation there for a time from those abuses and superstitions, in regard they
observe the State to resent the same: Yet many times the seduced people will
secretly find opportunity to resort thither, and so by stealths continue
those superstitious abuses, while the place stands as now it does. We have
therefore adjudged it the best and fittest means to prevent and wholly take
away the continuance of that abuse hereafter, that the place be defaced and
utterly demolished. And therefore We do hereby order and resolve that Letters
shall be dispached from this Board unto the Reverend Father in God the Lord
Bishop of Clogher, Sir John Dunbarre high Sheriff of the County of Fermanagh,
Edward Tarleton Esquier, high Sheriff of the County of Donnegall, Edward
Archdale, and Leonard Bleverhasset Esquier, and Archbald Areskon Clearke, or
any three or more of them, whereof the said Lord Bishop, or Sir John Dunbarre,
or Edward Tarleton to be always one. Requiring and authorizing them, or any
three or more of them as aforesaid: by or before the third day of December
next, to cause the Chapel and all the Irish houses now situate in that
Island which is called S. Patrickes Purgatory, all the buildings, pavements,
walls, works, foundations, Circles, Caves, Cells, and Vaults thereof of lime or
stone or otherwise, to be broken down, defaced and utterly demolished. And
that also called S. Patrickes Bed, as also that Rock or sto^e standing in the
water, there having a clift in it, whith (as is vainly said) S. Patricke made
kneeling at his prayers: And also that stone covered there with water which
has the print of a man's foot, and which (as the seduced people do believe) S.
Patrick made with standing thereupon; and likewise all other things there,
whereunto those superstitious people have used to go in pilgrimage: And that
they cause all the stones to be thrown into the Lough, or water wherein the
Island stands, saving only such of the stones of the said Chapel as James
mac Gragh Esquier, the Proprieter of the Land will forthwith carry clear out
of the Island, and make use of in some other place. We do also order that the
same James mac Gragh shall forthwith enter into Bond, to the Clerk of the
Council for his Majesty's use in the sum of one thousand pounds English with
condition to be are all the charges necessary, for the performing of all that
by this Order is required to be done, and to be personally present at the
seeing of it done, and not to suffer any interruption or impediment to be given
thereunto. And that such of the stones of the Chapel as the said James shall
carry out, shall not at any time hereafter during his life be again returned
to that Island. And that he shall from time to time take order, that no person
or persons be admitted at any time hereafter during his life with his
permission or knowledge, or privily to go into that Island or place called S.
Patrickes purgatory, to the end to say Mass there, or to perform any
pilgrimage, offerings, or any other superstitious Ceremonies there. And that he
shall saffer no Boat to be kept there to pass to or from the said Island.
And that during his life there shall not be any conventions there of Jesuits,
Friars, priests, Nuns, or any other superstitious Orders of the popish
pretended Clergy, that the said mac Gragh shall be able to prevent, which
Bond being so entered into; the Sargeant at Arms in whose custody the said mac
Gragh now remains is upon Certificate hereof from the Clerk of the Council
to release the said mac Gragh he paying his due fees. For which a copy of this
Order attested by the Clerk of the Council shall be his warrant. Dated the
13. of Sept. 1632.

Charles Wilmot. Roger Ranelagh. John King. Thom. Baltinglasse. William
Parsons. Thom. Rotheram.



Of the execution whereof the Lord Bishop of Clogher, chief of the
Commissioners gave this following account by his Letters dated October. 31. 1632.
directed To the most Reverend Father in God JAMES Lord Archbishop of Ardmagh,
Primate and Metropolitan of all Ireland, his Grace.

The Lord Bishop of Cloghers Letter to the Lord Primate, October. 31. 1632.
MOst Reverend and my Most honored Lord;
Your grace like enough may be desirous to know what is don touching the
demolishing of S. Patricks purgatory, required by the Lords Justices and
Council to be done by me, and some other joint Commissioners with me. May it
please your Grace then, The next day after I took my leave of your self at
Ardmagh, I sent the Copy of the Lords Justices and Councels Letter, with the
Order and Commission to every one of my fellow Commissioners, and appointed our
Randevouze at the Town next Lough-derge the 25. day of this instan^ October.

From them I received answer, that they might well come alone, but could get
none to accompany them, or any labourer or tools upon any terms: And that an
hundred men were not able to execute the Commission in a fortnight;
notwithstanding whereof, I required them again to keep the day, and assured
them howsoever that I my self would be present, and accordingly I came to the
place appointed the 24. day, with some twenty able men in my company any well
armed: and brought with us all sorts of tools fitting for the service.

If I had not come so appointed, we had returned without effecting any thing:
For the high Sheriff of Donnegall came not at the day. The high Sheriff of
Farmanagh on the other side came no better accompanied, than with one serving
man; and showed himself altogether unwilling, and refused to enter the Island.
I had many discouragements my self. For first I was forced on a rainy day, on
a bleake place without any shelter to horse or man, three hours before we
could have the Boat. The wind in the mean time did rise, and there was none
could take in hand to guide the Boat through dangerous rocks lying between
the maine and the Island. Again we were certified that we might be hardly put
to it for fault of victuals, if we took them not in with our selves: for the
wind would sometimes blow ten days together so strong, that no Boat durst
venture to go out or in; notwithstanding all which discouragements, I
adventured to go in without victuals, and stayed in the Island till the
service was done.

The first thing I searched diligently after, was the Cave, wherein I remembered
your Grace enjoined me to dig to the very foundations, and leave no corner
unsought, and so I did: I caused to dig about it on all sides, till I came to
the Rock, but found no appearance of any secret passage, either to the
Chapel or to the Lough: neither would the nature of the ground suffer it, in
a word this Cave was a poor beggarly hole, made with some stones, laid
together with men's hands without any great Art: and after covered with Earth,
such as husbandmen make to keep a few Hogs from the rain.

When I could find nothing there, I undermined the Chapel, which was well
covered with shingles, and brought all down together. Then we brake down the
Circles and Saints Beds, which were like so many Colepits, and so pulled down
some great Irish houses. Thus when I had defaced all saving one Irish house: I
came out of the Island my self, and left one half of my men behind to pull
that down also so soon as they should see me landed, not sooner; lest if by a
storm we were driven back, we might want a place to shelter us.

The country people expected that S. Patricke would have wrought some miracle,
but thanks be to God none of my Company received any other harm than the bad
ways, broken cawsies, and the dangerous going in a little Boat: Yet our
comfort is, we effected that for which we came thither, which was more than
was expected could be done in so short a time, which has wonderfully
displeased them who were bewitched with these fooleries. But that I do not
much stand upon, in regard I have obeyed the Command of the State, and
punctually also done what your Grace did enjoyne: whose directions I shall be
ever ready to follow, and shall ever remain.

Clogher October. 31. Ann. 1632. Your Graces most affectionate in all duty. James
Clogher.


Here then we see the truth of those relations of men passing through this Cave
into Purgatory, Hell, and Paradise: See how much the report of the Viscount (of
which before) deserves credit, That in the Cave the ground was so unsound and
shaking, that it seemed unable to bear a man; and that therefore he stepped
back, fearing to fall into some unexpected depth and abyss. Whereas the place
is Rockie not Boggie. If this be not the same place, why are men borne in hand
that it is? And if it be, what is become of this deep Cave? to speak nothing
of the other fancies and imaginations. But blessed be God, who has thus
brought to light these works of darkness: So that all the world may now see in
what blindness men were led all this while. And what cause there is of that
great boast of Lumbard, Et haecquid^ ratio agendae poenitentiae in hoc loco,
uti olim frequentata, ita and interca semper continuata, etiam hodie multis est
in usu. Adeo ut praefecti Angli, nec possint cos impedire, nec locum illum
violare ausint. Petrus Lomb. hib. Com. de reg. hib. (edit. Lovan. 1632.) cap.
20. page 277.
describing the manner of that pilgrimage, being from former times unto these
days continued, and now of many used; so as the English Governors neither
could hinder it, neither durst they violate the place, says he, which was
written the same year that this purgatory was demolished by the State: But we
see, they both durst do it, and did do it: And what did they do in so doing
then, what was before done by themselves and the Papal Authority?

So that if we would now send O Sullevan thither, he would be I suppose better
informed, who before would have us go thither for satisfying of our selves of
the Truth of the thing, Satis liquet eos ridiculos esse, qui malunt D. Patricij
purgatorium ridere quam causa cognoscendi very adire. Phil. O Sull. Patr.
decad. lib. 9. cap. 9. page 277.
It is apparent how ridiculous they are who do rather deride S. Patrickes
Purgatory, than seek to reform their judgments by going thither to see it.
Who also may here receive an answer for his question before propounded to us,
Ibid. page 110. cited before in the Epist. Dedicat. ad lit. c.
What the reason should be why of late days the State of this Kingdom placed
a guard for hindering a passage into this purgatory? It was not to suppress
the truth, as he vainly dreameth; but as the proceeding of the State therein
expresses it self to take away the insufferable height unto which the
superstitious thereof did rise: a superstition drawn on by so gross an
Imposture, that the like has not been seen. The justness therefore of the
action is most apparent unto all.

Thus have we enquired after the Beginning, Progress, and End of this
Purgatory, wherein it will not be altogether unworthy our observation to
consider that as Henry of Saltry, the first writer of this so strange a Fable
was therein deluded by Florenti^ his Tutor, then Bishop of Clogher, in whose
Diocese the place stood: So by means of another Bishop of the same See, was
it demolished by directions from Rome Anno 1497. as before. And now again this
last time by a third, and the now present Bishop of Clogher quite defaced Anno
1632. by Command from the State. So that at the last, we have found the End,
although we could not the beginning of this Saint Patrickes Purgatory.


