A BRIEF VINDICATION Of the Late Farewell-Sermon, Preached to the UNITED
PARISHES Of St. Mary Woolnoth, and St. Mary Wool-church-Haw IN LOMBARD STREET
By DAVID JONES, Student of Christ-Church, Oxon.
You seek to kill me, a Man that has told you the Truth, which I have heard of
God,

John 8.40. I am in Derision daily, every one Mocketh me,

Jer. 20.7. He that hates Reproof, shall Dye,

Prove. 15.10. Blessed are ye, when Men shall Revile you,

Mat. 5.11.
PErsecution, Tribulation, and Scandal, are so proper Marks on a true
Christian, that a real good Man thinks himself Happy in that his Reputation
suffers amongst his Persecutors: And yet, that is the most sensible Part that
an honest Man can receive a Wound in. However, it does not in the least grieve
the Author, that he has lately done unjust Penance in other Men's Sheets, for a
Crime never committed in his own. It Is well for them, they did not, nor could
deprive him of a Being, (though I cannot doubt their Rigor of their Intentions
and Inclinations) since he still lives an Apostle, and could willing dye a
Martyr of that Truth, which has so much offended Heaven's Adversaries and his.
He is blessed to think that he can innocently hear what they injuriously charge
upon him, and that there is yet one true Christian alive, whom Fire and Faggot,
Dragoons, nor any Evil, can deter from living accordingly. No, nor whom
Avarice, Vainglory, nor hope of Advancement, can corrupt to their own
likeness. And I doubt not, but there are many Thousands, but the Honor is now
so particular to the Author, that were he not armed by the Grace of God, he
would certainly be in great Danger of Falling under the Temptation of a
Spiritual Pride. How little did the Animadverters on his Farewell Sermon, design
him so great a Satisfaction and Advantage! yet how industriously does he labor
for their's! And is resolved still to speak and write what may be of Service to
them in a double Capacity; For they may make the best Use of it for their
Souls, or a worse against their Temporal Necessities, by emptying their Brains
in their nauseous Pamphlets, scoffing at my Doctrine.

But well, go on my Friends; you may thus chance to fix a Glory on his Head,
where you intended a Bramble, or a Pot-sheard. The wicked Attempts of the
Unrighteous, do generally deviate from their first Intentions; and the Curse
they utter and would fast^n upon another, very often seizes and destroys them:
And yet, why should it afflict you if he endeavored the Life of a Saint? Nay,
or if he should after Death, become such a Blessed Creature! Have you lost e're
a Friend by that, do you imagine! or rather, shall you not get a better, whilst
he is yet endeavoring.

It Is odd (methinks) to observe, how generally ill Nature prevails, and how
rarely the World applauds a Vice in another, which they adore in themselves,
unless it be what they call a Sociable Vice; a Whoring, Drinking, Gaiming, or
gainful Vice: with which none of our Moralists have yet had the hardiness to
charge the Author; though they were pleased to urge, that he would not own his
own Father at Oxford, because he was a Hind or Pesant; such as he was, he never
wanted their Assistance to show an honest Man; and the Author, as he often has
done, does still make it a Challenge to all Mankind, that ever he denied that
he was the Parent of him, who now forgives the Calumny.

I am not altogether unacquainted with the Characters, Practices, and
Necessities, (possibly) of those who have pretended to ridicule what I last
delivered in Lombard Street. It is an easy Matter to some People to despise
what they can never attain to, without the Blessing of God. To talk to such of
Peace, Obedience, Continence, and Self-denial, were to preach Resurrection to
the Sadduces, or Divine Justice to our Deists, who only believe, That Ludit in
Humanis Divina Potentia rebus.

Of these (to his Sorrow) he has found but too too many; when either he has
publicly or privately Instructed otherwise. And yet his Instructions did never
tend to Infallibility, what ever may have been objected to him in that Case,
unless directed by happy Writ, and the undeniable Authority of the best Church
of England-Men, and they very nicely too: Though (perhaps) an unkind and perverse
Curiosity brought many to hear and observe his Doctrine, more than the Gospel,
that the Author thanks God, he truly Preached and Admister'd, which he is said
to know little or nothing off; because (happily) to some he has made it so
obvious and open, that they cannot mistake their Way to Eternal Happiness, when
it shall please God to let them see, that he dealt it fairly to them,
notwithstanding they have nil in Contempt for his Ministry; which is his
Province, which is his Talent, which is his Fund and Hope of Salvation; and of
which no Man can spoil him, so long as he speaks according to the Word of God,
and his own Conscience; Alas! what imports a Man's Transitory Kindness! shall
God's Minister for this, hazard his Eternal Happiness? How weak you would think
that Man, who should sell his Paternal, Unengag'd Inheritance, for one Year's
purchase?

Did I tell my Lord, that he Lost more at a Horse-Race in one Day, than would
Relieve and Preserve all the Poor in his Parish for a Month? That he threw away
at Play (in one Night) more than would Feed 'em Seven: That he followed the
Chase of a Deer, or a Fox, closer than he purchased the Means of his Salvation:
And must I become his Enemy for telling him those Truths? Must I be dismissed his
Favor, and his House, for this? In the Name of God, Amen. I had rather be a
Doorkeeper in the House of God, than dwell in the Tents of Kedar. But this
comes of his Prating, perhaps you will say; Yet, why should he hold his Tongue or
Pen? when the Poet tells you, who, (give me leave to say) had not altogether so
particular a Command, if any, to remind you of your Vices, -- Difficile est
Satyram non Scribere.

If therefore he, only to gratify his own Humor, unknown to your Vices, might
have the Liberty to Rail at you; may not the Author beg the freedom to Advise
you? In good Truth, I think it is hard. But you have all the World before you,
and might have Heaven too, if you would hear with his Ears, and see with his
Eyes.

Now, for the Authors circumstances, and the Cause of his Farewell Sermon,
Truly, for the first, I must needs say, that they are not altogether yet so
miserable as to descend to the Entertainment of an unthinking Rabble, who only
hear with their Eyes. For to such, I hear, it is the Province of one of the
Calumniators to Appeal to.

Could the Author prevaricate, like him, he might hope a Preferment amongst
those Sectaries, of whom the Calumniator already esteems him a Minister, though
himself in few years of one Monarchs Reign, obliged and disobliged, canted and
recanted: But every Man to his Trade, it is as necessary to a Poet, as to a
Statesman or Mariner, to Tack as the Wind and Current shall serve him. But we
are fixed to our Center, and have no Circumference but that of Heaven, of which
only we discourse, or at least ought; to which we invite our sometimes, nay,
too often unwilling Guests. If the Author, out of his Zeal, has endeavored to
frighten any of his Friends, to that Blessed Place, to his own supposed present
Loss, by gaining their displeasure, I hope, they will Pardon the Sufferer, as
they think him: At what Rate would he not purchase Eternal Salvation to them!
yet, to what Injuries or Necessities would they not expose him. Is this the
Return of a Christian, of a Moral Man, of a Jew? No! certainly their Lex
Talionis would have allowed him better Measure, and fairer Play. But no matter,
since the great Author of all Bliss, has not taken from him the Power or Will
to assist these, or the very worst of his Enemies. I say, these, because the
Dialoguist has as much pretense to the Authors Charity on any occasion, which
Heaven defend them both from: Thus far for the Authors Circumstances.

And, now the Cause is evident, the Author is become an Enemy to many who were
counted his greatest Friends, because he Told them the Truth. And in this Cause
he is resolved to venture farther than he has hitherto done, when ever occasion
shall present: For, he will not omit his plain and friendly Exhortations, for
the advantage of a Prelacy. No, not for an Archbishopric: Therefore, if
Friendship here on Earth be only to be made by obsequious Adulation, he will
endeavor to contract a better, and a more lasting elsewhere: And, Heaven be
Praised, he is not quite Deserted; for he Preaches now to those who will hear
him with Devotion, and who will thankfully receive his friendly Admonition, and
kind Reproof of their Faults.

Here his Talent will not be lost, but will return to himself and Auditors
hereafter, an Hundredfold increase; though he is forsaken by his Friends in
Lombard Street, his God has not forsaken him. His Heavenly Father has raised up
Brethren to him, true Sons of the Church of Christ, Modest, Humble, and Lowly
of Spirit, who comes unfeignedly to hear of their Sins. A most certain Mark of
a living Saint, which distinguishes him from the Froward and Ungodly, whose
festring and putrefying Wounds of the Soul, cannot endure the Pool of good,
sound, searching Sermon. What? though it makes 'em smart a little, it is for their
good; the more likelihood there is of their being cured: He would have 'em
smart: He would touch 'em to the Quick: It may prevent an Eternal Mortification
of their Souls: But he could wish a Mortification of their Sins were already
began: He would not plaster up their Sores, before he had thoroughly cleans'd
'em: Nor besmear or daub 'em over with the Oil of smooth Words: No; He must
apply Corrosives to eat up the Proud Flesh, and Rancarous Venom that lurks at
the very Bottom.

I think, it is enough to convince any reasonable Man of the Necessity that
obliges every faithful Minister and Dissenter of God's Word; to tell his
Congregation of their secret and most beloved Sins; and to denounce Heaven's
Vengeance on the impenitent, hardened, and persevering Sinner: That, on the
contrary, it is not their Business to sooth and flatter Men into Eternal
Damnation. But to speak the Truth fearless, and to to strip every Man's darling
Sin stark naked, and lash it before his Face: And this the Author, I thank God,
has not omitted upon any Consideration whatsoever: And this, this alone has
gained him so many Enemies; whom that the Lord will pardon, and turn their
Hearts, is the daily Prayer of

The AUTHOR.

London, Printed for T. P. and B. A. and Published by I. Weekly, 1692.


