THE CRY OF BLOOD: OR, A Confutation of those Thirteen Reasons of the
Felicers at Westminster, for the maintenance of their illegal Capias for Debt.

By which is discovered the great benefit and freedom that will accrue to the
people of the Common wealth by the reformation of that destructive Law.

Luke 11.46. Woe unto you Lawyars, for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be
borne, etc.

By Joht Jones of Neyath in Com Brecon. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Matthewes, at the Cock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1653.

To his Excellence OLIVER CROMWELL, Lord General of the puissant Army of the
PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.
Renowned Sir!
AS your Command is general, so are your cares, troubles, sufferings, actions
and endeavors all general, for the general good of this Nation in general: Nor
is the case and number of the Prisoners for Debt in England and Wales, for whom
you have been, and are a sollicitous, although yet improsperous mediator to the
House of Parliament so small a particular, but that as the prudent King Philip of
Macedon, who accounted his body but small to the rest of his endowments, and
knew it to be mortal, desired to be daily remembered he was mortal, to the end
he should not more glory in what he had well done, than persevere in
well-doing, and finishing his wel-begun enterprises; that so he might
immortalise his fame, and illustrate the faculties of his immortal virtues,
that posterity might speak of him, not like Pythagorists of their master, ipse
dixit, but ipse fecit; nay more, ipse perfecit. I hope likewise your Excellence
will not be offended with me one of the heartiest, though of the meanest of
your Honors wel-wishers, to mind you of the neglected miseries of the said
prisoners now, more then ever, likelier to be continued and increased then
relieved, or abated by the generation of Lawyers overswaying the mildeness of
those Parliament Members that have long promised you to be merciful to such
Prisoners, and to hasten their enlargement out of their wrongful imprisonments;
which, if you see performed, as hereafter is desired, will be an action of no
less Divinity then Charity, and no less profit then Honor to your self in
particular, and the Commonwealth in general. The Officers in Law have lately
presented the Parliament with 13. Reasons or the maintenance of Arrests and
Imprisonment for Debt, contrary to Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, as
I have eftsoons proved elsewhere, and repugnant even to Reason it self, as I
have here following farther declared in answer to their said Reasons in the
Prisoner's behalf; in which, and whose names I likewise humbly dedicate the
same to your Honor, with a copy of the said Reasons hereunto first annexed as
it came to my hands, and next an answer to their preamble: and afterward
particular answers to their particular Ratiocinations: and lastly, the
Prisoner's humble Petition to your Honor; all which I could not have ready
before Colonel Pride's departure (whom God prosper in your Service, and the
Commonwealth's, whose welfare he prefers above all worldly ends) but have
now presumed to send them unto you; beseeching your Honor that your Lieutenant
General, Colonel Fleetwood, (a man of no less worth then eminence) or some
other like publik spirit may act in this matter, and others of the like nature
in your Honor's absence according to your directions, and the people's
necessity from time to time, that no opportunity be lost, and more lives of
Prisoners be saved, and your care thereof to the uttermost expessed.

The Lord President of the Council of State, and Col. Martin are conceived to
be no less willing then able to procure such a Commission as the Petitioners
desire, and Law would afford, if your Honor would be pleased to write to them,
which I humbly submit to your Honor's consideration.

So wishes your daily Orator, John Jones.

REASONS for the continuance of the process of Arrests, for the good of the
Commonwealth.
THe proceedings by way of Arrest at the King's Suit; and in all actions that
were Quare vi and Armis, between the subjects, are as ancient as the Common Law
of this Land; but the process for the people in other Actions, was Summons,
Attachment, and distress, which Course, as to recover Debts, did prove
delatorie, and many times fruitless, to the great hinderance of Merchandise,
and other Commerce in this Nation; and therefore former Parliaments did provide
as appears by diverse Statutes) the writ of Capias to an Arrest as a full
remedy, and most necessary for this Commonwealth. 3 Rep. 12. Sir Will
Herbert's Case. 52 Hen. 3. in Accomp. 1267.25 Edw. 3. c. 17. An. Dom. 1350.

1. Because attaching the person does secure the Petitioner's debt, either by
present payment, or causing other satisfaction, which the proceedings by
summons do not; and as a man will give all for his life, so he will do much
for his liberty.

2. When men are detained upon the Arrest (which is but seldom, for few are
arrested in comparison, and then) it is ordinarily but for a short time, until
they have given security to answer the Action, or some warrant to appear.

3. If men may not proceed by Arrest, it will much hinder Trade, and other
dealings; for men will not adventure to trust, where there is much liberty for
the debtor to stand out; and Merchants, and Trades men many times look upon
the Person as the best security, and the remedy by Arrest, the speediest to
gain their debts; without which Trade will necessarily decaie.

4. The process to Arrest, does end most suits before the Person be attached,
and before appearance, as experience does show; for when men will not regard a
summons, they will take course before they will suffer an Arrest, 52 Hen. 3.
cap. 23.

5. Men will take occasion from the summons (as formerlie they have done) to be
gone from one Country to another, and to make away their estates, and though
the Plaintiff know it, yet he cannot help himself, which the Arrest does
prevent: And the Lawmakers of this Land have ever held it more reasonable to
provide for the satisfaction of the Creditor, then the liberty of the Debtor.

6. England is an Island compassed with many Port Towns, where there are many
Merchants, and men that go abroad, and trade by Sea, who buie wares upon
Credit; there will be continual occasion of suits against diverse persons of
this sort, who will not much regard the summons, but will betake themselves,
and their estates, to Sea again, and the Creditor can have no remedy; whereas
if the parties may be Attached, they will make satisfaction.

7. Whereas diverse tradesmen subsist upon their Credits, and take up great
sums of Money, for which they can give no other security then their persons,
and by advantage thereof, many times attein to great estates; but if the
process of arrest be taken away, they can hope no more to be entrusted,
which apparentlie tend's to their ruin.

8. And that proceedings by Arrest may not seem at all cruel, or unjust; woe
find both presidents, and approbation of the like, and greater severitie in the
Old and New Testament; as selling the Debtor, his wife and children, and all
that he had to make payment, and of taking, and casting into prison for debt,
until the utmost farthing were paid: And yet this course was not condemned
amongst the Romans, (so much they loved Justice) nor by Christ himself in the
New Testament, who bid's agree with thy adversary before thou com to the Judge:
And God, who will have that which is right to be don among men, was very
careful that his own people should pay their debts; and therefore if any were
indebted, though they were poor, and could not pay, yet the Creditor might
take the Debtor, and his Children to be his servants and bondmen; and might
take their Garments from them, and the bedding whereon they did lie, from under
them, which was a far greater punishment then our light Arrests; for the
Prison, with us, is but a gage, or pledge, until the defendant take course to
answer the Action. Mat. 5.25. Mat. 18.30. 2 Kings 4.7. Levit. 25.39. Prove.
20.16. Prove. 22.27.

9. Men ordinarily begin Suits upon necessity, and Debtors generally are
called upon before any suit is commenced: which indeed is in the nature of a
summons; but yet neither this, nor the writ of summons does drive men to take
any course, until the process of Arrest issue forth, being more compulsorie,
and a more speedy remedy for the Creditor, then the mild, and gentle summons
was found to be, (as appears by sundry Statutes, 19 Hen. 7. cap. 9.) which
are more provisional for the Creditor, who is always out of his money, then
for the Debtor, who seldom well spent it, or has care to repaie it.

10. And if by any new way, upon mere summons only, and default, Judgment
shall be had before appearance, (which course the Law does not countenance)
then the grand pillar of our Common Law, the Trial by 12. Men (which the Law
does much honor and favor) will fall to the ground; for much business will rest
wholly upon the Affidavid of a summoner, or the like, which will be a means
to multiply suits, and is an unsure course, and will induce more perjurie into
this Nation, then our Law would ever before this time give an inlett unto: And
therefore former Parlaments providing against delays by summons, did not give
Judgment upon default, but found out a speedy remedy by Arrest to bring the
Defendant to his answer.

11. By the Law a Capias ad satisfaciendum, does not lie, but where there is a
Capias ad satisfaciendum first: and there is as great reason and equity for
the Arrest to answer before Judgment, as for the Arrest to satisfy after
Judgment, because the Capias ad respondend. does compel the defendant to take
notice of the action, to which he may plead, if he will, and does secure him
him that he shall not start, so that when the Capias ad satisfaciendum does
issue forth, there is left no color of just exception for the defendant: but on
the other side, if Judgment shall be entered upon a supposed summons, there
will be many grievous complaints, and the succeeding evils will hardly be
redressed; many will be undon, and suits will be multiplied.

12. Experience does show that the benefit of the process of Arrest has been
very great to this Common wealth: and all the Statutes have mentioned it from
time to time, and have given a larger extent unto it, then before it had, and
none have abridged it in any thing, which is now of great antiquity, having
been for many Ages the best remedy (for the People to recover their Debts,
and to compose other differences) that our Ancestors could devise. Anno Dom.
1267, 1350.

13. Lastly, The subtlety and subterfuges of Debtors having made the process
of Arrest now more necessary then formerlie, there will be reason rather to
add to the remedies provided for the Creditors in former Parlaments, then to
diminish them: And if a^nie inconveniencie by this so necessary a course happen
to the Debtor, yet will the taking it await prove more prejudicial to the
Plaintiff, who is the party injured, and in reason his case to be preferred,
and favored.

THE CRY of BLOOD.
THE first part of this Preamble is far from the matter: We confess, Arrests
by Capias, without Summons, for Treasons, Murders, Felonies, and Trespasses,
don Vi and Armis, or Contrapacem, or Formam Statuti, as Extortions, and all
Frauds, and Injustice, don under color of Office and Justice, to be lawful,
and as ancient as the Common Law of this Land; and more ancient too, because
such offenses were committed before the Laws were written, or made in those
cases, or thought upon, upon, to punish the past, and prevent the future. By
the Law, we know the sin that was before it; and by the due course of Law, the
course of sin ought to be stayed or corrected. But what is this to a debtor,
which grows neither vi and Armis, nor contra Pacem, nor contra Formam
Statuti? for recoverie whereof, against able debtors, the Statute of
Westminster 2. cap. 18. And the Common Law before that, provided remedies, the
process, or proceedings whereof were by summons, attachment and distress, (as
our adversaries confess) which course, if Antiquity can meliorate, is far
antienter then the Capias for debt, which they make no elder then the repealed
Statute that gave it, 25 Ed. 3.17. which the same King annulled the 3. and 17.
years next after, viz. 28. and 42. of his Reign. The delatoriness alleged in
the course of Summons, is a deceitful information, and an untrue report made to
the High Court of Parliament; which were it to an inferior Judicature, deserves
no less punishment, then the Informers, to be imprisoned a year, silenced for
ever, and fined, and ransomed at the State's pleasure, Westminster. 1. cap. 29.3 Ed.
1. For the truth is, there can be no speedier way devised, considering
Actions of Debt by Common Law, and many Statutes, ought to be laid in the
proper County wherein the Defendant dwells, and has, or has not wherewith
to pay; where the Sheriff having his Justices, which is the only proper writ
for debt, is a Commission to hold plea above forty shillings, and is to
summon, attach, and distrein, and do execution according to the verdict of the
Jurie, if in an Hundred Court, in three weeks, allowing fifteen days, as Law
requires, between Process and Process; which three weeks between Court and
Court, may fully afford, and that is no long delaie, in comparison of what is
usual at Westminster: or if in the County Court, three months, or twelv weeks
does the same. But if the Action be laid in, or removed to the Common Pleas at
Westminster, (which ought not to be don, or suffered, without injustice, or
partiality, proved, not alleged in the Sheriff) they cannot determine the
Action under three Terms, which is not the fault of the course of Summons, which
requires but fifteen days between Process and Process; but the fault (more
then delatorie) of the course at Westminster, which requires long Vacations
between Term and Term, and removes more Causes thither in one Term, or
Vacation, then they can end in seven.

And where they say, Summons are many times fruitless; that is never, except
the Debtor has nothing to be summoned by, and so ought not by any Christian
Law, to be looked after, but with eyes of charity. And why Merchandise and
Commerce in this Nation should be hindered for want of a Capias, to arrest and
imprison non-solvents to death, cannot be truly demonstrated by any Christian
reason, since all men know, that all other Nations as well Heathens, as
Christians, who never admitted so impious a remedy to recover debts, as the
Capias, find no hinderance of Trade or Commerce amongst them, but only the
Trade of Lawyers and Liers, whereof the fewer make the better Commonwealth.

That former Parlaments provided the Capias for debts, as a full and most
necessary remedy for this Commonwealth; and that diverse Statutes affirm so
much, appears to be these men's additions to their former mis-informations,
and endeavors, to abuse this Honorable Parliament: For it was but one Statute
that ever provided this Capias, and that is long since repealed as aforesaid,
and so continues by more then thirty three Parlaments and Statutes. Neither
does that Statute show any cause for its provision, making, being, or
necessity of its continuance, or has any Preamble at all (as all necessary
Introductions of Law usually have) but pinneth it self to the Statute made for
Accomptants, viz. Lords, Bailiffs, Rentgatherers, and servants, that cheated
their Masters of their rents, and moneys committed to their trust, to collect
and account for, contrary to all Laws, Justice, Equity, Mercy, and common
honesty; all which they falsified, and converted their Master's moneys to
their own use; which to answer unto by due course of Law, they commonly durst
not abide, for shame, more then for the debt, and therefore became Fugitives
from their acquainance: so that the Capias was necessary to stay, and fetch
them to account with their Masters. But this pinning, or relating this Statute
to that, seems to be (as Master Cook writes thereof) the work of some
corrupt Lawyers, Members of that Parliament, that passed it unexamined, except
by a Committee, which they overruled; and that is in a few words, so huddled
up amongst other things, as they might be as soon forgotten by the hearers, as
read by the Impostors: which practice they have used for the unspeakable
advantage in all Parlaments that trusted them; God bless this from the like,
and grant it be not too late wished. Howsoever, that venerable Judge, and
Author of the Mirror of Justice, page 283. ca. 5. sect. 7. condemns this
Capias, and declares it to be contrary to Law; and shows reasons
therefore, both there, and p. 108. where the Action for account is debated, and
declared to be mixed, in regard of the trust and deceit of the Accomptant,
deserving therefore to be prosecuted so far, as to be forced to an account:
but for the debt, more then he has wherewith to satisfy, the Law requires
nothing of him that has nothing; and gives no recoverie, nor other remedy
then revenge, which God calls his own. And both this Author, and the Lord
Coke, in the Third part of his Institutes, agree, that the acting and
mainteining of things contrary to Law, as Law, or lawful, is a subversion of
the Law, and that is no less then High Treason against this State and
Commonwealth; which case is our adversaries, whom we hereby impeach thereof,
and crave direction and assistance, to indict and prosecute them according to
the known Laws in that behalf; So far as they may not lose the honor of their
Antiquity, which they press so much for; and we confess, that for the
mysteries of its craft, it has exceeded the Sciences of all their Progenitors
in their several faculties; for in the art of mencatching, there are of them
many one, who exceed,

1. Three Bum-Bailies, who by virtue of their Capias, can commonly catch but
one by the poll at once, nor that without vi and Armis, and loss, or hazard of
lives, by the fury of their passions, while our Chamber-Officer can make
threescore Capises to catch five times threescore persons without any danger of
his own, except by the wrath of God, which few of them ever feared, but are all
emboldned by his patience, to attempt the catching of a whole Parliament of most
wise Senators at once, to become subject in themselves, or their posterities, to
this Purs-net, persuading them to father, and maintein this Bastard Capias,
which knows no difference between a Parlamentman, and another, or between his
friend and his foe.

2. In the Art of Ambition, they exceed their Father the Devil, who did but
attempt to be Lord of Hosts, whilst these men become Hosts of Lords, and still
covet to enlarge their Dominions.

3. In the Art of Murdering, they exceed their brother Cain, who killed but
one Abel in all his life time, and for that one offense, had the curs of God
upon him and his seed for ever; while these men daily murder many of their
brethren with falls Judgments, and solace themselves with Angels, desile their
hands, and fill them with blood, yet would be heard in Parliament, when God
tells them he will not hear them, Isa. 1.15. and bid's them fill up the
measure of their Fathers, that upon them may com all the righteous blood of the
Earth, from the blood of Abel, etc. Mat. 23.32.35. and Luke 11.50, 51.
concluding v. 52. Woe unto you Lawyers, for you have taken away the key of
knowledge; you entered not in your selves, and them that were entering in, you
hindered: Which Scripture, we conceiv, may be fitly applied to our English
Lawyers, who have taken away the English of our Laws, which was the key of our
knowledge therein; And entered not into the truth thereof themselves; and them
that would, they hindered, until this happy Parliament righted us in that, sore
against their wills, and will as we hope, and they fear, further right and free
us from their bondage, finding that now they have filled the measure of their
Fathers, that upon them may com, and from them may be required all the
righteous blood of prisoners for debt, from the blood of the first Freeman of
England, imprisoned for that cause, to the blood of the last that shall perish
in prison for the same.

4. In the Art of Treason, they exceed Judas, who with one kiss, betrayed but
one Master, to a death fore-ordeined by God's Providence, for the life of the
world, except his desperate betraier, and other unbeliever's children of
perdition; while these men by their daily prevarication, and changing their
notes, since they have deserted the Canonical Organs, and Psalmistical
Harmonies, to the tune of the Organical Canons, shrill Trumpets, and rattling
Drums, siding with the strongest Faction in Wars, as with the richest party
in Peace, till they have betrayed three Commonwealths to manifold deaths,
avoidable by the mercy of God, and Prayers of men, except these impenitents
that harden themselves in their wickedness, do stir up others to second them of
seditious and implacable spirits, sons of Belial.

5. In the art of Impostors, they exceed the Pope, and Mahomet, who by their
impostures endeavored but to counterfeit Christ's Miracles, and make those
counterfeits sailable at high rates, thereby to disestimate his truth, and
prefer their own inventions, and to eclips his kingdom of grace, that they
might ostentate themselves in too of Vain glory; whilst these men having
disguised our Laws in Foreign languages, made them vendible to our selves at
their own prices, and thereby have subjected the seven liberal Sciences, and
three free Kingdom's of several free Nations, to their unlimitable impudence,
which being overruled for the language they intend to maintain, and augment in
price and jurisdiction, and settle themselves in one tyrannical Monarchy, as
arbitrarie, as intolerable, and as slavish, as mercinarie. And contrary to
Magna Charta, and were ever since the Court called the Upper Bench, has
imposed its judicature in matters of Debt, and other Common Pleas, expreslie
forbidden them, and taken out of their jurisdiction; and both it, and the
Common Pleas, impose their Judicature in cases of Tithes, expreslie taken out
of their jurisdiction by several Statutes, and given to the spiritual Courts,
which (though now suppressed) their jurisdiction ought not to be resumed but
by the Parliament, nor executed without an Act for that end.

6. In the Art of Perjurie; they infinitely exceed Peter, who forswore himself
but once, and when he heard the Cock crow, went out from the Maid that urged
him, wept bitterly, repented him of his sin, and resolved to do so no more:
whilst these men forswear themselves daily; and when they hear their Pockets
ring, go in to their Wenches, with whom they interchange deceitful embraces,
and seem to laugh merrily, persevere in their wickedness, and implore a
Parliament to countenance, and continue them in condition to do so still.

7, 8, and 9. In the several Arts of Extortion. Bribing, and Prevarication,
they exceed the notorious Judges, De'Burgo Tresilian, Bremble, Thorpe, etc. as
well in their takings, as in their numbers; for as those were few to their
many, and Thorp's taking was but 100 l. from many hands; how many hundred
pounds takes one of them from one hand? we can witness too well, and others
may compute by the increas of the price of an habeas Corpus, Error, etc. And
the necessity of diverse parties to make frequent uses those instruments, more
to avoid Justice. them to desire it: whereby the prevarication, Ambodextership,
and Legerdemain of these men daily appears more and more by their impairing
of their Clients to improve themselves; many men of many thousands being
brought suddenly to nothing, and most of them from nothing to many thousands
per annum.

10. In the Art of Communtation they exceed both Canonists, and Civilians, who
commuted corporal penances to pecuniarie, paiable out of personal estates,
while these men change Treasons to trespasses, and Trespasses to treasons at
their pleasure, and make debt guilty of death, surer, though sometimes slower
then Treason, or Misdemeanor whatsoever, and men's estates as well real, as
personal wholly their own.

11. In the Art of Transformation they exceed Chamelions, who can be of any
color but white, expressed in Scripture to be the immaculate investiture of
Angels: These men can seem of all colors to suit with all predominations,
though never so diverse, and all contraries, and turn the Law for all their
turns, and arrogate most trust when they are most treacherous, and face
themselves with the truth of Saints, when they are as falls as Devils.

12. In the Art of Counterfeiting, they exceed both Alchimists, and Coyners, of
whom the first counterfeit, but Gold, and Silver, and turn more Gold to brass,
and Silver to lead, then Copper to Gold, or Lead to Silver: And the second
Counterfeit, but Pictures, whilst these men counterfeit Justice, Equity, and
Laws, more concernable then Metals, to God and Man; and fix men's substances,
more considerable then their pictures, upon themselves, and their heirs.

13, and 14. In the Arts of Forgerie, and Fraud, they exceed all Coiners of
falls Moneys, and Counterfeiters of Letters, and Tokens; whom, if they catch
with such misdeameanors, they sometimes severelie punish, and sometimes pass over
slightly, or excuse artificially, as may most conduce to their profit, or
concur with their practice, whilst they themselves make it a chief part of their
office to forge the returns of Sheriffs and Coroners of several Writs, and to
file them for true Records, and due proceedings of Law; whereupon follow
Judgments, Executions, and Imprisonments to many thousands, to their utter
undoing and for want of summons, Attachments, and exigents duly executed, and
returned by those Officers who never see them, yet are answerable by Law for
those falls Returns made unknown to them, and the Forgers thereof, as of all
other faudulent deeds which cannot be drawn, engrossed, antedated, and
contrived advisedlie without them, or some of their Counsels, ought to be
punished for the same, for which they are never questioned; but contracting the
greatest Forgeries, wherein they are actors, pass for good deeds and online
those trifles that want their skill, and privitie, are made great, or dear
offenses.

15. In the Art of Lying they exceed the men of Creet, and Chozeba, who (as is
written, 1 Chronicles. 4.22.) were also Ancient, as these men would be accounted;
for those but as Men and Heathens, lied but to men in humane things, whilst
these men, as Devils, lie unto God, and in contempt of his Divine Word, and
Deity, as shall appear hereafter.

16. In the art of Simonie, they exceed Simon himself, who would have bought,
for his money, the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and intending the Apostles favor,
purchased their indignation: whilst these men have, with their Monie's,
purchased their Offices, and all the said gifts of the Devil, to execute them,
and by the same endeavor to acquire the favor of many other corrupt members,
who (as we hope) shall not be suffered long to abuse the rest of this happy
Parliament.

17. and 18. In the arts of Rapacitie, and Tenacitie, the^ Catchpols and
Gaolers exceed Lions, and Tigers, and their Gaols and Dungeons Heayen, and
Hell, for Lions will favor their friends, and Tigers their neighbors. And
Heaven wll neither take, nor receiv, any but God's Elect; nor Hell any but
Reprobates; but Catchpols, Goalers, and their Gaols catch, and receiv all men
they can sue, and count all too few, and keep them in their paws, and caves,
while they are worth a farething.

And thus having suppedinated their Proem with eighteen descriptions of their
properties that appropriate to themselves all our proprieties, and so
supernumerated their 13 falls Reasons for the supportation of their innumerable
falsities, we shall descend to fist those Reasons as follows.

1. The first is all falls; for the attaching of persons secureth no part of the
Plaintiffs debts by payment, or other satisfaction, but commonly their debtors
bodies to miserable deaths, and their estates from their heirs and creditors,
to Lawyers and Officers: For the proceedings by Summons, we have answered
before. And for Prisoners that are able to give for their liberty or their
Gaolers, they have as much as they desire and pay for out of their creditors
rights; and their own Fry, and not the Plaintiffs, or their heirs, have their
Gaoler's leavings.

2. The second is like the first; for it is not a few, that are detained for
debt, when Sir Jo. Len^hal has in his custody or list one thousand persons;
the Warden of the Fleet as many, the Gaols of London, Westminister, and
Liberties adjoining, few less; and in the rest of all the Gaols of England and
Wales, will be found many more. They that account so many few, declare their
desire is to have all the Freemen of England and Wales (except themselves) in
the same case; why? and with whom else do they make the comparison, but because
they conveiv there are more persons out of prison, then in; their detention is
not seldom, but frequent, and so are murders, and hurts, committed as well
before, and at, as after arrests; by reason thereof, they are not detained for
a short time, but ordinarily till death as aforesaid: Warrant of Atturnie, if
they need any Atturnies, they ought to give to whom they pleas, and not to whom
any Court appoints. And for appearance, no Freeman owes it to any Court out
of his Decenarie, Hundred, or County.

3. The third is but a blockhead-ship's Proem, as untrue as the former, and so
demonstrated in our answer thereunto before. No Trade but Lawyers, nor such,
but Westmonasterians, will be hindered by taking away the Capias. It was the
lawless use thereof, that caused more Usurers then Merchants, to look after
men's persons: It never was, nor could be the speediest way for Plaintiffs to
gain their debts, but the most delatorie to recover, and the most ready and
usual to lose them; so as the repetition of the decaie of Trade, if the Capias
were taken off, is but tautologie for want of reason, and an abuse of
Parliament, to be offered such untruths, to hear, or look upon, punishable as
aforesaid.

4. The fourth is as bad as all the former; for the attaching of a man's
person, where he has neither means to pay, nor friends to bail, produces no
end but Imprisonment, Summons, and Attachments of men's goods, where they have
to pay, conduce to the speediest end between Debtor and Creditor: He that
has of his own to pay, will regard Summons, lest if that he be attached,
he shall lose all, and if submitted to his Creditor's mercy, he may save
some. He that has enough, or more then sufficient to pay his Creditors, of
his own estate, will neither regard Summons, nor fear Arrest, but desire it,
being sure of what liberty he pleases, paying his Jailer, and to leav what
his Jailer leaves, to whom he list, as aforesaid; whereby more Creditors are
cheated, then by any other deceit, and more undon, then debtors of that kind,
who commonly live too plentifully, and leav something, when their Creditors have
nothing whereby to live, or whereof to leav.

5. The fifth is as untrue as the rest; for a debtor that is worth the
Summoning, can live no where better then in his Decenarie where he is best
known, and has his pledges answerable for his honesty; nor can he transfer
his estate to any other County but to his loss: And his avoiding the due course
of Law, is a misdemeanor that depriveth him of the benefit depriveth him of the
benefit thereof; which being certified by a Testatum, a Capias of course
ensues, to pursue him from County to County, till he be found, or
outlawed; which was ever lawful against such as waved their Law and freedom, to
anser it in its due course; and such a Certificate of the Sheriff of that
County whence he fled, ought to make to the Chancerie, whence he had his
Justices to determine the matter; and the Chancerie ought to send the Capias to
the Sheriff in whose County he does latitare, and discurrere; and so the
alias Plures, Exigent, and Outlawrie, till he be forced to return himself to
the first Sheriffs, to have his cause determined there by his Peers, as it
ought: all which, affording fifteen days between Process and Process, is
feasible in half a year; and what he shall be then found to have left of his
personal estate, his creditors must have all, and two parts of his real; with
less then a tenth part of the fees and delays used at Westminster: which old
course of Law being restored, and so known, will make every able debtor submit
to Summons, and farther Process, especially Outlawries, more terrible and
odious then now, when they are but scare-crows, reversable and extinguishable
by their grantors, for their gain at their pleasures: For the debtor that is
not worth the summoning, up on the Sheriffs return of Non est inventus, and
nihil habet, the Law is ended (as aforesaid) until God enable him. And in the
interim, wheresoever he lurketh, or lives, by lawful endeavors, Cantabil
vacuus coram latrone viator, no debtor justly indebted, can, or ought to be
suffered by any just law, or equity to make away his estate, before he pay
his just debts, for it is not his own, but his creditor's; and such Conveiances
ought to be adjudged fraudulent, although the fraudulent makers of that
fraudulent Statute, have inserted the words honlifide, for themselves, and
their imps, who never had good faith or honesty to expound for their profit,
as aforesaid; for good faith can do no man wrong, but falls Lawyer's
interpretations thereof, and of the Law, commonly wrong all men, and enrich
only themselves. The Lord coke in the Third part of his Institutes, upon the
Writ de odio and atia, declares these men to be lier that charge the Law, or
its makers, with more regard of men's debets, then their liberties.

6. The fixth is of the same stuff, and in substance answered before. Do more
Merchants trade out of England by sea, because it is an Island, then into it out
of larger and Foreign lands, where the Capias for debt was never known? Do not
these men buy wares upon trust, and trade to sea as often as the English? and
having no Capias, have their creditors no Laws to recover their debts? is it
not better to attach their debtor's goods, or their, then their bodies? And so
has London used to do by Custom, and other Towns and Ports ought to have don
so as well; and the Law of the Admiraltie has its course of Justice within its
jurisdiction. Will common Lawyers have no Law but their bastard the Capias, to
range about by Sea and Land, like its its Grandfather the Devil, seeking whom
it may devour? Nay, are not the words of the Writ of Summons, at the Common
Law, directed to the Sheriff, which any Major, or chief Magistrate of any
Corporation, may upon complaint direct to Sheriff or Sergeant; praecipe, etc.
per bonos summonitores; that is, I command thee to summon A B, etc. by good
Summonitors, etc. and have their names, etc, and this Writ before me by such a
day: And to what end? but that the Summonitors being two, or more of the
ablest Freemen, or Pledges of the Jurisdiction, undertaking the Summons,
undertake the goods till the Attachment ensue, if they cannot end the matter
before, as neighbors bound in charity so to do. But these Westmonasterians
abhor that, and seem neither to know, nor willing to admit any charitable end,
or other Law, but their Capias to catch and bring all fish to their net.

7. The seventh is but a chip of the sixth, and answered before, with this
addition. Is there no trust, but where the Capias is, or can thrust it self? If
it be the cause of trust, Justice, Equity, etc. and such a cause, as without
which none of these can subsist (as they say it is) and both legal and
necessary for this Commonwealth, that it seems the only Trustee thereof?
Why is it not warranted, or suffered by these men themselves to peep into their
Inns of Court, and Chancerie? places pretended to be egress and ingress of
Law, Justice and Equity, and known to take upon trust more then all the
Merchants of England can tell how to recover by the Capias against their
persons, who make their Inns, and their Gaols of the upper Bench, and Fleet
their Sanctuaries, more privileged then those that were so called and used by
such debtors as made fraudulent gifts, feoffments, etc. and afterward withdrew
themselves thither, until the second Statute made the second year of Richard
the second, granted a Capias to ferret out such Latitants out of such Latebras;
Such a ferret conceiv we now, to be necessary for the Commonwealth, and
especially for many undon Londoners, by trusting such debtors, or rather
cheaters, to fetch them out of their profane Asylums, the Fleet, Marshalsey,
their Inns, etc. instead of that by them commended for the use of the
Commonwealth, and yet commanded not to meddle with themselves, or their
habitations; as if they concluded themselves and theirs, to be no part thereof,
though will known to be all forfeited thereunto. But how irrational they show
themselves, when they offer reasons to a most wise and circumspect Parliament, to
persuade them that can only be profitable to all, which is so unwelcom to
them, that they cannot endure their own beagles that carry it abroad, to be
their Inmates an hour longer then while they slave and pump them, and so make
them as fit to be their Mass-Priests, as their prolling Proctors.

8. The eighth shows these men's desires, as well to pervert the Word of God,
as to subvert the Laws of England, and declares their right as well to the
Faggot, as to the Halter, and their fitness as well for Hell, as the Gallows.
They blush not to say, that they find presidents and approbations in the Old
and New Testaments, of like proceedings, and greater cruelties against debtors,
amongst the Jews, then is used by them and their Capias here: And those (say
they) were condemned, neither by the Romans, that loved Justice, nor by
Christ. The first Scripture they cite, is Matthew. 5.25. where whosoever is
angry with his brother without a cause, is advised to leav his gift before the
Altar, and be reconciled to his brother first, and then offer his gift, lest
at any time the Adversary deliver him to the Judge, and the Judge deliver him
to the Officer, and he be cast into prison; where Christ says unto him,
Verily, I say unto thee, thou shall by no means com out, until thou paiest the
utter most farthing: wherewith agrees Lu. 12.58.59. and both with the Parable
of the non-solvent servant, Mat. 18.25. and all these places conclude with the
rest of the Scriptures, that the debt here meant to be punished by
imprisonment, was not a debt of money borrowed for need, and lent for love,
prophesied to be don. Deuteronomy. 15.6. and commanded Matthew. 5. and 42. And
therefore being no action of sin by the Old and New Testament, was liable to
no action of Law, tending to personal punishment or imprisonment; but the debt
meant here, was indeed the duty of the Usurer, Extorter, Deceiver, Hypocrite,
etc. to forgive their debtors their debts so accrued: But Usurie, Extortion,
Briberie, etc. which were such heinous offenses amongst the Jews, as still they
are, or ought to be with us, that they incurred mixed actions in Law worthy of
arrests and imprisonments, till the uttermost farthing were paid, or restored,
with amends; Levit. 6.2, 3, and 4, expounds this debt to be such clearly,
and no other. Our penal Laws for those offenses, which make the principal debts
void, and give the Plaintiff treble for damages, or according to the Judge's
discretion, carry shadow of that Justice. The Context in Matthew. 5. declaring
our Savior's speeches to the Scribes and Pharisees, elsewhere called Lawyers,
Extorters, Dissemblers, etc. and here redargued of their unrighteousness, and
breaking of the Commandments, which they adjudged death to others; accompting
killing only such as was don with the sword, and him to be subject to the
judgment, where they knew; that by their own law, men that killed in their own
defense, had sanctuary, and that the word Judgment emphatically proceeded with
the word The, is always used for the general Judgment of God: wherefore Christ
telling them, that killing extend's to him that is angry with his brother
without cause, and elsewhere to him that suffers his brother to perish when he
may save him; much more then to Falls Judges, Extorters, Usurers, etc. who may
find themselves sufficiently described in him to whom his Lord forgave all
his debt; (which in the last verse of this Chapter (as frequentlie elsewhere) is
called as well trespass, as debt, because mixed, and compounded with sin, more
then borrowing, or lending of money) until he extorted from his
fellow servants, who ought nothing to him, but to his Lord, upon whom he had not
like compassion, as his Lord had upon himself, but grew angry with his
fellow servants without cause, and cast him into prison; which, when his Lord
heard, he was wroth, and delivered the mad Extortor, not the meek Debtor to the
tormenter, etc whereof let Extorters, Usurers, etc. take better notice, and
apply the said Scriptures to t^emselvs, and know that the Devil, called here
emphaticallie the Adversary, is he that delivers them (as the common accuser
of sinners whom he seduceth thereunto) to the Judge of Judges, and King of
Kings, the God of Truth, Justice, and Mercy, who (except they say, and resolv
to pay all, viz. repent, and have like compassion upon their brethren, as they
expect from him) will deliver them to the Officer, as says Matthew the 5.
Tormentor, as says Matthew 18. viz. the Devil again, who supplieth all such
offices, and delivers all that are delivered to him, to Hell, whence is no
Redemption, till the uttermost farthing be paid, which is never to be don
after the oil is out of the lamp, and the door shut: Where contrariwise the Law
of the Jews (which Christ says he came not to destroy, Mat. 5.17. and
neither did, nor would alter, as appears, Mat. 18.25.) did not imprison money
debtors at all, but sell them, and their wives and children, and all they had
to their creditors that were bound by the same law to keep, and find them in
their houses, and imploiments, not in prisons, and dungeons, without, and from
all imploiment but wickedness, as our Gaolers do us; nor as these men
impiouslie allege, and belie the Holy Ghost, saying, That their creditors
might take their debtor's clothes, and bed-cloaths from them; where the Text
they cite, ( Lev. 25.39.) says, they must use them as brethren, hired
servants, and sojorners (which we find all the Old Testament over, had the
trust, and charge, not only of their Master's estates, but of their children,
and their wives, and wanted nothing suitable, not only to their own
necessities, but also to their master's credits, and employments. And debtors
were to be kept so by virtue of their sale, but till the year of Jubilee,
which, when it fell within seven years in the time of Moses, restored them to
their liberty; for without it, the seventh year they were to be restored, as
appears, Deuteronomy. 15.1. etc. And in Jeremie's time, at the fixth years end, Jer.
34.14. Now does the Capias, Arrests, and Imprisonments used by these men, hold
any analogy with the mercy, justice, susten. stentation, freedom, and hope
of liberty in few years, which the Jewish law afforded to those debtors they
sold to their Creditors? Compare, and find as follows: There the debtors had
the mercy to be no Prisoners at all, but as hired servants, and sojorners: The
Justice, to be no bondmen which masters might use at their pleasures: The
sustentation; to have food and raiment enough, and compotent to their
conditions, and their masters callings: The freedom; to live, and love
husbands, wives, and children all together; to pray, feed sheep, and work
comfortablie together in their masters houses, fields, vine yards, etc. with no
less good instruction, and recreation to themselves, then profit and pleasure
their masters, and hope of full liberty to make use of those good instruments
for their own best advange at six years end, if a Jubilee freed them no sooner.
Contrariewise; here the poorest debtor has the cruellest imprisonment; that is
the rule of these men's mercy: The greatest cheater has the greatest favor;
that is their Justice: The sustentation we would buy for our selves at the best
hand, while our money last's, our Goalers take, or keep from us, to force us to
buy half so much, and nothing so good of them, while we have a penny left;
and after to starve; when others, for our Custom, would prolong our lives, with
trust for a time, they will trust no poor man for a farthing; nor rich, but to
fetch his money. Our Freedom is not to the next Ward, nor in our own, to enjoy
wives, or children, longer then they bring fees to the Jailer; that when we
have sold our clothes, and bed-cloaths to feed our bloud-suckers, our common
bed is the bare ground, till we famish here, and our wives and children in the
streets, and ditches, do the like; hope of liberty we have none, but by such
deaths; for our livelihoods are too little to pay our Fees from the days of
our Arrests, to our Funeral: if any attein to liberty by some casualtie, he
is the wors while he lives for his Gaol education. Our Law is derived from
the Romans, who (as these men say) condemned not the Law of the Jews
concerning Creditors, and Debtors; we wish ours were as merciful; and so it
was before and since Magna Charta, when it meddled not with men's bodies that
had not wherewith to pay their debts, but relieved, and employed them according
to their endeavors, forgiving their debts, and believing that of our Savior; if
you forgive not men's trespasses, neither will my Father forgive yours, Mat.
7.12. But these men that dare abuse the everlasting Word of the everliving God,
and the fundamental Laws of this Land grounded thereupon, to mis-inform a
Parliament to their own ends, notwithstanding they know we have abundance of
sound Divines to expound Scriptures, and some honest Lawyers, though no
professors to explain Laws. What shall we think of these men's sincerity to
be trusted with the making up, and keeping of Records concerning the whole
estates of the Commonwealth? but submit^ the consideration thereof to all
interested therein.

Their 9. Reason pursues the former in its Coin; for most untrue it is, That
men always begin suits (meaning by way of Capias, and Arrest) upon necessities
of injustice, that is to say; when no other trick will serve to bar men of their
liberty to prosecute just suits for loss of lives, or estates of most
concernment; or for Treasons, felonies, or trespasses most notorious, committed
by night, and defended by injustice, what is more common then to arrest the
prosecutors for supposed debts of thousands of pounds, more then they are able
to find bail for, until Trials, and Judgments be carried against them in the
causes they should follow by the same hands of Power and Justice, that they
should prosecute, but cannot, being so prevented. And how many are now
imprisoned for supposed debts, which they never ought, or if they did, have
paid, or which were not due at the time of the Arrest, etc. And what necessity
of Justice was to begin such suits? And what murder more wilful, more
manifest, and more cruel, then to imprison men so till they die? And where they
say, that most commonly debtors have notice before any suit be commenced, why
then do they debar summons, which is the right process of notice? How come
Justices of Peace, and Grand Jurie men, that always attend Assizes and and
Sessions, to be arrested by bills of middle Latitats, and Outlawries, before
they can hear of any suits against them? which case is common. And for their
alleging of many Statutes, or Parlaments, that approved of their Capias, let
them name one more then that of 25 Edw. 3.17. which gave it, and was repealed,
28 Edw. 3.3. and 42 Edw. 3. as aforesaid. What Statute, or Parliament, ever
since revived it in express terms? It is true, That of 19 Hen. 7.9. ordeineth
process upon Actions of trespass upon the case to be no more delatorie then
that practiced for debt. And we grant that actions upon the Case, being mixed
actions, ever ought to have been by Capias before that Statute, however
neglected by such as ever left undon those things which they ought to have don,
to do those things which they ought not. And that summons is a milder way, and
not so compulsorie: as the Capias, we confess, and hold more Christian; for
the Capias compels men that are not able to pay their debts, and that never
ought any, to be imprisoned, starved, murdered: And no just debt to be paid
so soon as summons, all the world knows thereof, and therefore no Nation but
English admits a Capias for debt.

The 10. is as deceitful an information as any before that; for we desire no
new way upon summons, to hasten Judgments before Attachments and distress, by
affidavit of a summoner: but that summons may go by Writ, as it was wont, to
the Sheriff of the County wherein the debtor dwells, requiring him by good
summonitors (which are the words of the Writ) to summon the party to be at
the return of the Writ, in the Court whence it issued, whether the Sheriff is
to return both the writ, and the summonitor's names, in that ought to be
substantial freeholders, and free pledges of the same decenarie as the debtor,
who, if they return summonitus, are answerable for so much as they find him
worth, till Attachment takes it into the Sheriff's hands, or sureties for
appearance. If the return be a nibil haber, then (as aforesaid) the Law ought
to look no further after him, till God make him able: for (as the Proverb was)
where nothing was to be had, the King was to loos his due. And if the return
be non est inventus, his shunning of the Law makes him a malefactor, subject
to a Capias upon a Testatum directable to the Sheriff of the County wherein he
lurketh, and so from County to County, till he be taken, or outlawed.
Again, if the return be summonitus, Attachment, distress, and Judgment follow
of course, legallie, and speedily, and are the only due process of Law, as we
have declared before; and so is not a Judgment by nihil dicit, stolen by
connivence of Attorneys, unknown to the Defendant, although his warrant of
Attornie be had to appear for him: a common feat countenanced too much by the
Law at Westminster, to thousands undoings, and their own gain. For trial by
Jurie, Issues joined, cannot be tried otherwise, Nihil dicits, and Arrests by
Capias use them not: For multiplicitie of Suits and Perjuries, they were things
never found fault with at Westminster these 200 years, till now. And now if the
Chancerie grant Justicieses to Sheriffs and Stewards, as they ought, gratis;
and Corporations proceed by their Charters, Westmonasterians need not fear to
be troubled with multiplicitie of Suits; and those growing fewer, so will
their perjuries.

11. The eleventh is a toie; for we grant that a Capias ad respondend. being
unlawful, that ad satisfaciend. is groundless, and both most lawless, and
useless; the due process of law for debt being as aforesaid, summons, etc.

12. The twelfth is a Riddle and a Paradox, wherewith these men would amaze us
with some wonders of their experience happened by this Commonwealth by the
benefit of their Capias, which they call the Process of Arrest, Anno Domini
1267, and 1350. They might have don well to declare their particulars, that
others that know them not, might judge thereof as well as themselves. We
confess, and they know the Arrest, Imprisonment, Exile, and Hanging of
Traitors, Extortioners, etc. as were the Spencers, Father and Son; the Judges
Hugh d' Burgo, Tresilian, etc. who seduced Kings, as these men would Parliament,
were beneficial to this Commonwealth; and we hope it will be so again,
though we know not how long the Devil may help his servants: but of poor
debtors we can remember no arrest that was ever beneficial to any one person
of this Commonwealth, but have sufficiently proved the Negative.

13. Lastly, for the subtilties, and subtersuges of debtors, we know none more
then these men; and their predecessors taught such as grew indebted, and by
their natural inclinations, assisted with these men's advices, and devices, far
more subtle then their own, to cheat men of their Lands and Estates; and by the
credits of their sureties, that took them to be honest men, until too late,
they found the contrary. We confess it is true, that such debtors by the
helps of such teachers, became so subtle, as to get in their hands all they
could of their Creditor's rights, and conveied them to what uses they pleased;
and procuring themselves afterward to be arrested, where they might be
brought, or removed to the upper Bench, or Fleet; made those places their
sanctuaries and subterfuges, where they are many thousands in list, but few in
custody, riding, rioting, and spending their Creditor's and Suretie's Estates,
sometimes at their own doors, who want for their sakes those blessings to reliev
them, which they vainly consume to out-brave them; and sometimes in parts remote
and Foreign, more active against this Commonwealth, then for it.

The premises tenderly considered, and for that these men, by these their
endeavors declare themselves, and their Judges, and the rest of their rabble, to
be of one fraternity; and all parties in this matter of our wrongful
imprisonments, and guilty of all the Extortions and Oppressions concurrent
therewith, and livers, and thrivers thereupon; and therefore no fit Judges in
these causes, as further appears by their lothness to submit, or give way to
the House, whereof they are overruling members, to perform their promises to
your Excellence in our behalfs, made many years past, or to restore us, and
themselves, to our birthright, liberties, and freedom, whereof they have robbed
us, but are ashamed so to do like thievs and intruders, to deliver their
possessions to the right owners. May it therefore pleas your Honor, in our
further behalfs, to cause the House once more to be moved to grant a Commission
under the Great Seal, directed to indifferent Commissioners, that shall be no
professed Lawyers, Atturnies, etc. or persons engaged to public emploiments,
Martial, or Civil; but men of understanding, and discretion, undoubted
honesty, well-affected to the present Government, to be nomited by us, and
approved by any two, or more Parlament-men; autorising every two, or more such
Commissioners, (not exceeding twelv in all) to deliver all the Gaols of England
and Wales, of all prisoners for debt, forthwith without delaie, compelling all
that are able, to pay all or part of their just debts, to pay accordingly, so
far as all their goods, (except the beasts of their plough, tools of their
trade, and necessary clothes and bedding) and two parts of their Lands shall
extend, notwithstanding any Conveiance of any such Lands since the debts grew,
(except distributions between real Creditors.) And to hear and determine all
wrongful Imprisonments, Extortions, Briberies, Usuries, Perjuries, Forgeries,
Frauds, Deceits, Trespasses, or Oppressions whatsoever, concerning such
prisoners only, committed, or to be committed by any person or persons
whatsoever, against them, or any of them, or by any of them against any of
their Creditors, throughout England and Wales, according to the ancient Laws
and Customs of England, confirmed by the great Charter, and Petition of Right,
to endure for three years from the date thereof; allowing every such
Commissioner 300 l per annum, above his necessary expenses, for his salarie,
in consideration of his pains, and loss in his time, and private affairs; and
such fees, and allowances to their Clerks, Messengers, and other necessary
Ministers, as any three of them shall think fit, not exceeding the presidents
of other Courts, in like cases, to be deducted out of such fines,
amerciaments, issues, profits, and perquisits, as shall grow due to the
Commonwealth, by their service, as other Courts use to do; and the rest to be
accounted for, to such other public uses, as the House shall appoint: Which
being don by your means, the Land shall be purged of much iniquity, the
Lord's wrath for the same much appeased, your Excellency, and your Army gain
much happiness, love, and honor, divine, and humane, temporal, and eternal; the
Commonwealth regain a Million of money picked out of their purses by
Extorters, Usurers, and common Deceivers; and your Petitioners be at liberty
to fight for their Country, and safeguard of those lives of their own with
courage and comfort, which as yet they have no hope but to lose with care, and
sorrow.

And they, and theirs, as in duty bound, shall ever pray, etc.

A Case concerning a matter of Justice.
TO the premises I must add another Case of no less perspicuitie and
manifestation of our Lawyer's actions, then the former, briefly thus; A
Gentleman of Drurie-lane, ever faithful to the Parlament's service, and an
adventurer of his life and fortunes therein, imparted for their use and the
Commonwealths, 3600 l ready money, upon condition to be repaied, with lawful
consideration, in convenient time, to supply his own occasions, much subject to
oppressions and injuries offered unto him by Lawyers, and their Clients; in
which respect it pleased the Parliament to take him into their protection, which
he conceives Lawyers sitting Members in the House, advised or consented to be
don, and granted as a lawful and just thing; or had it been otherwise, would
have advised the contrary, and never consented to the same. Now the Gentleman
(having received none of his money, nor any consideration for any part thereof,
is forced to borrow money upon hard terms, of Use, and other Engagements, to
buie his Leases late held of the Bishopric of Elie, to prevent others to
deprive him thereof, being his main subsistence,) can have no benefit of his
protection, from any of them that granted it, or of those Courts wherein they
are employed, and eminently autorised; and the Gentleman and his Estate daily
and unduly questioned, yet desires he no more then his own, to defend himself
from injustice, or to be protected therefrom, until he has his own, and
justice with it, or for it; or that he may be satisfied how necessary it is,
or can be to this Parliament and Commonwealth, or either to have these men,
these Counselors, these Advisers, or rather Devisers of frauds, and subtleties
to delude Truth and Justice, that will counsel, advise, devise, or consent
things to be granted, which they will not justify to be performed by
themselves, (except that as in cases of common concernment, wherein the party
most suffering ought to have negation from all) Stratagemes are tolerable in
war, continued or tolerated in place or power, to mis-guide Parlaments, as
their predecessors have don Kings in times of peace, or to be sole Judges or
Interpreters of their own inventions; no less dangerous to this Republic, and
their Estates, then the Exposition of Papistical Impostures, while it was left
to the autors, was to our predecessors and their souls. All which is humbly
submitted to your Honor's further consideration, with the rest as aforesaid; by
the same

Your Honor's faithful servant, and observant, Jo. Jones.

A Case concerning Tithes.
FOR the further manifestation of the lawless Imposture, and usurpation of
Jurisdiction, Arbitrarie proceeding, and destruction of Propriety, exercised
daily, and generally by Judges, and no Judges at Westminster, and in their
Circuits to the deheredetation of many, and hazard of all; may summarily appear
in that one Case lately adjudged by no Judges legally authorized thereunto,
between Sir Matthew. Lister Knight, Plaintiff, and Lionel Gelson, Defendant,
published in print, partly by Petition, partly otherwise, by the modest and
discreet wife, and fellow-sufferer of the Defendant, in the Cause of Ann Gelson:
the brief whereof is this; the Plaintiff being possessed of the Tithes of a
Rectorie, called Burwel, in the County of Lincoln, an Impropriation, sometimes
parcel of the dissolved College of Totterial in the said County, by virtue of
a Conveiance derived from a Grant of King H 8. in which it is mentioned that
the said King gave that Rectorie (cum pertinentiis inter alia) to the then Duke
of Suffolk, and his heirs. And because it is there further mentioned, that the
said King gave also to the said Duke the Presentation of the Rectorie of
Walmsgate, which is a Parish of it self in another Decenarie, and Wapentack of
the said County, distinct from, though neighboring to that of Burwel, and
founded by the Lord of the Manor of Walmsgate, who then was (as yet the
Defendant who claims from him, is) Lord of all that Parish in Fee-simple, and
gave the Tithe thereof (as well his own, as his Tenants at will) to the Rector
for the time being, and his successors for ever, reserving to himself, and his
heirs for ever, the Patronage and Presentation; so that when there happened a
neglect of Presentation in him, or in his heirs, the right thereof fell by laps
to the Bishop of Lincoln, and upon his neglect, to the King; which being so
then, in King H. 8. he might grant for that time to the said Duke: But saving
for that time, or the like relaps, the inheritance descended to the Defendant.
Now this Inheritance from the Defendant, and Tithes from the Incumbent, and his
Farmor, are adjudged to the Plaintiff, by Judges and Jurors, according to the
course of Common Law, (as they pretend) whereas by the Statute 2 Ed. 6.13. and
many presidents, no right of Tithes ought to be tried but by Ecclesiastical
Judges, and Courts according to Ecclesiastical Laws; which, though now
abolished, the said Statutes being not repealed, the Judicature is obeyed, and
yet undisposed of by the Parliament, which only can dispose thereof. But in the
interim, such Judges and Jurors, as assume jurisdiction to try the rights of
Tithes by Common Law, are no Judges, but offenders in Praemunire; such trials,
no trials, but arbitrarie and lawless Disseisins, and destructions of men's
properties; and consequently (if not timely remedied) of the common liberty,
rights, and birthrights of all the Commonaltie of England; And the Defendant
can but fear to be deprived by the same course, of his whole Manor, and
subsistence, as well as he is of part.

FINIS.

