Zion in Distress: Or, The sad and Lamentable Complaint OF ZION AND Her
Children.

Wherein are demonstrated the Causes of Her miserable Calamities, and Her Faith
in God, touching her perfect Redemption, and the latter Days Glory.

Also showing The dreadful controversy God has with the Beast of Rome, and
Mother of Harlots, and all Adversaries and Nations of the world for Zion's sake.

Lam. 1.12. Is there any sorrow like unto my sorrow?

Verse. 17. Zion spreads forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her.

London. Printed in the Fatal Year.

THE AUTHOR To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
IF these ensuing illiterate and homespun-Poems come to thy hand, let me crave
this of thee, viz. Diligently and impartially to peruse them; and do not
censoriously judge, nor prejudicially condemn the plain and simple-hearted
Author thereof: Neither do thou slight them because of the lowness and
meanness of the style that they run in: But esteem them rather for the honesty
of the matter, then for their Elegancy; more for their Virtue, than for the
Variety of Scholastic Expressions. I never learned the Art of Rhetoric, nor
courted the Universities. Neither have I studied to deliver my self in that
style that might tend either to the pleasing of the Mind, Fancies, Or vain
Humors of any; nor to delight the Ear, but to affect the Heart; not to stir up
the Mind to Mirth, but to move the Soul to Mourn. And if, Courteous Reader,
thou art a Christian, one that art truly and really born from Above, of the
free Woman, and brought up virtuously in the Heavenly Family; if so, I am
persuaded that I need not enforce many Arguments to induce thee to a kind
acceptance of what I present thee with, because it treats of the state of Her
whose Womb did bear thee, and whose Paps have spiritually given thee suck.
Shall thy dear Mother be in a miserable languishing state and condition, and
not her own dear Children incline with all diligence to her mournful
Complaints? God forbid. If I have misrepresented the state of ZION this day, in
any thing, I humbly crave pardon: I have writ according to the measure of Light
received. The Subject is Divine, and I confess too high and good to be so low
and badly handled; too worthy for such an unworthy Worm to meddle with. Such
as it is, I here present to you: I have, with Mary, done what I could; you must
not expect a man's Head upon a Child's Shoulders. And if it prove acceptable in
your eyes, I matter not how I and it are censured by others: It cannot speed
worse then She does for whose sake I have writ these Lines. This only I
entreat of thee. Let Zions Captivity be thy Misery, and never add thou to her
Afflictions: So shall I be thine for ever, in all Christian Service.

Farewell.
Let Zealots carp at Homer, if they will,
And bark like Dogs, until they bark their fill:
True Protestants will not offended be;
It Is only Popish Imps will snarle at me.

To his Friend the AUTHOR.
WHat Muse is this does thus possess thy brain,
That leads thy Genius to so high a strain?
Must thy aspiring thoughts needs now rehearse
Thy Mothers Groans in such a kind of dress?
What, Poet-like, thy self deliver now?
Is Prose too mean, to let the World know how
She is oppressed by Rome's black hellish Crew,
How in her Blood they did their hands imbrew?
Let thy Endeavor ^ prosper; let them prove
To be Rome's shame: A Token of thy Love
To thy distressed Mother, (now the scorn
Of black-mouthed Imps, the Sons of Satan born.)
Aspiring Soul! What from her Sorrows clime
To a Prophetic Spirit in thy Rhyme!
Foretelling how she shall delivered be
From all those Bloody*Hounds, whom thou do see
God will destroy; and will thy Mother make
Heavens Glory and Earths Joy, for his Name sake.
Jehovah bless thy work, this Book, though small,
And make it prove a Preface to Rome's Fall.
Vale.
ZION IN DISTRESS: OR, The Sad and Lamentable Complaint of Zion and Her
Children.
Zion's Sons. ATtend all People, hearken and draw near:
What doleful noise is that soun^s in my ear?
Me thinks I hear a very dismal Cry,
Like one that does lament most bitterly;
And by the mournful voice that I do hear,
Some Woman is in great distress, I fear.
The more I mind t^is Cry, and do give heed,
The more my heart is pierced and made to bleed:
O how I thirst to know who this should be,
That makes my Soul to grieve and sigh in me!
A Person of great Honor and Descent,
Doubtless this Woman is, that does lament;
Highly descended; born she is from above;
Nursed in the Chambers of the Fathers Love:
Espoused to a Prince of high degree;
For King of kings, and Lord of lords is He.
Alas, alas, poor Zion! Is it thou?
O mourn my Soul, and let my Spiri bow:
Let all that love the Bridegroom, mourn for grief;
For Zion weeps, as one past all Relief.
But why, O Zion, loved of the most High,
Do thou lament and mourn so bitterly?

ZION. Ah! poor I am, mean, low, and desolate;
And few there be that pity my estate:
A long time I have in the Wilderness
VVander'd about in sore and great distress;
Hiding my self from the Beasts furious rage,
And there have been until this very Age:
And having lately looked a little out,
Again he spied me, and does search about:
For to destroy me it is his full intent,
Or drive me back again his mind is bent:
No rest nor peace to me or mine he will give,
Declaring that we are not fit to live.
The Dragon too, has with this Beast combined
To spoil both me and mine, when Us they find.
The old Lion, Lioness, and Lions VVhelp,
Come out against me, other Beasts to help.
Dogs, Bulls, and Bears, and Wolves do all agree
To rend and tear, and make a spoil of me.
O that ever I, so delicately bred,
And my dear Babes, at the Kings Table fed,
Should be this day as one even quite cast out,
And they as Sheep now scattered round about.
Now to deliver me, there is none dare venture;
The Truth would fain, but knows not how to enter:
And Justice that is made to stand far off;
Whilst I become the Object of men's scoff.
Zion am I, that no man does regard;
Men's hearts against me now are grown so hard:
Hurled to and fro, and tossed as with the wind;
And not one Dram of Comfort can I find.
My Children, which both young and tender are,
The fierce looks of these Beasts do greatly scare.
And some they seiz upon as their own Prey,
And them into their Dens do bear away;
Where they are kept in sore captivity,
Mourning for me, and their extremity;
Who for Christ Jesus sake, with much content,
Do from their Foes endure all punishment:
For they in Prison rather choose to lie,
Then to obtain, by sin, their liberty.
The spoiling of their Goods with joy they take,
Before they will the Lord of Life forsake;
Or to be sent out of their native Soil,
Before they will their Consciences defile;
Or otherwise to suffer or be slain,
Than to expose the Gospel to disdain.
These are the Souls I love, I love most dear,
Who for the Gospels sake exposed are
To all those troubles I before did tell,
That they with Christ for evermore might dwell:
But O that men should ever be so blind,
Who lived have where Gospel Light has shined,
My Children dear thus for to persecute*
Because they cannot Gods holy Name polute!
If they were cast amongst the Turks or Jews,
Doubtless they would not them so badly use,
As some of mine have been within this Nation,
For witnessing against abomination.
Ah! Woe is me! for this is a sad time;
Now Godliness is counted for a Crime:
The Gospel now, poor Souls, you must not preach;
For of their Laws, they say it is a breach;
Nor meet together in Christ's holy Name,
But to the Goal you must go for the same:
If you do venture once more and again,
Then Banishment or Death must be your pain.
Alas poor Souls! If this falls to your lot,
'T will be for good: Don't care for it a jot.
Though I c^^not forbear to grieve and mourn,
That you thus dealt with are, whom I have born;
Yet I had rather you should choose to die,
Than any of you should your Lord deny.
But I lament, and greatly, for all those
Who out of Ignorance do you oppose;
Who shall ere long be brought in unto me,
For whom in pa^n I travel ti^l it be.
But there are thousands more within this Land,
Who with the Beast are like to fall or stand.
I do grieve also, and that very sore,
Because the Gospel wants an open Door;
Instead whereof, a piece of stuff is read,
Whereby poor Souls in no wise can be fed,
No better then the Body of a man
Can nourished be with Husks, or Chaff, or Bran:
Which my Beloved never did compose,
Nor ever on poor men at all impose;
But the Inventions are of men's own Brain,
O that therefore all would it much disdain.
They to impose it, think it Policy,
To keep themselves in safe security:
Thus Jeroboam too, by his great sin,
Thought with himself in sa^ety to have bin.
Gods Threshold is dug down by wicked hands,
And in its room another Threshold stands:
But hark! methinks I hear my Foes a hisling,
As if some of my Sons of late were missing:
O let me mourn, as w^ll indeed I may,
For those dear Sons I lost the other day:
But not because they are to their Father gone*
For so they are out of the storm that is coming on;
But ^ather 'c^use they might have useful been
To me, if God to have spared them good had seen:
And also 'cause the En^my does boast
Saying, Tour Expectation is quite lost.
My very heart is pierced, whilst they say,
Where is the God to whom so often you pray?
For they having escaped his mighty hand,
Resolved to make more strong my heavy band.
They do blaspheme, swear, curse, and domineer,
As if nor God nor Devil they did fear.
But to return, and of my great loss speak,
This thing does cause my very heart to ache;
For I do fear some did these idolize,
As others to their worth did not them prize:
Offended doubtl^ss is my righteous God,
That he has struck me with his heavy Rod;
And yet my Children they do not agree
That do remain, nor live in unity.
Alas, I see hat love does much decline
Even every day, in these poor Babes of mine:
Strifes and debates amongst them are so high,
They envy one another piteously:
They grieve themselves in this, and me also;
And unto Christ and Truth much wrong they do.
O that they all were once but as one man,
How would the Gospel spread an^ ^lourish then!
But ah! this Rod their ju^gements han't informed,
Nor yet their Conversation ^eform'd;
For some there are, that walk but carnally,
And little m^nd the stroke of the most High:
Alas with these it will go very bad,
Whom frowns nor smiles will turn, nor yet the Rod.
O mou^n, my Children; you have not done well,
The Voice within this Rod does plainly tell.
O mourn and weep, I say; cry bitterly:
For I, your Mother, weep, lament, and cry:
Your Father loves you dear, and so ^o I;
In love h'hath smitten you assuredly:
It Is doubt^esly to purge your Souls from s^n,
Which you of late have much abounded in.
And if that you your Ways do not amend,
Some greater Judgment surely God will send:
Besides the great reproach you bring to me,
My dawning Glory you will hardly see.
The day is dark that I have lived in;
And here of late much darker it has been:
Thick Clouds do hide the glorious glistering Skies,
Some mists or fogs do shade or blind my Eyes.
Because the day abides of my distress,
Some Children fall now in the Wilderness,
Who murmur in their hearts against the Lord,
That Canaan to them he does not afford.
Alas, I shall be thin, before that I
Be ready for that blessed Liberty:
And some there are that seemingly do feed
Amongst my Sheep, of whom I would be freed;
For though that they are called by my Name,
Yet they do cause i^ for to suffer shame:
Some Truths of Christ indeed these do profess,
But not his saving Grace and Life possess:
I never brought them forth; they are not mine:
Do thou, O Hagar, own them; for they are thine:
After the Flesh they are born, and so do walk;
Though of the Spirit they do sometimes talk.
The day draws near when such shall be afraid,
All Hypocrites in me shall be dismayed.
For such I therefore now do greatly grieve,
Because that they do thus their Souls deceive.
When the Bridegroom does to his Chamber come,
These in that glorious Place will find no room;
But they must go into eternal Pain,
If quickly now they are not born again.
Thus do I spend my days in grief and care,
Because so few the mighty GOD do fear.
Though fearful Judgments he does often times send,
It Is not his Word nor Works will make them bend;
Nor mind the operation of his hand;
They slight strange Prodigies by Sea and Land;
Which of great Ruins are a plain symptom,
That from the God of Vengeance soon will come:
For greater Judgments there are still behind,
The Truth of which you all shall quickly find.

ZION's SONS. O how can we this Lamentation hear?
Or patiently this doleful mourning bear?
That our dear Mother should take on her thus;
Our hearts are pained, our Spi^its fayl in us.
Whence comes that Beast of whom thou have complain'd^*
What is he, and how long has he thus reigned?

ZION. From Hell beneath, this Monster did proceed,
As in the Revelations you may read:
He is the Little Horn, the Man of Sin,
Above twelve hundred years my Foe has bin.
Once he received, I know, a deadly wound,
But for the same a cure he since has found;
And ^eing healed, he glories in his power,
As if he would me presently devour.

ZION's SONS. Shall we arise against this Beast of Prey,
To rescue thee, and take his strength away,
Who has so long time been thine Enemy,
Ruling over thee and thine in cruelty?
Or shall he eve^ ^eign and domineer,
As he has done, without control or fear?

ZION. No, stay a while; I shall delivered be
From his fie^ce wrath, and cruel ^yranny.
When the set time is come, I fully know
I shall delivered be, as Truth does show;
For he that sits in the Heavens does scorn
At this great Rebel; for his Son that is born
Heir of the World, and Prince of Kingdoms too,
Shall surely ^eign, because it is his due:
For God has promised that his Son shall have
The C^own, the K^ngdom, and the Scepter brave:
Nations shall serve him; Kings that have abhorred
His Name, shall pay him homage, as their Lord:
To JESUS all shall bow; he shall be King,
And to poor Zion shall Redemption bring.
Wherefore my Children, I do say again,
Do you not stir; he has some time to reign:
Him to destroy, it is beyond your skill;
Your Wisdom and your Strength is to fit s^ill,
Till his long months be out, yea, the last hour,
None can consume or take away his power.
To suffer still it is for me appointed,
Till some to do this Work shall be anointed
With Gods good Spirit, that most holy Oil;
And then they shall this cruel Beast quite foyl.
Your present work is therefore for to pray,
To be prepared for that blessed Day.
Be therefore ready, for the time draws near
When he shall fall; of this you need not fear.
But since I see you active fain would be,
Revenge your selves, I give you liberty,
On one which a long time my Foe has ^in;
If you would know his name you shall, it is Sin*
Arise now, kill and slay; upon him fall;
A worser Foe I Have not among them all.
Spare not; it is he which always does oppose
Both you and I, and all that with Christ close.
Until he is beat down, I shall not rise,
Nor be delivered from my Enemies.
Because of Sin my very heart does ache,
And much of this complaint does therefore make.
For it is Sin, together with the Devil,
That is the cause of all my p^esent evil.
O strive against them in Gods holy power,
And give no place to them not for an hour.
Besides them and the Beast, there is the Whore,
Some wrongs I must impute unto her score;
For she does call my Children Heretics,,
Phanaticks, also, for by such her tricks
She keeps the World in such blindness, that so
There Is very few that do my Children know:
She takes from them their Souls most precious food,
Because they cannot partake with her vile brood:
Besides, of her I have cause to complain,
For she has many of my Children slain;
She makes the Beast to run at me, and roar,
And with his Horns oft-times my Sides to goar.
She has some Brats too, clothed in black and white,
Which st^ike at me this day, with all their might;
But amongst all he^ cursed hellish Train,
None shall speed worse then they, when she is slain.

ZION's SONS. Mother, What Whore is that? for she shall rue:
Has she so many of our Brethren slew?
Let Vengeance be on her, Gods Saints do cry,
Whose D^aths are precious in their Father's Eye:
though she has taken our good Name from us,
^et her not think she shall escape it thus.
^e do esteem our Names as precious Oil,
which she has labored so much to defile.
(...) know whom she should be, we do think long,
(...) has unto us all done thus much wrong.

ZION. She is great Babylon, of whom you have read,
Which owns not Christ in truth to be her Head.
This is that Romish Antichristian Harlot,
Who for long time has sat bed^^k'd in Scarlet,
Upon the Beast which from the Sea did rise,
Whose Fore-head's spread with Names of Blasphemie^;
Who with the golden Cup that is in her hand,
Invites the Rich and Noble of the Land,
For to commit the Sin of Fornication,
Which to the Lord is great abomination.
And now because that I abhor this Sin,
She to this day my Enemy has been;
And makes the Mighty Ones me to oppress,
For laying open her great wickedness.

ZION's SONS. Shall we arise? Why should this wicked Whore
Blaspheme our God, or wrong us any more?
She glories, and does live deliciously:
Both God, his Christ, and Us, she does defy.
And more then this, she thousands does annoy;
Both Souls and Bodies too, she does destroy.
She stretches forth her hand; and still does crave
Poor Innocents, that them she might inslave.
Yea, to the whole World she has done such wrong,
We her abhor more then the stinking Dung.
Shall we now fill to her in the same Cup
That she has filled to us for to drink up?
Yea double to her double, says Gods Word;
No mercy unto her at all afford.
Shall we arise, O Zion, full of ire,
To eat her Flesh, and burn her in the fire?

ZION. You instrumental in this work shall be;
Your Brother John long time since told it me.
Esaias also, and Jeremy before,
Did clearly show you should destroy this Whore.
And I perceive you this do understand,
Which comforts me too, on the other hand:
You are enlight'ned with the Angels Glory,
As it has been foretold in sacred Story.
As for my Children who before did live,
Light from this Angel they could not receive.
But you, my Sons, brought forth in these last days,
Great things shall do, though many it gain-says.
And you, I see, are earnest for to know
The time when you this Whore shall overthrow:
And I cannot blame you in this very thing,
Because great Glory to me it will bring:
The Gospel too, over the world shall spread,
And men instead of Husks shall feed on Bread:
And Gospel-Freedom you shall then enjoy,
No Popish Prelate you shall more annoy:
Nor shall the Locusts of you make a prey,
Because that Tithes to them you cannot pay.
Those wicked Fiends of Hell shall then no more
Have power for to sting and hurt the poor:
They shall be cast with shame, as it is most fit,
Into that dismal, dark and smoking pit:
Thither they shall, I say, with wrath be turned,
And with those lasting Flames they shall be burned.
But to reply to what you have inquired,
At present you must keep your selves retired;
To make attempts you ought for to defy,
Till strength be given from the Lord on high.
You now within the streets do lie for dead,
Not knowing yet how to lift up your head;
But you shall then appea^ to be alive,
The Spirit of the Lord shall you revive.
God has (I know) let down the time exact,
When he will begin his strange and dreadful Act,
To the amazement of your Enemies,
When God shall call his Mighty ones to rise:
And from the Heavens you then shall hear a Voice,
The which shall cause your Souls for ^o rejoice;
And that will be to you so clear a call,
That you straight way shall on this St^umpet fall.
Wait now with patience therefore on the Lord,
Until his saving strength he does afford;
And make to him always your supplication,
For from him only is my expectation.
O sigh with me, and in your Spirits groan,
And send strong c^ies up to his gracious Throne;
Do you give him no rest, until he has
Made me the only Praise of all the Earth:
And I Will lift up my Voice to God on high,
And make my moan to him, and thus will cry:
O Lord, my Lord, consider my estate;
Let me remain no longer desolate.
Am I not dear and precious in thy sight?
My sad Complaint do thou nor therefore slight;
But let thy Bowels now toward me move,
For sure I am thou do me dearly love;
Thou have redeemed me with thy precious Blood,
And nothing thou have thought for me too good.
Lord, though I sinned have, do thou forgive,
And let my Children dear in concord live:
Teach them all truly to know thee, O Lord,
And worship thee in peace, with one accord.
Let not the wicked of me make a spoil*
Who Thee abhor, and Me esteem most vile.
Thou do cast down, and raise up; wound and cure;
And nothing is to hard for thee, I Am sure.
Thou know my grief, there is nothing hid from thee
Arise, O Lord, for to deliver me.
Long time between the Serpent vile and me,
Thou know there has been bitter Enmity;
Above five thousand years h'hath bruised my Heel,
And I this day that grievous sore do feel:
Thou have declared, O Lord, my Seed shall break
His cursed Head; for thou will Vengance take
On this vile Serpent, and his cursed Seed,
Which first did wound my Heel, and made it bleed.
But when, O Lord? Is not the time yet come,
That thou will put an end to his Kingdom?
In Achor's Valley open thou a Door,
And make me sing, as once I did before.
O do thou break the bonds of my distress,
And bring me, Lord, out of this Wilderness:
Let me break forth, like to the Sun most bright,
And as an Army terrible in fight.
O take away the Vail that covers me,
And these thick Clouds, that I may clearly see
What is thy mind in this thy Dispensation,
And know the work of th^s my Generation.
It Is time for thee, O Lord to plead my Cause,
For wicked men make void thy Righteous Laws.
Obedience to their Law, they say is Reason;
Thine to obey, they make as bad as Treason.
Lord where thou sit, thou do see and hear
That in their shame they glory without fear:
Thy fearful Judgments they do not regard,
But sin the more, their Hearts are grown so hard.
Judgments deferred, in sin does make them bold,
Scorning in their vile course to be controlled;
As if thy dreadful hand their Lives did spare,
To sin against thee without fear or care;
Saying within their hearts, We a^e past by,
To serve our Lusts, in all Iniquity.
Thinking that God who does forbear to strike,
Of them and their debauched ways does like:
Or else as if some interposing Cloud
From Gods all-searching-Eye could be a shrou^:
Supposing that thy Seat is so on high,
That thou their sinful doings can not spy:
Or that since thou their Judgments have delayed,
Thou Wilt do it still; they are no whit afraid.
Thus they thy blessed patience do abuse,
And true Repentance wickedly refuse;
Whereby they do unto themselves procure
Great wrath from Heaven, which they shall sure endure;
And fit themselves for the great day of slaughter,
When into sorrow shall be turned their laughter.
Thy sev'n last plagues thou will pour forth on them,
Because they do both Grace and Truth contemn.
And how can thou with them so long forbear,
Who to thy face thee scornfully do dare?
Saying, Make speed, that we thy work may see,
And know thy Counsel, whatsoever it be.
Is not their sinful Cup filled to the top,
That thou might off these mighty Cedars lop?
Cut down these Trees, O Lord, but spare thy Vine,
Which thou amongst the Trees have chose for thine.
Make that, O God, to flourish and be green,
And fruitful, as before time it has been.
Thou brought this Vine from Egypt heretofore;
From thence, Lord, bring it out again once more:
Make room for it to ^oot, the Land to fill;
The Boughs thereof, let shade the highest Hill.
From Sea to Sea let her her Branches send.
And from all w^ongs her graciously defend.
Make up her Hedge, her Fence, which like a Wall,
Secure and safe should keep her now from all
Those wild Beasts of the field, with the wild Boar,
Who to devour and waste will never give over.
Visit thy Vine, O Lord; do thou behold
That which thou plant'st and prisedst more then gold
Do they not burn and of it make a spoil?
And thou do hide thy face too all this while.
Who is this Vine, but me whom thou have chose?
Both Vine, and Lily, and thy Sharon Rose.
I am thy Love, Dove, Undefiled One;
Why do thou then let me be trod upon?
By thy own Grace, I am made thus to thee;
Consider now therefore my misery:
For I am scorched and burnt in grievous pain;
And shall I never more thy Love obtain?
Have thou withdrawn thy self for evermore?
And will these days of Sorrow never be over?
O I am wounded, and in bitter smart!
Sure it is not long ere these will break my heart.

ZIONS SONS. Mourn, mourn, O Heavens; and thou, O Earth bewail;
And weep, ye Saints, until your Spirits fail:
For she that is the Glory of the Earth,
Most High and Mighty, and of precious Birth,
Lies sadly weltring almost in despair;
Her grievous sorrows no Tongue can declare.
And now, my Brethren, come, I pray, come hither;
And in Gods fear let us confer together:
Does not G^ief seiz on you, my Brethren dear?
Does not your hearts dissolve into a tear?
Does not your eyes like to a fountain run?
Does not all Joy now into Mourning turn?
Does not your sleep also from you depart?
Are you not peirced to the very heart?
Are you, or are you not in bitterness,
Because of Zion, and her sore distress?
How can our hearts delight in things below?
How can we sleep in peace as others do?
How can we comfort have, or comfort find:
Or how can we the Worlds concernments mind?
How can we eat or drink with Hearts content,
And not with Grief poor Zion's state lament?
Because that our dear Mother is a crying;
She sighs and sobs, as if she were a dying:
She languisheth, and is in bitter pain,
And in this state all do her much disdain:
She is reproached by every drunken Sot,
Being cast out, like to a broken Pot:
She is despised and trod upon like Dung,
The Drunkard of her makes his daily Song.
But I will turn, and will expostulate
The case with Zion, touching her estate;
Why art thou sometimes up, then down again?
Sometimes at ease, sometimes in bitter pain:
They Are doubtless throes; cheer up, and do not fear;
Deliverance, dear Soul, is very near:
And though thy throes and pains should now give over*
Don't fear, thou shall not die; One or two more
Shall bring that Child into the World, which thou
Have traveled with in bitter pangs till now.
O cry to God, thy Midwife he will be;
For I am sure he will deliver thee:
He is the God that brings unto the Birth,
He also it is that gives strength to bring forth.
O stay thy self upon thy blessed Lord,
His gracious strength he will to thee afford:
Upon his Promises do thou depend,
And thou shall see deliverance at the end.

ZION. Alas poor Hearts! my God has me forsook,
My sighs he does not mind, nor on me look;
To pity me* he has now quite forgot;
His anger's kindled, and his wrath is hot:
It burns sore against me; let me mourn;
For I am sorely spoiled, rent and torn:
Like to a Ship with raging tempests tossed,
That suffers Shipwreck, ready to be lost.
Ah woe is me, that ever I did on,
And so unfaithful to my God have bin!
How beautiful and comely once was I?
Like to a Pearl in his most blessed Eye:
I could not speak, but he would answer me,
But now I lie in sore captivity.
I cry and call, but he does stop his Ear,
And answers not, as if he had no care
Of me; but I will prove him once again,
And not give over till I do obtain:
Of Bowels he is full, and cannot retain
His anger, but will ease me of my pain.
O Lord, I come; I come again to thee;
O pardon, Lord, and do thou pity me:
For when I said I was of thee forsaken,
I see that I therein was much mistaken;
For I engraven am upon thy hand,
And in thy sight for evermore shall stand.
Awake, O Arm of God, and do not stay;
My Sorrows are so great, O say not nay.
Hear me, dear Jesus, unto thee I cry;
My Heart does bleed: O save me, or I die.

CHRIST. In Heaven where I do sit in Majesty,
A Voice sounds in mine Ears continually;
And now of late much louder it does cry:
Sing therefore Hall^lujah.
And doubtless it is the voice of her I love,
My Bowels in me do so greatly move;
I will therefore to her now faithful prove
Sing therefore Hall^lujah.
Alas, poor Heart, thy mournful voice I hear;
And will come down to help; be of good cheer;
For thou art precious to me, and most dear.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Go to; for all thy sorrows I well know,
And will deliver thee from them also;
And will again the Egyptians overthrow.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
I AM THAT I AM, that is still my Name,
The proudest of thy Foes shall know the same;
And they shall never more put thee to shame.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
In thy afflictions, great distress, and pain,
Of which thou do so grievously complain,
I am affli^ted, and made grieve again.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
F`or all the hurts and wrongs they do to thee,
I take as if they did them all to me;
And this indeed ere long they all shall see.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
It was for thee that I did bleed and die;
I love thee as the Apple of mine Eye:
Fear not thou then thy proudest Enemy.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Although, it is true, thou in their hands art now;
Yet Power's mine, and Wisdom: I know how
To strengthen thee, and make them all to bow.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
And I will rise now in great Jealousy*
To show my Power and great Sovereignty,
And make them to the Rocks and Hil^s to fly.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
The Day of Vengeance now is in my mind,
And where to hide themselves they shall not find,
Though with the Powers of Hell they have com^in'd.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Thy Controversy thoroughly I will plead,
And will bring down each high and lofty Head:
The Mighty Ones like Mortar I will tread.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Though silent for a long time I have stood,
I Will be revenged for all the righteous Blood,
That has run down, like to a mighty Flood.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Though Judgment on them I did long delay,
Yet what is due to Justice they shall pay;
And but a little longer will I stay.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
For now besides the wrongs thou do repeat,
The Martyrs blood does loudly me entreat;
I will come forth therefore in fury great.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
I will perform my strange and dreadful Acts,
And thou before me very strong shall wax;
For I Will make thee to be my Battle-Axe.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Thy Horn shall Iron be, and thy Hoof Brass,
With which thou shall be at down the Serpents Race;
And quickly will I b^ing this thing to pass.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Thy Sons that scattered are, the Earth throughout,
I will soon gather them, do thou not doubt,
And bring them forth too, with a mighty shout.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
The Mighty they shall overcome with Slings,
The Nobles also, and the Heathen Kings,
With Fetters they shall bind, and suchlike things.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
O t^ou who art with raging tempests tossed,
Without all comfort, ready to be lost;
Thy expectation shall not long be crossed.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
I Will lay thy Stones with colors fair and sure,
And thy Foundations shall be Saphirs pure,
Which shall indeed for evermore endure.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
For a small time I have forsaken thee,
But with great mercy thou shall gathered be;
And from all bondage I will set thee free.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Though I have thee afflicted heretofore,
I Will turn my hand upon the bloody Whore,
And will not now afflict thee any more.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Because thou do my holy name profess,
I will establish thee in Righteousness,
And break in pieces them that thee oppress.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
I will come down also from Heaven above,
And will from thee oppression far remove;
Against thee no Weapon formed, shall prosperous prove.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Thy Children too, shall all be taught of me;
Also great peace for ever there shall be,
And I Will bring in the Gentiles unto thee.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Though many do thee grievously deride,
Thy Borders I Will enlarge on every side,
And to thy Seed the whole Earth will divide,
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
For I did promise them, I do confess,
That they should fully all the World possess;
And I Will perform it now in Righteousness
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
I will come now unto my holy Hill,
The Heathen at my presence shall be still;
The Earth with Knowledge I will also fill.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Exalted I shall be; and sit on high,
Above all earthly Kings in Majesty;
And thou shall reign with me triumphantly*
Sing therefore Hall^lujah.
All Kingdoms of the Earth shall now be mine,
And then be sure that they shall all be thine,
And thou in Beauty like a Queen shall shine.
Sing therefore Hallelujah*

ZION. O matchless Grace, and Love beyond degree!
Now am I sure there is none like to thee
In Heaven nor Earth, were there ten thousand more,
For thou have found a Sal^e for every Sore.
By thee I ravished am, O thou most High:
O how my Spirit and my Soul does cry
To thee, O Lord, by whose enlarged Grace*
My Heart's enlarged to run the blessed Race.
Thou shall me lead unto thy living Springs;
From thence I Will mount up, as with Eagle's Wings,
Unto the Heavenly Mount of Faith's Desire,
Where I thy glory great may much admire:
And then will I descend down from above,
To be embraced in the Arms of Love:
I Will hold thee fast, and never let thee go;
For by the loss of thee, what grievous woe
Did I sustain? O what great misery!
Thou hidst thy face, and troubled sore was I.
Thee having, though naught else, what have I not?
Without thee, though all else, what have I got?
Lord, having all things, and not thee, what have I?
Let me enjoy but thee, what further crave I?
Without thee, Lord, things be not what they be;
All things are nothing, when compared with thee:
I am thy portion, Lord, though did me choose;
And thou my po^tion art, I Will ^e'er refuse.
But thou, O God, shall be my Heritage;
Thou art a God of Grace from age to age:
And therefore evermore I Will dwell with thee:
For thou, O God, my hiding place shall be.
In time of trouble and of fury great,
I will unto thy holy Name retreat;
Which is a Tower strong to all that fly
With care and speed, from their iniquity.
Thou light in darkness art, and joy in grief;
Though I in trouble am, thou send'st relief:
When I am down, thou lift'st me up on high;
And I thy Name, O God, will magnify.
And with much patience I will undergo
Thy indignation, Lord, for well I know
That I have sinned against thy holy Name,
And therefore it is that I do suffer shame.
And though this day I am but low and mean,
Poor and despised, and so long time have been;
Yet for my good I know that thou will make it,
And with content I therefore now will take it;
And will wait on thee till thou do arise
To break in pieces all our Enemies.
My precious Cause then I will leave with thee;
Which thou, O Lord, wilt doubtless plead for me.
Thy Voice, great God, is to my Soul so sweet,
I am revived, and set upon my feet:
O I can sing, in hopes of what I see,
Thou have, O Lo^d, laid Blessings up for me.
And now, O Whore, that art my bitter Foe,
My day is near, I would have thee to know:
My God han't me forsook, for he will now
Set me on high, and make thee for to bow,
And shall with shame cover thy filthy Head,
Whilst I in triumph shall upon thee tread.
Because so long thou have upon me ^rod,
And in contempt have said, Where is thy God?
He will therefore in right retaliate,
And bring just Judgments down upon thy pate.

BABYLON. Zion, thy self mistake thou do;
The Day will still be mine,
Wherefore then do thou proudly boast,
As if it would be thine?
I for my Wounds have got a Cure;
At ease I am, and well:
I very safe am, and secure;
And so I know shall dwell.
My Glory is returned to me,
Which I had lost indeed:
No Widowhood more shall I see,
From sorrow I am freed.
A Queen I am, so shall remain,
And have my Pleasures still:
For so long as my Lord does reign,
I can do what I will.
For he does me most dearly love;
And mighty strength has he;
All other Lords he is above,
They all his servants be.
He is the chief in all the Earth,
And sits in Peter 's Chair:
The Keys of Hell and Death he has,
And is past all compare.
The Dragon, from whence did derive
His power, strength and seat,
Thee to the Wilderness did drive,
There for to seek thy meat.
And they have got the same power still:
Who da^es make wa^ with them?
To spoil them, is beyond the skill
Of all that them condemn.
One Emperor, and also Kings,
Love me, as does appear:
My name in every Court so rings,
Ruin I do not fear.
My Sons, likewise, are Noble men,
For Dukes and Lords they be;
They will secure me always, when
Great dangers they do see.
Their Honors, and their Riches too,
From me they have them all;
They know they should them lose also,
If ever I should fall.
The Lawyers too, and Priests, I know,
Dear Children to me are,
To keep me from an overthrow,
Their lives they will not spare.
The Merchants, yea, and thousands more,
Will all lend me their hand;
Ce^tain, I am, from hence therefore*
Secure I long shall stand.
And thus thou clearly may behold,
What strength is on my side;
And although I am now grown old,
With glory I shall ride.
And as for God, the Lord most high,
He has spared me so long;
He does love me assuredly,
And will do me no wrong.
Falsely accused am I therefore,
As if God did mean me,
When he speaks of the wicked Whore,
That shall destroyed be.
It Is some one else, that God does mean;
His Church, in truth, am I,
And from all sin, I am washed clean:
Thy speech I do defy.

ZION. Leave off, leave off, it is thou, O bloody Whore,
Do not thou think, thou shall for evermore
Thus dominere, in pomp and wicked pride:
For God, ere long, thy Rulers will divide;
Those mighty ones, in whom are all thy trust,
Long shall not hold, but into pieces must
Be surely broken; this thou soon shall see:
Here, here, begins thy bitter misery.
Those that did love thee most, will hate thee so,
That they will seek thy utter overthrow;
As was their love, their hatred now will be,
And to destroy thee, they will all agree:
For thou have them enslaved unto thy lust,
Whilst they, like simp^e ones, in no wise durst
Offend, or cross, thy vile and bloody mind,
For they have been bewitch't, they now will find;
By thy alluring Voice and lustful Eye,
To join with thee in all iniquity.
Thy flatteries shall them no more deceive,
Nor thy base Whoredoms thousands more bereave
Of inward Good, and outward Riches, so
As they have been to their eternal woe.
They then shall see thy vile and ill intent,
In setting them against the Innocent.
To sati^fie thy lust and base desire,
Their sinful Hearts, alas, were set on fire:
And through the provocation of the Devil,
Have yielded to commit such horrid Evil,
That there is no Pen can write, no Tongue declare,
What things were acted almost every where.
For throughout Europe, either more or less,
There has been wrought indeed such wickedness;
Which surely would cause Hearts of Stone to melt,
When they consider what my Children felt,
And did endure from savage Tyrants great,
Who cruelly those tender Lambs did treat;
More then did ever the blood-thirsty Turk:
Which Tyrants thou did always set on work.
Some hints of which, here briefly does ensue,
Which I shall now present unto your view.
And what at this time I lay to thy Charge,
I Would briefly speak, and shall not much en^arge:
For men have writ great Volumns, thou do know,
Which of thy cruelties do largely show.
Thou have all men oppressed in every Age;
But eve^mo^e thy spiteful Hellish rage*
Was always set against my Children dear,
Who could not to thy wicked ways adhere.
Thou made the Magistrates their Enemies;
And the worst torments that thou could devise
Thou madst them suffer, sto^ie plainly shows;
Some thou did hang by the Head, some by the Toes.
And thousands thou did burn, and broil on Coals,
And others starve to death in stinking holes.
Some thou did cut to pieces very small,
And Infants Brains were dashed against the Wall,
On Bodies of the Saints thou trod'st like dung;
Thou spard'st no Sex, neither the old nor young.
By thy cursed Crew Women were ravished;
And after cruelly were knocked of the Head.
Some had their Eyes and Tongues by thee pulled out,
Some ha^borless were made, and forced about
To wander, and in Woods and Caves to lie,
Until their days were spent in misery.
Thousands were famished so, till forced to eat
Worms, Frogs and Toads, and Spiders for their meat.
Thy C^uelties all People may admire,
Thou have poor Children forced to set fire
To that same Wood in which their Parents dear,
By burning Flames consumed to Ashes were.
By cruel Massacres were thousands slain,
Who did endure the most in humane pain
That Bishops, Monks, and Friars could devise;
Whose Blood aloud to God for Vengeance cries.
What precious Blood was shed in Italy,
In Spain also, yea and in Germany?
How were the Merindolians put to death?
For Cruelties were ever the like on Earth?
The Massacres in Piedmont were sad;
And many more in France there were as bad.
As for Spain's Inquisition-Cruelties,
And of those many horrid miseries
That they invented for Religions sake,
'Twould fill a Volumn should I them relate:
But I Will forbea^ to speak of them at large,
And leave them to the day wherein the charge
Of all the Righteous Blood that has been shed,
Shall come with Vengeance down upon the Head
Of all thy proud and persecuting crew,
That studied have, the Righteous to undo;
The precious blood, which wicked hands did spil
In Ireland, I do remember still;
Thou there did play a very cruel part,
Poor innocents were there stob'd to the heart;
Yea grievous tortures those poor Lambs did bear,
Because they would not buy thy Popish ware.
But to come nearer home, within this Land,
How many blessed Saints, at thy command,
Were crue^ly to ashes burnt at Stake,
Because God's Truth they no wise durst forsake?
As in the Marian days; ye, and before;
I dare not say that yet thou have given over,
And have forgot to make attempts again;
For I do clearly see, there does remain
The self-same Spirit; had thou but the power,
Both me, and mine, thou quickly would devour:
For secretly, I do perceive, this day,
Thy Romish Ruffins, like to Beasts of prey,
Do now contrive, and privately design
To work the ruin both of me and mine.
Will not those horrid wretched cruelties
That thou have done, thy raging lust suffice?
Why thou art drunk already, and do reel,
And yet thou cryest, O give, O give me still
The blood of Heretics, that I may drink,
O fill my Cup up to the very brink.
It Is full, O Whore, for this I clearly see,
All precious blood the Lord does charge on thee,
That ever was shed, from Righteous Abels days,
'T^ill all be found in thee, the Scripture says.
O shameless, vile, and wretched bloody Whore!
Have drunk so much, and would thou yet have more*
What blood of Prophets and Apostles too,
Of Christ, the Lord, whom thou have also slew?
And since those days, have many millions slain,
Whose Blood, and Souls, do to the Lord complain
For Righteous Judgments to be poured on thee,
For all thy vile and bloody cruelty.
Prepare thy self for ruin, for I Am sure,
The patient God much longer will not endure,
Ere he avenge the cause of his dear Son,
For all the wrongs thou have unto him done;
Those who would see more of thy cruelties,
Let them read my Son Fox his Histories.

BABYLON. O why do thou father Christ's death on me?
This is a lie, all people plain may see
That I am free of this, all people know,
For who put him to death, the Scriptures show;
Don't charge his death on me, for I am clear,
But Heretics fit were not to live here;
I therefore did such kill, and sweep away,
And so it is fit I should this present day;
For if to holy Church they will not be turned,
It Is fit, in truth, that they should all be burned.

ZION. That this is true, vile Whore, I Will prove it plain,
That thou have my most blessed Jesus slain;
For if all precious Blood is found in thee,
That ever was spilt by hands of cruelty,
It follows then, by consequent most clear,
That thou have shed the Blood of Christ, most dear*
The former's so; I showed it thee before,
Therefore it is true: be silent, say no more,
But stop thy mouth, for this I further see,
That many times he has been slain by thee;
Under thy Romish power, his Flesh did die,
In Spirit since thou did him crucify:
And what thou have unto God's Servants done,
He takes as if thou did it to his Son.
He also is the Head, they Members are
Of his own Body, whence it does appear,
Thou have tormented him in every part,
And have oft-times plucked out his very heart.
Thou have Imprisoned, Scourged him also,
Ye burnt and hanged, and starved him I know:
Can the dear body thus be put to pain,
And not the head the like sore grief sustain?
And more then this, to show what thou have done,
The Father, Son, and blessed Saints are one;
What ere therefore thou have done unto me,
Thou have it done unto the Trinity:
Who touch God's Saints, the apple of his eye
Do also touch; O dreadful tyranny!
For men to persecute the Lord of Life,
And with the mighty God to be at strife!
When Saul afflicts the Saints, then Christ does cry,
Saul, Saul, It Is me that thou do crucify.
This is the reason of thy wicked spite
Thou bear unto the blessed Saints of Light;
It is, because that they do testify
Against thy Whoredoms and Adultery.
As they are men, thou do not persecute,
But it is because they will not God's Name pollute;
It Is Christ in them, and them for his Name sake,
That thou do hate, and such a spoil do make;
But it is from the Lord, that they cannot now
Unto thy whoredoms and thy falsehoods bow;
Revenge thy self on God, who is the cause
Why they contemn all thy invented Laws;
Let these alone, do not in mischiefs run,
For these, alas, what have these poor Lambs done?
Ye Persecutors all, mind well I pray,
The dreadful work you are about this day.
But I Will return, and talk with thee yet further
Who guilty art, most clear, of horrid murder;
And yet do wipe thy mouth, and proudly say,
I innocent have been unto this day,
And am in truth Christ's holy Church, I know
H^s love is such, there is none shall me overthrow.
But to confute thy lies and insolence,
And stand in Truths and blessed Saints defense;
No other Arguments need^ to bring,
For to disprove thee in this very thing;
For it is most clear, by all this horrid evil,
That thou vile Whore, art of and from the Devil;
Thou art no Church of Christ, he does thee hate,
And with his Soul does thee abominate;
Christ's Church his Members never did annoy,
Nor persecute, and millions thus destroy.
To blind men's eyes, thou have thy former tricks,
To tell the World that they are Heretics;
But after that way thou call'st Heresy,
That God they worship, whom thou do defy.
And here vile Worm, do thou think to contend
With God the Lord, whom thou do thus offend?
O^ think thou he has quite passed by,
All thy vile acts and cruel tyranny?
Do think he will not fulfill his holy Word,
And in his fury draw his glittering Sword?
Do thou not at his presence fear and quake,
Who with a frown will make all Nations shake?
Do think that man can save thee from his stroke,
That thou go on, and still do him provoke?
Do think, because he has spared thee so long,
He Will never avenge on thee my grievous wrong?
Or do thou think the Pope, that Fiend of Hell,
Who 'bove all Gods, does in God's Temple dwell,
Can save thee from that great and dreadful blow,
Which will produce thy utter overthrow?
Alas vile wretch, for all thy mighty strength,
There is no hope but down thou must at length.
What God resolves to do, on Sea or Land,
No Beast, nor Devil, can the same withstand.
As to the Pope, let me speak in thy Ear,
His time is short for to continue here;
For he that has presumed Kings to depose,
Shall soon destroyed be by some of those
Of whom he now nor dreads, nor stands in fear;
The truth of this, ere long, will plain appear.
This is the Beast, that did from Hell ascend,
And thither shall be cast too in the end:
This, this is he that ha^h so often swelled thee
With hopes, and has unto this day upheld thee;
For his false Pardons, and uncivil power,
Encouraged thee my Children to devour.
Though his Foundation's laid as deep as Hell,
And does in strength abundantly excel
The g^eatest Potentate, who heretofore
Ever swaid a Scepter; nay, I add much more;
Though he himself does greatly magnify,
Above the blessed Stars that are on high,
Yet he shall fall, and never rise again:
Thy hopes thou have of him is therefore vain;
He is condemned, the Sentence that is gone,
His day of execution does come on;
And to be short, I fear thee not at all,
Do now thy worst, you both together shall
Drink of one Cup, with all thy lovers too,
For thou shall surely know what God can do.
Thy Magpy-Merchants then shall cry and howl,
And mou^nfu^ly thy ruin thus condole.
Alas, alas, this City great and fair,
Sumptuous and very brave, beyond compare;
How in a moment are her judgments come,
Her fall, her ruin, and her final doom:
Our Trade is gone, and all our Merchandise,
And ah! there is none pitties our grievous cries:
Alas, alas, we all are quite undone,
What shall we do, or whither shall we run?
O that the Mountains, and the Hills would cover
Us, till the vengeance of the Lord be over!
But to conclude, all people, this I say,
From Babylon see that you haste away;
For if you don't, then you too late will mourn,
And curse the day that ever you were born.
Like as the Hee-Goat does before the Flock,
So haste away, and fly to Christ your Rock:
For if you follow her, then I am sure,
You will destru^ion to your Souls procure;
For you like Oxen to the Slaughter go,
Though like a Bird ensnared, you do not know
The danger you are in, and what 'twill cost,
Till Soul, and Body, Life and all is lost;
Many She Has wounded, and has strong men slain;
Let all Gods Saints then, from her ways refrain:
Her ways do lead unto the depths of Hell*
Who follows her, shall with the Devils dwell.

The Authors Request.
I.
SOme things, great God, my Soul does long to have,
Before these mortal days of mine be over,
Which things, Lord of thee I do humbly crave,
Before I go from hence and be no more;
Until which things, O Lord, I do obtain,
I shall be filled with sorrow, grief, and pain.
II.
Alas, my sorrows they do greatly double;
O that thou would be pleased to hear me Lord,
So should my Soul thereby be freed from trouble,
If that these things to me thou would afford;
Until, O Lord, thou grants me my request,
I cannot give over, nor give thee any rest.
III.
It Is not for riches of this wicked world,
Nor for vain honor, Lord that I do cry;
They with a puff alas, oft-times are hurled,
They get them wings and quite away dofly;
These things I know, dear God, uncertain be,
I ask them not, some better things I see.
IV.
Nor are they earthly momentary pleasures
For which, great God, I come now unto thee,
But it is for thy everlasting Treasures,
Which now I seek and beg, O Lord, for me;
Can Riches, Honors, Pleasures to me give,
The things that I do want whilst here I live?
V.
No, no, O Lord, the things I ask of thee
More precious are; the first that I shall urge,
Thy blessed presence, Lord, give unto me;
My heart from sin, Lord, also do thou purge.
These are the things, in part, for which I cry,
Lord, grant me this before I come to die.
VI.
Thy presence is more sweet unto my heart
Then Honey, or the Honeycomb, indeed;
And I will choose, O Lord, the better part,
From sin therefore, O let my Soul be freed;
And I thy holy Name shall magnify,
And happy be, when ever I come to die.
VII.
Let thy good Spirit ever be my guide,
And in thy house for ever let me dwell;
And from thy Truths, Lord, never let me slide,
Nor find my Conscience to be like a Hell.
And I thy Name, Lord, evermore shall praise,
And happy be, when ended are my days.
VIII.
And whatsoever, Lord, my state is here,
Let me therein always be well content;
When I in trouble am, Lord, then be nere,
And from me never do thy self absent;
And then, O Lord, I never more will fear,
What ever I suffer for thy Namesake dear.
IX.
Teach me always, O Lord, that heavenly skill,
My days to number, as thy Saints have done;
And ever let me yield unto thy Will,
And wait on thee until my Glass is run;
So shall I then thy holy Name adore*
And sound thy praise, O Lord my God, therefore.
X.
Lord, bridle thou my tongue, and make me see
How few my days are, O how short their length!
Incline my heart always to trust in thee;
Remove thy Scourge, O Lord, or give me strength:
Be thou my Way, my Strength, my Truth, my Light,
So shall I learn to live and die upright.
XI.
When, Lord, I hungry am, be thou my Meat;
When I in darkness am, be light to me;
And when I weary am, Lord, be my Seat;
And when in Prison, do thou set me free:
And I thy Name, O Lord, will glorify,
And walk in thankfulness until I die.
XII.
In time of wrath, O Lord, and fury great,
Be unto me a Fence, and Tower strong;
And let me to thy blessed Name retreat,
Till thou avenged art for all the wrong
That wicked men, O Lord, have done to me,
And unto all, dear God, that do love thee.
XIII.
Let me, with patience, run that blessed race,
And from my weights which grievious have bin;
Lord set me free, that I may run apace,
And the immortal Crown, the prize, may win:
Grant me thy fear, O Lord, guard well my Path,
O give me patience, and with patience, Faith.
XIV.
Make thy dear Saints, great God, all of one heart,
Let their divisions end also by thee,
Let them unite again, and never part
Whilst there is either Earth or Sea;
And then thy praises, Lord, I will declare,
For I shall then be freed from all my care.
XV.
Thy Saints, dear Lord, are many Members joined
To make one body, whose blessed Head thou art;
Let all thy Children, Lord, be of one mind,
Let this one Body, Lord, have but one heart;
Then shall I see indeed a blessed increase,
Of Zions Glory, and of Isreal's Peace.
XVI.
Thy Children dear. O Lord, offended have,
Do thou in mercy all their sins pass by;
Have mercy, Lord, thy mercy do I crave,
That they may live thy name to magnify;
And I thy mercy, Lord, will show to all,
And warning take, l^st that I also fall.
XVII.
Zion remember, Lord, in all her grief,
She mourns, she weeps, she cries, and is in pain;
Do thou in mercy send her such relief,
That she with cause may never more complain;
And then, O Lord, my sorrows will be over*
And I thy praises, Lord, will sing therefore.
XVIII.
Over all the world, now let thy Gospel spread;
All Popish enterprises Lord prevent:
Let Papists never here get any head,
As is their purpose, Lord, and full intent;
And then* I shall, O Lord, without all shame,
Ascribe the Glory to thy Holy Name.
XIX.
Lord, cast thine eyes upon those cruel Foes;
Prevent their purpose, who this day combine
Against thy Flock, O God, that thou have chose;
Do thou make them like Chaff before the wind;
Preserve thy Heritage out of their hand,
Establish Truth and Peace, Lord, in the Land.
XX.
O thou, great God, whose Judgments are severe,
Whose Mercies too are full of sweet compassion;
Do thou, Lord, scourge thy Foes both far and near,
And grant to me the joy of thy Salvation;
And I will spend the remnant of my days
In Psalms of thanks to thee, and Songs of praise.
XXI.
Make haste, great God, to judge the bloody Whore*
Thy Righteous Judgments do thou execute;
O let her fall, and never rise no more,
Lord, don't deny me this my earnest Suit:
But let me see her down before I die,
That I thy Name therefore may magnify.
XXII.
Establish, Lord, the Kingdom of the Just;
O let thy Son, upon his blessed Throne,
Destroy the Kingdom, Lord, of the vile Beast;
Let Christ, his foes to conquer, now go on,
That in the heights of Zion I may sing,
Hosanna, in the highest, to my King.
XXIII.
What thou, O Lord, have un^o Zion told,
Of blessings that thou have for her in store;
Those things, great God, O let my eyes behold,
And then let me go hence and be no more.
No more, dear God, I mean, as now am I,
For I shall live to all eternity.
XXIV.
There Is one thing more, O Lord, I beg for me,
Let me always be well prepared to die;
And this do I, Lord, also crave of thee,
To reign with Christ to all eternity.
And then, great God, when this short life is over,
With Angels I will sing for evermore.
XXV.
What ever of my Suit thou do deny,
Grant me true Faith, let me always believe,
That through Christ's death, when ere I come to die,
A Paradise from thee I shall receive.
O grant, dear God, to me this one request,
Let me enjoy but thee, and I will rest.
For having thee, O Lord, I all things have,
And having thee, there is nothing more I crave.
An Alarm to the wise and foolish Virgins.
I.
ALL you that fear
The Lord, give ear
To what I do indite,
There is a cry,
The Bridegroom's nigh,
It Is now about midnight.
II.
Awake, awake,
Your Lamps to take,
and longer do not slumber;
Them do you trim,
To tend on him
unto the Wedding Chamber*
III.
You Virgins all,
To you I call;
What Oil have you in store?
If you have none,
You are undone,
Look to it now therefore.
IV.
Watch you always,
Our Lord does say,
None knows the day nor hour;
Watch carefully,
For now it is nigh,
The day of his great power.
V.
Wherefore arise,
Open your eyes,
The Day Star does appear;
Rise from your Bed,
Lift up your head,
Redemption now draws near.
VI.
All who are wise,
Their time do prize,
Preparing for their Lord;
To them he will
His Word fulfill,
His presence to afford.
VII.
But fools do haste,
Their time to waste,
In sleep and slothfulness;
Yet they do dream,
I do presume,
Of glory ne'ertheless.
VIII.
But they indeed,
On fancies feed;
'Twill come to such an ebb,
That they shall see,
Their hopes will be,
Like to the Spiders Web.
IX.
They still do keep
Themselves asleep,
And know not where they be;
Were they awake,
How would they quake,
Their woeful state to see.
X.
You who remain,
Carnal and vain,
In a cold formal state;
And all the while,
Have got no Oil;
You Will mourn when it is too late.
XI.
You who profess,
And not possess,
The Truth in Life and Power;
Your state is bad,
And will be sad,
Before this day is over.
XII.
What is the shell
To the kernel,
Or Chaff unto the Wheat?
You husks do take,
And do forsake
Your Souls most precious meat.
XIII.
It Is the last day;
O, therefore pray,
And faithful now abide,
Unto the Lord,
With one accord,
And be on the Lambs side.
XIV.
And have a care,
You do not dare,
In Babel to remain;
For if you do,
Then also know,
With her you shall be slain.
XV.
Come, come away,
Without delay,
With all speed and endeavor;
Her end is come,
Her fatal doom;
Your Souls therefore deliver.
XVI.
You now do hear,
Her ruin's near;
Your sins therefore forsake;
And you will prevent,
Great punishment,
Of which she must partake.
XVII.
All her pleasures,
And rich treasures,
Abhor as a great evil;
Gods Word does show,
Who love them do,
Shall go unto the Devil.
XVIII.
Do you remove,
Your Souls, dear Love,
From Earth, and things thereof;
For this has bin,
Your very sin;
Now cast it therefore off.
XIX.
On things above,
Set you your love,
Affections and desire;
These things below,
God will o'erthrow,
With his consuming fire.
XX.
Alas, poor Souls,
Be not such fools,
To labor for the Wind;
The Wealth you heap,
You shall not keep,
It Is true, ere long you will find.
XXI.
Do you not rest
On self-int'rest,
But wholly for the Lord;
For he will at last,
You surely blast,
According to his Word.
XXII.
There are some men,
Cry Lord, When, when,
Will thou in Glory come?
Who will repent,
And then relent,
They prayed for his Kingdom.
XXIII.
For it will be,
They then shall see,
As when on scapes a Bear;
That being gone,
Comes a Lion,
Does him in pieces tear.
XXIV.
Subdue your sin,
For it has bin,
Your chiefest Enemy;
I say, again,
Let it not reign,
Thoroughly it crucify.
XXV.
For in this Land,
There Is none shall stand,
And happy be indeed,
But only those,
Whom God has chose,
Who on Christ Jesus feed.
XXVI.
Continually,
O, therefore cry,
For Christ and precious Grace;
That with his blessed,
You all may rest,
When you have run your race.
XXVII.
And the Bridegroom,
When he does come,
He will you entertain;
And you shall then,
Be happy men,
And with him ever reign.
XXVIII.
Yea, gloriously,
In majesty,
Your honor shall excel;
Here will I end,
Who am your Friend,
And bid you all farewell.
A POSTSCRIPT: Or, an After-Word to ENGLAND.
TO thee, O Land, this after-word I write,
Which does love darkness, and abhor the light;
I finish cannot this Work, until that I,
Against thy wickedness do testify;
And do pronounce the Righteous Gods decree,
Which will with vengeance executed be
In a short time; and that because thou have,
Let Zion, like a barren Field, lie waste:
She has bin trod upon in great disdain,
And yet from thee no comfort could obtain;
Thou have not succored her in great distress,
Nor helped her, though in the Wilderness:
She, as a stranger, fain would so^ourn here,
But thou not willing art, as does appear,
Her to embrace; no nor the Gospel neither,
But fain thou would be rid of them together.
Alas, thou sinful Nation, most unwise,
That hates thy friends, and loves thy enemies;
What will thou do over a little space?
I much lament thy sad and heavy case;
Thy sins more vile then Sodoms does abound:
Some Righteous ones, indeed, in thee are found,
Or else, before this time, I fully know,
God had, like Sodom, wrought thy overthrow.
God has with great compassion born with thee,
But yet thou art as vile; this I do see:
Judgments therefore already are begun,
And God will make thee bow ere he has done;
He Will break thy heart, and make thee for to cry,
Lord, I have sinned, thy Name I glorify.
God has begun to make thy people few,
And made them know, that they are like the dew,
Which early passes, when the Sun does rise,
Or like the Shadow which so swiftly flies.
The glory of thy City God has stained,
Which like a Queen so long a time has reigned.
But yet, the worst, O England, is behind;
Alas, these judgments I do clearly find,
Have made thee worser then thou were before;
Instead of healing, they have made thy sore
Appear so dangerous, that I do see,
There is no help, nor cure now for thee.
Woe, woe, unto all people high and low,
My Soul does mourn and bleed, because I know
The day of vengeance does draw very near,
Wherein all people shall cry out with fear;
They then will weep, and bitterly will mourn,
And curse the day that ever they were born
To see such days, the which will surely come,
Which will be like, though not the day of doom.
Thou will repent that ere thou did provoke
The Righteous God; for why, his dreadful stroke
Will be so sore, that some will seek to die;
But Death, alas, from them away will fly;
While others they their bitter days shall end,
A just reward, from God, whom they offend.
Some now there be alive, which shall behold,
The dreadful things which to thee have bin told.
With Nineveh, therefore, with speed repent,
If happily thou may Gods Wrath prevent;
Which otherwise will come on thee, O Land,
Before which Wrath, alas, no flesh can stand.
Cease to do evil, I do thee advise,
Learn to do well, I do thee advertise;
Break of all yoaks, set the oppressed free,
And labor for a Christian Liberty.
The Pope, that Hellish Beast, do thou withstand,
And all who ready are at his command,
To yield unto that wicked bloody Whore,
Who thinks to have the day again once more;
Do thou in time their purpose frusterate,
Who enemies are both to Prince and State.
Yield thou obedience unto God and King,
Rebellion is a vile and cursed thing;
which I exhort thee to defy and hate,
And utterly for to alominate:
For like the sin of witchcraft, it is I know,
And those that guilty are God will o'erthrow.
If thou this counsel take, I dare not say,
But God may turn his furious wrath away;
And thou may notwithstanding at the length,
Shine forth in glory and in perfect strength.
FINIS.

