DOOMSDAY. OR, The great DAY of the Lord drawing nigh; by certain Signs and
Tokens thereof, foretold by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherein is Declared, That there shall be an end of this World; and that all
men shall appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, there to be made
partakers either of everlasting Life in the Kingdom of Heaven, or of
everlasting Woe and miserable Torments in Hell to all Eternity.

The twelfth Edition with Additions.

Very useful for all those that desire to be saved.

Acts 17.31. God has appointed a Day, in the which he will judge the World.

Joel 3.30, 31. And I will show wonders in Heaven and in Earth, Blood and Fire:
The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before the
great and terrible Day of the Lord comes.

By ANDREW JONES, M. A.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed for John Andrews, at the White Lion near Pye-Corner. 1660.

Courteous Reader.
THere is lately published an excellent and profitable Sermon, called Christ's
first Sermon, or, The necessity, duty, and practice of Repentance, opened and
applied. Also Christ's last Sermon, or, The everlasting estate and condition of
all men in the world to come: very godly Books, and is but three pence price.

There are likewise seven other small Books, all of them very godly, and very
comfortable for thy soul. One is entitled, The Fathers last Blessing. The
second, The Devils disease, or, the sin of Pride arraigned and condemned. The
third, Englands Faithful Physician. The fourth, The Plain Man's plain Pathway
to Heaven. The fifth, The Black Book of Conscience. The sixth, The dreadful
Character of a Drunkard. The seventh, The Charitable Christian. All very
necessary for these Licentious Times, and each of them being but of two pence
price. They are to be sold by John Andrews at the White Lion near Pye-Corner.

DOOMSDAY: OR, The End of all Things.
Matthew. 24.29. etc. Immediately after the tribulation of these days, shall the
Sun be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light; Then shall they see the
Son of man coming in the Clouds, with power and great glory: When ye see these
things, know that it is near, even at the door.

As the days of Noah were, so shall the coming of the Son of man be: For in
the days before the Flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and given
in marriage, and they knew not till the Flood came and took them all away: So
shall the coming of the Son of man be.

Watch therefore, for ye know not in what hour the Lord comes: therefore be
ready, for in such an hour as ye know not, the Son of man comes. And blessed
is that servant, whom the Lord when he comes shall find so doing.


CErtain it is, that there shall be a Day of Judgment, wherein all mankind
shall be judged, and the earth and all therein shall be destroyed by fire:
which Truth is believed by all but the Sadduces, and Atheistical Infidels, of
whom this age is full, who think there is no Resurrection: but how few are they
who prepare themselves for this great Day, and make themselves ready to meet
the Lord at his coming.

The Bridegroom is coming, and yet most men with the foolish Virgins, have not
prepared their Lamps. Our Savior Jesus Christ in the 24. of Matthew, having at
large showed the signs of his coming to Judgment, and withal giving us many
fore-warnings, that thereby we might be fore-armed. In the 25. Chapter he shows
how unprepared many should be against his coming: and as a caution to us, he
sets down the event of their unpreparedness. Christ in the foregoing Chapter,
bids them watch and pray; but they (as you may see in the 5. Verse) all
slambred and slept: And at midnight was a great cry made; when they were all
asleep, then came the Bridegroom suddenly as a Thief in the night; and when
they should have been ready to have received him, they were to seek for Oil:
And so not being ready, the door was shut against them; and though they cried,
Lord, Lord, open to us, yet the Lord said unto them, I know you not, ver. 17.
Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of
man comes.

And now behold the day draws nigh, the Judge stands at the door, James
5.9. He is at hand; let us not therefore put far away from us the day of the
Lord: for yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and not tarry.

Let us be prepared and in a readiness, lest we be taken unawares, as the
foolish Virgins were, and so be shut out of heaven for ever.

God has appointed a day in which he will judge the world; and how soon this
Day may be, we know not, perhaps sooner then we are aware of: it may be if not
this year, yet the next. Although we know not certainly the time when this
great day will be, yet we may see it cannot be far off, if we look but into the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.11. We are
they upon whom the ends of the world are come. If therefore the ends of the
world were come upon them who lived sixteen hundred years ago, then surely the
day of Judgment cannot be far off. Zeph. 1.14. The great Day of the Lord is
near, it hastneth greatly.

And Mar. 3.2. John the Baptist preached, Repent, for the Kingdom of heaven is
at hand. St. Augustine says, the World shall last six Ages. The first from
Adam to Noah; the second from Noah to Abraham; the third from Abraham to David;
the fourth from David to the Transmigration of Babylon; the fifth from thence
until the coming of Christ in the flesh; and the sixth from Christ's coming in
the flesh, until the last coming to judgment: so that now we li^e in the last
Age. O that men were wise! that they would think of this day, Whether I eat or
drink (says St. Jerome) or whatsoever I do, methinks I hear this saying
sounding in mine ears, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment. John the Baptist
he was the forerunner of Christ, and we all know it was not long after his
coming that Christ himself came: and now the forerunners of the day of
judgment are already come, and the day it self will suddenly follow: When once
the Servants are come, the Master will not be long. God has foretold us, that
before his coming to judgment, such and such things should come to pass; and
we have seen these things come to pass: therefore let us be ready.

In Matthew 24. the Disciples asked Christ, What should be the sign of his
coming, and of the end of the world? And Christ answered them, saying, Take
heed, let no man deceive you; for many shall come in my name, saying, I am
Christ, and shall deceive many, Verse 5. and Verse 24. There shall arise false
Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonderr. And has
not this been fulfilled in our days: I tremble to think how impiously,
blasphemously, and cursedly many wretched creatures have abused the Lord Jesus
Christ; some affirming themselves to be the Virgin Mary; others the Lord Jesus
Christ himself. O what a sad account will these men give, when they shall
appear before the great Tribunal of the Lord.

Another sign of the day of judgment being at hand, is expressed, Ver. 6, 7.
There should be wars and rumors of wars, Nation against Nation, and Kingdom
against Kingdom. What cruel unnatural bloody Wars have been seen? Not only
Nation against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, but Brother against
Brother: yea, the Father has killed his own Son, and the Son has killed his
own Father, even as Christ foretold, Mark 13.10. The brother shall betray the
Brother to death, and the Father the Son, and the Children should rise up
against their Parents, and cause them to be put to death; and many shall be
offended, and shall betray one another, and hate one another. says Christ.
When ever was there more hatred and treachery then now? Can any Age of the
world show the like for envy and malice? will not one brother betray another
for gain? Behold these things ought not so to be: but this is a sign of the end
of the world. And because iniquity shall abound, says Christ, the love of many
shall wax cold. When did sin so much abound as now? when ever was there more
Sabbath-breaking and drunkenness, whoring, and swearing, and cursing, and all
manner of abominable evils then now? yea, even little ones are skillful to sin
before they are skilful to go; young Children great Sinners: And for Love and
Charity, when was it ever less then now? It is cold indeed now.

Another sign expressed, is, The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the
Moon shall not give her light; there shall be blood, and fire, with vapors of
smoke. What strange and sad Eclipses have we lately seen? And the Lord has
forewarned us by many strange sights from Heaven, as ever mortal men beheld:
and for Fire there has been many sad spectacles now of late; witness
Fleet Street, Tredneedlestreet, and Southwark, in which places were near twoh
undred habitations consumed. And this has not only happened in and about the
City of London, but likewise several other places of the Countries about have
been partakers of the same sorrows: what strange sights were lately seen in the
mountains of Sardona? In Spain was lately taken a monster with seven Heads, and
Arms like a man, but the lower parts like a Satyr, with cloven feet. Surely
these are the wonders of the Lord, declaring to us, that the great day of
Judgment is at hand.

The last sign Christ tells us of, is in Mat. 24.38. The days immediately
before the last day, should be like the days of Noah before the flood came.
The Lord grant we be not taken as they were suddenly before they were aware. In
the days before the Flood people were eating and drinking, marrying, and
giving in marriage: following after their voluptuous delights, and sinful
pleasures, and in that condition the flood came and took them all away; so
shall the coming of the Son of man be. And now men eat and drink, and follow
the swing of their own lusts, saying within themselves as the rich fool; Let us
eat and drink, and take our fill of pleasures, for to morrow shall be as this
day, and much more abundant; these pleasures shall continue for ever. Whereas
they should say, Let us watch and pray, for to morrow we may die: for it is
appointed for all men once to die, and then comes judgment. Solomon says,
Rejoice O young man, and let thy heart cheer thee: but know for all this thou
must come to judgment. And seeing (as Christ says) we have seen all these
things come to pass, let us know that this Day is near, even at the door. The
old World because they would take no warning, the Flood came and drowned them
all: they had 120. years to repent in, and yet would not hearken. Nineve had
but 40. days, yet they repented. Israel had 40. years time to repent in. But
who knows how long time we shall have to repent? We have had long time already,
hundreds of years, but we are still a stiff-necked and disobedient people.

St. Paul tells us, 1 Timothy 4. In the last days there should be a departure from
the Faith, and giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils. And 2 Timothy 3.1. In the last days perilous times should come, men should be lovers of
themselves covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy. Then certainly we are those upon whom the end of the world
is come; for how these things have been fulfilled, is very dreadful to
consider. The Prophet Zephaniah, Chap. 1. ver. 14. says, The great day of the
Lord is near, it is near, it hastneth greatly. And ver. 15. he tells us, It is
a day of wrath and distress, a day of desolation, a day of darkness, and
gloominess, a day of clouds, and thick darkness.

The day of Judgment, although it shall be a day of joy and rejoicing to the
godly, it shall be a day of woe to the wicked; for who may abide the day of his
coming? and who shall be able to stand when he appears, Mal. 3.2. Then wicked
men shall cry to the mountains to fall upon them, and hide them from the wrath
of God; for in that day, the wicked and all the Nations that forget God, shall
be thrown into Hell, there to abide for ever, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire, as S. Jude says, That day shall burn as an oven, and the wicked
shall be as stubble, and that day shall burn them up, says the Lord. Mal. 4.1.
But to those that fear his Name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with
healing in his wings, and shall shine upon the just, and receive them into the
Kingdom of heaven, where are joys unspeakable, and full of glory.

And now having showed you the certainty of this great day of judgment, and
forewarned you of the near approach thereof: I will conclude with some few
exhortations to all, to prepare your selves for this great day.

Is it so then, that there is a day of Judgment, and is that day at hand? then
let every one get Oil, get grace into the Lamp of his heart, and rouse himself
up from the world, that whenever the Lord comes he may be ready. We should
live every day, as if it were the last day we had to live; for if judgment
comes not, yet death will certainly come: We know not when we lay our selves
down to sleep whether we shall awake again. Many have been suddenly surprised
by death, that they have been taken away before they were fit to dye. Although
nothing is so certain as death, yet nothing so uncertain as the hour and time
when death will come. The fool said in his heart, Soul take thy ease, eat,
drink, and be merry, for thou have goods laid up for many years: But what says
God? Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee, then whose shall
those be? thou can carry nothing with thee.

He had provided that which would do him no good: certainly had he said thus,
he had laid up a good stock for eternity: O my soul, God has exceedingly blessed
thee in this life with geat increase in abundance, what shall I do to lay up
some portion for them for another day? This will I do, that as God has given
me them, I will make a good use of them: I will not abuse them to satisfy my
lust, but I will freely lend them to the Lord: I will relieve the poor, cloathe
the naked, and feed the hungry: for in so doing, I shall lay up a good stock
for eternal life. Certainly had he done this, God would have said unto him,
Well done good and faithful servant, thou have improved thy Masters Talent,
enter thou into thy Masters joy. For certainly what we give to the poor we lend
to the Lord, and he will repay us again threefold for it at the last day, when
all men shall be judged according to what they have done in the flesh, whether
it be good, or whether it be evil: and then the poor man shall be as much
respected before God, as the greatest Monarch or Emperor, and perhaps more, for
God is no respecter of persons, but he will give to every man according to his
works, whether he be poor or no. For we must all appear before the
Iudgement-seat of Christ, small and great, rich and poor, where we shall be
made partakers of eternal happiness in heaven, or sad spectacles of eternal
torments in hell. For God is a righteous Judge, he fears none, but will render
mercy to them that have showed mercy; but to the unrighteous, cruel, and
hard-hearted sinners, according to their own deserts. Then will he divide the
chaff from the wheat, the sheep from the goats, and set the sheep on his right
hand, and the goats on his left: and so pronounce sentence to the righteous,
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world: But to the wicked and ungodly, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And then what will the
profane swearer, curser, and blasphemer have to say? What will become of the
Drunkard, Whoremonger, and Adulterer? they shall wish then for the mountains to
fall upon them, or that they might be suddenly destroyed. The Lord awaken every
sinful soul, that he may repent and amend his sinful life, and turn to the Lord
with speed, lest that great and terrible day of the Lord come upon him
unawares: For as the Lightning lightneth from one place of Heaven unto the
other, so shall the coming of the Son of man be. Likewise also as it was in the
days of Lot, they eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they
builded: but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and
brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all; even thus shall it be in the day
when the Son of man shall be revealed, Luke 17.20, 30. And before him shall be
gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as the
shepherd divides the sheep from the goats; and the goats shall be sent into
everlasting punishment, and the sheep into everlasting life, Matthew. 25.32, 45.
For at the end of the world, the Angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked
from among the just, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, where shall be
weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth for evermore, Matthew. 13.49, 50.
Therefore let every one take heed, watch and pray, for we know not when the
time is, Mark 12.33, 34, 35. For the Son of man is as a man taking a far
journey, who left his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every
man his work, and willed the Porter to watch. Watch ye therefore, for ye know
not when the master of the house comes, at even, or at midnight, or at
cock-crowing, or in the morning; lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping.
And what I say unto you, I say unto all men, watch. For blessed shall they be,
whom the Lord when he comes shall find so doing. Amen. Even so come Lord
Jesus, come quickly.

FINIS.

