BY GEORGE JONES OF Hatton-Garden Holborn, A Corner-house, three doors from the
Sign of the New Hole in the Wall, over against Baldwins-Gardens, near the
George; (Student in the Art of Physic and Surgery for the space of about
thirty years)
His Book of Mighty Cures; Cures of all sorts, the Peoples Names, Men, Women,
and Children, of all Ages, the Places where they live: the like not known to be
done in this Age.
I Desire you will take notice that although it has pleased God to give me the
gift of Healing for a time, he does not give the like to every one that
practices Physic: therefore I would have you beware who you deal with, and
take no Physic of any but such as are known to do great Cures. I can tell
presently what good can be done for you, and give you speedy help, if there be
any to be had: but young Beginners may practice on your bodies many years
before they can learn to do good. I give my true Judgment to all for nothing:
Read over the Cures in this Book which I have done in City and Country; they
are your Neighbors round about you, inquire of them from their own mouths, and
so come to me: you will find many good people among them which dare not tell a
lie; but if you will not believe this, you will certainly slight all that God
would do for you, and become faithless in evrey good work, and so live and die
in pain and misery, it may be before half the number of your days are spent.

I confess Paul may plant, and Apollo water, but God gives increase: and I
believe that above forty thousand in City and Country are my Witnesses how God
has followed me with his Blessing on my doing Cures.

I would not have spoken so much, but that I see so many pretenders to Physic
that never practiced before, who use all the means they can to cry down those
who do good, and cry up themselves, endeavoring to turn Light into Darkness,
that their dark works may not come to the Light: But I shall leave them, and
give you notice that I practice, Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays at my House
in Hatton-Garden; and the other three days of the week at my House in
Moorfields, in the upper Fields as you go into Crown-Alley on the left hand,
two Posts before my Door with two Golden Balls on the tops of them; and do
intend (God willing) to practice there all the year, and from year to year.

First, I will set down some of the Virtues of my Electuary: and after that may
eight several sorts of Balsams, with their Virtues.

1. My Balsam of Balsams, very well known in City and Country for its wonderful
Virtues. 2. A Balsam for the Leprosy. 3. A Balsam for the Rickets. 4. A Balsam
for Deafness. 5. A Balsam, for old Ulcered Gonorrhea. 6. A Balsam for the
Ptisick and Cough. 7. A Balsam of twenty shillings the ounce. 8. A Balsam for a
weak Back. 9. The next is the signs of the Scurvy, and the Virtues of my
Friendly Pill. 10. And after that all sorts of Great Cures, both of young and
old, which I have cured; inquire of them. 11. Then a Diet for Children when
they breed Teeth. 12. A word to Men how to preserve Health. 13. Next how to
make the everlasting Cordial Drink, Water, or Spirits, which the Cheats have
cried up to Cure all Diseases.
Their Virtues I shall set down in order, and Directions how to apply most of
them.

FIrst, the ELECTUARY, of two shillings the ounce, which I have made better
then ever I made before, and it will work much better.

A Man or a Woman must take as much as a small Nut at night going to bed, and
so much in the morning fasting, and you may eat and drink what you please, and
go where you please, keeping your self temperate. It has a pleasant taste, and
you may eat it as you eat Bread, or roll it into Pills, or dissolve it in a
little Ale, or any thing what you please any way, so it goes into the Body, it
will do its work: and you may give the same quantity to any above sixteen
years: and for those which are between eight and sixteen, you may give them
half the quantity: and for Children under eight, give according to their age
and strength, more or less, according as you find it. It gives three or four
Stools a day; and, as you have occasion, continue taking it tell you are well.
You can hardly err in giving it, it is so safe, and may be taken any time of
the year.

It does (to the best of my knowledge) Infallibly cure all manner of
Convulsion-fits, Falling Sickness, Fits of the Mother, and all sorts of Fits of
that kind, be what they will; it does comfort and cheer the Spirits within an
hours time after you have taken it.

It will cure all manner of Sore and Rhumy Eyes though never so bad; it will
help all sorts of Melancholy; all Swellings in the Face, Lips and Nose;
Expels Wind upward and downward, strengthens both Head and Stomach, and
cleanses them, as also the Kidneys, Reins, and Bladder, of tough slimy
Humors, which Nature is not able to carry away; and all sharp Humors, which
breed Cancers in the Mouth, and at the root of the Tongue and Throat; which you
may perceive when they are breeding, if you draw forth the Tongue a little
sideways, you may see it will be a little raw on one side or both, near the
Throat; in such the whole mass of Blood is corrupted, and many die thereof. And
because this Distemper most commonly breeds without pain, People do not mind
it till it begins to be painful, and then most of them are past help. It is
caused by a sharp humor that distilleth down from the Brain, and this my
Electuary carries off all such sharp and mixed humors which breed this
Distemper; and there is not any thing in the World like it: For it is
continually drawing off all tough slimy Humors from all parts of the whole
Body by its gentle and mild operation; for if you eat as much of it as a small
hazel Nut in the morning fasting, before you go forth about your business, you
will seldom hear any more of it till six or seven hours after, and then it may
give you two or three stools, and not gripe nor distemper you all this while;
and if you take the like quantity when you go to bed, it will do the like in
the morning. And note, that whatsoever Humor offends, it brings it off; as
in some, it brings away green Choler, in another black Choler, and in another
yellow Choler, and in some thin watery Humors mixed with yellow and black, or
green, according as they are gendred in the Body: And it is such a friend to
Nature, that they join hand in hand to drive all these sharp and mixed Humors
out of the Body. Nature rejoices when it is received into the Body, as you may
see by the Party that takes it, who will be more cheerful and lightsom by far
than at any other time. It does correct the sharpness of all tough slimy
Humors, and draws them back out of the Veins and Arteries to the Stomach,
and sends them down through the Bowels, and so by that means leaves not a soul
corner in the body unswept. It takes away the Scurvy out of the body both root
and branch, if it be not got into the Bones or Joints; Dropsy and all other
Distempers that join with it. And Reason may tell you that if it draws away
all this vicious matter out of the Veins and Arteries, it must free the Liver
and Spleen of all stoppages, and by that means helps the Fits of the Mother,
and cleanses the whole mass of Blood to the purpose, and by that means helps
the Gonorrhea, running of the Reins, and all wasting Consumption of the Reins
and Kidneys, which you may know by soulness and thickness of your Water after
it has stood a while; it dries all most and sharp venerial Distempers, and
restores to the former strength; it does so much cleanse the Blood of all
Melancholy, that in young people it charges the color of the black and
swarthy skin, and takes away all Morphew off the Face, or any other parts of
the Body, when no other means will do any good. It is good for them that are
well to take an ounce or two of it Spring and Fall; for it will not suffer any
foul or noysom Humor to breed in the Body: and if there be any already gendred
in the Body, it will take it away. It does draw away all thick slimy Humors out
of the Veins and Arteries, both Reins, Bladder, and Ureters; cleanses the
Spermatick Vessels of all corrupt Seed and Matter, and makes the Body lively
and fit for Generation, and by that means helps Barrenness, and prevents
Miscarrying. I never heard of any Woman that was fit to bear a Child that had
taken of it long, but she soon Conceived: It does prevent the growing Stone in
the Kidneys, Reins, and Bladder; It will help the swelled Bellies in Children:
It also helps Nurses that have bad Milk, and will prove beneficial for her self
and Child; it does help the Wind Cholick, as also maziness or dissiness in the
Head, and takes away all stinking Vapors which overwhelm the Brain: It is good
for such as are subject to be costive, or bound, to have some of it always by
them; for it will be a merry companion when they take it, and give them their
desire. It comfortably cleanses the Body after the small Pox and Measels, and
carries off all the dregs and Poison out of the Blood, which the Distemper
has left behind; it does bravely cleanse the bodies of Women after
Childbearing; It prevents miscarriage in Women with Child, being taken three
or four times a week, and also makes barren Women fruitful: It helps the
Consumption of the Kidneys and Reins; Which is a Distemper more People die of,
then of any other. Most that have this Distemper have a foul disorderly Water,
with pain in the Back in most, and some will have a greasy Cloud on the top of
their Water, after it has stood a while. And I give you notice that violent
Purges cannot do any such Cures, because they go speedily through the Body and
leave the Distemper behind, and make the Body weak to little or no purpose: but
this my Electuary never makes you weak, nor hinders business, though you take
of it a month or two together. It is gently drawing away night and day, and
weakens not the Body. I sell it for two shillings the ounce, and that serves a
Man or Woman ten or twelve times taking. It has helped thousands of the
Gonorrhea. The Cheats have counterfeited it very much: some by the name of
Cordial Waters, or Spirits; some in one way, and some in another, and have with
their deluding Tongus cheated many.

It helped Mr. Withers of Hamersmith of Melancholy, who was so bad therewith
that he could not go out of his Chamber about any business; and a few ounces of
it did the work; you have your directions how to take it at the beginning. It
will Cure the Jaundice, I have experienced it several times.

I have often made use of it to fetch Mercury out of the Body; And because I
would be sure to prove the Truth of it, I have made them go to stool in any
Vessel of Silver, and if there be Mercury in the Body, their Ordour will turn
the Silver of a black blew color, and so netim^s mixed with yellow: and if
there be no Mercury in the Body, there will not be any alteration of color in
the Silver. This I have proved to my satisfaction.

THe next thing I will set down is, some of the Virtues of my BALSAM of
BALSAMS, being the best that ever was found out in the World, for all outward
and inward Diseases.

I sell it for one shilling the ounce; and they that take a pound together,
have it for twelve shillings, or half a pound after the same rate.

And now I will give you your Directions in short. Pray note that whatsoever
distemper you take it inwardly for, the quantity of a small hazel Nut is enough
for a Man or a Woman; roll it in some powder of Liquoris and so swallow it down
with a draught of Ale or Beer, or what you please last at night going to bed,
and in the morning fasting as hot as you can drink it.

1. And for all manner of Pains, Aches, and Swellings; It must be chaft well in
with the heat of the Fire, every night going to bed, and a piece of thin
Bladder laid thereon to keep it soaking in; only you must not rub it in to the
small of the back, for fear of hurting the Reins.

2. For all manner of Sores, new and old, you must apply it as a plaster
morning and evening; let it be laid on a linen rag, or a piece of thin Lether:
it will make and old Sore run faster then it did before for a little time, till
the Humors have emptied themselves, and then it will begin to heal. I told you
in my last Book of one Piry and one Brlin which did counterfeit it and my
Electuary, ull and I am now informed of many more such wicked People: but if
you have it at the places set down in this Book, you cannot be cheated.

3. It does help Tetter, Ring Worm, Shingles, or any sort of Worms in the Face,
Nose, Mouth, Teeth or Gums, by anointing the part grieved when you go to bed,
and as often as you please.

4. It helps the Toothach, and fastens loose Teeth, and must be used as a
plaster on the Tooth and Gum that aketh; and so fast as the Rhume washes it
away, put on another, till the pain is gone; which is most commonly in less
then a quarter of an hour. To fasten the loose Tooth, apply it as a plaster to
the Tooth and Gum, and were the Plaster all night: do so till you are well.

5. It will take a way the Scurvy out of the Mouth, if you anoint the Gums with
it two or three times a day.

6. For Soreness in the Mouth, Throat and Breast, take as much as a small Nut
every night when you go to bed, and in the morning fasting.

7. For the Headache, anoint all over where the pain is, and rub some up into
your Nostrils; do so every night going to bed, and as often as you please, till
the pain is gone.

8. For Staying the Bleeiding at Nose, presently put some of it into that
Nostril with the end of your Finger, and hold it on close to the Grisel of the
Nose in that side that bleedeth, where the Vein is broken, and it helps
presently.

9. For Foul Teeth* wash them morning and evening with a little white Wine, and
so soon as you have washed them, anoint the Teeth and Gums with the Balsam, and
it will take away the Distemper.

10. For Consumption and Cough, Running of the Reins, Gonorrhea, weakness and
wasting in the Back, the heat and wasting Kidneys and Reins. This kind of
Consumption or wast of the Reins and Kidneys is very dangerous, and you may
know it by a thin Cloud on the top of the Urin after it has stood a while, or
a bricky substance in the botom or sides of the Pot, or a continual pain in the
Back, or a foul Water at some times, and clear at other times; when you
perceive these symptoms, take as much as a small Nut of this Balsam morning and
evening, and roll it up in a little powder of Liquoris, or any other thing or
things you can best take it in, and cleanse your Body a little now and then
with my Electuary, and you may be helped of all these Distempers, if you are not
too far spent before you begin.

11. For the Cramp, rub it well in to the parts grieved when the fit is on you,
and it helps presently.

12. It much helps those which have not their breath freely through their
Nostrils, by rubbing up a little into both Nostrils with the end of our finger
every night going to bed, or at any other time.

13. And if you will help the shrinking Sinews, you must wear it with a piece
of thin Bladder on the part grieved; and as it dries in, renew it, and chase
it well in with the heat of the fire. It cured the Wife of Robert Austin of
Hitchin in Hartfordshire of a lame Leg with shrunk Sinews, who could not set
her foot to the ground, nor get help in twenty years, and it made her as well
as ever she was in her life.

14. For a stinking-breath from the Stomach, take as much as a small Nut every
night going to bed, till you find your self well; and when y ou would not have
any to smell your Breath, rub a little of it up your Nostrils with your fingers
end.

15. The Itch, and all manner of Scabs; anoint the part grieved, and in a few
times doing, it will take the distemper away.

16. For the Worms, you must chafe it well in to the Stomach and Belly with the
heat of the fire, for three or four nights together, and lay a double
Linen-Cloth thereon warm, and so wear it to assuage the hard Bellies of
Children. You must do as aforesaid: it does sometimes gently purge, if the body
be foul.

17. For Pains in the Stomach, Sides, Belly, and Back, use it as aforesaid.

18. Piles and Hemorrhoids; anoint the part grieved every night going to bed,
and at any other time.

19. Pains in the bottoms of the Feet, Toes, Ankles, and those which have weak
Ankles, wear it with a piece of thin Bladder.

20. It will cure a new wound with a few dressings, though the Member be cut
three parts off; It will help a man run through a Leg or Arm without any Tent;
apply it plentifully about the Member grieved, and dress it twice aday.

21. For All sorts of old Sores, apply it as a Plaster morning and evening; it
will make the Sore run more at the first then it did before, till the Humors
have emptied themselves, and it will bring out the skale of rotten Bones; after
that it will run but little, and heal apace.

22. It will dissolve and cure hard knobs that breed in the Necks of Boys and
Girls.

23. For the Red Pimples in the Face, anoint every night going to Bed.

24. It will help any sharp briny Humor that breaks out on any part of the
Body, by anointing the part grieved morning and evening.

25. For the Palsy; it did help Mr. Bailif a Scrivener in Chippingham in
Wilt-Shire of the shaking-Palsie, by applying it to the wrists for three or
four days; Insomuch that some Gentlemen of the Country thereabouts would not
believe till they had seen, but sent for him, and me also; and when they saw
that he could lift a Glass of Beer to his Mouth without spilling, they
believed, because they knew he had not any such use of his hands of a long time
before: However it has done greater Cures since; for instance one Mr. Gregory
Coe, living on the Bank-side near the Bear-Garden in Southwark, of the Palsy;
who had not the use of his hands to cut his meat for above three years, being
near fourscore years of age, and by the means of this my Balsam of Balsams he
soon had good use of his hands: it is four years since I cured him, and he
continues very well to this day. It will not fail doing good for the Palsy.

26. It will take away all pains from the Shoulders, Sides, Arms, Hands and
Feet.

27. It helps the Cancer, or any other Sore or Swelling in the Breasts of
Women.

It did save and help the Wife of Mr. Richard Yokney of Walminster in
Wiltshire, when she could not be delivered of her Child by any other means, and
so soon as the Midwife had applied this my Balsam, she was delivered of a live
Child; and many more I might mention, and they all did well.

28. For the Fleshy Rupture, apply it to the part grieved as you will, so you
keep it on, it will Cure.

29. It helps those whose Limbs are wasting, and their flesh withering away,
by taking of it inwardly, as you are directed at the beginning.

30. For the Fistula in the Hip, or any other part of the Body, it helps when
no other means will do: you must anoint the part grieved twice a day.

31. It gives such present ease for all Burnings and Scaldings, that so soon
as laid to the part grieved, the pain is gone, and in a few dressings makes a
Cure.

32. For Surfeits, want of Appetite, want of quiet sleep, or any sudden
Distemper, take as much as a small Nut going to bed, and roll it up in any
thing you can best take it in.

33. It will cure all manner of Squats, Bruises, Sprains in the Back, or any
part of the Body; and those that get Strains with over-lifting.

34. How many would give hundreds of pounds they were free from the Pits and
Scars of the small Pox, and there is no Cure; therefore I would advise all
which have not yet had the small Pox, and Men for their Children to have of
this my Balsam of Balsams from my own hand, and keep in a readiness; and when
the Scabs of the Small Pox begin to be dry, anoint them with the Balsam, and
they will all sheal off; you may do so once a day for three or four days, and
there will not be any sign where they were; but they must not pick them.

All that I have said of my Balsam of Balsams I have truly proved.

35. For such old Men and Women whose Blood is grown cold and chilly, and such
as are through Consumption of any other means weakened, and have lost their
Appetite; let them take as much as a small Nut of it going to bed now and then,
and they will find more warmth and comfort therein, then can be thought. You
have the price at the beginning, one shilling the ounce.

THe SECOND BALSAM is for the Leprosy and Scurvy mixed together, and settled in
the skin in great white and red Scurvy Bloches on the Elbows and Knees, and
sometimes over all the Body: it is five shillings the ounce, and most commonly
one ounce or two does the Cure, with a little inward means: you must anoint the
parts grieved with a little of it every night going to bed for two or three
nights, and then forbear three days, and see where it does appear again, and
then do as aforesaid till you are well.

THe THIRD BALSAM is for the Rickets; it infallibly cures, if they can have any
strength to stand, and it has cured many that had not any strength at all. For
instance one, the Child of Mr. John Sarret at the upper end of Sea-Alley in
Kingsstreet in Westminster, being pined away with a Consumption and Rickets to
the bare Skin and Bones, being above two years of age, and could not have any
strength to stand; however, through Gods Blessing with the means, he is grown
as brave a Boy as any about London.

I sell the Balsam for one shilling four pence the ounce; and most commonly
four or five ounces does the Cure: you have your directions with it.

THe FOURTH BALSAM is for Deafness: I sell it two shillings six pence the
ounce, with directions. It cured Mr. Chearsly in Brick-Lane in Oldstreet, being
near fourscore years of age, who had been quite Deaf about forty years, and I
think about four or six ounces cured him, and he hears as well as any.

THe FIFTH BALSAM is for Old Ulcerated Gonorrhea. After the Body is well
cleansed it does strengthen the whole Body, the Kidneys, Reins, Bladder and
Ureters, strengthens the Spermatick Vessels, and thickens the Seeds, and makes
it good; it cheareth the Spirits, and causes a fresh lively color in the Face;
it is a little restringent. I sell it for five shillings the ounce. You must
take as much as a small hazel Nut every night going to bed, and in the morning
fasting, and drink a draught of Sack, or what you like best, after it; do so
till you have taken an ounce or two.

THe SIXTH BALSAM is for the Ptisick, Cough, stoppage of the Breast and Pipes;
take as much as a small Nut every night going to bed, and every morning
fasting, and drink a draught of that you like best presently after as hot as
you can drink it.

THe SEVENTH BALSAM is twenty shillings the ounce; with direction for the
taking it. It does cure and help as follows.

1. First; Sour Belches. 2. The Obstruction of the Liver and Spleen. 3. Causes
a good Appetite. 4. Agues and Fevers of all sorts. 5. Present help for
Vomiting. 6. Present ease for the griping Plague in the Guts; and in a few
times taking, makes a Cure. 7. The Wind Cholick, Stitches, and pains in the
Sides. 8. The Strangury, and pains in the Bladder, and takes away the
sharpness of Urine. 9. Bleeding by Urine or Stool. 10. Yellow and black
Jaundice. 11. Mother, and Spleen. 12. All running pains in the Joints. 13. It
brings away all Sand and Gravel out of Kidneys and Reins without pain, and
Stones as big as Pease. 14. All manner of Pains in the Head. 15. It does
prevent Miscarriage in such Women which are subject to it, and does save the
lives of many Women and Children; and prevents many and long tedious fits of
Sickness, and many times Death it self, which does attend most Women after
Miscarrying. It helped Mr. Richard Bower at the sign of the Wheatsheaf in
Jarmanstreet, Westminster; there came a Stone from him first, and presently
after that he made much water, and so the great Stone dissolved to Sand and
Gravel, and came from him with much ease for the space of eight or nine days,
to the quantity of about half a pint of Sand and Gravel. 16. It gives present
ease and comfort to a disquiet mind, and wandering dispairing thoughts. 17. It
strengthens the Memory exceedingly, and sometimes recovereth the Senses lost.
18. It drives out the Smallpox, and Measels at once taking, and in two or
three times taking makes a Cure. 19. It dries up all manner of Rhume, though
never so sharp; strengthens the Stomach, and purges Wind downwards. 20. It
does help and dry up all sharp moist Humors of the Womb, which hinder
Conception. 21. It helps Vapors, that ascend from the Mother and Spleen to
the Head, which make some Women as if they had lost part of their Senses. 22.
It takes away all Swiming in the Head, and Swooning-fits. 23. It helps the
Dropsy, Cough and Consumpsion, if they are not too far spent.
I would not have you think it dear, being twenty shillings the ounce; for any
one may have a shillings worth, and as they like, may have more, if that does
not the Cure.

THe EIGHTH BALSAM is for healing and strengthening the Back, and Spermatick
Vessels, and thickening the Seed, after your Blood is well cleansed with my
Cordial Pill: you must take as much as a small Nut of it morning and evening,
and hinder no business: and you that have weak Backs will soon find much
strength. The price is two shillings the ounce, you may take of it till you are
well, for it will not much hurt your Purse.

MY friendly Pill cures the Scurvy, when it is grown to that height that it
makes many People fear they have got a worse Distemper, and I think that can
hardly be: for it will cause great pains in the Head, and sometimes pricking
pains in the Nose, and much dullness, and heavienss of body, some will have
pains in the Shoulders: in others, pains in the Shin-bones, and some pains in
the Joints; and in others, pains all over, with foulness of Stomach, Tongue,
and Teeth, and loss of Appetite: pains in the Back, and Bladder, sharpness and
heat in making Water, and stoppage like the relics of an old Gonorrhea, which
was not well cured, or like those which have taken Mercury ill prepared, that
cannot work it self out of the Body; some will have breakings out, or hard
knobs in the Head, others swellings in the Groin, or breakings out there-about;
some will have pains and swellings of the Joints of their Hands, others in Legs
and Thighs, others little swellings in the Belly and Stomach; some will have
Hoarsness with sore Throat and Mouth, and swelled Gums; others will have hard
red knobs in the Face, some Scurvy Briny Humors behind their Ears, some little
Pimples about the Body, others bad Sleep, with confused Dreams; some will be
tyery, faint and weak, like the Green Sickness; some will have pains now and
then between the Shoulders and Elbows; and some will be only dizzy in the Head:
their Water will alter according to what they eat and drink; but most commonly
in young Men it will be high colored, and thick at the bottom when it has
stood a while; in some it will be yellowish, and make the Glass it stands in
of an unwholesome greasy color; and after a Man or Woman has had it ten or
twelve years, they seldom make a good Water, and as seldom enjoy any perfect
Health; sometimes they think they have one Disease, and sometimes another; they
are often seeking for help, yet get but little. The Urine of Women that have
this Disease, in some it will be of a sad color, but in most it will be pale
or greenish, with a whitish settling at the bottom, when it has stood a while:
some grow heavy-headed, and when they have had it some years, they grow
Melancholy, and enjoy nothing: some it brings into a Dropsy and Consumption,
and when these three Distempers meet together in the Body of Man or Woman, they
seldom part till Death.

This Pill helps all these Symptoms aforesaid, though it is gotten into the
Marrow of the Bones: For the Scurvy will get into the Bones the soonest of any
Distemper.

It will cure the Gonorrhea, and sharpness and stoppage of Urine, and all
manner of Venereal Diseases, from the greatest to the smallest, although they
have had it twenty years; I say, all manner of Venereal Distempers; and the
pain and killing Consumption of the Kidneys, which is a very dangerous waste:
Ulcers in the Kidneys and Bladder, and Cancers and Ulcers in the Womb; all
sorts of Worms that breed in the Stomach and Maw, and the other small Worms: it
most commonly causes a good Appetite to ones Meat at the first taking; and
causes as good sleep as a Man can desire, and cheareth the Spirits very much:
it does presently help and carry off all Crudities, and swellings form the
Stomach and Belly, Legs, and Thighs: and is the presentest help that I know in
the World for the Dropsy: it does help Ulcers in the Throat, to admiration:
those which are sick with eating, or drinking, it does help at once taking: it
takes away all pains out of the Bones, when no other means will do it; and for
any of the aforesaid Distempers, the Pill being taken at the first beginning,
once taking will cure, but if the Scurvy be old and stubborn, it will require
more: and if you find the first taking have not finished the cure, take one
Dose every third night going to Bed, till you have taken four or five times.
Now I would have you take notice of the rarity of these Pills, they are in
bigness of a Pins Head, and any Man or Woman may take twenty and put them into
a Spoon with a little Ale, or Beer, and swallow them all at once, at night
going to Bed, or any way you can best take them, for they are very easy to
take; then you shall see the rarity of this little merry Bed fellow. In the
first place you will have a comfortable nights rest, with a little breathing
sweat all night, but not so much as to make your Linen wet, and in the morning
the sleep and sweat goes off together, and presently it beginns to Purge by
Stool and Urine, and will bring away corruption out of the Body, according to
the quantity that does offend; if the Body be very foul, it does bring away
almost a Chamber Pot full the first Stool, and two or three small Stools of
Corruption afterward, and so you may go about your business: the People say it
does make them very hungry, and you may know by that, the Pill is very
wholesome, and well prepared: and having the warm Bed all night, they draw all
the bad Humors to the Stomach, and there correct their sharpness, and send
them down through the Bowels; But still the more rarity of these Pills, they do
not gripe at all, nor make you sick; but strengthen the whole Body, and cheer
the Spirits: and you may go where you please, and do what you please, only
Women must not put their Hands in cold Water the next day: they may be taken
any time of the year, with good success; and will continue good longer than any
Man can live.

These Pills operate five several ways: First, after you have taken them at
night going to Bed, they operate by sleep; 2dly, By Wind downward; 3dly, By
little breathing Sweat; and in the morning that goes off; and 4thly, They work
by Stool; and 5thly, By Urine

And if Children have any the same Distemper's aforesaid, they may take from
one year old so many Pills as they are years old, till they come to twenty
Pills: and so they which are three or four score years of age, may take twenty.

These Pills raise the Lame out of their Beds, though Aged. This which I have
said is Truth.

The Dose which I now sell for a shilling, I formerly sold for a Crown, but now
the Poor may have the benefit, as well as the Rich.

You shall have them in Boxes, twenty in a Box, price one shilling; and if you
find the first taking does not the Cure, take twenty every third night, till
you have taken four or five times, or till all your pain is gone; for they fail
not to cure all sorts of Pains, only the Sciatica, the Bone being out: put all
the twenty into a Spoon, with a little Ale, or Beer, and swallow them all at
once at night going to Bed, and have a large Chamber Pot ready in the morning,
you need not take any Posset Drink, nor eat or drink till Dinner time, for the
Pills have enough in themselves to uphold Nature, only those which are very
weak may drink some Posset Ale.

The Scurvy is the Mother and Nursery of all Diseases: and upon taking cold, or
any disorder of Body, it branches out one Distemper or other, and yet the grand
cause which is the Scurvy, remains all one in the Body.

Most of these Cures, with thousands more, I have done with the help of this my
Friendly Pills, though I did not administer them in the same manner as now I do.

Now you shall hear of some of the Cures which I have done, the Peoples names,
and places where they live: and I desire you will enquire the truth of them,
and I think you will hardly find any the like done before me.
1. Mr. Alelxander Toys of Cattern wheel-yard, over against the Sheep-Pens in
West Smithfield, of the Fever and Gripes of the Guts, when it had brought him
so low, that none thought he would have lived. 2. Mr. John Farmer of
Limekil-yard in Limus, near the Sign of the Carpenters Arms, of the Ptisik, and
Cough of the Lungs, and Consumption, when he was like to dye, and I told him if
he did find good in my things, and live a week, he might with God's help
recover: he returned thanks for his Cure. 3. Mr. Edward Quinborow, over against
the Bear and Ragged-Staff, near the Bank-side, Sothwark, of the Ague and
Fever. 4. Mr. Wafs at the Sign of the Robbin-Hood and Little-John, in
Maiden-Lane in Westminster, who had a Coach run over his Leg, and I cured him
in about three weeks. 5. Mr. John Shersly living at the Swan and Key in
Brick-Lane in Old street, who had been quite deaf, troubled with a great noise
in his Head above forty years, being above threescore and seventeen years of
age when I cured him: both he and his Wife returned thanks both to God and me,
and he hears very well. 6. Mr. William Shearman in Blackfriars, over against
the Dark-Entry, of the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys and Bladder, and of the
Sciatica. 7. Mr. Ralph Steel of Clarkenwel, the next door to the Sign of the
Flying-Horse, of a Consumption and great weakness. 8. Mr. Harris of
Christophers Alley, in the upper More-Fields, of a Palsy, who could not get
help in fourteen years, and near threescore years of age, and with Gods help I
made him well. 9. Mr. John Davis of Pickled-Herring-Stairs, at the Sign of the
five Tobacco Pipes, of the Ague. 10. Mr. William Medbery, of St. Martins in the
Fields a Coachmaker, next door to the Sign of the Sugar Loaf at a Glassmakers,
of the Sciatica in his Hip, and at times in all his Joints, who lay very weak,
and could not get help by any other. 11. Mr. Edward Baily, at the Kings
Brew House, over against the Turks-Head in St. Giles's in the Fields, of the
Griping Plague in the Guts. 12. Mr. Richard Bower, at the Sign of the Ship in
Jerman Street Westminster,
of the Stone and Gravel: there came a small Stone from him at the first; and
after he had used that I ministered to dissolve the Stone, there came from him
above half a pint, by his own relation, of Gravel and Sand, and within eight or
nine days time; he made water very well all the time, and after that was very
well. 13. Mr. Seal an Oyl-man in Holborn, over against the White-Lyon at the
lower end of Hatton Garden end, of a Fever, and Griping in the Guts. 14. Mr.
Fawey at the Black-Raven in Long-Acre, of the Sciatica in his Hip. 15. Mr. Adam
Prince at the Sign of the Boot in Kings-street Westminster, of the Stone and
Gravel in the Kidneys and Bladder. 16. Mr. Barns of Hornsy, four miles form
London, of the Ague. 17. William Day near the Greyhound in Broad-Mead in
Bristol, of deafness, being near therescore years of age when I cured him, and
now he hears as well as any. 18. John Pawel of Donkerton, three miles from
Bath, of a Wen on his Eyebrow,
being of great bigness: and he brought it into the World with him, being near
thirty years of age when I cured him, and I did it without cutting. 19. Mr.
Edward Corbis of the Neat-Houses a Gardener, of great pain and stoppage of his
Stomach. 20. Francis Hollis in Wapping, at the Sign of the Water-house, of
great pain in his Ankles, who could not get help by any in three or four years.
21. William Ash of Bednal-Green, over against the Old Chapel, of the third-day
Ague, and Fever. 22. Mr. John Weston of the Neat-houses, near Westminster, of
the Third-day Ague, and Fever. 23. Mr. Phillip Luke of the Neat-houses, near
Westminster, of the Stone. 24. Mr. John Baker, a Ship Carpenter at Deptford,
near the Checquer, of a Fever, with great pain in his side. 25. Mr. Samuel
Chadwel, the next door to the Sign of the Worlds-end, in Tooly-street in
Southwark, of the Fever, and Gripes in the Guts. 26. Mr. John Heel of
Angel-Alley in Bishops gate-street, I saved his Leg from rotting off. 27. Mr.
Thomas Anyan in Bedfordberry, over against the Tobacco Roll, of Looseness and
Vomiting, with a Cough and Fever, and great pain. 28. Mr. Shephard, next door
to the Golden-Ball in Hatton-Garden,
of the new Fever, and Gripes in the Guts, his Tongue was as black as Ink with
the violence of the Distemper, yet with Gods help, I made him as well as ever
he was in his life. 29. Mr. James George on the Bank side near the Bear-Garden
in Southwark, of great pain in his Shoulders, Arms, and Hips. 30. Mr. John
Butcher of Hay-grove, a little way out of Warminster in Wilt-Shire, of a Cancer
in his Shoulder, Neck and Throat; he was so bad that none would meddle with him
but my self;
when I had undertaken him, the Doctors thereabout laughed: and one said he
would give me fifty pound, if I cured him, and others likewise; but when I had
cured him, there was not any would give me a Penny, but himself, yet with Gods
help, I made him as well as ever he was in his life. 31. Mr. Henry Clare, of a
Consumption, when he was so much wasted, that his Flesh was all withered away,
that he had not any thing left to cover his Bones, but the Skin; I did never
see any Man so bare of Flesh neither dead nor alive, and using my things, he
grew strong and lusty, and Flesh grew up and covered his Bones, insomuch, that
he has as much Flesh as any ordinary Man; and thus we may see God blesses the
means sometimes contrary to men's expectations: the People at the Golden Pattin,
over against the King's Bench in Southwark, will give you an account of this
great Cure. 32. Mr. Cook of Spalldock, three miles off St. Eeds, of the
Sciatica-Gout. 33. Mr. Whale of Wells, of Lameness, who was not able to rise
out of his Bed, and could not get help by any, and I gave him ease of his pain,
in about three hours, and in a short time cured him. 34. Mr. Thomas Day living
in Shore-Ditch, at a Corner Brick-house, next to Hollow-way Bridge, of a
Sciatica. 35. Mr. Abel Barton at the Brewhouse, at the upper end of St.
John-street, of the Gout,
being near threescore years of Age, and so lame with it, that he was not able
to turn in his Bed, and with Gods help, I made him as well as ever he was in
his life. 36. Mr. Michael a Schoolmaster, in Angel Alley in Grays-Inn-Lane, of
a sore and Rheumy Eye, who had made trial of able Men, for the space of seven
or eight years, and could not get any remedy, and with Gods help I made him
well in nine or ten weeks. 37. Mr. Richard Young of Park-street near St.
Albans, of a Wen upon the top of his Head: who could not get help by any other
in twenty years, and I took it out at twice dressing, not spilling one drop of
blood. 38. Mr. Edward Squire in Goswel Street, at Mr. Matthew Brown's House a
Sh^o-maker, over against the Pump, between the Sign of the Maidenhead and the
Bell,
of a Cancered Wen in the side of his Neck, near as big as a penny Loaf, which
grew fast to the Mandible, or the Jaw Bone; and the Veins and Sinews grew
through it, and I Cured him without hurting the Veins and Sinews, insomuch that
none can hardly see where it grew: And if he be not there now, Mr. Brown, the
Man of the foresaid House can give you an account of this great Cure. 39. Mr.
Robert Doyly, of Kingston upon Thames, ten miles from London, of the Vomiting
Blood. 40. Mr. Robert Miles, of Kent-street, next door to the Rose, in
Southwark, of the Ague and Fever. 41. Mr. John Arnel, at the top of
Saffron-Hill, of the Ague and Fever. 42. Mr. Michael Smith, near the Sign of
the Griffin in Russel Street in Covent Garden, of great pain in his Limbs, and
the Cramp. 43. Mr. Bull, near the Sign of the George, in Grove-street, in
Hackney, of the Third day Ague. 44. Mr. Richard Pope, of Bricksham, two Miles
off Dartmouth, of great pains in his Stomach, Sides, and Back. 45. John Beard,
of Tottnes in Devonshire, of Lameness in all his Limbs, and I soon made him lay
by his Crutches. 46. William Randal, three Miles off Exeter, of the Megrim and
Cough, and great pain of his Stomach and Back. 47. William Friggey of Glaston,
four Miles from Wells, of great pain in his Side, being Aged, and could not get
help by any other. 48. Robert Brownsy, of Honington in Devonshire, of the
Cough, and great weakness in all his Body; and I made him go about his Work in
three or four days. 49. Walter Collins, of Charlton Adam, eight Miles off
Taunton, with Noise and Deafness in his Head. 50. Benjamin Hollet, in Swan Lane
Court on the Key in Bristol, of the Third day Ague. 51. Thomas Roads, of Broad
Mead in Bristol, of the Ptysick and Cough, with a Consumption, and
extraordinary pain and stoppage at his Stomach. 52. Thomas Elot, near the Sign
of the Leg in Temple street in Bristol, of the Cough. 53. John Douting, of
Lewins Mead in Bristol, of great weakness and pain. 54. John Cox of Bath, of
Lameness, who could not get help by any other. 55. James Bramble, of Downing,
in Mangersfields Parish, three Miles from Bristol, of the Dropsy, with great
pain all over his Body: I took away all his pain and swelling, and made him as
well as ever he was in his Life, with God's Blessing and help. 56. John
Stevens, of Swanswick, two Miles off Bath, of the Sciatica,
pain in his Hip and Side; he being above threescore years of Age when he was
Cured. 57. Benjamin Cott, of Bath, two sad Ulcers in his Feet. 58. John Selmon,
of Marshfield in Glostershire, of a sad pain and lameness in his Shoulder. 59.
Robert Brothers, of the Devises Green, of an Ague and vomitting Blood. 60. John
Sidhinham of Chicklet six Miles of Warminster, of the Ague. 61. Henry Bealing
of Gillingame parish, seven miles off Warminster,
of the Sciatica pain in his Hip and Side, being above threescore years of Age
when he was cured. 62. William Hayght of Allsy Parish a mile off Coventry, of
the Sciatica pain in his Hip. 63. William Rabbet of Kettorin in
Northamptonshire, of the Third day Ague. 64. George Morris, of Ansly four miles
from Coventry, of a Cancer on his Face, who could not get help in fourteen
years, being near threescore years of age when he was cured. 65. Mr. Henry
Chapman of Moulton, three Miles from Northampton, whose Hand was to be cut off,
and I cured him without the loss of a Joint. 66. Thomas Gun of Rodington three
miles off Northampton, of the Third days Ague. 67. John Smith of Kingswaldon,
three miles off Hitchen, of a Wen on his forehead, without a skar. 68. Thomas
Robinson of Soothil Parish near Hitchen, of the Third-dayes Ague. 69. Richard
Dear of Shillington three miles off Hitchen, of Deasness. 70. Peter Shadbole of
Gravenist four miles off Hitchen in Hartfordshire, of the Ague. 71. Matthew
Negus of St. Needs, of the Third-day Ague, who could not get help in three
years. 72. John Roch of Swasy three miles off St. Jues, of the Ague. 73. Robert
Thurborn of Hadengham in the Isle of Ely, who had kept his bed a long time of
Lameness, with great pain, who could not get help by any, and I cured him in
one weeks time with Gods help. 74. Robert Pillings of Notingham, of the Ague.
75. Thomas Raynor of the same Town, of six Ulcers in his Legs, who could not
get help in many years. 76. Thomas Foster of Darby, of the Scurvy all over his
Body, and I cured him, with Gods help. 77. Mr. John Acton of Howbick-Hall near
Worsup in Notinghamshire, who had been quite deaf above twenty years,
being above fourscore years of age, and I made him hear as well as any in six
weeks time, with God's help. 78. John Astcot of Tornes in Devonshire, of the
Stone, being about threescore years of age when I cured him:
he could not make one drop of Water, his pain was very terrible, and I made
the Stone to break to pieces in about six hours, and cannot hear that he has
been troubled any more therewith, being near six years since: Witness John
Sampson, Peter Bragg, Ptolomeus Sampson, Zach. Panchard, Anthony Longworth,
John Amott, being his Neighbors in Totnes. 79. William Blackaller of Totnes
aforesaid, of the Apoplexy and Palsy on his right side, and a Consumption
withal, so that he coul dnot rise out of his Bed, and none thought he would
ever recover; and I first made him go on Crutches, and soon after without, and
within a reasonable time, with Gods help, I made him well. 80. William Day near
the Greyhound in Broad-Mead in Bristol, of Deafness; being near threescore
years of Age when I cured him, and he hears as well as any. 81. Mr. Thomas
Love near Shorditch Church, of the Jaundies, he being near fourscore years of
Age, and cannot hear the he has been amiss ever since. 82. Mr. Adam Fowler
Gardener, of Brick Lane in Old street near the Sign of the Horshooe, of the new
Plague in the Guts, with voiding Blood and Slime by Stool. 83. I helped John
Neal at Mris. Lumin's House at the three Tobacco Rolls in Woodstreet near the
Mill-Bank at Westminster, of a broken Vein, who bled at the Nose, Mouth, and by
Urine, and of black spots in the skin all over his Body. 84. John Day of
Chiriton Bushel nine miles from Exeter, of great pain in his Head, and also the
black Cataracks, which were breeding in his Eyes; and he was so blind with them
that he was fain to grope to find the Door: and to the best of my remembrance
he had but five or six shillings worth of things of me and within three weeks,
or thereabouts, he brought me a dish of small Trouts, and told me he caught
them himself with an Angle, and gave me thanks for the good I had done for him.
85. William Grigg of Atherford six miles from Taunton in Devonshire, of great
pain and weakness which was caused by a great Surfeit, and all that had him in
hand had given him over for a dead Man, and I gave him present ease and cured
him. 86. Mr. Gregory Coe on the Bank-side near the Bear-Garden in Southwark, of
the Palsy, who had not the use of his hands to cut his Meat, or to help
himself any manner of way, for the space of three years and two months, being
near fourscore years of age, and I soon made him well, with Gods help, and he
has the use of his hands as well as any of his Age. 87. William Panchin near
the Sign of the Leg in Templestreet in Bristol, of the Sciatica-Gout in his
Hips, who was so lame therewith, that he was fain to creep about the House upon
his Hands and Knees, being about threescore years of Age,
and could not get help of any other, and I made him as well as ever he was in
his life, with God's help. 88. John Jackman of Guilford in Surry, of the
Headache, who says his pain was so great for the space of twelve Weeks before
he made use of my things, that he could not take any rest night nor day. 89.
Mr. Robins of Cranebrook in Kent, a worthy Person of good note and quality, who
had labored under the pain of the Gout, not able to stir out of his Chamber
for the space of three months; who having heard of me,
sent no worse Person than his own Wife being a Knights Daughter, to whom I
said I did not fear with God's help to raise him up in two days time: and a
while after this noble Person was pleased to send for me, and gave thanks both
to God and me for his speedy help; and desired me to put it into my Book for
the public good, that others might know where to come and have help also,
August 8. 1674. 90. I cured Mr. James Gwilliams of Archingfield eight miles
from Hereford, in Wales, of the Leprosy all over his Body, who had been
afflicted with that loathsome Disease above twenty years; and seeing after all
means used here he could not get any help in England, he traveled beyond the
Seas, hoping the change of Air might help him, but all to no purpose, for his
Distemper still attended him:
and after his return home he yet made further trial for help, but without any
effect: then he made some Voyages to Sea, hoping the Air on the Salt Water
might profie something, but all to no purpose: So at his return home, hearing
what Cures I did, he came to me, and told me as aforesaid, and also that the
constant w^rking of the Distemper was in so strange a manner, that every night
in his Bed at least a quart of thin white Scales would drop from his Skin;
besides he judged there might as many fall from him constantly in the daytime,
with a briny thin humor Issuing forth through all the Pores of the Skin,
insomuch that he loathed himself; all which notwithstanding, I made him as well
and as clear from his Distemper as any man in England. This Archingfield
aforesaid lives in the Parish of Waynyards near Broadoak. He returned thanks
both to God and me the 24 of July 1674.
Now you shall hear of some of the great Cures I have done on Women, and the
places where they live, here being already ninety Witnesses of Men.
1. Mrs. Terry, both her Husband and her self desired this great Cure should be
set down in my Book, so that others might know where to come to me and find
good in like manner. Her Disease was a stoppage fallen into her Kidneys, which
caused an extraordinary racking and torturing pain in her back, and great pain
and weakness in her Hips and Limbs downward; this Distemper seized her
immediately after my going into the Country, whereupon she consulted the best
means she could for the Cure, but found none to be effectual;
and at my return to London, being near three months, she sent her Water to me,
by which and other Circumstances, I scund her to be in a very desperate
condition, and that in all likelihood she could not live above a day or two;
whereupon I administered something to her, and in once taking she found a great
benefit by it, which gave me encouragement to proceed in the Cure, which it
pleased God in a short time to make an effectual and perfect Cure. She lives
at the Bunch of Grapes near the King's Bench in Southwark, where she and her
Family are able to attest the truth hereof.

2. The Wife of William Thomas of Cock-lane going out of Cornstreet into
Nicolasstreet in Bristol, of a Cancer in her left Breast and Side, when they
that had her in hand gave her off for a dead-Woman;
the Distemper being so bad, with hardness of red, yellow, and black Colors,
which was very sad to behold; and they every day put in a Tent between her Ribs
quite into her Body, about the length of a man's finger; so I judge the end of
the Tent must needs reach within an Inch of her Heart: She had also a continual
Fever attending on her; so that there could not be any thing expected but
Death; I presently caused the Tent to be laid by, and I never applied Tent nor
Instrument, but gave her present ease, and cured her in nine or ten weeks time
with God's help. 3. Elizabeth Tonson, of Newington Butts, in Blackmans-street
in Lamb-Alley, in Southwark,
of a Cancer in her Breast, almost as big as a man's Head, and I consumed it
away without cutting, and without putting her to pain, or hindering business;
and she continues well to this day, it being three or four years since I cured
her. 4. The Wife of Robert Harison, of Coundon a Mile off Coventry, of the
Consumption, Fever, Yellow and Black Jaundice, having these four Distempers
all on her at once; and all that had her in hand gave her off for a dead Woman;
and yet God was pleased to give a Blessing to the means I used, and restored
her to her former Strength and Health again. 5. The Wife of Mr. Middleton, at
the Golden Pattin over against the King's Bench in Southwark, of the Dropsy,
with great weakness, who had lost the greatest part of her Blood, so that she
had little left in her Veins but watery Humors which turned to a sad Dropsy,
with great weakness; and this came with a miscarriage of two Children at one
Birth; and I made her as well as ever she was in her Life. 6. The Wife of Mr.
Edward Thomas, near the Sign of the Gun, in Woolledge, of great pain and
weakness after Childbearing, who had made use of other Doctors for about three
months, and could not get any help. 7. Mrs. Margaret Guiny, of Churchyard
Alley in Chick-Lane of great pain in her Stomach and Back, and Vomiting. 8. The
Wife of Mr. Edward Pearsisil, in the Glass-House yard in Ratcliff, near the
Red-Lion, of Weakness and Wasting of the Kidneys, with great pain in her Head
and left Side, who could not get help in many years. 9. The Wife of Mr. John
Fisher next door to the White Horse, over against Claringden-House in
Portugal-street, at the upper end of Pickadilly, of the Palsy all on one side;
and other weakness, which came with miscarrying of her Child. 10. The Wife of
Mr. John Hodgkins, in Shoomakers Row in Black Friars, at the Sign of the Last,
of a Fever, with great pain on her Stomach, and was so bad that none thought
she would have lived. 11. The Wife of Mr. Bullock of Feather-Alley, or Yard, in
Gray's Inn Lane, of the Fever, and Gripes in the Guts. 12. The Wife of Mr.
Isaiah Palmer, the next door to the Old Shears in Great Woodstreet, of a
Cancered Wen on her Hand, which was breeding above twelve Years, and could not
get help, and I made here as well as ever she was in her Life. 13. The Wife of
Mr. Steel, the next door to the Flying-Horse, near Hockly, in Clarkenwel
Parish, of great pain in her Side, who could not get help. 14. The Wife of John
Wright, of Brick-Lane in Old-street, in Key and Swan-Yard, of Deafness. 15.
Elizabeth Brownsear, of Swan-Alley, in the Minories, of the Convulsion-Fits,
and shortness of Breath. 16. Mrs Ann Fisher, of Churchyard-Alley in Chick-Lane,
of Deafness and Singing in her Head. 17. Judith Brownsy, in Honington, in
Devonshire, of the Colic and Spleen. 18. Mary Wilson, of Booknel Parish two
Miles off Honington, of loofness of her Teeth, when they were ready to fall
out. 19. Rebeccah Phillips, of the same Town, of a sad pain in her Breast and
Head, being near fourscore years of Age when I cured her: She could not get
help by any other. 20. Susannah Woran, of Stockland five M^les off Honington,
of the Ague and Fever. 21. The Wife of Mr. John Brooks, in the Back-Lane
without the Castle-Gate in Bristol, of the Ague and Fever. 22. I did much good
to Deborah Phillips, in Rackly-street, in Bristol, over against the
Three-Kings, for the Rising of the Mother, with great pain in her Stomach, and
great weakness of Body. 23. The Wife of Mr. Charles Parsons, at the Black-Raven
in Pearpool-Lane, of the Fever, with great pain at her Stomach. 24. Mrs.
Clipson, at Safforn-Hill, next door to the Tobacco-Roll, of a Cough, who could
not get help by any other. 25. Elizabeth Fish, of Hogsdon, the next door to the
Three-Kings, of a great pain and lameness in her Limbs, and the Grips in the
Guts. 26. Mrs. Elizabeth Cleverly, next door to the Three Neats-Tongues, in
Silver-street in Bloomsbury, of the Ptisick and Cough, who was so bad
therewith, that she was likely to lose her speech. 27. Alice Baker, over
against the Black-Swan, in Turnmil-street, at Mr. Corner's House, a
Brick-layer, of Looseness of her Teeth, when they were all ready to fall out.
She is near fourscore years of Age. 28. Mris Holloway, at the Nags-Head in
Grays-Inn-Lane, of a Fever with great Weakness, when none thought she would
have lived. 29. Mrs. Collins. near the Castle-Gate, in Bristol, of an
Imposthume in her Ear. 30. Elizabeth Gareish, of Warminster, in Wiltshire, of a
Consumption, with great pain at her Stomach, Head, and Side, who could not get
help in three years. 31. Ann Penny, of Froom, five Miles from Warminster, of
the Evil in her Neck. 32. The Wife of Thomas Wenton, of Forshil, two Miles off
Coventry, of the Mother and Spleen. 33. The Wife of Mr. Burnham, of
Westhadingham, seven Miles off Northgmpton, of Lameness in her Back and Hips,
which came with Childbearing, and I soon made her throw by her Crutches, and
cured her. 34. The Wife of William Biggs a Smith in Darby, of the Mother and
Spleen. 35. The Wife of Rober Ostine of Hitchen in Harfordshire, of a lame Leg,
and shrunk Sinews, who could not set her Foot to the ground, nor get help in
twenty years, and I made her as well as ever she was in her life. 36. Mary
Tholins of Ilkuston on the Hill near Darby, of the Evil on her Hand. 37.
Margaret Valence of Long-Maston near Worsworth in Darbyshire, of the Evil in
her Neck. 38. Joan Lodsdon of Southward near St. Needs, of blindness with the
Evil. 39. Elizabeth Barton at the Wool-pack in Sea Alley in Kings-street in
Westminster of the Dropsy, and Timpany, who was likely to dye thereof. 40. The
Wife of Mr. Richard Kirwood an Apothecary in Corn-street in Bristol, who got
harm in her Lying in, and had the advice of many able Doctors, but none could
cure her, insomuch that there was little expected but Death; however, with
God's Blessing, I made her as well as ever she was in her life. 41. The Servant
of Mr. Richard Corbit at the Globe in Long lane, who was quite blind of one
Eye, of the Evil, and I cured her. 42. I cured Mary Wilmot of Hogs-Norton in
Oxfordshire, of the Evil and Scurvy, when it had almost eat her Limbs to
pieces. 43. I cured the Wife of John Stooks of Guilford in Surry, of tormenting
pain and lameness of the Scurvy in all her Limbs. 44. I helped Mrs. Lime a
Lodger at the Crooked Billet in St. Martins Lane in the Fields, of five Stones
that came from her at once,
the first or second time after she had taken my things: They are about the
bigness of little Nuts, shaped like a Muscle, four of them, and the other is of
another shape; any that please may see them. 45. I cured Mrs. Sarah Merryman,
over against the Sign of the B^ll in Rotchester seven miles from Gravesend, of
an Ague and Fever, You may see, and prove the truth hereof, and you will find
that there is not any but my self have done any such Cures, since God gave me
the gift of Healing.

Therefore, I would not have you believe all Men and Women that say they can do
the same, for we live in a false Age and many People are given to lying:
therefore prove the truth of their works, and mine, and you that cannot trust
your own judgments, take the advice of some godly honest Man, and so proceed.

One thing more take notice of, which is this; Because I do good to all that
come, being curable, many of the People think that others can do the like, and
so go to those which have no skill, and so are cheated of their Money, Lives
and all.


Here follows and account of what Children I have cured.
1. The Child of Mr. Edward Costerine at Wapping-wall a Sailmaker, of the
Rickets, and Hectic Fever. 2. The Son of Mr. Thomas Partridge at the lower
end of East-Smithfield, near the Hermitage Bridge a Plummer, of the Fever. 3.
The Child of Mr. Harkalus Bridson near the Sign of the King David, a Dier, on
the Bank-side in Southwark, of lameness all one side. 4. The Child of Mr. Henry
Peacock, near Catherins Dock, of the new Malignant Fever and Cough. 5. William
Davis's Daughter of Warminster in Wiltshire, of the Evil in her Neck. 6.
Elizabeth Butcher, of the same Town, of a Scald and Leprous Head, who was
twelve or thirteen years of Age, and brought it into the World with her. 7. I
cured her Sister of the same Distemper. 8. Mr. Brooks his Daughter of
Fillingsly, three Miles off Coventry, of the Evil and Blindness. 9. Elizabeth
Weltons Son of Hill-woton, six Miles off Coventry, of the Evil and Blindness.
10. Mr. Francis Plowmans Daughter of Wotton, two miles off Northampton, of the
Palsy, and withered Hand and Arm. 11. Mr. Vickers Daughter of Little Oakly,
ten miles off Northampton, of the Evil and Blindness. 12. John Smiths Daughter
of Northampton, of Convulsion-Fits. 13. The Daughter of Mr. Standbridge in
Catherine-wheel-yard, over against the Sheep-pens in Smithfield, of the Fever,
and Grips in the Guts. 14. Mr. Hayht's Son of Catherine-wheel-yard in
Smithfield, of the Consuming Fever, which is the worst of Consumptions. 15.
The Child of Mr. Thomas Parsons, over against St. Giles Church at the
Wool-Pack, of the Evil in his Hand, being eat through the Bones and Sinews; and
to any honest Man's Judgment,
was quite past Cure, his Hand being eaten almost to pieces; and now he is a
brave Boy and five years old and upward, and his Hand well, and has the use of
it. 16. The Child of Mr. Grimes, between Vine-street and Mutton-lane, near
Clarken-Well, a Clock-maker, of the Rickets and Consumption, when he was almost
at Deaths door. 17. The Son of Mrs. Mary Clark, near the Lamb in Islington, of
the Lethargy, with great pain in his Head, and Deafness. 18. Richard Kinds
Child of Bachwell near Littleworth in Northamptonshire, of the Rickets and
Fever, being four years of Age, and never could have any strength to stand,
and I made the Child to go about the Streets in a Fortnights time, with God's
help. 19. I helped Mrs. Mary Coopland in Beamont-yard, a little without Algate,
of great lameness in her Hips. 20. The Child of Mr. John Sereitt, at the upper
end of Sea-Alley in Kings-street Westminster, being pined away with a
Consumption and Rickets to Skin and Bones, being above two years of Age, and
could not bear any strength to stand, and people thought it was impossible for
that Child to be recovered; however, with God's blessing, he is as brave a Boy
as any about London.
And whereas there are sick and diseased Children in the Womb, that die before
they are born, or soon after, besides it does endanger the Woman's Life also;
This is to let you know that I Cure Children before they are born and preserve
the Woman's Life and Health also.

And if Children have the same symptoms, as aforesaid, they may take from one
year old one Pill, and so many years old, so many Pills as they are years old,
till they come to twenty Pills: And so they which are three or fourscore years
of Age may take twenty.

You are not to give Children any thing but Milk before they put forth their
Foreteeth; but after the Foreteeth are come forth, let the Child by little and
little be accustomed to chewing, and use flesh minced very small with Bread,
which with a little chewing may be swallowed easily; and abstain sucking the
Breast for at least an hour after eating, lest the Milk being mixed in the
Stomach with the other Meats, and too long kept there, be corrupted; for I have
observed that Children are scarce ever troubled with Worms while they use Milk
alone.

I can with God's help save the lives of thousands of Children that may dye
breeding Teeth, and do it for small charge, if the Parents are but willing.

I cure all sorts of Blindness curable, without putting any thing into the Eyes.

I cure the Scald or Leprous Head without pain, or loss of a hair of the Head.

All sorts of Deafness curable

All sorts of Sores, though the Bones be rotten.

THe Scarvies breed a Gonorrhea, and so will hard drinking, smoking Tobacco,
and late sitting up at nights, and a Gonorrhea will breed a Consumption of the
Reins and Kidneys, and this Consumption will breed a Catarrh, which is known by
a sharp tickling in the Throat, which is a briny Rheum distilling down from the
Brain, but comes from the whole mass of Blood, being corrupted, and made thin
and sharp; and when it has much Ulcerated the Lungs, the best things in the
World will not cure; and that is known by much Coughing and Spitting Ropy Phlegm
in the night time, the loss of natural rest, the appetite bad, and strength
decaying, being heavy and melancholy, and little comfort in any thing, and the
flesh wasting away; the mass of Blood is all naught, the Bodies of most all raw
on the inside, from the Throat to the neck of the Blader; and further in some:
so all the Art is to take away all the corruption out of the mass of Blood, and
to make it pure and good and to heal all the inward parts, and then the work is
done: I do it in the hardest times of Winter, or Summer, the Catarrh goes
speedily off, and all pains soon after that; then comes a good appetite, with
all manner of comfort as formerly, but you must not give off taking things,
till you find some other symptoms gone as well as the former, which is foulness
and greasiness of the Urine, and when it coms to be of a clear wholesome color,
you are well.

But beware lest you come too late; therefore to prevent this Mortal Distemper,
so soon as you find a tickling in your Throat, make haste and come to me, and
I, under God, will help you for small charge; but if you stay till the foresaid
symptoms appear, you cannot without much difficulty be cured.

I help all sorts of Ruptures, and Burstenness in Men, Women and Children, and
keep a Truss-maker on purpose to make Trusses fit for them, otherwise they
cannot be cured: I do not hinder them of doing any business, but give present
ease, and they go more comfortably about their business: But do not believe
them that say they can cure without a Truss, for they will but cheat you of
your Money; I have not seen any Trusses so good as those which I have made; I
do not get one penny by them.

I cure the Ague for five shillings, and every one that I miss doing the Cure,
I will give them ten shillings.

I do more Cure for a Crown or an Angel, than you can have done at many places
for forty shillings.

How Men may preserve Health.
ANd first of Tobacco, it is hot and dry, and therefore it may be good for
gross Phlegmatic Bodies, which are cold and moist, so they take it moderatly.

But for a thin Choleric Man which is by nature hot and dry, Tobacco is the
Plague of the whole Body, and the best fruit it brings forth is a kind of
madness.

Also keep good hours going to bed; forbear hard drinking, which kills as sure
as a Gun, though not so quick: and when you are at Dinner or Supper rather rise
with an appetite than loathing of Meat: Walk moderately and whatever you do
vex not your mind with care and troubles of the World, for it will breed many
Diseases, and eat out the Body like a Canker-Worm: And knowing, that though we
are alive and well to day, we may be dead to morrow; therefore I think he does
well that considers his latter end.

The true Receipt (as it was given to me) of the Everlasting Cordial Drink,
Water, or Spirits, which the Cheats have cried up to cure all Diseases:

Take Spirit of Wine one Gallon, Senna two pound, bruise it a little, and put
it into the Spirit of Wine for the space of forty eight hours; then strain out
the Senna, (...)


