Deceivers Made Manifest.
There has been a Controversy in this Nation of England, and Dominion of
Wales, and in many other Nations, both far and near, between the People (by
Scorners) called Quakers, and the Bishops, Priests and Clergy, and with others
that went before them, concerning the Right Way and Worship of the LORD.
As for the Lord, his Way is Perfect, Psalm. 18.30.
THE Priests of all sorts have told the People, That the Quakers were
Deceivers; and upon that account they (even they) have stirred the Magistrates
(both former and latter) to persecute them in a most horrible manner.

Now that the People may have a little notice of what we have done in order to
the removing of this Scandalous Lie, and to clear our Innocence in the Matter,
take a short hint as follows.

Beside several Demonstrations of our Willingness from time to time for having
a clear Trial, according to the Scriptures of Truth, between Us and the Bishops
and Priests; the thing was also laid before the King after this manner, That it
was our real desire to have a public Meeting with the Bishops, that as many as
they would, and certain of us should meet in a Place Public and Convenient,
that as many a^ could might hear; and that the Matter discussed upon should be
according to the Scriptures of Truth; and the party whose Way was found to
derogate from the Scriptures, that that Party would confess their Error, and
acknowledge the Truth held forth by the other Party: Now to this we were (and
still are) willing. The Priests persecuted Christ, and said He had a Devil,
etc. They persecute and stir Persecution upon his Members now.
The King said, That the thing was Reasonable: So the thing was promised; but
the Bishops put it off, knowing that their Way would not concur with the
Scriptures: And yet notwithstanding, they have stirred the Magistrates against
us, and they have been the great Causers of all the Persecution, and Ruin, and
Bloodshed that have befallen us.

Now, in Obedience to the Lord God, I bear my Testimony against all the Priests
which are made by the Will and Approbation of men, without exception.

Such Priests are Deceivers, and deceive People's Souls of their Eternal
Felicity: Thus I charge them in the Name of the Lord, and prove them as
follows.

Wherein the Kingdom of the Lord stands, and how contrary it is in all things
to Satan's Kingdom.
The Power and Spirit of the Lord God is in all things contrary to the Spirit
and Power of Darkness, which is the Devil; the Spirit of the Lord is Holy, Just
and Righteous; and all that come to know that Spirit, and come to be guided by
it, they are thereby led to Holiness, Justice and Righteousness, and to Peace;
in these things stands the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Kingdom of the Devil stands in Sin, which is all manner of Wickedness,
all manner of Unrighteousness, all Debauchery, all Uncleanness, all Wantonness,
all Profaneness; these, and such like, as Cruelty, oppression, Tyranny,
Hard-heartedness, Drunkenness, etc. are the Fruits of the Devil's Kingdom: So
here is the appearance of his Kingdom, and in what People soever these Fruits
are manifested, they are the Subjects of his Kigdom, and he is their Godd and
King.

All men in the first Adam are in this Perishing State, and there is no Help to
come out of it but by and through Christ Jesus the Power of God; and he brings
People out of Sin, even such as believes in his Light and Spirit, and
destroys the Root of it in them, and so they come to cease from the Act of
Sin, and that whilst in the Body: [Mark] Man can Sin no longer then whilst he
is in the Body; for, after Death Judgment follows.

The Testimony of the Ministers of Christ, and the Priests Testimony contrary.
Now the Testimony of the Ministers of Christ is, That there is an absolute
Neeessity fot all Men and Women to know the Power of God to redeem them, whilst
in the Body, from Sin and Imperfection, or else the Guilt will remain upon
them, and their Reward will be according to their Deeds done in the Body.

The Priests Testimony (of all sorts) unanimously is, That no man can be free
from Sin and Imperfection on this side the Grave: So this is contrary to what
they bind those they call Godfathers to promise for Children.

Therefore they are Deceivers, and such as plead for the Devil, and his
Interest, which is Sin and Imperfection, even so long while men can sin no
longer: Therefore in God's Dread and Authority I charge them to be Deceivers,
and Ministers of the Devil.

Objection, But do not the Scriptures say, That if we say that we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us.

Answ. The Apostle was a Heavenly Man, redeemed from Sin, and he knew well by
what means he was redeemed; and I refer the Reader to his Epistle, where they
whose Eyes are any thing enlightened may see that John's Testimony is against
Sin and Imperfection, and that may fully serve to answer this Objection; for,
in the verse before he speaks of the Blood of Cleansing, which cleanses from
all Sin: and in the verse following he says, If we confess, etc he does not
mean England's General Confession, which is confessed from a Childhood to Three
or Four Score Years, where People live and dye in their Sins: But the Apostle
adds, and speaks of being cleansed from all Unrighteousness: So they that
do confess and forsake their Sins, they find the Mercy of the Lord. Prove. 28.13.


The Ministers of Christ do preach the Life and Power of God, and that all
People are to wait to know the appearance of it in their own Hearts, to
overcome the Devil's Power and Authority; they that have believed their Report
have found the Lord's Power and Arm revealed, to work effectually against the
Strong Man, and to cast him out, and to spoil his Goods, which is Sin, etc. the
Power of God destroys it, and gives man Victory over it whilst in the Body.

We plead the Lord's Interest, which is, Holiness, Righteousness, and Good will
to men, etc.

The Priests preach the Devil's Interest, which is Sin, as Strife, and
Contention, etc. therefore they are his Servants: For, if men cannot cease from
some sort of Sin whilst in the Body (as they say) then he is not redeemed from
the Devil's Pow^^ ^^ilst in the Body, but the Wrath of God abides upon him.

The Priests are Blasphemers. Lords, and My very good Lord; and most
Blasphemously do give one another that Title which only and alone belongs to
Christ Jesus; for thus they call one another, Most Gracious Lord; Is not this
Blasphemy in the highest degree? Consider and understand. This is spoken to the
Arch. Bishop of Canterbury.


The Ministers of Christ did and do invite people to follow them as they follow
Christ, and as they had and have them for an Example.

But the Priests are bad Examples, and do not follow Christ, being Deceivers
and Blasphemers, as aforesaid, The Priests stinking savor poisoning Nations.
Proud and Covetous, Drunkards and Swearers, Liars and False Accusars, Cruel
Oppressors, Tyrannizing over Innocent People for that which they have no right
from God unto, Back-biters and Adulterers; these, together with many the like
are the Examples which the Priests are found to live in and to be guilty of;
and their poor deluded Followers (the more is the pity) do follow them fully;
for their stinking Savor and bad Example does encourage and strengthen the
People in their Wickedness, and so the Priests are Co-Workers with the Devil.

These are Babylon's Merchants, who shall Howl for very Vexation of spirit; for
the Lord God will Plague them, and Torment them to all Eternity,

Except they speedily confess their Error and Wickedness, and seek Repentance
before it be hid from them.

Ye Workers of Iniquity of all sorts, Dives; did he find Repentance in the
Grave? (having Earthly Treasure enough) did he? No, but he wished, That his
Brethren (he had five) might be warned, left they should come to that
Tormenting Place; that is, That they should seek Repentance, lest they dyed in
their Sins, and so go to Hell, where he was.

Laneingan, the 5th of the 4th Month, 1672. From a Lover of Truth and Justice,
but a Hater of all Unrighteousness. Evan Jones.


