depiction of Death I Kill you all




Death Triumphant: OR, The most Renowned Mighty, Puissant, and irresistible
Champion and Conqueror General of the whole World DEATH, Described.

WITH A descripton of his notable Fights, and triumphant Victories obtained
against all Creatures, especially against the Sons and Daughters of men.

ALSO His particular Stratagems and numerous regiment of Seknesses and
Diseases, whereby he conquers and subdues Mankind. Lively set forth to the view
of all men, for their better preparation for the day of their death, and
dissolution out of this sinful life.

The Fifth Edition

By Andrew Jones.

1 Cor. 15.55. O Death where is thy sting! O Grave where is thy Victory!

London, Printed for Will. Thackery at the Sign of the Angel in Ducklane. 1674.

Revel. 6.8. And I looked, and behold a pale horse, and his Name that sat on
him was Death.

Revel. 14.13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the dead that die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their works follow them.


IT is appointed for all men once to die, says the Apostle in Hebrews the
ninth and the seven and twentieth verse; and after death comes the Judgment.
And as St. Paul says in Romans the fifth and the twelfth verse, By one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned. And death, says he, in verse 14. reigned from Adam to
Moses: Yea as daily experience tells us, it reigned from Adam to Christ, from
the beginning of the world to the end thereof: There is not a day nor a night
that passes, but experienceth this great Truth, and as the Psalmist says of
the Sun in the Nineteenth Psalm. There is no Speech, nor Language, no Land nor
Nation where his voice is not heard; yea, his power and dominion is gone forth
into all the world. Therefore beloved wonder not at all at this conquering
Conqueror; for who is there among all the sons and daughters of men but is able
no speak of his greatness, and declare his power to the generations to come.
Look but upon your Forefathers, Grandfather, and other your Predecessors, and
they will all tell you experimentally of his power and greatness. Where is
Alexander? Where is Pilate? Where is Julius Caesar? What Is become of all the
great and renowned Champions of the World? are they not all dead and gone and
overcome by death; is it not said by Methusalem and the Fathers of old, in Genesis
5. that they all died; they lived hundreds of years, and yet at last these
died. And what day is there but you may see some one or other bemoaning the
loss of some one or other of their friends, Oh says one, My Father is taken
away by Death, and My Mother, says another; the Husband laments for the death
of his Wife, and the Wife for the death of her Husband, Parents for the death
of their Children, and the Children for the death of their Parents, every day
are bemoaning themselves, and yet notwithstanding every one is ready to say of
him, I hate him, for he tells me no good, but evil tidings; They Cannot
endure to hear of him, because one time or other he must and will vanquish and
overcome them. They cannot endure to hear talk of him: O how it troubles and
perplexeth them, especially those who live at hearts ease in pleasure and
prosperity: its a grief indeed to them to hear of death: for why? it brings to
them no tidings of good, but altogether of evil; for true it is, death is an
ill friend to them that dye in the guilt of their Conscience, and sins
unrepented of, to them its very sad news indeed to dye: But to those who live
honestly, walking as in the day time; having a conscience void of offense, to
them he is ever welcome for why, nothing on this side Heaven can be more
comfortable to a godly man, then that day; For blessed are the dead that dye in
the Lord.

Death to a gracious godly man is a good friend, it brings them the best news
that ever they heard in all their lives; a message from their Father in Heaven,
to summon them home to himself, to partake of those glorious and heavenly
enjoyments, which he has provided for them from the beginning of the World;
they are not afraid of his fears, nor of the power, greatness and revenge of
this King of Terrors; yet this is that undaunted Champion of the World, that
puts the whole World in fear of him, and makes even Kings to fall down before
him; and certain it is, this great and mighty Champion Death will one time or
other overcome the whole World; For all must dye, that is undoubted: And should
all the World join together to resist him, they could not be able to stand
before him: Be pleased then to take this description.

A lively Description of the Great Champion and Conqueror DEATH.
DEATH is a raw-bon'd shrimp, nor low nor high,
Yet he has power to make the highest low.
The supreme Master of Mortality,
The poor man's friend, the rich man's foe,
The last remains of times anatomy.
A Thief in pace, in pace more sure than slow.
A sleep, a dream; hence we are said to have
In sleep our death, and in our bed a grave.
His sign's in Sagnittary, and the But
He shoots at, is Men's Hearts, he never sits
The shafts he shoots to the Quiver they are put.
Won is he not by threats nor by entreats,
Trice, power and prayer; at whosoever he shoots
Or aim^ to strike, he never fails, but hits;
Thus fearless he, as ever he has been
Makes his stroke to be felt, not to be seen-
Death is worms Caterer, who when he comes
Will have provision, though the Market starve;
And knows before where he intends to come,
And on which carcass he intends to carve.
As he awakes the sin belulled Drones,
And cuts them off, as rightly they deserve;
Its he that all things to subjection brings,
And plays at Football with the Crown of Kings.
Two empty lodges has he in his head,
Which has two lights, but now his eyes are gone.
Cheeks had he once, but they are now hollowed,
Beauty he had, but now appears there none;
For all those moving parts are vanished,
Presenting horror, if but looked upon;
His color sable, and his visage grim,
Most ghastly looks do still attend on him.
Fleshly he was, but now it is picked away,
The reason's this, because he has so much to do.
Clothed with flesh, he would be forced to stay,
And show perchance too much of mercy too,
To some young piece, who on some Holyday,
Might force him sore, if she could tell him how;
Which to prevent, and better to restrain him,
He goes so ugly, none would entertain him.
Yet entertained he will be, though he be
Contemned by the profane Courtezan, whose form,
Seems coy to give him hospitality;
Yet when he comes, he will not on heads adjourn,
To give them summons of Mortality,
Converting that some Beauties did adorn,
Her composition to corrupted earth,
Whence she deriv^d both period and birth.
Snake like, he comes on us with creeping pace,
And takes us napping, when we least think on him.
In's hand an hourglass, which infers our race,
Is near an end, and though we strive to shun him,
He moves when we do move, and that same place,
Where to we fly? and think we have out run him;
There he appears, and tells us it is not good,
To strive against that which cannot be withstood.
If we shed tears they are bootless, for his eyes,
Instead of sight are molded up in clay:
If we essay to pierce his ears with cries,
Vain is our labor, fruitless our essay:
For is remorsless ears all motions flies,
Nor will he give the Prince a longer stay.
His payment must be present, and his doom
Return to earth, thy cradle and thy tomb.
Nor is his summons only when we are old,
For age and youth be equally attends:
Nor can we say that we have surer hold,
In youth than age, nor further from our ends;
Save that we are by Natures verdict told,
With length of years our hope of life extends.
Thus young or old, if Death approach and say,
Earth unto earth, we must perforce obey.
A breath, bereaving breath, a fading shade,
Ever in motion, so as it appears;
He comes to tell us whereto we were made,
And like a friend, to rid us of our fears:
So as if his approach were rightly understood
He should be welcomed more with joys than tears.
Joy to dissolve to earth; from whence we came,
That after death joy might receive the same.
Naked his scalp, thrill, open is his nose,
His mouth's from ear to ear, his earthy breath
Is corrupt and noisome, which makes me suppose,
Some moldy Cell's the Manor bouse of death.
His shapeless legs bends backwards when he goes,
His rake lean body shrinking underneath:
Feeble he seems, bereft of heart and power,
Yet dares he fight the mightiest Emperor.
Now he consorts with flesh, only worms and men,
Prepared for worms meat, though he makes resort
To Country, City, Village, now and then,
Yea, where he is seldom welcome, to the Court,
There will he enter, and will summon them,
And go they must, though they be sorry for it.
Thus Country, Cit^, Village, Court and all,
Must their appearance make, when death does call.
Chop fallen, crest sunk, dry-boned, anatomy,
Earth carved, mole-eyed, flesh-hook that pulls us hence;
Night crow, souls doom, that tells us we must die.
Pilgrim remover, that deprives our sense,
Lives date, souls hate, that sends from misery.
Man's sharpest assault, admitting no defense.
Times exit or our entrance to that clime,
Where there is no time nor period of time.
Nor stands he much upon our dangerous year,
All are alike to him, yea often we see,
When we are most secure, then he is most near.
There is none at all from him can flee,
For as he can transpose him every where,
East, West, North, South, with all felicity,
So he can come; so coming in his stealth,
And take us hence, when we are best in health.
This is his Descripion; Death is his name; King he is over all Kings and
Princes; yea terror to Princes, and a most bitter enemy to all ungodly
wretches; unwelcome he is to most, and unlooked for and unthought of almost by
all.

As for strength, who is there that can equal him? for power he is most potent,
for strength he is invincible, and by all inresistible: His fears are most
horrible, and his dominion is from Sea to Sea, and from Generation to
Generation, over all the World.

I remember a story of an old man that had gathered a bundle of sticks, and
carrying them upon his back, at last grew very weary of his burden, and was so
far tired and spent, that he could go no farther; which caused him to throw
down his sticks, and cry out for death to come and take away his life, no
sooner had he spoke, but death appeared to him, and demanded why he wished for
him? The man amazed at his sudden appearance, could scarcely speak for fear,
yet recovering his spirits, said, I pray thee help me up with my bundle of
sticks.

This is the Condition of many in troubles and afflictions, they will wish for
death, and O that I might die, but when death appears, they change their notes,
and are of another mind; but I say unto you all be prepared for his coming, and
fear him not: for death to those that are prepared is a welcome friend; yea,
when he comes, he puts an end to all controversies; Death dissolves many a hard
knot which the world cannot: he makes a separation betwixt a Man and Wife,
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants. He observes neither Years nor
Months, neither Weeks nor Days, neither Hours nor Minutes. He comes at the
first as well as at the last; yea, the first minute of our lives.

Death has one way or other to overcome all, both old and young; it is no more
but a word and a blow with him, to touch and go, yea many times without words,
without fickness, yea suddenly, in a moment. Death is the ablest Doctor in the
world, he cures all diseases instantly; if so be men be given to ambition, he
has a cure to humble them, and lay their hoour in the Dust; if men are given
to pride, Death will teach them humility, and lay them even with the dust; if
men are given to prodigality, Death will cure them: if men are given to
covetousness, Death will make them liberal to the Worms; if men are given to
Drunkennss, Death will make them sober; if an Adulterer, Death will teach him
Chastity: All these cures will he do with one and the same Medicine, and sall
we say of him, Our God never made him, but the Devil and Sin brought him into
the World? For the Devil bore a grudge to mankind from the beginning, and has
ever since set each in division against him. For as by one may sin entered into
the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed over all men, for that all
have sinned, Romans 5.8.

Now the principal motive which may encourage Christians to embrace and welcome
death, is the assured hopes of the enjoyment of these everlasting joys which
every true Christian shall enjoy to all eternity in heaven: therefore welcome
death, welcome friend, says the godly man. I desire, says St. Paul, to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all; therefore farewell life,
and welcome death, welcome messenger of my Father, thou will put an and to all
my sorows, and convey my soul into Abraham's bosom. I shall sore from Earth to
Heaven, from a Prison to a Palace, from this sinful World to the Heavenly
Country; where I shall always be in the presence of God and Christ, and all
the glorious Angels of Heaven, and all the Patriarchs and Prophets, Apostles,
immortal and blessed Saints: Where there shall be joy without sorrow, liberty
without imprisonment, health without sickness, joy without sorrow, pleasure
without pain, and that to all Eternity; where one day is better than a
thousand. Come then O Death at thy pleasure, for it is a pleasure to me to die.
To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. Come thou O my joy, for it is a
joy to me to enjoy thee. Welcome Death, the beginning of joy, that first-fruit
of pleasure; when thou come, farewell sorrows, and farewell miseries, my Winter
is past, thou art to me a messenger of joy. O life thou art my death, O death
thou art life; this life is a continual death: but after that death has seized
upon this my body, then shall my soul go unto her life, adieu therefore O my
life, and welcome, yea thrice welcome Death; farewell also O Death, and for ever
welcome life and immortality and glory for ever.

Since death is thus described, for this he is, be still prepared, lest
unprepared he come, and take you hence for spending time amiss, for death is
sins reward, transgressions doom; So when thou die thou shall be sure of
this, to have access unto the marriage room, and for thy tomb, instead of
Ivory, or Marble, or Brass, shall glory cover thee.

Certain Rules and directions how to live a godly life, that so we may die a
happy death, and not fear him when he comes.
IN the morning when thou first awakest bless God, and give him thanks for his
careful protection, and watching over thee, for the quiet rest and sleep he
has bestowed upon thee, to the refreshment of thy body, and the renewing of
thy mind.

Call to mind all the business of the day following, and then to all thy honest
endeavors crave the direction of God, and his assistance; otherwise thou
toilest in vain, and thy labors will not prosper.

2. At the evening, when thou have retired thy self, call to mind what thou
have effected, what thou have neglected, what evil thou have avoided, what thou
have done.

3. When thou preparest thy self to bed, likewise prepare thy self as for thy
grave; remembering that many go to bed and never rise again, till they be
raised with the sound of the last trumpet; thou art nearer thy end by one day,
then thou wast in the morning; Therefore every night be so wise as to know that
which the fool neglected, That this night thy Soul may be taken away.

4. For Food, Raiment, the fruit of the body, the Fruits of the Field, for
health, wealth, friends, for the mercies and benefits thou receivest form God,
whether outwardly or inwardly in Body, or in Mind, receive them not, use them
not, touch them not, without prayer and praise, and thanksgiving to him, the
Creator and giver of all good things.

5. Be fully persuaded in mind, that thy present estate is best for thee,
whether prosperity or adversity, whether poor or rich, because it is the good
providence of God, and without his will nothing befalls his children.

6. Put away jesting, with foolish talking, remembering this, thou keep thy
tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile, Ephesians. 5.4. For in
many words there cannot want sin.

7. Endeavor to have servent Love, for the gift thereof is sweet, it covers
a multitude of sins.

8. To do good, and to distrib^te, forget not; for with such sacrisice God is
well pleased, Heb. 13.6. Wherefore stop not thine ear at the cry of the poor,
lest thou likewise cry and God will not hear.

9. See that in word and conversations of life, thou become a president for
others to imitate, let this be done without hypocrisy; and forget not in all
things to keep a good conscience, for this will bring a man peace at the last.

10. Practice in thy life true humility, for God resists the pro^d and gives
grace to the humble. For what have we that we have not received.

11. Whenever thou fallest into sin, speedily recover thy self again by
repentance; and lie not therein with the dead, but rise again by faith in
Christ, as being alive unto God.

12. Whatsoever thou take in hand, remember thy death, so shall thou never do
amiss, if at all times thou esteem the day of thy life, as the day of thy
death; for there is nothing to so certain as it; be therefore sober and
watching, that Christ at his coming may find thee waking: And for thy better
watch, let this sound be always in thine ears, Arise ye Dead and come forth to
judgment.

13. So spend the Sabbath day in thy life, that thy soul at death may rest in
bliss.

14. Think with thy self thou have deferred many years thy repentance, and
think how gracious the Lord has been unto thee, that he has not cut thee off
in the midst of thine iniquity, and resolve with thy self no longer to delay
in that kind, but make this thy present day, upon pain of thy peril.

15. Daily and hourly think upon the Love of Christ, never enough to be thought
upon; the gracious and admired work of thy Redemption, By the blood of that
immaculate, and unspotted Lamb Christ Jesus, at the very Name whereof, shall be
bowed all the knees of heaven and earth; but at the thought thereof, shall be
rent all the hearts of both.

16. Do not that injury to any other, that thou would another should do unto
thee, though thou can: Oppress not the poor by thy might, be not Quarelsome,
a Gamster nor Surety, but for a tried friend, and a good occasion.

17. Keep not company with any notorious and detected person, by whom, though
not otherways thy Reputation and Credit may be called in question in the
opinion of the World: For the company, be it good or evil that thou keep,
such shall thou be censured to be.

18. Be fearful to commit sin, especially any exemplary sin, to show the way as
it were to others, lest they perish therein unrepented, and it be one day laid
to thy charge.

And in this doing, thou will be so prepared, that thou will not fear death
when he comes. Amen.

FINIS.
Books printed for William Thackery, at the Angel in Duck-lane.
THe School of Grace, or a Book of good Nurture. Christ's First Sermon. Christ's
Last Sermon Christians best Garment. Christians Blessed Choic^. Heavens Glory
and Hells Horror. A Warning-piece to the Sloathful, Idle, Careless, Drunken,
and secure ones of these Times. Mr. Fenners Sermons of Repentance. A Sermon on
Dives and Lazarus. The Christian Comfort.
These are a^l very good books, and are but 3 pence a piece,

The Plain-mans Pathway to Heaven. The sin of Pride Arraigned and Condemned.
The Black-Book of Conscience The Dreadful Character of a Drunkard. Englands
Faithful Physician. The Fathers last Blessing to his Children. Dooms day at
hand. Peter's Sermon of Repentance. The Charitable Christian. Death Triumphant.
The Godly Man's Gain and the Wicked Man's Woe. The Singers Sobs. The Swearer and
the Drunkard: Two Brethren in Iniquity, arraigned at the Bar. A Book of Prayers
and Graces The ready way to get Riches, or the poor man's Cou^sell^r The short
and sure way to get Grace and Salvat^on The Touchstone of a Christian. The
Pathway to Saving Knowledge. Every Man's Duty, and the God^y Man's Practice. The
Christians Guide. The way to Heaven made plain.
Read them over carefully and practice them constantly and rest assuredly thou will find much comfort in th^^ (...) thy own Soul; And are but two pince a
piece.


