CHRISTUS DEI, OR, A THEOLOGICAL DISCOURSE, WHEREIN Is Proved, that Regal or
Monarchical Power is not of Humane, but of Divine Right, and that GOD is the
sole Efficient Cause thereof, and not the People.

Also, That every Monarch is above the whole Commonwealth, and is not only
Major Singulis, but Major Universis.

Written In Answer to a late Printed Pamphlet entitled, Observations upon some
of His Majesty's late Answers and Expresses.

1 Pet. 2. 13. Subjecti estote omni humanae creaturae propter Dominum, sive
Regi quasi Praecellenti. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the
Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme.

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall. An. Dom. M. DC. XLII.

CHRISTUS DEI, OR, A Theological Discourse, wherein is proved, that Regal
Power is not of Humane, but of Divine Right, and that GOD only is the
Efficient cause thereof, and not the People.
Preface.
THere is a Book come forth of late, barely entitled, Observations upon some
of His Majesty's late Answers and Expresses, without any name of the Author or
place where it was Printed. Wherein the Observer (so I must call him not
knowing him by any other name) aims chiefly and directly to prove; that the
hereditary, Regal, and Monarchical Power of our now present dread Sovereign
King Charles, is inferior and subject to the Power of the now present
Parliament.

Which to evince he undertakes to lay down the Original foundation of all
Regal Power whatsoever, according to the efficient and final causes thereof.
And having made the final cause to be the safety of the people, together with
their Civil or Political happiness; he also makes the efficient cause to be,
not God, but only the people, and the isntrumental cause of conveying and
deriving this Regal Power to be, not any divine law, nor nothing else (amongst
Christians) but the mere humane pactions and Agreements of the Politic Body
of the people. And then arguing by a rule in nature; that quicquid efficit tale
est magts tale, he issues out this just inference (as he calls it) that
though the King be singulis major, yet he is universis minor, and therefore
inferior and subject in Power to the Parliament.

Having perused this discourse, and finding it to be most injurious to Regal
Power or Monarchy, contrary to the true Principles of State and Divinity, or
Orthodox Christian Doctrine: I thought I might do my King and Country good
service, to confute these desperate and more then dangerous Positions, by
declaring and proving the true Original foundation, according to the final
and efficient causes of Regal or Monarchical Power: which (with Gods good
help) I hope to do perspicuously in the few ensuing Paragraphes.

. 1 Of the Primary Final cause; as also of the Efficient cause of all Civil
Societies or Republiques.
Because whatsoever is done, is done for some end or purpose, without which it
should not have been done, nor had a being: therefore it is the constant
Doctrine of all Philosophers, that the End is the chief and Principal of all
causes: and therefore, for methods sake I will begin with it. now to find out
the Primarie end of all Civil Societies or Commonwealthes, we, that are
Christians, must reflect attentively upon those words of the Holy Ghost. Prove.
16: 4. universa propter semetipsum operatus est Dominus. By which we are
ascertaind, that God Almighty created not only all other Creatures, but all
mankind also, as for their Primarie end, for himself, and his own Praise and
Glory.

And as for man in particular, God created him to his own image and likeness,
endowing him with an understanding and a will, that he might know how to honor
and love his Creator, and by such love and honor might finally become happy in
the fruition of his eternal, unspeakable and inestimable Glory in Heaven: for
means whereto, first God dictated certain divine Precepts and Principles unto
man, and imprinted them with his very Creation upon his natural reason (for
which cause they are called divine natural Laws written in every man's heart,
says Saint Paul Romans 2. 15.) That every man might be equally Capable to know
them, and equally obliged to obey them. Secondly God infused into him Faith,
Hope, and Charity, and other supernatural Virtues, all tending to this
Conducement, that man following them as his guides, might, through his
obedience to God, attain to his own Salvation. Thirdly to bind man more
strongly to his Subjection, and to make it appear more illustriously unto him,
that therein principally consisted his Welfare, as the very End and Center, for
and to which he was created, He gave him an express divine Law, not to eat of
the tree in the midst of Paradise upon pain of death. Fourthly, by Revelation
he instructed him in many particular sacred forms and Rites of exterior divine
worship, as sacrifice and others; for though we read not any where in holy
Writ, that Adam offered Sacrifice, no more then we do of Isaac; yet we read
there that Cain and Abell did, and that Abraham and Jacob did. But it cannot be
imagined that Cain and Abell were the first Inventors of this most, religious
and divine worship, (noe more then that Isaac did neglect it) but that by
Paternall Tradition and example they received it from Adam.

All which duly considered; it will appear evidently, that the primary end
for which all men are created, is to serve, honor, love, obey, and worship
God. From whence it follows; that this being man's highest and principallest
Concern, it ought also to be his highest and principallest care to attend to
it. But most certain it is, that men, living divided and scattered over the
face of the world without the instruction and assistance one of another, cannot
possibly perform this for every particular man's behoof, as is requisite. And
therefore from this final cause arose primarily a necessity amongst men to
unite and combine themselves into civil Societies and Commonwealths. This end
could not be prefixed by men; but men were created for this end by God. And
therefore this is the Primary, spiritual, supernatural, and divine final
cause of all Republiques, to which every other end must be but secondary,
subordinate, and subservient.

And from hence it follows further, that since on the one side no natural
agent can by it is natural power compass the attaining of a Supernatural end;
and on the other side Civil Societies ought not to be instituted in vain: we
mustneeds conclude, that the Primary efficient Cause of all Commonwealths is
only God.

. 2. Of the Secondary final Cause, and also the only Efficient Cause of all
Civil Societies and Republiques.
Every Creature in the World strives to preserve its own kind. We see what
pains and Care Beasts and Birds take to rear their Younglings. Trees and
Plants bear fruits and seeds to produce the like when they are perished. Yea,
the inanimate Creatures (according to their predominant Element and mixture)
strive every one to obtain and enjoy their Center. And all this not only for
their own particular, but also for the harmonious Accommodation and
preservation of the Universe, the great and most excellent work of nature,
wherein she does nothing in vain. But in vain had man been, if he also had
not been provided of necessary means toward the Preservation of his kind. For
which cause God said it was not good for man to be alone: and therefore gave him
a Woman to be his Helper, that so by means of generation he might propagate
his offspring to the worlds end.

This Preservation then of mankind is the maine natural and secondary end of
man. And to this end God gave him his blessing to increase and multiply from
whence arises, that of necessity there must be at least private families. But
man and Woman finding (by woeful experience) most true what God said to Adam
and Eve; that He should eat his bread in the sweat of his brows, that she
should bring forth her children in pain, found also presently, that every
private family is not sufficient of it self to maintain this work of
Preservation, without the help of one another. For first, to say nothing of
women's deliveries in childbirth, which cannot possibly always and every where
be performed requisitely by themselves and their families, without the help of
some other, or others: and yet even upon this the Preservation of mankind holds
a most necessary and principal dependence. I will only speak of man's part,
who with the sweat of his brows, with extreme toil and labor must provide
food and clothing, and all other necessary supports and sustentations for his
family. But to do this, he must of necessity (I speak not of barbarous
inhumane people) have some certain place of abode; and in this he must have
some peculiar right, some propriety of possession, by virtue whereof he may
reap the fruits of the earth, and maintain his Cattle. And how shall every
private family be able to do this with Security? will not every one strive
for the best possession? will not the shepherds of Abraham and Lot, and of
Isaac and Gerara fall to contention for water and pastures, and such like other
necessary elbow room? And in these uncivil and unsociable quarrels, must not
all private families be made like to the fishes of the sea. Hab. 11, 13. 14.
where the stronger must devour the weaker.

Secondly God endowed man in his Creation with an understanding and a will.
This understanding is of that infinite capacity, that it has for it is
Adaequate Object omne ens as it is verum. And man therefore is in perpetual
and restless search of knowledge, to perfect his understanding by experience
and learning. The will also has for her adaequate Object omne ens as it is
bonum? And man therefore is in perpetual pursuit of Reciprocal love to
perfect his will by friendship and Justice. Over and above these God gave to
man the faculty of speech, to be the Reciprocal conveyance of learning and
friendship. So as for this very reason Arisiotle said excellently well, that
man is by nature a sociable Creature, for neither learning, nor friendship, nor
justice (in which consists essentially man's Civil or Political happiness)
nor safety or security (which is the only preservative of man's very being)
can possibly be acquired and maintained in the division of men in their private
families. And therefore for this very end it was naturally necessary for men
to unite and associate themselves into Civil Societies and Communities, that
so they might preserve their Kind.

From the learning, Experience and Industry of the understanding proceed all
Arts, Tillage, Manufactures, Trade and Traffic, which bring in Gain, and
that brings plenty from the freindship and justice of the will proceed Peace
and Security: in which secure peace and plenty consists Perfect salus
populi. now since this cannot be had in divided private Families, and without
this there can be no preservation of mankind, it follows, that Civil
Societies or Commonwealthes are naturally necessary. Whose natural final
cause is truly and only (in the manner as I have explicated) Salus Populi.

Now furthermore, seeing that a Commonwealth is not the design of Art and
Invention of particular men, nor of any positive law of theirs, but proceeds
from the Common necessity of all mankind, intimated unto them by the law of
nature, of which God is the sole cause and Author; it follows, that the
officient cause of all Republiques is only God.

. 3 Of the Final and Efficient cause of Civil Power in a Common wealth.
As for the final cause there is little or no difficulty; for seeing that the
final cause of every thing must needs be that, which that thing necessarily
referres unto, as to it is end for which it is done or has it is being: it is
manifest, that since Civil societies have for their natural and secondary
final cause Salus Populi; the power also which must not be ad destructionem,
but ad adisicationem, to maintain those Civil Societies, can have no other
final cause, but that whereunto they direct and are directed, which is Salus
Populi.

The material cause in which this power original, resides and inheres; as the
form to make up a complete Body of a Commonwealth, is the People. And so the
Observer says very well in this kind of cause; power is originally inhaerent
in the People, most certain then it is; that even at the very first uniting
themselves into a Civil Society, there is an inhaerent power in the People to
govern themselves, and by such government to preserve themselves in safety.
For this is the only necessary natural end for which they met (as I have
shown before) that they might be able and powerful to secure themselves, and
preserve their kind. But this meeting would have been in vain, and this
preservation wholly made frustrate, if there were not this Power inhaerent in
them.

If in the natural Body of man there were not an Interior Directive Governing
Power to guide every particular member in the operative use of it is function,
and to contrive those operations to the mutual good of one another, and the
conservation of the whole man; that Body could not possibly but suddenly
perish. For if the teeth will not chew, nor the throat swallow, nor the hands
reach, nor the feet stir, nor the eyes look out, when nature requires her
necessary food, she and they and all must sterve. So in a Political Body; if
all members should do but what they list, and should not be compelled by some
absolute Power to contribute their strengthes and endeavors to the
preservation of one another, and the whole Community, it would be but Regnum
in se divisum, that of necessity must fall to desolation, as the Holy Ghost
confirms also elsewhere, saying, Proverb. 11. 14. Ubi non est Gubernator
dissipabitur Populus.

The maine difficulty is: who is the efficient cause of this Power. Wherein,
not to be tedious to my Reader, but to yield him the satisfaction of his
expectation in a breife and Resolute Answer, I present unto him this
Decretorie Assertion. This Power is not a Humane but a divine Right; and God
only is the Immediate efficient cause thereof. This I prove by five Arguments.

Arg. 1. There is a rule in nature (to use the observers own words) Quod dat
esse dat consequentia ad esse. But the esse of a Republique cannot have a
simpliciter esse without the esse of this power. Therefore he that is the
Efficient cause of the Republique, is also the Efficient cause of this power.
But (as I have proved before. 2. n. 5.) God is the sole efficient cause of all
Republiques, therefore he is also the sole efficient cause of this power.

Arg. 2. The Primarie final cause of Civil Societies (as I have proved. 1.)
is divine worship; which man could not prefix to himself as his end, but he
was created by God for and to that end, and only God prefixed that end to man.
Therefore this is a divine end which cannot be atcheived without a divine Power
(as I have also proved in the same.. n. 4.) only God then is the immediate
Efficient cause of this Power.

And from thence it proceeds, that Kings, acknowledging themselves to have
received this divine Power Principally for this Primary end, their Oaths at
their Coronation are (as the Observer very grutchingly grants) more precise
in the care of Canonical Privileges, and of Bishops and Clergymen, then of
the Commonalty* and not from the reason which he gives. viz. because they were
penned by Popish Bishops. For whether the Bishops were Popish or Protestant,
surely they are not to be blamed ex hoc capite, but most highly to be
reverenced, that according to their profession and duty they put Kings in
mind, in the first place, of divine Worship, and their own and their peoples
eternal salvation depending thereupon. And I cannot understand why the
Observer should give that reason, but only to seduce the vulgar into a base and
profane misconceiving and vilifying of the Royal Power of Kings, and their
sacred Oaths. For, Popish, without all doubt in his Dictionary signifies
superstitious at least, if not Idolatrous. But, if it be superstition for a man
to be more precise in the care of divine worship, and his souls everlasting
salvation, then of any other his remporall end or affair (see. 1. n. 3.) in
vain then have all Christians hitherto believed that they were in a true
Religion. Let the Observer consider what censure he deserves for thus finding
fault with Kings Oaths, and whether he gives not just cause of suspicion,
that he is rather an Athiest then a Christian. It is well known to all
Christians, that Quaerite primum Regnum Dei and justitiam ejus is no invention
of Popish Bishops, but our Blessed Saviors own Doctrine and Rule, not only to
Bishops, but to all Kings and People whatsoever, as the! Principal, to which
as an Accessorium follows, and haecomnia adjicientur vobis: Mat. 6. 33.

Arg. 3. When private families first joined themselves into a Common Body of
society, before any Condictum, Paction, or Agreement amongst themselves, to
enact positive Laws for their government, there was an inherent power in them
to enact: such Laws. For who can make a Law without a power? But this power,
not being the effect, but the most necessary cause of all humane pactions or
positive Laws, cannot have it is origin from man, but only from God. Ergo God
is the sole Efficient cause of this power.

Arg. 4. When men first associated themselves into a Commonwealth, they were
all of equal Right and Power, so that none (I speak of several families
still as before) could challenge superiority the one over the other. For, this
divine natural power, viz. Se defendere, et vim vi repellere, was inherent in
every one of them, and obliging them. The power then which accrewed to the
aggregation of the whole society, was not made but brought, as being no other
then what was in all and every particular Member of that society before. But
that is a divine power and the immediate effect of God. Ergo. And indeed in the
due managing or excercising of this divine natural law of se defendendo, and
vim vi repellendo consists totallie the security and Salus Populi, and the
power of the Commonwealth to maintain it.

Arg. 5. God Almighty is so solely the Legislator and Author of his own Laws,
without the concurrence or consent of any other Counsel, (quis enim
consiliarius ejus fuit, aut quis prior dedit ei? Romans 11. 33.) That they have
their establishment only in and by his own will. So that noe power whatsoever
of his Creatures, can by any contraition against him, invalid or annull those
Laws. But non occides is a divine natural Law and precept expressed in the
decalogue. Therefore no Pactions or agreements of men can give this power of
putting a man to death, no more then Cain could kill Abel. But on, the other
side it is manifest, that Republiques have a lawful power of putting men to
death, without which they could not preserve their own safety. Therefore they
have it from God. And how soon God gave this power to men I know not, nor
cannot find, until after the flood; when Genes. 9. 6. we read this express
positive divine law and precept given to the Civil magistrate. Quicunque
effuderit humanum sanguinem, fundetur sanguis illius.

. 4. Of the Efficient cause of Regal Power.
The Final Cause of Regal Power must of necessity be the same that is of the
Commonwealth, because the King is the administrator of the power of the
Commonwealth, to the same end no doubt, for which it was first ordained: of
which having spoken largely before, I have no need to say any thing here.

The maine question is, who is the Efficient Cause of Regal or Monarchical
power? Which the Observer boldly averres to be, not God, but the people. And
upon this false ground he vents all those swarms of false Inferences
throughout his whole discourse.

But before I lay down the true Resolution of this question, I must desire my
Reader to mark with good heed the great difference that is between the power
it self of a Commonwealth, and the Authority to administer that power: for the
people may be the Efficient Cause of this second, though not of the first. As
for example, the Aldermen of London may elect, nominate, and constitute such or
such a man to be their Lord Major to administer the power that belongs to the
Corporation of that City: and herein they may be the Efficient Cause of his
Authority to administer the power of the City, but not of his power; because
that is the gift of the King by his Charter, of which His Majesty therefore is
the only efficient cause, and not the Aldermen, nor all the people of that
Corporation whatsoever?

I have proved all along in the precedent. that the Civil power of a
Commonwealth, is not a Humane, but Divine power, of which, not the people, but
God only is the Efficient Cause. It is true indeed, that it is in the
voluntary election of the people to authorize one, or few, or more with the
administration of this power. And as long as this Authority is still Elective
in the people, they may by consent of the major part alter their form of
Gubernation into Democraticall Oligarchicall, Aristocraticall, or Monarchical,
as they please. And herein the Observer says truly, that God is no more the
Author of Regal, then of Aristocraticall power: for whether this power be in
many, or in one, it is still the same divine power of the Commonwealth, though
diversely administered, of which God only is the Efficient Cause. But when the
people have once resigned up all their Authority into the hands of one, and his
heirs for ever, so that now it is not any longer elective in them, but
hereditary in Him: then not only the power, but the Authority also to
administer that power is solely inherent in Him and His heirs, unalterably and
irrevocably for ever.

This then is my first Assertion. The Efficient Cause of Regal or Monarchical
power, is not the people, but only God. I speak in this Assertion, not of
conditional Princes, but only of absolute Kings, and Monarchs. My first proof
then is. When the people create a King, they elect his Person, and authorize
him with the administration of that absolute power which is inherent in the
whole Commonwealth to govern it self: otherwise he is no absolute King, of
whom only I speak, and so does the Observer also. But this power (as I have
proved) is not an Humane, but a Divine Power, of which God only is the
Efficient Cause. Therefore God only, and not the people is the Efficient Cause
of Regal Power.

My second Proof, God says expressly, Prove. 8. 15. Per me Reges regnant, etc.
Then their Dominion or Power by which they Reign is immediately from God.
Christ says to Pilate, Ioh. 19, 11. Non haberes potestatem, etc. nisi tibi
datum esset desuper. Then this Power is not from below from men; but from
above, from God. Saint Paul says, Romans 13. 1. Omnu anima potestatibus
sublimioribus subdita sit: non est enim potestas nisi a Deo. And, qui resistit
Potestati, Dei Ordinationi resistit. And, non sine causa gladium portat. For
what cause? Dei enim minister est, vindex in iram etc. Then Regal Power is
Divine Power and the Ordinance of God, wherein the King is not the Peoples, but
Gods minister, as being invested and anointed interiorly in his Person by him
with a Divine Power; of which the Exterior Unction is a sacred, Ceremonious,
Commonefactive and solemn Testimony. And for this cause, Cyrus though a
Heathen King is called by God himself. Isay. 45. 1. Christus men's, Gods own
anointed. The holy King Josaphat says to those whom he had constituted Judge.
2. Paralip. 19. 6. Non hominis exercetis judicium sed Domini. Then it is not a
Humane Power, but a divine Power by which the King does judge and rule his
people.

From hence I inferie two Corollaries.

The first. That there is a twofold trust in the King. The one of his power.
The other of the Administration of his power. The first is Gods trust unto him
to exercise his divine judgments. The second is the peoples, to administer it
Propter salutem populi. But if he swerve herein, seeing that the power is
Divine and residing and inhering only in him, and not in the people, he is not
liable to the people, but only to God.

The second Corollarie. As God is the sole efficient cause of Regal power; so
the isntrumental cause which conveies this power, is the Divine natural Law
obliging men to unite themselves into Civil societies. For God gives a power
to men to govern themselves by obliging them to unite themselves. And
consequently the election of the people (with all the observers pactions and
agreements) is but Causa sine qua non, by way of approximation, that this
divine power may reside in those few, or more, or one rather then in any other.
As in my former example. ^. 3. The efficient cause of the Lord Majors Power is
only the King. The isntrumental cause by which this power is derived unto him,
is the Charter of the City, granted to them at pleasure, more strictly, or
more largely by the King. And the Aldermens election of this or that particular
man, is but the approximation, that the Kings power may reside in him to
govern the City, rather then in any other.

My second Assertion. Every absolute King (invested and anointed with a divine
power by God himself to exercise his judgments, through the election of the
people to be sole administrator thereof) is in power super totam Rempublicam,
Superior absolutely over the whole Commonwealth. And therefore is not only
Major singulis, but Major Universis, and super omnes simul. This Assertion is
evident out of the former. For, the power that was inherent in the whole
Commonwealth to exercise Gods judgments and to govern and preserve it self,
was a Divine power, not only super singulos, but super omnes simul, and
therefore Major Universis. But this power is now totally and absolutely inherent
in the King only. Ergo he is super totam Rempublicam: and Major Vniversis,

In Confirmation of this Argument, I argue thus. Either the whole power of the
Commonwealth is in one, or no. if no: then he is no absolute King or Monarch,
contrary to our supposition. But if he be a Monarch I ask again; if there be
a power in the Commonwealth, which is not in him, is it subordinate to his
power, or no? if it be subordinate, then his power is above that power, and so
super totam Rempublicam, and Major Vniversis. If it be not, then there are
simul and semel two supreme Civil powers in a Commonwealth, two supreme
contrary masters at once to be obeyed, one and the same individual Kingdom
and Gubernation, and yet divided against it self, which are most absurd and
impossible.

From hence it is evident that His Majesty said most truly and most learnedly,
that the administration of the whole power of the Commonwealth being committed
in trust absolutely and irrevocably to him and his heirs for ever, it is
impossible that a power above that trust should be committed to others.

This the Observer in effect plainly confesses. But relapsing into his wonted
Paroxismes of strong malice against Regal Power, he labors (by his most false
erroneous Principal Rex est minor Vniversis) and tires himself in vain to
answer it. And because the strength of all his long tedious and farraginous
discourse depends wholly upon these two false grounds, viz. that the people is
the Efficient cause of Regal power. And that Rex est minor Vniversis; and I
have manifestly confuted them both, I presume I have also sufficiently confuted
all the rest: and therefore conclude in those sacred words. Data est a Domino
Potestas Regibus, and Virtus ab Altissimo. Power is given to Kings of the Lord,
and Sovereignty from the Highest. Sapient. 6. 3.

FINIS.

