Stonehenge Situated in the midst of the Plains, 6 Miles distant from the City
of Satisbury, is esteemed one of the wonders of England. It is a great huddle
of large unpolisht Stones, placed in a circular fashion, but in such an
irregular manner that its affirmed to be impossible to count their Number, some
of these Stones are 30 feet high, and there are some Stones laid across the
Tops of others, that all the strength of Man could not perform without the help
of Engines, nor are there any Carriages now in use, that could carry such
prodigious Bodies of Stone, so that how they came there no body can imagine,
for there is no such Stone within 100 Miles of it, nor any Quarries of Stone in
any Countries about. Most Authors are silent concerning the Compilers of this
Stupenduous Work, the best of them are only uncertain Guessers.



IGNATII JONES MAG: BRIT: ARCHITECTI GENERALIS VERA EFFIGIES


THE most notable ANTIQUITY OF GREAT BRITAIN, vulgarly called STONE-HENG ON
SALISBURY PLAIN.

RESTORED By INIGO JONES Esquire, Architect General to the late KING.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher for Daniel Pakeman at the sign of the Rainbow
in Fleetstreet, and Laurence Chapman next door to the Fountain Tavern in the
Strand. 1655.

TO The Right Honorable PHILIP Earl of Pembroke and Montgomerie, Baron
Herbert of Caerdiff and Sherland, Lord Parr and Rosse of Kendall, Lo: Fitzhugh
Marmyon and Saint Quintin etc.

STONE-HENG restored is humbly dedicated by Your LOds devoted servant John Webb.

TO THE FAVORERS OF ANTIQVITY.
THis Discourse of Stone-heng is molded off, and cast into a rude Form, from
some few indigested notes of the late judicious Architect, the Vitruvius of his
age Inigo Jones. That so venerable an Antiquity might not perish, but the world
made beholding to him for restoring it to light, the desires of several his
learned Friends have encouraged me to compose this Treatise. Had he survived to
have done it with his own hand, there had needed no Apology. Such as it is, I
make now yours. Accept it in his name, from

I. W.


STONEHENG RESTORED, BY INIGO JONES Esquire.
BEing naturally inclined in my younger years to study the Arts of Design, I
passed into foreign parts to converse with the great Masters thereof in Italy;
where I applied my self to search out the ruins of those ancient Buildings,
which in despite of Time it self, and violence of Barbarians are yet
remaining. Having satisfied my self in these, and returning to my native
Country, I applied my mind more particularly to the study of Architecture.
Among the ancient monuments whereof, found here, I deemed none more worthy the
searching after, then this of Stoneheng; not only in regard of the Founders
thereof, the Time when built, the Work it self, but also for the rarity of its
Invention, being different in Form from all I had seen before: likewise, of as
beautiful Proportions, as elegant in Order, and as stately in Aspect, as any.

King James, in his progress, the year one thousand six hundred and twenty,
being at Wilton, and discoursing of this Antiquity, I was sent for by the right
Honorable William then Earl of Pembrook, and received there his Majesty's
commands to produce out of mine own practice in Architecture, and experience in
Antiquities abroad, what possibly I could discover concerning this of
Stoneheng. What mine opinion was then, and what I have since collected in
relation thereunto; I intend to make the subject of this present Treatise. And
certainly, in the intricate, and obscure study of Antiquity it is far easier
(as Camden very well observes) to refute and contradict a false, then to set
down a true and certain resolution. For mine own part, in what I shall here
deliver, I intend not to struggle against any opinion commonly, and long since
received. Let every man judge as it pleases him. What opinion soever the
Reader inclines to, I shall not make much material, my aim being, a desire
only to vindicate, as much as in me lies, the Founders of this venerable
Antiquity from oblivion, and to make the truth, as far forth as possibly I may,
appear to all men.

Several Writers, both Strangers, and our own Countrymen, have treated of
Stoneheng. Before recite whose opinions, I think not amiss to seek this
subject from the most ancient times, endeavoring thereby to give satisfaction
whether or no, the Druides, alias Druidae (in Authors indifferently written,
and in old time the Priests of the Britans and Gauls) or the ancient Britans,
for the Druid's use, might not be the Founders of so notable a monument; which
if they were, there is then no cause why bestow farther study or pains, in
searching who the Founders were, but acquiesce in the honor of our own Nations
first erection of it.

As far nevertheless, as from History ancient or modern may be gathered,
there is little likelihood of any such matter, considering especially what the
Druid's were; also, what small experience the Britans, anciently inhabiting
this Isle, had, in knowledge of what ever Arts, much less of building, with
like elegancy and proportion, such goodly works as Stoneheng.

Concerning the Druid's in the first place, true it is, they are reported in
ancient times, to have been in great esteem in this Island, where their
discipline, and manner of learning, Caesar. Commen. lib. 6.
was supposed to be first invented, and from hence translated into Gaul.
Disciplina in Britannia reperta (says Caesar) atque inde in Galliam translata
esse existimatur. They are said in like manner to have ordered and disposed all
divine matters, as well in relation to their several kinds of Sacrifices, as
to expounding whatever rites of their idolatrous superstition; insomuch, Plin.
lib. 16.
you may call them (if you please) the Bishops and Clergy of that Age.

Their power moreover, and pre-eminence was not confined within the strict
limits of sacred matters, but enjoying a more large prerogative, temporal
negotiations, and affairs of State were transacted by them: the managing of
Peace and War was usually remitted to their Authority, even when Armies were
ready to join in Battle. Publica iis (says Strabo) and privata judicia
committuntur, and aliquando causis bellorum disceptandis jam acie congressuros
composuerunt. Strab. lib. 4.
Judges they were (says Caesar also) in almost all civil and criminal
causes: Caesar. lib. 6.
sentence they gave in case of life and death: decide they did controversies,
and debates betwixt party and party: finally, whatever else was requisite and
convenient to keep the people in due obedience to their Princes, they wholly
took the care and charge of.

These were the maine affairs wherein the employment of the Druides consisted,
and whereunto they wholly addicted themselves. Whosoever desires to know more
of them, may read Caesar, Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Pliny, Diogenes Laertius,
Ammianus Marcellinus, and such like ancient Authors. But, whatsoever these, or
other Historians have written of the Druides, certainly, Stoneheng could not be
builded by them, in regard, I find no mention, they were at any time either
studious in Architecture, (which in this subject is chiefly to be respected) or
skillful in any thing else conducing thereunto. For, Academies of Design were
unknown unto them: public Lectures in the Mathematiques not read amongst
them: nothing of their Painting, not one word of their Sculpture is to be
found, or scarce of any Science ( Philosophy and Astronomy excepted) proper to
inform the judgment of an Architect; Vitr. li. 1.
who, (as Vitruvius says) should be peritus Graphidos, eruditus Geometria, and
Optices non ignarus etc. perfect in Design, expert in Geometry, well seen in
the Optics, skillful in Arithmetic, a good Historian, a diligent hearer of
Philosophers, well experienced in Physic, Music, Law and Astrology.

Of all that have written of the Druid's, no Author knew them better then
Caesar, neither has any more fully described them; who after a large discourse
of their discipline, Caesar. li. 6.
privileges, and Theology, Multa de sideribus (says he) atque eorum motu, de
mundi ae terrarum magnitudine, de rerum natura, etc. disputant, and juventuti
transdunt. They make much dispute, and instruct their Scholars in many things
concerning the Stars, and their motion, the greatness of Heaven and Earth, of
the nature of things etc. As for other Arts relating to the Mathematiques, or
any works of this kind, he makes no manner of mention, though himself an
Architect, glorying in his own, and much more extolling others invention in
that Art.

The truth is, those ancient times had no knowledge of public works, either
Sacred or Secular, for their own use, or honor of their Deities. Besides, they
used not any buildings of Stone, or (for ought is manifest) knew so much, as
how to order working therein. The Druid's led a solitary contemplative life,
contenting themselves with such habitations, as either mere necessity invented,
to shelter them from contrariety of seasons, without Art, without Order,
without any whatever means tending to perpetuity: or, such as Nature alone had
prepared for them in dens, and caves of desert and darksome woods; esteeming
it, questionless, the highest secret of their mystery, rather to command in
caves and cottages, then live like Kings, in Palaces, and stately houses. They
were too wise, knew too well, 'twas their humility, integrity, retired manner
of life, and pretended sanctity possessed the people with an awfully reverend
esteem of them; and which fed, and kept up their reputation throughout the
Country, when outward appearances of State and magnificence would either have
brought them into envy, and their superstition into contempt, or themselves and
Religion both to be wholly extirpated and laid aside.

Pomponius Mela discoursing of the Druides, Pomp. Mela lib. 3.
Docent multa (says he) nobilissimos gentis clam and diu vicenis annis in
specu, aut in abditis saltibus, They teach the Nobility, and better sort of
their nation, many things, even twenty years together, secretly in caves, or
close coverts of obscure woods and forests. Such, and no other were their
habitations, such their Universities, and public Schools.

As for their Temples' and sacred structures, they consisted not in variety of
forms, costlinesse of materials, or perfection of humane Arts, but were of
Natures own framing in like manner, being no other then groves of Oak. The
Druid's chose of purpose ( says Pliny) such groves for their divine Service,
Pliny lib. 16.
as stood only upon Oaks; nay they solemnized no Sacrifice, nor performed any
sacred Ceremonies without the branches, and leaves thereof; from whence they
may seem well enough to be named Dryadae in Greek, which signifies as much as
Oak Priests.

The Romans having forced their passage, and gained victory over the Druid's in
Anglesey, cut down their woods and groves, amongst them reckoned holy, and
consecrated to their execrable superstitions. Tacit. Ann. lib. 14.
Excisi luci (says Tacitus) saevis superstitionibus sacri.

To this purpose, Humphrey Lloid, in his history of Wales, The vast woods
growing in that Island, were not only by the Romans, but afterward, when the
Christian Faith took place in this Nation, by the Christians also felled and
rooted out. And why? because of the idolatry (says he) and absurd Religion
used in them. Again, in his Epistle to Ortelius concerning the Isle of
Anglesey, the same Author affirms; Though there is little wood now growing
there, yet every day the roots and bodies of huge trees of a wonderful length
and bigness are by the inhabitants found, and dug out of the earth, in
diverse places in low grounds, and champion fields.

Now, if in stead of these roots, and bodies of trees, the ruins of ancient
Structures had been there found, it might peradventure, with some probability,
have been presumed, either that the Druid's used Temples, or some other
buildings of stone. For, their ancient seat was in the Isle of Mona, now
Anglesey, whence modern Writers style it Insulam Druidum, the Island of the
Druid's, and sedem Druidum, the seat of the Druid's. And from hence,
questionless, it came to pass, the Romans, with such difficulty, under the
conduct of Suetonius Paulinus, brought that Island under their power; nor was
it wholly subdued to their Empire, until Julius Agricola's time. For, whereas
in other parts of Britain, the people contended for Liberty only, there, they
fought pro aris and focis, for Liberty, and Religion both.

There it was the British armies (says Tacitus) being imbattailed, Tacit. Ann.
lib. 16.
the women ran to and fro amongst them in sable weeds, their hair about their
ears, and firebrarnds in their hands, like infernal furies, the Druid's round
about them also, lifting up their hands to Heaven, and pouring forth deadly
curses; the novelty of which sight bred such amazement in the Roman Legions,
(the Romans here, it seems, were unacquainted with the Druid's till then) that
they stood stock still, and close together, not once moving a foot, as if
possessed with a resolution to act nothing at all, but receive their deaths
tamely and without any great resistance.

Wherefore, besides, that History has not remembered the ruins of any ancient
buildings dug up in Anglesey; if either, this Antiquity had been remaining
in that Island, or any Author delivered such Actions of the Druid's, as
aforesaid, performed about the place, where Stoneheng remains standing, there
might have been some advantage made thereof to the purpose now in hand. But
Anglesey excepted, ancient Writers give them residence in no part of Britain
beside, nor are they remembered by any, to have been found elsewhere, throughout
the whole Nation. With respect whereunto, if the Druid's had knowledge, either
to build the like magnificent structures, or use, for any such, they would,
without all peradventure, have erected them upon the same place rather where
themselves resided, then elsewhere.

Neither are we to wonder, they chose such an out-nook or corner as Anglesey,
to reside in; in regard, there, they lived remote, and solitary; there, were
store of caves, and dens to instruct their Scholars in, close and retired
places for their own habitations, and plenty of groves to perform their sacred
mysteries in. Moreover, they past their days there, like the Hermits of old
time, according to their own desire, in full contentment, and with free liberty
to study, and contemplate what they pleased. For, Anglesey (we must know) in
those times of yore, was wholly overgrown with desert Woods, and obscure
forests, from whence the ancient Britans called it Ynis Dowil, the shadowy or
dark Island. Which name it still retains, and is well known thereby to the now
inhabitants, who are, even at this day, likewise inclined, (yea, they usually
accustom themselves) to commit things more to Memory, then Writing; and, as
having received it by tradition from their Ancestors, living in those ancient
times, still endeavor to observe that custom of the Druid's, who held it
unlawful to commit any thing to writing. Caes. Com. lib. 6.
As Caesar (in the sixth book of his Commentaries of the Gaulish war) delivers.

Concerning the Britans in the next place, The condition of those ancient
inhabitants of this Island in the Druid's time duly considered, ( viz. in what
manner they lived, how unskilful in all Sciences, and civil customs, what
Deities they had, in what places they adored them, and what manner of
buildings, or sacred or secular, were used by them) as little reason appears,
that this Antiquity was by them erected.

As for their manner of living, the Britans were then a savage and barbarous
people, knowing no use at all of garments. Herodian. lib. 3.
Vestis usum non cognoscunt (says Herodian.) Now, if destitute of the
knowledge, even to clothe themselves, much less any knowledge had they to
erect stately structures, or such remarkable works as Stoneheng. What fashions
they used to adorn their bodies with, the same Author tells us. As a rare and
rich habiliment, they wore about their wastes and necks ornaments of iron (says
he) and did pounce and color their bodies with sundry forms, in rude manner
representing several creatures. In which regard, they would not be otherwise
clothed, lest constrained thereby to hide such their simple (though with them
much esteemed) bravery.

Again, in other their civil customs, they were no less rude and ignorant;
yea, so barbarous, even in things appertaining to common sustenance, and
whatever husbandry; Strabo li. 4.
that ( as Strabo) Quidam eorum ob imperitiam caseos nullos conficiant, cum
tamen lacte abundent: alii hortos colendi, and aliarum partium agriculturae
ignari sunt. Many of them, though they had great plenty of milk, yet their want
of skill was such, they knew not how to make cheese: others so simple, they
knew not to order their gardens or orchards, or any thing belonging thereunto.

Their Country also then lay uncultivated, no corn sown: Quaevis herba and
radix cibus est, Their food was herbs and roots (says Dion Cassius. Dion li.
62.
) Hence Sir Walter Raleigh calls them the British Nomades. Ral. li. 3. c. 5.
And (by the way) it may not inappositely be observed, milk, roots, and fruit
were the chief banqueting dishes; and skins of beasts (if clothed) the most
costly habits of our Forefathers. Now who can, in reason imagine, that any
great knowledge, practice, or delight of Arts and Sciences, wherein the
elegancy of Architecture consists, should be in use or esteem, amongst a
people, wholly devoted (as I may so say) and given over to such barbarity?

There were then no public roads, or common highways to pass from one place
to another, no constant habitations, Nec moenia, Dion li. 76.
nec urbes, Nor towns nor walls (as Dion out of Xiphiline has it) much less
Temples, or other buildings made of stone, composed by Art, with Order, and
Proportion.

Moreover, who cast their eyes upon this Antiquity, and examine the same with
judgment, must be enforced to confess it erected by people, grand masters in
the Art of building, and liberal sciences, whereof the ancient Britans utterly
ignorant, as a Nation wholly addicted to wars, never sacred to her in the
Country of the Iceni, anciently containing Norfolk, Svffolk, Cambridge, and
Huntingdon Shires, far though from Stoneheng.

Besides, it is not to be past over in silence, how Tacitus expresses himself
in the before cited fourteenth Book of his Annals, telling us; The Romans
overthrew not the Temples, or razed to the Foundations, any of the sacred
structures of the Druid's and Britans made of stone, or other materials, which
he might as readily have done, if they had used any such: but positively, the
Romans cut down the Britans woods and groves, amongst them reckoned holy, and
consecrated to their execrable superstitions. True it is, other Temples, of
greater magnificence then already spoken of, I find none: Ornaments of Art to
enrich them they were not acquainted with: such orderly composed works as
Stoneheng, they had not any: yea, no kind of sacred structures of stone were in
use amongst them: their idolatrous places being naturally adorned, only with
wild, and overgrown shades, designed and brought to perfection by Dame Nature
her self, she being Architect general to all their Deities. Nor did it consist
with their vain Religion to use any other, they making their worship,
performing their Ceremonies, offering their Sacrifices in dark and obscure
groves, most conformable unto their barbarous, and inhumane, humane oblations.

Neither must it seem strange, they used no other Temples then these, Mayer. 1
K. 1. Chapter
it not being their custom alone; for the Excelsi or high places mentioned in
the sacred Story, wherein the Heathen performed idolatrous rites unto their
Idols, were commonly groves, affectedly sited upon some mountainous place,
without any House or Temple. The Persians of old, (of whom Herodotus Herod. li.
1.
) Neque statuas, neque templa, neque aras extruere consuetudo est, Erected
neither Images, nor Temples, nor Altars: quinimo hoc facientibus insaniae
tribuere, accounting it great folly and madness in those that did: but
ascending to the tops of the highest, and most lofty hills, on them offered
sacrifices to their Gods. From hence, Xerxes, in his expedition, burnt down the
Temples of the Greeks, because they shut up their Gods therein, to whom all
things are open and free, and to whom the whole Universe serves for a Temple.
The Abasgians also (inhabiting Mount Caucasus) did worship, even till Procopius
his time, groves and woods; and in a barbarian simplicity esteemed the very
trees themselves to be Gods. In like manner, the Northern and Southern people
of America, made all their Invocations and Exorcisms in woods. The ancient
Germans likewise consecrated woods and forests. Lucos ac nemora consecrant,
says Tacitus of them. And the like places for idolatrous superstition, did
diverse other barbarous Nations use, before reduced to order, and civility of
life, Tacitus giving this reason for it: They thought it a matter ill beseeming
the greatness of their Deities, to enclose them within Temples made by Art.
His words are, Nec cohibere parietibus Deos arbitrantur, They thought it not
fit to restrain their Deities within compacted walls: id est, neque templis,
neque domibus, viz neither within Temples or Houses made with hands, as C.
Pichenas commenting thereon more fully interprets.

Touching the manner of the buildings of the ancient Britans, and of what
materials they consisted, I find them so far short of the magnificence of this
Antiquity, that they were nor stately, nor sumptuous; neither had they any
thing of Order, or Symmetry, much less, of gracefulness, and Decorum in them,
being only such as Ovid Ovid. Met. lib. 1.
(relating to the first Age of the world) makes mention of. -- domus antra
fuerunt,
Et densi frutices, and junctae cortice virgae.
Thus Englished by Arthur Golding. -- their houses were the thicks,
And bushy queaches, hollow caves, and hardles made of sticks.
To like purpose Vitruvius. Vitru. lib. 2.
In the first Age of the world (says he) men lived in woods, caves, and
forests, but after they had found out the use of fire, and by the benefit
thereof were invited to enter into a certain kind of society, coeperunt alii de
fronde facere tecta, alii speluncas fodere sub montibus, nonnulli hirundinum
nidos, and aedificationes earum imitantes, de luto and virgultis facere loca,
quae subirent. Some of them began to make themselves habitations of boughs,
some to dig dens in mountains; other some, imitating the nests of birds, made
themselves places of lome and twigs, and such like materials, to creep into,
and shroud themselves in. Directly after which manner of workmanship, were the
houses of the ancient Britans.

Domos ex calamis aut lignis ut plurimum habent compactas, Their houses for the
most part are of reed and wood, says Diodorus Diodo. li. 6.
Siculus.

In the Northern parts they live in tents. Degunt in tentoriis, (says Dion,
epitomis'd by Xiphiline.)

Their Cities were without walls, the Country without Towns. Urbium loco ipsis
sunt nemora, ( says Strabo Strab. lib. 4.
) woods stand them instead of Cities or Towns. Arboribus enim dejectis ubi
amplum circulum sepierunt, ipsi casas ibidem sibi ponunt, and pecori stabula
condunt, ad usum quidem non longi temporis. For when by felling of trees, they
have enclosed, and fenced therewith a large circuit of wood, therein they raise
cabbins and cottages for themselves, and hovels for their cattle, of no great
continuance, but only to supply their present use and occasion.

Opidum Britanni vocant ( says Caesar Caesar. lib. 5.
) quum silvas impeditas vallo atque fossa munierunt, quo incursionis hostium
vitandae causa, convenire consueverunt, The Britans call a thick wood, enclosed
about with a ditch and rampire, made for a place of retreat to avoid the
invasion and assault of their bordering enemies, a Town.

Thus, you see, in what condition the Inhabitants of this Island lived in those
ancient times, having of themselves, neither desire, nor ability to exercise,
nor from others, encouragement to attain whatever knowledge in the Art of
Building. Precepts, and rules therein, the Druid's neither could, nor would
impart unto them. That they could not, appears from what is formerly said, and
in what skillful above others, they communicated nothing, but to those of their
own society, taking special order (as Caesar affirms) their discipline might
not be divulged.

As for Colonies of any Nation practiced in Arts, from whom they might receive
or knowledge, or civil conversation, there were none settled amongst them:
neither had they commerce, or traffic, with any people experienced therein,
much less acquaintance with any other, except those of Gaul, welnear as
barbarous as themselves. None of the Gauls in a manner, had any knowledge (
says Caesar) of the nature and quality of the people of Britain, or of the
places, ports, or passes of the Country. Neque enim temere praeter mercatores
illo adit quisquam, Caesar. lib. 4.
neque iis ipsis quidquam, praeter oram maritimam, atque eas regiones quae sunt
contra Galliam, notum est. For, not any went thither without eminent danger,
except merchants, and they also could give account of nothing, save only the
Seacoast, and those Countries which were opposite to Gaul. Never any Colony of
the Greeks, for ought I know ( says Ortelius Ortel. descr. Fr.
) was seated in Britain. And Caesar, the first of all the Romans that
discovered it, says Camden. Camden fo. 2.


If desire nevertheless, to know in what times the ancient Britans began to be
civilized, when to learn the knowledge of Arts, to build stately Temples,
Palaces, public Buildings, to be eloquent in foreign languages, and by their
habits, and attire, attain the qualities of a civil, and well ordered people,
Tacitus shall relate the same.

Sequens ^iems saluberrimis conciliis absumpta etc. The winter ensuing ( being
the second year of Julius Agricola his Propraetorship, or Leivtenancy in
Britan; Titus Vespasian Emperor, about one hundred thirty three years after
the first discovery thereof by Caesar) was spent in most profitable, and
politic Councels ( says Tacitus. Tacit. in vit. Agr.
) For, whereas the Britans were rude, and dispersed, and thereby prone, upon
every occasion, to war; Agricola, to induce them by pleasure to quietness
and rest, exhorted in private, and helped them in common to build Temples,
Houses, and places of public resort, commending those, that were forward
therein, and punishing the refractory Moreover, the Noblemens sons he took, and
instructed in the liberal Sciences, preferring the wits of Britain, to the
students in Gaul, as being now eagerly ambitious to attain the eloquence of the
Roman tongue, whereas lately they utterly rejected that language. After that,
our attire grew in account, and the gown much used amongst them, and so by
little and little they proceeded to provocations of vices, to sumptuous
galleries, baths, and exquisite banquettings. Thus far Tacitus. Now had there
been but the least mention made, by any Author, concerning the Druid's
instructing, and training up the ancient Britans in any such matters, as these,
(which Tacitus remembers the Romans to have done) what conclusions might have
been raised from them? what presumptive reasons drawn, to prove, Stoneheng a
work of the Druid's, or at least erected for their use?

To conclude, if this authority from Tacitus only, (an Author esteemed the
Polybius of the Latins) be thoroughly weighed, it will evidently manifest,
(whatever else has formerly been delivered) there was no such thing in
Britain, before the Romans arrived here, as that which we now call Stoneheng.
What credit else with posterity could Tacitus expect to gain, in affirming the
Britans were taught and instructed in the liberal Sciences by the Romans; if
those Arts acknowledged, to be practiced amongst the Britans before? What need
to have told us, the Romans made them skillful in erecting sumptuous Palaces,
stately Portico's, and public places, if the inhabitants here, accustomed to
enjoy such noble buildings, before the Romans arrival in this Land? Why, tell
succeeding Ages, when gentle persuasions not prevail, to make the Britans
innovate, and admit of sacred structures to whatever Deities, Agricola
compelled them to found magnificent Temples, and assist therein, if this
Antiquity Stoneheng extant before those times? Why also, should the Britans
look upon the Temple erected by the Romans at Camalodunum, (supposed Maldon in
Essex) in honor of Claudius sacred memory, as an Altar of perpetual dominion
over them, if been used to such structures before? yea, such an eyesore the
Britans accounted it, as, that Temple was one of the principal causes, which
gave birth to that fatal insurrection under Boadicia. Neither would Tacitus
have magnified the introducing those customs amongst them, as admirable policy
in Agricola, and the true and only rule to bring them from their rude, and
dispersed manner of living to civility, if the Britans attained such discipline
before, or any knowledge in the excellency of Architecture preceding the time
of the Romans government here. No, for what says Camden? Came. fo. 63.
It was the brightness of that most glorious Empire, which chased away all
savage Barbarism from the Britans minds, like as from other Nations, whom it
had subdued.

Furthermore, in the time of this Agricola, Britain was fully discovered, the
Romans had circumnavigated it, and knew, for certain, it was an Island,
formerly doubted of till his time; yea, there was not a Port (as I may so say)
a bay, mountain, valley, hill, plain, wood, or forest, either any custom, rite,
ceremony, or what else belonging to the knowledge of the Country, or manners
of the People, but the Romans were then as well acquainted with (especially, in
that part of the Island now called England) as, at this day, the Inhabitants
themselves are. Nevertheless, what mention soever is made by their Historians,
concerning other matters of the Britans, not one word is to be found of this
Antiquity, or any building of this kind in use amongst them. But, because some
curiously learned have desired somewhat to be spoken for their better
satisfaction touching this particular, I have been too prolixe. In a word
therefore, let it suffice, Stoneheng was no work of the Druid's, or of the
ancient Britans; the learning of the Druid's consisting more in contemplation
then practice, and the ancient Britans accounting it their chiefest glory to be
wholly ignorant in whatever Arts. Neither could it be otherwise, seeing their
life so uncivil, so rude, so full of wars, and consequently void of all
literature. (as Camden Came. fo. 4.
relates)

Yet, before I come to speak of this middle Age (if I may so call it) wherein
the Romans prevailed, and to complete their victories gave first rise to
civility in this Island; as, I began with times of great Antiquity, so must I
now descend to those less ancient, and modern, wherein, as posterity has
suffered an irreparable damage, through want of writing in those first times,
so has it been almost at as great a loss, by too much writing in later times;
so many Authors, so much contrariety, so little certainty is found amongst
them. Who, when they could not search out the truth in deed, labored to bring
forth narrations invented by themselves, without or reason, or authority:
delivering (says Camden) their several opinions, rather with a certain
pleasant variety to give contentment to their Readers, then with any care or
judgment to find out the truth of things.

THOSE ancient Historians who (among other actions of the Britans) treat of
this Antiquity, differ much in their several reports. And, as it is usual
with Historiographers of other Nations, where, they cannot give a just and
rational account of unwonted accidents, beyond the common course of things, to
fill up their stories with fabulous, and incredible relations; so, no marvel,
if we hear the like in our own Histories. Credibile enim est calamitatem
bellicam, quae ecclesias una cum bibliochecis exhauserat infinitis, clara
vetustatis monumenta abrasisse. For evident it is, through the calamities of
wars (says Leyland) Leyland. de assert. Arth. fo. 35.
which together with infinite Libraries ruined the Churches themselves, the
certain records of our Antiquities, are utterly lost. Unde scripturienti de
antiquitate Britannica occultissima pleraque omnia. Whereby the Writers of the
British Stories, are all of them, for the most part, very obscure and doubtful.

Some others again, especially the most ancient and authentic British
Historians, who lived in Ages next succeeding those, wherein, Stoneheng might
probably be first erected, have wholly passed it over with silence. In like
manner venerable Bede, William Malmesbury, Roger Hoveden, and others, speak
nothing thereof, as happily, willing rather to decline it altogether, then
deliver it upon frivolous conjectures, and in so-doing cast a blemish upon
their other labors. Neither is it improbable, that the most ancient Authors,
considering the times wherein they wrote, upon the first springing up of
Christian Religion here, might through zeal unto the true God, forbear to
commemorate unto posterity, places designed for idolatrous uses; endeavoring
A. The Altar

rather, to suppress the memory thereof, and make succeeding generations
sollicitous therein; then, in that infancy of Divine worship, to illustrate the
magnificence of the Heathens, for building such notable structures to their
false Gods. Insomuch, I find very little, or no mention at all thereof in the
British Stories, except by Geffrey Monmouth, with some who follow him, and by
such Authors only, as our most judicious Writers hold in many things, either
merely fabulous, or overladen with malicious, or accidentary untruths. Such
relations nevertheless, as they make thereof, I shall endeavor to deliver in
their own words, reduceable into two conjectures, viz. either that Stoneheng
was erected by A. Ambrosius (in ancient times King of the Britans) in memory of
the British Nobility perfidiously slain at a treaty by Hengist the Saxon: or
else, set up by the Britans themselves in honor of Him their said King.

Giraldus Cambrensis, Gir. Camb. de adm. Hib. Cap. 18.
curiously diligent in his relations of the miracles in Ireland, amongst other
strange things in those parts, reckons up this Antiquity Stoneheng. Fuit
antiquis temporibus in Hibernia, lapidum congeries admiranda, (says he) quae
and Chorea Gigantum dicta fuit, quia Gigantes eam ab ultimis Africae partibus
in Hiberniam attulerunt etc. There was in Ireland in ancient times, a pile of
stones worthy admiration, called the Giants Dance, because Giants, from the
remotest parts of Africa, brought them into Ireland, and in the plains of
Kildare, not far from the Castle of the Naase, as well by force of Art, as
strength, miraculously set them up. These stones (according to the British
story) Aurelius Ambrosius, King of the Britans, procured Merlin by
supernatural means to bring from Ireland, into Britain. And, that he might
leave some famous monument of so great a treason to after ages, in the same
order, and art, as they stood formerly, set them up, where the flower of the
British Nation fell by the cutthroat practice of the Saxons, and where under
the pretense of peace, the ill secured youth of the Kingdom, by murdrous
designs were slain.

Rainulph Monk of Chester, Polychr. li. 5.
speaking of Aurelius, alias Aurelianus Ambrosius (by others called Ambrosius
Aurelianus) says (as Sir John Trevisa the Priest in old English laid it down)
His brother Uter Pendragon by help of Merlin the Prophet brought Choream
Gigantum, that is Stonehenges out of Ireland. Stonehenge is now in the plain of
Salisbury: of that bringing of Stonehenge out of Ireland, speaks the British
story, if it should lawfully be ytrowed.

It appears, Rainulph of Chester, as easy credit as he gave to strange
stories, had not much confidence in this: and if, according to Geffrey
Monmouth, or Matthew Westminster, I should set it down, I presume you would be
of his mind. But, I affect not such conceits, they are neither fitting my
discourse, nor your perusal. Nevertheless, seeing none of them tell us, by
what ways, or Arts, Giants (as they will have it) brought them from the
remotest parts of Africa into Ireland (for it seems they could not hansomly
find a Merlin to help them therein also) I shall take so much leave, following
Geffrey Monmouths steps, as to give you, at least, some part of the story, and
relate (according to their opinions) how they came from Ireland hither. After
Geffrey Monmouths discourse of Uter Pendragons victory over the Irish, who with
Merlin forsooth and a great Army, were sent by A. Ambrosius to fetch the Giants
dance, Lapidum structuram adepti (says he) gavisi sunt and admirati;
circumstantibus itaque cunctis, accessit Merlinus and ait, utimini viribus
vestris juvenes, ut in deponendo lapides istos, sciatis utrum ingenium virtuti,
aut virtus ingenio cedat, etc. i.e. Having found the structure, from joy they
fell into admiration, and standing all of them at gaze round about it, Merlin
draws near, and thus bespeaks them: Use now your utmost strength young men,
that in taking away these stones, you may discover, whether Art to strength, or
strength gives place to Art. At his command therefore, they bring several
sorts of engines, and address themselves to pulling it down. Some ropes, some
cables, some had made lathers ready, that what they so much desired, might be
effected, but in no wise able to atcheive their purpose. Deficientibus cunctis,
solutus est Merlinus in risum ( says Geffrey) and suas machinationes confecit.
Denique cum quaeque necessaria apposuisset; levius quam credi potest lapides
deposuit: depositis autem, fecit deferri ad naves, and introponi: and sic cum
gaudio in Britanniam reverti coeperunt. All of them tired, Merlin breaks out
into laughter, and provides his engines. Lastly, when he had set all things in
a readiness, hardly to be believed it is, with what facility he took them
down: being taken down, he caused them to be carried to the Ships, and
imbarqued; and so with joy they began their return toward Britain. Leaving it
for us to suppose, with as small labor they were imbarqued, disimbarqued, and
brought from their landing place to Salisbury plain: all (it seems) done by
Merlins spells. But of this too much.

Nevertheless, as I contemn fables, so do I embrace, and take pleasure in
the truth of History: and therefore, that which concerns the slaughter of the
British Nobility by treason of Hengist commander of the Saxons, as of greater
moment, and truth, I shall more fully relate. And Geffrey Monmouth's Authority
in this treacherous slaughter of the Britans, though I respect not so much, as
Ninnius, Malmsbury, Sigebert, and others that affirm the same; yet, because he
was the first, after so many, and so ancient Authors, that fathered Stoneheng
their monument, and A. Ambrosius founder thereof, and therefore must trace him,
and his followers therein; I will give you the history likewise from him, and
thus it was: Hengist, upon his return with new supplies into Britain, finding
Vortigern beyond expectation restored to the Crown, and withal greatly
alienated in his affections toward him, prepared for his defense, with force
of arms. But, whether he thought himself too weak; or, that he rather sought to
be especially revenged on the British Nobility, who had wholly unriveted his
designs, or both; he thought it no difficult matter to delude him by a Treaty,
whom formerly he had so easily beguiled with his Niece Rowena. To which
purpose, he makes an overture, to compose the enmities betwixt them at a
Parley; and the King accepting it, appoints Ambresbury Town their meeting
place, Nec mora, statuta die instante convenerunt omnes intra nominatam urbem
(says Geffrey) and de pace habenda colloquium inceperunt. G. Mon. li. 6.
Ut igitur horam proditioni suae idoneam inspexisset Hengistus, vociferatus
est, Nemet our saxas: and ilico Vortigernum accepit, and per pallium detinuit.
Audito ocyus signo, abstraxerunt (i.e. eduxerunt) Saxones cultros suos, and
astantes principes invaserunt, ipsosque nihil tale praemeditantes jugulaverunt
circiter quadringentos sexaginta inter Barons and Consules. The prefixed day
being come, they all, without delay, met in the aforesaid Town, and began their
Treaty for Peace; when therefore Hengist saw fit time for execution of his
intended Treason, he cried out, giving the word, Nemet our saxas (Nem eowr
seaxes (says Verstegan Verstegan Chapter 5.
) that is, Take your seaxes; a kind of crooked knives, which each of the Saxons
then carried closely in his pocket) and forthwith seized upon Vortigern, and
held him by his robe. The Saxons quickly hearing it, drew forth their knives,
and fell upon the Britans standing by, of whom, part Noblemen, part officers of
State, expecting no such design, they slew four hundred and sixty. Quorum
corpora beatus Eldadus postmodum sepelivit, atque Christiano more humavit, baud
long a Raer-caradane, quae nunc Salesberia dicitur, in coemeterio, quod est
juxta coenobium Ambrii. Whose corpses holy Eldad, according to custom, after
Christian manner interred, not far from Raer-caradane, now called Salisbury, in
the Churchyard adjoining to the monastery of Ambresbury.

With this relation of the Saxons treachery, Matthew Westminster Ma. West. fo.
84.
(in his Floreshistoriarum) seems to agree. And it wholly destroys the opinion
commonly received, That the said Treaty with the Saxons, the massacre of the
Britans, and likewise their interment, were at Stoneheng; and that in memory,
those matters so transacted there, A. Ambrosius in the same place erected this
Antiquity. Wherefore, I much wonder, Hollinsh. l. 5. Speed lib. 7. Stow fo. 53.
4to.
our modern historians should cite the aforesaid Authors in cofirmation
thereof, especially, when they affirm directly, the treaty was held in
Ambresbury Town, and that the British Nobility fell by Treason there. Iussit
Vortigernus and cives and Saxones Maiis Kalendis, quae jam instare incipiebant,
juxta Ambrii coenobium convenire (says G. Monmouth, G. Monm. lib. 5.
) Vortigern commanded both his own people, and the Saxons, upon the Calends of
May then approaching, to appear near to the Monastery of Ambresbury. In Pago
Ambri convenire, to meet in the Town it self of Ambresbury (says Matthew
Westminster) In order to which summons, (that I may proceed with Geffrey
Monmouths story explaining himself positively concerning the place) statuta die
instante convenerant omnes intra nominatam urbem, etc. the appointed day being
come, all of them met together within the forenamed Town, and there treated.
The issue whereof was, that upon the word given (as before related) The Saxons
drew their knives, and falling upon the Britans standing by, slew them. And,
lest posterity should doubt those sacrificed for their Countries cause
neglected in their funerals, he leaves not there, but gives us the direct
place, and manner of their burial, affirming plainly they were buried by a
Metropolitan of those times, even in a Church yard, as Christians should. In
coemeterio, quod est juxta c^nobium, In the Churchyard, close by the
Monastery. (says he) There is not one word mentioned (I pray observe) of
Salisbury plain, where this Antiquity Stoneheng remains, throughout all their
Story.

But, it is objected, although they were buried at the Monastery, the monument
for their memory might be set up elsewhere, in a place more proper, and more
conspicuous; even, as in the most properly conspicuous places where great
actions happened Trophies were erected by the Romans, whose customs A.
Ambrosius living long time amongst them, knew very well. I answer, A.
Ambrosius, is supposed by Bid, and the best Authors, descended from the
Romans; who, living many years under their subjection, in foreign parts, had
fully informed his judgment, no doubt, with whatever customs, civil or
martial, then in use amongst them. For, though the Romans in those times, had
utterly lost all knowledge of Arts, questionless civil, and martial customs
in some sort continued with them. Nevertheless, if A. Ambrosius did erect any
monument for the British Nobility, he rather, doubtless endeavored to observe
the rules of his own Religion, being a Christian, then the Heathenish customs
of his Ancestors. However, in erecting it, at the place of their interment, he
pursued both. As for the Christians honoring to posterity their famous men
after death, it being so well known, I need not relate it. And, as concerning
the ancient Romans manner in burying their Emperors, and those that had
triumphed, or otherwise deserved well of the Commonwealth, though they burned
their bodies abroad, Thomas. Procachio fo. 46.
the place for sepulture of their Ashes, was within the City, monuments to
their memory being erected, upon the same place where buried; so was Publicola
honored, so the Fabritii, the Caesar's, and others. And, after the same fashion
it seems, was the monument for the British Nobility (if any) set up where they
were interred; as in the place of all others most proper for it, all the
considerable circumstances touching their deaths, happening there in like
manner.

It Is true the Romans set up Trophies for great Victories, in the most eminent
places where those victories were obtained by them; as the Trophy for Caius
Marius his vanquishing the Cimbrians, in the most notable place where that
memorable field was fought. Also, the Trophy dedicated to the memory of
Augustus Caesar that by his happy conduct, all the Alpine Nations, were reduced
to Roman obedience, was erected in the most conspicuous place of the Alps. Now,
this martial custom considered, the British Nobility being (as the aforesaid
Historians maintain) slaughtered in the Town, and buried at the Monastery
adjoining. Some one of those high hills, on either side Ambresbury, had
certainly for site been more eminent, and the monument it self more exposed to
the daily view of travelers, then about two miles from the Town, in a place
remote, where this Antiquity stands. Which, though indeed eminent of it self,
and overlooking the plains adjoining; yet, at a large distance, especially on
that side toward Ambresbury, and Salisbury-ward, is so surrounded with hills;
as it appears with an Aspect of Religious horror, rather then as carrying any
form of whatever sepulture.

This, though sufficient to refute the preceding objection (the former reasons
being grounded upon customs only) I shall yet, from the histories of those
times, further answer thereunto; Matthew Westminster Math. west. fo. 92.
tells us, A. Ambrosius having completed his victories over Hengist, and
subdued his sons at York; Deinde porrexisse ad monasterium Ambri, ubi principes
defuncti jacebant, quos Hengistus prodiderat; from thence came to the Monastery
at Ambresbury, where the deceased Nobles, whom Hengist betrayed, lay buried.
And Geffrey Monmouth, G. Mon. li. 8.
prosecuting the same story, affirms also, that A. Ambrosius being come to the
Monastery, ut locum quo defuncti jacebant circumspexit, pietate motus in
lachrymas solutus est, dignum namque memoria censebat cespitem, qui tot nobiles
pro patria defunctos protegebat. So soon as he cast his eyes upon the place
where the slaughtered Princes lay interred, deplored them; esteeming that very
ground which covered so many Nobles, dying for their Countries cause, worthy
eternal memory. Upon this consideration, Praecepit Merlino (says the same
Author) lapides circa sepulturam erigere, quos ex Hibernia asportaverat. A.
Ambrosius commanded Merlin, that the stones brought out of Ireland (for he
still troubles himself and readers therewith) should be erected about the place
of their burial. Whereby it clearly appears their Sepulcher was set up about
the same place where they were buried, and not elsewhere. Also, as fully that
their burial place (as both the said Historians have told us) was at the
Monastery of Ambresbury, or Churchyard adjoining to it. All which former
circumstances duly weighed, it is not possible Stoneheng should be supposed
their Monument; except Geffrey Monmouth, having made so formal a tale of their
easy transportation from Ireland, would compel us also to imagine, posterity
might as easily be induced to assent, they were in like manner removed from the
Churchyard at Ambresbury to Salisbury plain, the one being equally as
ridiculous as the other, and no manner of credit to be given to either.

Wherefore, laying all the aforesaid Authorities together. First, that Giraldus
Cambrensis formerly cited, tells us, (in that part of his story which carries
most likelihood of truth) a Monument was set up by A. Ambrosius, in memory of
the Britans, slain at a Treaty by the Saxons, upon the very same place where
slain; and in order thereunto the aforesaid British Historians unanimously
affirming the place at which that treaty was held, and where those Britans were
slain, was the Town it self of Ambresbury, not where this Antiquity Stoneheng
remains: again, if suspect Cambrensis authority, and allow rather what our
Historiographer of Monmouth says, That the Monument was erected by A.
Ambrosius, upon that plat of ground, where the slaughtered Britans lay buried;
he telling us also, their burial place was in the Churchyard of the Monastery
at Ambresbury (at the Monastery it self, says Matthew Westminster) certainly
then their Monument (whatsoever it was) being set up at the place, where they
were both slain and buried, and (according to the aforesaid Authors) they being
nor slain nor buried at Stoneheng, it must necessarily follow, this Antiquity
was not erected in Honor of those Britans. Unless any man will undertake to
prove (which most certain it is none can) Stoneheng stands now, where
Ambresbury stood of old: or that the Monastery and Churchyard thereof were not
at Ambresbury, but at Stoneheng.

That the Monastery of three hundred Monks, stood there, (to wit at Ambresbury)
Camden, Came. fo. 254.
out of the Book called Eulogium, affirms. And, that the Churchyard was close
adjoining to it, there is no question to be made. First, because in all times
since Monasteries erected, it was always in use, to lay out places for
Churchyards belonging to them, near to the Monasteries themselves. Secondly,
because diverse Sepulchers, upon several occasions, broken up at Ambresbury
Monastery, manifest the same. Thirdly, because Geffrey Monmouth plainly tells
us, they were buried in coemeterio, quod est juxta coenobium; in the Churchyard
which is close by the Monastery. Lastly, it is further confirmed by these his
formerly recited words, G. Monm. lib. 6 and 8.
A. Ambrosius being come unto the Monastery, cast his eyes upon the place where
the slaughtered Princes lay interred. Which is not possible he should have
done, if the Churchyard had been at Stoneheng; it being very well known
Stoneheng cannot be discerned, even from the highest hills, upon those parts
especially, that next surround Ambresbury, much less from the Monastery it
self, sited in the bottom of a deep vale by the river Avons side.

Among other Sepulchers found at the said Monastery, it is worthy memory, that
about the beginning of this Century, one of them hewn out of a firm stone, and
placed in the middle of a wall, was opened, having upon its coverture in rude
letters of massy gold, R. G. A. C. 600. The bones within which Sepulcher were
all firm, The original Inscription I could not procure; such relation thereof
nevertheless as came to my hands, I have, upon credit of those persons of
quality from whom received, inserted it here.
fair yellow colored hair about the scull, a supposed piece of the liver, near
upon the bigness of a walnut, very dry and hard, and together therewith, were
found several royal habiliments, as jewels, veils, scarfs, and the like,
retaining even till then, their proper colors. All which were afterward, very
choicely kept, in the collection of the Right honorable Edward, then Earl of
Hertford: and of the aforesaid gold diverse rings were made and worn by his
Lordships principal Officers. Concerning which Tomb (though I list not
dispute) why might it not be the Sepulcher of Queen Guinever, wife of King
Arthur; especially the Letters R G. as much to say, Regina Guinevera, declaring
her title and name; and the date An. Chr. 600. (if truly copied) agreeing
(possibly well enough) with the time of her death? Besides, Leyland Leyl. de
assert. Arth.
affirms, several Writers make mention, she took upon her a Nuns veil at
Ambresbury, died, and was buried there. To which he gives so much credit, that
(what ever Giraldus Cambrensis delivers to the contrary) he will by no means
allow, either her body to be afterward translated from Ambresbury, or, at any
time, buried by her husband King Arthur at Glastonbury. Unto Leylands reasons
for her interment at Ambresbury, Camden (it seems) inclines also, because
wholly silent of her Sepulcher, discovered any where else: though he at large
sets down all the circumstances of her Husbands body, its being found at
Glastenbury. For, had Camden apprehended any thing inducing him to believe, her
body had been together with his there found, he would never, certainly, have
concealed it from posterity.

Whether the aforesaid Tomb so found, were her monument, yea or no, enough
concerning the slaughter and sepultures of the aforementioned Britans; as also,
that Stoneheng was not erected in memory of them. Let us come now to Aurelius
Ambrosius, and see whether Polydore Virgill's story in relation to Stoneheng
agrees with what other Authors have delivered of Aurelius. For from Polydore's
authority, our modern Writers raise their second, and quite contrary opinion:
Speed lib. 7.
namely, that the Britans erected this Antiquity for A. Ambrosius his
Sepulcher. Stow fo. 53.


Polydore Virgill Polyd. Virg. lib. 3.
treating of the actions of those times betwixt the Britans and Saxons;
Britanni, Duci suo Ambrosio de republica been merito magnificum ( says he)
posuerunt sepulchrum etc. The Britans in memory of his great achievements for
the Commonwealth, erected a magnificent Sepulcher to their Chieftain Ambrosius,
made of great square stones in form of a Crown, even in that place, where
fighting, he was slain, that the prowess of so great a Commander, should
neither be forgotten amongst themselves, who then lived, or left unremembred to
posterity. Which Monument remains even to this day, in the Diocese of
Salisbury, near unto the village called Amisbery.

This opinion of Polydore is grounded (as I conceive) upon no great likelihood.
For, should the British Nobles, far inferior to A. Ambrosius, in honor, and
dignity, be buried in the Churchyard of a Monastery, and a Sepulcher assigned
for Ambrosius himself in the open fields? Should that Christian King, who had
accomplished so many great achievements victoriously against the Pagans,
enemies to Christ? Caused Churches to be repaired, which the Barbarism of the
Saxons had destroyed? pulled down and demolished idolatrous places of the
Heathen, and (as is more probable) rather, then erected by him, whilst living,
to others, or by others, to his memory after dead, the very first that began to
deface this Heathenish sacred structure, (for, though a Roman, yet a Christian,
and zeal to true Religion, might, no doubt, cause him dispense with ruining
idolatrous Temples though formerly built, and consecrated to false Gods by his
seduced Ancestors) should he, I say, be buried Pagan-like, in unsanctified,
unhallowed ground, and others far less eminent, less conspicuous, in more
noble, and sacred places? It could never be. Neither reason of State, nor
fervor of piety, in those more scrupulous times, could ever admit thereof.

Had Polydore, or any other, told us some Pagan-Saxon-Commander lay there
intombed, 'twould have carried a show of much more credit, and the ancient
custom of that Peoples burying their dead might have been produced, at least
as a probable argument, to confirm the same. For the Saxons a Pagan Nation, if
any of their Princes or Nobility died, in their houses at home of sickness,
were buried in pleasant, and delightful gardens; if from home, and in the
wars, not far from their camps, in heaps of earth cast up in the fields, which
heaps they called Burrows: and the promiscuous common people in medows and open
fields. Saxones Nobiles gens Christi ignara, in hortis amoenis, si domi forte
aegroti moriebantur: Leyl. de assert. Art.
si foris and bello occisi, in egestis per campos terrae tumulis quos Burgos
appellabant, juxta castra sepulti sunt: vulgus autem promiscuum etiam in pratis
and apertis campis. As Leyland, who laid a good groundwork toward the
discovery of British Antiquities, delivers.

Polydore nevertheless, had great reason to imagine A. Ambrosius famed the
restorer of his Country (and Bulwark of War, as Camden calls him) worthy an
everlasting Monument, Extat etiam nunc id monimentum in dioecesi Sarisberiensi
prope pagum quam Amisberiam vocant, Which monument is yet extant in the
dioecese of Salisbury (says he) not far from Ambresbury Town: and so was the
Churchyard of the Monastery too. He also tells us, Factum fuisse ad formam
coronae, it was made in form of a Crown. An elegant expression (I confess) of
a no less elegant work, if he meant Stoneheng; yet no argument thereby to
prove A. Ambrosius or buried, or slain there. For, as touching A. Ambrosius his
death, several Authors, of as good credit as Polydore (his integrity
nevertheless I question not, others have been busy enough therein) affirm, G.
Monm.
that Pascentius Vortigerns son, M. Westminster.
with many rewards corrupted a certain Saxon Polychron.
called Eopas (Clappa, says Caxton Caxton.
) who, Leyland.
taking upon him the habit of a Monk, under pretense of Physic ( A. Ambrosius
being then sick) gave him poison, whereof he died at Winchester. And no wonder
he was so poisoned, many examples of the like kind being recorded in History.
As in later times, Knolls in vit. Ba.
the Turkish Emperor Bajazet the second, under pretense of Physic poisoned by
a Jew: also Conrad third of that name Emperor of Germany, Ped. Mexia in vit.
Con.
by an Italian: and, in times of old, under the same pretense, Pyrrhus that
famous Epirot had been poisoned by his own Physician, Plutarch in vit. Pyrr.
if C. Fabricius the Roman Consul would have inclined to such ignoble
resolutions, as Pascentius after put in act against A. Ambrosius in our story.

Amongst other, who relate this disaster of A. Ambrosius, Matthew Westminster
Ma. West. fo. 94.
tells us, The said pretended Monk, tandem ad Regis praesentiam perductum,
venenum ei porrexisse, etc. being at last admitted to the Kings presence,
administered poison unto him, which having drunk, the wicked Traitor advised him
to sleep, and in so doing suddenly should recover health! Nec mora, illabente
per poros corporis and venas veneno, mortem pariter subsecutam esse. But, ere
long, the poison being dispersed through the pores and veins of his body, death
seized upon him.

Concerning the burial of A. Ambrosius, if give credit to Geffrey Monmouths
affirming A. Ambrosius on his deathbed gave command, and was accordingly
buried, in the Sepulcher by him (whilst living) prepared in the Churchyard
adjoining to the Monastery at Ambresbury, then was A. Ambrosius nor buried at
Stoneheng, nor consequently this Antiquity erected to his memory. Geffrey
Monmouth tells us; His death being known, the Bishops, Abbats, and all the
Clergy of that province, G. Monm. lib. 8.
assembled together in the City of Winchester. Et quia vivens adhuc
praeceperat, ut in coemeterio prope coenobium Ambrii, quod ipse paraverat
sepeliretur, tulerunt corpus ejus, eodem atque cum regalibus exequiis,
humaverunt. And with respect to his command, whilst living, that in the
Churcyard adjoining to the Monastery at Ambresbury, prepared by him, he would
be buried, they took his body, and with royal solemnities enterred him there.

Furthermore, at Ambresbury, that is, Ambrose his Town, Came. fo. 254.
( Camden tells us) certain ancient Kings, by report of the British story, lay
interred. Whether A. Ambrosius was one of them, or no, I argue not; yet the
same Author says, Ambrose Aurelianus gave name unto the place. And why not, he
being buried there, as well, as upon the translation of the body of Edmund that
most Christian King, the Town of Edmundsbury in Suffolk was so called?

It manifestly hence appears, Stoneheng no Sepulcher, either erected by A.
Ambrosius, or by the British Nobility, or to any of their memories. Some
Monument there was, perhaps, anciently set up in honor of them, at the
Monastery of Ambresbury. Which, the fury of the Saxons when victorious, or
violence of time, which destroys all things, utterly consuming, might happily
be the reason, Historians in succeeding Ages, finding so notable an Antiquity
as Stoneheng, not far from thence, and not apprehending for what use it was
first built, supposed no other thing worthy A. Ambrosius, or those Britans,
then such an extraordinary structure. Whereas, the Monuments in those ancient
times, made for great Princes here in Britain, were only two Pyramids between
which interred, of no extraordinary bigness erected to their memory in what
e're Religious places those Princes lay buried. Moreover, if seriously take
notice of the several sorts of Sepulchers used by diverse Nations, none are
found bearing like Aspect with this work Stoneheng, but of other kind of
Architecture, far different in Form, Manner, and Composure. Some, made of one
Column only; or, if otherwise, only a vase erected on the place of burial,
as amongst the Athenians: Some, had a Column whereon the shields used in War
by the deceased, whilst living, were fixed, as in those medals of silver, which
the Roman Senate dedicated to Vespasian: Some, a Column with a Statue thereon;
so the famous Column of Trajan had a Colossus on the top thereof, as by his
medals also appears. Again, the Gauls on the tops of Mountains, erected
Pyramid's or Columns, as Monuments to their Princes. The Saxons were buried
(as said before) in huge heaps of earth, to this day visible among us. The Keep
of the now Castle S. Angelo at Rome was the Sepulcher of the Emperor Adrian.
(such mighty moles were the Monuments of the Romans) The Greeks erected Altars,
and instituted Sacrifices to the memory of their Chieftains, as the Spartans to
Lysander: The renowned Carian Queen made the Mausoleum for her husband, a
massy bulk of building, 140 foot high: The huge Pyramid's in Egypt causing
such wonder in the world, were Sepulchers of Egyptian Kings. In a word,
amongst all Nations, Sepulchers whether little or great, were always real and
solid piles; not airous, with frequent openings, and void spaces of ground
within, exposed to Sun and wind, neither uncovered like this Antiquity; or in
any manner so built, as may enforce the least presumption, that this our
Stoneheng was ever a Sepulcher.

I have given you a full relation what concerning Stoneheng has been delivered
by Writers, in respect of us though ancient, yet in regard of the great
antiquity of this Work, indeed but modern, Geffrey Monmouth living not full
five hundred years ago, and Polydore Virgill long after him, in King Henry the
eighths reign: Who, as they are the principal Authors that write any thing of
Stoneheng; so, upon what authority deliver the same, they make not appear.
Insomuch, Camden gives no more credit to their relations in this very
particular, then unto common sayings, (so he calls them) as if grounded upon
Fame only, or invented by themselves. And it may the rather be so presumed,
because, as they lived not in ancient times, and consequently could not
themselves bear testimony of any such things; so, neither the Britans nor
Saxons for a long time after their first arrival here, had any Records or
Writings to convey whatever actions, either of their own, or others to
posterity. Ninnius a British Historian, living about one thousand years ago,
telling us, Britannos doctores nullam peritiam habuisse, etc. The great Masters
and Doctors of Britain had no skill, nor lest memorial of any thing in
writing: confessing, that himself gathered whatsoever he wrote, out of the
Annals and Chronicles of the holy Fathers. Nec Saxones amusi quicquam pene de
rebus inter ipsos, and Britannos eo tempore gestis scriptum posteritati
reliquerint, Leyland. de assert. Art. fol. 25.
etc. Neither did the Saxons being unlearned (says Leyland) leave almost any
thing in writing to posterity, of the actions performed in those times betwixt
themselves and Britans: whatsoever, remembered after Christ taught in this
Island, of the first victories of the Saxons, being both taken up upon trust
from the mouth of the common people, and committed to writing from vulgar
reports only. Neither the Britans, utterly worn out with so many wars, had (as
the same Author has it) or desire, or opportunity, had they desired it, to
bestow their pains in compiling any whatever history, that might commend their
actions to succeeding Ages.

But, it may be objected: If Polydore Virgill, and Geffrey Monmouth could
neither be eyewitnesses themselves, nor have authority from other more ancient
Authors for what related by them concerning Stoneheng: and that from whatever
writings ancient or modern, not any thing of certainty can be found out
concerning the same; from whence then appear, for what use, or by whom
Stoneheng erected? I answer, though not appear from Histories written either by
the Britans or Saxons; yet, as Gildas professing he wrote his History (for the
former reasons) by relations from beyond Sea: and, as Ninnius his out of the
Annals and Chronicles of the holy Fathers as aforesaid: so, several other ways
a possibility of truth may be gathered, namely, from the authority of other
Nations; from the concurrence of time for such undertakings; from the customs
of forepassed Ages in like works; from the manner and form of building proper
to several Countries; from the use to which such buildings applied, and the
like. Upon which, as occasion serves, intending hereafter more largely to
insist, I shall in the mean while set down the judgment our late Writers give
of this Antiquity.

Camden, a diligent searcher after Antiquities of our Nation, having, in his
Chorography of Wiltshire, collected all the aforesaid opinions, together with
his own, gives a summary description of Stoneheng, Came. fo. 251.
in words as follow. Toward the North, about six miles from Salisbury, in the
plain, is to be seen a huge and monstrous piece of work, such as Cicero terms
insanam substructionem. For, within the circuit of a ditch, there are erected
in manner of a Crown, in three ranks or courses one within another, certain
mighty and unwrought stones, whereof some are twenty eight foot high, and seven
foot broad, upon the heads of which others, like overthwart pieces, do bear and
rest cross-wise, with a small tenon and mortaise, so as the whole frame seems
to hang; whereof we call it Stoneheng, like as our old Historians termed it for
the greatness the Giants dance. Our Countrymen reckon this for one of our
wonders, and miracles. And much they marvel, from whence such huge stones were
brought, considering that in all those quarters bordering thereupon, there is
hardly to be found any common stone at all for building: as also, by what means
they were set up. For mine own part about these points I am not curiously to
argue and dispute, but rather to lament with much grief, that the Authors of so
notable a Monument are thus buried in oblivion. Yet some there are, that think
them to be no natural stones hewn out of the rock, but artificially made of
pure sand, and by some glewy and unctuous matter knit and incorporate together,
like as those ancient trophies or monuments of victory which I have seen in
Yorkshire. And what marvel? Read we not I pray you in Pliny, that the sand or
dust of Puteoli, being covered over with water, becomes forthwith a very
stone, that the cisterns in Rome of sand, dug out of the ground, and the
strongest kind of lime wrought together grow so hard, that they seem stones
indeed? and that statues and images of marble scalings, and small grit grow
together so compact and firm, that they were deemed entire and solid marble?
The common saying is, that Ambrosius Aurelianus, or his brother Uther did rear
them up, by the art of Merlin, etc. Thus far Camden, it being needless to
repeat more from him, having already delivered the story from the Authors
themselves. Yet here nevertheless, as necessarily induced thereunto, I shall
take leave to observe something more remarkable to our purpose in hand, upon
his words.

A. Stones fallen down -- B. Part of the outward circle -- C the highest Stones
the inner part about 23 feet high each.



In the first place then, Stoneheng is by him called a huge and monstrous piece
of work, terming it from Cicero, insanam substructionem. To which I say, had
Camden as well attained other abilities of an Architect, as he was skillful in
Antiquities: or been as conversant in Antiquities abroad, as learned in those
of his own Nation, he would have given a far different judgment hereof. For,
whosoever is acquainted with the ancient ruins yet remaining in and about
Italy, may easily perceive this no such huge building, either for the circuit
of the work, or bigness of the stones, they being as manageable to the Roman
Architects, as amongst us to raise a May Pole, or mast of a Ship. And, if this
styled huge and monstrous, what may be said of Diocletians baths? the great
Cirque? Marcellus his Theater? Vespasians Temple of Peace? and other prodigious
works of the Romans? the very remainders whereof now lying in the dust, breed
amazement and wonder (not without just reason too) in whosoever beholds them
with attentiveness and judgment. Nay, whereas he styles it insanam
substructionem, it is demonstrable, that betwixt this Island of great Britain,
and Rome it self, there is no one structure to be seen, wherein more clearly
shines those harmoniacall proportions, of which only the best times could
vaunt, then in this of Stoneheng.

Moreover, Our Countrymen marvel (says he) from whence such huge stones were
brought, considering that in all those quarters bordering thereupon, there is
hardly to be found any common stone for building. Upon what trust Camden (his
extraordinary judgment otherwise considered) took this relation, I know not.
For, there is not only common stone thereabouts, for ordinary uses, but stone
of extraordinary proportions likewise, even for greater works (if occasion
were) then Stoneheng: the Quarries of Hasselborough and Chilmark, both of them
not far from the borders of the plain, having of a long time furnished all the
adjacent parts with common stone for building. And (to come nearer the matter)
it is manifest, that in diverse places about the Plain, the same kind of Stone
whereof this Antiquity consists may be found, especially about Aibury in North-
Wiltshire, not many miles distant from it, where not only are Quarries of the
like stone, but also stones of far greater dimensions then any at Stoneheng,
may be had.

They wonder also (says he) by what means they (that, is such huge stones)
were set up. What may be effected by that Mechanical Art, which Dee in his
Mathematical Preface to Euclyde, calls Menadry, or Art of ordering Engines for
raising weights; those (it seems) of whom Camden speaks took little notice of,
when Archimedes during the siege of Syracuse, Plut. in Marcel.
raised out of the Sea, and turned in the air at pleasure, the Ships and
Galleys of the Romans, full fraught as they were with Soldiers, Mariners, and
their ordinary lading: and if King Hieron could have assigned him, a fit place
to firm his engines on, he would have undertaken to remove, even the
terrestrial Globe out of the worlds center, so high, perfection in this Art
transported him. What should I say of the Obelisk in Ages so far past, brought
from the Mountains of Armenia, and erected in Babylon by Semiramis, one hundred
and fifty foot high, and at the base twenty four foot square of one entire
stone? Herod. lib. 2.
Est in fano Latonae (says Herodotus of his own knowledge) delubrum ex uno
factum lapide, cujus parietes aequali celsitudine ad longitudinem quadragenum
cubitorum. cujus lacunari, pro tecto impositus est alius lapis quatuor
cubitorum per oras crassitudine. In the Temple of Latona (in Egypt) is a
Chapel framed of one stone, whose walls being of equal height, are in length
forty cubits, covered in like manner with one sole stone four cubits thick.
Those, which made this wonder would have much more admired, if they could have
seen the Obelisk raised in times of old by King Ramesis at Heliopolis, Ptol.
lib. 4. Plin. lib. 36.
in that part of Egypt anciently called Thebais, in height one hundred twenty
one Geometrical feet (which of our measure makes one hundred thirty six feet)
of one entire stone: and so little wonder made they of raising it, that the
Architect undertook and did effect it, the Kings own son being at the same time
bound to the top thereof. Amongst the Romans, Augustus Caesar erected in the
great Cirque at Rome, an Obelisk of one stone, one hundred and twenty foot,
nine inches long: another also, was set up in Mars field, nine foot higher then
it, by the said Emperor. And it seems also, neither they, nor Camdens self had
ever seen that Obelisk, which even in these our days, in the year one thousand
five hundred eighty six, Sixtus Quintus caused to be erected in the Piazza of
S. Peter at Rome, Dom. Font. lib. 1.
one hundred and eight Roman palms high, and at the base twelve palms square,
(according to our Assise, fourscore and one foot high, and nine foot square) of
one entire stone also: Dominico Fontana being Architect. But, there are more
strange things (as Sir Walter Raleigh has it) in the world, then betwixt
London and Stanes. It is want of knowledge in Arts makes such admirers, and Art
it self have so many Enemies. Had I not been thought worthy (by him who then
commanded) to have been sole Architect thereof, I would have made some mention
of the great stones used in the work, and Portico at the West end of S Paul's
Church London, but I forbear; though in greatness they were equal to most in
this Antiquity, and raised to a far greater height then any there. What manner
of Engines the Ancients used for raising; and what secure ways they had, for
carriage and transportation of their huge weights, is more proper for another
subject.

Some there are (says Camden) that think them to be no natural stones, hewn
out of the rock, but artificially made of pure sand, and by some glewy and
unctuous matter, knit and incorporate together, like those ancient trophies, or
monuments of victory, which I have seen in Yorkshire. As for these Monuments
(for my part) I have not seen, otherwise I would give my sense upon them, and
happily they may be found as far from being artificial, as those at Stoneheng.
And what marvel? (says he) read we not, I pray you, in Pliny, that the sand
or dust of Puteoli, being covered over with water, becomes forthwith a very
stone etc. He might as well have told us the Rocks in Portland are artificial.
But it is true, this sand of Puteoli, was much used by the Ancients, and it is
such a kind of earth, as is very famous for its admirable effects in building,
being tempered with the cement of Cuma; For, it not only yields strength to
all other buildings, but thereby also, all works made in the Sea under water,
are most firmly consolidated. Yet, do I not find, that ever the Ancients made
any artificial stones thereof, or that Vitruvius has any thing to that
purpose, to him the credit given to Pliny, and others, concerning the Earth of
Puteoli, being only due; posterity being in the first place beholding unto him
for finding out the nature of that earth, he giving us not only the effects
thereof, but the cause also from whence those effects proceed. Hoc autem fieri
hac ratione videtur, quod sub his montibus (i.e. in regionibus Baianis, Vitr.
lib. 2. cap. 6.
and in agris, quae sunt circa Vesuvium montem) and terrae ferventes sunt, and
fontes crebri, qui nen essent, si non in imo haberent, aut de sulphur, aut
alumine, aut bitumine ardentes maximos ignes. Which is (says he) by reason in
those mountains (to wit, in the regions of Baiae, and fields about mount
Vesuvius) the grounds are hot, and full of springs, which heat could not be,
but that from the bottom, are nourished mighty great fires, arising from
sulphur, alume, or brimstone there. Indeed, according to Pliny, the sand upon
the side of the hill of Puteoli, being opposed to the Sea, and continually
drenched, and drowned with the water thereof, does (by the restringent quality,
no doubt, of the salt water) become a stone so compact, and united together,
that scorning all the violence of the surging billows, it hardens every day
more and more.

Nevertheless, whosoever could find out any kind of earth in this Island,
naturally apt, to make artificial stones of such greatness as these; and,
like them so obdurate also, that hardly any tool enter them: or, that our
Ancestors in times of old, did make use of such a cement, and in what manner
composed by them. The benefit thereof doubtless, would amount so ample to this
Nation, that Records could not but render him deservedly famous to all
posterity. In the mean while, as it is most certain those stones at Stoneheng
are natural; so, am I as clearly of opinion, the very Quarries from whence
hewn, were about Aibury before mentioned: where, no small quantities of the
same kind, are even at this day to be had; vast scantlings, not only appearing
about the Town it self, but throughout the plain and fields adjoining, the
Quarries lying bare, numbers also numberless of stones, are generally seen.
(being no small prejudice to the bordering inhabitants) As also, not far from
the edge of Wiltshire, in the ascent from Lamborn to Whitehorse hill, the like
stones are daily discovered. To mention, more places in particular is
needless, the Quarries at and about Aibury (without relating to Lamborn, or
what ever other) distant but fifteen miles or thereabouts from Stoneheng, being
of themselves sufficient to clear the doubt. These, having through long time,
got the very same crustation upon them, are in like manner colored, grained,
bedded, weighty, and of like difficulty in working, as those at Stoneheng. Some
of which, being of a whitish color, are intermixed and veined here and there
with red: some, of a lightish blew, glister, as if mineral amongst them: some,
for the most part white, perplexed (as it were) with a ruddy color: some, dark
gray and russet, differing in kinds as those stones at Aibury do. Some of them
again, of a grayish color, are speckled or intermixed with dark green, and
white, together with yellow amongst it, resembling after a sort, that kind of
marble which the Italians (from the valley where the Quarries are found) call
Pozzevera; nothing, notwithstanding, so beautiful, though naturally much
harder, and being weathered by time, as in this work; disdain the touch even of
the best tempered tool. Insomuch, that if nothing else, the more then ordinary
hardness of them is such, as will in part convince any indifferent judgment
in the nature and quality of stones; those, in this Antiquity, are not (as
Camden would have them) artificial, but natural.

Whatsoever, worthy admiration concerning Stoneheng, either in relation to the
greatness of the work in general, the extraordinary proportion of the stones
in particular, the wonder the people make, from whence brought, by what Arts or
Engines raised, and in such order placed, Camden delivers: certainly, in his
judgment he was wholly opposite to the opinions of the aforesaid British
Historians. He would never else, with so much regret have complained, The
Authors of so notable a Monument lay buried in oblivion, had he given any the
least credit, this Antiquity had been built, either by A. Ambrosius, or the
British Nobility, or to eternize either of their names, or actions to
succeeding generations. Let Geffrey Monmouth and his followers, say what they
please, Henry Huntingdon (his Contemporary, if not more Ancient) is mine
Author, H. Hunting. lib. 1.
Nec potest aliquis excogitare, qua art tanti lapides adeo in altum elevati
sunt, vel quare ibi constructi sunt. No man knows (says Huntingdon) for what
cause Stoneheng erected, or (which is fully answered already) by what Art such
huge stones were raised to so great a height. Take with you also Draytons
judgment in his Poly-olbion couched under the fiction of old Wansdikes
depraving Stoneheng. (Wansdike being a huge Ditch in Wiltshire so called, Came.
fo. 241.
anciently, as Camden opines, dividing the two Kingdoms of the Mertians and
West Saxons asunder) Whom for a paltry ditch, Poly-olbion Cant. 3.
when Stonendge pleased t'upbraid,
The old man taking heart, thus to that Trophy said;
Dull heap, that thus thy head above the rest do rear,
Precisely yet not know who first did place thee there;
But Traitor basely turned to Merlins skill do fly,
And with his Magicks do thy Makers truth belie.
For, as for that ridiculous Fable, of Merlins transporting the stones out of
Ireland by Magic, it is an idle conceit. As also, that old wives tale, that for
the greatness it was in elder times called the Giants dance. The name of the
dance of Giants by which it is styled in Monmouth, has nothing allusive, no
not so much as to the tale he tells us, says a modern Writer in the life of
Nero Caesar.

Furthermore, Speed lib. 7. Stow fo. 58. in 4o.
our modern Historians Stow and Speed, tell us, in several parts of the Plain
adjoining, have been by digging found, pieces of ancient fashioned armor, and
the bones of men, insinuating this as an argument, for upholding the opinions
of the British Writers. To which, if they would have those to be the bones of
the slanghtered Britans, how came those Armours to be found with them, they
coming to the Treaty unarmed, and without weapons? Howsoever, what is done in
the Plains abroad, concerns not Stoneheng, Neither can any man think it
strange, that in a place, where Fame has rendered, so many memorable and fierce
battles, fought in times of old, rusty armor, and men's bones should be dug
up. It is usual throughout the world in all such places, and (if I mistake
not) Sands in his Travels, relates, that even in the Plains of Pharsalia, such
like bones and Armor, have lately been discovered: and Sir Henry Blunt in that
notable relation of his voyage into the Levant, speaks with much judgment of
those Pharsalian fields. Came. fo. 194. Speed lib. 7.
Likewise, the aforesaid Writers, might well have remembered, some of themselves
deliver, that at Kambulan, or Cambula in Cornwall, such habiliments of War have
been dug up, in tillage of the ground, witnessing either the fatal field,
sometimes there fought, where Mordred was slain by Arthur, and Arthur himself
received his deaths wound: or else, the relics of that battle betwixt the
Britans and Saxons, in the year eight hundred and twenty. It Is true, the
relation conduces much toward confirming, that ancient custom of the Saxons,
formerly recited out of Leyland; considering especially, not far from this
Antiquity, lie certain hillocks, at this day commonly called the seven Burrows,
where it may be presumed, some Princes, or Nobles of the Saxon Nation lie
interred. But, that Stoneheng should therefore be a place of burial, the
aforesaid relation to maintain the same is nothing worth.

They add moreover, the stones yet remaining are not to be numbered, according
as our Noble Sydney in his Sonnet of the wonders of England.

Near Wilton sweet, huge heaps of stone are found,
But so confused, that neither any eye
Can count them just, nor reason reason try,
What force brought them to so unlikely ground.
This, though it scarcely merits an answer, yet, to satisfy those which in
this point may be curious, let them but observe the orders of the Circles, as
they now appear, and not pass from one to another confusedly (noting
nevertheless where they begin) and they will find the just number easy to be
taken.

Now, though whether in order to the Place it self where this Antiquity stands,
or Persons, by whom Stoneheng pretended to be built, enough said, to wave the
reports upon fancy, or common Fame, formerly delivered: to the state of Time
nevertheless, wherein the British Histories would have it erected, because
nothing by me has yet been spoken, I will therefore add, it is not probable
such a work as Stoneheng could be then built. For, although our Britans, in
ancient time possessed, together with the Roman civility, all good Arts, it is
evident during the reign of A. Ambrosius (about the first coming in of the
Saxons here, and toward the later end of the fifth Century, as Historians and
Chronologists compute it) in the last declining of the Roman Empire, the Arts
of Design, of which Architecture chief, were utterly lost even in Rome it self,
much more in Britain, being then but a Tempest-beaten Province, and utterly
abandoned by the Romans. Britain, therefore, being overrun with enemies, and
the knowledge of Arts then lost amongst them: none, questionless, can
reasonably apprehend so notable a work as Stoneheng could in such times be
built.

That, amongst the Romans and Britans both, A. Ambrosius governing here, all
Sciences were utterly perished, is evidently manifest. For, the Goths had then
invaded Italy; and that vast Empire drooping with extreme Age, by the fatal
irruption of strange Nations, was not only torn in pieces, Stone Henge Wiltshire
but Barbarism having trod learning under foot, and the sword bearing more
sway then letters, or learned men, all Sciences were neglected; and
particularly that of Building fell into such decay, that till of late about the
year one thousand five hundred and ten, it lay swallowed up, and (as I may so
say) buried in oblivion. When one Bramante of the Duchy of Urbin, Serl. lib.
3.
attaining admirable perfection in Architecture, restored to the world again,
the true rules of building, according to those Orders, by the ancient Romans in
their most flourishing times observed. Furthermore, not only liberal Sciences
and Architecture, but Art military also, about the time of A. Ambrosius, was so
far lost amongst the Romans, that they were ignorant, yea, in the very
rudiments of War. Insomuch, (as Procopius in his second Book of the Gothic
Wars relate) Barbarism had bereft them of the skill, even in what manner to
sound a retreat.

With us here also, the Saxons domineered over all, and A. Ambrosius with the
Britans had enough to do, in endeavoring the recovery of their lost Country
from a mighty prevailing Enemy, that in few years afterward (maugre all the
ways which force or policy could invent) conquered the whole Nation. Among
other calamities attending that miserable Age, Camden (from William of
Malmsbury) directly to the purpose in hand tells us. W. Malmes. fol. 8. Camden
fo. 87.
Cum Tyranni nullum in agris praeter semibarbaros, nullum in urbibus praeter
ventri deditos reliquissent: Britannia omni patrocinio juvenilis vigoris
viduata, omni Artium exercitio exinanita, conterminarum gentium inhiationi diu
obnoxia fuit. When the Tyrants (to wit, the Romans) had left none in the
Country but half Barbarians, none in the Cities and Towns, but such as wholly
gave themselves to belly-cheer; Britain, destitute of all protection, by her
vigorous young men, bereaved of all exercise, and practice of good Arts, became
exposed for a long time to the greedy, and gaping jaws of Nations confining
upon her.

Here you have it from an Author, more ancient then G. Monmouth a little,
though both lived in one age, the times about A. Ambrosius government, whether
before, during his reign, or after, were so full of miseries, that he
complains, none then employed, or exercised in any whatever works belonging to
Art. They had something else (as appears by diverse Writers) to think upon, all
their abilities being insufficient to defend their Country from foreign
servitude, their Cities and Towns from ruin, and destruction, and their
habitations from rage of cruel and insolent enemies, robbing, Gildas.
spoiling, burning, wasting, all before them: to which, plague, perstilence,
and famine being joined, the inland part of the Island, even to the Western
Ocean was welnear totally consumed.

Besides, the Country was so oppressed, what with outward hostile miseries,
what with intestine tumults and troubles: that, had they not lost the practice
of all Arts (as the former Historian says they had) so far were they from
erecting any work of this kind, that they were compelled to abandon their
Towns, and houses, built in times foregoing by their Ancestors, and betake
themselves to mountains, caves, and woods for shelter. Now, if the calamities
of those times hung over the Britans heads, in so general manner, that not one
amongst them had leisure to put pen to paper, (as from Leyland before
remembered) much less able were they, without all peradventure, to undertake so
great a work as Stoneheng, wherein, as all rational men must grant, numbers of
men employed, and many years taken up, before brought to its absolute
perfection.

But, nothing can better express the ignorance of that Age, then the barbarous
manner of inscription upon the Tomb of the British Hector King Arthur, nephew
to A. Ambrosius, found long since in the Churchyard of the Abbey at
Glastenbury, the letters whereof, being exactly represented to our view by
Camden, Came. fo. 228.
do, as by demonstration, fully discover to us the Barbarism of those times.
As, barbarous in those characters, so were they ignorant in, and had lost the
use of all other Arts. Nor exercise nor practice of good Arts, was then amongst
them, says the Historiographer of Malmsbury. And well he might so deliver
himself, notwithstanding Matthew Westminster tells us, A. Ambrosius repaired
Churches, which the rage of Saxons, enemies to Christian Religion, spoiled.
For, besides, the vast difference betwixt such works as Stoneheng, where Art
overmasters the common skill of man, and making up the decaies of ruinated
buildings, is apprehensive even to the meanest capacities: Gildas and Bid
(whose Antiquity and learning the greater it is, the more is their authority
acceptable) affirm, the Britans in those times knew not in what manner to bring
up bare walls of stone. When, the Roman Legion sent to aid the Britans by
Valentinian the third, under the conduct of Gallio of Ravenna, was remanded
hence, for defense of France; before departing, they exhorted the Britans to
make a wall overthwart the Island, to secure themselves from the Barbarians,
Picts, and Scots: which wall, Bid tells us, was made not so much with stone, as
turffes, considering they had no workmen to bring up such works of stone; and
so, (says the venerable Historian) they did set up one, good for nothing.
'Twas made by the rude, and unskilful common multitude, not so much of stone,
as turffes (says Gildas also) none being found able to give direction for
building works of stone. This was about thirty six years preceding A. Ambrosius
government. In which time, the Romans abandoning Britain, Vortigern usurped;
called in the Saxons to his aid; was deposed by his Nobility; and Vortimer his
son set up. Whom Rowena having made away; Vortigern was re-enthronis'd. Him A.
Ambrosius invades, and having burnt him, together with Rowena in Wales, assumes
the Crown as his; holding continual war with the Saxons, until poisoned by
Pascentius as aforesaid.

It being thus, that nothing but universal confusion, and destructive broyls
of war, appeared then in all parts; more ancient, and far more propitious
times, must be sought out for designing a structure, so exquisite in the
composure as this: even such a flourishing Age, as when Architecture in rare
perfection, and such People looked upon, as by continual success, attaining
unto the sole power over Arts, as well as Empires, commanded all. I say, such
Times, and Persons, because those things, which accord not with the course of
time, which by a genetall consent of Authors agree not; which by the approved
customs of ancient Ages, and votes of learned men, are not received and
allowed, and consequently no ways probable; I easily admit not of.

Another fiction there is concerning Stoneheng, not to be past over; and though
the cause upon which it is grounded, be far more ancient then the government of
Ambrosius, or aforesaid slaughter of the Britans: nevertheless, in respect it
is a new conceit, not thirty years being past since hatched, I suppose this the
most proper place to discourse thereof, having ended with Geffrey Monmouth,
Polydore Virgill, and their followers.

The Author thereof is Anonymus, unless known in being Translator of Lucius
Florus. His opinion, (in his Nero Caesar) Stoneheng the Tomb of Boadicia
(formerly remembered) Queen of the Iceni. Ner. Caes. fo. 181.
His reason, first, because that memorable battle betwixt her, and Suetonius
Paulinus fought upon a Plain. Secondly, in respect the Britans buried her
magnificently. For confirming this, he tells us, Had the precious volumes of the
Cornelian Annals, and Dio Cassius, and John Xiphiline been within the sphere
of Geffrey Monmouths studies, not Aurelius Ambrosius, nor those four hundred
and sixty Noblemen of Britain, murdered in Vortigerns reign, should have
carried away with him the fame of this material wonder, but magnanimous
Boadicia. It seems, he would not be behinde-hand with Monmouth; for, as the one
finding no story more famous then of A. Ambrosius and the slaughtered Britans,
fathered Stoneheng upon them: so, to make the inventive faculty, as apparently
predominant in himself; this other, respecting Boadicia's heroical actions,
would as willingly make the world believe this Antiquity her Monument.

His principal argument I delivered before; to wit, the battle betwixt Her
and the Romans, wherein Boadicia utterly overthrown too, being fought upon a
Plain. Was there in old time (did he think) no Plain in Britain to fight a
battle on but Salisbury Plain? How came Boadicia and her Army thither? I find
indeed, Boadicia leading one hundred and twenty thousand fighting men out of
the Iconian Countries, and like a terrible tempest, falling upon Camalodunum,
that famous Roman Colony of old, (where the first fury of the War was felt) she
surprised it and razed it to the ground; Suetonius Paulinus then in Anglesey:
Intercepting Petilius Cerealis, who advanced with the ninth legion to relieve
that Colony, she cut all his Infantry in pieces: Putting to the sword all
those, which imbecility of sex, tediousness of age, or pleasure of the place
detained from following Suetonius in his march from London: And taking
Verulamium, sacked and burnt it down to ashes. But, how she marched from thence
to Salisbury Plain is neither apparent nor probable; not the least inkling
being left in the world, what hostile acts she committed, which way she moved,
or what done by her, after the ruin of Verulam, till utterly overthrown.

Can it be imagined, she that destroyed so great a Colony, together with a
free-borough of the Romans, slaid seventy or eighty thousand persons in such
horrid manner as scarce credible; reserving not one Prisoner alive, but
killing, hanging, crucifying, and burning whatsoever Roman, or to that party
inclined: that was yet victorious, and her Army increasing daily; can it be
imagined, I say, she marched to Salisbury Plain with so huge an Army invisibly?
or stole from Verulam thither by night, lest notice should be taken of her
proceedings? Anonymus self cannot think so unworthily of his Boadicia, yet
certainly after such manner she went, if ever went thither at all: Otherwise,
Boadicia marching in the height of glory, and bearing down all before her till
rancountred by Suetonius. Those faithful Historians Tacitus, and Dion, (both
so sedulous in delivering her Fame to posterity) would never have omitted so
notable a march, through such a large tract of enemies Country, as of
necessity she was to make from Verulam, to Salisbury Plain; but would have
prosecuted her War, by recording the spoils, rapines, burnings, and
devastations made therein; as particularly, as from the first fomenting the
rebellion, till her advance to Verulam, they have done. Upon which Town, and
the aforementioned places only, the aforesaid Historians directly tell us the
whole burden of the War fell. Tacit. Ann. lib. 14.
Ad Septuaginta millia civium and sociorum iis quae memoravi locis occidisse
constitit, says Tacitus. It was manifest, there were slain in the places, I
have remembered, the number of seventy thousand Citizens and Allies. Dion. Cas.
lib. 62.
Bunduica duas urbes (says Xiphilines Dion also) populi Romani expugnavit
atque diripuit, in iisque caedem infinitam, ut supradixi, fecit. Bunduica took
and razed to the ground two Towns of the Romans, and in them made that infinite
slaughter, I have mentioned before, of fourscore thousand persons. At Verulam
then, it fully appears, the course of her Victories stopped, the inhumane
butchery of the Romans, and their confederates, ended with the massacre in that
Town; which could not possibly have happened, if with such a firm resolution to
extirpate the Roman name in Britain, and such a numerous Army to effect it, she
had gone on victoriously unfought with, so far as where this Antiquity stands.
And therefore the Plain of Salisbury could not be the place of battle, as
Anonymus would fain enforce it. Who having so largely, and with so good advice,
discoursed the motions, and actions of this rebellion, with all the
circumstances thereof, from the first rise, till she destroyed Verulam, should
either have found some warrantable authority for Boadicia's so great an
undertaking afterward, else never engaged her so far within the Roman
Province; otherwise, some may imagine, he framed it, only out of ambition for a
mere pretense, rather, then stated it, from a real endeavor, to make
discovery for what cause Stoneheng at first erected.

Furthermore, Suetonius Paulinus was too well skilled in the discipline of war,
to make the seat thereof in a Country so absolutely Roman, as betwixt the
British Ocean and the River Thames. He had it is true (being returned from
Anglesey) abandoned London, no colony. But upon what result? finding his
access of strength disproportionable to the War in hand, Tacit. Ann. lib. 14.
and therefore determined with the loss of one Town to preserve the rest
whole, (whether London or Camalodunum is not to the purpose) and, by attending
the motions of the enemy, wait all fair occasions to give Boadicia battle,
Dion. Cass. lib. 62.
being unwilling to try his fortune too suddenly, multitude and success making
the Britans outragiously daring. In the interim nevertheless, raising what
forces, the exigency of so important affairs would permit.

Which way Suetonius marched from London is altogether omitted, yet if lawful
to conjecture, why not? to draw off the Forces of Catus Decianus Procurator,
(not long before fled into Gaul, for fear of this War) together with the
remains of Petilius Cerealis troops; Ner. Caes. fo. 105.
quartered, as Anonymus confesses, in those very camps yet appearing about
Gildsbrough and Daintry in Northamptonshire, then, confining the Icenian
Dominion to the Westward. Which Troops therefore, lay doubtless, in very great
danger if not timely relieved; especially in case Boadicia should conduct her
Army that way; as, ere long afterward she did so far as Verulam; this course
being taken by her, not improbably, in pursuit of Suetonius. Neither was it
very dangerous for the Roman General to lead his Forces that way, the Enemies
main strength lying about Camalodunum. Howsoever, whether he marched up to them
or no, concluded it is, he made his retreat toward Poenius Posthumus encamped
with the second Legion in the borders of the Silures, (now Herefordshire,
Radnorshire etc.) for which Legion, Suetonius sending to have it brought up to
his Rendezvous, his commands being slighted, Ner. Caes. fo. 154.
that strength failed him. The way which Suetonius took, after his departure,
was in mine opinion (says Anonymus) toward Severn, where Poenius Posthumus
encamped with the second Legion among the Silures. So also Spencer our famous
English Poet finds it. Whereby it appears, Suetonius retreat was not Westward
to Salisbury Plains, but Northerly toward that second Legion. In this retreat,
I may not omit, Anonymus conducts him over the Thames at London; Ner. Caes. fo.
155.
which if granted, and, that he kept the river upon his right hand still,
until engaging Boadicia, as Anonymus says he did: then was Suetonius march
far away indeed from Salisbury Plain. The course of that River winding, as we
all know, through Barkshire out of Oxfordshire, where Tame from the County
Buckingham, and Isis from the edge of Gloucester Province, make their
conjunction a little beneath Dorchester. And, if keeping this course still by
the Rivers side, Suetonius marched along the banks of Cherwell also, then must
Anonymus, whether he will or no, bring him up close to Gildsbrough and Daintry,
Ner. Caes. fo. 166.
as aforesaid; and thereby (for it is admitted Cerealis horse-troops were at
the fight) reconciling all opinions, upon his direct way toward the second
Legion.

How far on, nevertheless, toward Poenius Posthumus Camp Suetonius advanced is
uncertain; but, that the battle might be fought in some Plain about Verulam,
or upon that rode, is not altogether improbable (Especially considering part of
Suetonius strength consisted of Londoners, who, as Auxiliaries followed him in
this War, and would not stay behind) For, the Roman General when marshalling
his Army for fight, had with him (says Tacitus) the aids of the places
adjoining. What places were these? the last place named by him was Verulam, the
next place before it London; and, if the Historian intends either of these two,
by the places adjoining to the field, where the battle fought: then may
Anonymus prove the deserts in Africa, as soon as the Plains of Salisbury, to be
the place of Battle.

Spencer says, Cant. 10.
the battle was fought near Severn: Which seeing stout Bunduca up arose,
And taking arms, the Britons to her drew;
With whom she marched straight against her foes,
And them unawares besides the Seuerne did enclose.


Suetonius, when resolving for fight, deligit locum artis faucibus, Tacit. Ann.
lib. 14.
and a te^go silva clausum, satis cognito, nihil hostium nisi in front, and
apertam planitiem esse sine metu insidiarum. Choosed a place with a narrow
entrance, enclosed behind with a wood, being well assured, he had no enemies
but before him, and the Plain being open was without fear of Ambush. Thus
Tacitus describes the field, the Roman Army consisting of scarce ten thousand
armed men. In what part of Britain soever this Plain lay, it was, for certain,
of no great extent, being hardly able to contain the vast multitudes of
Boadicia's Army; computed two hundred and thirty thousand fighting men, by
Dion, and therefore could not possibly be Salisbury Plain. For, the Britans
placing their carts and wagons supra extremum ambitum campi, in the utmost
borders of the field, had so environed their Army therewith, that upon the rout
given, they could hardly flee away, quia circumjecta vehicula sepserant abitus,
by reason the carts (says Tacitus) hedged in the passages on every side, Ner.
Caes. fo. 179.
and (to use Anonymus own words) were like a wall against evasion. Now, if the
Britans had so surrounded the utmost borders of Salisbury Plain, and in such
manner barricado'd up all the passages thereof, their numbers should rather
have been millions then thousands, as every man knowing those Plains must needs
confess. Besides, Anonymus self tells us, Ner. Caes. fo. 178.
after the Britans in the head of their battle began to shrink and turn, that
alone was a blow to all behind, who being many score of thousands, remained
untoucht, during the fight, because they could never come up to handy-strokes,
for want of room in the narrowings of the field. He told us even now there was
scope enough. Ner. Caes. fo. 161.
Whereabout in these parts of Britain, (says he) that very place was, unless
it were upon Salisbury Plain, where there is a black heath, and scope enough,
is not for me to imagine. Now, on the contrary, when coming to the issue, he
tells us the Plain was narrow, and they wanted room. Did the Britans want room
in the field, and were on Salisbury Plain? Surely, in the heat of his
describing the Battle Anonymus forgot his own invention; the fury of the
Romans, in beating down the British squadrons, therewith dashed the main force
of his conceit to pieces. Suspicious and jealous men had need of good memories.
Upon the aforesaid situation he might rather have observed, the great
experience of the Roman General in martial affairs, then from thence
suggested, the Britans in point of honor erected Stoneheng to the memory of
Boadicia, Suetonius not only choosing to make good a straight enclosed behind
with a wood, for securing his own small Troops, but such a straight also, where
the Plain or field before it, was not of sufficient extent for Boadicia to
marshall her great Army in. Furthermore, Anonymus determining (it seems) to
parcel out his ground proportionable to the numbers, undertakes to give
posterity an exact survey of this Plain, telling us, it was a Plain of five or
six miles over: This makes it more apparent 'twas not Salisbury Plain, which
far and wide so expatiates it self through the middle of Wiltshire, that it is
not only five or six miles, but (as I may say) five times six miles over. This
famous battle then, being struck upon a Plain hardly capable of Boadicia's
Army, was not fought upon Salisbury Plain; but, on some other, which Suetonius
Paulinus found best for his own advantage, and therefore Stoneheng (as Anonymus
would fain have it) could not be the Sepulcher of Boadicia.

Concerning Boadicia's magnificent obsequies; a mighty Prince may be buried
with great solemnity, yet no material Monument dedicated to his memory.
Examples of this kind are so frequent, there needs no mention of them.
Humaverunt magnifice, Dion. Cass. lib. 62.
(they are Dions words) the Britans laid her into the earth magnificently, with
as much pomp, happily, and honor, attending her to the grave, as their
barbarous customs for their glorious Chieftain would admit; but, that they
raised any Monument, or erected whatsoever kind of Sepulcher for her, much
less so notable a structure as Stoneheng, he no where tells us. Which had the
Britans done, the Historian could not avoid, taking more knowledge thereof,
then of her bare enterment, and would undoubtedly have recorded it. Again,
grant Salisbury Plain the place of Battle, yet, Dion says not, they buried
her magnificently where the battle fought, only, Humaverunt magnifice: adding
withal, those, that escaped the field, prepared to re-enforce themselves for a
new trial, in the mean while a disease seizing on Bunduica, she died. Now
then, after so terrible an overthrow, wherein it is reported she lost fourscore
thousand Britans; Boadicia, in all likelihood, endeavored to recover the
Icenian Countries, her principal strength; having in her speech before the
Battle insinuated the fenny parts thereof, as a refuge if the worst should
happen. In what Countries else could they recruit? where falling sick she died,
(whether by violent or natural death is not material) and as ever observed
among all Nations, was, no doubt, buried in her own territories, among the
graves of her renowned Ancestors.

That the Britans, until Julius Agricolas time, Ner. Caes. fo. 117.
had learned nothing (as Anonymus takes special notice) but to fight, and were
no handicraftsmen, whereby they might be capable of erecting such works as
Stoneheng, being already fully proved from Tacitus, I will add, the
ringleaders or heads of commotions against Empires and Commonwealths were
anciently, (in many Countries at this day) not only themselves punishable by
the Laws with death, but their whole families and kindred though guiltless,
suffered in like manner; their very houses also, being razed to the ground,
left any knowledge of such pernicious undertakings should remain visible to
posterity: and a capital crime it was, in whomsoever that restored them. How
comes it then, Boadicia the principal promoter, Sueton. in Ner.
and Head of an insurrection so fatal, as accounted by Suetonius Tranquillus,
among the unfortunate losses of the Roman Empire, Dion. Cas. lib. 62.
and the more ignominious by a woman's conduct, should be permitted by the
conquering Romans, a monument to eternize her fame to succeeding Ages?
Boadicia, that ripped up the bellies of the Roman Legionaries, and cutting out
their bowels impaled their bodies upon burning stakes; that hanged up the most
noble and honorable Roman Dames naked, and slicing off their paps, sowed them
to their mouths, as in act of eating them; that in scalding water boiled the
Roman infants, and young children to death; their Parents, Husbands, and
Commanders unable to relieve them, but enforced to give way, and happy in so
saving themselves from the cruel inhumanities of the Conqueresse. We fought
for to live, says Tacitus. Yet, when ere long afterward, victoriously
recovering Britain to Caesar, by so memorable a battle as compared to their
victories of old, should the Romans suffer the enthralled Britans to erect a
Trophy to her memory, whose purpose was absolutely to root out all that was
Roman here? what greater infamy to the Roman name, except the permission of it?
They, who rased and broke in pieces whatever titles and inscriptions, bearing
the names of their Caesar's; pulled down and demolished the royal Ensigns,
Trophies, Statues, Temples, or whatever else sacred, to their own Emperors,
when actively administering to the prejudice of the Roman State; would they
permit any public monuments be erected to the memory of a conquered Prince, of
an Enemy so barbarously cruel as Boadicia? That she lives in History, they
could not prevent; so live their worst of Emperors. Moreover, public Monuments
were in all ages set up in honor of the Vanquishers, not vanquished;
respecting which, Anonymus should also, either have made Boadicia Victresse, or
never supposed Stoneheng her Sepulcher.

The time assigned by Anonymus, Ner. Caes. fo. 182.
for erecting these orderly irregular, and formlesse uniform heaps of massive
marble, (as he calls them) to the everlasting remembrance of Boadicia, is much
above fifteen hundred years since: Petronius Turpilianus succeeding Suetonius
Paulinus in the Leivtenancy of Britain; who by his idle and lazy life, making
the world believe there was peace here: Anonymus will have it a proper time,
for permitting such an office to the Britans, in Boadicia's honor. Times of
peace, it is confessed, when Arts flourish under nobly minded Governors, are
chiefly proper for erecting magnificent buildings. The Government under
Petronius was guilty of none of these. As for the State of Britain in general,
Tacitus in the life of Agricola tells us, Petronius had composed the former
troubles; but in what sort, the fourteenth book of his Annals declares; non
irritato host, neque lacessitus, neither the Enemy, incensed him; nor he,
provoked the Enemy: otherwise Petronius durst not do. And, if peace settled, why
does the Historian call them Enemies? Concerning his own person in particular,
Petronius gave himself over to an unprofitable life, disguising it under the
honorable name of peace, Honestum pacis nomen segni otio imposuit, says
Tacitus. And, the Britans (as said before) were not then civilized, nor friends
to such Arts as either nourish or are nourished by peace, therefore such a work
of wonder as this Antiquity famed, not to be expected from them. For, as
through the malignities of the Age, wherein Aurelius Ambrosius lived, the
Britans had utterly lost the practice of all those Sciences, in times
foregoing, learned by their Ancestors from the Romans: so, through the neglect
of civil policy in the preceding Roman Governors, in this Leivtenancy of
Petronius, the Britans had not attained the knowledge of any those Arts, not
many years afterward, taught their posterity by the Romans. Whose imperial
Eagles took not wing in Britain with such lofty speed, as over other Countries;
Tacit. Ann. lib. 14.
The Britans being a fierce Nation, slowly giving ear to any peace, the Romans
had work enough in subduing them. Julius Caesar rather showed the Island to his
successors, then left them possession of it: Augustus and Tiberius held it
policy to neglect it: Caligula intending to invade Britain, was diverted by his
Wars in Germany: Claudius first prosecuting the conquest with effect,
established the colony at Camalodunum, and his Leivtenants Aulus Plautius,
Flavius Vespasianus. Ostorius Scapula, and Didius Gallus by little and little,
after much contest, and various success, subdued certain Countries; and
reducing the nearest part of the Island to the form of a Province, built also,
or rather cast up some few fortifications further within the land: Nero's
Generals had much to do in keeping, what their predecessors gained; Suetonius
Paulinus (under him) struck that fortunate battle with Boadicia, else the
Romans beaten out of all. So that, in the time of Petronius, the Romans having
obtained no such assured dominion over the Britans, as might make them,
themselves confident to undertake great and stately buildings here, for their
own either public, or private accommodations; (the ruin of Camalodunum being
too fresh in memory) occasion was not offered, nor the time yet come, to let
the Britans know by what Arts all civil Nations of the world, did erect their
excessive, rather then not magnificent structures, for eternizing their names
to succeeding generations. And therefore, the Leivtenancy of Petronius
Turpilianus, not proper for building this stony marvel, as Anonymus suspects.
For, beside what is delivered, whenever Stoneheng built, the preparation only
of materials for the work, and bringing them to the place, what Engines or Arts
soever used, necessarily, spent more time, then Petronius consumed in the whole
continuance of his government here. What tumults succeeded him, let others
declare.

Furthermore, if those times of Petronius would not, yet (says Anonymus) other
ensuing seasons might permit such an office to the Britans, her name for ever
glorious among them. The heinousness of her Rebellion, horridness of her
cruelties, and inveterate hatred Boadicia bore to the Romans, whereby her name
for ever infamous among them, clearly manifest all other ensuing seasons,
equally improper for those ancient inhabitants of this Island, to erect
Stoneheng. If the Britans, once attaining the Roman manner of Architecture, in
any succeeding times had expelled the Romans, and been triumphant; some
probable reason, at least, Anonymus might have alleged, toward advancing his
opinion. But Boadicia and her Accomplices overthrown, the Roman Power in this
Island increasing daily, and the liberty of the Britans as fast declining, no
following season could be opportunely favorable, for undertaking such a work
by them; the erecting whereof, yea the sole endeavoring to commemorate by such
public means, so mortal an enemy to the Romans as Boadicia: nothing but the
dearest lives of the bold attempters, could, certainly, expiate. The Temple
upon Mount Coelius at Rome, Suet. in Vespas.
begun to Claudius sacred memory by Agrippina, was destroyed to the very
foundations by Nero. If then, insulting Agrippina might not erect a memorable
structure, to the glory of her deceased Caesar; whom the Senate and People of
Rome, in all solemn manner deified: What oppressed Britan, durst undertake the
raising a public Monument to the honor of vanquished Boadicia, whom the State
(in all reason) for ever declared enemy to the Roman Empire? And though, after
a long succession of years, the Romans abandoned this Island, yet, when
departed, the Britans were left in such deplorable condition, (at large
declared before) that, albeit her name never so glorious among them, they had
much more to do, in saving their own miserable lives from plague, famine, and
the sword, then any opportunity, or ability to erect whatever Monument to the
glory of Boadicia. But, of this enough; the invalidity of Anonymus opinion
especially respected. The discovering the original foundation of an Antiquity
so famous, being not to be enforced by jealous suspicions, raised upon bare and
groundless conjectures.

THIS Antiquity ( called by Henry Huntingdon, The second: by Poly-olbion --
First wonder of the land) because the Architraves are set upon the heads of the
upright stones, and hang (as it were) in the air, is generally known by the
name of Stone-heng. It is sited upon the Plain in the County of Wiltshire in
England, not far from Ambresbury (the foundations of whose ancient buildings,
frequently dug up, render it to have been in times past a Town of no small
fame) six miles at least from new Salisbury northwards.

The whole work, in general, being of a circular form, is one hundred and ten
foot diameter, double winged about without a roof, anciently environed with a
deep Trench, still appearing about thirty foot broad. So that, betwixt it, and
the work it self, a large and void space of ground being left, it had, from the
Plain, three open entrances, the most conspicuous thereof lying North-east. At
each of which, was raised, on the outside of the Trench aforesaid, two huge
stones gate-wise, parallel whereunto, on the inside two others of less
proportion. The inner part of the work, consisting of an Exagonall figure, was
raised, by due symmetry, upon the bases of four equilaterall triangles, (which
formed the whole structure) this inner part likewise was double, having, within
it also, another Exagon raised, and all that part within the Trench sited upon
a commanding ground, eminent, and higher by much, then any of the Plain lying
without, and, in the midst thereof, upon a foundation of hard chalk, the work
it self was placed. Insomuch, from what part soever they came unto it, they
rose by an easy ascending hill.

Which, that it may be the more clearly demonstrated, (being by me, with no
little pains, and charge measured, and the foundations thereof diligently
searched) I have reduced into Design, not only as the ruin thereof now
appears, but as (in my judgment) it was in its pristine perfection. And that
the groundplot, with the uprights, and profyle of the whole work may the more
distinctly be understood, I have purposely countersigned each Design of them
with Numbers, and the particular parts thereof with Letters.

Nu. 1
Signifies the Plant of the whole work in general, with the Trench round about
it, drawn by a small scale, that it may be seen all at one view.

A
The Trench.

B
The Intervall betwixt the Trench and Work.

C
The Work it self; in the inmost part whereof, there is a stone appearing not
much above the surface of the earth, (and lying toward the East) four foot
broad, and sixteen foot in length. Which, whether it might be an Altar or no, I
leave to the judgment of others, because so overwhelmed with the ruins of the
Work, that I could make no search after it, but even with much difficulty, took
the aforesaid proportion thereof. Yet for my part, I can apprehend no valid
reason to the contrary, except that the whole constructure being circular in
form, the Altar should rather have been placed upon the center of the Circle,
then enclining to the circumference. Nevertheless it cannot be denied, but
being so sited, the Cell (as I may call it) was thereby left more free, for the
due performance of those several superstitious rites, which their Idolatry led
them to. Besides, though the Altar amongst the Ancients was exalted and raised
somewhat high above the earth; yet, their Ara was made quadrangular, not very
high, and as some will have it close to the ground, being consecrated as well
to the supernall as infernal Deities: Rosin. lib. 2.
and therefore in respect of the form, it may hold well enough it was anciently
an Altar.

D
The supposed Altar.

E
The great stones which made the entrances from the outside of the Trench,
seven foot broad, three foot thick, and twenty foot high.

F
The parallel stones, on the inside of the Trench, four foot broad, and three
foot thick; but they lie so broken, and ruined by time, that their proportion
in height cannot be distinguished, much less exactly measured.

G
The scale of fifty foot.

The Design follows.

Nu. 2
The Groundplot of the work, as when first built, in a greater form, with the
four equilaterall triangles making the Scheame, by which the whole work was
composed.

H
The six principal entrances, three whereof directly opposite to those of the
Trench.

I
The stones which made the outward Circle, seven foot in breadth; three foot
and an half thick, and fifteen foot and an half high: each stone having two
tenons mortaised into the Architrave, continuing upon them, throughout the
whole circumference. For, these Architraves, being joynted directly in the
middle of each of the perpendicular stones that their weight might have an
equal bearing, and upon each side of the joint a tenon wrought, (as remains
yet to be seen) it may positively be concluded thereby, the Architrave
continued round about this outward circle.

K
The smaller stones of the inner circle, one foot and an half in breadth, one
foot thick, and six foot high. These had no Architraves upon them, but were
raised perpendicular, of a pyramidall form. That, there was no Architrave upon
these, may be hence concluded, the stones being too small to carry such a
weight, the spaces being also too wide, to admit of an Architrave upon them
without danger of breaking, and being but six foot high, there could not,
possibly, be a convenient head-height remaining for a passage underneath,
especially, considering fully the greatness of the whole work.

L
The stones of the greater Hexagon, seven foot and an half in breadth, three
foot nine inches thick, and twenty foot high, each stone having one tenon in
the middle.

M
The stones of the Hexagon within, two foot six inches in breadth, one foot and
an half thick, and eight foot high, in form pyramidall, like those of the inner
circle.

The Scale which has this mark, X, is of thirty foot, by which likewise all
the ensuing Designs are drawn.

The Design follows.

Nu. 3
The upright of the work, as when entire, in which the perpendicular stones of
the outward circle, are countersigned with the Letter I, as in the groundplot.

N
The Architrave lying round about upon them, being mortaised into them, and
joynted in the middle of each of the perpendicular stones. This Architrave is
three foot and an half broad, and two foot and an half high.

O
The Architrave lying on the top of the great stones of the Hexagon, and
mortaised also into them, sixteen foot long, three foot nine inches broad, and
three foot four inches high. This Architrave continuing only from stone to
stone, left betwixt every two and two, a void space free to the Air uncovered.
For, if they had been continued throughout the whole Hexagon, then necessarily
there must have been two tenons upon each of the said stones, as those of the
outward circle had, but being disposed as aforesaid, that one, which was in the
middle, and yet remains apparent, was sufficient for the thing intended.

Nu. 4
The Profyle, or cut, through the middle of the work, as entire, countersigned
with the Letters of the Groundplot.

The Designs follow.

Nu. 5
The whole work in Prospective, as when entire, whereby the general composure
of the particular parts of the uprights, are together all seen: and, by which
also, the stately Aspect, and magnificent greatness thereof, are fully, and
more apparently conspicuous.

Nu. 6
The Groundplot of the work, as it now stands, countersigned with the same
Letters by which the Plant marked Nu. 2 is described. The stones of the greater
Hexagon, and outward circle, after so long contest with the violence of time,
and injury of weather, are for the most part standing at this day; which,
though not all at their full height, as when first set up, yet the Footsteps
nevertheless, of so many of them as expressed in the Design, are still remaining
in their proper places. Those of the inner circle, and lesser Hexagon, not only
exposed to the fury of all devouring Age, but to the rage of men likewise, have
been more subject to ruin. For, being of no extraordinary proportions, they
might easily be beaten down, or dug up, and at pleasure, made use of for
other occasions. Which, I am the rather enduced to believe, because, since my
first measuring the work, not one fragment of some then standing, are now to be
found.

Nu. 7
The Ruin yet remaining drawn in Prospective.

P
The manner of the tenons, of a round form, mortaised into the Architrave of
the outward Circle.

Q
The tenons of like form in the middle of the stones of the greater Hexagon.

R
The English foot (by which the work it self was measured) divided into twelve
inches, and each inch subdivided into four parts.

The Designs follow.

Hitherto, upon what occasion Stoneheng built (you may easily perceive) is very
doubtful, the true History of those times, when first erected, and by which
the memory of things especially made over to succeeding Ages, being either not
written, or if written, utterly lost. Likewise, as for what use set up, not yet
known; so, by whom also founded, is equally uncertain.

You cannot but remember, in what manner the ancient Inhabitants of this Island
lived, before reduced to civility by the Romans I have formerly delivered:
also, how they were first instructed by them, in several Arts and Sciences,
whereof the Britans wholly ignorant, before the Romans arrival here, and
teaching them. I have given you in like manner, a full description of this
Antiquity, whereby doubtless it appears to you, as in truth it is, a work
built with much Art, Order and Proportion. That the ancient Britans, before the
discovery of this Island by the Romans, could not be the Founders thereof, by
the former reasons, I suppose, is clearly manifested. For, where Art is not,
nothing can be performed by Art. As, for that which concerns the British
Nobility, Aurelius Ambrosius, or Boadicia, enough already.

It rests now, to endeavor the discovering by whom Stoneheng built; in what
time, and, for what use anciently erected. But, it is not expected (I hope) any
absolute resolution should be given by me, in so doubtful a matter, for, as it
has been always lawful for every man in such like matters (says Camden) both
to think what he will, and relate what others have thought: So pardon me, if I
take upon me, what others have done before me, and interpose mine own opinion
also, grounded nevertheless upon such Authorities, customs, and concurrence
of time, as very probably may satisfy judicious and impartial Readers.

Touching the Founders of Stoneheng. Among the Egyptian Antiquities, or those
Eastern Nations from whom the Graecians deduced their learning, I find not any
such composure ever used: or with the Greeks themselves, mention made of any
work conformable to this, in point of Order. (as the most conversant in those
Histories cannot contradict) I read nevertheless, in Pausanias, Pausan. fo.
392.
of a Temple amongst the Eleans erected without walls: novam quandam in Eleorum
foro templi formam vidi. I saw (says he) in the market place of the Eleans, a
Temple of a new form. Modicae est aedes altitudinis, sine parietibus, tectum e
quercu dolatis fulcientibus tibicinibus. A low thing, without walls, having the
roof supported with props of oaken timber (instead, it seems, of Columns)
neatly wrought. He remembers a Temple also in Attica sacred to Jove without a
roof. Idem fo. 75:
The Thracians (as I read likewise) used to build Temples dedicated to Sol, of
a round form, open in the middle, and also without a roof: by the form, or
roundnesse thereof, they signified the Suns figure; by making them open, and
rooflesse, they expressed his surmounting, and dilating light equally to all
things. Thraces soli rotunda templa faciebant (says Daniel Barbaro) in medio
sub divo, In Vitr. lib. 4.
and aperta erant: hac forma Solis figuram innuebant: quod autem aperta essent,
and sine tecto, innuebant Solemn supra omnia esse, and lumen suum diffundere.

Howsoever, considering what magnificence the Romans in prosperous times
anciently used in all works, both public, and private: their knowledge and
experience in all Arts and Sciences: their powerful means for effecting great
works: together with their Order in building, and manner of workmanship
accustomed amongst them: Stoneheng in my judgment was a work, built by the
Romans, and they the sole Founders thereof. For, if look upon this Antiquity,
as an admired and magnificent building, who more magnificent then the Romans?
Seamoz. lib. 1. fo. 9.
Essi soli fra i populi dell' vniverso, con ogni termine di magnificenza
edificarono tutti i generi d'edifici. They only amongst all the Nations of the
Universe, erecting all sorts of buildings, with all kinds of magnificence,
says Scamozzo in the first Book of his Architecture. If consider the Art, and
elegant disposition thereof, all Arts and Sciences (we must know) were in full
perfection with them, and Architecture, which amongst the Greeks was youthful
only, and vigorous; under the Romans their Empire grown to the full height
became manly and perfect, not in inventions, and elegancy of forms alone, but
also in exquisiteness of Art, and excellency of materials. Salito al colmo
l'imperio Romano, ella pure divenne virile e perfetta: non solo nelle
inventioni, e nella elleganza delle form, ma parimente nell' esquisitezza
dell' artificio, e nella singolarita della materia. As the same Author has it.
If take notice of their power and ways by which they effected such goodly
structures, their means were not ordinary according to the common custom of
other People; and why? because, besides particular Artisans practiced in
several Arts, they employed in those their works whole bodies of their own
Armies, and whatever Nations subdued by them. The Romans were wont to exercise
therein (says Camden Camden fo. 64.
) their Soldiers, and the common multitude, upon great policy doing the same,
left being idle they should grow factious, and affect alteration in the State.
The Britans complained (says Tacitus likewise) corpora and manus contrivisse,
that their bodies and hands were worn out, and consumed by the Romans, in
bringing to effect their great and admired undertakings: in that kind employing
their slaves and prisoners also, as holding it, rather then by violent deaths
to cut them off; more profitable for the Commonwealth, more exemplary for
others, and far greater punishment for their Prisoners, to enjoin them
continual labor.

If observe their Order in building; the only Order of Architecture, which
Italy may truly glory in the invention of, is the Tuscane Order, so called,
because first found out by the Tuscans, that in a more then ordinary manner
they might reverence their Deities in Temples composed thereof. Choul. fo. 5.
( Ianus their first King, according to the common opinion of diverse ancient
Historians, being the first of all others, that built Temples to the Gods)
Which Order, though first used by the Tuscans, certain it is, the Romans took
from them, and brought it in use with other Arts, in several parts of the
world, as their conquests led them on. Now of this Tuscan Order, a plain,
grave, and humble manner of Building, very solid and strong Stoneheng
principally consists. So that, observing the Order whereof Stoneheng built,
there being no such Elements known in this Island as distinct Orders of
Architecture, until the Romans introduced them, the very work it self, of so
great Antiquity, declares the Romans Founders thereof. Who, that has right
judgment in Architecture, knows not the difference, and by the manner of their
works how to distinguish Egyptian, Greek, and Roman structures of old, also
Italian, French and Dutch buildings in these modern times? Is not our Shipping
by the mould thereof, known throughout the world English built? Who did not by
the very Order of the work, assure himself, the body of the Church of S. Paul
London, from its Tower to the West end anciently built by the Saxons: as the
Quire thereof, from the said Tower to the East end by the Normans, it being
Gothic work? yet that there might be a Roman Temple in old time standing in
that place, I will not deny, the numbers of Oxeheads dug up and anciently
sacrificed there, setting all other reasons aside, so probably manifesting the
same. And in all likelihood, the Romans for so notable a structure as
Stoneheng, made choice of the Tuscane rather then any other Order, not only as
best agreeing with the rude, plain, simple nature of those they intended to
instruct, and use for which erected; but also, because presuming to challenge a
certain kind of propriety therein, they might take occasion thereby, to
magnify to those then living the virtue of their Ancestors for so noble an
invention, and make themselves the more renowned to posterity, for erecting
thereof, so well ordered a building.

Besides, the Order is not only Roman, but the Scheam also (consisting of four
equilaterall triangles, inscribed within the circumference of a Circle) by
which this work Stoneheng formed, Vitr. lib. 5.
was an Architectonicall Scheam used by the Romans. Whereof, I shall have more
occasion to speak, when I come to set down, for what use this Antiquity at
first erected.

Again, the Portico at Stoneheng, is made double, as in structures of great
magnificence the ancient Romans used: so at the foot of the Capitol the Temple
to Jove the Thunderer, built by Augustus Caesar; so the Pantheon at Athens,
royally adorned with one hundred and twenty vast columns of rich Phrygian
marble, by the Emperor Adrian. But, some may allege, the Romans made the
Pillars of their double Portico's, of one and the same symmetry, or very little
different, which in this Antiquity otherwise appearing, cannot be a Roman work.
To as much purpose it may be alleged the Temple of Diana at Magnesia, was no
Greek work, because the Pillars of the inner Portico were wholly left out. Yet
it is true, the Romans usually made them as is objected, and the reason was,
because of the weight the inner Pillars carried: now, in this work, no roof
being to be sustained, nor any manner of weight born up, though the judgment
of the Architect, thereby to save labor and expense, ordered the stones making
the Portico within, of a far less proportion then those of the outward circle,
it retains nevertheless the proper Aspect (principally aimed at by the ancient
Architects) in use amongst the Romans, and consequently for ought alleged to
the contrary by them built.

In this Antiquity, there is a Portico also (as I may rightly term it) within
the Cell, or greater Hexagon, reduced likewise into the same figure. Now, that
the Romans used to make Portico's on the inside of their buildings, as well
sacred as secular, by the ruins of their Basilicaes or Courts of Judicature;
by that Temple without a roof anciently dedicated to Jove in Mount Quirinalis,
now the Horse Mount in Rome; by the Temple of Bacchus there of a round form, at
this day consecrate to S. Agnes without the gate Viminalis, manifestly appears.
But in what ever structures else the Romans used them, certain it is, within
their most stately Temples which lay uncovered, and had no roofs, they always
made such Portico's; and though in other Temples they sometimes disposed them,
yet from Vitruvius it may be gathered, they properly belonged to the Aspect
Hypaethros, which was uncovered and rooflesse as this Antiquity Stoneheng, he
peremptorily assigning Portico's to be made on the inside of no kind of
Temples, but those; Vitr. lib. 3. cap. 1.
His words are, Hypaethros in interiore part habet columnas, remotas a
parietibus ad circuitionem (ut porticus) peristyliorum. Temples open to the
air, and without roofs, have columns on the inside, distant from the walls, as
Courts Portico's about them. Even, after the same decorum as at Stoneheng.

Furthermore, if cast an eye upon their artifice and manner of workmanship,
Stoneheng appears built directly agreeable to those rules, which the Romans
observed in great works. For, the Roman Architects, in distinguishing the
manner of their Temples, always observed (as Vitruvius in his third book
teaches us) the greater the Columns were, the closer they set them together;
so in this Antiquity, the stones being great, the spaces betwixt them are
likewise narrow.

The Architraves also, in this work were all of them set without mortar, and
fixed upon the upright stones by tenons (as formerly described) in the very
same manner, as in great structures, where the stones solid, and of more then
ordinary greatness, the Romans were wont to do. They laid them without any
unctuous incorporating matter, Leo Bap. Alber. lib. 3.
nullo fulta glutino, says Leo Baptista Albertus. And diverse examples of this
kind might be brought, I my self amongst other Antiquities have seen the ruins
of an Aquaeduct, built by the Romans in Provynce, running through a deep
valley, and raised in height equal to the adjacent Mountains, upon huge
Arches-fifty eight foot wide, the stones whereof, being of extraordinary
scantlings, were laid without any cement or mortar, to incorporate them with
the rest of the work. And, where occasion guided their judgments to the
observance of this rule, they united and compacted the stones together, by
certain ligatures or holdfasts, (the Italians call them Perni, pegs or tops,
for such they resemble, and we, from the verb tenere to hold, not improperly
calling them tenons) quae inferiores, and und superiores in lapides infixae,
cavatae fuere, ne quid forte protrusi ordines alteri ab alteris distrahantur.
Leo Bap. Alber. lib. 3.
Which (says Albertus) being formed in the inferior stones, were hollowed or
mortaised into those above, lest by any chance they should start one from
another, and break the order of the work. Here the Florentine Architect gives
us the self same manner of banding stones, when the Romans laid them without
mortar, as if he had seen this very Antiquity Stoneheng.

Moreover, what ever footsteps of the Romans found in other places of this
Island, it is not inconsiderately to be past over, that in Wiltshire, the County
(as is said before) where our Stoneheng remains, Roman Antiquities are most
perspicuous, not only, by the apparent testimonies of the coyns of their
Emperors in diverse places dug up, but by several their encamping places yet
to be seen, Camden.
as Leckham, in times of yore a seat of the Romans: the place also where old
Salisbury now shows it self, within six miles of Stoneheng: and within three
miles thereof Yanesbury Castle, supposed a work of Vespasians when he
conquered, and after kept in subjection the Belgae, ancient inhabitants of that
tract. Likewise the ruins nearer yet to Stoneheng, Speed.
of a fortress our Historians hold anciently a garrison of the Romans, and in
many other forts of that Shire (both by their form and manner of making well
known to have been Roman) the tract of their footing is yet left.

But it is objected, If Stoneheng a Roman work, how comes it, no Roman Author
makes mention of it? I answer, their Historians used not to commit to writing
every particular work, or action the Romans performed: if so, how vast would
their volumes have been? Stoneheng it is granted, is much admired by us, yet,
how far more admirable works were the Romans Founders of, not mentioned in any
of their ancient stories? That notable bridge invented and built by Caesar, for
passing his Army over the Rhine, himself at large describes, remembering little
or nothing nevertheless concerning diverse other as great works in Gaul and
Batavia, supposed to be performed by him also. Dion, Herodian, Eutropius and
other their Historians tell us, the Romans built the so famed wall, commonly by
us called the Picts wall, extending cross over our Island from the Irish Sea
to the German Ocean, above fourscore Italian miles in length, with many towers
and fortresses erected upon it; when works of as great admiration in Britain
they have past in silence: those wonderful causeys made throughout the land,
by dreining and drying up Fens, levelling hills, raising valleys, and paving
them with stones of such breadth, that Wains might without danger pass one by
another, not any ancient Roman Author (for ought appears) directly mentioning.
Yet, who doubts them Roman works? I dare confidently avouch, the Romans by
little and little founded and raised them up, says Camden. Came. fo. 64.
And why? mark I pray, because, whilst Agricola governed Britain, Tacitus tells
us, several ways were enjoined. If then, because Tacitus affirms in general
terms only, several ways enjoined, Camden confidently concludes them Roman
works, no Roman History otherwise remembering them; Why may it not, the same
Tacitus telling us in like manner, Agricola exhorted the Britans in private,
and helped them in common, to build Temples, Houses, and Places of public
resort, as peremptorily be inferred, Stoneheng was a work built by the Romans,
though not particularly remembered by them in their stories? In a word, Tacitus.
Beda.
Temples and places of public resort, the Romans built here, and were the
first that did so, leaving it to after ages to find out by their Manner of
building, Order in building, and Power and Means for building, such lofty
ruins, as appears in this Antiquity, could be remains of none but Roman
building.

The next thing to be enquired after, is, in what time Stoneheng built.
Happily, about those times, when the Romans having settled the Country here
under their own Empire, and, together with bringing over Colonies reduced the
natural inhabitants of this Island unto the society of civil life, by
training them up in the liberal Sciences. For, then also (says Camden Camden
fo. 63.
) did they furnish the Britans, with goodly houses, and stately buildings, in
such sort, that the relics and rubbish of their ruins, cause the beholders
now, exceedingly to admire the same, and the common sort of People plainly say,
those Roman works were made by Giants, of such exceeding great admiration, and
sumptuous magnificence they are.

This relation of Camdens, reflects chiefly upon the time of Agricola;
nevertheless, that Stoneheng (though fabled Giants work) was then built, I
dare not affirm: the great works of the Romans, brought to perfection in this
Island, being not the work of a day. It has been the invention of wise Romans
of old, affecting civility, to raise goodly buildings here: but the precise
times when, in things so far from all knowledge, cannot be with any certainty
avouched. For my part, I should choose to assign those times for building
thereof, when the Romans in their chief prosperity most flourished here, and
refer the first erection to the time betwixt Agricolas government formerly
mentioned, and the reign of Constantine the Great: in order to which, the times
rather somewhat after Agricola, if not during his own Lievtenancy, then next
preceding Constantine. For, long before Constantine acquired the Sovereignty
(which was not till the year of our Lord three hundred and ten) the magnificent
splendour of that mighty Empire began sensibly to wane, and the ambition of the
great Captains of Rome, (some few excepted) tended rather to make parties for
obtaining the Purple Robe, then (after the manner of their ancestors) to
eternise their names by great and admirable works, or patronizing good Arts,
for want whereof they began likewise to decay apace; Serly in his third Book
speaking of those times, telling us, that id temporis Architecti, si cum
superioribus conferantur, rudiores and ineptiores extitisse videntur. In those
days although there were many Architects, yet, compared with such as lived in
the preceding Ages, they were very rude and unskilful. Besides, the condition
wherein this Island was, diverse years preceding Constantine, would not admit
such undertakings. for, by the civil discord of the Romans, the Britans taking
occasion to make frequent revolts, in hope to recover their lost liberty, the
Romans were put upon other manner of Councels then to think of building; namely
to reduce the Britans to their wonted obedience, and keep the Province in some
reasonable quiet, by expelling the Scots and Picts (savage and perfidious
People even from times of old) making daily inroads and incursions thereunto.

Now, as for these reasons, it is not likely Stoneheng could be built in the
times next before Constantine, so, by what follows, it will manifestly appear,
it was not erected after his Reign. For, after his transplanting the seat of
the Empire into the East, and the government of the then known world, under the
Romans, distinguished by East and Western Emperors, a deluge of barbarous
Nations (like so many Locusts) swarmed over all. Who, as with their vast
multitudes they often had formerly attempted it, so, thence forward, till
bringing that mighty Empire unto its final and fatal period; and thereby
utterly destroying in like manner all Arts and Sciences, together with
Architecture, (not restored again, even in Italy it self, until, as formerly
remembered) they never desisted. Moreover, in the times after Constantine, no
Temples to Heathen Deities (such as I shall make appear this Antiquity
Stoneheng was) were erected here, they being times of defacing, rather then
erecting idolatrous places. For, most of the succeeding Emperors becoming
Christians, the tempestuous storms of persecution were over, and the thick
clouds of superstition beginning to be dissolved by the bright beams of the
Gospel, and true light of CHRIST, every where Temples were shut up against
false Gods, and set open to the true GOD. According to that of Gildas, Gildas.
No sooner was the blustering tempest, and storm of persecution blown over, but
the faithful Christians, who in the time of trouble and danger had hidden
themselves in woods, deserts, and secret caves, being come abroad in open
sight, renovant Ecclesias ad solum usque destructas, basilicas sanctorum
martyrum fundant, construunt, perficiunt etc. Churches ruinate to the very
ground they reedifie, Temples of holy Martyrs they found, build, and finish
etc. So that, in stead of idolatrous Temples, built in the Ages preceding
Constantine, during his reign and after, whilst the Romans continued in any
prosperous state here, by erecting Christian Churches, they began generally to
neglect, and suffer fall to decay, rather then new build Temples to their Pagan
Gods.

These pressing occurrences therefore, to wit, civil broyls amongst the Romans
themselves, frequent insurrections of the Britans, daily inrodes by the Picts
and Scots, together with the downfall of Paganism, decay of Arts, and fatal
ruin of the whole Empire, making the times both long before and after
Constantine incompatible for undertaking such works as this Antiquity, it may
safely enough be concluded, if Stoneheng not founded by Agricola, yet erected
it might be about fifteen hundred and fifty years ago, in the times somewhat
after his government, Tacit. in Vit. Agr.
the Province being formerly left by him in good and peaceable state, the
Britans reduced from Barbarity to order and civil conversation, and the Romans
flourishing in all manner of Arts and Sciences.

Now, concerning the use for which Stoneheng at first erected, I am clearly of
opinion, it was originally a Temple, it being built with all accommodations
properly belonging to a sacred structure. For, it had an intervall or spacious
Court lying round about it, wherein the Victimes for oblation were slain, into
which it was unlawful for any profane person to enter: It was separated from
the circumadjacent Plain, with a large Trench in stead of a wall, as a boundary
about the Temple, most conformable to the main work, wholly exposed to open
view: Without this Trench, the promiscuous common multitude, with zeal too
much, attended the ceremonies of their solemn though superstitious Sacrifices,
and might see the oblations, but not come within them: It had likewise its
peculiar Cell, with Portico's round about, into which Cell, as into their
Sanctum sanctorum (pardon the expression) none but the Priests entered to offer
Sacrifice, and make atonement for the People: Within the Cell an Ara or Altar
was placed, having its proper position toward the East, as the Romans used.
Arae spectent ad Orientem, says Vitruvius. Vitr. lib. 4. cap. 8.
And, that there has been the heads of Bulls, or Oxen, of Hearts, and other
such beasts dug up, or in, or near this Antiquity (as diverse now living can
testify) is not to be omitted; for who can imagine, but these were the heads
of such, as anciently there offered in Sacrifice? together with which also,
were heaped up great quantities of Charcole, happily used about the performance
of their superstitious ceremonies. That the ancient Romans had Charcole in use
amongst them, Pliny affirms. Plin. lib. 16. Tom. 1. lib. 33. Tom. 2.
And when I caused the foundations of the stones to be searched, my self found,
and yet have by me to show the cover of a Thuribulum, Rosin. lib. 3. Choul fol.
217, 229.
or some such like vase (I suppose) wherein Choul in his discourse of their
Religion, reports the ancient Romans used to carry Incense, wine or holy water,
for service in their Sacrifices, lying about three foot within the ground, near
one of the stones of the greater Hexagon.

The Order whereof this Temple consists, according to the rules of Art observed
by the ancient Romans in works of this kind, is mingled of Greek and Tuscane
work. For, as the plainness and solidnesse of the Tuscane Order, appears
eminently throughout the whole Antiquity: so the narrowness of the spaces
betwixt the stones, visibly discovers therein, the delicacy of the Corinthian
Order. Which commixture amongst the Roman Architects was very usual, in regard
Vitruvius (in his fourth Book and seventh Chapter) treating somewhat largely
(his method otherwise considered) of several sorts of the like composed
Temples, mixed of the Greek and Tuscane manners tells us: that, Nonnulli de
Tuscanicis generibus sumentes columnarum dispositiones, Vitr. lib. 4. cap. 7.
transferunt in Corinthiorum and Ionicorum operum ordinationes. Some taking the
qualities of the columns of the Tuscane Order, transfer them into the symmetry
of the Corinthian and Ionick works. Whereby (to please themselves it seems in
their own inventions) efficient Tuscanicorum and Graecorum operum communem
ratiocinationem. They make of the Tuscane and Greek works one common composure.
As the same Author likewise remembers.

The Aspect of this Temple; by which we understand that first show which
Temples make to those that draw near unto them, is Dipteros Hypaethros, which
is double winged about uncovered. Dipteros circa aedem duplices habet
columnarum ordines (says Vitruvius Vitr. lib. 3. cap. 1.
) Dipteros has double orders of columns about the Temple. Hypaethros sub divo
est, sine tecto, (as the same Author) Hypaethros is open to the air, without a
roof.

The Manner of this Temple is Pycnostylos, or narrow spaces. Pycnostylos is
that kind of Temples, which has the columns set thick, and close together
creb^is columnis, as Vitruvius Vitr. lib. 3. cap. 2.
also has it.

But it may be objected, though it appears from very good Authorities, the
Artifice, and workmanship of this Antiquity, together with the Scheam which
formed it, were Roman: and the Order of which consisting, invented in Italy,
and so consequently Roman in like manner: as also, by the several peculiar
accommodations, the probable relics of Heathenish Sacrifices, and determinate
rules of Architecture, it was anciently a Temple: Nevertheless it appears not,
the Romans ever used any whatever profane structure like this, much less any
manner of Temples of this kind of invention, Where the Temple lies open
without walls, surrounded only with pillars. For, that the upright stones which
make this work Stoneheng, are in stead of them, may well enough be granted.

To this I answer, the learned in Antiquities very well know, those things
which oblivion has so long removed out of mind, are hardly to be discovered.
Yet, as to the first part of the objection, that the Romans never used any
whatever profane structure like this, Varro de re rustica (as I find him cited
by Philander Phil. in Vitr. lib. 4.
) tells us, that they had in use amongst them a round building without any walls,
having a double Order of columns round about, this he calls by the name of
Tholus, edificium rotundum, columnatum duplici columnarum ordine. A round
edifice (says he) environed about with a double order of columns. Which double
Order of Columns Pyrrho Ligorio a famous Neapolitane Architect, and great
discoverer of Antiquities, in his description thereof designs without a roof
also.

But to come to their sacred works, which in regard of this Antiquity, are
(it is true) of most concernment, I find the Romans used (as Vitruvius Vitr.
lib. 4. cap. 7.
witnesses) such manner of Temples. For (in his fourth Book, and seventh
Chapter) he delivers, there were amongst others two forms of round Temples,
commonly in use amongst them, the one called Monopteros; the other Peripteros.
This, had the Cell enclosed about with a continued wall, and at a proportionate
distance from it, the columns placed which made a Portico round about it, clean
different from Stoneheng: the other made open, and in stead of a wall
encompassed with a row of pillars only, having no enclosed Cell within it at
all, as much conducing to our purpose in hand. Aedes sacrae Templa dicta
fuerunt, quod essent quasi aedes Deorum. Rosin. lib. 2. cap. 2.
His words are these, Fiunt autem aedes rotundae, e quibus aliae sine cella
columnatae constituuntur. They make also (says he) round Temples, of which
some are built without a Cell, environed with Pillars only. These were without
any walls, (as his Commenter has it) lying open to the Air. And truly (as I may
presume to say) from this very manner the invention of stoneheng was
principally taken, Dan. Barbar.
in ordering whereof, the Architect disdaining usual and common forms, of both
the aforesaid forms composed one. For, taking the outward circle from the
Monopteros, he made it open also as in that, but in stead of the continued wall
circularly enclosing the Cell of the Peripteros, at Stoneheng he made only an
Hexagon about the Cell, leaving the same open in like manner. And, as
Hermogenes (whom I shall have occasion to remember again) to illustrate his
work, leaving out the inner row of Pillars, made a single Portico about the
Temple at Magnesia, whereby it came to be a new invention, for which he is
famous to posterity: so the subtle Architect, whosoever he was, to ennoble
this his work, adding the said Hexagon here, made a double Portico round about
this Temple, and thereby a new invention likewise, no less famous to
succeeding Ages. Our Antiquity Stoneheng had otherwise been of the self same
Aspect without a Cell, as Vitruvius has before delivered. That Temple
Monopteros, was environed with a row of pillars; this Temple Stoneheng, in
stead of them, supplied with a rank of pillasters (as they may well be called)
continuing round about it. That, lay open to the air without any walls: so does
this at Stoneheng. That, had over the pillars an Architrave, Freese, and
Cornice, the Order being delicate: this at Stoneheng, over the pillasters an
Architrave only, as most conformable to the solidnesse of the Order and
plainness of the work.

Thus it fully appears, the ancient Romans used to erect Temples, which lay
open without walls, surrounded only with pillars; in invention like this at
Stoneheng. But, let us see whether the form Monopteros, had any roof over it.
That the Romans had Temples uncovered, and without roofs, like Stoneheng, is in
part already, and shall more manifestly be hereafter proved: and searching
curiously into their Antiquities, it will be found the greatest, most splendid,
and most magnificent work of all others, which the Ancients made for service of
their Deities, were those kind of Temples of the Aspect Hypaethros. Whether
the Monopteros was one of that kind, appears not yet, and Vitruvius is very
obscure therein; nevertheless, that it was built without a roof, I shall
illustrate by these reasons.

First, Vitruvius tells us not it had a roof; for, in his precepts of all
several kinds of Temples, after he has delivered the Aspect, Form, and Manner
of them with much exactness, he omits not throughout his fourth Book to
demonstrate as well the contignation, as proportion of timbers of the roofs,
belonging to all those Temples, which had any, and when vaulted he gives us
likewise the form thereof, if the Temples so covered: but, in the description
of the form Monopteros, there is no manner of timber work, nor form of vault,
nor the least word mentioned of any roof at all, in what place soever
throughout his whole work speaking thereof. In which respect, considering all
Temples having roofs, those roofs are described by Vitruvius, and that he
describes no roof belonging to this, it must necessarily follow, the Temples in
form Monopteros had no roofs over them.

Again, after giving the proportion of the Architrave over the columns of the
Monopteros, he says, Zophorus and reliqua quae insuper imponuntur, ita uti in
tertio volumine de symmetriis scripsit. The Freese and other ornaments laid
upon them, are as in his third Book of symmetries made mention of. Now, in his
third Book, he only treats of proportions, and not one word is so much as
mentioned by him of any manner of roofs at all, only in the close of the said
Book, he gives the proportion of frontispices belonging to quadrangular
Temples: the same referment in like manner he makes for the ornaments of the
Peripteros, and withal proceeds to a full description, in what manner the roof
of its Cell was made, which questionless, he would likewise have done in the
other form, if it had been covered. For, he says, whatever is to be laid above
the Freese of the Monopteros, is, as set down in his third Book: but, in his
third Book, there is not one word mentioned of any roofs; the conclusion then
follows the Monopteros was without a roof.

Lastly, he positively tells us it was sine Cella, without a Cell: now the Cell
(and which for distinction sake I have so called in describing this Antiquity,
because it was applied to the same use, to perform their sacred rites in) was
indeed properly, Bern. Baldo.
the inner, or chief part of the Temple, quam nos corpus Templi vulgo dicimus,
we commonly call it the body of the Church, which enclosed with walls, was
covered with a roof, as Vitruvius declares in the form Peripteros, tecti ratio
ita habeatur etc. The manner of a roof (says he) was thus etc. But, the
Monopteros was without a Cell, and consequently without a roof also, as having
no walls to bear it. For, in regard of the manner of the Architecture, the
pillars standing in Island (as we say) the work could not securely bear a roof,
if made of any great capacity: either therefore, they made Temples of this form
very little (in which respect only, Palladio supposes it might be vaulted)
inconsistent with the Roman greatness, or else, like Stoneheng they were
wholly uncovered and rooflesse. Howsoever, it is manifest, the Aspect was just
the same. And if I should say, the ruins of one after the same form also,
remains yet in Oxfordshire, which the common people usually call
Rolle-rich-stones, take it but as my conjecture only, as likewise one or two
built after the like manner in Scotland, no man unless Hector Boethius knowing
by what Kings.

Moreover, the proportions appearing in this Antiquity Stoneheng, are much
conformable to those, assigned by Vitruvius to the parts of the Monopteros: He
tells us, Tribunal habent and ascensum ex suae diametri tertia part: they had
the Tribunal, (by which is understood that level upon which the Temple placed)
and the ascent, consisting of one third part of the Diameter. So at Stoneheng,
the work it self is one third part of the Diameter of the circumvallation: And,
acording to the proportion allowed by him to the Ascent, it seems those Temples
were sited more stately then others, (by consequence great also) and certain it
is, whosoever views this Antiquity attentively with judgment, upon the place
where remaining (for the Folio being too little I could not express it in
Design) and does allow a proportionate depth to the Trench surrounding it;
considering also, together therewith, the level of the plain lying without, he
will then find it standing upon such a rising ground, that the Ascent unto it,
was not much less magnificent, then what Vitruvius has declared.

Furthermore, besides the aforementioned round Temples, Vitruvius in the same
Chapter tells us, that, generibus aliis constituuntur aedes, ex iisdem
symmetriis ordinatae, and alio genere dispositiones habentes. The Romans built
them after other manner of inventions, following the same proportions, and
having their disposures after another kind. Of which, if vouchsafed to
posterity the descriptions, some of them might have been found, not only
agreeable in Aspect, but happily of the very self same form also, as this
Temple Stoneheng does appear.

Now considering this discourse may happen into the hands of those, who cannot
by words so easily apprehend things of this Art, I have for their satisfaction
brought into Design, the plants of both the aforesaid Temples mentioned by
Vitruvius, whereby their conformity with Stoneheng, and the invention thereof
taken from them, is more clearly manifested.

A
The Plant of the Monopteros.

B
The Order of Pillars which continued round about it, to which the outward
circle (of Pillasters) in this Antiquity Stoneheng, directly corresponds, as
will appear in the second Figure thereof, formerly described by the Letter I.

The Design follows.

C
The Plant of the Peripteros.

D
The Portico continuing about the Cell.

E
The Circular Cell enclosed with a wall, which in the Temple Stoneheng, to vary
the invention, was converted into an Hexagonall form, and in stead of walling
it round about, the Architect as said before, left it wholly open, as most
agreeing with the nature of the Deity to whom consecrate.

The Design follows.

By the Plants of which said Roman Temples, although it is plainly manifest,
from whence the invention of Stoneheng was taken: yet, that it may more clearly
be understood, I have, unto the Order of pillars which makes the Portico of the
last of those Temples, applied the Architectonicall Scheam by which our
Antiquity was formed; whereby the intersection of the several triangles fully
demonstrates after what manner the greater Hexagon made open at Stoneheng, was
raised from the solid wall environing the Cell of the Peripteros.

F
The Rank of Pillars which made the Portico of the Peripteros.

G
The Architectonicall Scheam by which Stoneheng formed.

H
The circular wall environing the Cell of the Peripteros.

I
After what manner the stones of the greater Hexagon at Stoneheng, were raised
from the circumference of the said wall.

The Design follows.

But, before deliver my judgment, unto which of their Deities this Temple
Stoneheng was anciently dedicated by the Romans, I shall give you some customs
in force amongst the Ancients, relating the Decorum used by them, in building
their particular Temples: whereby, those several opinions seemingly conclusive
to whom Stoneheng sacred, may more evidently appear invalid, and my own more
apparently probable. Those therefore that endeavor the searching out
Antiquities of Architecture, must amongst others, especially prescribe to
themselves five things to be guided by. viz. The Situation, Aspect, Manner,
Form, and Order of the work as in use amongst the Ancients. For, inventing the
several ornaments of Architecture, at first for honor and distinction only
of their Deities, they appropriated to each of them particular situations,
precise forms, peculiar Orders, according to the several qualities, in regard
whereof adored by them.

The situation of the Temples to Venus, Mars, Vulcan, they ordained to be
chosen without their Cities, as those which moved men's minds to
lasciviousness, wars, and devastations. Within their Cities they placed the
Temples of the Patrons of Chastity, Peace, good Arts: and of such Gods also, to
whom the Protection of their Cities committed. To Pallas, Mercury, and Isis the
chief Presidents of Artificers, and Merchants, they built Temples near the
Market places, or upon the Market places themselves. To Apollo and Bacchus near
the Theater. To Hercules near the Cirque or Amphitheater. Unto Aesculapius and
Salus, in places most of all others healthful, and near to pure streams, and
waters; because the infirm people, coming out of a pestilent and contagious
Air, to that which was good and healthful, by drinking those waters might the
sooner, and with less difficulty be recovered, whereby zeal to those supposed
Deities increased.

The Aspect Hypaethros, mentioned before, of which Stoneheng appears built, was
proper only to some of their Gods, as shall be remembered in due time: the other
five (needless here to name) were indifferently disposed, sometime to one, and
sometime to another Deity, as the magnificence of the Temples to be built
required, and, as to be made with Portico's or without.

The Manner, which Vitruvius distinguishes into five kinds, according as the
intercolumnes are of five several proportions, was only so far forth
peculiarly appropriated to their Deities, as it was agreeable to the proper
Order, otherwise they followed the greatness of the Work.

But, to each of them appropriating particular forms of Temples; to some of
their Gods, they made them of a round form, to others quadrangular, to others
of many angles: some of them having their Temples covered, with roofs over
them; others again built uncovered, without any manner of roofs at all: As, our
Antiquity Stoneheng.

Lastly, the Order of which they built them, was so diligently observed,
according to the peculiar qualities of their Deities, that seldom or never they
varied: as in fit place I shall remember. These aforesaid rules also were so
firmly observed by the Ancients, that even at first sight the Roman Architects
of old were able to judge, to what Deity, this, or that Temple sacred: and the
modern Italian Architects, by the ruins of them at this day, give such notable
testimonies toward the discovery of them, as are very hardly to be
contradicted. Whosoever desires more of this, may read Vitruvius, Leo Baptista
Albertus, and other Authors writing of Architecture. That then we may arrive to
a degree of certainty unto whom our Stoneheng anciently dedicated; some such
Deity of the Romans is to be found out, in whose honor they built Temples,
not only in such situations as this at Stoneheng; but with whose nature or
quality the Form and Aspect thereof may be agreeable also; and the Order
proper. For, whosoever goes about to enforce other reasons, do as I conceive
but beat the air, neither can they reduce this Antiquity to any probable
Original.

To which of the Roman Deities Stoneheng consecrated, are, as I said before,
several opinions. Some presume it sacred to Diana, but upon what ground their
conjecture is raised, considering both the Aspect and Manner of this Temple
utterly different from those the Ancients used to dedicate to Her, I cannot
conceive; Vitr. lib. 3. cap. 1 and 2.
for, the Manner of the Temples erected to Diana, was Diastylos, i.e. columnis
amplius patentibus, made with large and void spaces: the Aspect of that at
Ephesus was Dipteros; that at Magnesia Pseudodipteros: which Manner Hermogenes
inventing to save expense and labor, though he left out the Order of pillars
within, and thereby the Portico came to be more large, yet the Aspect continued
still the same. And, as in the Aspect and Manner, so likewise in the Order and
Form it is different: that, at Ephesus aforesaid being of the Ionick Order, the
Order peculiarly appropriated to Diana, and quadrangular: of the same Form
also, was that at Magnesia aforesaid, and so likewise the Romans built them, as
by the now Church of S. John Evangelist at the Latian, or Latin Port, Fab. Call.
anciently the Temple of Diana; and that in Mount Aventine also, the chief of
her Temples in Rome, fully appears. The situation of the Temples dedicated to
her, was in groves, whence Vitruvius Vitr. lib. 4. cap. 7.
calls her grovy Diana. Ecce suburbanae templum nemorale Dianae, says Ovid.
See where Diana's grovy Temple stands.
In which sort Virgil, Pliny, and other Authors also tell us her Temples were
always sited. The Architecture therefore of the Temples to Diana, and this at
Stoneheng being so far different, there is no probable reason Stoneheng should
be supposed dedicated to her.

Moreover, whether or no this opinion may be consistent with any of those
qualities, the Ancients endowed this Goddess with, let us examine further the
Nature of the Deity it self. Not. Com. lib. 3. cap. 18.
Is Stoneheng consecrated to Diana because she presided over ways? what public
roads then, or common highways are to be read of, which anciently led over the
Downs near this Antiquity? The most ancient ways we meet with, and which the
Romans first made in this Island, as Camden Camden fo. 64.
sets them down, are four, Watling-street, Ikemild-street, Ermin-street, and
the Fosse. Watling-street led through Verolamium directly as it were by a
straight line to the West side of Leicestershire, Camden fo. 517.
and from thence through the Northerly Counties into Wales. Ikemild-street
began in the Country of the Iceni, tending Eastward. Ermin-street in the same
quarter, running through Gambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, and so on toward
Lincolnshire led the right way into the Northern Countries on that side: (this
street-way, happly, may be that which among the inhabitants passes now by the
name of High Dike.) The Fosse passing through Warwickshire, came down to Stow
on the Would, Ibid. fo. 366.
thence to Cirncester, from Cirncester continuing on toward Bath and beyond it
to Somerton into the Western Provinces: the ridge whereof is yet to be seen in
diverse places of that tract. All of them lying so far from Stoneheng, that none
of them are remembered to come nearer then Cirncester to any part of the Plains
whereon it stands, and therefore in this respect there can be no cause to
imagine this Antiquity should be dedicated to her. Or, is Stoneheng sacred to
Diana, because she was the Patroness of Gates? for which reason the Ancients
built her Temples, either near to them within their Cities, or not far from
them in the pleasant suburbs. But what Cities, or places having any such Gates,
were ever found anciently so near Stoneheng, as might cause the dedication of
so great a work to her? surely none. Or, is Stoneheng hallowed to Diana because
she had the tutelage of Mountains? if so, then where are those Mountains to be
found near this Antiquity on Salisbury Plains? which Plains, North, South, East
and Westward through the midst of Wiltshire are so open, that they terminate
the Horizon. If any such Mountains there, why do all Historians call them
Plains? But admit Mountains sometimes on Salisbury Plain, what then became of
them? were they removed by Earthquakes, swallowed into the ground by an Hiatus
of the earth, or levelled by inundations? then let it be made apparent when
such like accidents fell out. Or is Stoneheng dedicated to Diana, because she
delighted to bath her self in fountains and fresh springs? where are those
fountains and fresh springs to be found? happily, in the utmost borders they may
be had, none certainly in the body of the Plains, or any thing near Stoneheng:
spring veins being not there to be found, unless by sinking wells or pits very
deep, which the inhabitants are enforced to make in several places for
watering their sheep, and as glad they are there, as the Patriarchs of old in
the deserts of Canaan to come by them. Or is Stoneheng sacred to Diana, because
reputed Goddess of hunting? then, who ever desirous of a Temple for her, may
find it in Daphne, the anciently famous suburbs of Antiochia, where was not
only a Temple dedicated to her, but an Asylum also, Strab. li. 16.
as Strabo witnesses: such places only being held proper for her mysteries,
where intervened variety of pleasures, goodly shadowy groves, delicate walks,
and pleasant springs of most cool and fresh waters. In the midst of these
delights the Ancients sited her Temples, not in wild Downs, or vast Plains, so
wide and open that hardly see from one side of them to another, affording
neither shelter for travelers against canicular heats, nor succor for cattle
against the boisterous blasts of blustering Boreas. Lastly, is Stoneheng
dedicated to Diana, because the supposed guardian of woods? then remains it to
be made apparent by them, those Plains in ancient times bore another
countenance then at present. That they were full of Forests, woods and groves,
with variety of lawns, replenished and stored with such sorts of game, and
wild beasts in chase whereof Diana and her companions are said to recreate
themselves: from whence some are of opinion she was called Diana, as much to
say Deviana, Rosin. lib. 2. cap. 7.
quoniam venantes per devia and silvas deviare solent, captantes feras. Because
of huntsmens deviating, or wandering out of the way, through uncouth paths and
woods in pursuit of their game. That those Plains afforded as much pleasure and
delights as the Thessalian Tempe, the Syrian Daphne, or what place else as
famous where her Temples anciently stood: and, in what unknown age they were
disafforrested and laid wast. Which, if ever so, certainly some signs thereof
would remain, or at least be found there, as well as in other parts of the
Island, in times past overgrown with woods. As in Anglesey formerly mentioned;
in Cheshire, where, in digging their marlepits are often found huge trees,
demonstrating to posterity the forests there anciently growing; in the Isle of
Axholm in Lincolnshire, where the inhabitants have hardly any fuel, but what
such trees afford so dug out of the earth; in Somersetshire, where I my self
have seen trunks of trees lying under ground, and expressing the places in
times past overgrown with trees, very few or none being in those places now
standing. Besides, some remembrance of the aforesaid forests and woods History
questionless would yield; now what occasion soever Historians take for
mentioning this tract, not one word is delivered by them to that purpose, all
unanimously consenting 'twas never other then at present an open and champion
Country. A Theater on which Bellona often displayed her bloody ensigns, and
acted several tragedies in times of old: A field of Mars, where Romans,
Saxons, and after Danes for obtaining the dominion of this Island decided their
ambitious controversies. Of which actions we have visible testimony unto this
day, witness those burrows, and places where they cast the bodies of their
slain, over all quarters of the plain dispersed, which in long time are so
shrouded by nature with ever growing grass, that their memory will remain by
their sepulchers to all posterity; that which consumes all works of Art, making
them still more fresh and flourishing: witness spoils of war there frequently
dug up, as formerly remembered: several encamping places of those several
Nations in all parts of the plain even yet appearing, no place in the whole
Island, respecting the circuit, having more remains of them: Also that huge
Trench, mentioned before by the name of Wansdike, running through the very
bowels of them, such manner of trenches appearing no where in any part of
England beside, saving where the like plains interveen; so at Newmarket Heath
the like trench vulgarly called Devils Dike, as if made by Devils not by men,
is to be seen; though in ancient times it was the limits of the Kingdom of the
East Angles, and it took end, as Camden Camden fo. 490.
very well observes, where the passages by reason of woods grew cumbersome:
Which, if the like be granted for Wansdike (as is very probable, it ending also
with the Plains) then without controversy there were no more woods in times of
old on Salisbury Plains then at this day; it running overthwart them, as in a
direct line from East to West. And who knows not, that other manner of
fortifications then running trenches upon direct lines are to be cast up for
defense of woody situations? But why urge more Authorities, when the
Inhabitants of the Country tell us, the soil or ground being hot, dry, and
chalky is altogether improper for the growth of trees. Thus then the situation
of the place, so antipathizing in all respects with the nature and qualities
anciently attributed to Diana, and the Manner, Form, and Order of this
Antiquity, so contrary to the custom used by the Ancients in erecting her
Temples, no reason wherefore this Temple Stoneheng should be conceived as
erected for celebration of the superstitious ceremonies anciently ascribed unto
her Worship.

Some, again, would have Stoneheng consecrated to Pan; because Pan a Greek word
signifying the Universe, under him the whole frame of Nature was adored. And
therefore, the Ancients made his statues with horns, says Servius, expressing
thereby the beams of the Sun, and horns of the Moon; those issuing from his
forehead, and turning upwards toward Heaven, as Boccace will have it,
signified the Celestial bodies: feigning also, as the world moves with
extraordinary swiftness, he excelled likewise in speed of running. By the
purple, ruddy, and enflamed face, attributed to Pan, that pure fire, above all
other Elements holding his place in the confines of the Celestial Spears was
demonstrated: by his large long beard descending down upon his breast, the two
superior Elements Air and Fire of a masculine nature, sending down their
impressions upon the other two naturally feminine was showed: by the spotted
skin covering his breast and shoulders, the eighth sphere wholly embelished
with glorious stars; inveloping in like manner all appertaining to the nature
of sublunary creatures was represented: by the sheep-hook which he held in one
hand, Natures dominion over all things (according to Boccace) was signified:
and as Servius says, because this staff, or rod was crooked, the year
revolving into it self, was thereby expressed: in the other hand holding a
Pipe, consisting of seven reeds, whereby, the Celestial harmony conceived by
some to have seven sounds, and seven different tunes, according to the number
of the Planets, and their Spears which are seven, was so set forth.

After this manner Mythologists discourse of Pan, with various opinions,
according to the subtle niceties of their several fancies: and in these
respects as having relation to the Heavens, this Antiquity Stoneheng is
imagined sacred to Him. It Is true, if Mythologie, and not demonstrative reasons
were to be fixed upon in matters of Architecture, the former conceptions might
be some ground to frame conjectures Stoneheng sacred to Pan. But, Architecture
depending upon demonstration, not fancy, the fictions of Mythologists are no
further to be embraced, then as not impertinently conducing to prove real
truths. Wherefore, the aforesaid ancient rules for building Temples considered,
and comparing the Order, Form, Aspect and Situation of the Temples to Pan, with
the like in this Antiquity, so much contrariety is found betwixt them, as may
convince any reasonable judgment Stoneheng not dedicated to Him.

Pan pastorum, venatorum, and universae vitae rusticanae praesidem crediderunt
Antiqui, says Natalis Comes. Not. Com. lib. 5.
Pan was the reputed God amongst the Ancients, of Shepherds, Huntsmen, and all
those that led an agrestick life. The same Author also calling him Piscatorum
Deum, the God of Fishermen as well as Shepherds. Arcadibus Deorum antiquissimus
and honoratissimus est Pan, says Dionysius. Dion. Hali. lib. 1.
Pan is the most ancient, and most honored Deity of the Arcadians. Rosin. lib.
2.
And in Arcadia it self where he was principally adored, they built his Temples
for the most part in Towns of the same Form and Order as to Juno: In the Town
of Heraea, habet Pan templum suum (says Pausanias in his description of
Arcadia) quod olim Junoni dicatum fuit, Pausan. fo. 496.
Pan had his Temple which anciently was dedicated to Juno. Now, the Order
appropriated to Juno by the Romans, was the Ionick, as is manifest from
Vitruvius, who tells us, To Juno, Diana, and Bacchus, and to the other Deities
of the same quality, Vitr. lib. 1. cap. 2.
they built Temples of the Ionick Order. The Form in like manner of her sacred
structures was quadrangular, as in Mount Aventine, in foro Olitorio (or the
herb Market) in Mount Quirinal, and elsewhere amongst the Romans the ruins of
her Temples do evidently witness: as also, her Temples anciently at Argos,
Alexan. Don. Pomp. Totti.
and amongst the Elians in Greece, built of the like Form, and of the Dorick
Order. But this Antiquity is of the severe Tuscane work, Pausan. fo. 114. and
317.
and of a round figure. The Temples to Pan had a Portico only in front, at
Stoneheng it continues round about the Cell. The Temples to Pan were not
exposed to the open Air, and built uncovered as Stoneheng was, but had roofs
upon them. For, Ignis eiperpetuus ardebat, Ibid. fo. 516.
therein they kept perpetual fire, as at Acacesium a Town also of Arcadians;
all Temples wherein they kept such fires being covered, as the Temple to Apollo
at Delphos amongst the Greeks, and to Vesta at Rome amongst the Romans. But, if
at any time they did erect them distant from a Town, reserving always the Form
and Order, they chose such situations as wholly environed with trees; for
example, the Temple to Pan in Mount Lycaeus, was compassed in with a thick
wood, condenso circumseptum luco, as Pausanias has it: so likewise, that
Temple sacred to Him in the Parthenian Forest, according to the said Author.
Now, this Temple Stoneheng is sited in an open champion Country; where scarce
a bush or tree, much less thick woods, or forests to be seen throughout the
whole Plain; nor was there ever any in times of old as History remembers, and
the nature of the soil, as I am informed, is no wise prosperous for their
growing there, as is sufficiently before declared.

But Pan (say they) being the God of Shepherds, why might not Stoneheng to
gratify them be erected, and consequently by the Romans dedicated to their God
Pan? no place in the whole Island more abounding with sheep, then the
circumadjacent Plains; the almost innumerable flocks whereof, not only most
plentifully satisfying the bordering inhabitants for food; but, from their
delicate fleeces, a great part of the known universe are clad also. I answer,
amongst the Romans (declared at large before to be Founders of Stoneheng) I do
not find any one Temple, Holy House, Sanctuary, Grove, Altar, or any such like
sacred structure consecrated to Pan in their own Country; much less any Temple
dedicated unto Him by them in Britain: and therefore, utterly improbable this
Temple Stoneheng should be erected by the Romans unto Pan.

There was a Temple indeed, Dion. Hal. lib. 1.
built to Pan Lycaeus on Mount Palatine, Rosin. lib. 2. cap. 20.
by those Arcadians which accompanied Evander into Italy; in which, though the
Romans in succeeding times performed the same rites, as the Arcadians anciently
had instituted; yet, He passed with the Romans under the name of Lupercus,
Justin. lib. 43.
and in honor of Him, as some Authors of opinion, certain festivals or games
called Lupercalia, at Rome only, not in Provinces conquered by them, were
solemnized by the Romans; Noblemens sons running in those games, Plutarch. in
Romans
according to the primitive institution setting forth and beginning their
course at Mount Palatine, and so round about the City to the same place again.
Rosin. lib. 3. cap. 2.
I may not omit, nevertheless, that several Authors deliver the Lupercalia
were instituted in thankfulness to Lupa, or the wolf that gave Romulus suck,
and the course of those games beginning at Mount Palatine (not so much in
remembrance it seems of Pans Temple there, as) from the Lupercal or the very
place they say where Romulus was cast out. Plut. in Romans


Dionysius Dion. lib. 1.
of Halicarnassus tells us the Arcadians built the aforesaid Temple to Pan,
idoneo invento loco etc. when they had found out a convenient place for it
adjoining to their habitations: the condition or nature of which place is not
unworthy your observation; for by his description thereof we shall easily
perceive what manner of situation was by the Arcadian Shepherds held proper for
performing the ceremonies of their God Pan. His words are, Erat tum, ut fertur,
spelunca sub tumulo magna, denso querceto contecta, and sub petris profundi
fonticuli, solumque rupibus contiguum nemorosum, and frequentibus ac proceris
opacum arboribus: ibi ara deo extructa, more patrio sacra fecerunt. Under the
Hill (to wit, Mount Palatine) was anciently, as report goes (says he) a great
cave or den, covered over by a thick grove, deep wells or riverets running
amongst the stones of the cave, and round about it a wood, by the many and tall
trees growing therein very dark and obscure: there the Altar of the God was
placed, and his Sacrifices after their Country manner performed. Now is
Stoneheng thus sited, or was there ever any such like place near this
Antiquity? of all the places in England that I know, none comes nearer that
cave, then Ochy-hole in Somersetshire: And if the Ancients held such dismal
situations only proper for Pans Temples, then without peradventure Stoneheng
was never erected in honor of him, they being no innovators in their
superstitions.

A further observation may be made to our purpose, upon the aforesaid
description, Erat tum antrum magnum, it was anciently (says Dionysius Dion.
lib. 1.
) a great cave. But in his own time, which was under Augustus, the Romans had
so choked up the place with building, that the manner how Pans Temple in old
time stood, was hardly to be discovered: nunc quidem aedisiciis (says he)
fanum circumquaque sepientibus, difficilis conjectura est qualis olim loci
natura fuerit. At this present, verily, the Temple being every way environed
with buildings, it is hardly to be conjectured in what manner of place it
anciently stood. This was the cause which enforced him to deliver to posterity
the former description merely upon report. Certainly then, the Romans employing
the place to profaner uses, Pans Deity was little esteemed by them; otherwise,
they would never have polluted it, by setting up private houses upon the place
consecrated to him. Now the Romans slighting him after this manner at home,
little reason appears so magnificent a structure as Stoneheng, should be
erected by them for adoration of Pan in other Countries.

Furthermore, the Sacrifices in times of old offered to Pan were milk and
honey, offered up in simple Shepherds crocks or earthen pitchers: quare non
rite sacrificabant, qui tauros illi immolabant, aut qui in aureis poculis lac
aut vinum offerebant etc. Wherefore, they sacrificed not aright, says Natalis
Comes, Not. Com. lib. 5.
who immolated Bulls or Oxen unto him, or out of golden cups poured forth milk
or wine upon his Altars; for goblets of that metal were proper only for the
supernall and celestial Deities, not to terrestrial, and such as had care of
Heardsmen or Shepherd Swains. To which purpose also, the same Author out of
Apollonius Smyrnaeus remembers Pan, thus speaking of himself. Sum Deus
agrestis, cur his sunt aurea sacris
Pocula? quo vinum funditis Italicum?
Ad petram cur stat taurus cervice ligatus?
Parcite: non haec est victima grata mihi.
Pan montanus ego sum, ligneus, ipsaque vestis
Pellicea est: mustum e fictilibusque bibo.
In English thus: A rural God am I, in golden cup
The Falern wine, why then do you offer up?
Why at mine Altar, stands the stern Bull bound,
Or Ox that is fat, with laurel girland crowned?
Spare ye such cost: no grateful victimes these
Are unto me, others less costly please.
A Mountaineer, a wood-man clad in skin
Am I: your wine in earthen vessels bring.
But the Sacrifices anciently offered at Stoneheng (already remembered) were
Bulls or Oxen, and several sorts of beasts, as appears by the heads of diverse
kinds of them, not many years since there dug up.

As for that of the Pantheon, it is very well known the Ancients so called it,
not in any relation to Pan, but because it was sacred to Jove the Revenger, and
according to others to Cibele, and all Gods. For which reason, Boniface the
fourth obtained license from the Emperor Phocas, Platin. in Bon.
to consecrate it to the Virgin Mary, and all Saints. And who knows not the
Architecture thereof wholly different from this of Stoneheng? The Pantheon has
its Cell enclosed with a continued solid wall, and the Portico only in front,
of the delicate Corinthian Order; of which Order the inner part consisted
likewise, being vaulted in most admirable and magnificent manner. From whence
Dion Dion. lib. 53.
Cassius delivers his opinion, inde id nominis habere, quod forma convexa
fastigiatum, coeli similitudinem ostenderet, it to be called the Pantheon,
because by the form of that vault wherewith covered, it represented the concave
of Heaven, or (as others will) the figure of the world; for the world being
man's house, the firmament is as the vaulted roof thereof. At the crown of the
vault it had an opening, by which only it received light and air. But, this
Antiquity Stoneheng built of a grave and humble Order (as is said before) had a
double Portico continuing round about it, the Cell thereof free and open, and
every way exposed to the air, received light from all parts.

Wherefore leaving these, Stoneheng was dedicated, as I conceive, to the God
Coelus, by some Authors called Coelum, by others Uranus, from whom the Ancients
imagined all things took their beginning. My reasons are, First, in respect of
the situation thereof; for it stands in a Plain, remote from any Town or
Village, in a free and open air, without any groves or woods about it.

Secondly, in regard of the Aspect; for Stoneheng was never covered, but built
without a roof. Which Decorum the Romans ever observed, both in the Situation
and Aspect of the Temples dedicated to this their God, and to Jove the
Lightner, the Sun, Vitr. li. 1. cap. 2.
and the Moon. Iovi fulguratori, and Coelo, and Soli, and Lunae, aedisicia sub
divo Hypaethraque constituuntur. To Jove the Lightner, and to Coelus, and to
the Sun, and to the Moon, they erected buildings in the open air and uncovered,
says Vitruvius in the second Chapter of his first Book. Take with you also his
reason. Horum enim Deorum and species and effectus in aperto mundo atque
lucenti praesentes videmus, because both the forms and effects of these
Deities, we behold present before our eyes, in a clear and open view. Another
reason I find also why they built their Temples to Coelus, Godw. Antiq. l. 1.
cap. 20.
and those other Deities uncovered as Stoneheng: because they counted it an
heinous matter to see those Gods confined under a roof, whose doing good
consisted in being abroad.

Thirdly, in regard of the Form of Stoneheng, which is circular. Pier. Valor.
Hier. lib. 39.
This figure was proper to the Temples of Coelus and Tellus, whom the Ancients
called Vesta, as Valerianus (in his Hieroglyphics) affirms. Non solamente la
palla, ma una simplice piegatura di ruota, appresso gli Egizziani demostrava il
Cielo. Not only (says he) the circular form, but the mere segment of a circle
amongst the Egyptians was an Hieroglyphick of Coelus. And to this purpose also,
Leo Bapt. Alb. lib. 7.
Leo Baptista Albertus uses these words. Aedem Vestae, quam esse terram
putarent, rotundam ad pilae similitudinem, faciebant. Unto Vesta, whom they
reputed to be the Earth, they built Temples of a round form globelike. Besides,
observe what Philander commenting on Vitruvius tells us. Philand. in 4. lib.
Vitr. cap. 7.
Templorum quanquam alia fiant quadrata, alia multorum angulorum, Coeli naturam
imitati veteres, imprimis rotundis sunt delectati: Although (says he) the
Ancients made some Temples square, some of six sides, others of many angles,
they were especially delighted with making of them round, as representing
thereby the Form or Figure of Coelum, Heaven.

Fourthly, in respect of the Order whereof Stoneheng built. The severity of
this Tuscane work, retaining in it a show (as it were) of that first face of
Antiquity An. Pal. li. 1.
(as A. Palladio terms it) being most agreeable to the nature of this their
God, reputed the ancientest of all their Deities, and Father of Saturn. For, it
was the custom of the Ancients (as in part I remembered before) to appropriate
the several Orders of Architecture, according to the particular qualifications
of those they deified. Minervae, and Marti, and Herculi, aedes Doricae fient:
his enim diis propter virtutem, Vitr. lib. 1. cap. 2.
sine deliciis aedificia constitui decet. To Minerva, and Mars, and Hercules,
Temples of the Dorick Order were made; for, to these Deities in respect of
their valiant actions, it was requisite to build without delicacy. Veneri,
Florae, Proserpinae, Fontium Nymphis, Corinthio genere constitutae, aptas
videbuntur habere proprietates, quod his diis propter teneritatem, graciliora
and florida, foliisque and volutis ornata opera facta augere videbuntur justum
decorem. To Venus, Flora, Proserpina, the Fountain Nymphs, the Corinthian Order
was thought most proper: because unto these in regard of their tender natures,
the work seemed to advance a just decorum, when made delicate and flourishing,
and adorned with leaves and volutes. Iunoni, Dianae, Libero Patri caeterisque
diis qui eadem sunt similitudine, si aedes Ionicae construerentur, habita erat
ratio mediocritatis, quod and ab severo more Doricorum, and a teneritate
Corinthiorum, temperabitur earum institutio proprietatis. To Juno, Diana,
Bacchus, and to the other Deities of the same quality, building Temples of the
Ionick Order, they had regard unto the mean, that from the severe manner of the
Dorick, and delicacy of the Corinthian, the condition of their indowments might
be duly moderated, says Vitruvius. To Jupiter, Sol, and Luna, though they made
Temples sub divo open to the air and without roofs like this Antiquity; yet
were they not built of severe and humble but most delicate Orders, and
accordingly were adorned with costly ornaments, and beautified with various
enrichments in several sorts of sculpture, as by the ruins of them in diverse
parts of Italy remaining to this day, evidently appears. Respecting therefore,
this Decorum used by the Ancients in building their Temples, and that this work
Stoneheng is principally composed of a most grave Tuscane manner, by just
proportions of an agreeable form; it is in mine opinion, as I said before, most
agreeable to the quality and condition of that ancient Coelus, whom Antiquity
reputed the very stem whence all those Deities in the succeeding Ages
proceeded. Coelus ex eadem conjuge (scilicet Tellure) procreavit Oceanum,
Coelum, Hyperionem etc. Apollod. lib. 1.
and novissimum omnium Saturnum suscepit. Coelus, by the same wise (to wit
Tellus) had Oceanus, Coelum, Hyperion etc. and last of all begat Saturn. To
which purpose also Lactantius, I find Uranius by his wife Vesta had Saturn and
Ops: Saturn attaining the government, called his father Uranius, Coelus, and
his mother Terra; that by this change of names, he might the more magnify the
splendour of his original etc. Further, I conceive it will not be impertinent
to our purpose in hand, to deliver what the Ancients have reported of Coelus;
and wherefore they ascribed divine Honors unto Him.

According to the Poets, Coelus was not that huge machine adorned with stars,
which Orpheus says was composed for habitation of the Planets, and other
Deities, and which we behold moving with continual revolution: but a certain
man so called, son to Ether and Dies, that, is della virtu ardente, and della
luce famosa, of transcendent influence and resplendent brightness, as Boccace
has it. Boccace lib. 3.


By Historians, especially Diodorus Dioder. lib. 4.
Siculus, it is thus delivered. Scribunt primum regnasse apud Atlantides Coelum:
Hominesque antea per agros dispersos, ad coetum, condendasque urbes exhortatum,
a fera eos agrestique vita ad mitiorem cultum extitisse etc. They write, he
which first reigned over the Atlantides was Coelus, and that he invited men
living dispersedly before throughout the fields, to convene, and dwell in
companies together, exhorting them to build Towns, and reducing them from wild
and savage to the conversation of civil life: Taught them also to sow corn and
seeds, and diverse other things belonging to the common use of mankind; Ruled
likewise over a great part of the world from East to West; Was a diligent
observer of the stars, and foretold men diverse things to come: The year (before
confused) bringing into Order, according to the course of the Sun, reducing it
also into months after the Moons course, and appointing likewise the several
seasons of the year. Whereby many ignorant of the perpetual course of the
stars, and amazed at his future predictions, did verily believe he participated
of Divine Nature, and therefore after his death, as well for benefits received
from him, as great knowledge of the stars, they conferred on him immortal
honors, and adored him as a God. And, as appears, called Coelus in regard of
his skill in the celestial bodies, as also, for diverse other causes eternal
King of all the world. Thus Diodorus. It being an ordinary custom among the
Heathens to deifie, and esteem for Gods, such excellent personages, as either
had well ruled, or governed them, or done any notable thing among them to their
especial benefit, or good liking. Such, were they men, or women, remained with
the name, reputation, and reverence of Gods or Goddesses after their deaths.

Furthermore, according to the Philosophers; Men (they knew not how) by nature
soon wanting, and by instinct as soon seeking some God (in stead of
apprehending better) deified the best to sense. Whereupon, out of all Entities
as most glorious to the eye, they first made choice of Heaven, and Heavenly
bodies; Plu^. Phil. opin. lib. 1.
considering again, as the most beneficial objects, those living creatures,
and fruits which the Earth beneath brought forth, to make complete generations,
they coupled Coelus to Tellus, adoring Heaven as Father, and Earth as Mother to
these; the pouring down of showers from Heaven seeming in stead of natural
seeds, and the Earth as a Mother to conceive, and bring forth the same.

Fifthly, the Sacrifices in times of old offered to Coelus were Bulls or Oxen,
their great God Jupiter himself, as I find in Rosinus, Rosin. lib. 2. cap. 5.
offering such Victimes unto him. Ante pugnam, quae cum Gigantibus in Creta
habita est, Jovem sacrificasse dicunt Soli, Coelo, ac Terrae bovem. Before the
battle struck with the Giants in Crete, they say Jupiter sacrificed an Ox to
Sol, Coelus, and Terra. Now that there has oftentimes been dug out of the
ground at Stoneheng, the heads of such beasts, in all probability anciently in
that place sacrificed; I need not again remember, being it is so well known.

Sixthly, all the upright stones in this Antiquity are Pyramidall like flames,
in imitation of those Aetheriall fires, wherewith the Heaven is adorned. Pier.
Valor. Hier. lib. 60.
Now, that Fire has the form of a Pyramid is evident, percioche, essendo largo
da basso, intorno alla materia and esca, da che si pasce, finisce in acuta
fiamma che riguardo al Cielo. Because, being large at the bottom, in respect
of the matter and fuel, by which it is fed, it finishes in an acute flame
tending upwards toward Heaven. And, that the Heavens are adorned with fires,
Natalis Comes in his Mythology, out of Orpheus, makes apparent. Nihil aliud
esse Coelum existimans, nisi hunc aethera qui constat ex altissimis illis
ignibus. Supposing the Heaven to be no other thing, but this Air which
consists of those transcendent Fires.

Lastly, that Stoneheng was anciently dedicated to Coelus I collect from the
Conformation of the work. For the conformation of the Cell and Porticus in the
Plant, was designed with four equilaterall Triangles, inscribed in a Circle,
such as the Astrologers use in describing the twelve celestial signs in
musical proportions. Vitr. lib. 5.
According to that of Vitruvius; In ea conformatione quatuor scribantur trigona
paribus lateribus and intervallis, quae extremam lineam circinationis tangant;
In the conformation thereof, let four triangles be inscribed of equal sides
and intervals, which may touch the extreme part of the circumference: quibus
etiam in duodecim signorum coelestium descriptione, Astrologi ex musica
convenientia astrorum ratiocinantur; by which figures also, Astrologers from
the musical harmony of the stars ground their reasonings, as concerning the
description of the twelve celestial signs. Besides the Cell it self in the
formation thereof, is cast into an Exagon, one of the three figures, likewise
used by Astrologers in their aforesaid arguments of the sympathy of the stars.
Figuris tribus (says Philander) utuntur Astrologi, Trigono, Tetragono and
Hexagono. The Astrologers make use of three sorts of figures; the Triangle,
Tetragon, and Hexagon. Furthermore, the three entrances leading into the Temple
from the Plain, were comparted by an equilaterall triangle; which was the
figure whereby the Ancients expressed what appertained to Heaven, and divine
mysteries also. Aggiungono i Magi (says Pierius Valerianus Pier. Valor. Hier.
lib. 39.
) che un triangolo semplice di lati uguali, e indizio di divinita, overo
effigy di cose celesti. The Magi add that a triangle of equal sides is a
symbol of Divinity, or sign of celestial matters. Now this Antiquity
consisting of several stones, orderly disposed into one entire work, in
imitation, as it were, of those several stars which appearing to us in the
Heavens in form of a circle, are called the celestial Crown; and wholly
designed by those Scheams wherewith Astrologers use to describe celestial
bodies; which figures, usually applied by them to particular accidents only,
being all jointly made use of by the Architect for conformation of this sacred
structure, it is not improbable Stoneheng was so composed, because dedicated to
Coelum. Yea further, (if lawful to compare an idolatrous place with so divine
a work) was not the Temple at Jerusalem adorned with the figures of Cherubims,
that thereby the Nations of the Earth might know it was the habitation of the
living God? and, why not in like manner this Temple composed by Astrologicall
figures, that after Ages might apprehend, it was anciently consecrated to
Coelus or Coelum Heaven?

But in this conjuncture; concerning such kind of Temples as this at
Stoneheng, what says the learned Patriarch of Aquileia? Dan. Barba. in lib. 4.
Io credo, che quel Tempio senza parete significava alcune cose del Cielo,
Vitr. cap. 7. in Ven. 1584.
gli effetti delle quali sono nello scoperto. I believe that Temple without
walls (speaking of the Monopteros aforesaid) had a relation to Coelum ( Heaven)
because the effects thereof are openly displaied to the full view of all men.

Camden tells us he had heard, that in the time of King Henry the eighth, a
table of metal was found, not far from this Antiquity, engraven with diverse
strange characters, which being not legible, was neglected and lost: had,
indeed, that Table been found within the work it self it might happily have
brought to light somewhat in relation to Stoneheng. And by all likelihood, in
time some inscriptions may therein be found, it being the custom as well of
Greeks as Romans, in times of greatest Antiquity, to lay inscriptions (usually)
under the first stones set in what works soever; especially, those of any great
magnificence. Wherefore, I advise mine honored Friend Laurence Washington
Esquire in whose demeasnes this Antiquity stands, to whom I am much obliged,
for his friendly notice of what things have been there of late years dug up,
that he would be solicitous upon any search made there, to enquire after them,
and if any found not to neglect, or curiously conceal them, but preserve and
willingly produce the same.

I suppose, I have now proved from Authentic Authors, and the rules of Art,
Stoneheng anciently a Temple, dedicated to Coelus, built by the Romans; either
in, or not long after those times (by all likelihood) when the Roman Eagles
spreading their commanding wings over this Island, the more to civilize the
Natives, introduced the Art of Building amongst them, discovering their
ambitious desire, by stupendous and prodigious works, to eternize the memory
of their high minds to succeeding Ages. For, the magnificence of that stately
Empire, is at this day clearly visible in nothing more, then in the ruins of
their Temples, Palaces, Arch's Triumphals, Aquaeducts, Thermae, Theaters,
Amphitheaters, Cirques, and other secular, and sacred structures.

History affords only Contemplation, whereby their great Actions are made
conceivable alone to reasoning: but the ruins of their buildings
Demonstration, which obvious to sense, are even yet as so many eyewitnesses of
their admired achievements. Roma quanta fuit, ipsa ruina docet,
How great Rome was, her ruins yet declare.
Opinions fancied to the contrary, I have rendered improbable, the Authors of
them in respect of this Antiquity being not only modern; but also, what said by
them Romance-like hatched out of their own brains, Camd. fo. 8.
even as other fables invented by them, touching the Britains of old. Men
possessed nevertheless, with a former conceit of things, endure not by any means
new opinions, having not commonly patience to search long after the truth
thereof. To them, ever the more generally received, the truer things seem,
accounting all of their own time despicable; insomuch, as some are so far in
love with vulgarly received reports, that it must be taken for truth,
whatsoever related by them, though nor head, nor tail, nor foot, nor footstep
in it oftentimes of reason or common sense. They that believe Geffrey Monmouths
ipse dixit, may make themselves merry therewith; in pleasing their own fancy,
they displease not mine. As I have delivered my own judgment freely, all
reason they should enjoy theirs. But such as sail in the vast Ocean of time,
amongst the craggy rocks of Antiquity, steering their course, betwixt anciently
approved customs, and convincing arguments, guided by good Authority, and sound
judgment, arrive much safer, and with better repute, in the secure Haven of
undoubted Truth. For mine own part, I had rather err happily with venerable
Antiquity, then so much as trouble my thoughts with modern conceits. Whether,
in this adventure, I have wafted my Barque into the wished Port of Truths
discovery concerning Stoneheng, I leave to the judgment of skillful Pilots. I
have endeavored, at least, to give life to the attempt, trending perhaps, to
such a degree, as either may invite others to undertake the Voyage anew, or
prosecute the same in more ample manner, in which, I with them their desired
success, and that with prosperous gales they may make a more full and certain
discovery.

FINIS.
Errata.
Folio 10. line 6. These words, [The Romans overthrew not the Temples, or razed
to the Foundations, any of the sacred structures of the Druid's and Britans
made of stone, or other materials, which he might as readily have done, if they
had used any such: but positively,] should have been printed in the ordinary
letter. Fo. Line Read 18 22 was 28 4 Cappa 38 19 Mercians 49 37 streit 50 1
streit 80 23 the roof


