

Art's Masterpiece. OR, A Companion for the Ingenious of either Sex.
CONTAINING, I. The Art of Limning and Painting in Oil, etc. In all particulars,
viz. Drawing and Painting Faces; Bodies, Garments, Landscape, Preparing and
Laying on Colors; also coloring Mazzotinto Prints, Gilding on Wood, Metals
and Leather. II. The newest Experiment in Japaning, to immitate the Indian way,
Plain and in Speckles, Rock-work, Figures, etc. Receipts for making the several
sorts of Varnishes, Colors, etc: III. To make Artificial Tortoiseshel; to Dye
or Stain-Ivory, Horn, Bone, Bristles, Feathers, and sundry sorts of VVoods for
Cabinets. IV. The Mystery of Dying Silks, Stuffs, VVoollen and Linen Cloth. V.
To take Spots, Stains, Pitch, Tar and Iron Moulds out of Silks, Stuffs, Linen,
and VVoollen, and to recover faded Silks, Linen, etc. VI. The Art of Perfuming
and Beautifying. VII. Diverse Physical and Chirurgical Receipts. VIII. To make
London Powder-Ink, other Powder Inks, and the shining Japan Ink. With many
other Notable things.


By C. K

London, Printed for G. Conyers at the Golden Ring, and J. Sprint at the Blue
Bell in Little Britain. 1697.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Kind Reader,
I Think I need make no long Apology for this Book, since the Title is
sufficient to recommend it to the perusal of the Ingenious, though it contains
but hints of what in larger variety of curious things, are more copiously
incerted for the Accommodation of Young Gentlemen, Gentlewomen, and others,
done with that Care and Exactness, in all the many particulars, that without
vain glory, I may presume to say, that this, nor former Ages have not produced
of these kinds any thing so curious and compact.

It carries with it all along as linked in a Chain, Pleasure and Profit, and
cannot but be grateful to the Fancies, especially of the younger sort, who
putting in practice what best suits their Minds, may much please others and
accomplish themselves.

As for Limning or Painting, it has always been in high Esteem with the
greatest and most Honorable Persons in the World, and is an Innocent and
Diverting Recreation. Japanning I confess is not so Ancient, especially in
these parts of the Globe, therefore to be esteemed as (indeed it is) the more
Rare and Considerable, as for the rest too tedious to enumerate in a short
Epistle, though some of them have been long in use, Time and Industry have
better Improved them to advantage, such as are Industrious to Employ their
Talents for the good of themselves and others: And so the whole Work not
comprehending many Sheets, I shall omit what more I justly might say, and
submitting to the Censure of the Candid and Ingenious Reader, take leave to
subscribe my self,

Your most Humble Servant C. K.

THE Curious Art OF DRAWING, AND Preparing for Limning or Painting in Oil, etc.
The Introduction to the Practice, in some things necessary to be provided for
the proceeding in this Art.
THE curious Art of Limning or Painting in Oil, has in all Ages been
wonderfully admited and approved, as the Masterpiece of other Arts and
Sciences, wherein Art so exactly imitates Nature, that Motion only seems to be
wanting; and many such rare Pieces have been Drawn, that they have at the first
blush deceived the Eyes of the Curious, who have taken them for real Living
Beings, and though the Eye and Hand are mainly required herein, the one to
direct, and the other to operate, yet the Mind or Imagination must furnish out
a great part of the curiosity, having Ideas, or the true shape of things always
in a readiness.

This cannot be done hastily, but must be done by a steady practice and curious
Observations, and the first in this undertaking, is to prepare your self with
suitable materials, and amongst others French Chalk Red and White, that it may
be cut into curious taper Pencils, to Draw the out strokes of any Figure you
design, Sallow wood so burnt that you may do the like by it, and if these
strokes hit not at first to due proportion, they may be rubbed out with the
Feather of a Mallard's Wing, and so till you find them right, then go over your
strokes with a strong well pointed Pencil, either of Red or Black Lead: To make
the Impression more Even and Regular, it will be proper to have Pens made of
Raven or Crow Quills to finish the finer strokes, also a Rule and Compass with
three feet, to take in and out at the points as you have occasion, the one of
White or Red Chalk, the other of Black Lead, and a third of any other Pastile,
and these in most Drawings are proper to mark out equal distances after; the
drawing of the outstrokes; there are other things required, which in their
proper place I shall speak of.

Being thus far entered, come a little nearer to the Practice, and make your
entrance on it with plain Geometrical Figures, such as are the Circle, Square,
Oval, Cone, Triangle, Cylinder, which at first use your self to mark out with
your Rule and Compass, till you can readily do it with your Hand, and these
will much assist you in the beginning of this curious undertaking, the Circle
well made will direct you in Orbicular forms, as the Globe of the Earth,
Spherical World, Moon Sun, and the like; is very proper in confining the
Picture you are to Copy; the Oval gives you directions for the Mouth and Face,
the Foot of a Wineglass, the Mouth of a Well, and the like; The Cone assists in
Drawing Columns, Spires, top of Towers, Steeples, etc. The Triangle is of
admirable use in making the half Face; the Cylinder gives you assistance in
drawing Columns, Pillars, Pilasters, and other things belonging to
Architecture; the Poligon may be also used for Ground-Plats, Fortifications,
etc. and Angles and Arches in Prospective.

These things premised, try to Draw several sorts of Fruits and Flowers, as
Grapes, Cherries, Peaches, Apples, Apricots, Tulips, Pinks, etc. also Insects,
Trees, Branches, and the like, and from these proceed to practice on Birds,
Beasts, etc consider well their proportion, color, slowness, swistness,
fierceness, and many other things natural to them, and the better at first,
till your Mind can well frame such Ideas, it will be proper to have good
Drawings to imitate, and so go on by degrees to other things, as Fish, Melions,
Roots, Oranges, etc. and by no means mistake their suitable lively colors, not
proper form; and then you may venture on Humane Faces and Bodies, wherein lies
the excellency of this Art.

Of Drawing Faces, etc.
When you come to Draw a Face you must well weigh and consider in what posture
it must be done, whether side-ways, upward, forward, or downward, touching
lightly the Features, where the Nose, Eyes, Mouth and Chin ought to stand, then
go more perfectly over them, for the Circles, Squares, and Triangles used in
this matter, may sufficiently guide you where the Nose, Eyes, Mouth and Chin
should stand; but in taking the Features, observe with a steadfast Eye, the
principal Muscles in the Face, which in persons of years appear very much, and
there is usually to be observed a threefold proportion in a Face, as in the ^^^
place, from the top of the Forehead to the Eyebrows, in the second place from
thence to the bottom of the Nose, and lastly from thence to the bottom of the
Chin, observing in this case a due proportion in the length of the Forehead and
Nose.

In a full Face, the distance between the Eyebrows, consists of the length of
one Eye, but where there is a side, or three quarters Face, the distance must
be lessened answerable to the proportion, the Nostrils must be placed directly
against the nether corner of the Eyes, and if the Face you Draw be Plump or
Fat, the Cheeks must swell; but consider, in a Lean Face the Jaw-bones stick
out, and the Cheeks fall somewhat in.

In a smiling countenance, the Corners of the Mouth turn somewhat upwards, and
in a sour frowning countenance, the Forehead is bending, and Wrinkles appear on
the upper part of the Nose.

In Drawing a fore-right Face, you must make a perfect Oval, divided by two
Lines into three equal proportions, in the first part place the Eyes, in the
second the Nostrils, and in the third the Mouth, keeping the Eyes an equal
distance from each other.

In Drawing an upright Head, you must make it in equal divisions, with three
lines every way, either upwards, downwards, higher or lower, divided as the
former.

To Draw the shortened or enclining Face, observe how the Lines agree, and so
in their proper places you may Draw the Mouth and Nose, and the rest of the
parts after you have brought your hand a little into practice; and note,
whatsoever proportion the Face bears, your out-strokes must be formed
accordingly.

As for the Nose, you must among other things, particularly observe the
roundness, hollowness, and Indentings of the Nostrils.

As for the Hands, their Po^ures are various, but a true measure must be
observed in it, according to the proportion you Draw, as likewise the Arms as
far as they appear bare, then proceed to Draw the Feet with measure and
without, but for these it will be requisite to get Drawings to practice on at
first, then practice Drawing Feet and Legs conjunct or separate, and proceeding
from the Members, draw the other parts of the Body, and practice first on a
Child, wherein there is more case, because they are of a Fatter and Plumper
Face and Body, the Sinews, Lines and Muscles, not appearing as in Men and Women.

In Drawing, begin at the Head, and so proceed by degrees to the Feet, running
it lightly over at the first, and as you see occasion, increase the fullness,
let the parallel Joints and Sinews be equally proportioned, as also the
Muscles, and their Attendants, and exactly opposite, and the Motions of the
Body be answerable to each other, and the Limbs a true Symetry, one not being
larger than the other, nor longer where Nature requires it not.

In Shaddowing, observe to cast them ever one way, as in the figure of a Woman,
if you begin the Shadow at the left Cheek, you must continue the like on the
left side the Neck, Body, and all other parts, unless the Light side of it
requires to be Dark, by reason some other Body standing between the light and
it, as put the case three Men stand together, the middle Figure must be
darkened by the foremost, unless the light by facing it comes between them.

Observe that all Shaddows, the further off they are, grow fainter, and
circular Bodies must have a circular Shadow, according to the light that makes
it.

In Drawing a Figure standing, Draw that Leg the Body stands firm upon strait
and steady, or else the Figure will seem to decline, as if it were falling.

As in naked Figures, the outlines are required to be Drawn first, so do it in
Drapery or Clothing, leaving spaces within for your greater or lesser Folds,
and break them into lesser, that may be contained within them, and the closer
the Garment sits to the Body, the smaller and narrower must be the Folds, and
in Shadowing the Innermost, it must be the harder, and the outermost the
softer, continue the great Folds, but as for the lesser, break them off where
occasion requires it; and the finer the Drapery is, the finer and sharper must
the Folds be, and the Shadow the stronger and finer to the Eye, always
observing that the Garment that sits close, as the Body Coat of a Man, or
Breasts of a Woman and the like, require no Folding, but rather with a sweet
Shadow represent that part of the Body, that the Garment appears to cover, as
Women's Breasts with a sweet round Shadow, and the like.

Of Colors useful in Limning or Painting, and other matters.
The next thing to be considered, the Cloth primed, and the Drawing put on, is
the preparing your Colors, which in Oil Painting must be with Linseed Oil,
unless for Linen, and then Walnut Oil is a great deal better, for it will not
turn yellow as the other in time will, when mixed with curious white.

You must Grind your Colors on a Stone with a Muller, till they are as fine as
Butter, etc. The Colors proper to be used in Limning are,

The Blacks; Sea-cole black, Ivory black, Lamp black, and Earth of Collen; the
White, White Lead; the Green; Terravet, Verditer and Verdigreace; the Yellow,
Spruce Oaker, Pink or Piment, and Masticot; the Blues, Smalt, Biss, Indico, and
Ultramarine; the Reds, Red-Lead, Vermillion, Lake, Indian-red, and Ornatto; the
colors indisserent are Umber, Spanishbrown, burnt Spruce.

These are the chief to be laid in Oil, but Ivory, Spruce-Oaker and Umber must
be burnt before they are ground; and as for Masticot, Ultramarine, Masticot,
Vermillion, Smalt and Orpiment, you may temper them on your Palate without
grinding, though grinding is better, because it mixes them the better with the
Oil, and makes them dilate and spread more easily: And what of these are to be
burnt, perform it in a Crucible, taking care they be not overburnt, to lose
their Tincture.

Take care in the next place to get good Pencils of all sizes, proportionable
to your Work, a Palate or Board to lay Colors ^^ whilst you are using them, ^^
Easle to place your Cloth upon or against, and a straining Frame, to which it
must be nailed, a Mollstick or Stay, made of Brasil, or some ponderous Wood,
not subject to bend, about a yard long, at one end tie a ball of ravelled
Cotton, with a Leather over it, so that with your Left Hand, holding it against
the Work, you may support your right Arm with it, whilst you are Working.

Of Mixing or Tempering of Colors.
To make a Violet color, take Indico, White Lead and Lake, mix them well, and
the more or less of each quantity, will make it deeper or lighter.

A Lead color make of White and Indico, well mixed and tempered together.

For a Scarlet color, take Lake, Red-Lead, and a small quantity of Vermillion.

For a Flame color, take Red-Lead and Masticot heightened with white.

For a Light-green, take Pink and Smalt, and as you see occasion lighten it
with white.

For a Purple color, take Spanish brown, Indico, and white, well tempered
together.

For a Bay color, mix Spanish brown and white.

For a Murrey color, mix Lake and White; and so by often tempering Colors,
and Practice, you may find out the rest.

Of the first Operation or Sitting.
Having thus far proceeded, it will be time to begin your Work, and having laid
your Ground for the general Complexion, and Drawn the Out-Lines, which you must
do with Lake and White mingled, Drawing very faintly, that if there be any
fault it may be rubbed out and amended; the proportion of the Face Drawn, add
to the former color a small proportion of Red-Lead, tempering it faintly to
the color of the Cheeks and Lips, the tip of the Chin and Ears, about the Eyes
and Roots of the Hair, placing red shadows, and the shadows must not be put in
with the flat of the Pencil, but with small touches, after the manner of
hatching, and in this wise go over the Face, and cover the Groundwork, with
these and the like shadows, but in the dead colors your curiosity need not be
great, only strive as near as you can to immitate Nature, for the roughness of
the colors may be mended at the second operation.

Having duly placed and proportioned your red Shadows, proceed to put your
faint blue ^hadows about the Corners of ^he Eyes, and Balls, etc. and the
greyish blue under the Eyes, and about the Temples, working them sweetly and
faintly over by degrees, beginning the Shadow as the Light falls, as likewise
the hard Shadows on the dark side of the Face, under the Eyebrows, Chin, Nose
and Neck, with strong touches or those places, so pass to the light side of the
Face, and bring all your Work together to an equal roundness; yet at this time
give not perfection to any particular part, but well view the Work, and
consider how near you come to the Life, not only in likeness, but posture,
coloring, etc.

Having now wrought the faint Shadows into the red Shadows, you may take a
touch ^^ the Hair, disposing it in such Curls, Folds, etc. as best contribute
to Grace and Ornament, only drawing it with Colors suitable to the Life, and
deepen it somewhat more strongly in the deepest shadowed places, and so desist
from your first Operation.

Of the second Sitting or Operation.
The Party to be drawn in this second Sitting, must take the place and posture
as before, and now you must take a more curious survey of the Lines and
Features, and as you drew them over roughly before, now is the proper time to
sweeten them with the same Colors, by Working and Drawing them one into
another, so that no rough edge or lump of Color may appear, and you must do
this with a Pencil sharper than the former, to render the shadow smooth and
soft.

This done, proceed to the Backside of your Picture, and if there be a Curtain
required, and it be supposed of Blue Satin, then temper Bice with your Oil,
and draw the out-lines of the Curtain, as also your Picture, and lay it over
very thin and airy with a large Pencil, that it may be the whole ground,
intended to be done with Blue, and then lay it over again with a substantial
Body, with the same color, doing it swiftly that no part of the Color may dry
before it be all finished, and in the same manner you may lay the backside with
any color.

This done, lay your Linen of a fair white, and your Drapery flat, with the
Color you intend it, then view the Face again well, noting what shadows are
too light or too deep, and labor to reduce the several shadows to their
perfection, then draw the Lines out of the Eyelids, and Shadow the entrance
into the Ears, the deepness of the Eyebrows, and all the most material marks
and notes in the Face, do this with a curious sharp Pencil, then heighten the
Hair, deepening it as it appears in the Life, casting over the ground some
loose Hairs, which will not only make it look airy, but seem as if the Picture
stood a distance from the Curtain.

In shadowing the Lines, which must be done curiously, use black, white, and a
little blue, deepen the black with Ivory-black, and put to it a little quantity
of Indico or Lake, and so the second Operation is finished.

The third Sitting or Operation.
Herein where you find any defect, or judge it reasonable, you must give strong
touches, taking curious heed for the rounding of the Face, which will now be
better accomplished than before, observing diligently what yet may conduce to
similitude, as Moles, Scars, Casts with the Eyes, drawing of the Mouth, and the
like.

For Garments or Ornaments, the Ground for Blue being laid with Bice, the
deepening must be Indico, and a little Lake, the Lightening white, very fine,
faint and fair, and for the greater ornament, the Light may be mixed with
Silver or Gold, but of Drapery more particularly in Mezzatinto Painting, for
Pearl color the Ground must be White and Indico, and the Shadow Pink and
Black; if the Body requires to be in Armor, let Leaf Silver be the Ground, and
when it is well dried and burnished, work the shadow with Silver, Umber and
Indico, and the shadow on the Silver as the Life directs.

For Gold Armor, lay Shell-Gold for the Ground, or Liquid Gold, and shadow it
with Lake, English-Oaker, and a mixture of Gold.

For Drawing a Fair Complexion.
To do this, make a mixture of a small quantity of White, and twice as much
Lake and Vermillion, temper them well with the flat of a Knife upon the Pallat,
and let it be used as the deepest Carnation in the Face, then adding a little
part more of White, reserve that for a lighter Carnation, and yet a third part
being reserved, add more White to it till it comes to the lightest color in
the Face, and so proceed to prepare the faint shadows.

In doing this, take Smalt, and mix it with a little White, which may
conveniently serve for the Eyes, then separate the greatest quantity, and add
to the rest a little Pink, and these well tempered will be sufficient for the
greenish shadows in the Face, then proceed to prepare your deep shadows, do it
with Pink, Ivory-black and Lake, a like quantity of each, temper them well
together, and if the Complexion you Draw, requires redder shadows, add more
Lake; if bluer or greyer, more black, if yellower, more Pink.

Having prepared your Palate with suitable Colors for a fair Face, consider
again what other Colors are required; if the Complexion be more Brown or
Swarthy, and in such cases temper the Colors as before, putting a little
quantity of burnt Oaker amongst the Lake, and Vermillion and White, that it may
amongst your heightened Colors appear Tawny; and in this case, temper so much
Oaker as will just turn it; and for your very deep, and very faint Shadows, use
the same as for the former Complexion.

For a Tawny Complexion use the same as before, however, prepare the Shadows,
of burnt Oaker and Umber.

For a very black or dark Complexion, prepare the Shadows as the foregoing, but
as for your lightening, take Lake, Burnt-Oaker, with White and Black, however,
but a little of the White must be put in at first, that by degrees it may be
the better worked up, and observe that the single Shadows laid at first upon
your Palate, and well tempered according to the foregoing directions, serve as
Shadows for all Complexions.

Further Directions for Coloring Garments, etc.
These Garments, or Drapery, require to be made suitable in their Colors; for
Red therefore, lay the Ground with Vermillion, glaze it over with Lake, and
heighten it with White.

For Scarlet, let Vermillion be the lightest, deepened with Lake, and
heightened with Indian red.

For Crimson Velvet, lay a Ground of burnt Oaker, Vermillion and Indian Red,
glaze it with Lake, and touch it up with Vermillion.

For a sad Red, heighten Indian Red with White, and deepen with Black, Pink and
Lake, well mixed together.

For Green, heighten Bice and Pink with Masticot, and deepen it with Pink and
Indico.

For Green Velvet, lay the dead color with a little White and Lamp-black,
glaze it with Verdigrease, deepen with Pink and Indico, and heighten with White
and Pink.

For Yellow, use Masticot, Umber and Yellow Oaker, lay the dead color with
Masticot and White in the highest places, and with Oaker in the meanest, in the
darkest with Umber, glazing when dry with Pink.

For Blue Garments, take Indico and White, first laying the White in its due
place, and then your mean color, viz. Indico and White, well tempered in their
proper places, then deepen with Indico, and when dry, glaze it with Ultramarine.

For Black Garments, let the dead color be Lamp-black and a little
Verdigrease. and go over it when dry with a little Ivory-black, and when you
have heightened it with White, go over the Work with Verdigrease and
Ivory-black.

For Orange color, mix Lake and Red-Lead, laying the lightest part with
Red-Lead and White, the mean part only with Red-Lead, and the deeper with Lake,
and if it be necessary you may heighten with White.

For a Cloth color, let the Ground be Umber and White, and for the deeper
Shadows Black and Umber, for the mean Oaker and Umber, and heighten it with
Oaker and White, and so much for coloring Garments.

Instructions how to Frame and Paint Landskips.
In this Work of Painting with Oil, begin with the Sky and Sun beams, and the
lighter parts, and then the Yellow, which must be done with Masticot and White,
the next your Blue Sky with Smalt, leaving no part of the Ground uncovered, but
lay the Colors smooth ^ll over, working the Sky downwards, toward the
Hori^on, still suffering it to grow fainter as it enclines nearer to the Earth,
and work the tops of Mountains and other Objects very remote, so faint as they
may appear lost in Mist or Air, and as for the nearest and lowest Ground, it
must be a dark brown Earth color, enclining a little to Yellowish and Green,
as the nature of it requires, the next a light Green, and so proceed gradually
as they lose in their distance you must lessen their Color, observing not to
make any thing that is to be seen at a great distance, perfect or really,
because you must imagine it is at such a distance that you cannot well discern
it, but express it in Colors weakly and faintly; as your Eye Judges it may be,
always taking notice to place the Light opposite to the Dark, which will very
much extend the prospect, and do it so that the Shadows may lose in their
proportion of distance, their force by little and little, as they remove from
the Eye, observing always to put in the strongest Shadows nearest; put no Moon
nor Stars but in a Night-piece, for they are not otherways naturally proper,
because they cannot be well seen in the day; if you imitate an over-cast Sky,
where black Clouds threaten a Storm, the Shadows may be on the meeting parts of
the Clouds, this may be also done with Colors mixed with Water wherein
Gum-Arabick has been dissolved.

If in any fair* Landscape you express the Light of the Sun, always observe
throughout the whole piece, that you cast the lights of your Trees, Rocks,
Hills, Buildings, Ruins, and all other things expressed in it that way;
observe also to lessen your Bodies proportionable, as they are nearer or
farther distant, and carry it off so far that the Earth and Sky, or Water seem
to meet, Rivers as they run to a distance must lessen their Streams, so Ships
or Boats, and the like.

As for Living Creatures, Beasts, Fowls and Serpents, or Insects you must
consider their proportion, shape and color, and get Draughts or Patterns,
which will be better than Printed Directions, and these kinds being numerous,
for brevities sake I must omit to treat of them.

To lay on Mezzatinto Prints on Glass.
In undertaking this curiously lay the Prints flat ways in warm water, of the
finest and thine: Paper, for that which is rough and thick will not do near so
well, if at all, let them soa^ well, and your Glass being very white and thin,
go over it with Venice Turpentine spread thi^ with a pliable Knife, and dab i^
all over with your Finger, tha^ the Turpentine may seem rough.

This done, take the soaked Print and lay it on a clean cloth even, then press
it with another; to take out the Water then lay it on a Glass, the Prin^ next
it, beginning at one end stroaking outward the part already fixed to the
Glass, that neither Wind nor Water may ^e retained between, to wrinkle ^^, then
with a little Sponge, or ^our Fingers, wet the backside, and lightly by degrees
roll off ^he Paper carefully, without making holes, especially in the Lights,
which are the tender^st, and when the Print appears very transparent on the
backside, let it dry about two hours, then varnish it over with Turpentine or
Mastick varnish, till you can see through it, and ^ nights drying will prepare
it to be worked on with Colors.

If you would have all the Paper off, so that nothing but the Print should
remain, lay it as before, with Oil of Mastick, and a little Turpentine, and a
Brush will fetch off all the Paper.

To Paint Landskips of Mezzatinto.
As for the Posture to do any of this Work, the best is sitting to a true
light, your Pencils must be fine, and in the first place glaze all the places
that require, and if you would have them thin as they should be, and soon dry,
mix varnish as they are laid on, and in four hours you may venture other
Colors.

In this Work glaze the nearest and greatest Trees, Ground them with brown
Pink, or if you fancy them greener, use distilled Verdigrease, and where the
Leaves and Weeds that appear in some Landskips very sprightly and extraordinary
green, must be glazed with distilled Verdigrease, and Dutch Pink, the Trees
appearing farther off with only the former; the Hills, Rocks, Mountains and
Trees at the greatest distance, glaze with Smalt, a little Lake, and
Verdigrease thinly mixed with Varnish; as for the Skies, use Ultramarine or
fine Smalt, mixed with thin varnish, glaze it over two or three times with a
large clean Pencil, and nimble strokes, if Buildings or Ruins of Buildings
appear in it, finish them first, and the mixture of Colors, for these consist
of Yellow, Black, White, and now and then a tincture of Red.

To finish Ground Trees and Skies, begin with the nearest and largest Trees, do
over the lightest Leaves with white Pink and a little Smalt, and neatly do over
the darkest and nearest Leaves, with a little Pencil diped in Varnish, and
those Tree* you would have very beautiful, Paint with a mixture of Verdigrease,
Yellow Masticot and White, the darker parts with white Verdigrease and Pink, as
also those Trees you glaze with Verdigrease only, they being very light mixed
with White.

As for the Skies and Foreskips, if any Clouds appear, let them be touched with
Varnish, and a light color mad of White Lake and Yellow Oaker; touch also with
these the light parts of Hills, likewise Towns, and the remotest distance; then
mix White ar^ Smalt, as light as conveniently may be, and Paint over the Sky
add a tincture of Lake for the dark Clouds; let the Colors lie even and thin,
and where finished, give it time to dry, to make it look more lively, set ^he
Picture against the light, that the Shadows may appear.

Of Painting Figures this way, as Men, Women, etc.
In Painting a Face, where there are deep Shadows, glaze and touch them thinly
with crown Pink, Lake and Varnish, also the black Ball, and white Speck of the
Eye, as you will be directed by the Print, the round white Ball must likewise
be of a convenient color; if the Lips are to be of a curious Red, glaze them
with Lake or Cazamine, and then begin with the dark side of the Face, and Paint
the Shadows with the Color more Red than usual, to do this, Yellow Pink,
Vermillion and White are most proper and note, no Varnish must be used in
Painting Flesh colors except in glazing the Shadows for the Varnish drys so
fast that you cannot sweeten the Shadows of the Flesh.

After this give a few touches on the strongest light of the Face, as the
Forehead, top of the Nose by the Eyes, Chin and Mouth, which color must be
made white with pale Masticot, or Yellow-Oaker, and a little Vermillion mixed,
according to the Complexion intended, then mix that color a little darker, and
lay it on all the Face that before you had not very carefully painted, yet that
for the Mouth and Cheeks must be somewhat redder.

Now with a fine clean Pencil that has been worn a little, hatch and sweeten
the Flesh colors and Shadows sweetly together, taking care to cleanse ^our
Pencil as often as it is re^uisite, so that whilst the piece ^s moist and wet,
you may regulate Cheeks too pale, or any other defect.

If the Complexion be Swar^hy, mix the Flesh-colors with White, Brown, or
Yellow Oaker and light Red, with agreeable ^hadows; and by this means ^ou may
Paint naked Breasts, Bodies or Hands, always being ^areful that your Pencil be
steadily guided, for the least slip mars the Feature, and trespass ^ot on
Features and Lines of a ^isagreeing Color.

How to Paint the Hair.
In this Painting you have no occasion to use Colors or Varnish near so dark
as the Life, for the Print contributes to the darkening of it, as suppose yo^
was to Paint Black Hair, you mix black Red-Oaker with a touch of light Red or
Lake, and these may well produce an Ashcolour, and the Hair colored with it,
will show you a natural Black; if you would make the Curls stronger, with a
lighter color, touch the lightest part and the darkest with the contrary,
which you may well see through, if the Colors ar^ not laid too thick.

Of Painting Garments or Drapery.
If you are to Paint Cloth or Drapery, in a broken color, observe carefully
its mixture, however you must make three degrees of that color, one the proper
color, another more light, and the last darker, for it must be for the darkest
folds, and the lightest for the lightest pleats, and that between both for the
other parts.

With a worn Pencil sweeten the Color, so that the Folds may lie hard, and if
you intend to make a Fringe, Imbroidery or the like, and to them with Shell or
Powdered Gold or Silver, mix your Minerals with Gumwater, having a fine Pencil
to Hatch or Imbroider the Flowers, and touch the Fringes and other Imbroderies
before you glaze, after this manner. viz. I imagine the changeable Draperies
Ground to be Purple, and the light Yellow, then must I take a fine Pencil
dipped in Varnish, and thinly touch all the lightest parts of the Folds with
Yellow Masticot, if there be occasion to repeat it, for it must be granted the
Color must be very thin with Varnish.

When dry I must glaze all over with Lake, Smalt, or Ultramarine, once or twice
with Varnish, and so it must dry, and then I mix three degrees of Purple
color, of Smalt, Lake and White, and lay them on as directed, and by these
measures fitting your Colors suitable to your intention, you may Paint any
other colored Drapery, which in this little Book I want room to particularize.

The Curious Art and Mystery of Japanning.
To be a Proficient in this Art, several matters are required, and these you
must consider as suitable, not only in property but goodness, that your Cost and
Labor may not prove in vain.

As, two Strainers made of Flanel, moderately fine, or of course Linen, in the
nature of a Tunnel, for to strain your Lac Varnish, and the other for your
White Varnish, and the first of these may serve for Laccers, when your occasion
requires you to make them; besides these, there are required two Tunnels of Tin
for the same Purpose as before, Glass Bottles and Vials small and great, must
be in a readiness, as to suit with the quantities of Varnish your business
requires you to use, and Gally Pots to put it in when you design to work, as
also to mix your Blacks in, when they come to be ordered with other things.

As for Tools, they are no less requisite, for without them, this Art would be
insignificant, and therefore to furnish your self with them, you must have
Pencils according to the greatness or smallness of the things intended to Work
on; those for the Varnish must be made of Cammels Hair very soft, and are of
various prices as to the largeness or fineness; like wise drawing Pencils,
placed in Swallow, Duck, or Goose Quills, as the finess or largeness of the
stroke requires, and the longest haired Pencils are accounted the best in this
business, you must have in a readiness a considerable number of Muscle-shells
to mix Colors and Minerals in, as the occasion shall require it, Dutch Rushes
are another material useful in this matter, to smooth the Work before it is
Varnished, or take off the knobs or grittiness from the Ground, or when it is
Varnished.

Tripoly is proper to Pollish this Work with when Varnished, being reduced into
fine powder and sifced, as for Linen Rags you must be provided with them, both
fine and course, to clear and pollish this Work, also Olive Oil for a clearing;
as many of these things shall be directed hereafter, as they occur in due
place, in the Work.

Several things necessary to be used in this Art, etc.
Of Spirit of Wine.
This is of main use in Varnishing, and if it be not properly qualified, it
will spoil the Varnish, and not be capable, for want of strength to dissolve
your Gums, or make them spread, and so consequently lie uneven upon the Work,
and to know when this Spirit is sufficiently rectified, put some of it in a
Spoon, and put a little Gunpowder in, and if it burns out, blows up the
Gunpowder, and leaves the Spoon dry, then it is a good Spirit, but failing in
this, and leaving the Spoon moist when the flame extinguishes, it is not fit
for your use.

Of Gum Animae, Gum Lac, and Gum Sandarack.
To choose these well, as for the first, take the most transparent, clearest and
whitest, which is the best.

The second also called Seed Lac, choose that free from dross, sticks or dust,
large grained and bright.

As for the third, take that which is large and very white, casting the least
yellow, free from dust and dross.

Of Shell Lac, White Rosin, Bo'e-Armeni^ck, and Venice Turpentine.
As for the first, that is best which is most perspicuously transparent, will
easily melt, and draw out with your Fingers as fine as a hair.

As for the second, choose for your use that which is he whitest and clearest.

As for the third, that is most fit for your purpose, that is free from
grittiness or gravel, and is of a blackish red color, commonly called
French-bole.

Of Gum Elemi, Gum Arabic, and Gum Capal.
As for the first, choose the hardest, and freest from dirt and dr^ss.

Choose the second white and transparent.

As for the third that is best for your use that is whitest, free from dross,
and the thick dark stuff incorporated with it.

Of Gambogium, Isinglass, Benjamin or Benzoin, Dragons Blood, etc.
These are other things necessary in this Art, and ought to be well chosen

As for the first, the best is that of a bright yellow, free from dirty
thickness and dross.

Choose as to the second, that which is whitest and clearest, free from
yellowness.

As for the third, the best is that of a bright red color, much like to
clarified black Rosin, free from all dross and filth.

The fourth, when the best, is of a bright red, free from dross, it may be had
as the others at the Drugists, but the prices I set not down, because they
generally rise and fall.

Of Silver Dust, Brass Dust, Green Gold, Dirty Gold, Coppers, Powder, Tin, etc.
The Silver Dust, the best is brought from beyond the Seas, and is known from
the Counterfeit by being squeezed between your Finger and Thumb, giving a
glorious Luster, as indeed it does in the Work.

Brass Dust, by Artists called Dust Gold, is the best made in Germany, the best
is of a fine bright color, nearest resembling Gold, try it as the Silver Dust;
as for the course sort, though it will work pretty well with Gold Size, yet it
will not do so with Gum-water.

Green Gold, a corrupt Metal so called, is very good in this Work, for casting
a fading Green color.

Dirty Gold is a corrupt Metal, casting a dark, dull, though Silverish color,
bearing pretty well a resemblance to dirty drossy Gold.

Coppers are three sorts, Natural, Adulterate and Artificial; as for the
Natural, being cleansed it may be ground without any mixture.

The Adulterate is most fit for a Ground, and serves commonly to lay other
Metals on, as in hetching or heightening Gold or Silver on; but the Artificial
is of a higher and brighter color than either: There are also used in this
Art, those called Speckles of Copper Gold and Silver, and diverse other colors
differing in fineness, which may be worked as the Artist fancies, either on the
outsides of Boxes or Drawers, or on Mouldings, and may be purchased ready done.

Of Colors proper in Japaning.
Some of these are called transparent, on which Gold and Silver are to be laid,
or some light color, so that by this means they appear in their proper
colors, lively and beautiful.

Of these, for a Green are Distilled Verdigrise, for a Red, fine Lake, for a
Blue, Smalt, have to Grind these on, a Porphiry or Marble Stone, Grind with a
Muller what quantity you please, with Smalt or Verdigrise, with Nut Oil, as
much as will moisten the Colors, and grind them till they are as fine as
Butter, put then the Colors into Shells, and mix them with Oil of Turpentine
till they become thin for use, lay them on Silver, Gold, or any other light
color, and they will then become transparent, altering their lightness or
darkness, according to that of the Metal or Colors that are placed under them;
this for a curious Red may be done with Lake, but then use drying Oil to grind
them with.

If you design Figures on the black of your Table or Boxes, as Trees, Birds, or
Flowers, those may be done for White, with White Lead; for Blue, Smalt, mixing
it with Gum Arabic Water, and mingle them as you please, to make them lighter
or deeper; Flake white is a very pure White, but the other will do for ordinary
Work, and you must use either of these with Smalt, or all other Colors that
have not a Body of their own; you may for a Purple use Russet, fine Lake, and
Seagreen, and it may be done with other sorts of Reds and Greens, and except
transparent Colors, all must be laid with Gum-water.

Seed Lac Varnish how to make it.
Your Ground Work is good rectified Spirits, of which you may take a Gallon,
put it into a wide a necked Bottle as you can get, that the Gums may the better
come out, then of the best Seed Lac add a pound and a half, let it Macerate
twenty four hours, or till the Gums are well dissolved, with often shaking, to
keep them from cloging together, then with Flannel Strainers strain it into a
Tin Tunnel, placed in the Mouth of the empty Bottle, the Strainer may be made
as before directed, and squeeze the Dross in the Bag, and throw it away as of
no use; then let the Varnish settle, and pour it off into other Bottles, till
it rises thick, and no longer, then strain the thick part and settle that
again, and keep the fine Varnish for your use, and this does as well, without
the danger of attempting to boil it, which endangers firing the House, and the
Party's Life.

Shell Lac-Varnish, how to make it.
This in curious glossy pieces of Work is not of value, but in Varnisht Woods
it succeeds, to make, put to a Gallon of Spirit ^ pound and a half of the best
Shell Lac, order it as the former, and though it has no Sediment, it is proper
however it should be strained, to take away the sticks or straws that may be in
the Gum, nor will it ever be fine and clear as the former, but turns in a few
days to cloudiness, yet is it fit for course work, and much used.

White Varnish, how to make it.
Take an ounce of White Gum Mastick, and an ounce of White Gum Sandarach, three
ounces of the best and clearest Venice Turpentine, Gum Elemi half an ounce, Gum
Capal an ounce and a half, Gum Benjamin or Benzoin of the clearest, half an
ounce, and half an ounce of White Rosin, and the Gums being separated in their
quantities provided, put the Rosin and (Capal in a glass Vial, with half a pint
of Spirits, that they may be dissolved, and to the same end, in a Glass Bottle
of three quarts of Spirits put the Venice Turpentine, Animae and Benjamine, and
in another Bottle the Gum Mastick and Sandarack, in a pint and a half of
Spirits, then dissolve the Gum Elemi in a quarter of a pint of Spirits, powder
very finely the Animae and Benjamin the better to dissolve in the Spirit, and
then pour them off into one large Bottle, let them stand to fine as the former,
and then strain them through a Linen cloth gently, not hardly pressing the
Sediment, lest you carry the grittiness of the Gums along with you, to injure
the Varnish.

General Rules for Varnishing.
This is a point nicely to be observed, or your labor and cost may be in vain.

1. If you choose Wood that requires to be Varnished, let it be exempted from
knots, very close grained, smooth, clean, well rushed, and free from greasiness.

2. As for your Colors and Blacks, lay them even and exquisitely smooth, sweep
all roughness off with your rush.

3. Keep your Work ever warm, but not hot to raise blisters or crack it, which
no thing but scraping off all the Varnish can amend.

4. After every distinct wash, let your work be thoroughly dry, for neglect in
this point introduces the fault of roughness.

5. After it is Varnished, let it lie by and rest as long as your convenience
will admit, and it will be the better.

6. Ever take care to begin your Varnish strokes in the middle of the Table, or
what you do it on, and not from one end to the other, and your Brush being
planted in the middle, strike it to one end, then take it off, and fix it to
the place you began at, so draw, or extend it to the other end, and so continue
it till the whole plain be Varnished over, and beware you overlap not the
Edges, which is, when the Varnish hangs in splashes or drops on them; therefore
to prevent it, draw your Brush gently once or twice against your Gally-pot side.

7. When you have proceeded so far as to come to pollish, let your Tripoly be
very fine, and the finer the Work, let it be still the finer, and use fine
Rags, keeping your hand moderately hard upon it, and brighten or pollish one
place as much as you intend, e're you leave it and pass to another, and always
have regard, that you pollish your Work as smooth as you intend at one time,
but if your convenience will admit, let it rest two or three days before you
give the finishing strokes after you have pollished it, but come not too near
the Wood to make it thin and hungry, for then it will require another Varnish,
or remain to your discredit.

8. Take a sufficient quantity of Tripoly at the first pollishing, till it
begins to come smooth, and so lessen by degrees, and carefully observe there be
no scratches or grating in it.

9. When you have a mind to clear up the Work, wash off the Tripoly with a
Sponge, and soak up the wet with a fair Linen Cloth, and with Lampblack mixed
with Oil, gently smeer the whole face of it, let no corner nor moulding of it
escape, that the whole Piece may be freed, then with other Linen, and a hard
hand cleanse it of that, and these things done there will be an admirable gloss.

For white work, let your pollishing be gentle and easy, do it nimbly, and
clear it with Oil and fine Flower, and in exactly observing these Rules you
will prove an Artist.

Of Black Varnishing, or Japan.
Provide for this imatation of Japan, a close grained Wood, well wrought off,
Rush it smooth and keep it warm by a Fire, but never so near as to burn, scorch
or blister your work, then add to Seed-Lac-Varnish, as much Lamp black as will
at the first strokes color the Wood; do it three times, permitting it to dry
well between every doing, and also Rush it well, then with a quarter of a pint
of the thickest Seed-Lac, mixed with an ounce of Venice Turpentine, put in more
Lamp-black, so much as may well color it, and with this wash it six times,
leting it stand twelve hours between the three first and the three last
washings; then with the finest Seed Lac just tinctured with the Black, do it
over twelve times, leting it dry between every time doing, after which let it
remain for five or six days before you pollish it.

At the end of that time, take Water and Tripole and Pollish it, having first
dipped your Cloth in Water, and rub it till it gains a very fine smoothness and
gloss, but do not rub so as may any ways wear off the Varnish, which cannot be
easily repaired, then use a Rag wetted without Tripole, and clear it up with
Oil and Lamp-black, yet Pollish it not all at once, but let it have some days
respite between the first and last Pollishing, and at least three or four days.

White Varnishing or Japan.
This must be curiously done without any soiling, and therefore you must be
cautious of letting any dirty thing come near, whilst you are doing it.

To begin this Work, scrape as much Isinglass as will make it of a reasonable
thickness, or when dipping your Pencil into it, it will with a stroke whiten
the Body which has been passed over with a Brush, but let it be in neither of
the extremes, too thick or too thin, then mix it with your Size, whiten your
Work over with it, and when dry, repeat the same, covering it from all manner
of Dust before it is Varnished; it must be whited three times, and dried
between every one of them, smooth, and lay it as close as you can to the Wood
with your Rushes; then mix White Flake with your Size, only so that it may lie
with a full and fair body on the Piece, and whiten your Work three several
times, with this drying between each, then make it with your Rushes very
smooth, but keep your distance from the Wood.

In the next place, take white Starch boiled in fair Water till it come to be
somewhat thick, and when it is lukewarm, wash over your Work with it once or
twice, drying between whiles, and let it then stand twenty four hours, then
take the finest of the white Varnish I have directed you to make, wash your
Pencil in Spirits, and wash or anoint your Work six or seven times, and after
thirty or forty hours, do the like again, and if done with a dexterous hand, a
better gloss will be set on it than if it had been Pollished; but if it miss of
that gloss, it is requisite that you Pollish it; and in order thereto, you must
accommodate it with five or six washes of Varnish more than the former, and it
must continue to settle well about a Week before you Pollish it.

In Pollishing, your Linen and Tripolee must be of the finest, being neat and
careful in all this operation, your hand carried light and gentle, having your
cloth neither too dry nor too wet, and clear it up with fine Flower and Oil.

Isinglass Size, how to make it.
Break and divide an ounce of Isinglass into little pieces, put it into a
glazed, clean, and well covered Pipkin, and let it for twelve hours soak in a
pint and a half of fair Water, then place it over a gentle fire, till it boil
well at leisure, and when the Water is consumed to a pint, let it stand to cool
leisurely, and then it will be a Gelly, and may be used in the White Varnish
and other Works, but make no more at a time than you will use, for in two or
three days it will prove naught.

Red Japan, to make it.
The Reds are properly three, viz. the Common Red, the Deep dark Red, and the
Lightpale Red.

In the first Vermillion is proper, mixed with the thickest of Seed Lac, warm
the work and mix your Vermillion with the Varnish in a Medium, carry it over it
four times, permitting it to dry as the former; and if your Reds be in a good
body and full, Rush it smooth, then with the ordinary Seed Lac-Varnish wash
eight times, and after twelve hours Rush it again; and then for a curious
outward covering, give it eight or ten washes with Seed Lac-Varnish, and after
five days Pollish it, and clear it with Lamp-black and Oil.

Of the Dark-red.
The Common Red laid as before directed, deepen it with Dragon's-Blood mixed
with your Varnish, and when it has pretty good color, go over it with
Lac-Varnish, which will much deepen and strengthen the Color, and in all
things else, as to Pollishing and Clearing, do as in the former Red.

Of the Pale-red.
To do this, grind white Lead with a Muller on a Stone, and when it is finely
done, mix it with so much Vermillion as will make it a Pale-red, mix Varnish
with them, and give the Work four washes, and follow the prescription of the
Common Red, considering well, that the after-Varnish will heighten the Color.

An Olive colored Japan.
Take English Pink color, grind it with common Size, and when it is like Pap
mix with it a proportion of Lamp-black and White Lead, and work it as in other
Japanning.

Chestnut colored Japan.
To do this, take Indian Red, or else Brown-red Oker, grind it well, and mix it
with ordinary Size, then grind a little white Lead extraordinary well with the
small Size, mix with it Lamp-black, and so both with the Indian Red-Oker, stir,
and well incorporate them together, if the Color be too bright, darken it with
the Lamp-black, if too dark, lighten it with white Lead, and so bring the
Color to your Mind; considering always that your Varnish will heighten it.

With this wash over your Work, let it dry, and repeat it till your Color lie,
full and fair, Rush it smooth, but not close to the Wood, unless you design
anew to begin your Work, and give it a second Varnish.

After it has stood three or four days, give it a Luster with Seed-Lac, and
when dry fit it for Pollishing with white Lac-Varnish, and clear it with Oil
and Lamp-black.

Blue Japan.
To do this, grind white Lead very fine, add Smalt as finely ground, mix them
with Isinglass Size, the white Lead grind with Gum-water, let there be a
proportion of White and Blue, and mix them well to the thickness of common
Paint, go over your Work with it, and when it is well dry, proceed so three or
four times, till the Blue lies with a fair body, Rush it smooth, and go over it
again with stronger Blue, and when dry wash it with the clearest Isinglass
Size, having a new Pencil for that purpose, then when it is dry, warm it by the
fire, and go over it with a Pencil dipped in white Varnish seven or eight
times, and so let it continue for a day or two, then wash it as often as
before, and so continue many operations at intermitted times; for a week at
least must pass, before you can well venture to Pollish it, and when it is
Pollished, Clear it with Oil and Lamp-black.

Note, that in no wise you mix your Colors with Isinglass Colors too strong,
lest when dried, they be apt to crack, fly, and spoil the Piece, but when you
lay your Wash of clear Isinglass, to keep your Varnish from tarnishing, or
soaking into your Colors, then it is proper that it be of a full and strong
body.

And thus much may very well suffice the Learner, to give him an insight into
this excellent Art, from whence I shall proceed to other things, useful and
profitable.

Of Speckles, for the Adorning Japan'd Work.
Mix so many Speckles as you have occasion for, with ordinary Lac Gum-Varnish,
so much, as when they are put into a Gally-pot, will fit them for working with
a convenient Pencil, but not so thick as Colors, keep them stirring very well
with a Brush, and generally warm by the fire: This continue till you perceive
the Speckles lie thick and even to your mind, so beautify them with three or
four washes of Varnish, mixed with Turpentine, and this, unless you intend to
Pollish, will be sufficient, but then you must give it after all this eight or
ten washings with the Prime Lac-Varnish, drying between whiles, and then
Pollish; and on this manner you may lay on all colored Speckles; but Silver
requires Seed Lac-Varnish, and the best White Varnish e're it can be brought to
a good Pollish, but if not to be Pollished, you may spare your Varnish.

To lay on Speckles in Japan Work, etc.
If you design to Adorn your Work with Flowers, Rocks, or Garments, etc.
Varnish the places intended with a fine Pencil, and through any small Sieve
shake the Colors you design, whilst the Varnish is wet, and sweep up in
Rock-Work all Speckles that straggle on the edges, with a new dry Pencil lodge
them on the sides and top of the Rock, which sticking, will render the Work
more beautiful, and give it a Shadow or Reflection.

This must be done with all diligence, and no intermission had till finished,
till once covered, and being once dry, operate again, and so one upon another
successively, to shape it to your mind; and in sweeping the Speckles, intermix
not one portion of scattered parts with the other, that are of a different
color, but every parcel in the proper station, to beautify the better: At
first when laid, it will look dull and heavy, but the securing Varnish in a
little time will add to it a pleasant, beautiful color; and so you may do
Flowers, Trees, Garments, and many pleasant things to Adorn your Work.

Wood, how to overlay with Gold or Silver.
To prepare this Work, yea must be furnished with Parchment-Size, that is, the
cuttings of Parchment boiled in fair water to a gelly, and when strained and
cooled, it will prove a strong Size.

When you are to use it, put as much as you shall want into an Earthen Pot, and
make it hot, then as it is cooling, scrape as much fine Whiting into it as will
color it, mix them well with a clean Brush, and with this mixture white your
Wood or Frame, striking or jobbing your Brush against it, that it may the
better enter in the hollownesses of carved work, then give it rest, that it may
dry.

This done, melt the Size again, and put in more Whiting to render it some
degrees thicker, and with this, do over the Frames seven or eight times, or as
you see there is a necessity, and when it is dry, open with a Gouge no bigger
than a Wheatstraw, the Veins in the Carved Work, that the Whiting has stopped
up, then with a fine wet Rag and your Finger, carefully smooth and water, plain
it over, and Rush it smooth when dry, if necessity require it; and in this
condition it will well receive your Gold or Silver Size; but before I proceed,
I shall teach you to make these Sizes.

The best Gold-Size at present in use.
Take an equal quantity of the best French and English Bole-Armoniack, grind
these fine on a Marble stone with fair water, then scrape into it a little
Candle grease, incorporate and grind all these well together, then mix a little
quantity of Parchment-Size, with a double proportion of Water, and the business
is done.

The best Silver-Size in use.
Grind fine Tobacco-pipe Clay very small, mix with it as much Lamp-black, as
will turn it of a light Ash Color, and to these add bits of Candle grease,
grind them very fine together, a mixture of Size and Water, and try these on
the corner of the Frame, if it be rough in burnishing, put more Oil or Grease,
and as near as you can bring it to a due temper, that it may work well.

To Size your Frames, or other matters.

To do this, make the Size Wood-warm, and with a fine Brush stir it very well,
till it is somewhat thin, go over the Frames with it twice or thrice, yet touch
not the hollow parts of the deepest Carvings, where the Gold cannot
conveniently be laid, for the yellow color nearly resembling first laid on,
the fault will not soon be discovered; let it dry four or five hours, and then
try the Gold if it will Burnish on it, if not, alter the Size, and do it over
again.

To lay on the Gold, in order to Burnishing.
Let your Frame or other matter intended, be set on a Hazle, place the Leaf
Gold o^ a Cushion to be held in your left hand with the Pallat and Pencil, you
must for this work have a Swans-Quill Pencil, or a larger of Camels hair, if
the Work require it, dip it in Water, and wet no more of your Frame at a time
than will take up three or four Leaves, make your beginning at the lower end,
and so proceed upwards, laying on whole leaves or half ones, as it requires,
then wet such another part of your work, and lay on the Gold with your Pencil
or Cotton, gently pressing it very close; and having Gilded the upright sides,
turn the Frame, and proceed the same way with the ends, then survey the spots
and places that are omitted, and cut small parts of Gold to cover them, when
wetted with a smaller Pencil than before, when it is so finished let it stand
till the next day that time you leave off.

To Burnish the Gold-Work.
Take a Wolf or Dogs Tooth, if you cannot get Aggats or Pebles formed into the
same shapes, and Burnish so much of the Work as you design, leaving the Ground
of the Carving untouched, and some other parts as you see best convenient,
which in respect of the Burnishing being rough, the better sets it off: That
which is omitted to be Burnished, must be Matted, or secured with Seed
Lac-Varnish or Lacker, if you design it a deeper color, then must your Work be
repossest or set off with Lacker, mixed with Saffron and Dragons-Blood, or the
color called Ornator, and with a fine Pencil dipped herein, touch the
hollownesses of the Carving, and the Veins of the Foldages or Leaves; if you
fancy it is not deep enough, you may by a repetition make it so, and the Work
is done.

To lay on Silver-Size.
Warm the Silver Size that is newly ground and mingled well with weak Size, as
you did the Gold Size, do it once or twice, and let it dry, and try the Leaf
Silver, if it will Burnish on it, it is prepared for the Work, but if it will
not make an alteration in the Size, and for the rest, lay on the Leaf-Silver,
and do as you did by the Gold, and it will answer.

Note, as farther Rules, and ever observe them.

1. Let your Parchment Size be somewhat strong, keep it not long, least it
spoils.

2. Grind no more Silver or Gold Size than just you have present occasion for.

3. Ever keep your Work clean from Dust, after it is Sized and Gilded, or else
in the Burnishing it will be full of scratches.

4. Do not Whiten or Burnish Gold Size in hard Frosty Weather, for then the
Whiten will be apt to peel off, and the Gold flaw.

The Art of Gilding Metals.
To Prepare the Gold.
Take Ducket, or Leaf Gold, what quantity you desire, observe to beat the
Ducket very thin, and put this Gold with as much Quicksilver as will just
cover it into a Gally-Pot, where let them continue half an hour, where
immediately after the mixture stir them with a stick, then strain them through
a piece of Leather, squeezing with your hand till you have forced out as much
Quicksilver as you can industriously do, so that what remains in the Leather,
looks more like Silver than Gold, yet this only must be employed in Gilding
after the following manner.

To Gild with Gold, Silver, Copper, Brass, Princes Metal, etc.
Brush first your Metal well, with a Wire Brush, wet it with Water or Beer,
and brush on till the dirtiness or filth be quite removed, that the Gold may
more closely join it, prepare then your Quicksilver, by mixing it with a
little Aquafortis in a Vial, three or four drops of the Aquafortis to an ounce
of the Quicksilver, quicken your Work with it, viz. rub it over with a Rag or
your Finger, till it appears all Silvered, or touched. This done,

Take your prepared Gold, and with a small Knife, or Iron Tool proper to the
purpose, spread, or overlay the whole piece, omitting no part, give it two or
three little heats, before you give it a thorough heat, so that with a Hair
Brush like a Comb Brush, you may dab and spread your Gold, these little heats
making the Quicksilver more ready to comply; then give it the thorough-heat,
which will compel the Mercury or Quicksilver to evaporate or fly away, then
take it from the Fire, and with a scrub Brush, untouched with Quicksilver,
cleanse it as at first; if you perceive any untouched spot of Quicksilver, the
Gold must be laid on it again, when it is cleansed with a scratch Brush, and
after this manner you may heighten its color if you see it necessary.

To heighten the color of Gold.
Take an equal quantity of Salt Argal and Brimstone, mix them with as much fair
Water as will cover the gilded Metal when put into it, boil them well, and
tying your Gilded Metal in a string, plunge it in for a little space, often
plunging, and looking as often on it as you draw it out, and when the color is
heightened to your expectation, dip it in cold water, and the work is done; you
may in the foregoing manner double or treble Gild, till the Gold enriches it to
a lasting thickness and color.

To Counterfeit Tortoiseshell.
To do this well, let the Wood you intend to work on, be very close grained,
clean and smooth wrought off, as Peartree, or the like; but if rough grained,
you must Prime it with Whiting, as you are taught in Black Japaning, for coarse
grained Woods, Rush it smooth and go over it with Seed Lac-Varnish, the breadth
of a Silver Leaf, which take up with Cotton, and lay on it moist, as close as
may be; then wash again, and place on another Leaf of Silver, and so continue
till the Wood is overspread with Silver, and when dry sweep off all the loose
Silver with a hair brush, then finely grind Collins Earth, and m^^ it with Gum
Water or Common Size, and with this, havit, added more Size or Gum Wat^^ than
it was ground withal, S^^ or Cloud the Ground-Wor^ having a fine, true, natural
Shell by you to imitate, and when this is done, you will perceive several Reds,
lighter and and darker, appear on the edges of the Black, and many times lie in
streaks on the transparent part of the Shell; to imitate this finely, grind
Sanguis Draconis with Gum water, and with a fine Pencil draw those warm Reds,
flushing it in about the dark places more thick, but fainter, thinner, and
lesser of color toward the lighter parts, so sweetening it, that it may in a
manner lose the Red, being sunk in, in the Silver, or more transparent parts.

When it is done and dried, give at least six washes of Seed Lac-Varnish, and
when it has continued twenty four hours, Rush it gently, and when it is smooth,
and fit for the second operation, grind Gambogium very finely in an equal small
quantity, put these into as much Seed Lac-Varnish, as will serve to wash it
another six times, then let it stand twelve hours, and give it the third
Varnishing, and with the last mixture wash it so often, that the Silver is
changed to a Golden color, and the work is done.

To Dye Wood a curious Red.
The VVood that takes this color must be very white, and to begin it put a
handful of Allom in a moderate Kettle of water, and cast your wood into it, and
when well soaked, take it out, and put in two handfuls of Rasped Brasil-wood,
and when that has boiled well, put the wood in again for a quarter of an hours
boiling, and it will take the color.

To Stain a curious Yellow.
In this case, take the knotty Ash or Bur, that is very white, knotty and
curled, Smooth and Rush it very well, and when it is well warmed, wash it over
with a Brush dipped in Aquafortis, then hold it to the fire till it desists to
smoke, Rush it again when dry, then Pollish it, and Varnish it with Seed-Lac,
and it will be of a curious color, not inferior to any Outlandish Yellow
wood, and if you put filings or bits of Metal, as Copper, Brass, etc. each
Metal will produce a different tincture.

To Stain or Dye Wood Black.
Boil Logwood in Water or Vinegar, and two or three times Brush or Stain your
Wood with it when very hot, then take Nut-Galls and Copperas, bruise them well,
and boil them in Water, and with it Wash or Stain your Wood so often till it be
a perfect Black, or rather steep it in the hot Liquor if you can put it in, and
the Dye will penetrate the better.

To Dye or Stain Wood for Inlaying of Flowers or other things in Cabinets.
Get moist new Horse-Dung, and squeeze out the moisture through a Cloth, put it
into several small Vessels fit for your purpose, and dissolve Gum Arabic, and
Roach Allom, each the quantity of a Walnut, and with these mix Reds, Greens,
Blues, or any Color that is suitable to the work, stir them often three or four
(...) then take your Wood, particularly Pear Tree for White, cut into the
thickness of half-crowns, or so much as will suffice any Inlayed work, and in a
square or length, according to your desire, boil up the Liquors or Colors very
hot, and put in the VVood till the Color has well taken; some indeed you may
take out sooner, that the Color being less strong, may the better agree with
your parti-colored Flowers, Shading and the like.

To Dye or Stain, Ivory, Bone or Horn Red.
Soak fine Lime about twelve hours in fair Rain Water, then pour off the
Water well from the settling through a Linen Cloth, and to each Pint put half
an ounce of Rasped Brasil wood, and having boiled your materials in Allom
water, boil it in this, and it will give a curious tincture.

To Stain Horn, Bone, Wood or Ivory Green.
Prepare your materials, by first boiling in Allom-water, then grind the common
thick Verdigrise, or Spanish Green, a moderate quantity, adding half as much
Sal-Armoniack, and put them into the sharpest Wine Vinegar, as also the
materials you intend to Stain, and keep them there hot till they have taken a
good tincture.

To Stain or Dye, Horn, Box or Ivory a curious Black.
To do this, put small pieces of Brasil VVood into Aquafortis, and so continue
them, till they appear green, then wash well your materials in them, and boil
Logwood in Water, into which put them whilst they are warm, and in a little
time the Ivory, etc. will be of a curious Black, so that being Pollished it
will look like Ebony or Japan, and if you would have any part for Flowers, or
the like remain white, draw them before staining with Turpentine Varnish, and
the black will not touch them, and afterward you may hetch them, and clear up
with Oil and Lamp-black.

To Stain Skins Green.
Bruise a good quantity of the Leaves of Nightshade very well, dissolve in the
Juice well strained out about two ounces of Allom, then put in half an ounce of
Verdigrise, suffer them to stand over a very gentle fire twenty four hours,
then warm, dip in a Brush, and strike over your Skins, let it dry, and repeat
it till it has taken a pleasant Green.

An approved way to color White Leather.
These Skins must be hung in Lime or Chalk Water, that the Wool or Hair may
be entirely stripped off, and they become supple, stretch them smooth on
Tenters, brush them over with Allom-water very warm, and so tincture them with
the Colors you design, suitable to your purpose.

To put a curious Black on Leather.
Take two pound of the inward Bark of an Old Elder, the like quantity of the
Rust or Filings of Iron, put these into two gallons of Rainwater, and close
them right up in a Vessel, and when they have stood about six weeks, put in a
pound of Nut galls well bruised, a quarter of a pound of Copperas, let them
simper a considerable time over a fire, and after twenty four hours standing,
and often stirring, pour out the Liquid part, and go over your Leather with it
warm, and it produces a curious German Black.

To color Leather a Bright Red.
Dip your Leather first in Allom water, and rub it well therein, then take
stale Urin, boil it till it is half consumed, scum it well, and put to it an
ounce of the best Lake, Rasped Brazil wood two ounces, and an ounce of Allom,
add to these half an ounce of Sal Armoniack, stir them well-over a moderate
fire two hours, pour off the Liquid part, and brush over your Skins with it,
till it takes a good tincture, remembering ever to let the Skins in all Colors
dry well, between each going over with your brush, and your expectation will be
answered to a very considerable advantage.

A curious French Yellow for Skins.
Take Wood-Ashes and Chalk, of each a like quantity, and then you have made a
good Ley with Rain water, strain out the finest part, and set it over the fire,
then put in a sufficient quantity of Turmerick well bruised or beaten to
Powder, and as much Saffron as may give a lively Tincture, let it stand over a
moderate fire, but not boil, till it becomes pretty thick, and being warm
color the Skins with it.

For a deep Blue, or Purple.
Strain out the Juice of Elder-Berries, put to two quarts, an ounce of Allom,
half an ounce of Smalt or Indico, set these over a gentle fire, and when warm,
brush your Leather over with this composition.

For a Crimson Color.
Dissolve Cake-Soap in Fair Water and Bole Armoniack, each three ounces, place
them over a gentle fire till the Liquor grows clammy, then put in a little
handful of Grains of Cochineal, two ounces of Red-Lead, an ounce of Lake, and a
quarter of an ounce of Vermillion, a little piece of Indico, mix these well
over a gentle fire, till they are the thickness of the glear of an Egg, then go
over the Skins with a soft brush dipped into it, till the Color arises to your
mind.

To Imitate the Turkey-Blue.
Take two ounces of Smalt, a quarter of a pint of Red Wine, half a pint of
Vinegar, an ounce of White Starch, incorporate these over a gentle fire, till
they come to a moderate thickness, then soak the Skins with Allom Water; add to
the composition a pint of Water, wherein Gum Arabic has been dissolved, and
stir it well, go over the Skins three times, drying them between whiles, and
when well dried, Pollish them over to render them glossy.

For a Light Green.
Take the Juice of the Herb called Horse-tail, add to it a little Allom,
Verdigrise and Copperas.

To Cover or Dress-Skins with Gold or Silver.
Grind Brown-red with a Muller, on a Marble Stone, add to liquidate it a little
Water wherein Chalk has been dissolved, and lightly go over the Skins, till
they look whitish, and before they are dry lay on the Leaf Gold or Silver, a
little lapped over one another, that no space be found wanting, and when they
stick well to the Leather, and are dry, Pollish them over with smooth Ivory, or
a Horses Tooth, and it will give a very glorious Luster; the Silver you may
Lacker over with Lacker Varnish, and change it into a Golden Color.

Or another way, take Gleer of Eggs, or Gum-water, brush the Skins over with
it, and lay on your Leaf Gold or Silver, doing as before.

To make Skins look Shining; without Silver or Gold.
Take Gum water, the Gleer of Eggs, and the Powder of Antimony, grind and mix
them well together, and the Skins ^eing dry, lay it on them with a Brush three
or four times, letting them dry every time between; then burnish them over, and
they will have a curious gloss like Silver, which tinctured with Lacker Varnish
will produce a Fading Gold Color.

To Dye Bristles a Red Color.

To Dye Bristles a Red Color.
Take half an ounce of Allom, a quarter of an onnce of Vermillion, and an ounce
of Raspe Brasil-wood, put these into pint of Vinegar, and boil the moderately
thick, and dip the Bristles when it is very ho^ and continuing there a time
they will be a fine Red; you man make larger quantities of the Liquor, with
ingredients proportionable; and thus Dye Feather.

Feathers or Bristles Green.
Take Verditur and Verdi grise, each an ounce, put them into a pint of water,
soak the Feathers or Bristles in hot water, and then put them into this Liquor
boiling-hot, and let them remain till they have taken a good color, and so
according to the complexion of your Dies, you may Color them this way any
Color.

For Blue, let your Dies be Indico and Bise.

For Black, Galls and Log^ood, with a little Copperas.

For Purple, Lake and Indico.

For Carnation, Smalt, and Vermillion.

For Yellow, Yellow-Berries and Saffron, dissolving a little Tartar in your
water.

For Orange, Turmerick and Red Lead, and so of any other Colors you fancy.

Or Dying Silks, Stuffs, Cloths, Thread, and other things, of diverse curious
Colors.
To Dye Silk a Sanguine Color.
Take a pound of Green-weed, as much Allom, bruise them and pour on them fair
water, add half a pound of Rasped Brasil, set them over a gentle fire, well to
mix them, then put in the Silk, suffering it to sees therein then, and so
continue it, by strengthening your Dye and dipping till you perceive the Color
has taken well; after that rinse it in Leys, Wood-Ashes, or Oak-Bark, and so
clear it with fair water, dry it, and press it.

To Dye Silk a deep Carnation.
Take Whitegall and Allom, the Herb called Foli well dried, to the quantity of
a pound, two ounces of Spanish-red, four of Indian Lake, boil them in fair
water over a gentle fire, and when they come to a height of tincture, dip your
Silks into them, and let them have ^ood dippings three or four tim^^ and the
Color will take very well.

To Dye Silk Quoins Red.
Let these be steeped well in ^llom-water, then give them a gentle heat, adding
in the heat^ng Bran-water, a pound and a half of Green-weed, so heat it up, and
put the Silk into it, but let it not sees, then rinse ^^in Leys of Wood-Ashes,
after that in Water, then put in ^our Logwood Rasped or in Powder, and so heat
it up a second time, and so in thrice well dipping, the business will be
accomplished.

To Dye a curious Yellow.
Take Wood, the Stalks, Seeds and Leaves, and lay them to soak in Wood-Ashes
Leys three hours, then feeth it till it is sufficiently sodden, and put it into
a mixture of ho^ water and Urine, so heat it up and strain the Liquid part
through a Sieve or Strainer adding Verdigrise, and so boi^ it up with the Ley
already sod, stirring and well mixing the Liquor about three hours, and when it
is very hot, dip three times.

To Dye Silk a Rose-red.
Take to every four yards an a half you intend to Dye, a pound and a half of
Nutgalls, boil them in fair water unbruised two hours, shift the water, then
put in the Silk or Linen, letting it soak four hours, then wring it dry, and
heat it in fair water, wherein Allom has been dissolved, then put in half a
pound of Brasil Powder, and a pound of Green-weed, and so by dipping in gentle
heats, the Color will heighten.

A good Black Water, for Silk or Cloth.
Take an ounce of Lamp-black, half a pound of Nutgalls, bruise the latter, and
put them into a Pottle of Water, with a handful of the Filings, or Rust of
Iron, heat them up, adding a quarter of a pound of Copperas, sees it to a
third part consumption, then add half a hint of Gum-water, and it will not only
be for present use, but keep long, and be a very good black.

To Dye Purple.
In this case if you Dye Silk, you must take to each pound of an ounce of
Allom, and a gallon of water, dissolving the Allom therein over a gentle fire,
then put in the Silk, and let it continue there about four hours, then take
Lake and Indico, each a quarter of a pound, a quart of Urine, then adding a
little handful of Cochineel, heat them up into a Dye, and dip your Silks or
fine Stuffs into it as usual.

To Dye a very fair Blue.
Take any Silk, Stuff, or Cloth white, and soak it in water, that done, wring
out the water very well, and add two pound of Would, a pound of Indico, and
three ounces of Allom, give a gentle heat in fair water, and so dip till you
perceive the Color take well.

Carnation.
To make this a curious right Color, take dried Purper, soak it in Man's Urine
for a Night, then take what you have to Dye, and soak in Allom water twice,
sees the Purper in fair water, and then set another Vessel to receive the
Liquor, and dip therein.

For a Pleasant light Red.
Boil two gallons of Wheat, and an ounce of Allom in four gallons of Water,
strain it through a fine Sieve, dissolve more Allom, half a pound, and as much
of white Tartar; add three pound of Madder, to perfect the Color, and put in
your Stuff, Cloth, etc. at a moderate heat.

Black for Velvet, etc.
Take half a pound of Copperas, a gallon of Smiths-water, two pound of Galls,
burn Ivory, Oak Bark, and Shoemakers Black, each an ounce, well ground, two
gallous of fair water, mix them well, and set them in the Sun, or other warm
place a Month, often stir it, and at a moderate warmth dip your Vesvet, or
other things designed for deep blacks.

To make Red Water for Silk or Woollen, Violet, Green, Azure or Yellow.
Take two gallons of fair Water, four ounces of Brasil, and being half consumed
in heating up, remove it from the fire, put in an ounce of Grains, a quarter of
an ounce of Gum Arabic, with a quarter of a pound of Allom well bruised, and
having stood all Night, it may be well used in the Morning.

To Dye Woollen, Yarn, or Wool.
Take two pound of Wood, to every four pound of Yarn, etc. and two gallons of
Water; put more, two handfuls of Wood Ashes, and when it seeths, put in the
Yarn or Wool, and let it continue half an hour, or somewhat more, then wring
it, and put it in again, and let it sees as long as before, and if it were a
brown Blue, it will be a dark Green, or of a white Yellow color.

To make Bran-water.
This is very necessary in Dying, and therefore you ought to know how to
prepare it; do it with half a peck of Wheat-Bran, to two gallons of Fair water,
over a gentle fire, and half a pound of bruised Allom; suffer it to stand about
a week, with often stirring before you use it.

To make Gray Florrey.
Let the Florrey be soaked twenty four hours, then wring it through a Cloth,
and take Ashes of Vine-Sprays, and with them make a Ley, and upon a Table
spread the Florrey, about two hours, put the Ley into three Vessels, and shift
the Florrey out of one into another, and before you dip, put Vinegar in, and
the Florrey will be well ordered, and your Color good.

To Dye Linen with Crampenade.
To three Else of your Linen, use a pound of the Crampenade, and a gallon and
a half of water, and so to a greater quantity proportionable; let it stand over
a fire till it begins to sees, put in at that time two ounces of Galls, and
then your Linen, and when you take it out, which must be often, wring it, and
put it into Allom water; but if you would have the Color darker, it is
requisite to have a Ley of unslacked Lime, or Chalk Stones.

To Dye a good Red in Linen, Thread, or Cloth.
Soak a pound of Sam-fleure twenty four hours in two gallons of water,
suffering it to heat over a gentle fire, add two ounces of Vermillion, half a
pound of Rasped Brasil, and an ounce of Allom, dissolved in a pint of fair
water, and dip, and order your materials as in other things.

Thus Reader, have I given you a good Insight into the Mystery of Dying Silks,
Stuffs, Cloths, and other things relating thereto, which may by Practice prove
advantageous.

The Art of Perfuming.
To make Essence of Hypocras.
Take a strong Glass Bottle, and put half a pint of Spirit of Wine into it, add
an ounce of Cinnamon, half an ounce of Cloves, a gross of Ginger, and as much
Coriander as you can hold with your Forefinger and Thumb well beaten, three or
four grains of black Amber, or Ambergrise beaten in a Stone Mortar, stop the
Bottle very fast, and set it on Sand, exposing it to the Sun for a Month: the
Bottle in this case must not be full, nor stand out in the Rain; This is a
curious and wholesome Perfume.

Essence of Amber.
Put a pint of Spirits of Wine into a strong Glass Bottle, and beat in a very
small Stone Mortar, a gross, or the eighth part of an ounce of black Amber, or
Ambergrise, put it into the Spirits, with half a gross of the Bladder of Musk
very small, so stop it close, and set it for a fortnight as the former, shaking
it two or three times a day, when the Sun shines hot upon it, but fill not the
Bottle full, left the Spirits break it; and then let it stand still another
fortnight, and it is done.

Rosa-Solis, or perfumed Liquor.
Put two pints of Water, and two pounds of Sugar in a Copper Pan over a gentle
fire, and let them boil to the consumption of a fourth part, then put in two
Spoonfuls of Orange-Flower Water, then throw in the White and Shell of an Egg,
well beaten with a whisk, and stir the Egg well in the Liquor with it, take it
off when it boils, and strain it through a bag several times, and when you
perceive it well clarified, pour in of the best Brandy, and then Essence of
Hypocras or Amber, and you will have excellent perfumed Solis.

Angel-Water.
Put into an Earthen Pot a quart of Orange-Flower Water, a quarter of a pound
of Benjamine, two ounces of Storax, a quarter of an ounce of Cloves, half an
ounce of Cinnamon, two or three bits of Calamus, set the Pot on a gentle fire,
to the consumption of a fourth part, add a Bladder of Musk, then let it cool,
strain it well from the Dross, and put it up for use.

Millefleur, or the Water of several Flowers.
To do this, put in a strong Glass Bottle, a pint of Angel-Water, then in a
little Mortar beat twelve grains of Musk, then put several Flowers of various
scents, more of the weaker than of the stronger, that there may be a
temperature, and allay them with that Water, and when well infused, pour it off
into a Bottle, and keep it well closed for use.

Orange-Flower Water.
To make this well, infuse t^o pound of Orange-Flowers, and quart of Water
three or four hours, and so Distill them in a cold Still; This Water is good for
cleansing Spuff, making Angel-Water, or Perfuming Wash-Balls, or Skins.

The Queen of Hungary's-Water.
But a quart of the best Spirit of Wine into a strong Glass-Bottle, and two
large handfuls of Rosemary-Flowers, a handful of Time, and half a handful of
Sweet Marjorum, the leaves only, and as much of Sage, keep the Bottle close
stopped, and expose it to the Sun a month, and then you may dissolve the
bigness of a Bean of Orcanat, bruising it with a little Spirit of Wine, and put
it into the Bottle; then expose it four or five days more to the Sun, and it
will be of a fine Red Color, and a curious Scent.

Pastils or Perfumes, of diverse kinds.
Pastils of Roses made into Wax-Candles.
Take a pound of the Dregs of Angel-Water, beat them when dried very fine, and
searce them through a Hair Sieve, then put to them a handful of the Leaves of
Roses, newly gathered, dissolve Gum Adragant in Rose Water, and beat the whole
long together, to well Incorporate it, then roll up pieces as big as your
Finger taperwise, and when they are dry they will burn like a Candle, and give
a very curious scent.

Perfumed Pastils for Beads or Medals.
Dissolve Gum-Adragant and Arabic in Millefleur-Water, and put into it
Marchal-pouder is much as will stiffen it into a Paste, rub the Moulds you cast
them in with Essence of Flowers, and the Beads or Medals will be of a curious
Brown or Coffee color.

Another.
Take of Frangipan and Cyprus pouders, each a like quantity, put them in Gum,
wherein Millefleur-Water is the greater part, and make them into Pastils.

To make Liquid Snuff, excellent for the Cure of the Headache, or against
Apoplectick Fits; a rare Secret.
Take Distilled Betony-Water a pint, half a pint of Rosemary-Flower-Water,
infuse in these four ounces of the best Virginia-Tobacco, finely sifted into
powder; let them stand warm by the Fire, or in the Sun twenty four hours, then
squeze out through a very fine clean Cloth the liquid part, Scent it with a
little Ambergrise, and a very small quantity of Musk, drop into it three or
four drops of Chimical Oil of Nutmeg, or Cinnamon, shake it well when the
Settlings are taken off, and keep it in small, close Vials for use, snuffing or
spirting up a very small quantity at a time into your Nostrils; the Scent of it
without snuffing up, remedies an ordinary Headache.

^osmeticks, or Curious Receipts for Beautifying the Face, Hands, or any part
of the Body.
Benjamin-Water, an excellent Beautifier.
Take a pint of good strong Brandy, a pint of Spirit of Wine, half a pound of
Benjamine, and a quarter of a pound of Storax, on ounce of Cinnamon, and half
an ounce of Cloves, and four Nutmegs; beat the Spices and Benjamine, and
putting them into the liquids, stop them up close in a strong Glass-Bottle, and
let it stand upon Sand in the Sun, in the heat of Summer a month, and then pour
it off, and clarify it.

This cleanses the Skin of Morphew, Tandness or Sunburning, and causes a
delicate complexion, as does the Queen of Hungary's Water, which I have already
taught you to make.

To prepare Spunges for the Face.
Having chose the best and smoothest Sponge, and cut off what is superfluous,
soak it, changing the Water till it looks clear, then dry it, and dip it in
Orange-Flower or Angel-Water, pour over it a little Essence of Amber, then
squeeze it but a little and let it dry, and it will be for your purpose, in
Cleansing and Beautifying the Skin, far beyond the use of Linen.

To cause a Fair, Clear Complexion.
Distill Fumitory Rosemary-Flowers, and Scabious, each two good handfuls in a
Pottle of White Wind, and a quart of Dew, gathered off the Grass or Corn, with
clean Napkens and Handkerchiefs, and so wrung out; keep it close stopped in
Glass Bottles, and wash the Face and Hands with it, as there is occasion.

To cause a Fresh-coloured Complexion.
Take Oil of Myrrh an ounce, three drops of Oil of Sulphur, an ounce of the Oil
of Sweet Almonds, mingle them well, and anoint the Face going to Bed, and the
next Morning take it off with Benjamine-Water.

To make a Clear-Pale Complexion*
Distill the Blossoms of Pease Beans and Peaches, each a good handful, in two
quarts of Whey, and wash the Face with it.

A Pomatum to Refresh the Complexion, and take off Pimples and Redness.
Take half a pound of the leaf of Hogs Fat, work it well in Fair-Water till it
is very white, then put it into a new earthen Pan, put in a quarter of an ounce
of Copperas, two Pippins cut in pieces without paring, mix an ounce of the Oil
of Sweet Almonds, and strain it through a Linen Cloth into clean Water, and
make it into a Pomatum, and with it anoint the Face.

To take away Freckles.
Take the Gaul of a Cock, an ^unce of Rye-Meal, a quarter of an ounce of the
Juice of Hem^ock, an ounce of Oil of Turpentine, make them into an Ointment,
and anoint the freckles with it, and in a little t^me they will disappear.

A Pomatum, to Plump the Lips and Cheeks.
Take an ounce of Fresh Butter, and as much Virgins-Wax, set them over a gentle
Fire, and throw in black Grapes, bruise them with a Ladle; then put in two
ounces of Orange-Flower-Water; bruise in a Porringer, the bigness of a Rean of
Orcanet, allay it with a little Orange-Flower-Water, put them into the Pomatum,
and work them up together with a Spoon, and put it up for your use.

A Liquid Past, to Wash the Hands without Water.
Take of bitter Almonds a pound, bruise them well in a Stone Mortar, till no
Lumps remain, wet it with a little Milk, and make it into a Paste, beat the
Crumbs of Whitebread with a little Milk, and put these with the Yolks of Eggs
without a Tread into the Mortar to the Paste; beat them up yet more, and then
boil them till thick, and keep them for use.

of white Lead, and as much of burnt Bone, mix them over a gentle fire, to a
thickness, lay them on the Strainer.

To make a Soap that will take Grease, Spots, or Stains out of Cloth, Silks or
Stuffs.
Burn a pound of Roach-Allom, and finely powder it, add to it half a pound of
the Root of an Herb called Florence-flame, then a new-laid Egg, and two pound
and a half of Cake Soap, bruise and mix them well together that they may be
made up with Fair Water into Balls; then first wash the place Stained or
Spotted with Fair warm Water, scrape the Soap moist on it, and wash it out, and
in three or four times thus doing, the blemishes will disappear.

To take Spots out of Linen.
Take two spoonfuls of the Juice of an Onion, and as much of Lime-Juice, wet it
two or three times, as often drying it by a Fire, wash-it immediately in a good
Laver, and it is done.

A good Ley, to take out Spots or Stains.
Put half a pound of Soapboilers Ashes, into two pints of Water; let them
remain three days with often stirring, then pour off the clear Ley, and mix it
with Fullers-Earth, and lay it thick on the place, drying it in the Sun, or by
a Fire, and in two or three times doing, it will effect your desire.

To take Spots or Stains out of Colored Silks, Stuffs, Linen or Woollen.
Take Pumice-Stone and grind it to pounder, put to it sharp Vinegar and
Fullers-Earth, let it lie on and dry, then wash it out with Milk and the Flower
of Almonds.

A way to take out Tar, Pitch, or Rosin.
Dab on this Oil of Turpentine, let that dry, and put on more, and the third
time when it is dried you may rub out the Pitch, etc. for it will crumble like
Dirt.

To take out Oil, or Grease.
Mix burnt Bone and Fullers-Earth with a little White Wind, and Plaster them
on the Spot, dry it by the Sun or Fire, and it will suck out all the Grease in
once or twice doing.

Sweet Pouders or Perfumes, etc.
To make gross Powder Ala-Marchale.
Take of Iris sixteen ounces, dried Orange-Flowers twelve ounces, Coriander
four ounces, a pound of Provence Roses, two ounces of Angel-Water dregs, an
ounce of Calamus, two ounces of Souchet, half an ounce of Cloves, beat them
well one after another in a Mortar, mix them, and finely sift them into one
incorporated Powder.

Powder of Jessimines
To make this, mix about a thousand sprigs and flowers of Jessimine, amongst
twenty pound of fine Starch, in a close Box, lay them even, making a Bed of
Flowers, and a Bed of Powder, and let them lie twenty four hours without
touching, then shift the Flowers, and put fresh ones the same quantity for
three days, and the Powder will be well scented.

Powder of Musked Roses.
To do this well, you must put the Musked Roses into the Powder, and leave them
there twenty four hours, in a close Box, so shift them three times, and they
will give an excellent scent.

Powder of Orange-Flowers.
Mix a pound of good scented Flowers with twenty pound of Starch, or Rice
grounds, mingle them, and sift them twice a day at least, for these are subject
to heat, and in twenty four hours you must shift the Flowers, and put the same
quantity of fresh ones in, and so till there is a good scent, keeping it always
close, unless when you use it.

Powder of Violets, or Iris.
In this case, beat the Iris, and pass it through a Sieve, mingle it with the
Powder, and it gives the natural scent of a Violet.

Powder of Amber.
Mix Jessimine, Rose, and Musk-Pouder together, each a like quantity, then mix
with them the eighth part of an ounce of the Essence of Amber; then sift the
Powder, but break not the Lumps made by the Essence till dried, then sift them
in, and mingle them well; and in this manner with Flowers, Essences, etc. you
may make what Scent you please, Starch being the Ground of these Hair-Pouders,
which sucks the Scents, and contains it a very considerable time for use.

Wash-balls Perfumed, etc.
Common Wash-Balls, to make them.
Take a pound of white Cake-Soap, scrape it, and beat it well in a Mortar; take
out the Crumbles that are not well incorporated, and put in a pound of Starch
well poudered, an ounce of the Essence of Orange, half a pint of Macanet-Water
prepared, stir them gently with a Pestle, then beat till they are an well
mixed, make the Paste up into Balls, and let them dry.

Wash-Balls of Neroly.
Take eight pound of Cake-Soap well cleansed, put to it when scraped, as much
of Rose or Orange-Flower, as will well temper it, stirring it twice a day, the
better to soak; then having beaten it well, put in a pound of Labdanum in
Powder, and two ounces of Neroly, mix them into a Paste, and so make them into
Balls.

Bologna Wash-Balls.
Take three Bundles or Boxes of these Balls, beat them, and dip them in
Angel-Water, as much as will well wet them, add half a pint of Benjamine-Water,
make two equal Cakes of the Paste, by well beating, then beat very small two
drams of Musk or Civet, with two ounces of Balm of Peru, dropped in by degrees;
add to these the gross Essence of Amber, and some Essence of Cloves, and some
Cinnamon, mix these with the Paste, make it into Balls, and keep it for a very
curious Perfume; and in this nature other Wash-Balls, or Paste may be made, and
perfumed with various scents.

Sweet-Bags, to make.
Take of Common-Rose-Leaves twelve ounces, Lavender-Flowers a pound and a half,
Sweet Marjoram-Leaves twelve ounces, four ounces of the Leaves of Myrrh, six
ounces of Tyme-Leaves, four ounces of Mellilot-Leaves, one of Rosemary, two of
Cloves, one of Musk-Roses, a good handful of Citron and Orange-Flowers; put
these in a Pot, making a Ley of Leaves and Flowers, and another of Salt, then
stop it well, yet every other day, stir it with a stick, exposing it to the
heat of the Sun in Summer, but not in the Rain, and fill your Sweet-Bags with
these, and powder.

To perfume Gloves, Fans, or Skins, with Flowers, etc.
Grind on a smooth clean Marble Stone, two drams of Civet, add three drops of
the Essence Orange-Flowers, and other Flowers, made with Ben-Oil, add more, a
few drops of Millefleur-Water, grind by it self Gum Adragam, about the bigness
of a Hazle-Nut mixed with Orange-Flower-Water; after that, mix your Civet,
dropping a little of the Millefleur-Water; so do till all is well mixed, then
put your composition into a Mortar, and pour more Water, stir it till it comes
to a quarter of a pint, lay it very even on your Gloves, Skins, etc. dry them
in the Air, open, and order them for Coloring, and by this Rule, you may
Perfume them with any Scents.

Roman-Gloves, how to Perfume.
Grind on a fine Marble, a dram of Civet, with a few drops of Essence of
Orange-Flower-Water, then mix Gum-Adragant of the bigness of a Hazle-Nut, in
other Orange-Flower Water, then warm a little Mortar, and infuse in it a dram
of Amber, with a few drops of Orange-Flower-Water, pouring more to it by
degrees, till all come to about a quarter of a pint, then mix again the Civet,
with some drops of the same Water, adding, till the whole comes to half a pint,
and then Perfume your Gloves, Skins, or Fans with it.

How to Color and Perfume Gloves, at once.
Choose what Colors you like best, and grind them on a flat Stone, with a
little Ben-Oil, or the Essence of Orange-Flowers or Jess^min, pour
Orange-flower-water by degrees, still grinding, then put to the Colors
Gum-Adragant, dissolved in Orange-Water, then being well ground, pour all into
an Earthen Pan with more Water, taking the Colors, being not too thick, and
then dip a soft Brush into it, and rub over Gloves, Skins, or Fans; let them
dry in the Air, then smooth and order them as is requisite; grind a bit of your
Color with a little piece of Gum Adragant, infused in Orange-Flower, and very
clear, rub them over with this, and it will keep the Scene a long time.

Several sorts of Snuff, Solid and Liquid, how to Make and Perfume them.
To Prepare and Cleanse Snuff.
The Ground of it is Tobacco dried into Powder, that it will sift curiously
through a fine Sieve, and then it requires briefly to be washed and cleansed in
the following manner.

Soak it in Fair Water twenty four hours, then take it out, and squeeze it very
well in a Cloth, dry it in the Sun on Wicker Hurdles, over which a fine Linen
Cloth is laid, keeping it turning, and stirring almost continually; being
dried, sprinkle Sweet-Water on it, as Orange, Jessimine, Angel, or the like,
then dry it again, and wet and dry it three times, by which means it will be
capable to take the impression of any Scent, by being sprinkled on it, or
infused; but if you design to color it Red or Yellow, it must be done before
it is scented, especially for Flower-scents, it may be colored with Red or
Yellow-Oker.

To Perfume Snuff with Flowers.
The Flowers most used in this are Jessimine, Orange, Musk, Roses,
Common-Roses, Turbe-Roses, etc. But these if used naturally, must be helped
with the Essence of other Flowers, or the same; to do this, get a wooden Box
large enough for your purpose, lined within with dry White-Paper, lay a laying
of Snuff, and a laying of Flowers, and let them stand twenty four hours, then
searce or sift the Snuff, to take out the Flowers, and renew them with other
Flowers; continue it four or five days, then separate it, and keep, it in close
Boxes in a dry place for use.

Snuff, with Spanish-Perfume.
Take a pound of Snuff that has been Perfumed with any sort of Flowers, beat in
a Mortar twenty grains of Musk, with a little lump of Sugar, so put in your
Snuff by degrees, gently stirring it about, and when the Mortar is full, empty
it gently, and cover it to keep in the Scent as much as may be, then put in ten
grains of Civet, put in the Snuff again, and mingle them well, and so keep it
dry for use.

How to take Spots or Stains out of Scarlet or Velvet.
To do this, take Soap-wort, a Herb of that name, bruise it, and strain out the
Juice, add a little Black-Soap, mix them well to a moderate thickness, daub
over the stained or spotted place, wash it out with warm water, and suffering
it to dry, do it again twice or thrice, and it will effect your desire.

To take Iron-moulds, or Spots, out of Linen.
Dissolve the Powder of Burnt-Allom, in the Juice of Limon, wet the place with
it, and dry it with the back of a Spoon, in the forepart of which is a live
Coal, and in doing it five or six times, the Iron-mould, or Spot will wash out.

To Recover Faded Linen.
Heat a gallon of New-Milk over the Fire, and scrape a pound of Cake-Soap into
it, and when the Soap is well dissolved, boil the Linen well therein, and then
clap it into a hot Laver of Water and other Soap, wash it out well, and it will
recover its Strength and Color.

To make Pouder-Inks, as the London-Pouder-Ink, etc. and Liquid Shining
Japan-Ink.
To make that which is called the London-Pouder-Ink.
Take ten ounces of the clearest Nut-galls, bruise them and sift the Powder
very fine, then White Copperas two ounces, Roman Vitriol three ounces,
Gum-Arabick or Sandriack an ounce, bruise and sift them very fine, so that
though they appear White, a little being put into Water, will in a little time
turn it, and an ounce of the Powder, will make a pint of very Black Ink.

To make Japan, or Shining-Ink.
Take Gum-Arabick and Roman-Vitriol, of each an ounce, Galls well bruised a
pound, put them into Rape-Vinegar, or Vinegar made of clear Small-Beer; let
them remain in a warm place, often stirring, till the Liquor becomes black,
then add to a gallon an ounce of Ivory-Black, and a quarter of a pint of
Seed-Lac-Varnish, and it will be a curious Black-Shining Ink.

A Pouder-Ink to rub on Paper, and Write on.
Bruise about twenty Nut-galls and half an ounce of Roman Vitriol, as much
Gum-Arabick, and Gum-Sandriack, mingle these finely together, when well bruised
and sifted, to a powder, rub the Paper hard with it with Cotton Wool, and
polishing it with a piece of Ivory, write with Water, and in a little time, the
Letters you write will appear a Fair-black, as if written with the best Ink.

Receipts for the Cures of sundry Diseases and Grievances, Incident to Men,
Women and Children.
For the Ague.
Take a little handful of the Tops of Rue, boil them in a quart of White Wind,
give the party half a pint, four times successively, upon four Coldsits
approaching, if the Ague last so long, and put the party into a warm Bed, this
must be drank as hot as the Patient can drink it.

To Ease, and Remove the Pains of the Gout.
Take two ounces of Sarsaparilla, cut it small, and boil it in a quart of
Small-Beer, till a third part be consumed, drink it as hot as may be, and about
a quarter of an hour after, bathe in with your warm hands a mixture equally of
the Spirit of Wine, and the finest Oil of Turpentine, where the afflicting Pain
is, and it gives present ease, and in a short time makes it cease.

For Pains of Teeth.
Take Henbane-Seed, and Hisop-Seed, bruise them finely together, mix them that
they may stick well, with a little Oil of Spikenard, if hollow, stop the Tooth
with these, and a piece of Lint dipped in the Oil if not, tie up the quantity
of a large Pea, in a fine thin Rag, and lay it to the Root of the Tooth, and
the Pain will soon cease.

To take away Corns.
Cut well and close, take out as much of the Coat as you can then take
Burnt-Allom, and the Pith of an Oister that sticks to the Shell, dried and
poudered, incorporate these with a little Venice-Turpentine, put into the
hollowness, if there be any, a little Tent of Lint dipped in Oil of Cloves, and
lay on the other as a Plaster, and it in a weeks time with thrice renewing,
takes away the Corn, making Flesh arise, to fill the hollowness.

For Blasts, Burns, or Scalds.
Take Ointment of Tobacco a quarter of an ounce, Pigeons, or Pullets Dung half
an ounce, Sallad Oil two spoonfuls, Snow-Water the like quantity, Cream a
quarter of a pint, and the White of a New-laid Egg, beat and bruise these till
they become a pliable Ointment over a gentle fire, spread them on a fair Cloth,
and lay it to the afflicted Part, and in three or four times renewing, it will
take out the fire, and put the party in an easy way of Recovery.

For the Stone or Gravel, in the Reins or Bladder.
Take green Parsley, if it can be got, that is running to Seed, if not, other
Parsley, stamp it, and squeeze out an ounce of the Juice, and as much of that
of a very hard Onion; take a little handful of Sloes, bruise them that the
Stones may break, mix these with a pint of White Wind and boil it well, then
add to the strained Liquor, a quarter of an ounce of calcined Crab's-eyes or
Claws, and let the Patient drink fasting half of it, and move up and down
swiftly, and within a quarter of an hour the rest, and it will speedily afford
ease, and bring away Sand and Gravel, if it remain in the Ureters, or Neck of
the Bladder or Yard.

Thus Reader have I made good my Promise in this crowded Work, full of
variety, and must conclude, because there remains not room for any more to be
inserted in this little Book.


