A SERMON Preached at the Meeting of Protestant Dissenters, CALLED QUAKERS, IN
Turners-Hall LONDON; On the 16th. of the Second Month, 1696.

Being the Public Day of Thanksgiving For the Deliverance of the King and
Kingdom.

By GEORGE KEITH.

To which is added a Testimony of Fidelity and Subjection to King WILLIAM the
III. from the aforesaid People on behalf of themselves and others of the same
Persuasion with them.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1696.

Isaiah xxxviii. xix. The Living, the Living he shall praise thee, as I do this
Day.
Compared with Psalm. 18. 46, etc.
IT is a certain Testimony which the Holy Scripture gives concerning those that
praise God, according to the Words of that good King Hezekiah, a Faithful
Servant of the Lord, For the Grave cannot praise thee, Death cannot celebrate
thee, they that go down into the Pit cannot hope for thy Truth. How is this to
be understood? Do not the Deceased Saints Praise God? Yes certainly they do, to
wit their Souls and Spirits which die not: Though their Bodies die, their Souls
Praise God. Who then are these Dead which the Scripture testifies do not Praise
God? I Answer, such as are dead in their Sins and Trespasses; for Sin has
brought that Spiritual Death over Men and Women that they are not capable to
Praise God nor serve him any manner of way acceptably, till he breath upon
them, and quicken them by his Living Breathings, and by that Living Virtue and
Power which proceeds from him. Now Holy David was very sensible of this when he
says, in that excellent Psalm, The Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock: Psalm.
18. 46.
and let the God of my salvation be exalted. That Man or Woman that can say
this, The Lord lives, from a true inward and Spiritual Sense of his Living
Power and Presence, that has quickened them and made them alive, made them
sensible of his Power and Mercy, of his great Deliverance and Preservation,
these are only fit to say, Blessed be my Rock: and let the God of my salvation
be exalted. But alas! How few are there in comparison that can speak these
words in sincerity of Heart and from true experience, The Lord lives? Those
that can speak it in an acceptable way from true experience, they know the
Revelation of Gods mighty Arm and living Power in their Hearts and Souls; They
know that the Lord is the only Living and True God; There is no other God like
to him: The Idols of the Nations are false Gods. The Psalmist speaks thus of
them, Psalm. 135. 15, 16.
The Idols of the Heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. They
have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not. They have
ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath in their mouths. They that
make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusts in them. But
David's God, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, he is the True and Living
God. Dead Idols can neither do good nor evil, but God is a present Help in
trouble. God is the Living and True God; they that have an Inward Sense and
Experience of his Mighty Power that has quickened them, Ephesians. 2. 1, 4.
and made them alive, they alone can praise him in an acceptable manner. Those
that are under the Power of Sin, and under its Reign and Government, they are
under the Power of Death, and the Dead cannot praise him. Death reigns over
them, Spiritual Death; Romans 5. 14.
Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression. Death began from Adam, God made him upright
and in Innocence; Death reigned from his Fall and Transgression, when he
transgressed the Commandment of the Lord. So now I desire you well to ponder
and consider this great and weighty Testimony of the Holy Scripture, who these
are that are capable to praise God for his Mercies, Deliverances and
Preservations. Those that he has made alive, and quickened, those that can say
from true Experience, The Lord lives, and can call him their Rock, and can say
with the Psalmist, Blessed be my Rock: and let the God of my salvation be
exalted. And as he speaks in the beginning of this Psalm, Psalm. 18. 2.
The Lord is my Rock, and my Fortress, and my Deliverer: my God, my strength,
in whom I will trust, my Buckler, the horn of my Salvation and my high Tower. I
will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from
mine Enemies. And the Psalmist says in another place, Psalm. 147. 1.
Praise ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises our God; for it is
pleasant, and praise is comely. Praise is comely for the Righteous. Psalm. 33. 1.
It is as a beautiful and comely Garment; it is an Ornament to them; but it is
as improper for the Unrighteous and for Wicked and Ungodly Persons, as it is to
take a Dead Carcass full of Stench and Corruption, and cloth it with a rich and
beautiful Garment, so improper and uncomely is Praise and Thanksgiving in the
Mouth of a Wicked and ungodly Person. The Scripture gives no Allowance to such
as are altogether unfit, to Rejoice and Praise the Lord; they are called to
mourn and weep, and to be humbled for their Sins. But some may object and say,
Is it not an universal Duty of all Men to praise the Lord? Yes if they will
forsake their Sins, and turn to the Lord; as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 55. 7.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon. Then the Lord will accept of a Sacrifice of Praise,
Isa. 1. 16, 17.
Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, etc. Come now and let
us reason together, says the Lord: though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall
be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.
Then he will allow them to come into his presence and to speak unto him, and to
offer him praise for his Mercies.

Now there is this thing further that I would recommend to your serious
Consideration. Look through the whole Scripture and you shall find, it has
been the manner and way of Gods People to praise him, not only in general,
daily and constantly for his Mercies, Favors, Preservations and Deliverances,
but upon every New Occasion upon the receiving of any Extraordinary Mercies,
Blessings, Preservations, or Deliverances from Dangers, and from Violence
designed and threatened, to Praise, and Solemnly bless the Lord, with Cordial
Thanksgiving; and we are to set Time apart for this Work, and to excite and
stir up our selves to magnify and praise the Lord. Thus Holy David excites and
stirs up himself to praise the Lord, Psalm. 119. 156.
and prays to the Lord to quicken him, Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord:
quicken me according to thy judgments. Many are my persecutors, and mine
enemies: yet do I not decline from thy testimonies. Consider how I love thy
precepts: quicken me O Lord, according to thy loving kindness. Of this I might
give many Instances from the Holy Scriptures.

When the Lord brought a Flood to drown the old World, he said, I will destroy
man, whom I have created, Genesis 6. 7.
from the face of the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping thing, and
the fowls of the air. But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord, and he
commanded Noah to make him an Ark for the saving himself and his Family; and
when he had finished it, the Lord said unto Noah, Genesis 7. 1.
Come thou and all thy house into the Ark: For thee have I seen righteous
before me in this generation; and that Ark was Instrumental for the preserving
him and his Family from the Deluge. We see what benefit Noah's Family received
by, and through him. You that dwell in Families that serve and fear the Lord,
there is great benefit and advantage you may receive thereby; but it is not
that which intitles you to Eternal Salvation: It is not the Righteousness of
Parents that will save their Children, but they must be changed and renewed in
their own particulars: But there is a great advantage in it for Chilrend and
Servants to dwell in a Godly Family; they enjoy many Spiritual Advantages, and
partake of Temporal Salvation and Deliverances, as it appears by Noah's Family,
who were saved in the Ark. After the Flood Noah builded an Altar unto the Lord,
Genesis 8. 20.
and in token of his Thanksgiving, he took of every clean beast, and of every
clean fowl, and offered burnt-offerings on the Altar. And the Lord smelled a
sweet savor: There was a sweet savor did ascend to the Lord, it was the
savor of his Faith. And God spoke unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying,
And I, behold, I establish my Covenant with you, and with your seed after you;
And I will establish my Covenant with you, neither shall all flesh be cut off
any more by the waters of a flood: neither shall there any more be a flood to
destroy the earth. I shall give some further Instances of this great Truth, of
offering Praise and Thanksgiving to the Lord for Mercies and Deliverances.
Consider that great and wonderful Deliverance that God gave to the Children of
Israel when he brought them out of Egypt, through the Red Sea, Psalm. 106. 9, 10.
as upon dry Land, He rebuked the Red Sea also, and it was dried up: so he led
them through the depths as through the wilderness. And he saved them from the
hand of him that hated them: and redeemed them from the hand of the enemy. And
the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them left. Then believed
they his words, they sang his praise. You have the words of Thanksgiving set
down: Exodus 15. 1.
Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, I will
sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously; the horse and the rider
has he thrown into the Sea. We have many Instances of this Duty of praising
God in the Book of Psalms, Psalm. 126.
When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that
dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing:
then said they among the heathen, the Lord has done great things for them. The
Lord has done great things for us: whereof we are glad. And the Psalmist tells
us, Psalm. 137. 1, 2.
By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea we wept, when we remembered
Zion. We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof. For there they
that carried us away captive, required of us a song; and they that wasted us,
required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the Songs of Zion. How shall we
sing the Lords song in a strange land? But when they came back to their own
Land, when the Lord turned back their Captivity, then they sang the Songs of
Zion. The Apostle John tells in the Book of Revelations, how he saw, Rev. 15.
2. 3.
as it were a sea of glass, mingled with fire; and them that had gotten the
victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the
number of his name, standing on the sea of glass, having the harps of God. And
they sang the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying, great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true
are thy ways thou King of Saints. Who are these may some say, of whom this may
be understood, that they sung the Song of Moses and the Song of the Lamb? I
hope this is in part already fulfilled, and it will be more abundantly
fulfilled, when the Lord shall be pleased to raise up many, and make them
Living Witnesses of this Victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over
his Mark, and over the Number of his Name. Those that shall be raised up with a
Living Testimony, and with a holy courage to withstand the gross Errors of the
Church of Rome, and all her false Doctrine, and all the Papal Power, by which
they have brought into bondage so many Thousands and Millions of People:
Blessed be the Lord our God, that has begun to break off that Yoke, and give a
measure of Victory over this Beast, this Beastly Power and this Beastly Raging
Spirit, that has for many Hundred Years and Ages past, prevailed over the
Spirits and Consciences of Men, and brought a Consternation upon them, Rev. 13.
4, 8.
that the general cry was, Who is able to make war with the Beast? Yet still
God has had a number that would not Worship the Beast, and they were Sealed
with the Seal of God; yet the greatest number Worshipped him, whose Names are
not written in the Book of Life, of the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the
World, whose Cry in those days was, Who is like the Beast? Who is able to make
war with the Beast? I hope none of us here are of that mind to slight and
undervalue what God has already done, to make way and room for what is now
brought to pass, and will be more and more brought to pass and accomplished,
the great Work of God, in raising up Men with a Noble and Undaunted Courage,
and great Resolution, with their Lives in their Hands; for many have laid down
their Lives to give a faithful Testimony of the Truth, and have sealed it with
their Blood above One hundred and thirty Years ago: The Work of God is to be
owned, the Arm of God was made bare, and his Mighty Hand made known therein:
This which has been done is a great preparation for what is to follow: He that
made not the World at once, but by degrees, as in the space of six days: God
that was before ^ime was, is pleased to take time to bring forth his most
wonderful Works in the World; God could (if he pleased) form the Child in the
Mothers Womb in one day, or in a moment, yet he does it gradually, in the space
of ten Months; God could make a Corn or Grain of Wheat to grow up in a moment,
but he has appointed a season for it. The Errors and Corruptions of the Church
of Rome are such, that she may well be called the Mother of Harlots, and
Abominations of the Earth; She has her Daughters, that tho they profess to be
different from her, yet they are too much of her Spirit. All that Worship Idols
of Gold and Silver, VVood and Stone; And likewise those that, although they do
not Worship Images, yet if they love Money more than God, they are guilty of
Idolatry, and will be numbered among her Daughters at the great Day of Account:
As also, all Persecuters and false Worshipers. It was a mighty Work of God that
has broken the Ice in that that has been already begun, and brought to pass,
and is yet further to be carried on till it be completed and accomplished. It
was a wonderful Discovery and Revelation that God made to the Apostle John, who
by the Light of Prophecy foresaw things to come, many Hundred Years before they
were fulfilled, wonderful things respecting Worldly Governments relating to the
State and Condition of the Church and People of God, And there appeared a great
wonder in heaven, Rev. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 15, 16.
a woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head
a Crown of twelve Stars: And she being with child, cried, travailing in birth,
and pained to be delivered. And behold, a great red dragon, having seven heads,
and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. And the Dragon stood before the
woman that was ready to be delivered for to devour her child as soon as it was
born. And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a rod
of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne. And the woman
fled into the Wilderness, etc. And the dragon was worth with the woman, and
went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the Commandments of
God, and have the Testimony Jesus Christ. The Apostle John by the Light of
Divine Prophecy, he foresaw how long the Woman should continue in the
Wilderness, and when the Scarlet Whore should be Judged, that had made her self
drunk with the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs; Rev. 19* 1, 2, 4.
And after these things, says the Apostle, I heard a great voice of much
people in heaven, saying, Alleluja, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power
unto the Lord our God: For true and righteous are his Judgments, for he has
judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and
has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand. And the four and twenty
elders, and the four living creatures, fell down and worshipped God that sat on
the throne, saying, Rev. 5. 8, 9.
Amen; Alleluja. And the four living creatures, and the four and twenty elders
fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them harps, and golden vials
full of odours, which are the prayers of the saints. And they sang a new song,
saying, Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. And every creature which is in
heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and
all that are in them, heard I, saying, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and
Power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and
ever. So that this I say, by way of Testimony out of the Holy Scripture, that
it has been the Work of Gods people to praise God for all his Mercies,
Blessings and Deliverances, and this is that which God expects from us that we
should Magnify and praise him when he is pleased to work great Deliverances
for us according to those Words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 50. 14, 15.
Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most high. And call
upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.
This is the just Tribute that God requires who is the Great Deliverer and
Preserver of Men, to glorify and praise him, and give him that honor that is
due to his Great and Excellent Name, and not only to praise him with our
Tongues and Lips, but with our Lives; Whosoever offers praise, Psalm. 50. 23.
glorifieth me: (says the Lord) and to him that orders his conversation
aright, will I show the salvation of God. And our Savior commands this, and
charge it upon us as our duty. Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, Mat. 5. 16.
and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Now as concerning the praises of
God; all Gods praises which are acceptable to him, they are to be in Spirit and
in Truth. John 4. 24.
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in
truth. The father seeks such to worship him. The praises of God are of a
higher and lower degree. We find there are in the Book of Psalms Songs of
degrees, so there are the high Praises of God, when the Soul is raised up by
Gods Power and Spirit from a deep and profound sense of his Mercies and great
Deliverances to render Thanksgiving and Praise. For thou have delivered my soul
from death, Psalm. 116. 8.
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. The Psalmist praised God for
Spiritual and Temporal Blessings, for Mercies both to his Soul and Body. Psalm.
104. 33, 34, 35.
I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praises unto my God,
while I have my being. My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in
the Lord. When the Psalmist comes to utter the high Praises of God, these words
are going before; Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the
wicked be no more: bless thou the Lord, O my soul, Praise ye the Lord. When the
high Praises of the Lord are to be in our Mouths, then all evil thoughts, and
wicked imaginations, and sinful motions, such as hinder Gods. Praises, are to
be put far from us, that we may worship God in Spirit, and serve him with
Sincerity and Purity of Heart. Psalm. 105.
O give thanks unto the Lord; call upon his name; and make known his deeds
among the people. Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his
wondrous works. Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that
seek the Lord. Seek ye the Lord and his strength: seek his face evermore.
Remember his mavelous works that he has done. Psalm. 149* 5, 6.
Let the saints be joyful in glory: let the high praises of God be in their
mouth, etc. Blessed are they that can witness to this Truth, that upon receipt
of great Mercies do render praises to God. If real gratitude be in our Hearts
and the high Praises of God in our mouths, this is a token for good; it is like
the white stone and new name, which none know but them that have it. It is a
great folly in many Men that will argue so much about Perfection, as if they
had attained to Perfection, and were already perfect, when it may be they know
little of it, or are scarce advanced a few steps toward it. It is as if a
Child of three or four Years old should dispute and quarrel about the
Perfection of a Man come to a full age, and about the Wisdom and Strength of
such a one; as an Infant under age is not in a capacity to understand these
things, no more can many that talk so much of Perfection judge of the
experiences of grown and eminent Christians. The Apostle says concerning such,
1 John 2. 14.
I have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God
abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. We cannot attain to this
high degree of praising the Lord with a perfect heart, and a raised and
heavenly mind as becomes those that sing the high Praises of God, till the body
of Sin in a great measure be destroyed, mortified and crucified in us, that Sin
may not have dominion, but that as Sin has reigned unto Death, even so might
Grace reign through Righteousness unto Eternal Life by Jesus Christ our Lord.
The motions of Sin in the Flesh, are like a Rebel in a Country well governed:
There may be some Rebels in a Princes Country that is well governed, and they
may seek to do mischief, so it is with some in whom a good work is begun; he
has a Law in his Members, that wars against the Law of his Mind, to bring him
into Captivity to the Law of Sin, yet there is in him something that is good,
so that the Reign and Government of Sin is opposed and resisted, and Sin has
not Dominion over him. It is a good and blessed State a Man is in, when he
resists and strives against Sin to get the Blood of Sin; he will resist Sin
unto Blood to get the Blood of Sin, Ye have not yet resisted unto blood (says
the Apostle) striving against sin. Heb. 12. 4.
There have been those that have resisted unto Blood, not to shed the Blood of
Mankind, but have laid down their Lives in the Cause of God, and have Sealed
their Testimony with their own Blood, and have witnessed against Popery, and
the damnable Heresies of the Church of Rome with the expense of their own
Blood. We have cause to bless God for those that are gone before us that have
broke the Ice and prepared our way for us. We have cause to bless the Lord
that has the hearts of Kings in his hands and turns them as the Rivers of
Water. Blessed be God that so inclined the Heart of the King and those in
Authority, that all in this Nation and all the three Nations that are Sober and
Godly and of tender Consciences may enjoy the happy Freedom and Liberty to
serve and Worship God according to their Faith and Persuasion. This is that,
God has graciously vouchsafed to us which is a Mavelous and Signal Mercy
never to be forgotten. O how would we have prized this Mercy and Liberty some
Years since, when we could not meet and assemble together without great hazard
and suffering, when many were haled to Prison, and many knocked down, and had
their Blood shed when they came together for the Worship of God. O that we
could truly apply to our selves the Words of Holy David, Psalm. 18, 17, 19.
and say, The Lord delivered us because he delighted in us: He delivered me
from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me: for they were too strong
for me. He brough me forth also into a large place: he delivered me, because he
delighted in me. O that we could say, that God has delivered the KING, and the
whole Nation because he delighted in us, and has taken pleasure in us. It may
be said so concerning some, I would to the Lord, it might be so said concerning
many among us. David says further in the following words, The Lord rewarded me
according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands has he
recompensed me. For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly
departed from my God. I was also upright before him: and I kept my self from
mine iniquity. This is a very high strain of David, he mentions his Innocence
with respect to Saul; we have it thus expressed in the title of the Psalm;
David the Servant of the Lord spoke unto the Lord the words of this Song, in
the day that the Lord delivered him from the hand of all his Enemies, and from
the hand of Saul. David was proclaimed by Saul a Traitor and a Rebel. Poor
David, Little David, when he was a Shepherd, little thought that he should be
the King of that great Kingdom; and after he was anointed King he did not
conspire against Saul, that pursued him for his Life as a Rebel, but David was
innocent with reference to him; therefore he says, The Lord rewarded me
according to my righteousness, and according to the cleanness of my hands has
he recompensed me. This is not to be understood, as if David relied upon his
own Works or Merits, but he had a Testimony in his own heart, and the Lords
Spirit bare him witness, that he was Innocent with respect to Saul, and the
Lord accounted him Innocent, he suffered for his sake. The Lord chose him to be
King, without any Plotting or Contriving, and David was tender of Saul, he did
not take the opportunity to slay Saul when some would have persuaded him. But
then there is an observable word which David speaks, Psalm. 18. 23.
I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine Iniquity. A
strange word may some say; How did he keep himself from his Iniquity? The
opening of this may be of use and service to some here: It is thus to be
understood; David tho he was a good Man, yet he did find, and was conscious to
himself, that there was a Principle of Iniquity which lay very near to him, to
tempt him to Sin, and to some particular Sin more than to others, which he
calls mine Iniquity; he was not so careful and watchful afterward, when he
came to be settled in the Kingdom. He was not so watchful over his Heart, as to
keep himself from that principle of Lust that was remaining in him; you know
what appeared and brake out in the case of Bathsheba; he walked upon the top of
his Palace, and was gazing abroad, he was not upon his Guard, did not keep his
Watch, and his Iniquity got Victory over him; but before this happened, when he
was vigilant and jealous over himself with a godly Jealousy, he could say, I
have kept my self from mine Iniquity; this Expression declares to us thus much,
that he had some particular Sin that he had need to watch against; he had some
particular Enemy near to him according to those words of our Blessed Lord, A
Man's greatest enemies are those of his own house: So it was in this case,
David's worst Enemies were those of his own House, he did not watch and keep
his guard against them in the time of his Prosperity, when he was advanced to
the Crown and Scepter of Judah and Israel, and his Enemies subdued under him;
after God had delivered him from the Hands of all his Enemies, he should have
kept himself from his Iniquity, as he had done formerly when Saul hunted and
pursued him as a Partridge upon the Mountains. Men and Women commonly have some
particular Sin and Lust, which in a peculiar manner they may call their own
Iniquity. It is Voluptuousness and the love of Carnal Pleasure in some,
Ambition and Pride in others; and Envy and Malice in some and Covetousness
(which is Idolatry) in others. Therefore let not Men Flatter and Deceive
themselves, and think that there is nothing of the Seed and Principle of Sin
remaining in their Flesh. I have heard of the Saying of a choice Christian a
worthy Woman, she had long experienced a blessed State of nearness to God: I
have heard a Person say (that had it from her own Mouth) that for the space of
some Years, the Grace of God did shine in her as the Sun at Noonday. It was a
constant thing with her to walk with God the whole Day, from her rising up to
her lying down, and she enjoyed a lively sense of the Love of God, and the
Consolations of his Holy Spirit: But it pleased the Lord afterward to hide his
Face, and then she was troubled, yet God did not utterly leave her, for she
Died a good Christian: But He did withdraw and withheld from her those
sensible Joys and Consolations she had rasted and felt in Communion with Him;
some have heard her say, When it was so with me, that the Light of God's
Countenance was lifted up upon me, and he had put gladness into my Heart, I
thought there was no Sin had any place or room in me; but after those
refreshing Joys and sensible Consolations were removed, and the Lord did hide
his Face from me, who has promised he will not utterly forsake his People,
whose Faithfulness does engage him never finally to leave them, though for some
time he may seem to Desert them; when I had (said she) those wonderful Joys and
refreshings from the presence of the Lord, I thought Sin had been quite gone,
but afterward I found it was but driven into a corner. Many that think they are
come to high Seize, Romans 7. 18.
may say, For I know that in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing. O
wretched Creature that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!
I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then with the mind I my self
serve the law of God; but with the flesh the law of sin. The Work that God has
appointed to every Christian is like the work of a Gardener Dressing his
Garden, we are so to manage our Hearts, and order our Conversations, and
Cultivate our selves, that we may be as a Watered Garden to the Lord. A Dresser
of a Garden must take great pains, and labor hard to make it Fruitful; if he
does not diligently and constantly employ himself, Weeds will be springing up,
and hinder the growth of the Herbs and Flowers; therefore the Gardener must lay
his Hands to it, and pluck up the noxious Weeds that they may not spread and
spoil and overrun the Garden. So we must labor and take pains with our Hearts
and Souls. I remember it was a saying of Bernard in a Letter which he wrote to
some of his Friends, Let your Soul be continually in your Hands, Psalm. 119. 109.
as David said, my soul is continually in my hands, that is, in a way of
reliance and giving it up into the Hands of the Lord. But Bernard, when he
says, Let your Soul be continually in your Hands, he means thus, Let your Soul
be continually washing and cleansing every Day more and more, that you may be
purified and kept unspotted from the World. If we have a spot or speck upon a
Garment, we will take pains to rubit out. And thus it ought to be with every
one of us; let our Souls be continually in our Hands, let us be dressing our
Hearts continually, and keep them with all keeping; keep them with all
Diligence, for out of them are the Issues of Life; keep your Hearts with all
keeping, and our Lord Christ will refresh you with his Living Water, as he told
the Woman of Samaria, Whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst; but the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well
of Water springing up unto everlasting Life. There is a great Mystery in this;
God for Christ's sake, and through Christ Jesus has placed in us an inward
principle of Divine Life. We are often refreshed with the Streams of this Living
Spring that flows within us, reviving us with the sense of the Love of God;
What is it that often hinders this Well from springing up in us, but the dirt and
rubbish of Sin? The Philistines stopped the Wells that Abraham and Isaac's
Servants had Dug, but they unstopped them again that the Waters might
spring up. Let us keep our Hearts clear from the dirt and rubbish of Sin, that
this Well may spring up in us to Everlasting Life. When our Savior was
demanded of the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God should come? He answered
them, and said, The Kingdom of God comes not with observation. Luke 17. 20.
Neither shall ye say, Lo here, or lo there: for behold, the kingdom of God is
within you. Yet they were bad Men and Hypocrites. It was in them as a very
little Seed, it was in them as if it were not in them; as the Man that had one
Talent, he had it as if he had it not, he did no good with it; our Lord called
him wicked and slothful Servant, Matthew. 25. 13.
and said, Take therefore the Talent from him, and give it unto him which had
ten talents. For unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have
abundance: but from him that has not shall be taken away, even that which he
has. A Covetous Man wants what he has, as if he had it not. Christ Jesus is
the true Light that lights every Man that comes into the World. I dissent
from them that speak slightly of that Light which reproves Sin in the
Consciences of Men and Women, God has put his Law in Men's Hearts, and as the
Great Lawgiver he has written it there with his own Finger, and the Gentiles
that have not the Law, are a Law to themselves, for if God had not writ his Law
in all Men's Hearts they would have no sin, where no Law is there is no
Transgression. God also writes his Laws in the Hearts of true Believers and
softens their Hearts to take the impression of it; but every Unbeliever and
unconverted Man and Woman has a Heart of Stone. None but those which know
themselves to be of the New Creation of God, have experience of a Heart of
Flesh given them, and a Heart of Stone taken away. It is they only that have
the Law written upon the fleshly Tables of their Hearts, that are washed and
purified; though I cannot say, there is a Well of Living Water in any that do
not believe, yet there is something placed by God in every one toward it, like
the Ministry of John the Baptist which was a preparing the way of the Lord, he
was spoken of by the Prophet Isaias saying, Mat. 3. 3.
the voice of one crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make his paths straight. Our Savior said to the Woman of Samaria, if thou
knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, Give me to drink;
thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. And
in another place it is said, John 7. 37. 38.
In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying,
if any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believes on me,
as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water;
but this he spoke of the spirit, which that believe on him should receive; not
Unbelievers: You that sincerely and truly Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
without all peradventure you have something of this Well of Living Water within
you, you have the gift of God, O give thanks to God through Jesus Christ our
Lord for this great and unspeakable Gift! Some may say, if I have a Well of
Living Water in me, what is the reason I feel so little comfort? my soul
thirst, and I want this Living water to drink, O that I had some drops of it to
cool and quench my thirsty Soul. I Answer, Thou do not diligently watch thy
Heart; thou suffer thy Sins, those Philistines to prevail over thee, and stop
up thy Well. When Abimelech's Servants had stopped the Wells which were dug
in the days of Abraham, Isaac dug them again; Genesis 26. 18.
I say unto you throw away the Rubbish, and Earth, and Dirt, that is got into
your own Hearts, and every thing that the Light in your own Consciences tells
you in evil, and then the Waters will spring forth. Then you will experience a
Well of Living Water springing up in you unto Everlasting Life. The Prophets of
Old, David and Samuel, Isaiah and Jeremy, and Daniel, and all other Holy Men of
God, they had experience of this Well within them springing up unto Everlasting
Life, and all true Believers before Christ came in the Flesh, they did all eat
the same spiritual meat; 1 Cor. 10. 3. 4.
and drink the same spiritual drink: (For they drank of that spiritual Rock
that followed them: and that Rock was Christ) and they had all those Spiritual
Blessings we enjoy upon the account of Christ, his most Holy Obedience and
Death: There was this difference between us and them. We believe in Christ that
is already come, and they saw Christ in the Promises, and in Shadows, Types and
Figures, and believed in Christ that was to come Under the Law they were under
a Yoke of Bondage; but we have cause to bless the Lord, that has taken that
Yoke from off our Necks, that neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear.
We Read in Act. 15. 5. Acts 15. 5, 6, 7, 8.
There rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees, which believed, saying.
That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of
Moses. And the apostles and elders came together for to consider of this
matter. And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up and said unto
them, Men and Brethren, ye know how that a good while a go, God made choice
among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel, and
believe. And God which knows the hearts, bear them witness, giving them the
holy Ghost, even as he did unto us: And put no difference between us and them,
purifying their hearts by faith. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke
upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers, nor we were able to
bear? But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall
be saved even as they. Blessed be God, that has delivered us from that burden
of Ceremonies and multitudes of Rites and Observations, that were continued
till the clearer times of the Gospel, when all the Males before that time went
every Year up to Jerusalem to worship, which was many Miles distant from many
of their Habitations: The Lord has been pleased to make the Christian Service
under the Gospel much more easy to us upon an outward account, and likewise
more advantageous as well as more easy and Delightful upon a Spiritual
Account: God has given us more of his Spirit in these times of the Gospel, not
that God has given us a greater Measure of his Holy Spirit than he gave unto
the Prophets (for they had greater gifts of the Spirit) but there is now
generally given more abundant measures of the Spirit to Gods Poople under this
Dispensation of the Gospel; there were then in general but lower and lesser
Measures, and as it were some droppings of the Spirit upon them that lived in
former Ages, but in the latter days after Christ's ascension there has been the
pouring out of the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 7.
that (as the Apostle speaks) God might in ages to come show the exceeding
riches of his grace in his kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus. And if
any do not now witness the pouring forth of the Spirit, they may find the cause
in themselves, they are not careful and diligent to improve the Means and
Advantages that God has given to them, and that is the reason of it. In the
close of the 18th Psalm, David speaks some things concerning himself, and other
things relating to Christ, speaking of himself, as he was a Type of Christ,
Psalm. 18. 43. 44.
Thou have delivered me from the strivings of the people: and thou have made me
the head of the heathen: a people whom I have not known shall serve me. As Soon
as they hear of me, they shall obey me: the strangers shall submit themselves
to me. This was but little fulfilled in David the Type, but was largely
fulfilled many hundred years after in Christ the Antitype. When the Apostles
came to Preach Christ Crucified, then very many that heard believed in Christ,
and obeyed him, submitted themselves to him, and many afterward laid down
their Lives for him. My Friends, ought not we be very Thankful when we consider
and call to mind what a sad condition England was in many Hundred Years ago,
when the Inhabitants worshipped Diana, and other Idols and false Gods? Jerome
says, the Britains were so Savage and Barbarous, that they did eat Man's Flesh.
Blessed be God for his abundant mercy and kindness to us that has brought many
in this Nation to the true Knowledge of God and his Son Jesus Christ, which is
Life Eternal. The Psalmist concludes the Psalm I have been mentioning with
these words, Psalm. 18. 50.
Great deliverance gives he to his King: and shows mercy to his anointed,
to David, and to his seed for evermore. David (as a Type of Christ) styles
himself Gods King, none are to be called Gods Kings equally and in all respects
as David was, thus he brings in God speaking in Psalm. 2. 6. of Christ. Yet
have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion. Ask of me, and I shall give thee
the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession. Great deliverance has he given to his King; David was called Gods
King in a peculiar sense as a Type of Christ: I know no King in the World,
that in all respects may equal himself with David. God sent the Prophet Samuel
to anoint him King when he was keeping Sheep; 1 Samuel 16. 12.
he was the least and lowest of all his Brethren, but he was ruddy, and withal
of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. Samuel Anointed him in the
midst of his Brethren, and the spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day
forward; and afterward the People chose him to be King. It is my Belief and
Persuasion, that there have been, and may be Kings in the World that may be
said to be God's Kings. God has raised up some for some singular and eminent
Work, so God raised up Cyrus and styled him his Anointed, Isa. 44. 28.
and his Shepherd: Isa. 45. 13.
I have raised him up in righteousness, (says the Lord) and I will direct all
his ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for
price not reward, says the Lord of hosts. Whatsoever King or Prince God has
raised up, it should be our earnest Desire and Prayer, That the work of the
Lord may Prosper in their Hands. And let me tell you this Day here is matter
for high Praises and Thanksgiving, that God has graciously and wonderfully
Saved and Delivered the King from the Hands of bloody Men that designed his
Destruction, and the Ruin of these Nations: We have abundant cause to be
Thankful not only for his Personal Deliverance and Preservation; but also to
Pray that God would be pleased to make him an eminent Instrument in his Hand to
serve and glorify God in his Generation, and promote the Christian Faith, and
the common Interest of all sincere Protestants against the Roman Papacy, and
barbarous Tyranny and Slavery. I pray God the sense of this great Mercy and
Deliverance may dwell upon all our Spirits. It is not only a Deliverance (as I
hinted before) of the King's own Person; but of us, our Wives and little Ones,
our Cities, Towns, and Families: If this Design had prospered and answered the
expectation of our Enemies, what Ruin and Confusion would it have brought upon
these Nations! What could we have expected in this Great and Populous City, but
Desolation and Ruin throughout the whole Island. I speak in sincerity, I feel
joy to arise in my Heart, and such a sense of this Mercy, as does excite me to
Praise and Thanksgiving, and to magnify the Name of the Lord that has done
great Things for us; if therebe any that flatteringly and hypocritically Praise
God for this National Mercy, they have their reward. Let us all therefore
Sincerely Cordially and in good ear-nest express our Thankfulness to God for
that great Salvation he has wrought for the King and these Kingdoms. It is a
signal Mercy and Universal Blessing. Let us all excite and provoke one another
to be truly Thankful to God, not only with our Lips but with our Lives, not
only verbally but really in a Christian Life and Conversation; without which
our keeping a Day of Thanksgiving will not be acceptable to the Lord. For thus
says the Lord, Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me: and to him that orders
his conversation aright, Psalm. 50. 23.
will I show the salvation of God.

A TESTIMONY OF OUR Faithful Obedience and Subjection TO King WILLIAM the III.
And His GOVERNMENT.
AS We do sincerely believe and profess, that Magistracy and Government in the
World is an Ordinance of God; and that it is the Duty of all Men to be subject
to those in Authority whom God has placed over them, so most especially, that
it is the Duty of all Christians to be eminently exemplary to all others in
giving and demonstrating all due subjection to the Government and Authority
under which they live; not only for Wrath but for Conscience sake; and that
they ought to pray for them, and give thanks to God for the Blessings and
Benefits received by them and their Government; and for this cause Tribute is
due unto them to support and maintain them in the necessary discharge thereof:
And in behalf of our selves and other Christian People, who are of one Faith
and Persuasion with us, as true and sincere Christians and Protestants,
sincerely concerned in the common Interest of all true Protestants, for the
preservation of the true Christian Protestant Doctrine and Faith, generally
received and professed by all sincere Protestants, against the great and
manifold pernicious Errors of the Roman Papacy, and for the true Christian
Liberty, that God in his great Mercy has in general brought into these Three
Nations, as well as to other Protestant Countries, against the Usurpation of
the Papal Hierarchy. By this our present Testimony we do sincerely and solemnly
declare, that we hold it to be our Christian Duty, to give all due and faithful
Subjection to King WILLIAM, the present KING of England, Scotland and Ireland,
etc. with all Love, Humility, and due Honor, and Respect, and cheerful, ready,
and peaceable Obedience to Him, as Supreme; acknowledging Him to be Rightful
and Lawful KING of these Realms; and to all under Him in Authority in their
several Places and Stations; giving thanks with our hearts to God for the many
Blessings and Benefits we enjoy under His Reign and Government; And we give Him
Cordial Thanks, for the Liberty and free Exercise of our Consciences, which He
has Granted, and is Established by Law, in Worshipping God according to our
Faith and Persuasion. And we utterly deny and disown the Authority of all
Foreign Power to have any Jurisdiction over these Realms: As also, we give
thanks to God for the late great Deliverance and Preservation, that God has
given Him, in Delivering Him and Preserving Him from the wicked Attempts and
Designs of such as did intend to Assassinate Him; in whose great Deliverance
and Preservation, the whole Body of all his Loving Subjects in all His
Dominions, have met with great Deliverance and Preservation to themselves and
their Families; of which singular Blessing of God to Him, and in Him, to all
these Three Nations, and all other His Dominions, we desire that all may be
deeply sensible, and by Divine Grace and Assistance may be helped to be
thankful unto God for the same, not only by confession of the Mouth, but by the
good Works of a Christian Life and Conversation: And we sincerely pray, that
God Almighty may still preserve and defend Him from all future Attempts and
Designs of wicked Men; prolong His Life and Reign; make Him a great and eminent
Instrument to promote True Christian Piety, and the True Protestant Doctrine and
Cause against the Papal Faction and Hierarchy: Bless His Government more and
more to Him, and all his Faithful and Loving Subjects; Establish His Throne in
Righteousness during His Lifetime in this World, and in the World to come give
him the Crown of Righteousness and of Eternal Life.

Given forth from our Meeting, at Turners-Hall in London, in behalf of our
selves, and other Christian People of the same Faith and Persuasion with us,
commonly called Quakers, though differing from many that go under that Name in
diverse weighty Things, relating to Christian Faith and Doctrine. The 26th of
the Second Month, called April, 1696.
FINIS.

