QUAKERISM No Popery, OR, A Particular Answer to that Part of JOHN MENZEIS,
Professor of Divinity in ABERDEEN, (as he is called) his Book, Entitled Roma
Mendax; Wherein the People called QUAKERS are concerned, whom he does accuse as
holding many Popish Doctrins, and as if QUAKERISM, (so he Nicknames our
Religion,) were but Popery-disguised.

In which Trea^ise his alleged grounds for this his Assertion, are impartialy
and fairly examined and confuted: And also his Accusation of POPERY against us,
justly retorted upon Himself, and his Brethren.

Romans 2.1, 3. Therefore Thou art Inexcusable O Man, whosoever thou art that
judge, for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou
that judge, do the same things, etc.

By GEORGE KEITH.

Printed in the Year, 1675*

The Epistle to the Reader.
Freindly Reader,
AMong the many Calu^nie^ wherewith those that have opposed this appearance of
Truth, have endeavored to aspress it, and render it Odious to the People; that
Imputation of Popery has been as frequent and constant as any other, almost
always in the mouths and hands of such as have spoken and write against us.
So that I hardly remember I ever saw a book, amongst those many has been
written by our Opposers; which had not some reflection of this kind in it* This
might perhaps have some weight with easy and simple people, who understand not
how frequent it is for persons of different persuasions, even among those
called Christians, to use such sinistrous means to weaken one another* a crime
so much the more to be regrated, that it is contrary to that truth, which all
lay claim to: it is not unknown to those that are acquainted with the history
of the Protestant-reformation; how it was a common practice among those that
opposed Luther as in Pope Adrian his Ambassadors speech ^o the Princes of
Germany Sl^id. lib. 4. Ibid in the Emperors letters to the Princes from Spain
also book 13 in Cardinal Farnesius Nephew and Legate for Pope Paul the third,
his speech to the Emperor Charles the fifth,
and the Protestants, to compare him and them to Mahomet, and the Turks;
because that as the Turks opposed the Pope, so did the Protestants. And yet it
is for this same reason our Adversaries brand us with Popery, which can no more
conclude us Papists, then the former did the Protestants Turks. But after the
Protestants became divided among themselves, and that the suspicion of Popery
was a ground to render them odious to their respective people, they have all of
them branded each other with this crime, and compared each other with Papists.
As first the Lutherans have and do compared the Calvinist^ with Papists and
Jesuits, as in many other of their writings may be seen in Lucas Osiander his
Epistle to the last part of his Ecclesiastic History, where he classes the
Jesuits and Calvinists as equal enemies to the Church. Yea and because all the
Calvinists were no^ so rigid in the matter of Justification as excluding all
good works from being necessary thereunto, the Lutherans have often branded
them with Popery. So that ^o^ Himmelius a Lutheran Divine upon this account
wrote a book, which he called GALVINO-PAPISMUS. On the ^^her hand the
Calvinists have often accused the Lutherans of Popery, for their keeping up of
Images* and many other ceremonies. How much the Calvinian presbyters do brand
the Prelatick par^^ with Popery, few in this Nation are ignorant of, but
especially those that are of age to remember that PULPIT PROVERB, which for the
frequencie of its use, might have past for a piece of the
PRESBYTERIAN-DIRECTORY, (to wit) that expression which they used both in their
Prayers and Invectives against the Bishops, terming them and their followers,
the POPISH PRELATICK MALIGNANT PARTY. And indeed in those day^^, P^pery and
prelacy were still classed together, as being TWINS of ONE MOTHER, and both
LIMBS of ANTICHRIST. And I suppose such as frequent the Conventicles can bear
witness that this dialect is not yet out of use among the Presbyterian
Preachers. On the other part the Episcopalians do not scruple often to compare
Popery with Presbytery, and do look that the Pope and the Presybter are very
near of kin in their presences over the Magistrate, and those who are in
authority, in their method of handling them, where they can compass it: So that
Bishop Spotswood in his Church History lib 7, page 457. says that at the
conference of Hampton court, Doctor Buckrige Bishop of Rochester preaching upon
Rom 1^.1. Let every soul be subject etc did soundly and learnedly handle the
matter to the satisfaction of all: only it grieved the Scots Ministers to hear
the Pope and Presbytery so often equalled in their opposition to Sovereign
Princes. Yea many Episcopalians do not scruple to affirm that the COVENANT
Which passes for the SACRED OATH of GOD in the presbyterian account was a
IESUITISH INVENTION made and contrived abroad among papists to creat troubles
and distractions at home and to defame the protestant Churches. But to proceed,
the Sectarian Congregations of Independency and Anabaptism hade no sooner stepped
aside from their presbyterian Brethren, and begun to set up for Themselves;
but the presbyters begin to deterr their prosel^ts from them with the old
imputation of popery, alleging that such seperations was a draught of Popish
Policy to defame the glorious fabric of Presbytry. Such as have read the
gangren or history of Independency writ by a Zealous presbyter will find
enough of this sort of stuff. For the gifted (but Vnordained) Preaching
Brethren among Independents and Anabaptists were alleged many of them to be
Jesuits, and Moncks metamorphosed into the shapes and appearance of Soldiers
and Tradse men to do mischief the more securely. In one of the first books
printed against the people caled QUAKERS by a presbyterian priest near Bristol,
lie affirms that the Pope sondeth forth his Emissaries to preach in England
not only under the shape of QUAKERS; but also of Independents and Anabaptists.
But the Independents have not been far behind with the presbyters in this
matter, and therefore have very often compared Presbytry and Papacy. Peter
Sterry a noted man among them preached a Sermon before the chiefest in
authority at that day; which Sermon being Printed, he intitules it Englands
deliverance from Northern Presbytry, Compared with its deliverance from Roman
Papacy. In which Sermon, He often classes together the Pope and the Presbyter
and proves them One in several particulars. And John Owen a man though pretty
sparing toward his Presbyterian Brethren, does nevertheless not spare to
affirm in his answer to Doctor Cawdrey, That since their Ministry is derived
through Rome, it must needs be a Romish Ministry. How much the Anabaptists
accuse the Rest of Popery for their retaining the SPRINKLING of INFANTS, and
S^T SINGING of PSALMS, is not unknown. Thus READER thou may see this calumny
is not New; but an OLD THREED-BARE Argument, wherewith each of these sects have
been long beating one another, and therefore no wonder if they also throw it
upon us, but with how little reason, this small Treatise will inform thee, where
the Imputations of Popery cast upon us are fairly and modestly examined, and
Justly and rationaly retorted upon the Accuser. Also that the subjects treated
of, might not be too sterile and jejunt, and so disgust thee; if they hade been
only simply vindicated; from Popery and barely retorted. The Author has for
thy further satisfaction found freedom to open our sense and judgment briefly
in the several particulars here handled, manifesting not only the falsness of
the Accusers calumnies, in evidencing that we differ widely from Papists in
these paerticulars; but also showing how Our Belief of them is aggreable to
the Scripturs, to the purest antiquity and to the judgment of many of the most
famous primitive Protestants. So that the Author of this treatise has well
observed John Monzeis his affinity and dependency upon Popery, in that he
acknowledges his Mission and Ministry to be derived to him by Popish
Succession, and so is by his own concession a BASTARD of that PAPAL-WHORE the
Church of Rome, whom he terms Rom^ Mend^x, and as it is usual for the
offspring to resemble its progenitor and according to our country proverb,
Hard for to take out of the Flesh what is bred in the Bone. The Impartial
Reader will observe by seriou^ly Reading this Treatise that I. M. as by his own
confession he deduces his Ministry from ROMA MENDAX i. e. LYING ROME; so also
he inherits through her as a part of her goods, that property of LYING, so that
it may be truly said MENDAX MENESIVS ROMAE MENDACIS FILIOLUS. For one may know
him to be a ROMISH-BROOD, he is so like Her in this faculty though he hade not
been so ingenuous as to acknowledge it.

Be it also known unto the READER that we are necessitat to this Controversy
being drawn thereunto through the implacable malice of Our Opposers; for I. M.
in his contensions with the Jesuit, would needs concern us by often reflecting
upon us who otherwise were not meddling in these matters. Also we have several
papers by us, vindicating us and our Testimony not only from Popery, but diverse
other calumnies unjustly laid upon us by the PREACHERS of ABERDEEN, which we
have forborne, and yet do forbear to publish. Because for several years we
have been threatened with a full confutation of all our principles from GEORGE
MELDRVM his Colleague, as he himself and some of his Brethren have told us:
yea we are informed that the BISHOP and SYNOD of ABERDEEN has particularly
recommended that work unto him* and now we are the more confirmed in that
expectation, that I. M. in his foresaid book page, 88, shuns (as he says) to
refute the Quaker whimsies, because he hops that ere long it shall be
accurately done by the penn of a learned and judicious person in this place, to
wit ABERDEEN. Thou must needs judge READER, this is a MIGHTY WORK in the men's
own esteem, that needs such PREAMBLS to go before it; and though the waiting
for it might have also in reason excused us from I. M, his passing Flings; yet
we did judge it our Concern for the TRVTHS SAKE to entertain thee in the
Interim, (until that GREATER VOLVME appear;) with this small treat^se, which
(if seriously and Impartialy considered,) will no^ a little contribute to let
thee understand how much we are abused; Which that thou may rightly observe,
and by observing truly improve to thy souls advantage is the earnest desire of
thy Well-wisher,

ROBERT BARCLAY.

THE CONTENTS.
SECTION I. Containing the Introduction, and Occasion of this Treatise. Page,
1. SECT. II. Concerning our alleged agreeing with Papists about the
Scripturs, where also some things are opened concereing the Rule of Faith, and
Immediate Revelation. p. 5. SECT. III. Where the alleged agreement about
Perfection is considered, and examined. p. 34. SECT. IV. Where the alleged
agreement about Justification, is considered and examined, p. 42. SECT. V.
Where the alleged agreement about Good-Works, is considered and examined. p.
55. SECT. VI. Concerning the Apocryphal Books, 58. SECT. VII. Where the
alleged agreement, as if the Efficacy of Grace, depended upon Man's
FREE WILL, is considered and answered. p. 65. SECT. VIII. Where the alleged
Agreement about the Apostasy of the Saints, is considered and examined. p. 73.
SECT. IX. Where the alleged Agreement about Indwelling-Concupiscence is
considered and answered. p. 75. SECT. X. Where several other alleged lesser
agreements in point of Practice, and diverse other Calumnies of that kind, are
considered and examined. p. 78 SECT. XI. Wherein I. M. his acknowledgment
concerning the Ministerial Succession through the Church of Rome is briefly
considered, and the Imputation of Popery in that respect, justly retorted upon
him. p. 88. SECT. XII. Wherein we are further vindicated from the Imputation of
Popery unjustly cast upon us, and how much more truly it agrees in our
Opposers, is evindenced by a short Account of many weighty particulars, wherein
they agree with Romanists against us. p. 96. SECT. XIII. Containing the
Conclusion by way of Epilogue; wherein the whole (...) briefly resumed, and the
falsness of the Accusation* as well as the justness of our Retortion clearly
presented to the View of the Serious and (...) Reader. p. 102.
Quakerism no Popery.
SECTION I. Containing the Introduction, and Occasion of this Treatise.
THe Occasion of this Treatise, is a late book of John Menzies (Professor of
Divinity in Aberdeen as he is called) published, wherein, as in very many other
places of his book, he does accuse Us, classing Us with Papists and Jesuits, so
particularly page 20 21 22, The Author of Scolding no Scholarship* blames John
Menzies as not having candor for saying, that Quakerism is but Popery
disguised, He answers, But there is less candor in the accuser for I only said
if it were otherwise learned and judicious men were mistaken. His frivolous
Apologies are like to confirm these men in their opinion. For many of the
Quakers notions are undoubtedly Popish doctrines. To this I say, if He have no
better argument that Quakerism is but Popery disguised, then the bare
affirmation of learned and judicious men, His alleadgeance is weak, unless He
thinks, or can prove, that His learned and judicious men, are infallible, and
cannot be mistaken, which I know he is so far from, that it is a great crime in
his esteem for any men however so learned and judicious, to pretend to any such
thing. Now whereas he alleges as a ground of his former insinuation that
many of the Quakers notions are undoubtedly Popish doctrines, in order to the
more clear and distinct examination of this his assertion, let us consider what
a Popish doctrine is. First, every doctrine affirmed in words by the Papists is
not a Popish doctrine, otherwise, that there is one only God, that Christ dyed
for sinners, and rose again, and in a word, all the Articles of the
Apostolick-Creed should be Popish doctrines, because in words affirmed by
Papists. A popish doctrine then is A Doctrine taught and believed commonly by
Papists repugnant unto or contradicting the testimony of the Scripturs either
expressly, or by just and necessary consequence of sound reason. This definition
of a Popish doctrine, is so fair and just, that as I suppose no Protestant will
disown it, nay not John Menzies himself. Let us then proceed, laying down this
definition of a Popish doctrine, for a rule whereby to examine, what doctrines
are Popish, and what not: The instances brought by John Menzies to show that
many of the Quakers notions (so he calls our Principles) are undoubtedly Popish
doctrines, are these following.

First, That the Scriptures are not the principal and complete Rule of Faith.
Secondly, That a sinless perfection is attainable in time. Thirdly, That Men
are justified by a righteousness wrought within them. Fourthly, That good
works are meritorious. Fifthly, That Apocryphal books are of equal dignity
with other Scriptures. Sixthly, That the efficacy of Grace depends on man's
Free Will. Seventhly, That real Saints may totally Apostatize. Eighthly, That
indwelling Concupiscence* is not our own sin, until we consent to the lusts
thereof.
Before I descend to a particular examination of these eight instances, I
premise this general consideration, viz. That if we should acknowledge that
these eight instances, as worded and laid down by John Menzies, were held by
all Papists, and Quakers so called, which yet is false (as afterward I intend
God-willing to make appear) yet that the consequence does not follow that they
are Popish doctrines, unless he had also proved, that they are repugnant unto
the Scriptures testimony, according unto the definition of a Popish doctrine
formerly laid down. Now this John Menzies has not so much as attempted in this
place, as against the Quakers, and some of them he has not in all his book as
I suppose, so much as undertaken even against the Papists. However most of what
he says against them, as touching any of these particulars, do not so militate
against us, because we differ very materially from them, in the very things
alleged. Another general consideration I shall propose and that grounded
upon an express affirmation of John Menzies himself positively laid down by him
page 162. The same sentiment (says he) held upon different accounts may be
heretical in the one, and not in the other. Very well, if then I do show,
that in those alleged instances or any others he can allege, wherein we
seem to agree with Papists, they and we hold them upon different accounts, it
does manifestly follow, from John Menzies his own mouth, that those sentiments
or doctrines may be heretical and Popish in Papists, and not in us called
Quakers. This advantage that I have again^* him, out of his own mouth, I intend
to lay up, until I come to the particulars, and then to make a suitable
application of it.

SECT. II. Concerning our alleged agreeing with Papists about the Scriptures*
where also some things are opened concerning the rule of Faith, and immediate
Revelation.
THe first Popish doctrine that John Menzies charge us with, is, That the
Scriptures are not the principal and complete rule of Faith This article has
two branches, 1* That the Scripturs are not the principal rule of Faith. 2,
That they are not the complete rule of Faith. As to the first, that the
Scripturs are not the principal rule of Faith, I know not that any Papists say
so, he ought to have given us his proof out of their writtings, nor will it
suffice that he bring the testimony of some private Doctors among the Papists
for a proof, seeing John Menzies denies* page 452. That the testimony of some
private Doctors among the Protestants is a sufficient proof against any
Protestant principle. I am sure of this, that I can bring some of great repute
and authority among the Papists, who do mantain, that the Scripturs are the
principal rule of Faith, touching these things revealed or declared
particularly and expressly in them as witness Bellarmin often cited by John
Menzies himself, lib. 1. cap. 2. De verbo Dei: who says expressly, That the
Scripture is a most certain and sure rule, withal affirming that he is
certainly a mad man who leaving The most certain testimony of the Scripture
betaketh himself unto the judgment of a spirit within him, that is often
fallacious and ever uncertain. Now that which is a most certain, or the most
cerrain rule of Faith, is the principal rule of Faith.

I find John Menzies citing Bellarmin against the Papist, in his book Roma
Mendax, page 116 Does not (says John Menzies) Bellarmin lib. 1. cap. 1. Charge
Gaspar, Swenkfeldius, and the Libertines, as declyning the Scripturs, and only
flying to the inward dictats of the Spirit? By this it appears manifestly
from I. M. own mouth, that Bellarmin is not guilty of declining the Scripturs
to be the principal rule, or of setting up the dictats of the Spirit, seeing
He charge it as a heinous crime against Swenkfeldius. Now I appeall to all
sober and impartial Readers, whether John Menzies and Bellarmin the Papist,
and Jesuit, whom some call the Popish Champion be not more a kin to one another
in this very particular, then the Quakers and the said Bellarmin are. Does not
I. M. say that the Scripturs are the principal rule of Faith, and Bellarmin
says, they are the most certain and sure rule, and consequently the
principal? Again does not I. M. blame them who prefer the inward dictats of
the Spirit to the outward testimony of the Scripture? and the very same does
Bellarmin in the place already cited by I. Ms. own confession. Surely one egg
is not liker another then the reproachful speeches of both Papists, and John
Menzies with his brethren are, against the dictats of the blessed Spirit of
GOD, in the hearts of believers, as being to be preferred, as the more
excellent rule. Here then this first instance, as to the first branch is justly
retorted upon I. M. himself. The Papists deny that the Spirit of GOD inwardly
dictating or revealing the truth, is the principal rule of Faith to, and in
every believer, and so does I. M. and his brethren, wherein they manifestly
agree with Papists against ^s the people called in de^ision Quakers. I. M.
could not be ignorant, how easily this instance could be retorted upon Himself
and these of His profession. I shall only at present say this to Him, as to
this and other particulars that may be retorted upon Him and them. Turpe est
doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum. It is a shame to the Doctor, when the same
fault he blames in another is found in himself, Moreover if some or all Papists
did hold that the Scripture is not the principal rule of Faith, as preferring
thereunto the outward testimony of the Church of Rome; this does no wise touch
us, nor are we concerned with them therein, seeing we do no wise prefer the
testimony of the Church of Rome or of any other Church unto the Scripture* but
do indeed prefer the Scripture as the best and greatest outward testimony in
the world. If then Papists deny that the Scripture is the principal rule, on a
different account from us, (they preferring the testimony of the Church
thereunto, we prefering the Spirit of GOD sealing and confirming in our hearts
the truth of what we outwardly read in the Scriptures.) according to I. M. his
own rule above mentioned, that may be a Heresy in them, and not in us. But as
I have already said, I know not any Papists who say That the Scripture is not
the principal rule of Faith, I know they say commonly It is not the formal
object of Faith, but I. M. is not ignorant how they distinguish betwixt the
Rule of Faith, and the Formal object of Faith, how truly they do so, we are
not concerned. But that this assertion ( to wit) that the Spirit witnessing the
truth in the hearts of Believers, is greater, then the outward testimony of the
Prophets and Apostles, and consequently the principal rule, is so far from
being repugnant unto the Scripture, that it is in express terms, asserted in
the Scripture, 1. John 5.8.9.10. If we receive the witness of men, the witness
of God is greater, etc. He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in
himself etc. And surely it is most agreeable to sound reason, that what the
Spirit of GOD witnesses or dictateth in the heart of a Believer, has more
evidence and force to convince, then the outward testimony of the Scripture,
seeing it is more immediate, for although the outward testimony of the Scripture
may be called a testimony of the Spirit, yet it is not so immediate as what the
Spirit speaks in the heart; nor secondly, has it so powerful an operation
upon the Conscience or Spirit of a man, a^ the inward testimony of the Spirit
has. I need go no further to prove this, then the experience of all those who
ever knew any inward touches, or working of the Spirit upon their hearts, such
will declare, that what the Spirit speaks home to their hearts, by his secret
touches and motions, has fare more abundant power to convince, then the
outward testimony of the Scripture. Yea notwithstanding of the outward
testimony, how many have been in great doubt, whether the things declared in
Scripture are true, as whether there be an eternal reward for the righteous,
whether the Lord does regard the righteous more then the wicked, and such like
truths. But when the Spirit has spoke home those truths to their hearts, they
could no more question them, they were so clear, as nothing could be more. Yea,
was not the Psalmist greatly tempted in his mind with doubting, If the Lord
had a favor to the righteous, Psalm. 73.? What cleared him of this doubt, and
raised up his mind over this temptation? Was it the outward testimony of the
Scripture? (so much as was then writ of it) He had this before, and yet he
was troubled, but when he went into the Sanctuary, then he was cleared; not
as if the outvvard Sanctuary or Temple had this virtue in it, but that the Lord
appeared unto him while he was there. And if there was any outvvard
testimony given there, the Lord did second it, with the inward testimony of
his Spirit, and this was it that cleared him, as the words follovving import,
verse 26. My flesh and my heart fails, but GOD is the rock of my heart, (So
the margin according to the Hebrew.) Here the rock of his heart was GOD, (to
wit) revealing himself and his truth in him: and this was the rock and
foundation of his Faith, therefore he concludes in a most svveet strain, It is
good for me to draw near to GOD, and then he adds, I have put my trust in the
Lord God, importing, that since he drevv near to the Lord, or since the Lord
drevv near to him, (as the words may be as well translated) he was enabled to
believe, and nor otherwise. Moreover the Sanctuary mentioned by him in the
place above cited, may in a spiritual sense well be understood to be that
holy principle put by GOD into his heart, which is indeed the true sanctuary
signified by the outvvard, wherein GOD appears, and speaks unto men in
their hearts. Therefore said the Psalmist, I will hear what God the Lord will
speak in me, Psalm. 85.8. So the Septuagint as it were Paraphrastically, and
that this was the common privilege of all the people of God in that day, see
Psalm. 50.7. Hear O my people, and I will speak, O Israel, and I will testify
in thee, So the words according to the Hebrew; yea, and this is the very tenor
of the new covenant, that all his people shall be taught of God Himself,
((...)) which import a real distinct teaching of God over, beyond and above
all outward teaching by the ministry of men: I say a real distinct teaching,
which I prove thus,

If men may be outwardly taught by the Scriptur^s, and want this teaching of
God here mentioned in the Promise, then the one is distinct from the other, Bu^
the first is true, therefore the second.

The connection of the first proposition in manifest from that maxim, Quorum
unum potest ab alto separari, illa realiter distingu^tur: when one thing can be
separated from the other, these two are really distinct. The second proposition
is clear from I. M. his own principles, viz. that they may be outwardly taught
by the Scripture, and want the teaching promised in the new covenant, because
such a teaching is only given unto the elect by hi^ principle, and I do
confess the Elect are in a special way taught of God, beyond what others are:
Now to proceed, If this teaching of God be a real distinct teaching from all
outward teaching by the Scripture, then I argue, It is the greater, and more
excellent from I. M. his own principle. My Argument is this,

That which is given as a special distinguishing privilege and mercy unto the
people of God, is a greater and more excellent thing, then that which is given
indifferently both unto them and others (to wit) the wicked: But this inward
teaching of God is given as a special d^stinguishing privilege, etc.
Therefore it is a greater and more excellent thing.

Again I prove it thus,

That which a man having it does him most good, that is the greatest and most
excellent thing, But this teaching of God by the Spirit promised in the new
covenant, a man having it, does him most good, Therefore, etc.

The second Proposition is clear, for to be taught of God inwardly by the
secret operation of his Spirit, does a man more good, then merely to be taught
by the outward testimony of the Scripture.

Now if it be replied, that the inward teaching of the Spirit is granted to be
a more great and excellent thing, then the outward testimony of the Scripture,
and yet it be denied, that it is the greater and more excellent rule, As for
example, Gold is a more excellent thing then Iron, yet it is not so serviceable
to be a Knife or Sword, as Iron is. To this I answer, That the inward
teaching, dictate, or word of the Spirit as it is a more excellent thing, then
the outward testimony of the Scripture, so is it a more excellent Rule, because
any aptitutde or fitness that the outward testimony has to be a rule, the
inward has it more. Yea, the inward was a rule before the outward was, and is
a rule at this day, as I. M. must needs confess, unto those who are deaff, that
belong to the number of the Elect, who can not make use of the outward. Again,
why is the Scripture fit to be a Rule, but because it is of a divine original,
is divinely inspired, has somewhat in it that cannot be expressed, that does
convince that it is of God, but all this aggreeth more immediately to the inward
teaching, dictate and word of the Spirit in the heart. For it is most absurd,
to say, or think, that what God speaks to us more mediately and remotely in
the Scriptures, has a greater self-evidence, then what he speaks immediately
and most nearly to us in our hearts, as who would say, what another has
reported unto me, that I. M. had said so or so, i^ more evident unto me, that
he has so said, then what he has told me himself out of his own mouth: Yea,
why does I. M. allege that the Scripture has a self evidencing authority in
it, but because it is the word of God. Hence I thus argue.

Whatever is the word of God, has a self-evidencing authority, But the inward
dictats of the Spirit in the heart of Believers are the word of God, Therefore.

I prove the second Proposition.

That which God speaks is the word of God, But the inward dictats of the
Spirit is that which God speaks, Therefore.

I see no way how I. M. can evade those arguments but by denying, that properly
and really God does speak in the hearts of Believers, and indeed this is
conform unto their usual doctrine, that the illumination of the Spirit of God
in the heart of Believers is not objective, but merely subjective, and
effective. The contrary whereof I have proved at large in my book of IMMEDIATE
REVELATION, To which I referr the Reader: Only at present I shall say this,

That if God does not objectively illuminat and irradiat the souls of
Believers, and does not inwardly speak in their hearts by his Spirit, (and that
this be their Faith) it is but a sort of deceiving the people, when at times
they themselves use these words both in preaching and praying as holding forth
the necessity of God his speaking inwardly to the heart by his Spirit, for if
the effective operation of God, as it is denied to be objective, may be called
the speaking of God, then it may be as much said that God speaks to a Tree,
or a Horse, etc* when he works in them 28 an efficient cause, by way of
concurrence to help them in the operations proper to, their natures, as he does
unto the hearts of Believers, at least when he acts in them, (to wit in the
unreasonable creatures) in a supernatural way, as when he said to the earth,
on the third day of the creation, let the earth bring forth grass, or when he
spoke to the great fish, to vomit out Jonah. Certainly in both these there was
a supernatural influence, or operation of God, yet is it not absurd to say,
that God speaks no more intelligibly or perceptibly in an immediate way unto
the souls of his own Children, his own sons and daughters, then he did to those
unreasonable creatures: But if it be granted that this inward speaking or
illumination of God, is in it self intelligible and perceptible unto the souls
of Believers, then it must be granted that it is objective, for what is in it
self perceptible is objective, and what is not objective is not in it self
^erceptible. This consideration has formerly made me conclude, that those who
deny inward objective illuminations of the Spirit, do also deny all spiritual
sensations or senses properly so called. And thi^ I do affir^e, from as great
clearness of ^nderstanding, as if I should conclude, from a ^^ns denying that
the outward Light is objective and perceptible in it self, that therefore there
is ^o sense of seeing, and from a man's denying that (...) outward sound is
objective and perceptible, that therefore there is no sense of hearing etc, or
that ^^eat and drink, as for example Bread, Flesh, Wine, Milk, Honey, is not
objective and perceptible, therefore there is no sense of smelling, tasting and
feeling. And if any should reply, that the Scriptures are the only objects of
those spiritual sensations, such a reply would sufficiently declare, that they
do not mean spiritual senses and sensations properly so called seeing the
objects of the spiritual senses, are the things whereof the Scriptures are but
a declaration, as the objects of the natural senses are things* And even as it
is most false to say, that when I read or hear a declaration or discourse of
meat and drink, that I really taste of the same, seeing the sense of tasting
is not at all answered by the discourse, but by the things discoursed of, even
so it were really as false to say, that when I hear or read a verbal
declaration of God, and divine and spiritual things, that I really taste of
them. For indeed those spiritual and divine things are really as distinct from
the words declaring of them, as meat and drink are distinct from the best of
all words declaring of them. Now the Scripture says, Taste and see that God
is good, Here God himself is proposed unto the soul, as the object of its
spiritual sensation, and not the words. But to say, I can see and taste of the
goodness of God in the Scriptures, simply as being the only and alone object
of my seeing and tasting, is really as much to deri^e me, as who would
discourse to me for an hour or two, very effectually of the goodness of meat
and drink, and then tell me, I have sufficiently seen and tasted it, whereas I
have indeed neither seen nor tasted it, and all his discourse does not answer
the sight and taste, nor yet the appetite, as their proper objects. Moreover
when the Scripture declares of God his speaking and witnessing in his children
generally, and uses the same manner of speech, as when He is said to speak in
the Prophets, we ought to understand it, as properly in the one, as in the
other, seeing according to that general rule agreed upon by all Expositors, We
are to keep to the proper sense of Scripture words, when there is no necessity
to reside from them, as indeed there is none here, but rather on the contrary,
there is a great necessity, that God do indeed speak immediately to the souls of
his Children, else they cannot have true peace, for it is He who speaks Peace
unto his people, and to his Saints, and to them who are turned unto the heart,
(as diverse of the Fathers did ^ite these words of the Psalmist, Psalm 85.8.)
and particularly Bernard, yea, and as the same Bernard and Augustine cites
Isaiah 46.8. (and as the Hebrew does bear it,) Even transgressors such as are
gross Idolaters are bid return to the heart, (to wit) unto that inward law, and
teaching of GOD therein: Yea, Augustine says expressly, Nulla est anima, etc.
There is no Soul so perverse, in who^e conscience God does not speak, lib. 2.
de Sermon Domini in monte. And indeed that most famous primitive Protestants did
not only acknowledge Inward supernatural operations of the spirit of GOD in
the hearts of Believers, but did also hold, that there was an Inward word spoke
by the Spirit into their hearts, which was evident and sufficient in it self to
beget Faith, and be a law and rule to Believers, I shall prove ou^ of manifest
Testimonies of Luther, Zuinglius, OEcolampadius, and Melanchton. First as to
Luther in a Sermon of his on Pentecost: The second law (says he) that is not
of the letter, but of the Spirit, is spiritual, which is neither written with
pen nor ink, nor spoken with the mouth, but as we see here in this occurrence*
the Holy Ghost descended from Heaven, and filled them all, that they received
Firie-tongues and preached freely otherwise then formerly, which astonished all
the people, there he comes and overfloweth the heart, and makes a new man,
which now loves GOD, and does willingly what he wills, which is nothing else
but the Holy Ghost himself, or at least, the work which he works in the
heart, there he writteth mere flammes of fire in the heart, and makes it
alive, that it breaks forth with firie-tongues, and active hands, and
becomes a new man, and sensibly feels that he has received a quite other
understanding, mind and sense then before. So now all is living,
understanding, light, mind and heart, which burns, and takes delight in all
that pleases GOD. Again, Here thou see clearly, that his office is not to
write books, nor make law^s, but freely puteth an end unto them, and is such a
GOD that writs in the heart, makes it to burn, and creat^ a new mind etc. and
this is the office of the Holy Ghost rightly preached etc. Such a man is above
all law, for the Holy Ghost teaches him better then all books, so that he
understands the Scripture better then any man can tell him, therefore such a
man needs not the use of books any further but to prove, that it is so
^ritten therein, as the Holy Ghost teaches him. Therefore GOD must tell it
thee in thy heart, and that is Gods-Word: otherwise Gods-Word remains unspoken.
Note from these words, First, That Luther did hold, that the second law, (which
is the rule of a Christian) is not the Scripture, but what the Holy Ghost
teaches and writes in be heart. Secondly, That this inward teaching of the
Holy Ghost is better then the Scripture. Thirdly, That the service of the
Scripture is rather to prove to others what is written therein, then to be the
foundation and principal rule of Faith. Fourthly, That the Scripture unless it
be spoken by GOD in the heart is not GODS-Word. I suppose I. M. will not find
greater Enthusiasm in any of the writtings of the People called Quakers. Again,
Luther upon the Magnificat. None can understand GOD, or the Word of God aright,
except he receive it immediately from the Holy Ghost. Again Luther on the 11
Psalm. (but in our English, Psalm 12.6.) Eloquia Domini ^asta: The words of the
LORD are pure, The Prophet David here, speaks no^ of the Scripture but of the
Word of GOD chiefly. And he says further, They are therefore Eloquia Domini,
that is GODS-Word, when the Lord speaks in Us, as he did in the Apostles, but
not when every one b^ings forth the Scripture, which the Devil and wicked men
may do in whom God speaks not, and therefore it is not Gods. Word. Here
Luther is down right an Enthusiast, as much as any Quaker can be. If it be
objected that Luther wrote against the Enthusiasts: I answer, I know he did,
but these were not true Enthusiasts, as the Apostles were, but such as under a
pretense of Enthusiasm both taught and practiced evil things.

Secondly, Zuinglius speaks his mind exceeding clearly of the inward word,
and that it is preferable to the outward word, so as the outward is to be
judged of by the inward. Ex commentario de vera and falsa religione, cap. de
Ecclesia and verbo Dei. Thou do now understand ( says he) what is the
Church which cannot err, [to wit] She alone, which leans to the alone Word of
GOD nor that (which Emserus thinks we only regard) which consists of
letters or words, but that which shines in the mind. Again, He who hears in
the Church the Scripture of the heavenly Word explained, judges that which he
hears, but that which is heard, is not the Word it self whereby we believe,
for if we were made faithful by that Word which is heard or read, all should
surely be made faithful. It is then manifest, that we are made faithful by
that Word, which the heavenly Father preaches in our hearts, whereby also he
enlightneth us, that we may understand, and draws us that we may follow who
are endued with that word do judge the Word which sounds in the preaching,
and beats the Ears, but in the mean time, the word of Faith, which sits in
the minds of the faithful is judged by none, but by the same the outward word
is judged, which GOD has ordained to be brought forth, although faith be nor
of the external [or o^tward] Word. Thirdly, Oecolampadius on Ezekiel. cap. 3.
Thou Son of man receive all the words that I speak unto thee in thy heart, and
hear them in thy Ear. This Text is against those that would bind the course of
the Word of GOD to external things, but it is necessary, that the only Master
be first heard, who is in Heaven that is in the secret opening the heart, and
giving Ears to hear, and begetting or stirring up desires in us to learn the
truth. Again, Faith is an inward thing, and a spiritual gift of GOD, therefore
springs not from any outward things, as from the outward word or hearing, but
from the inward word and inspeaking of GOD it is produced. Again [ says he,]
We divide not in our ministry the inward from the outward Word of GOD, but we
only distinguish them, that we may know, that the inward Word and Work of GOD
in us must preceed, that the outward be not taken for the inward, nor the
humane for the divine, and so a humane opinion be gotten instead of Faith, we
desire that both these words may go together, and do couple them in our
ministry. Again a little after, Thus it appears, that the power of GOD is not
bound to the Element, nor to our ministry, but the pure Grace of GOD is
acknowledged, which is given either with the Word or before the Word, or after
the Word as pleases him. Fourthly, Melancton in Annot. super Johan. 6. So they
who hear only the external and bodily voice, hear a creature, and seeing GOD
is a Spirit, He is neither seen, nor known, nor heard but in Spirit, therefore
to hear the voice of GOD, to see and know GOD, is to hear the Spirit. Again, by
the Spirit alone GOD is known, and his voice is perceived: it does not justify
to have heard bodily (or after a bodily manner;) because justification is to be
regenerated by the Spirit of GOD. Again, the same Melancton Super epist. ad
Romans Per Lutherum editam. cap. 2. on these words the Letter, and the Spirit.
For the Letter signifies not the written sense, or the history as Origin
thought, but all works and all doctrines that live not in the heart, through
the Spirit and Grace is letter. The Law is letter, the Gospel is letter, the
History is letter, the Spiritual allegorical Sense is letter, yea, all that
which lives not in the ^eart, through the Spirit and Grace is letter. The
Spirit is that by which the Spirit of Grace lives in the heart, the Spirit is
the true love of God, and of our neighbor which lives in the heart, which is
the law written in the heart, by the finger of GOD, and not in the tables of
stone. The Spirit is the faith by which the gospel is truly and from the
heart believed. And here observe, that if all be letter, as well the words of
the New Testament, as of the Old, which live not in the heart, through the
Spirit and Grace, then it is manifested, that every unregenerat man who is a
Preacher, is at best but a minister of the letter, so that his ministry is
letter, he is not a minister of the new Testament, but of the letter which
kills, his ministry is nothing else but a killing letter, and is good for
nothing.

Now as to the second branch of his first article, that the Scripturs are not a
complete rule of faith, this he alleges is a Popish doctrine, mantained by
Quakers. But First, I query, how is it a Popish doctrine, seeing according to I.
M. his own confession, some of the Popish Doctors, yea many Old Schoolmen as
Aquinas, Scotus, Durandus all hold [as it seemeth] that the Scripture is the
complete rule of Faith, wherein all supernatural truths, necessary to be
believed are revealed, page 76. yea, in the same page he says, the Romanists
are so far from that Unity whereof they boast, that they are broken into a
multitude of Opinions, touching the Rule of their Faith and Religion. And
indeed I* M. in^inuateth elsewhere little less in his book, then that as
touching all the differences, betwixt them, and those of his profession, the
Popish Doctors are subdivided among themselves, so as to contradict one
another, in those very points, which I am apt to believe is a truth. And if so,
then it is apparent, that there is no doctrine held in common by Us, and some of
the Papists, but the same is contradicted by others of them, and so these
others of the Popish Doctors agree with I. M. and his Brethren, wherein they
contradict Us. But as I have already said page 2. that which indeed makes a
Popish Doctrine, is, that it be not only affirmed by Papists, and that most
generally, but that it be contrary unto the Scripturs, and by this rule we are
most willing to be tried, whether he or we have most of the Popish stuff or
Wares. Secondly, as to the charge it self, That the Scripturs are not the
complete rule of Faith, I do affirm that this charge does not at all reach us
called Quakers, more then it reaches any true Protestants, which that I may
make to appear. I distinguish of Faith, as it is common unto all Christians,
and as it is peculiar and proper unto some, now as to common Faith, I say, the
Scripturs are a complete secondary rule of all principles both fundamental or
essential, and integrall of common Faith, so as there is no principle of Faith
whatsomever, that is necessary to be believed by all Christians in common,
whether essential or integrall, but is sufficiently declared in the Scripturs,
so that as to common principles of Faith, we say, the Scripture is not a
partial rule, [as do those Papists, who say it is] but a complete and total
rule, and herein we agree with all true Protestants, and do with them reject
all unwritten traditions, as being any part of the rule of Faith. Yet although
we say, the Scripture is a complete rule, we understand it in its own kind [to
wit] a complete external rule, as when I say a complete Chart, or Map of
Scotland, or England, I mean that it is as full as a Map needs to be; yet it
is not so full as the Land it self is, otherwise it behoved to be as bigg as
the Land. Again though I call it a complete rule yet I deny it to be the
Principal. It is then a complete Secondary rule, and in this we differ
exceeding widely and materially from Papists, but as to that Faith, that is not
common and universal, but only peculiar and proper to some, if there by any
such Faith I. M. must needs acknowledge, the Scripture is not the rule thereof,
as for example, when George Wishard, John Knox and several others in our own
Nation, did prophecy some particular things not to be found in Scripture, but
which indeed They had by special revelation, this our Scots Protestants do
generally acknowledge, and some have thought it a great honor to our Nation,
particularly Durham, and the Author of the fulfilling of the Scripturs. Now
this speciaell revelation was the rule of that proper and peculiar Faith, which
those men had, as touching those particular things, whereof they Prophesied;
but the Scripture was not the Rule of this their peculiar Faith. And indeed for
this distinction of ommon and peculiar Faith, the Scripture is plain, as where
it says, Romans 14.22, Have thou Faith, have it to thy Self. This is that
peculiar and proper Faith, (as is said:) unto which belongs that Faith, whereby
I or any other particular true Christian does believe, that we are indeed the
Children of God. For that a man may have ane assurance of Faith that he is a
Child of GOD, is granted by true Protestants, and yet the rule of this
particular Faith can not be the Scripture, seeing no Scripture in all the Bible
says, that such a man by name now living is a Child of GOD, for although the
Scripture give true and certain marks of a Child of GOD, yet it does not tell
me, that I have these marks, and so can not be the Rule unto me, whereby to
know or believe that I have them indeed. But the Spirit himself bears
witness with our Spirits that we are the Children of GOD. Romans 8. And this
Faith I say, whereby a particular person does believe that he is a true Child
of GOD, that he is regenerated and sanctified and justified, is a peculiar and
proper Faith unto him, or them only to whom it is revealed, and is not any part
of the common faith of all true Christians; for all true Christians are not
required to believe that such a particular man is a true Christian, or Child of
GOD seeing perhaps not one of a thousand did ever hear of Him at all, and so
are not bound to believe that he has a being in the World, far less that he
is a Christian. Many other examples I could give of this peculiar and proper
faith, the rule whereof cannot be the Scripture, but the special Revelation of
GOD by his Spirit, in the hearts of GOD'S Children, whereby they have a real
knowledge and Faith in all their actings, how far they are approved and
justified of GOD, and as their is a peculiar and proper faith, that is not the
common faith, so I do affirm, there is many times a peculiar and proper
obedience, unto peculiar and proper commands given of GOD, unto some of his
Children, and not unto others. Is there not an inward call, whereby the LORD
calls such Preachers as are indeed accepted of Him, in the discharge of their
Ministry. Sure I am, I have heard some Protestants acknowledge this. And is not
this inward call, a real commandment, seeing it is a transgression to refuse
to hearken to it? And may not such a^ Preacher have it made known to him from
the LORD that he is really called to labor in Word and Doctrine among such a
particular people rather then others? And herein he is to give obedience unto
the LORD, although he have no outward call, as many true Preachers never had.
And surely as there are some special things proper to every person in the
World, so as there are not to be found two in all the world, but their way and
manner of life does differ in many observable things, as much as their faces,
and that by a secret appointment of GOD, so there are special directions of
GOD'S holy Spirit given to those who do attend unto them, whereby they may be
safely and comfortably guided in all these various passages. O how happy and
blessed are they who have such a Bosome-Guid^ as the blessed Spirit of GOD to
direct them in their hearts, and are given up to wait for, and receive the
Same, when they fall into intricacies, that no Scripture rules can sufficiently
extricate? And surely this the LORD has promised his Children, to guide them
continually and to give them His Spirit to lead them into all truth. By what I
have said, on this head, it is manifest, how far we differ from Papists as
touching the first Article charged by I. M. against us, seeing as to all
principles of common faith we hold with Protestants against Papists, that the
Scripture is a complete and sufficient declaration and testimony, and indeed
the best and most complete outward rule that is in the world, unto which all
Doctrins and principles of Christian Religion are to be applied, as to a Test,
(or Touch ston,) in all external debates and disputations whatsomever, so that
whatever Doctrine or principle that is not found agreeable to the tenor of the
Scripturs Testimony, is to be denied and disowned for ever. Yea and whatever
proper or peculiar faith or obedience does contradict the principles of common
faith and obedience declared in the Scripturs, I do plainly affirm, that it is
not a true and right faith and obedience but a delusion. Moreover though I find
that I. M. labors in his book called Roma Mendax to fix Enthusiasm upon the
Papists, so as he may the more conveniently class the Quakers and them
together, to render us the more odious, yet I desire both him and all others to
consider how I. M. himself does rather clear the Papists, at least the greatest
and more considerable part of them, of this so hainou^ a crime of Enthusiasm,
as he thinks it page 44.45. he produc^th Stapleton, and Testefort, as downright
Enthusiasts, but in the same page 45. he brings Melchior Canus, Alphon^us a
Castro, Becanus and Bellarmin as downright Anti-Enthusiasts, who are all
ashamed ( as says I. M.) to assert that Popes and Counsels pass out their
definitions by immediate revelations. And the University of Paris anno 1626.
emitted a Decree condemning the foresaid impious assertion of Testefort, [viz]
that the Sacred Scripture is partly contained in the Bible, partly in the
Decretals of the Bishops of Rome. Very Good: Here are then four, [together
with a whole Universitie of Papists the most famous in the world] for two, the
two are guilty of Enthusiasm, and the four, with the Universitie of Paris are
as perfect Anti-Enthusiasts, as the other are Enthusiasts. So here is far the
greater number of them Anti-Enthusiasts, and I believe, who will search the
Popish Doctors and Writers, for one Enthusiast, in pretense, will find ten
Anti-Enthusiasts. Let then all impartial men consider, whether Enthusiasm or
Anti-Enthusiasm deserve most to be called a Popish doctrine, seeing that it is
most probably a Pop^sh doctrine, that is held by the plurality or greatest
number of Popish Writers. As for example, what if I should find some
Protestants [so called] whom I. M. does own for real Protestants, perhaps two
or three or more, as down right Enthusiasts, as either Stapleton, or Testefort,
were it therefore just for me to conclude that Enthusiasm is a Protestant
doctrine. As for Doctor Stillingfleet, whom I. M. cites as giving an account of
the Enthusiasms of the Church of Rome, I suppose the same Author could give as
full an account of the Enthusiasms of the Pre^byterians who were I. M. his
Brethren but of Late Years; and peradventure I. M. himself could do as much.
Sure I am, that diverse of the present Church of England have charged
Enthusiasm upon the Presbyterians, and Independents, both I. M. his Ancient
Friends [as witness] William Sharlock page 271. in his discourse, with others
could be named. And Richard Baxter whom I suppose I. M. will hardly brand with
Popery speaking hereof in his book called Aphorisms of Justification page
says, That some ignorant wretches gnash their teeth at this doctrine as if it
were flat Popery, I judge I. M. will not take it well to be accounted among
such, and yet I see not how in his brother R. Baxter his judgment be can avoid
this censure. Yea may not Calvin himself, whom some call the FATHER of
Presbyterians be as much charged with Enthusiasm, as any Papist seeing in his
Institutions he affirms, that in his time God raised up Apostles or at least
Evangelists, whom he calls Extraordinary Officers in the Church, that were
needful to bring back the Church again out of the Apostasy and from those
Protestant Apostles or Evangelists he deriveth the ordinary mission of
Protestant Preachers, and goes not back to the Antichristian Church and
Bishops of Rome to derive the same, as I. M. does in his Roma*Mendax, and this
forsooth lest He should run upon the rock of Enthusiasm, whether he thinks to
drive his Popish Antagonists. But I ask I. M. whether he thinks that Geo.
Wishart was ^ne Enthusiast, when he Prophesied of the death of the Cardinal,
or John Knox (called by some) the APOSTLE of the Scots, whose particular
prophecies are mentioned in the History of his life, seeing these me^ had
immediate revelation which I. M. understands as I suppose by the word
Enthusiasm, or if not, I desire him to tell us what he means by Enthusiasm, as
for all false and falsely pretended Enthusiasms, whether of Papists or any
others, which contradict the tenor of the Scripturs testimony we are as much
against them, as any people are, ^or can be, but Enthusiasm in the true sense
(that is to say) divine inspiration and revelation, from the in-being of GOD,
revealing and illuminating the hearts of His Children [yea and all men, in some
manner and measure] and inspiring or inbreathing into them a living knowledge
and sense of himself, and His holy mind, will and counsel, that is never
contrary, but always conform unto the Scripturs of truth, I do plainly and
freely declare my self, together with my Brethren to be for it, as a most
excellent principle of christian religion and indeed as the only true original
and foundation of all saving faith, sound knowledge and sincere obedience, and
let both Papists, and degenerated Protestants be ashamed of this principle,
fling it and toss it, from hand to hand, as refusing to give it, any shelter
or entertainment, (as We see they do in the present debate, one against
another) yet true Enthusiasm, [as is above described] we most willingly and
cordially own it, and with the greatest reception of kindness do oppen our
very souls and hearts to let in this most harmless, and most helpful Stranger,
who was the Friend and Beloved-companion Bossome and Heart-freind of all the
holy Patriarchs, Fathers, Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs of Jesus Christ,
who all held the Testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of prophecy, for
which the Dragon was wroth, and fought against them, but they overcame by this
word o^ their Testimony, and Blood of the Lamb, and loved not their lives unto
Death. And as to that ordinary objection, This were to make all Christians to
be Prophets. I answer not; for to be Prophets is not only to have the same
spirit inspiring them, as the Prophets had, but also to be moved by the same to
utter and express by words and writtings a declaration of their inward
Sentiments, Faith, Feeling and knawledge. Now all who are truly inspired have
not this gift, for to some, it is given to believe to, others both to belive
and speak and writ, and yet the spirit is one and the same in both, and
although we do affirm that some do both speak and writ from a measure of the
same spirit which the Prophets and Apostles hade, yet we neither equal our
selves nor our writtings unto them, and theirs, they having had such a Solemn
and extra-ordinary inward conduct; and guiding of the spirit of GOD (which is
generally acknowledged) as did se^ure them from all error and mistake in
writting the Scripturs, the divine spirit so abundantly ceasing and taking
hold both upon their understanding and will so as they did not in the least,
deviat or decline from following after the inward dictats, leadings and
directions of the same, as being overruled by a most sweet and powerful
constraining, limiting, and bounding of Them, so as neither to speak or writ,
but what They did indeed receive from the LORD, that and at such times, as it
pleased GOD to make Them His Instruments, in delivering those holy Records and
Oracles of His mind and will, (the Scriptures of Truth) for a general service
unto the children of men, so far as by the providence of GOD they came to be
spread abroad in the World: Therefore I do freely acknowledge, They have a
dignity and excellency in them above our writtings; But as for us, and what we
speak and write, although we affirm that the least measure of the true leading
and moving of the spirit of GOD in our hearts is in it self infallible, and
has a direct tendency to le^de guide and move us infallibly, as it is purely
kept unto; yet we are conscious to our seves, that both in speaking and
writting, it is possible for us in some measure more or less to decline from
those infallible leadings, and consequently both to speak and write in a
mixture. As also it is possible to keep unto them in perfect and pure chastity
accordingly as the mind is purely exercised in all diligence and watchfulness
of attention, unto the directions of the inward guide, the spirit of Truth, or
to err as the mind labors under any defect of remissness or unwatchfulness.

SECT. III. Where the alleged agreement about Perfection is considered, and
examined.
THe Second Instance adduced by I. M. to prove the Quakers guil^ie of Popish
Doctrins is, that a sinless perfection is attainable in time; But I miss his
proof that this is a Popish Tenet, for indeed I could never find to my best
remembrance any Papist, who hold such a principle as, that a sinless perfection
is attainable in time by the people of GOD. Its true some of the Papists think
that Mary was free of all sin, both mortal, and venial, which others of them
deny, affirming that She h^de original sin, but that the People of GOD [ Mary
only excepted by some few] could attain to a sinless perfection in time, I
require I. M. to show out of their writters, or rather out of their public
confessions and definitions of Popish counsels, seeing it is not the private
opinions of some either Popish or Protestant private Doctors [by I. M. his own
confession] that makes an Opinion Popish or Protestant. Yea does not I. M.
know, how eage^ly Bellarmin that Popish Champion does dispute against Pelagius
in this very point, pleading from diverse Scripture, [such as] There is no man
who sins not. 1. Kings 8. verse 46. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, etc. 1. John 1.8. [the same I. M. and his brethren use to produce
against us] That there is no man who can be free in this life from all sin,
both mortal and venial, By venial sins he means sins of a lesser size or
degree, which both Papists and Protestants acknowledge to be sins, however they
differ otherwise, as to the nature of venial sin, that i^ extri^sick to the
matter in hand. It is true that Pelagius did hold, That a man might be free
from all sin in this life; yet it was not for this, that he was generally
condemned by the Fathers, nor was that Doctrine generally condemned, but this [
viz.] that he taught that men could attain to this freedom from sin by his
endeavors without the special grace, and supernatural help and assistance of
the holy spirit, so that Augustine who was the greatest impugner of the Pelagian
Heresy, was so far from condemning it as heretical, That a man by the Grace
of GOD might be free from sin, that he expressly affirms it himself as
possible. It is one thing [sayeth he] to ask, whether any man in this life is
withouth sin, another, if he can, or may be. And as to the question, if he may,
he answers affirmatively, That he may be the Grace of GOD and free will. This
he said in opposition to Pelagius, who affirmed, That a man by free will
without the Grace of GOD may be free from all sin. And the very same which
Augustine said in this matter lib. 2. de pec. mer. and remiss. we say. And
seeing as I suppose I. M. will not condemn Augustine as Popish in this
particular, I see not how he can co^demn Us, without great partiality. Moreover
the same Augustine is so far from holding it to be an error, That a man by the
Grace of GOD may be free from all sin, that he says expressly, lib. de spiritu
and litera cap. 2. If it be defended, and thought that some are, or have been,
or shall be perfect with such purity, how far I can judge [sayeth he] they do
not err much, nor dangerously, [and yet I. M. and his Brethren, think this a
most dangerous error,] seeing every one that thinks so, does err with a
certain benevolence of mind, if notwithstanding he who thinks this, think not
himself to be such, unless he do really and clearly perceive himself to be
such, but these are most earnestly and vehemently to be resisted who think that
without the help of GOD by the proper power of mans-will they can either
perfect righteousness, or can profit, in aiming after the same. This he says
against the Pelagians, which does not reach us, for we abho^e any such thought,
that any man, without the Grace, and supernatural help of the Spirit of GOD
can either finish or begin any good thing. Others of the Fathers [so called] I
could cite, who do ^avour this perfect doctrine; only I shall at present men^ion
Athanasius the Great, [a man I suppose whom I. M. does not suspect as guilty of
Popery] Who says expressly in his fourth Oration against the A^^^n (...)* Many
were born holy and free or clean from all sin. And he mentions in particular
Ieremias, and John the Baptist, but if I. M. is to be believed, both Ieremias
and John were sinners and not clean or free from all sin, even when born into
the world, yea when in the womb. And in this he agrees with the Papists and
not we, both of them holding That many Infants are excluded from the Kingdom of
GOD, because of Original sin. Now as to these and such like Scripturs that are
brought against the doctrine of perfection. It has been shown not only by many
of our Friends, that they do not prove, that a sinless state is not attainable
in time, but even the same has been asserted, and the doctrine of perfection in
as great a latitude mantained by some famous men among the Protestants, as by
us, particularly by Sebastian Castellio, a man much beloved and esteemed by
many, however Calvinists may think of him. Yea, and diverse of the present
Church of England, whom I. M. owneth to be Protestants has appeared in defense
of this doctrine, as Hen. More and others: As also our Countryman William
Forbes as may be seen in his book, called, Considerationes modestae and
pacificae controversiarum. Where he cites diverse Protestants of the same mind
with himself, who hold That by the Grace of GOD, the Law of GOD may be
performed, according unto that divine condescension [called (...)] whereby he
requires obedience of us, according unto that proportion and measure of divine
Grace and ability that is given us, and in this true sense we own perfection,
and a perfect state attainable in time, which yet does still admit of a growth
in degrees. Be ye perfect [said Christ, Matthew. 5.48.] as your heavenly Father
is perfect. Surely this is a sinless perfection that is here commanded, and it
is as sure, that what Christ commands He gives sufficient ability of Grace
to perform. For His yoke is easy, and his burden i^ light, Matthew. 11.30. and
His commandments are not grievous, 1. John 5.3. And according to this says
Prosper ad Demetriadem. In omnibus monitis Dei, etc. In all the monitions and
commandments of GOD, there is one and the same reason both of divine grace and
man's obedience. And indeed this is the great difference betwixt the Law and the
Gospel, that the Law did command, but was weak, (as said the Apostle) whereas
the gospel is the power of GOD unto salvation to every one that believes,
which salvation is from sin, and not in sin And said Christ to his Disciples,
Now are ye clean, through the Word that I have spoken unto you, John 15.3. but
to that Objection both of Papists, and Others out of John 1. Ioh. 1.8. If we
say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves. I Ansuere first with Augustine
exp. ep. ad Gal. Aliua est non peccare, aliud non habere peccatum. It is one
thing not to sin, another thing not to have sin. This place does not favor
them who say, that men cannot be free from actual sinning i^ this life. Seeing
John does not say, if we say we sin not; but, if we say, we have not sin. By
which sin, some do understand that which the Regenerat find in the flesh, as a
temptation unto sin, or that which tempts thereunto, which nevertheless not
being anywise consented unto, is not their sin, although it be their great
trial, and a great occasion unto them to desire to be dissolved, that they may
be free of all temptations unto sin, as well as of sin it self. Secondly, the
same Apostle says immediately after, if we confess our sins He is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Now he
that is cleansed from all unrighteousness is cleansed from all sin; because sin
is unrighteousness, and seeing it belongs to the faithfulness and justice of
GOD to do it, certainly He will do it to every one that diligently improveth
that Divine grace, that is given, to that end: yea he says also verse. 7. The
blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses us from all sin, which he speaks in
the present time. Now to be defiled with sin, and to be cleansed from all sin
at one and the same time implies a contradiction; Therefore the Apostles
words are to be referred to two several times and states which loses
suffic^ently the contradiction. Nor does it follow that the Apostle John, was
at this time defiled with sin, more then that James was a Curser when he said
of the Tongue, Herewith curse we men. James. 3.9. But both John and James words
are to be understood after the manne^ of ane usual figure called
Metaschematism^s, as also the Apostle Paul Romans 7. from verse 14. to verse. 25.
For to say that Paul at that time when he wrote that Epistle was carnal, sold
under sin, being in captivity to the law of sin in his members, i^ a very
absurd thing, and condemned by sundry judicious and famous Protestants, as
Bucer and Musculus, as they are cited by Arminius. The Apostle therefore is
describing not his present condition, but the condition of others, and of
himself, as they were, in the struggling and warfaire estate before the victory
was attained, whereas the same Apostle speake^ of a victory both here and
eleswhere* Here as cap. 8.2. for the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus
has made me free from the law of sin and death. Elsewhere as 1. Cor. 15. verse
55.56.57. O death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory. The sting
of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law, but thanks be to GOD,
which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ* see also Romans 8.57.
2. Tim 4.7. Another objection they make from 1. Kings 8.46. There is no man
that sins not. Like unto this i^ Chron. 6.36. Eccles. 7.20. To which I
answer; that the words being in the second future may be translated in the
potentiall mood, (as indeed Iunius and Tremellius truly translate it) thus,
there is no man who may not sin, this we do not deny, for a possibility of
sinning is consistent with a perfect and sinless estate, as was the state of
Adam before he fell, he was innocent and yet he could sin, it is one thing, non
posse peccare, that a man cannot sin, which is the highest perfection. Another
thing posse non peccare, that a man is able not to sin. As for that place Romans
3.10. taken out of Psalm. 14.1.23. there is none righteous, no not one. It is
manifest, that it is underst^od of men in the natural unconverted and
unjustified state, and so is impertinently alleged against per^ection. But
the main and most ordinary Objection is from the words of the Prayer which
Christ taught his Disciples, Forgive us our sins, as we forgive them that sin
against us. Matthew 6.12. Which Prayer is to be daily put up unto GOD, as
appears, by the preceding petition, Give us this day our daily bread, so that
as the best on earth need daily bread, they need also daily to say, Forgive us
our sins. To which I answer, First, That this place does no more militate
against perfect sanctification, then it does against perfect justification,
which is comprehensive of a forgiveness of all sin. Now does not I. M. and his
Brethren acknowledge yea plead for it, that the Sai^ts have all their sins
forgiven them in time, yea that the least Saint has perfect forgiveness, let
them see what answer they can give to the one, which we cannot give to the
other. I answer Secondly, forgiveness of sin may be understood two ways.
First, As it is received by every particular Saint and Child of GOD in his
heart and conscience, by the secret intimation of the Spirit of GOD, and so
far^ as ^e having received this secret intimation he desires to retain it, and
that it may be continued with him, he may pray for it, as he does for his bread
which yet he has, for many have daily bread, although they are to pray for it,
that they may have it, as a gift out of the Fathers-hand, and in that they
acknowledge him to be the giver of it, and every good thing. Secondly, As it
signifies that solemn absolution which God by Christ shall give to all the
Saints at the last-day, and so to pray for forgiveness of sin is to pray that
none of our sins which we have committed may be laid to our charge in that day,
but that we may receive that final and signal absolution of them, and for
this, the most perfect may and ought to pray. Before I go from this second
alleged article of Popish doctrine, I shall only remind I. M. how it is, [ and
how it may be very safely retorted] upon Himself, and his Brethren, who
together with Papists do wrest and abuse those and such like Scripturs before
mentioned, to plead against a sinless state, and so to uphold the
Devills-Kingdom.

SECT. IV. Where the alleged agreement about Justification is considered and
examined.
A Third instance of Popish doctrine charged by I. M. upon the people called
Quakers, is, That men are justified by a righteousness wrought in them. But
unless he can prove that this doctrine is contradictory unto the Sc^rpturs
testimony, it is not a Popish doctrine, although Papists do hold (...), more
then it is a Popish doctrine to hold, That there is one GOD. Nor is I. M.
ignorant how many do hold, Justification to be by an inward righteousness whom
he does notwithstanding acknowledge to be true Protestants, and these, not only
some of them Presbyterians, such as Baxter; but of the Episcopall-way, not a
few, if not the greatest number, (as witness) their books on that subject. Also
that the primitive Protestants diverse of them, were of the same mind, William
Forbes does show in his book already cited, to which I refer the Reader, ye^
James Durham a noted Presbyterian does sufficiently clear us of Popery, as
where he declares in his commentary on the Revelation, degr. 11 That where
Christ is rested upon for Justification and his Sanctification acknowledged,
they ought not, who do so to be blamed as guilty of Popery, although they
hold, that Repentance, Love and other inward spiritual virtues and graces are
necessary to Justification as Faith is. Now we indeed rest upon Christ alone,
and not upon Mary, nor any other of the Saints, as the Papists are said to do,
and the satisfaction of Christ, we do acknowledge in the true sense of it, so
as that by his obedience, death and sufferings he has indeed obtained
remission of sins, unto all who truly believe and repent: Now that repentance
is expressly required in Scripture, as necessary unto remission of sins, which
I. M. does hold at least to be a great part [if not the whole] of our
Justification, see Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your
sins may be bloted out, etc. Observe, here not only repentance but conversion
are both expressly required in order to forgiveness or blotting out of sin, and
consequently in order to Justification, seeing our Adversaries acknowledge that
forgiveness is a part of Justification, and Calvin seems to place it wholly
therein. But that repentance and conversion are a great part, if not
comprehensive of the whole work of inward righteousness wrought in us by the
Spirit of GOD, I suppose I. M. will not deny. See Acts 26.18. To turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto GOD, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins and inheritance among them that are sanctified. Here
expressly the turning from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
GOD is required in order to forgiveness, which turning is an inward
righteousness; for to turn to GOD is an act of obedience, and consequently is
righteousness, and it is also inward, for it is an act of the soul and heart,
that is wrought in us by the Spirit of GOD. And indeed in this last place of
Scripture, our whole Justification as consisting in these two, Forgiveness of
sin and (...) R^ght unto eternal life which is the inheritance above
mentioned, to the receiving of both which our turning unto GOD from the power
of Satan is expressly required; yet not as if this conversion, or inward work of
righteouness were the p^^curing cause of our receiving either the one or the
other, nay not at all, but they are the conditions or qualifications most
necessarly required in order to the receiving them. And seeing I. M. and his
brethren affirm, that men are justified by faith, so as faith is a condition,
or qualification necessary unto Justification, I ask him, and them, is not
faith inward righteousness, though not the whole yet a part, I prove it is. All
true inward obedience is inward righteousness; but faith is true inward
obedience therefore, etc. The first proposition is clear, because righteousness
is nothing else but obedience unto what God commands. The second proposition is
no less clear for God has commanded us to believe in Christ; therefore faith
in him, is obedience, and it is inward, being an act of the soul, wrought in it
by the Spirit of God concurring with it, that it may believe. Yea this faith,
according to I. Ms. principle, is not a bare assenting of the understanding,
unto what is revealed of Christ, but it has in it the consent of the will, as
also a certain affiance, of confidence in GOD and Christ, which is commonly
called Fiducia, that i^ of the nature of hope. And seeing this faith is an act
of the will, it must have love in it, for indeed all acts of the will are
either acts of love or hatred, or do proceed from them, so that if faith be
ane act of the will as well as of the understanding, it must love, or desire,
or both: and thus in justifying or saving faith, there is both Love and Hope,
as well as Faith, all which three are inward righteousness wrought in us, and
by us, through the help of the Holy Spirit. Augustine says tract. evan.
secundum Ioh. 29. What is it to believe in Him, but by believing to love Him?
and thus he defines justifying Faith. And if it be replied that it is
confessed that faith is an inward work of righteousness, but that we are not
justified by faith as it is a work, or as it is a part of inward righteousness.
To this I answer first, This distinction is too too nice, and metaphysicall,
seeing it is the very essence of faith to be ane inward work of righteousness;
whereby with the greatest love of our hearts, we both cleave unto the Lord,
desire Him, and have confidence, affiance or hope in Him. Now to distinguish
betuixt a thing and the essence [or that which is essential to it] is too nice
and curious, and indeed altogether impertinent in the handling of controve^sies
of religion, where all things should be proposed with greatest plainess, that
is possible; but to distinguish betwixt a thing and its essence, is not plain,
nor fit to be understood by those of common capacity, as consisting in a
logical notion, as a mere ens-rationis, as who would distinguish betuixt Paul
his being a man, and his being a reasonable creature made after the image of
GOD. I answer secondly, the controversy betwixt them and us, is not whether
we be justified by a righteousness wrought in us, as it is a work, we leave
this to those vain janglers, who delight themselves in such airy and
unprofitable questions, it suffices us to contend for this, that men ate
justified by a righteousness wrought in them, which inward righteousness is
indespensibly necessary to our Justification before GOD. I answer thirdly, if
they mean, that we are not justified by any work of righteousness, so as that
work is the procuring cause [by way of strict merit] of our Justification, we
do also most willingly affirm the same, for indeed no Faith of ours, no Love,
no Hope, no Humility, no Patience, no Meekness, nor Temperance, nor any other
thing wrought in us, or by us, through the help of the spirit of GOD does in a
way of strict justice, merit or procure, either our Justification, or any other
favor, or thing whatsomever, so that we do indeed renounce all merit on our
part strictly and rigidly considered, and all debt, as owing on Gods-part to
us, otherwise then as by His promise He has bound Himself unto us, so that as
the reward is of grace, the merit and debt is of grace also, according unto the
words of Augustine, Fidelis est Dominus, qui se nobis debitorem fecit non
aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed omnia promittendo. Faithful is the LORD, who
has made Himself a debtor unto us not by receiving any thing from us, but by
giving us all things. Yea, we do really declare that we are as freely
justified, as we are sanctified, and seeing our being sanctified by inward
righteousness, does not hinder it to be by free grace, no more does our
Justification. But for the more distinct understanding of our mind, concerning
our Justification before GOD. I thus define it.

JUSTIFICATION, is an Act of GOD, whereby He does acquit (absolve and
discharge) us, of sins past, and does own and acknowledge us, upon our
Repentance and Conversion unto Him, as righteous, and as having right unto
Eternall-life, with a respect unto JESUS CHRIST not only in wha^ He has done
and suffered for us, without us, but as really and truly indwelling in us, and
really and truly making us righteous.

In this definition, two things are considerable, First, as it is an act of
GOD. Secondly as in relation to its object, the one is Justification formally
considered, the other is, it, objectively considered, [or as it may be called
objective Iustification] Now i^ this whole definition of Justification, I shall
show, how indeed I. M. and his Brethren are much more AKIN to the Papists,
then we (the people called Q^^kers.) First, whereas we affirm that this act of
GOD is a real inward act in us, whereby the Lord does by an inward
declaration, and testimony inwardly and immediately revealed in us, both forgive
us our sins, and acknowledge us to be righteous, and as having a right to
Eternal life. This definition of Justification in relation to the act of GOD,
is denied and opposed both by Papists and also by I. M. and his Brethren, [as
being Enthusiasm] whereof they are most unwilling in any terms to be thought
guilty. Secondly, in relation to the object I say we are the object of
Justification, not only as having our sins pardoned for CHRISTS-Sake, but as
being righteous in the sight of GOD, through CHRIST indwelling in us, so as we
are clothed and covered with Christ the LORD our righteousness dwelling in us,
He made unto us, in us, Righteousness, as well as Sanctification, Wisdom and
Redemption, from which, [ to witt] Christ in us, all those inward virtues and
graces, of Love, Hope, Patience, Humility, Meekness, Temperance, as well as
Faith, do flow and proceed as streams from a fountain. Now it is the fountain
which is CHRIST Himself, that we regard principally, in our Justification, and
but in the next place, that inward righteousness wrought by Him in us, which is
but as the stream, so it is not the stream, that we rely and rest upon for
Justification [to speak properly] but Christ the fountain, [to wit] whole
Christ, [and not divided,] both as what He has been, and is without us; And
also, in what He is in us, and this we certainly believe and know, that who
rest upon Christ for Justification, only as without, and not as within,
indwelling in their hearts, they have neither true faith nor justification, but
both their faith and justification is a dream, and delusion of Satan. Now this
sort of justification, by the indwelling of Christ in us, wherein we affirm
that our justification does principally consist, is so far from being a Popish
doctrine, that it is expressly denied by Bellarmin that Popish Champion, who
undertaketh to refute it. And that I. M. is of one and the same mind with
Bellarmin as to this particular I do greatly suspect, if otherwise, let him
clear himself. Sure I am, he and his Brethren are so far from thinking that we
are justified by Christ indwelling in us, that they do no^ acknowledge any
real, true and proper indwelling of Christ in the Saints at all; for that they
affirm, That Christ is not in us any other way but by his graces, or gracious
operations; But say we, these graces and gracious operations can not be divided
from Him, so that if they be in us truly, really and properly, He also who is
the fountain of them must be in us, as truly, really and properly. Moreover
for the further clearing of our faith touching justification. I desire the
Reader to consider, that to be justified by an inward righteousness, is one
thing, and to be justified by outward works of righteousness done by us, even
through the Grace of GOD, and help of the Spirit, is another; for as we are
first inwardly righteous, before we can work good works, so the justification
by inward righteousness is first, or before the justification by works, and as
some have well observed, as it is not the good fruit, that makes the good tree,
but the good tree makes (and produces) good fruit. So good works make not a
man at first righteous, but a man must be first righteous, (or holy) and then
he ^ringeth forth Good-Works. And thus truly is the mind of Agustin to be
understood, That good works go not before a man's being justified, but follow
his being justified, even as good fruit goes not before the good tree, but the
good tree is before the good fruit, and so the same may be said of
sanctification. Good works go not before a man's sanctification, as to the
beginning of it, and yet a man is sanctified by inward righteousness. And thus
though it could be proved, That a man is not justified by good works; yet it
does not follow, that he is not justified by inward righteousness. Now I say,
good works have not any place, in the beginning of our justification, I mean-
outward works, for the Reason alleged; because a man is first justified, [or
made righteous,] before he work a good work outwardly, and if in that state, he
should die, before he could work any outward good work, he should die in a
justified state, as certainly Infants who are saved, die in a justified state,
without works; yet not without inward righteousness. Good works then are
necessary, not to the beginning of our justification; but to the continuance
and progress of it: so that being justified by ane inward righteousness, we are
more justified by doing good works, which are necessary, if not to bring us at
first into favor with GOD; yet to continue us in the favor of GOD, so as, if
we did not work good works, if we live, and are in a capacity to do them, we
should fall from our Justification, and this is the very doctrine of William
Tindall, that famous Protestant and Martyr, as I have declared, in that little
book called A LOCKING GLASS FOR ALL PROTESTANTS. And Richard Baxter whom I
suppose I. M. will hardly brand with Popery speaking hereof in his book called
Aphorisms of justification page 80. says that some ignorant wretches gnash
their teeth at this doctrine as if it were flatt popery I judge. I. M. will not
take it well to be accommodat among such, and yet I see not how in his Brother
R. Baxter his judgment he can avoid this censure. Secondly, consider, that
justificaton as it is taken for a remission of sin, although it does indeed
respect inward righteousness, as a condition necessar to the obtainment of it;
yet it does not respect it, either as the procuring cause of it, nor yet as its
formal reason, the procuring cause being CHRIST alone, who became the
expiatory sacrifice and propitiation unto GOD for our sins, the formal reason
of the remission, being indeed the remission or forgiveness it self; for the
formal reason of a thing is the very nature of the thing it self, which
consists in that act of GOD, whereby He acquiteth and discharges us in our
hearts, by the testimony and dictat of His Spirit in us. Consider Thirdly, that
the reason why we are said to be justified by faith, and not by works, as to
the beginning of our justification is not to exclude inward righteousness from
our justification; but indeed because it is by faith and not by works that
inward righteousness at first is received; for of all other graces and virtues,
faith is most of a receptive nature; for as it is wrought in us by the Spirit
of GOD, we not resisting but complying with His motion, and operation in us, so
by faith being once received in us, we receive all other inward graces and
virtues, so that as by faith alone, we receive inward righteousness, by which
we are justified, as to the beginning of it, so it may be said, that by faith
alone, we are at first justified, that is to say, That righteousness by which
we are justified, we do inwardly receive it into our hearts from the Spirit of
GOD, and do not work it out unto our selves either by outward working, or by a
long continual inward activity of our minds, as being a thing rather received
in us, as to say ingenerated and wrought in us by the Spirit of GOD, then
wrought by us, for indeed in our Regeneration, Conve^ion, Justification and
Sanctification, as to its beginning at least, we are rather (or at least) more
passive then active; and as the Child both in the womb, and on the breast, is
not said to live by its works; yet it draws nourishment to it self from the
Mother by a certain faculty, instinct or power implanted into it of GOD,
wherein the Child is more passiive then active, even so it is as touching
faith, which is a certain heavenly faculty, power or instinct, put into those
who are Children and Babes in CHRIST, whereby they do draw nourishment that is
heavenly and spiritual, unto them from GOD whereby they live, and grow up as
holy and righteous plants of GOD, to bring forth the fruits of good works, and
thus the faith that was at first of a receptive nature, becomes now more
operative and active, so as to put forth that inward virtue, by which the
heavenly growth is witnessed, into real acts and works of righteousness.

Consider Fourthly, that when the Apostle speaks of a man's own righteousness,
as being excluded from our justification, by the same, he does not understand,
that righteousness which is wrought in us by the spirit of GOD; but that which
man works in and by himself without the Grace and Spirit of GOD: and the
Righteousness of GOD and Christ, by which we are most immediately and nearly
justified is Christ himself and His work of righteousness in us by His Spirit,
even as the faith of the Son of GOD Gal. 2.20. is the faith he works in us,
so his righteousness is that of His working in us. And indeed that this is the
mind of Augustine is clear from his own words. lib. de gratia and libero
arbitro. Quid est non habens meam justitiam, quae ex lege est, cum sua non
esset lex ipsa, sed Dei, nisi quia suam dicit justitiam, quamvis ex lege esset,
quia sua voluntate legem se posse putabat implere, sine adjutorio gratiae, quae
est per fidem Christi. What is it [sayeth he] not having my righteousness,
which is of the law, whereas the law was not his but Gods, but that he calls
it his righteousness, although it was of the law, because he thought that by
his own will, he could fulfill the law, without the help of Grace, which is by
the faith of Christ. To the same effect he writes in his second book against
Julian the ^elagian, showing also. That the righteousness of faith is said to
be of GOD, because GOD does distribute to every one the measure of faith, and
to faith it pertains to believe that GOD works in us both to will etc. I
shall conclude this matter with that observable passage of Luther on the second
of the Gal. verse 16. touching justification. Christ [sayeth he] apprehended by
faith, and indwelling in us is our righteousness, for which we are justified or
reputed just. This of Luther is according unto these Scripturs, The LORD our
righteousness. Ier. 23.6. And again, He is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption. 1. Cor. 1.30. And indeed none have Him to be
their righteousness, but who have Him to be their LORD, not only dwelling in
them, but ruling in and over them. He must be Lord in and over us, by having
the obedience and subjection of our souls and whole man, that he may be our
Righteousness.

SECT. V. Where the alleged agreement about Good-Works, is considered and
examined.
THe Fourth Instance of the Quakers holding Popish doctrins alleged by I. M.
is, that Good works are meritorious. To this I answer we do not hold the
merit of good works in any other sense, then that which both agrees unto the
Scriptur and has been used generally by those called Fathers, such as
Augustine, Gregory, Bernard, yea and by some of the most famous Protestants: for
the clearing of this matter I shall propose two significations of the word
Merit. First, as it signifies to deserve a reward, so as the merit is equal
in worth and dignity unto the reward, as when a Servant meriteth his wages from
his Master, this is the strict signification of it, and in this sense we
altogether deny that good works are meritorious. Secondly, as it signifies to
obtain from GOD by promise, according as He out of His infinite bounty has
seen fit to bestow, and thus Merit and Reward are relatives, so that as the
reward is of grace, the merit is of grace also: and in this sense the Fathers
commonly use the word merit, particularly Augustine, who says when GOD does
crown our merits, He crowns nothing, but His own gifts. Where he plainly
acknowledges merit of grace. Now it is certain, that the Lord promises a
reward to good works, which shows that there is a dignity, value or
worthiness in them, though not equal to the reward of eternal life; yet such
as it pleases GOD to take notice of. So as it is a suitable thing according to
His infinite bounty to reward them so liberally, the Apostle says, 1. Pet. 3.4.
a meek and quiet spirit is in the sight of God of great price; therefore it has
a real dignity worth and value in it, which is of GOD and not of us: so that
we can not think so meanly and basely of that Righteousness and holiness which
the Spirit of GOD works in us, as those called Calvinists or Presbyterians
do, who affirm that the best righteousness or holiness that is wrought in any
of the Saints, by the Spirit of GOD is defiled and as a menstruous garment, yea
is such, as for the same, GOD might justly abhore us. We cannot but abhore such
unclean and antichristian doctrine, tending to lessen the esteem and love of
righteousness among men. The Apostle makes mention of the Faith, Love and
patience of the Thessalonians, as a manifest tocken (or demonstration) of the
righteous judgment of GOD, that they may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of
GOD. 2. These. 1.5. And said the Lord by His Servant John, unto those of Sardis,
who hade not defiled their garments, they should walk with Him in white, for
they are worthy. Rev. 3.4. these Scriptures show a dignity or merit in good
works, not in the first sense; but in the second. Now if any Papists hold merit
in the first sense, we deny them in this, as much as any Protestants do; yet
that Protestants [ and some of greatest fame] did hold merit in some sense,
(...) eviden^ both out of Melancton, and Bacer. Melancton in his common places
says expressly, That good works in the Reconciled, seeing they please GOD
through faith [or the Mediator] men^ sp^rituall rewards and corporal both in
t^is l^fe and after this life. And Bucer [ as he is ci^ed by Cassander,
consult. cap. de Merit.] contra A^rince^sem, says thus. As we acknowledge
faith it self the fountain of good works and merits, to be the free gift of
GOD: so also we confess, that both the works and merits, are the free gifts of
GOD etc. And of this same mind are we, with these men whom I. M. himself and
his Brethren own to be Protestants of great note. And with them, and a^l true
Protestants we do join against the Popish merit, either of congruity without
the Grace of GOD, or of condignity with and by the Grace of GOD, as condignity
does signify an equality betwixt merit and reward, as some Papists hold,
though contradicted by others, but when Papists contradict one another, one
side must hold the truth at least in words; but that is not [ to speak
properly] a Popish doctrine.

SECT. VI. Concerning the Apocryphall-Books.
THe Fifth Instance adduced by I. M. is, that Apocryphal Books are of equal
authority with other Scripturs. He means those judged by him, and his
Brethren to be Apocryphal. For the question is what Books are Apocryphal and
what not, also what Apocryphal is in his sense. If by Apocryphal he mean,
writ and not from any measure of the inspiration of the Spirit of GOD. Surely
we cannot conclude that all these books called by him so, are Apocryphal,
seeing as to some of them we find the testimony of the Spirit of Truth in our
hearts, to answer to many precious, Heavenly and divin sayings contained in
them, which is as a seal in us, that they have proceeded from a measure of the
true Spirit; yet as to all these books, or sayings contained in them we do not
so affirm, And I belive I. M. cannot prove out of any of our Friends books,
that all these books commonly called Apocryphal, and the sayings contained in
them are of equal authority with the Scripturs: however if they hade done so
it proves not, that they hold a Popish doctrine, because Papists and they hold
their judgment concerning them on different accounts, [which according to I. M.
his own rule is sufficient to make that a Heresy in the one and not in the
other] The Papists on the account of the authority of the Church, [that is to
say] the authority of some Popes, or Popish councills; But the Quakers on the
account of the inward testimony of the Spirit of GOD in their hearts, whereby
the spiritual ear tries words, whether having proceeded from GOD, or not, as
the Mouth tastes meat, [as the Scripture says.] So that this may be retorted
as a Popish doctrine on I. M, and his Brethren, who agree with Papists, in
denying that the inward evidence and testimony of the Spirit of GOD in men's
hearts, is the principal rule and touchston, whereby to judge of words and
writtings, whether they be of GOD, or not. Again seeing the Papists are divided
among themselves, and contradict one another, touching the authority of those
books: some of them holding that they are of equal authority with the
Scripturs, others denying it, and placing them in an inferior degree. We have
the same advantage to reflect Popish doctrine upon him, as he has upon us, if
we did hold, that either some or all of them are of equal authority with the
Scripturs, which yet I know not, if I. M. can prove out of any writtings of a
Quaker [so called.]

If perhaps I. M. shall Object that our Friend SAMUEL FISHER (that faithful
servant of the Lord) in His Book Entitled RUSTICUS AD ACADEMICOS, Or, THE
RUSTICKS ALARM To THE RABBIS etc. ( which was writ about sixteen years ago;
but never as yet Replied unto by any:) does affirm that Some of those books (
commonly called Apocryphal) are (...) or have proceeded from Men divinely
inspired, and are of a divi^ Inspiration and Authority To this I answer First,
SAMUEL FISHER ^oth not affirm, that all these books [esteemed by I. M. and his
Brethren to be Apocryphall] are divinely inspired; but that some of them [such
as] First, the wisdom of Solomon; Secondly, the Wi^^om of Jesus the Son of
Sira^h (called Ecclesi^sticus.) Thirdly, the Epistle of Jeremiah, which (...)
^ro^e to those who were to go Cap^ive to B^bylon etc. Fourthly, the Fourth
Book of Esdras [or the Second as it stands usualy in the Old English Protestant
Bibles,] which books (and especially this last of Esdras which gives so clear a
testimony unto Christ as in Chap. 13.) are denied by unbelieving Jews to be of
divin inspiration with whom I. M. and his Brethren are in this matter to be
classed together, who deny them also. Secondly, albeit SAMUEL FISHER affirms,
that these before mentioned books, were writ by men divinely inspired; yet he
does no^ affirm, that they are of equal authority wi^h the Scripturs [as I. M.
falsely charge us;] for writtings may be from divin inspiration, and yet some
of them of greater authority then others, as proceeding from a greater measure
of the Spirit: however if I. M. have any convincing reasons why these books
aforesaid are not of a divin original, let him produce them. Now that some
principal and famous men among the Papists do place th^se books [commonly
called Apocryphall] in an inferior degree to the Scripturs, Gratius does
plainly show, in his Annotations upon Cassander his consult. that both Cajetan,
and Bellarmin, who were Cardinals, did hold them to be placed in an inferior
degree. And also, that KING JAMES the sixth did approve the same.

But let me ask I. M. one question or two First, does he think it a matter of
faith that these books are not equal to Scripture? If he does, I ask Secondly.
By what rule of faith, he does know, or can prove, that they are not equal to
Scripture? The Scripture it self can be no rule in the case, seeing no place in
all the Scripture says any thing of these books, not indeed of the number of
the books of the Scripture. If he say there are ^ound in them contradictions to
the Scripture. I answer, if it were so in some of them; yet I suppose he will
not say in all. If he say, they want that (...) (or character,) which the
Scripturs have, I ask again, By what rule does he know this, that they want
that (...), seeing the Scripture does not say, they want it, and seeing
possibly some may as strongly affirm that they have it: Who shall be judge in
the case? Moreover we have this just retortion of Popery to reflect upon I. M.
and his Brethren, that both Papists and they, have set up such a determined
number of books (though differing among themselves, as to the number of the Old
Testament; yet agreeing in one as to the number of the New) which closes up
the Canon, whereby they have both of them limited the GOD of Glory Himself,
both from bringing to light what other books have been writ, that may be of
equal authority with the Scriptures, such as, the Prophecy of Enoch mentioned
Jude 14. the Epistle which Paul wrote to the Corinthians, not to company with
fornicators, mentioned in the first of these Epistles which are extant, 1. Cor.
5.9. and diverse other books which are mentioned in the Scripturs not ^ow to be
found, although it is possible they may be found; yet if they were found, by
their principle, they are to be rejected as not being in the Canon received. As
also they have limited GOD from moving or inspiring any men, [in any age of the
world to come,] to writ any book or books, that may be of equal authority with
the Scripturs. For which bold and presumptuous alleadgeance, neither Papists
nor they have the least solid ground. Finally, there are some writtings that
both Papists and they reject, as not having Scripture authority, which yet we
find no just cause to reject, such as the 151. Psalm that is in the Septuagint,
and Paul his Epistle to the Laodiceans which are both extant to this day
wherein nothing is to be seen unsuitable either to other Scripturs, or unto
that spirit that gave them forth. And if you say, they want the (...) which the
Scripturs have, I suppose it will be as hard for I. M, and his Brethren, to
evince by any evidence, that such books have, or have not the true (...), as it
is for any Quaker to evince by any evidence that he has the Spirit of GOD,
this I say, not as denying but that the Scripturs have a Secondary (...) known
unto them, who know the primary of the Spirit in their hearts; but seeing our
Opposers require of us, to show, or evidence unto them, some infallible (...),
that we have the Spirit of GOD, I would have I. M. to know, that the same
difficulty recurreth as to the (...) of the Scripturs, it being a thing which
cannot be shown or made to appear by any evidence unto the carnal mind, which
yet is evident unto the spiritual. And indeed as the Scripturs have their
(...), which convinces that they are of GOD, ^o all the Children of GOD have
their (...) also, [who are as a living book or Epistle of Christ] which
convinces that both they are of GOD, and have the Spirit of GOD, and this is a
sufficient demonstration, unto them that are spiritually minded. And here only
I shall mind I. M. how the Protestants themselves are not agreed upon the
number of the Canonical books. The Lutherians at this day rejecting some,
(which the Calvinists receive,) such as the Epistle of James, the second and
third Epistles of John, and the book of the Revelation by some: yea Luther call-
James Epistle, a STRAWY EPISTLE. And if he had charged it as a Popish principle
on the Calvinists, that with Papists, they hold James Epistle to be Canonical,
I suppose I. M. would no^ for this have rejected it, although Papists at this
day do own it to be Canonical with him.

However this Advertisment I give to the Reader, that seeing the books
(commonly called Apocryphal) are controverted by some, to have that sufficient
authority; Yet in all matters of debate betwixt our Opsers and us, we shall not
urge their authority upon any who do not receive them; but are willing to wave
them; and keep to those books of Scripture, acknowledged by them, wherein we
have sufficient testimonies to all the Principles of Truth, mantained by us,
and furniture enough by the help of our GOD, to resist and oppose the contrary.

It is worth the observing, that not only both Papists among themselves, and
Protestants among themselves, have been divided about the number of the
Canonical books, as what books be Canonical, and what not; but even the
Fathers (so called,) and the Councills who did Canonise them, have differed
greatly also. Eusebius in his Ecclesiastic History lib. 3. cap. 22. writteth
exceeding uncertainely concerning diverse of the books of the New Testament
[such as] the Epistle of James, The Second Epistle of Peter, the second and
third Epistles of John, The Revelation of John, as being received by some at
Authentic, and gain^a^d by others. The Council of Laodicea, ( which was the
first council I read of, that did determine the Canon of the books of
Scripture,) as it omitteth, or passes by, as not Authentic* all these books [
commonly called Apocryph^:] so it also omitteth the Revelation of John. But the
third Council of Carthage, which ^a^ not long after, where Augustine was
present, does put into the canon both the book of the Revelation and most of
these books (commonly called Apocrypha) yea Augustine himself lib. 2. de
Doctrine Christiana. cap. 8. Among the other books of the Old Testament
numbereth Tobias Hester, Iudi^h, and two books of the Maccabees, and two of
Esdras, and the book of Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus, concluding thus. In these
forty and four books, the authority of the Old Testament is determined. Now if
to hold some of these books equal to Scipture be a Popish doctrine then
Augustine himself did hold Popish doctrine in this very thing: And yet I suppose
I. M. does not think that Augustine was a downright Papist, for all this. But if
this prove not Augustine to be a Papist how will it prove us the people called
Quakers to be Papists? he must either assoilzie us, or condemn Augustine, in
the case.

SECT. VII. Where the alleged agreement, as if the efficacy of Grace,
depended upon Man's FREE WILL, is considered and answered.
THe Sixth Instance of Popish doctrine charged by I. M. on the people called
Quakers is, that the efficacy of Grace depends on Man's free will. I suppose
this is but a consequence of I. M. his making upon the doctrine or principle of
Universal Grace mantained by the Quakers. As for my self, I never heard it,
nor read it, mantained by any of these people, that the efficacy of grace
depends on man's free will. And I do altogether deny, that it is a consequence
lawfully deduceable by any principles of sound reason from the doctrine of
Universal grace as mantained by us. For we deny that there is any free will in
man, to any thing that is truly good, and acceptable in the sight of GOD, but
what is of the grace of GOD. The will of man is servum arbitrium, [as Luther
called it,) and not liberum arbitrium, in respect of any obedience acceptable
unto GOD, that is to say, servil and bound over unto Satan, and captivated by
him; but as the grace of GOD does make it free: and that all men at times have
some measure of a freedom of will, by the grace of GOD we do with holy
boldness affirm, conform both to the Scripturs testimony, Ioh. 1.9. Romans 5.18.
2. Tit. 10.11. and many other places.
and the consent of the greatest part of Antiquity if not of all generally, as
both Vosius [a learned Antiquary,] in his Pelagian History, and Grotius in his
disquisition of the Pelagian Dogma's do show at great length. "By the
visitations of which Grace of GOD upon the souls of all men, at certain times
and seasons, the prison door is opened unto all who are in captivity, (as all
men are in the unconverted state) and the arm of GOD'S Salvation is stretched
forth unto them, yea it touches them, and by its touches infuseth into them
some measure of ability, whereby the soul is put into a capacity to convert and
turn unto GOD, that so it may become Light in the LORD, which was darkness,
according to which Augustine says expressly lib. Annot. in fol. ult. In
voluntate enim cujusque est, utrum tenebrae sit, an lux etc. It is in the will
of every man, whether he be darkness or light; but when he is darkness it is in
himself, [that is,] by his sin^, which are his own. But when he is light, he is
not it in himself; but in the LORD.

Now seeing we do expressly hold, and believe it as a most certain truth, that
all free will in man, unto any good thing acceptable unto GOD, has a most
absolut and necessary dependence upon the grace of GOD, and the efficacy
thereof, we cannot in any justice of reasons, be thought to affirm, that the
efficacy of grace depends on man's free will; seeing a mutual dependency
implies a manifest contradiction. I conceive that I. M. draws his
consequence from this, that we say the Grace of GOD many times works so
gently upon the souls and hearts of men that they may resist it, and so put a
stop in the way of their Conversion; therefore he concludes according to our
principle, the efficacy of grace depends on man's free will. But this
consequence I deny, for although a man may resist the Spirit of grace, and so
put a stop, ( some have named it so, po^ere obicem) to their conversion; yet
the Grace of GOD has its efficacy still of its own nature, and loses nothing
of its virtue thereby; yea it has its due effect upon these who resist it, as
to Conversion, [namely] to render them without excuse, and be against them, a
just ground of their condemnation, as Christ said, John 3.19. This is the
condemnation that Light is come into the World. Nor is the intent of GOD
frustrated thereby; but sufficiently answered; for GODS intention was only,
that the Grace of GOD should convert them, who do not resist it, and be a just
ground of condemnation against those who do resist, and reject it. Moreover,
the same consequence may be drawn against I. M. himself and his Brethren by
way of retorsion, seeing the Grace of GOD may be resisted, in order to
Perfection, as indeed it is, according unto their principle, as according unto
ours, it may be in order to Conversion. We say men may hinder their conversion,
by resisting the spirit of Grace, they say men hinder their perfection by
resisting the Spirit of Grace, for certainly he is a perfect man, and in a
sinless state, who makes no resistance unto the spirit of GOD in him; but in
all things yields unto it, and complyeth fully therewith. Now if resisting in
the one sense infer^ that the efficacy of Grace depends on man's free will,
resisting in the other sense will infer the same also, seeing it is the will
of man that resists in both, and if it does not infer in the one, neither
does it in the other.

But if I. M. allege that the doctrine it self of Universal Grace and
Free Will in all men, by virtue of that Grace be a Popish doctrine, I altogether
deny it, though Papists seem in words to affirm it, as they do many other
Christian truths, which are not Popish doctrins; for their holding them in
unrighteousness, that being a Popish doctrine (according to my former definition
that I. M. I conceive will not deny) which is mantained generally by Papists,
and is repugnant unto the Scripturs, to which I may add, [as I suppose with I.
M. his consent] and unto the testimony of Antiquity in the purest times,
(before that Bastard Religion of Popery was born into the World,) especially
the three or four first Centuries.

Now that this doctrine of Universal Grace, and Free Will in all men, by reason
of this grace, or any other principle affirmed by us, held in common, as it may
seem, by those (called Papists) and us, is neither repugnant unto the Scripture
testimony, or the most general testimony of Antiquity in the purest times; but
on the contrary most agreeable thereunto, I offer my self ^y the Grace and help
of GOD, to defend against the said I. M. or any of his Brethren. who will
undertake it for him, either in word or writ, as they please. And indeed that
the doctrine of Free Will unto good in all men, was taught by Justin Martyr, (
one of the most Authentic of the Fathers in the primitive times) is confessed
by Abraham Scultetus a Calvinist, in his Medulla Theologia Patrum, also that he
did hold, that men might merit, or live worthy of GOD, which he imputes to him
as his Errors. Again he blames Athenagoras another of the Fathers in the
purest times, for the matter of free will: So does he Tatianus, Irenaeus,
Theophilus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and those two Theophilus and Clemens
Alexandrinus, he blames both for the doctrine of free will, and justification
by works, also he blames Clemens Alexandrinus for the doctrine of perfection.
He blames Tertulian both for the doctrine of free will and for the merit of
good-works. Moreover he blames Cyprian about the matter of free will,
justification by works, and merit: Also he blames Lactantius for holding
justification by works and merit, and perfection. But these doctrins are not
the more erroneous [taken in the sound sense of those writters, who were
neither Pelagians, nor Papists] because a Calvinist so judges of them, through
prejudice, (as clashing with his narrow spirit and principles] however this is
certain both out of this writter, [ whose fidelity I suppose I. M. does not
suspect in his citations,] and also out of these Fathers their own writers,
most of whom, I have searched, upon these matters, and do find that in the
matter of Universal grace, Free Will, Justification, Mirit in a sound and sober
sense, and Perfection, they go much along wi^th us, in opposition to our
Adversaries who oppose us in these things, [ whose particular testimonies,] as
also of others in after times of the most famous of those called Fathers unto
those principles of Truth owned by us, and opposed by I. M. and his Brethren in
due time, [if GOD permitt] I may make known, and intend so to do, for the sake
of the Simple, that it may be seen, that our Holy Religion and Faith, (which
they reproachfully call by the name of QUAKERISM,) is neither Popery, nor any
other Heresy, but the Truth owned by the Scripturs and most approved of the
Ancient Writers and Fathers [so called.] Now as touching the aforesaid
particulars of Free Will in all men, by the Grace of GOD, Justification by
works, Merit, Perfection, I propose this alternative: that seeing the Fathers
held these doctrins, as Scultetus and Others acknowledge, it will follow, that
either they are not Popish errors, or that Popish errors were mantained by the
Fathers in the first three Centuries. If I. M. grant the first he clears the
Quakers, as to these things. If he grant the second, he contradicts himself,
who did undertake to defend the principles owned by him, to be conform to the
Fathers in that time, and the contrary repugnant thereunto.

Before I pass from this Sixth Instance or Head of Popish doctrine, I cannot
omit to take notice how handsomely, (or rather unhandsomely) I. M. in his Roma
Mendax goes about to evade that charge of Novelty concerning free will imputed
unto him, and these of his way; the Papist charge him as denying free will,
since the fall of Adam, he answers he and they of his way do not deny
free will. But this answer of I. M. is a faint evasion, the charge as to the
intent of it, is, whether there be in all men in the fall, a free will to
convert and turn unto GOD by any grace given by GOD. If the Papist did not so
word his charge, I. M. has taken the advantage of his failure and oversight;
but I would willingly know, what I. M. does or will answer to this charge.
That he and his Brethren do indeed deny any free will in any unconverted Men
by any Grace of GOD given them, to convert and turn to GOD, this I charge upon
I. M. and his Brethren as a novelty repugnant both to Scripture, and Antiquity
in the purest times: that he affirms men have free will to evil, in a
natural state, does no way bring him of. For the question is not whether there
be in man a free will to evil; but unto good, whereby it is possible for him to
convert, by any grace of GOD given him. Like unto this is his other evasion
about merit, he is brought to confess that some of the Fathers in the three
first Centuries did use the word merit, but in an innocent sense. Very well
then, why may not some Others use it in ane innocent sense also. Why does he
accuse the People called Quakers, for using the word merit, seeing he says
himself that it has ane innocent sense, and also that the Protestant Churches
have not abhored from [ or rejected] the word merit? where can he prove our of
the Quakers books, that either they hold merit of good works ratione operis,
or, ratione operis and pacti, as having a meritorious condignity in them unto
Eternal life, as many of the Papists teach? When he accuses the Quakers for
holding that good works are meriterious, may I not justly say unto him, as he
says unto the Papist, page 290. Ought he not to have told what he meant by
merit of good works. I shall conclude this Head with a just and equal
retorsion of this very matter of free will upon I. M. and his brethren, who
confess that a famous party of the Popish Church, does oppose the doctrine of
free will in all men unto good, and these are Dominicans, Thomists and
Ianse^ists page 289. Well then, and does not I. M. oppose the same? so that if
one sort of Papists (to wit) the Jesuits seem to aggree with us in the matter
of free will (although I could easily show very material differences betwixt
them and us in this very particular.] Here are three great sorts or tribes of
Papists, who do really agree with I. M. and he with them in the contrary
doctrine.

SECT. VIII. Where the alleged Agreement about the Apostasy of the Saints, is
considered and examined.
THe Seventh Instance of Popish doctrine charged on the Quakers is, that real
Saints may totally apostatize. To this I answer, if by real Saints he means
those who are come to a confirmed state and condition in holiness, so as to have
obtained the Election, and are the Elect of God in the strict sense, I say none
of these can totaly fall away, or Apostatize, and that this state is attainable
in time, and is attained unto by many we do affirm, and if Papists deny any
such state as attainable in this life, we oppose them; but if he mean, that men
may fall away from some true and real beginnings of Sanctification, who as yet
are not come to the state of the Elect in Christ Jesus, (in the Foreknowledge
of GOD before the World began) this is so far from being a Popish doctrine,
that it is a truth conform both to the Scripturs Testimony, Luke 8.13. Romans
11.19, 20. Hebr. 10.29. 1. Pet. 2.18. Jude 4.5, 6.
and the Fathers [so called,] as also unto the most famous of Protestant
Writters. The Augustan Confession set out by as famous Protestants, as any he
can name does expressly condemn it, as an Anabaptist error, that they who are
once justified cannot lose the Holy Spirit. And Melancton in many places, in
his loc. com. does affirm, That men may commit such gross sins as whereby they
may expel the Holy Spirit, after having once received him. Augustine says
expressly lib. de correctione and gratia, That some love God, and yet do not
persevere in that Good unto the end. And in his book de bono perseverantiae
cap. 8. he says of two that are holy, why perseverance is given to the one,
and is not given to the other, the judgments of GOD are the more ins^rutable.
Prosper ad septimam says, That of the regenerat in CHRIST JESUS, some having
left the Faith, and holy manners do apostatize from GOD. Cyprian, Epistola ad
Gratianum, The discipline departing, the Grace of the LORD departed also. Many
other testimonies could be cited for the same; but that I intend brevity at
present.

SECT. IX. Where the alleged Agreement about Indwelling -- Concupiscence is
considered and answered.
THe Eight and Last Instance of Popish doctrine charged on us, is, that
indwelling concupiscence is not our sin, until we consent to the lusts
thereof. To this I answer, that this principle as he does represent it, I know
not, that it is owned by any Quaker. We do indeed say, that the seed of sin,
is not imputed unto them for sin, who do not obey it, nor consent unto it,
even as the seed of Grace and righteousness that is in wicked men, is not
imputed unto them for righteousness, because they do not obey it; but if this
seed of concupiscence indwell in any, it becomes sin unto them; seeing it is
impossible but they who give it a dwelling in them must also give obedience
unto it; but it may be in them, in whom it does not indwell; for indwelling
signifies Union, and kindly reception. Cassander does show, that Augustine
openly says, Aug. exp. ad Gal. That concupiscence in the Regenerat is not sin
when not consented unto, which yet elsewhere he calls (...). And that the
controversy in this particular is rather about Name then thing. Consult. super
Articulum secundum. It is certain that the Regenerat may, and do find at times
a temptation in the flesh, or fleshly part, unto that which is evil: which
temptation, or inclination, (or however it be called,) is an evil thing, and
inclines to evil, yea to sin, and in that respect by a metonymie may be called
sin it self, but that it makes the soul guilty of death, without its own
consent, is no where to be found in Scripture. It is said, The soul that
sins it shall die. Ezekiel. 18.4. Now to sin imports a consent of the will,
which being wanting both in the Regenerat, and also in Infants, it is
unreasonable, as well as contrary to Scripture* that it does infe^r any real
guiltiness, where it is not in the least consented unto. I remember what
Bernard says of it, Non nec^t sensus, ubi desit concensus. The sense of it,
hurts not, ( viz. to bring on guiltiness) where the consent is wanting. Now
if it were their sin, it would certainly hurt. The same Cassander shows a
form of agreement among diverse Protestants and Papists, how that the Materiale
of it, does remain in the Regenerated, (that is to say) a certain evil, or
infirmity, or weakness; but that the Formale of it is removed, which Formale is
the guiltiness of it, (to wit) which it had before. This Eight and Last
Instance may be justly also re^or^ed upon I. M. and his Brethren, who teach,
That by reason of this Principle in Infants, they do all come into the world
guilty of Eternal Damnation, and that many Infants do really perish
Eternally, which is a Popish doctrine, wherein they do both agree, contrary to
the Scripture, which says, The soul that finneth shall die, Importing that
the soul that does not actually sin shall not die; which Popish error,
Zuinglius did manifestly impugn. De Baptismo.

Having thus passed through all the Eight Instances alleged by I. M. wherein
he charge us as guilty of Popish doctrins, I desire the Reader to take a
serious review of what I have answered on every particular head, and he will
find that upon all of them I have made it manifest, that either we do not hold
the same doctrine with Pap^sts, or if some papists seem to hold the same, others
of the Papists as Numerous and sometimes more, hold the contradictory, wherein
I. M. and his Brethren aggreeth with them. And so how the same charge is more
justly retorted upon himself and his Brethren. And Lastly, that there is not
one principle or doctrine held by us wherein any of the Papists seem to aggree
with us, but we have famous protestants, whom I. M. does acknowledge to be
Protestants, who therein do aggree with us also. And therefore if any of these
doctrins can prove that our religion is but Popery disguised, it will prove as
effectually, that the religion of those protestants, who agree with us in all
these things, is also but Popery disguised; which yet I suppose he will be
loath to acknowledge.

SECT. X. Where several other alleged lesser agreements in point of
Practice, and diverse other Calumnies of that kind, are considered and examined.
AS for his Criminations page 22.23. that Quakers have so much indignation at
these who go under the name of Puritans, and so much correspondense with
Romanists, with whom before they could not converse. I answer, to the First,
as we love all men, to those who are the rightest sort of Puritans, we have a
special kindness for: in whom the true Puritanicall Spirit is alive, by which
they were separated in good measure from the dead and dry formalities of the
worlds religion, and also from their profane customs. And who will narrowly
compare them and us, will find a greater mearness betwixt us, then is indeed
betwixt us, and any other people, and although they differed from us, in some
of these principles above mentioned; yet in others, more in number, they
aggreed with us, and which is most, we have more unity with their spirit, then
with the spirit of any other people in the Nation. But that spirit is much lost
in those days among many who bear that name.

As to the Second, for our Converse with Romanists, I suppose it is not greater
with them, then with other people, if the Lord has delivered us from that
peevish and narrow humor of some Presbyterians, wherewith some of us hade been
deeply tinctured; and enlarged our hearts with true love, both to Papists (so
called) or any others differing from us, so as we can converse with them,
either about our worldly lawful occasions, or in order to be isntrumental
unto their conviction and better information. We ought not to be blamed,
providing we keep free of complying with them in any sinful thing: far less
should I. M. blame us, who himself has been known [as I am informed] to
converse with EXCOMUNICAT PAPISTS, so as to eat and drink with some of them, a
thing repugnant unto the discipline of their Church. Again whereas he querieth,
have not persons gone under the character of Quakers in Britain, who have been
known to be professed Priests, M^n^ks or Jesuits in France and Italy. This
informatory question, may be returned with another of the same nature, have not
Papists, if not Priests, Mon^ks or Jesuits gone under the character of
Protestants, both in England and Scotland; yea in Aberdeen: will it therefore
follow, that the Protestant religion is but Popery disguised. It is most
certain that many Papists [so called] did outwardly conform to the Protestant
religion, so far as to go to their public assemblies, and be present at
their worship as seemingly owning it, and yet dissenting from it in their
hearts; for which, I have heard they hade a dispensation from the Pope. And
some of the popish writters have writ against the lawfulness of such a
practice, which shows that some have done it: yea some in Aberdeen have been
known to do so, will it therefore follow, that Protestants in Aberdeen are but
disguised Papists? And yet the Case is the same. He proceeds to tell, that he
heard a chief Quaker confess before famous witnesses that one giving himself
out for a Quaker in Kinnabers family, was discovered to be a Popish Priest. I
answer, if it hade been so, (how the thing was whether true or false* I have
not hade opportunity yet to examine,) i^ proves no more that Quakerism is
Popery disguised then that because a Hypocrite does give himself ou^ to be a
true christian, Hypocrisy is true christiani^ty disguised. And if it be true
as I. M. says, tha^ Romanists, espcially Jesuits can transform them^selves
into all shapes, admit then that some Iesui^ does transform himself into the
shape of I. M* himself, (or at least of his religion,) will it fol^^ow that I.
M. is a Jesuit or a Romanist but disgu^sed* or his religion Iesuitism? but
seeing these to whom that popish priest is alleged to have given him^self
forth to be a Quaker, did discover him, wha^ indeed he was, and so did not
acknowledge him to be what he pretended. This shows that Quake^rism and
Popery are not of so near a relation, fa^less one thing. If he could prove that
any Romanist Priest, Monck, or Jesuit were received by any of ^he Quakers, as
one with them in Religion, whom yet they did know to be Romanists, it would be
some presumption, but he is so far to seek for a proof of this, that I
suppose, he can not give any one Instance that ever a Quaker received a
Romanist as a Quaker even unwittingly; which yet if he could do, could only
prove the Quaker at that ^ime, was in a mistake, without any reflection upon his
Religion.

As to his Instance of Prophetesses among the Papists such as Hildegardis,
Katherin of Sens and Briget, whom he compares unto the WOMEN PREACHERS among
the Quakers. The comparison is unequal; seeing prophesying in that sense, and
preaching are two distinct things, we hear nothing of those Prophetesses
preaching in religious assemblies of Men and Women; and seeing the Protestants
commonly acknowledge, that GOD may in in those days give unto men the knowledge
of things to come by a Spirit of prophecy as he has done unto some: how is I.
M. sure, that it shall never be given unto Women, for they may be Prophetesses
by giving forth their prophecies in writ, although they speak nothing in the
Church. As for Hildegardis, She is acknowledged both by Fox in his acts and
mon: and by Brightman in his commentary on the Revelation to have been a
Prophetess, whose prophecy is brought in by them both as a witness against the
Papists, especially the begging Friars. As for Papists allowing Women to
baptize, it concerns us nothing, who look upon SPRINKLIN^ of INFANTS whether by
men, or women, but ^s an^ human tradition. And as to Papesse Joan, seeing I. M.
by his own confession derives his call through Rome, he is one of her Lineall
Succesors, through whom it is conveyed to him. But have not there been Women
among the Presbyterians, who have spoke in the presence of many both men and
women, of their experiences of the things of GOD. I suppose I. M. may have
heard of Margaret Mitchelson who spoke to the admiration of many Hearers at
Edinburgh, as concerning her experience in the time of Henry Rogue, Preacher
there, who is said to have come and heard her himself, and to have given her
this testimony (being desired to speak himself) that he was to be silent when
his Master was speaking, (meaning Christ in that Presbyterian woman.) There is
a relation of her speeches going about from hand to hand among Professors at
this day, and I my self have heard a Presbyterian woman speak in a meeting of
Presbyterians, which were a Church or convention of men and women. Yet has not
I. M. in such meetings, and consequently in assemblies of Churches, invited
some women to speak and pray, and declared solemnly (whether he did it merely
in his ordinary customary way of Complementing, that is best known to himself)
that he was edified thereby. And if some of those Women formerly in that
respect so much applauded by I.M. be of those that now open their mouths in the
Quakers meetings how comes it now to be Popish and heretical, more then in the
days of old when I. M. did use to frequent the CHAMBER-CONVENTICLES, unless
that he now has forgotten these, because fear has made them out of fashion
with him. Besides that Whores to this day upon the Stool of Repentance (so
called) speak in your public assemblies.

And whereas it is Objected by Some, That their Church does not allow unto
Whores Authoritative-teaching. To this I answer, First, that at least they
permit them to speak in the Church, and so by their own principle, they
transgress the words of the Apostle, saying, It is not permitted unto them to
speak. 1. Cor. 14.34. And again, I permit not a Woman to teach, 1. Tim. 2.12.
Secondly, do not they command and call them to speak, and therefore is not
their call to speak or teach as much authoritative from the Preachers, as the
Preachers call is from the Pope, seeing none of them pretend to the true
authority of the inward call of GOD, which is by IMMEDIATE REVELATION.

Next, he falls upon Enthusiasm, asking what other grounds has the Romish
Infallible Judge to walk upon, but Enthusiasms, and pretended Inspirations. I
answer, yet, he has another ground, which the Popish Doctors much more
commonly allege then any Enthusiasm, and that is, an effective assistance of
the Holy Ghost, which is not any objective immediate revelation; but a
subjective illumination, and this is also, the very ground, why a Presbyterian
who esteems himself a true Christian, thinks he can not err fundamentally in a
point of faith, (to wit) a blind unknown assistance of the Spirit pretended
both by Pope and Presbyterians, without immediate objective revelation. I say a
blind unknown assistance, because by confession of both parties, it is merely
effective and not objective, and so Medium incognitum assentiendi, an unknown
midst of assenting, as R. Barron did call it. And whence have either
Prelaticall or Presbyterian Professors borrowed this deceitful, and
Antichristian-distinction of an effective illumination of the Spirit of GOD, as
contradistinct from an objective; yea separated from it? But from the Popish
Doctors: Sacroboscus ^ Popish Doctor uses the same distinction of subjective
and objective assistance, def. decret. Trident. page 93. and 94. cited by
Iackson, third book of comment. on the Creed. And this I may more justly charge
upon I. M. and his Brethren, that they have learned this deceitful distinction
of effective and objective illumination from Papists, then that wherewith he
charge us, as having learned from Romanists to call the Scripturs a dead
Letter. page 71. For we do no otherwise call or esteem the Scripture a dead
letter, but as it is not accompanied with an administration of the Spirit, and
in this sense, Famous Protestants have affirmed the same, as both O
Ecolampadius, and Calvin, yea and John Owen in the very same bo^k of the divine
authority of the Scripturs, does positively assert the same, that the Scripture
is a dead letter, where it is not accompanied with an administration of the
Spirit, giving an instance in the unbelieving Jews, which holds no less in
unbelievers professing Christianity,

Next whereas he alleges that the whole work of Quakers is to break the
Reformed Churches, I answer, if it were so this is but an evasion as to that
Instance of affinity that the Quakers have with Papists; seeing in this the
Quakers rather agree with the Puritans, both whose principle it is, that it is
lawful for Persons to carry on a Reformation, without any public consent, or
allowance of those in outward authority: which sort of Reformation the Author
of Scolding no Scholarship, calls Reformation by a private spirit: though what
is done by the Spirit of GOD in private men, is by a public and universal
spirit, such as the Spirit of GOD is, nor does it answer it, that he calls
the Reformation among the Quakers a Deformation; for besides, that he but beggs
the question in that he cannot but know, that the Papist does as much think,
either the Episcopal or Presbyterian Reformation a Deformation, as these think
that ours is such. Again, seeing the doing one and the same thing on different
accounts may be good in the one and bad in the other, according to his rule
above mentioned: the Papists design and ours, as in relation to those he calls
Reformed Churches, being as far different as North from South, makes the
difference to be so wide, seeing what they do against you, is to bring you
back again to the grossest part of Popery: what we do is but to move you
foreward, that you may leave behind and throw away those too many and hurtful
relicts of Popish principles and practices, which hinder you from being a
truly Reformed Church that so you may be indeed a Reformed Church and People
unto GOD. And so far as the Reformed Churches (so called) have forsaken any
Popish principles and practices whatsomever in that we allow them, and have
unity with all the sincere and upright in heart, among them, which are but a
very few in respect of the great multitudes of profane and scandolous Persons:
nor is it any thing of the Work of GOD, that he has wrought in any, whether
among Papists or Protestants (so called) that we seek to break down; but indeed
to cherish it, and build it up; But it is the work of the Enemy, that our
testimony is against and for the breaking of it down, where ever it appears,
both in our selves and in others. Finally, whereas he says that we Romanise in
denying the Scripturs to be the complete and principal Rule of Faith. I have
so sufficiently answered it above, that I need say no more here: Only for a
testimony of our agreement with true Protestants, against all Popish
superstitions and traditions whatsomever, this I affirm: that whatever
principle or practice in Religion is obtruded by Papists or any other, upon the
account of tradition that is not to be found declared and witnessed to in the
Scripturs, or can not by sound evidence of true reason be deduced from the
Scripturs is to be rejected utterly, and denied by every true Christian: which
principle as it is verbaly owned by many Protestants, I wish it were as realy
practiced among them, and then it should be known how cordialy and realy we
should join with them in all things against the common Enemy of true
Reformation. And as to his charity (or rather indeed the defect of it)
wherewith he concludes this matter in expressing himself jealous, that both
Papists and Quakers could wish there were not Scripture in the World. As it
relates to us, I shall only wish that the LORD may forgive him his hard
thoughts conceived against us without any just ground, and shall be so far
from thinking so of him or any of his Brethren that they could wish there were
no Scripture, that I really believe they are glade that it is in the World. For
either they have a measure of sincerity, and who have this will love the
Scripture upon this good principle, or they have not, as indeed too many of
them, as I suppose by I. M. his own concession, are of that stamp, who are but
mercenary and covetous men, even whose GOD is their belly, and mind Earthly
things, and yet these are glade to have the Scripturs, not to conform their
lives unto them; but to make a trade of them, Cauponantes Verbum Dei, Making
merchandise of the Word of GOD, as the Apostle declares. 2. Cor. 2.17.

SECT. XI. Wherein I. M. his acknowledgment concerning the Ministerial
Succession through the Church of Rome is briefly considered, and the Imputation
of Popery in that respect, justly retorted upon him.
MAny other things I could have observed in his book, that might have been of
service to us, for our Vindication, and an occasion further to clear the Truth,
but we not being so particularly concerned in them, I have purposely forborne,
intending briefness, also his frequent naming of us, and classing us with
Romanists, Papists, Jesuits, etc. with his many bitter expressions, and
insinuations I have waved, it being chiefly before me to answer directly to
th^se particular charges above mentioned* Only in the Close, I cannot ommit one
thing, and that is, his opnely and professedly avowing that Ordination
con^erted by Antichristian Ministers, such as the Bishops and Popes of Rome,
even supposing them to be the Great Antichrist, may be and is valid, and that
the Ordination of the first Reformers was such. To this I have some things to
say.

First, If the Pope of Rome his Ordination and Cal^ be valid, which he
conferreth, and that the Protestants have no other, but what was at first
received from him and them (to wit) Popish Bishops, then it may easily appear,
whether they or we be most akin to the Pope, they owning expressly his
authority (seeing none can conferr Ordination but who has authority so to do)
we expressly and altogether rejecting and denying it, as mere usurpation: surely
I. M. and his Brethren may henceforth be ashamed to call us the Popes
Emissaries, seeing we never directly ^or indirectly owned him, or his call, and
yet so in the face of the World to print himself, and his Brethren, to be
indeed the Popes Emissaries; for Emissarie is one sent by the Pope as he
confesses his Ordination, Call, or sending to be, seeing his is derived by
them, who had it first from the Pope. And if an Emissarie of the Pope, he is
also an Emissarie of Papesse Joan, who is in the line of Papal succession by
I. M. his confession.

Secondly, it is a very strange thing, how a Minister of Antichrist, yea how
he, who is Antichrist himself, the Great Antichrist, (as I. M. admits the
supposition) can make or ordain a true and lawful Minister of Christ. If I. M.
can show us any where in Scripture that Christ conferred this power to
Antichrist, we shall confess him to be a Minister of Christ; but till then he
must excuse us to hold him as in that respect (at least) a Minister of
Antichrist. But I. M. seems to come of with a distinction he gives page 379. (
not in so far as Antichristian [ says he] but as retaining some of Christ's
Goods:] this distinction I fear will be found too Metaphysicall, and fitter for
men, who have Philosophical Consciences, ( who can defend any thing by a
distinction) then men of plainness and simplicity; but I ask I. M. how, or in
what relation does the Pope hold some of Christ his Goods, whether as Christian
or Antichristian, if as Antichristian the distinction destroys it self, in
making the members of the distinction to coincide, as to say the Pope not as
Antichristian, holds some of Christ's Goods and yet as Antichristian holds
some of Christ's Goods: this were to make two contradictory propositions both
true together, which is absurd. But if he say, that the Pope as Christian
holds some of Christ's Goods, then it follows that he is both Christian and
Antichristian together, which is indeed as real an impossibility, as for one
and the same man, to be both a man and a beast, in a strict and proper sense;
seeing Christian and Antichristian differ really as much as man and beast;
especially in the sense acknowledged, that the Pope is so Antichristian, that
he is in the Abstract, the Great Antichrist himself: for to say, that he who is
in the least measure a true Christian, can be the Antichrist, yea the Great
Antichrist is to reconcile the greatest contradictions. As who would say
Whiteness is Blackness, Life is Death. Not does it suffice to say, as a thing
can be partly white and partly black, so the Pope may be partly Christian and
partly Antichristian, for to be the Great Antichrist (as I. M. supposes him to
be in the case and I am sure formerly used really to judge him so) is to be
wholly Antichristian, and not partly. Now a thing cannot be partly such, and
wholly the contrary* And besides I. M knows out of his own School rules, that
the Essences of things are indivisible, and so cannot be parted, (as for
example,) the Essence of a Horse is so indivisible that we cannot say, a Horse
can be partly a Horse, and partly an Ass; for a living creature that is
generated of a Horse and an Ass, is neither a Horse nor an Ass, but a third
kind.

Thirdly, Moreover seeing I. M. affirms, that the Roman Church has neither
doctrinall, nor personal succession, some of the Popes having taken the Chair
by force, some by Fraud, some by Simony, some by Magical Arts. It is manifest
then that She has no real and lawful succession at all; but merely usurped:
even as if an ordinary Thief or Robber, should by theft or violence, steal or
rob the Rights of any civil Authority, and fraudulently insert his Name to be
KING: how can this Usurp^r, who has no lawful Authority, convey it down to
others, and here let us see, if I. M. his distinction can do any good. He
conveyeth it down, not as a Thief, or a Robber, but as having the KING'S-
Goods. Ay but I ask, how he has the KING'S- Goods? it is by stealing of them,
and consequently as a Thief, and yet according to the distinction, not as a
Thief: so both as a Thief, and as no Thief which is a contradiction, and indeed
it is so impossible to conceive that a man can be a Thief, and no Thief, that
it is hard to conceive how he can be a Thief and an Honest man together. And
seeing some have taken the Popedom by Simony, (as O^e well observes) The Pope
is the Successor rather of Simon Magus, then of Simon Peter and consequently I.
M. who is the Popes successor, by his own confession must be the successor of
Simon Magus also. I desire him not to be offended, for I call not him so, only
I tell him what I judge to follow from his own assertion, and indeed I am a
shamed, that he should derive either his own or any other of the Protestants
call, or Ordination, through so unclean a conduit as the great Antichrist, and
through confessed Symoniacks, Magicians and Negro-mancers yea through Papesse
Joan, a vile Harlot. Sure I am the most famous of the Primitive Protestants
abhorred such a thing, and if at any time any of them alleged that outward
Ordination, it was but ane Argument ad hominem, [as we use to say] by way of
Retortion to stop the Papists mouths, otherwise acknowledging their Call to be
Extraordinary and Immediate, as Calvin, Beza, Sadeel, Fulk and many others, And
I believe that distinction of quoad Substantiam, and quoad modum, never came
into their heads, for they hade no need of it, and many of the First Reformers,
without all question hade no owtward Ordination, nor call at all; seeing they
were not All in Orders, who were the First Reformers, not so much as Priests
but Laymen, and being among the first, they could not be ordained by
Protestant Ministers, seeing None were to ordain them. But Lastly, seeing I. M.
does hold that the Church of Rome does err Fundamentaly, and did so before the
Reformation, as in being guilty of gross Idolatry, in worshipping a piece of
bread for the true GOD, beside other Fundamental Errors; he cannot in reason
hold her for a true Church; seeing a Fundamental error destroys the Nature
of a true Church, otherwise he may say, The Turks are a true Church. Now if she
be not a true Church, she can not convey Ordination; because it is a thing
only proper to a true Church; for if a false Church can ordain, then the
Mahumetants may ordain, or indeed the most abominable People in the World;
seeing they are a false Church as well as She. But it seems for all this I. M.
holds her to be a true Church, or at least a Church truly, if not Vera, yet
Vere. Strange and ridicolous distinctions! as to say, not a true Horse, but
truly a Horse, not true Gold, but truly Gold, not true Fire, but truly Fire.
Whoever first invented this distinction, seems plainly not to have been in
his right wits. For indeed every thing is both true and truly what it is, even
a Liar is both truly a Liar and a true one, though he is not moraly a true,
[that is to say] ^ faithful man. But his reason is this, Antichrist sits in
the Temple of GOD, therefore Rome where the Pope [Antichrist] sits is the
Temple of GOD. To this, it is easy to answer. That it is one thing to be the
Temple of GOD, de jure, another thing, de facto. I confess, Rome is the Church
of GOD de jure, of right, and that in a special way, as having been formerly a
true and faithful Church of GOD, and though Antichrist has stepped in, and
taken Usurpation; yet the Lord loses not His right, She is still His de jure,
or of right and so are the other places, where the Gospel once flourished, as
Jerusalem and Alexandria now overrun with Paganism or Mahumetanism, all these
places are as much the Temple of GOD, as Rome de jure, and yet I suppose I. M.
will not say that de facto they are the Temple of GOD; so that by an easy
Metonymie, Rome may be called the Temple of GOD, both as to what She should be,
and as to what She once was, even a^ Britain, was called the KING'S Dominions
and He KING of Britain in the time of His Exile; because it was His formerly
and His title to it remained, yet de facto and actually it was in the
possession of an Usurper. Nor will this Argument any more prove that Rome is
the Church of GOD, then those Pagans are the Church of GOD; because they live
in a place, where once the Church of GOD was. And indeed if we take Antichrist
more strictly as he is a Spirit, properly the Temple where he sits, is Man's
Heart, there opposing the Spirit of Christ, under a pretense of being for
Christ, and thus every wicked man under a profession of Christ, has Antichrist
sitting in the Temple of GOD, (to wit) in man, who is de jure GODS Temple, but
de facto, Antichrists Synagogue: and in some respect, every man on Earth and
all men though never so wicked, are the Temple of GOD, (that is to say,) of
Right, but not Actually or in Fact; But more especially, they, who have a
profession of Christ, and yet give way to that Spirit which opposes Him, they
are the Temple of GOD, not realy, but seemingly, not in truth, but in show, and
that the Scripture sometimes is so to be derstood [to wit] (...), or according
to opinion or appearance only I.M. himself does well allow. But tho we had the
Letter of the Bible conveyed to us, by the Popes and Church of Rome, which yet
may be doubted, the case is not alike as to Ordination. For I may take my
Fathers goods from a Thief, seeing they are my Fathers, and mine by my Father;
But if that Thief hade killed my Father, who was the true KING of the Country,
and made himself the KING and offers to make me a Magistrate under him, I am
not to receive it from him; because he is not de jure, one himself, so that
there is one reason or manner of conveying Goods, another of conveying an
Office, seeing the Goods may be mine antecedently to the conveying, the Office
only becomes mine in the conveying. We have a right to the Scripture immediately
of GOD, who has given it us for our profit and comfort, and therefore it is
ours antecedently to all conveyance. But to be ordained is not a man's right
before, but in the Act it becomes his.

GEORGE KEITH.
Write at ABERDEEN in SCOTLAND, in the Beginning of the Sixth Month, 1675.
SECT. XII, BY ANOTHER HAND. Wherein we are further vindicated from the
Imputation of Popery unjustly cast upon us, and how much more truly it agrees
to our Opposers, is evidenced by a short Account of many weighty particulars,
wherein they agree with Romanists against us.
I Suppose the Reader by the perusal of the Former Treatise is sufficiently
informed and persuaded how much I. M. and his Brethren have abused us in
casting upon us the Imputation of Popery, and how innocent we are of that
charge. But their crime is so much the greater that they falsely charge us of
that, of which, themselves are highly guilty, which briefly to demonstrat for
Thy further satisfaction is the business of these two last Sections. If we
consider the principles and doctrins of the Romanists and those of I. M. and
his Brethren and those of the Quakers; there is no man of reason can deny, but
that they aggree Ten Times more with the Papists, then do the Quakers, as will
thus easily appear.

First, The Papists and I. M. and his Brethren agree as to their notions and
distinctions of Trinity and Persons: which the Quakers deny; who though they
confess Father, Son, and Spirit, and that these three are one, (according to
the Scripturs;) yet deny the School-mens uncertain notions and unscripturall,
terms of TRINITY and PERSONS so here the Papists and I. M. agree against the
Quakers

Secondly, The Papists and I. M. and his Brethren agree in affirming that
Infants are really guilty of Adams sin before they committ actually any of
their own, which the Quakers deny they are, until they actually sin; though
they acknowledge a Seed of sin in Infants conveyed unto them by reason of Adams
transgression.

Thirdly, The Papists and I. M. and his Brethren agree in denying there is a
Saving, Evangelicall, Supernatural Light in all men, by which, they may be
saved without the use of other outward means, if GOD necessarly abstract them
from them, both affirming that such as have not the Scripturs or some to preach
to them or baptize them etc must of necessity perish, unless the Lord make use
of some extraordinary means. All which the Quakers deny, who though they
believe the Scripturs and outward knowledge of CHRIST to be both very useful
and comfortable, and absolutely necessary to be believed by such as GOD
conveyeth it to; yet can not think GOD so unmercifull or unjust as to damn
those for not believeing that, which he never affords them an occasion to
hear, who if they obey and follow the LIGHT, (which is the Gospel preached in
them,) may come to be saved.

Fourthly, The Papists and I. M. agree in affirming that humane learning and
natural parts are more Essential qualifications to Ministers and Preachers
then the Grace of GOD, averring that men may be true Ministers without the
Grace of GOD, but not without the other, which the Quakers deny and condemn.

Fifthly, The Papists and I. M. agree in deryving the power of their Ministry
by ane outward succession, which together with the use of outward ordination
they judge sufficient to constitute a Minister though he want ane inward call
from GOD'S-Spirit reckning people are obliedged to hear him and look upon him
as a Minister, because of this outward formality of ordination, without
questioning his inward call. Whereas on the contrary they agree in affirming
that whatever inward call from GOD'S- Spirit a man have, he ought not to be
heard nor received as a Preacher, until he obtain this outward approbation.
All which the Quakers deny as Antichristian.

Sixthly, The Papists and I. M. and his Brethren agree in affirming that the
Clergy ought to be a distinct sort of Persons distnguished from the rest of
the people by their BLACK COATS etc. So that it is not lawful for Honest
Tradesmen, such as was the Apostles to preach, who have not past their
APPRENTICE-SHIP at the University, and there Learned the ART and TRADE of
Preaching. But the Quakers say the contrary, believing all may prophecy if
moved thereunto, and that ane honest trade is no-wayes inconsistent with a
Gospel Minister.

Seventhly, The Papists and I.M. with his Brethren agree in affirming that
Preachers are not to wait to speak as the Spirit gives them utterance; but
ought to study it in their Closets before hand, and then when the BELL ringeth
repeat over before the people, as the School-boyes do their Lessons, and the
Commedians their parts upon the stages. But all this is denied by the Quakers.

Eighthly, The Papists and I. M. and his Brethren agree that Ministers ought to
have a SET-LIMITED-HIRE; and ought not to supply their wants with their hands,
as did the honest Apostle Paul, but sit at ease and feed of the fat, and cloth
themselves with the finest of the woole, and take from such by violence and
poinding, as cannot for conscience sake hear them, and so receive none of their
spirituals. But all this the Quakers deny as Antichristian

Nynthly, The Papists and I. M. and his present Prelatick Brethren (not his
OLD PRESBYTERIAN and INDEPENDENT FRIENDS) agree in affirming that all Ministers
are not alike; but that there ought to be DIOCESIAN BISHOPS over the rest, whom
men must call MY LORD. Which is denied and condemned by the Quakers as
Antichristian.

Tenthly, The Papists and I. M. and his Brethren agree, in affirming that men
may, yea, and ought to pray, preach and do all other acts of worship, when
they please, whether they be moved and influenced by GOD'S Spirit or not, which
the Quakers deny as will worship and superstition.

Eleventhly, The Papists and I. M. with his Brethren agree, in affirming that
Water Baptism is the Baptism of Christ, and a standing Ordinance of the Church
of Christ, which the Quakers deny.

Twelfthly, The Papists and I. M. with his Brethren agree, in affirming that
INFANT-SPRINKLING is an Ordinance of the Gospel, which the Quakers deny,

Thirteenthly, The Papists and I. M. and his Brethren agree, in affirming that
the partaking of the visible Signs of B^ead and Wine, is a Sacrament or
standing Ordinance in the Church of Christ, Which the Quakers deny.

Fourteenthly, The Papists and I. M. and his Brethren agree, that it is
lawful for Christians to swear which the Qu^kers according to the express
command of Christ, do deny.

Fifteenthly, The Papists and I. M. and his Brethren agree, that it is lawful
for Christians, to fight and KILL ONE-ANOTHER in fighting, which the Quakers
deny.

Sixteenthly, The Papists and I. M. and his Brethren agree, in the bloody
Antichristian Tenet of PERSECUTION, in affirming that the Civil Magistrate may
lawfully Kill, Banish, Imprison and poynd men for their Opinions in matters of
Worship and Doctrine, which Doctrine the Quakers deny.

Seventeenthly, The Papists and I. M. with his Brethren agree, in affirming it
lawful for men to Knell, Bow, and take off their Hatts One to another, and in
the use of vain Titles, Complements and Cringeings, etc. all which things the
Quakers deny.

Eighteenthly, The Papists and I. M. and his Brethren agree, in asserting the
lawfulness of Gameing, Sporting, Playing, and all such^ other things, as
Danceings, Singings, acting of Commedies, useing of Lace, Ribbands, plating the
Hair, and such other kind of Superfluities, all which the Quakers deny.

I could have instanced several other particulars, some whereof are in the
former part of this Treatise included, but this may serve abundantly to prove
the matter in hand: for since it cannot be denied, but that I. M. and his
Brethren do agree in those before mentioned particulars, and that jointly in
opposition to the Quakers, who then can deny but that there is more affinity
betwixt I. M. and the Papists, then betwix^ the Quakers and them. And if I. M.
and the Papists agree in many more particulars, and that more weighty against
the Quakers, then he himself can allege the Quakers do with Papists against
him, then let the Rational Reader judge whether he had any reason to upbraid us
with affinity with Papists, to whom he is far more near a kin. As for his
Popish charges against us, we have vindicated our selves from them, let him if
he can clear himself from these, he is here charged with. If he confess the
agreement, but affirm that both he and Papists are right in these things, and
we wrong in denying them. However this will be hence so far apparent, that he
is more one with Papists then we, and therefore had no reason to accuse us of
Popery. But as to these particulars, both I and some others of my Brethren
have already proven how they and Papists do in these agreements against us
contradict both Truth and Scripture, and that in several Books already
published, which lie at their door unanswered.

SECT. XIII. Containing the Conclusion by way of Epilogue; wherein the whole is
briefly resumed, and the falsness of the Accusation, as well as the justness of
our Retortion clearly presented to the view of the Serious and Impartial-Reader.
THe Sum of what is said, results here, that the Quakers do as much, yea
more then any Protestants deny these Gross, Abominable, Idolatrous and
Superstitious Popish Doctrins, upon the occasion whereof the Reformation first
took place, and therefore in no true respect can be said to return to Popery.

But upon the contrary the principles, doctrins and practices of the Quakers,
are a further step of Reformation from Popery in many things wherein
Protestants adhere to them, who have only cut of some of the grossest branches
and fruit, that was most obviously putrified, but we strick at the very root
and foundation of i^. The root and ground of Popery, and all Apostasy standing
principaly and fundamentaly in this one thing, (to wit) a forsaking,
neglecting, over-looking and despising the gift of GOD, the spirit of GOD, the
inward Anointing, which should be the constant immediate and only guide of
Christians, as that whereby is signified their daily dependence, relying upon,
and trusting to the Lord above, and being ruled by him, and a setting up
exalting and following man's own will, spirit and wisdom, as he stands in his
fallen degenerat state; in which great error and Apostasy, Papists, and
Protestants are one in the root and spring; however subdivided in the branches
and streams, as will appear by this short resumption of the former particulars

First, in that both Papists and Protestants do not derive the ground of their
knowledge from the inward immediate objective revelation of GOD 'S Light and
Spirit, manifesting to, and revealing in them the things of His Kingdom, as all
the holy men of GOD ever did. But all the knowledge of GOD, they have, and
consequently the very ground and foundation of their Faith is built upon ane
external testimony, and is by mere hearsay, tradition and the report of
others, and not by any intuitive, infallible Knowledge in themselves. So here
the testimony of man is set above the immediate witness of GOD. But the Quakers
do the contrary.

Secondly, Being strangers then to this inward testimony, they have invented
in their imaginations several strange and wild notions of GOD, darkened and
clouded the clear knowledge of Him, with many heathnish and barbarous terms,
distinctions and nycities, the useless fruit of man's fallen, carnal wisdom, who
confess themselves not led by GOD'S spirit. Which terms have no resemblance to
the plain simple testimony of these good men, who by the leadings of GOD'S
spirit wrote the Scripturs, which terms as of a Trinity ( a word not to be found
in all the Bible) of seperat distinct persons, the Quakers in opposition to
both Papists and Protestants reject, as being such as are neither revealed in
them by the spirit, nor testified of in the Scripturs.

Thirdly, The Ministry both of Papists and Protestants is a MAN-MADE-MINISTRY
founded upon a traditional succession, qualified by natural and acquired parts,
performed by the art and wisdom of man, to which they neither judge the inward
and immediate call of GOD'S Spirit, nor the assistance and influence of His
Grace, a necessary qualification. So here is man with his fallen natural wisdom
set up and exalted, but the Grace, Spirit and Power of GOD despised, neglected,
accounted at best but as an accidental and no essential qualification. But the
Quakers do the contrary. Fourthly, The Worship both of Papists and Protestants
is a voluntary will worship, stands in man's will and traditionall appointments
of meats and drinks diverse washings and carnal observations, wherein consists
the substance of both their worships, which they go about at their own times
seasons and in their own strength not minding the Spirit of GOD, to act, move,
lead or order them therein, nor judging its influence or assistance essential
to the matter of their worship. So here they set up their own Idols,
inventions, traditions, forms, ceremonies and observations above the spirit and
power of GOD; but the Quakers in opposition to both do the contrary.

Fifthly, The Papists and Protestants are one in the same spirit of pride*
vanity, lust and envy, whereby they both are for fighting, swearing,
persecuting* and destroying each other about who shall be uppermost with their
Idols and inventions and are both one in the superfluous use of cringing
complementing and bowing to each other, in abusing and unnecessarly using the
creation in the superfluous use of clothes and meats, whilst the Poor among
both are ready to starve in the fruitless and sinful use of games, sports and
invented recreations in the general abuse of precious time, and all the good
creaturs of GOD, being equally one in the love of the vain glory, pomp pride
and vanity of this perishing World. so here is the spirit of the world, the
pride of life, the lust of the flesh etc* and man in his natural wordly glory
and liberty set up by both and the mortified, meek, self-denyed life of Jesus
neglected. Whereas the Quakers in opposition to both have witnessed against
those things, and are in measure by the spirit of Jesus, (which they follow as
their guide) gathered into this life, for which the world and worldly literal
Christians both Papists and Protestants mock and deride them as the Pharisees
did Christ their Lord and Master.

And to conclude both Papist and Protestant religion (abstracting from these
general notions of truth as they are ass^nted to by all in words) and is
nothing else, but the old corrupt first fallen man with his notionall wit,
working forming, inventing, and imagining in that earthly carnal wisdom about
the things of God, as they were delivered by these good and holy men, that by
the spirit of GOD wrote the Scripturs of truth, while they are alienated from
the spirit of life and power that these holy men lived in, and spoke from, and
therefore in the same wild nature which is one both in Papists and Protestants
because their imaginations do not jump, they are wrangling, contending, yea
and sometimes murdering one another. But the Quakers Religion in opposition to
both, is that which stands in mans-will, wisdom, arts, and parts, as he is in
his natural, unregenerat state, but in the spirit, power, light and wisdom of
GOD, which reveals and gives the knowledge of GOD, in and to man, and so
purifies, sanctifies, renues him, and makes him conform to the Image of GOD in
the holy pure, meek, undefiled life of Jesus, and also acts moves and leads
them in his service and worship, whereby he comes to know the things of GOD,
and serve him, even as the holy prophets and apostles did not only in mere form
and imitation; but in the same spirit, life and power with them.

I shall add no more but that I hope none who will seriously read and consider
these things, unless they be either deplorably dark and ignorant, or desperately
malicious and prejudicat; but will easily acknowledge that the Quakers differ
more widely and fundamentally from Papists, then any other sort of Protestants
and therefore that a more Horrid Lie can scarce be hatched then, that Great One
(to wit) that Quakerism is but Popery disguised.

ROBERT BARCLAY.

Certain QUERIES, concerning a CHRISTIANS-RULE.
Query First.

Whither is a living Rule, or that which lives not the best Rule? [supposing
they point at the same things both,] yet upon the account that the one is
living* the other not, is not the living Rule to be preferred to the other not
living? and whither is the Scripture a living Rule or the spirit of Christ, yea
or nay?

Qu II Whither is a rule that can be wrested, or a Rule that cannot be wrested*
but is inviolable; unalterable, the best Rule? and whither may the Scripturs be
wrested? seeing Peter says, many do wrest them unto their own destruction, or
can the spirit of Christ in his inward living and certain manifestation be
wrested, yea or nay?

Qu* III. Whither is a rule that a man may loss and be robbed of* by outward
violence or a Rule that cannot be losed by any outward violence the best rule?
and whether the Scripturs may be losed by outward violence? or can the spirit
of Christ be losed by any outward violence yea or nay?

Qu. IV. Whither is a Rule that is manifest evident and certain in it self, or
a rule which is but evident, manifest and certain in and by another evidence,
the best Rule? and whither the Scripture be evident, manifest and certain to
any in themselves (without the illumination of the Spirit of Christ,) or is not
the Spirit of Christ evident, manifest and certain in his own immediate
operation, in the heart of a Christian, without any external, or outward
evidence whatsomever, being spiritually felt and tasted, yea or nay? and hade
not many of the Saints a Rule, before Scripture was written? and did not such
(viz Abel, Enoch, Noah) know certainly the Spirit of Christ in his own
manifestation without the Scripturs, yea or nay?

Qu. V. Whither is a Rule that gives power and strength to obey whatever it
commands, or a rule that does not so the best rule? and whither a rule that
gives life, or a rule that kills be the best Rule? and does not the spirit give
power and strength to obey what it commands does it not give life? but does or
can the Scripturs do so? does not the letter kill, yea or nay?

Qu. VI. Whither is a Rule that makes the commands of GOD, so far from being
grievous, that they are a delight unto the heart, and makes it become natural
to do the will of GOD, yea meat and drink, so that the yoke of Christ becomes
easy and his burden light, or a rule that has not of it self this virtue, the
best rule? and has not the spirit of Christ in the heart of a Christian, this
virtue of it self, or has the Scripture this virtue of it self, yea or nay?

Qu. VII. Whither is that which makes nothing perfect, and is weak and
unsufficient of it self or that which makes perfect and is strong and
sufficient of it self the best rule? and whither of these is true, of the
Scripturs, or of the spirit, yea or nay?

Qu. VIII. Whither is the original of the Scripturs, or a transcription and
translation of them the best rule? And is not the spirit of Christ writting the
law in the heart, the original of the Scripturs? and most not all under the new
Covenant come to this, according to what is promised, Ierem. 23. Heb. 8? or is
the Hebrew and Greek the first original, yea or nay?

Qu. IX. Whither is the letter of the Scripture, which declares of the life and
substance which is Christ, the living and eternal Word, spiritually in the
Saints, or this life and substance declared by the Scripturs the best Rule?
also, whither the law of God written in the heart by the spirit of the living
God, or the law written in any outward book whatsomever with pen and ink, be the
best rule, yea or nay?

Qu. X. Whither is that which can readily answer all occasions and conditions,
and infallibly teach man his duty and his place in all cases, without
burthening either the memory, or understanding, or going out for seeking
counsel from any, or that which has not these advantages the best Rule? and
whither of these is true of the Spirit, or of the Scripturs, yea, or nay?

Qu. XI. Whither that which is universally accorded upon by all sober,
reasonable men, and has been the Saints rule in all ages, and is the Angels
Rule, and was Adam's Rule in Paradise, and shall be the Saints Rule for ever,
be the best Rule, and whither this is the Spirit of Christ or the Scripturs,
which many of the Saints never had in any outward book or sound, yea or nay?

Qu. XII Whither is Wisdom it self Goodness it self Righteousness it ^elf,
Holiness it self, Love it self, Honesty, Virtue it self, an Inward, Living,
Eternal Principle of all Good Actions, or any Outward Declaration of this the
best Rule, and whither is this true of the Spirit of Christ or of the
Scripture, yea or nay?

GEORGE KEITH.

THE END.
Freindly Reader,
Thou art desired to excuse the difference of the Printing in this last half
sheet* from the rest; in respect our Adversaries (who notwithstanding are so
confident and clamorous in falsely accusing us, yet dread nothing more then that
we be permitted to vindicat our selves, and detect their falsehoods) caused
surprise the one half of the preceding half sheet at the Press, which put us
to some trouble, and necessitat us to take another course, which has hindered
this from coming so soon to thy hands.

As also, Thy Caendor must excuse some false Stops Comma's etc and with thy pen
correct some letters and Verbal Errors, the most obstructive to the sense are
here collected and amended, hoping thou will pass by the rest.

ERRATA.
Page 11. Line 22. Read (...) p. 14. l. 6. r. hearts p. 17. l. 11. r. recede p.
30. l. 5. dele all these 7. lines beginning thus, and Richard Baxter, etc and
ending thus, this censure, these lives by the fault of the transcriber, were
put in into the wrong place, which page 51. comes in their own propper place.
p 32. l. 24. r ^easing p 43 l. 10 r satisfaction p. 44. 16. after Justification
add is comprehended, p. 45. l. 18 r. have. love in it, p. 51. l. 10. r.
LOOKING ibid. l. 17. r. accounted p. 57. l. 8. r. for p. 66. l. ult. r. in Job
(...).


