A POEM ON THE CORONATION OF JAMES the II. King OF Great Britain, France and
Ireland, etc. Who was Crowned at Wistminster-Abey the 23 th of April, 1685.
Julium Sidus micat inter omnes, velut inter ignes Luna Minores Horat.

A Thron's Promotions Pyramid, and Kings
Are God's Vicegerants, and the Healthful Springs
Whence Judgment both and Equity do flow,
To cause the Flowers of Peace and Plenty Grow,
Which bear, and yield the Fruits of sweet Content,
The Root and Nosegey of a Government.
For as the Sun darts forth his Beams and Light,
To clear the World from Darkness of the Night;
A Gracious King makes Anarchy to Fly,
By Justice joined with Soveraignity.
It Is Providence (that is nominated Fate)
Guides and Governs all things in Church and State.
Promotion and a Kingdoms Royal Crown
Comes not by Chance; it is God al^^^ ^^rows down
The Proud; Exalting those (who for D^^^nce)
Take his decree and sure Omnipotence.
Now since the Triumph of this joyful Day
Has turned the Wheels of an Hyperbole;
And Expectation has conceived in Vain
A Gemini; and Labor without Pain
Has brought forth One, who is (without Contest)
Of Royal Blood, and Sovereign Kings the Best:
Great JAMES, who with his Conquest of Renown,
And Sacred Head, has honored Englands Crown;
Let all his Subjects sound and echo forth
A Loyal Simphonia to his Worth.
The first rate Sovereign that was sadly tossed,
From Wind to Wave, and was given o'r for Lost,
'Twixt Scilla and Charibis, now has past
The Shore of Shipwracks, and Arrived at last
At that safe Harbor, where (tho Billows Rore)
No Tempest can prevail against him More.
Call and conveen the Hystories of Time,
With all the Poems have been Wrote in Rhyme,
And all the Hyrogliphicks that have been
'Twixt Trismegistas and late Guiccardeen:
Then let the great Chronologers point forth
A Prince that was more Eminent in Worth;
For Gratitude (the Glory of a King,
The Life of Loyalty, and only thing
That Binds a Subject firmly to persist
In Truth, to live and Die a Loyallist)
Is his Predominant; he casts an Eye
On those who did prove True, when Anarchy
Eclipsed the Royal Race; and does repay
Their Deeds and Service, till this very Day.
And furthermore, (as it is by all Confessed)
Our present MARY is of Queens the Best;
Tho Malice Judge and Envy's Jury Sit
Upon her Size, no Blemish she will admit;
Her spotless Reputation does Defy
The rigid Critic of Hypocrecy.
Cast all the virtues to one Total worth,
Her Sum of parts will point the Product forth.
But why should I presume thus to rehearse
A Them that is far beyond the reach of Verse;
Her innate Candor sends forth a Light,
Can show her Splendor, in the darkest Night.
Her Fame's enough her person to extole,
And send her praises to the Artick-Pole.
And tho blind Mortals now should not her prize,
Yet after ages will her canonize.
Hence then State-grumbling Critics get ye gone,
With all your prancks of Combination.
In Israel the Scismaticks and Sects
The very Prince of Peace himself did vex;
So Trimmers now, and Counterfeits throw dirt
At Church and State; and make Religion Squirt.
Yet thou Great JAMES Vicegerant unto God,
Whose Providence has brought Thee safe, dry-shod,
Through that Red Sea which threatened to fall down
Upon thine Highness, and o'rwhelm thy Crown,
Mind his great power; and keep before thine eye
His Glory; that thy Name may never dye;
But have (when thou art laid in Earths vast Womb)
The Good and Great Engraven on thy Tomb.
All flesh is grass; turn back, and look behind
The vail of by past ages; and thou wilt fiind
Time's glistering Gloryes are but shadows vain;
And Man once Dead returns not again:
Crowns are but Cobwebs, and the Life of Man
Compaired to Long Eternity's a Span.
P. K.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Sign of the Blue Ball in
Thames Street, over against Baynard's- Castle. 1685.


