Monumenta Westmonasteriensia: OR AN Historical Account OF THE Original,
Increase, and Present State OF St. PETER's, OR, The Abbey Church OF WESTMINSTER.

WITH All the Epitaphs, Inscriptions, Coats of Arms, and Achievements of Honor
belonging to the Tombs and Grave-Stones:

TOGETHER With the Monuments themselves faithfully described and set forth.

With the Addition of three whole Sheets.

By H. K. of the Inner Temple, Gent.

London, Printed for C. Wilkinson, and T. Dring, at the Black-Boy, and at the
Harrow in Fleetstreet. 1683.

TO The Right Honorable HENRY Lord HOWARD Earl of Arundel, etc. Heir apparent
to the Illustrious Prince Henry Duke of Norfolk, etc. And Earl Martial of
England, etc.
My Lord,
THe honor I have had (for some years past) of being of your Lordships
acquaintance has given me assurance of troubling your Greatness, at present,
with a Dedication. But when your Lordship shall understand to whose sacred
protection your illustrious name is called upon; and that no less than the dead
Ashes of your noble Ancestors, humbly lay themselves ^^ your Honors feet
(branched ^^ their several Stems, and mixed with those of the Bloud-Royal o^
England:) I am confident my invitation will want wings, and come too late,
compared to your Lordships fervent wishes and willing desires to embrace them:
For that innate piety wherewith your excellent Progenitors have in all ages
signalized themselves is more particularly eminent in you, as immediately
deriving it from so great a stream of virtue as your renowned Father, the
present Duke of Norfolk.

Our Chronicles, our Histories, our Records are all full of the glorious
Actions, and puissant Name of the Howards. The lofty Structures and Princely
Fabrics dispersed here and there in this our Island of Great Britain silently
speak the Magnificence of their Founders your Predecessors: And those who have
had the opportunity of being abroad, and have passed through France, Flanders,
Brabant, Germany, even to Rome it self, can want no occasion of beholding the
pious footsteps of your Religio(...)ce^^ors, by those many marks o^ (...)un^^
and liberality they have left behind them. And as if Europe alone were too
little to have so great a name confined within its borders, you have made a
descent into Asia, from thence into Afric, and planted your fame in no less
than three parts of the habitable World. To whom then,

My Lord, could I more properly offer these my endeavors but to your self, if
for no other reason than that you inherit as well the virtues as the honors of
such renowned Ancestors. But when I shall declare, That it was always my
intentition to present your Lordship with the first fruits of these my poor
labors ever since I had the honor of knowing your Lordship, by reason of that
affable disposition and generous temper I constantly beheld in your great mind,
I hope your Lordship will pardon my intrusion, and give me leave upon your own
account to subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant, Henry Keep.

TO THE READER.
OBserving (when I was taking The reason and occasion of this undertaking.
out the Inscriptions, Epitaphs, and Arms belonging to the Tombs and Funeral
Monu^ents of this Church, for my particular ^^tisfaction and delight) what a
daily con^ourse of Gentlemen, and Ladies; as ^ell Forainers, as Natives, led by
their ^^riosity, came to behold this so famous Mausolaeum, or place of
Sepulcher and Re^ository of our Kings, Princes, and chief Nobility, with the
Encomium's and prai^^s that were continually bestowed thereon: ^et at the same
time I could perceive a ^^nging kind of desire that some of the more judicious
and Inquisitive had to be better ^nformed, than what this cursory sight, ^^d
the imperfect relation of the Tomb^ewer had given, by their frequent in^^iry
after some Historical Narration or ^rinted account concerning this Churches
Antiquities and Memories. But when they understood how among all the noted
Churches of the neighboring Nations round about her, she only had the
misfortune in this particular to be least attempted; not without some show of
discontent, and admiration at so great a neglect and carelessness of her
inhabitants, They went away full of dissatisfaction and dislike. This
consideration gave me the occasion of exposing these my Collections to the
public, that (if possible) I might in so^e measure take off the Imputation and
blame (not without reason) laid to our charge, by reviving again the almost
dead remembrance of this Churches greatness and former To inform Strangers, and
oblige the Natives.
splendor, and by leaving to Posterity the condition she continues in at this
day. And if herein I have been any ways serviceable to my worthy Countrymen,
and can oblige the Noble Stranger, I shall esteem my pains and labor so well
bestowed, that I may be induced (according to the favorable reception this
Essay shall meet with in the world) to travel further in the like kind
hereafter.

Omitting therefore all tedious harangues The memorable commendations of this
Abbey.
and long discourses concerning this Churches reputation and renown, (as is
usual on such subjects) by reason of my designed brevity in the whole, I shall
only tell you that for Antiquity, Princely Indowments, large Privileges and
Immunities, it always was, and still remains, inferior to none of the most
illustrious Churches either at home or abroad: But in this is her principal
glory, that all our Kings and Queens (at least from the days of EDWARD the
Confessor) have honored it with their Inaugurations or Coronations, and many
of them made it the place of their burials and Sepulchers.

The Method that I have proposed in The Method observed in this Work. 1. The
History of the Churches original and continuance to this day.
this undertaking, is first to give you a concise and short Historical account
of the Original, foundation, and continuance of this Church both in its
Buildings and Government, with the several alterations and vicissitudes it has
met with for the sp^ce of fifteen hundred years or more. And although therein I
may seem to differ from many others who have sprinkled their greater Works with
something concerning this Abbey, yet I have done it upon such grounds, and taken
my evidence from such authentic Records and Testimonies, that I have little
reason to doubt of the certainty or truth thereof.

In the next place, (for that I could 2. The description of the Tombs and
Monuments therein.
not have the Fabric, with the Mon^ments therein so represented to your eye by
their Icon's as I could wish; the charge and cost far exceeding a private
undertaking) I have endeavored, by giving you a lively description of each
Tomb and Monument by words, to fix some Sentiments and delightful Ideas thereof
in your mind.

And lastly, I have added all the Epitaphs, 3. The Epitaphs, Inscriptions, and
Coats of Arms
Inscriptions, and Tables, as they are now remaining, by which such inanimate
Creatures are wont to tell us why they are there posited, and for whom.

In collecting these Epitaphs and Inscriptions The trouble in collecting the
Epitaphs, etc.
(notwithstanding the gre^^ care to preserve them to the contrary) I found many
liable to the same sat with others elsewhere, either wholly worn away by the
malevolence of time, or defaced by the injury they receive by negligent and
heedless Passengers. To supply this defect I have taken the greatest pains
imaginable, and I dare promise, there is no^ a Tomb or Monument, either in the
Church or Chapels, except some fe^ Gravestones in the Area, but that I have
given a satisfactory account to whom they belong. For those Inscriptions Though
endeavored by others, yet performed but in part.
which are more perfect, and visible, it may be said, I might have saved my
self that trouble, seeing CAMDEN, STOWE, and WEAVER have done it already. Truly
I should have been glad to have have found in any (or all) of them together
that certainty that I might have relied thereon.

CAMDEN, if that small Work be 1. By William Camden in lib. intit. Reg. Regin.
Nob. etc. in Eccl. B. Petri Westminster. Edit. Land. 1600. 1603. and 1606.
his, (which I much doubt) of the funeral Monuments of this Church (which was
so acceptable that it was Printed no less than three times in five years) is
the most to be commended of any I have yet seen, but it will not reach us in
many things as well as point of time, the last Impression being in the year
1606.

STOWE in his Survey of London 2. By John Stowe in his Survey of London Edit.
1603. and continued by A. M. 1618. and by A. M. and H. D. to 1633.
and Westminster, and the continuators of him until the year 1633. have only
set down what pleased themselves, or what they thought most remarkable,
neglecting many other worthy a remembrance; and those they have given us, when
the Inscriptions have been long, and in Latin (or any other Language than
English, as there are some in Greek, and others in French) they have clipped
them off in the midst, or wholly left them out.

WEAVER, whose method would not 3. By John Weaver in his ancient funeral
Monuments of great Britain* etc Edit. Land. 1631.
permit him to put forth any other than the Ancient Epitaphs and Inscriptions,
has rather in them trusted to the credit of those Books and Authors from
whence he drew them, than gone to the trouble of searching whether any such
were remaining when he wrote, or no; as ^s manifest by very many alleged by
him, which had been torn, or worn away in the beginning of the Reign of Queen
ELIZABETH.

All these defects I have therefore supplied All their defects supplied.
by comparing the Inscriptions, mentioned by CAMDEN, STOWE, and WEAVER, and
correcting them according to the originals remaining at this day, and have set
them down as they are now in being; and what are not, will be seen in the
description of any such speechless Monument. To this I have continued the
Epitaphs from the years 1631. and 1633. (where STOWE and WEAVER left off to
this present time) where (in the compass of little less than And above 120.
Epitaphs added with their Coats of Arms, etc.
fifty years) have been produced mo^^ than one hundred and twenty seve(...)
Inscriptions. And what as yet has been undertaken by none, I have added Coats
of Arms, with the Achievements of honor in Blazon of all those Kings,
Princes, Noblemen, and others, that have any such like adornments on their
Tombs or Grave-stones. And I have set them down either with, or without
colors, as I have found them, without any addition or alteration of my own,
that what faults are committed, might not be imputed to me, but to the
ignorance or carelessness of the Carver, Graver, or Painter. The same likewise
may be said of the harsh English and bad Latin that is to be met with in many
of the Epitaphs and Inscriptions, which would have been as unprofitable, as it
were an endless labor every where to have rectified, and therefore The Authors
short Apology for himself and Printer.
I have left them in their native simplicity, unless some faults of the Printer
may have contributed to their alteration, for whom and for my self I shall make
no farther Apology, or detain you any longer, but leave all to your candid
ingenuity and acceptance.

H. K.

MONUMENTA Westmonasteriensia, OR AN Historical Account OF THE Original,
Increase, and present State OF St. PETER's, etc.
. 1. AMong particular Families The Introduction to the History of this Churches
Original.
and Generations of Men, those Genealogies and descents have been esteemed the
most Noble and Illustrious which carry with them the greatest certainty of
their existence for many Ages. So sumptuous Buildings and Religious Structures
are in nothing more valued and set by, or sooner invite the Eye of the curious
Passenger to behold them, than when they bear an outward show and appearaece of
venerable Age and reverend Antiquity: If therefore so great Honor and Renown
be acquired by the real Antiquity of the first, and Respect by the seeming
appearance of the last; I doubt not, That this Edifice of St. PETER's Eminent
for her Antiquity.
or the Abbey Church of Westminster (which I have undertaken for my Province at
this time) will want either; as being attended with all these inviting
circumstances. For if we behold the Fabric as it now stands, nothing so entire
in this our Nation can seem more Venerable and Antique, or if we dive into her
Histories and Records, we shall find those who have asserted her Original to
bear date almost with Christianity it self, and that the Apostle St. PETER was
the first who Erected A Christian Chapel here in the time of the Apostle St.
Peter.
a Christian Oratory or Chapel here: But upon what probable conjectures or
humane certainties they have grounded this their Opinion, it is not my
intention at present to discuss.

. 2. Let it therefore suffice that about the latter end of the Second Age, we
want not Authorities of good Credit and Reputation, who tell us; That LUCIUS
King of the Britans, who A. D. 183. A Church built here by Lucius King of the
Britans.
ruled here by permission of the Romans, having relinquished his Pagan
Superstition and Heathen Idolatry, and embraced the true Faith of CHRIST,
sought as much as in him lay to Establish this his new Belief over all his
Dominions, and as means conducing thereunto commanded, That the Heathen and
Idolatrous Temples should be abolished, and in their rooms Christian and
Religious Structures Erected, and that in this place where our Church of
Westminster now stands, a Christian Oratory was Built by him and Dedicated to
St. Peter. But when the Persecution under Dioclesian and Maximinian, the one in
the East and the other in the West, grew so large and extensive that it
stretched it self to the remotest parts of the Roman Empire, and coming into
Britain, became so violent and resistless that every where the Christians were
put to death with most unheard of Cruelties and exquisite Torments, the Women
deflowred, the A. D. 313. Destroyed by Dioclesian and turned into a Temple of
Apollo.
Churches subverted, and in their places Temples again Erected to the Gods of
the Heathen. This Church built here by Lucius, after one hundred and thirty
years, was immediately pulled down and turned into a profane Temple of Apollo,
so that in the same place where God had been devoutly worshipped before in his
own Church, Idolatrous abominations were afterward performed, the place losing
the memory of its former Christian Inhabitants became the head and principal
seat where Pagans exercised their execrable Superstitions.

. 3. How long this Temple of Apollo The Temple of Apollo subverted.
continued, or by what means it came to be destroyed: whether decayed for want
of those necessary reparations which are requisite toward the support of such
Structures? or that it fell down, and was overturned as some think by an
Earthquake? I cannot be certain: For we hear no more thereof for almost three
hundred years, and then we find it utterly subverted altogether in its ruins,
and the place so overgrown with Briars and Thorns, with the River of Thames
flowing about it; That the Saxons who were now the Inhabitants, had given it a
Name suitable to its new condition by calling it Thorney Island, or the Island
of Thorns. Here it was and on those Ruins of Apollo's Temple that Segebert or
Sebert King of A. D. 6 ^. On whose ruins another Christian Church was Erected
by Sebert King of the East Saxons, and Dedicated to St. Peter.
the East Saxons, soon after his Conversion to Christianity and his being
Baptized by the hands of Augustine the Mong, commanded another Noble Edifice
and Christian Church should be Erected and Dedicated to the remembrance of its
former Patron St. Peter. And that there might not be wanting a sufficient
number of Religious Persons continually to attend the Celebration of the Holy
Sacraments and Services of this Church: He was at the same time induced by the
persuasion of Mellitus who was then Bishop of London, to Build an adjoining
Covent, and liberally to indow it for their better support And a Monastery
adjoined thereunto.
and maintenance: which from the situation thereof and in opposition to
another that was placed on the East side of the City of London took the name of
(...), that is, the West-Monastery or Minster, as it is called at this day. Of
the famed Miracle and Story of the wonderful Consecration of this Church at
that time by St. Peter himself who list to read, may find it writ by AELRED
Abbot of Rivauloe, in the Life of EDWARD the Confessor, as likewise in BARONIUS
and ALFORDUS in their Ecclesiastical Annals, Bishop USHER in his rise and
original of the Churches of Great Britain, with others.

. 4. This Church and Monastery, A. D 959. Almost ruined by the Danes, and the
Monks slain, but repaired by King Edgar.
with many more, was cruelly harrased and destroyed by fire, with all the Monks
therein slain some Ages after the first institution, by the outrage of the
barbarous and inhumane Danes, and so continued desolate and forsaken until the
days of King EDGAR, by whose care and bounty it was again new cased and
re-edified, and by the vigilance of St. DUNSTAN, supplied with a small number
of Monks of the Order of St. BENEDICT, setting over them for their chief
Governor or Abbot, the Bishop WOLSINE, who by his exemplary holiness and piety
gat himself the renown of being placed in the Calendar for a Saint; he died and
was buried here, says Matthew of Westminster, about the year nine hundred
fifty eight.

. 5. Afterward, when King EDWARD A. D. 1045. The occasion of re-building this
Church by King Edward the Confessor.
the Confessor came from his exile out of Normandy, and calling to mind the
vows and promises he had then made to Almighty God in case of his restoration,
grew much troubled, that having been some time in England, he had so long
neglected to perform the same; wherefore he called an Assembly or Convocation
both of his Clergy and Nobility, and related to them his intention of visiting
the chief Pastor of the Church, and his going to Rome, according to the tenor
of those Vows and Promises: But this resolution of his was diverted by the
earnest entreaties, and persuasions of his Subjects, who having but newly
recovered a little breath from their former grievances and oppressions, were
fearful upon his so sudden departure that their peace might be disturbed, and
themselves relapse again under their old burdens and vexations, so that laying
before him (even with tears in their eyes, and hearts full of sorrow) the
imminent danger the Commonwealth must inevitably fall into upon his removal or
withdrawing, sought with all their endeavors that other measures might be
taken, wherein himself might not be altogether disquieted for the
nonperformance of his Promises, nor they absolutely ruined by his absence. And
therefore with all diligence Ambassadors were dispatched away to the Bishop of
Rome, who having related the case, and procured a Breve from the Papacy for the
dispensation with the said Vows, they returned again to their disconsolate
Master, informing him of their success, and the imposition enjoined him in lieu
of his Promise, viz. That all the expenses that he had prepared for his Journey
should be distributed among the poor and indigent; and that he should build a
new, or repair some old Monastery, to the honor of St. PETER.

. 6. This then was the occasion that our old ruined Abbey, (founded by King
SEBERT, destroyed by the Danes, and re-edified by King EDGAR) now fallen into
great decay, was thought on as a place most proper for such an undertaking; but
much sooner was the performance thereof put in execution, and the design
accomplished, when this pious King understood that it was the express will and
command of St. PETER himself that he should do so. If you will believe those
who report that WULFINUS (a man whose austerity of life and retirement from the
world had gained him the reputation of being no small Prophet among his
brethren) had orders in a vision to inform him. His great diligence and expense
therein.
With all alacrity therefore he set himself to the work, commanding that his
Estate, either in Gold, Silver, Jewels, or Possessions should be decimated, and
appropriated to the pulling down the old ruined Church of King SEBERT, and the
erecting a most stately Edifice in the place thereof. He removed the Parish
Church of St. MARGARETS (which then stood in the Cloisters of the old Abbey) and
built another in the Churchyard, The Magnificence of this Fabric, and the
first built in the form of a Cross.
that he might make more room for this his magnificent foundation, for as such
it was reputed by those who were eyewitnesses of it, which for august majesty
and excellent contrivance that Age could not parallel, affording a pattern of
framing Churches in the figure of a Cross, which in succeeding times was
emulated (says WILLIAM of Malmsbury) with incredible expenses. For the greater
honor of this new erected Fabric, in imitation of the glorious Emperor
CONSTANTINE (as the learned SPELMAN observes) he called together an Assembly of
all his chief Clergy and Nobility, that they The solemn dedication of this his
Church.
might be present on the day of the solemn dedication of this Church, and
witnesses of his Princely bounty and liberal Magnificence, which was shown by
the endowing it with large Possessions, adorning it with high privileges, and
exemptions, making it a perpetual Sanctuary, and habitation for Benedictine
Monks (which he The endowments and privileges granted thereto.
brought from Exeter and placed here) who should be subject to no other person
but to the King only. To these he confirmed it to be the place for ever (as it
had been aforetime) of the Kings Constitution and Consecration; the Repository
of the Royal Crown and Ensigns of Majesty; and gave toward The donation of the
Regalia.
the same several rich Vestments, golden Crows and Scepters, a Dalmatick
embroidered Pall, a pair of Spurs, Linen Gloves, a Tortois-shell Comb set in
Gold, a Chalice made of an Onyx stone, bound about the foot with a Patten
thereunto all of pure Gold, with some other Royal Gifts and Perquisites to be
used on the days of the Inauguration or Coronation of our Kings and Queens,
many of them remaining at this day preserved, and in the custody of the Dean
and Chapter of And the confirmation of all by three Royal Charters, being the
first sealed Charters in England.
this Church. All these Possessions, Privileges, and rich Gifts were ratified
at the same time by his signing and sealing three Royal Charters, and getting
them confirmed by the Bishop of Rome, whose Bull was inserted in the body of
the Great Charter according to the custom of that Age. After all His Death and
Burial. vid. Sect. 146.
which he fell sick, and soon after died, and was buried according to his
desire in this his new Church of Westminster.

. 7. One hundred and threescore A. D. 1220. The structure of King Edward pulled
down, and another erected by King Henry III. with a new Chapel to the blessed
Virgin.
years had now passed from the time of King EDWARD the Confessor, (during which
space all the Kings and Queens of England had not been sparing in their
Liberalities whilst living, nor forgetful by their Legacies when dead, to
increase and multiply the Revenues of this Monastery) when HENRY III. King of
England, commanded the old Fabric of King EDWARD to be taken down, and out of
the largeness of his Princely mind, began part of that work which is now
standing, laying the first stone thereof in the year 1220. and as an addition
thereunto built a particular Chapel at the East end, and dedicated it to the
Virgin Mary. But such was his misfortune at this time, that having begun a
work, so ample and large, that it exceeded the bounds and incomes of his
revenue, he was forced to have recourse to means not altogether so honorable
as he could have wished to finish the same. For by a wile or stratagem he
procured money of the Citizens of London, with which, and by the help of the
Monks, (who very much enlarged it toward the West) at length, after fifty
years time, and a wonderful charge, it was finished.

. 8. But long had not this Church A. D. 1274. Destroyed by fire, and repaired
by the bounty of King Edw. I and II. with the help of the Abbots.
of King HENRY continued, when a sudden fire happening in the Palace hard by, and
the wind driving the devouring flames toward the Abbey, it took hold of the
Church, whereby the Roof, which was then covered with Lead, and all the Timber
therein was consumed, leaving nothing but the bare Walls as a mournful
remembrance of its former splendor; which by the assistance of King EDWARD I.
and II. with the help of the Abbots was again repaired, some of whom were
especial Builders and Benefactors to this Monastery.

. 9. As SIMON LANGHAM, A. D. 1359. 1. Simon Langham, vid. 46.
who being Abbot, (and afterward Archbishop of Canterbury) he discharged a
debt of 2200 marks, owing by this Covent to some Merchants: he gave 400 pounds
toward the finishing the body of the Church, Books to to the value of 830
pounds. And forgave this Church a debt which was owing him of 3954 pounds*

. 10. NICOLAS LITLINGTON A. D. 1380. 2. Nicolas Litlington. vide. 45.
Abbot, who from the foundation built the Hall and great Chamber called
Jerusalem, with the West and South side of the great Cloister, his Arms
remaining there at this day, viz. Quarterly Argent and Gules, in the second and
third a Fret Or, on a Bend B. 3. Flowersde-lucies of the third. He also erected
the Granary which is now the dormitory for the Kings Scholars, with the Tower
adjoining, and a Water Mill for the use of the same Abbey.

, 11. JOHN ESTNEY eased this A. D. 1436. 3. John Estney. vid.. 171.
Church of 3070 pounds which was owing to the Sea of Rome for the confirmation
of their Abbots, and built the great West Window at his own charge.

. 12. And JOHN ISLIP, who was A. D. 1500. 4. John Islip. vid.. 141.
a man of great Authority in the time of HENRY the Seventh, King of England. He
built that which is now the Deans House, repaired much of the Church and other
buildings belonging to this Monastery, renewing all the Butteresses, and
placing in the Niches thereof the Statues of all the Kings and Queens that had
been Benefactors to the same.

. 13. In this Abbots time it was that A. D. 1502. The new Chapel of King Hen.
VII. built. vid.. 77.
HENRY VII. beforementioned in the year 1502. intending a more sumptuous and
curious Chapel to the honor of the Blessed Virgin, than what King HENRY III.
had already built, pulled down that Structure so reared by him, and erected
that stately Edifice now called by his name, which by LELAND, and other learned
Antiquaries, is styled (not unworthy) Orbis Miraculum, or the wonder of the
World. The King himself laid the first stone thereof, and forbad by his last
Will and Testament that any but the Blood Royal should be interred therein,
expending in the raising and finishing this curious Fabric the sum of ^1400
pounds only.

. 14. From hence (as to the buildings The Government of this Church, with its
various alterations.
about the Church) all things have continued without any eminent alteration or
change until these our days. But the Government thereof has participated of
diverse variations and turns of Fortune. For after it had remained 1. By an
Abbot and Monks, which continued 935 years.
almost a Thousand years under the regiment of Abbots and Monks; It was
resigned up by WILLIAM BENSON the Abbot, and seventeen Monks, into the Kings
hands (in pursuance of an Act of Parliament) on the sixteenth day of January in
the 31. year of the Reign of King Henry VIII. being able to expend by the year
3471 pounds, and two pence farthing: so great were then her constant revenues.
Soon after the resignation in the year 1539. and that the Abbot was preferred,
but the Monks sent abroad to seek their fortunes, the King took the Revenues
into his own possession, and ordered the Church to be governed by a Dean and
Prebendaries, 2. By a Dean and Prebendaries. An. 2.
placing therein BENSON, who had been the last Abbot, to be the first Dean. But
in the year 1541. this Government was dissolved; and the Church turned into an
Episcopal See, having Middlesex for its Diocese, and THOMAS THURLEBY for its
Bishop, 3. By a Bishop. An. 9.
who having much dilapidated and spent the Revenues allotted for its
maintenance; after nine years he was removed from thence to the Bishopric of
Norwich, whereby a second 4. By a Dean and Prebendaries again. An. 6.
time it reverted to be governed by a Dean and Prebendaries. But when MARY
Queen of England came to the Crown after the death of her Brother King EDWARD
VI. it again changed its condition; for the Queen 5. By an Abbot and Monks
again. An. 2.
(having procured a License from her kinsman REGINALD POLE, who was Archbishop
of Canterbury, a Cardinal, and the Popes Legate here in England, for
disanulling the former institution of a Dean and Prebendaries,) settled therein
JOHN FECKNAM Abbat, and fourteen Monks in the year 1556. But with her life this
Government likewise ended. And with the entrance of Queen ELIZABETH into the
Throne it reassumed to be governed 6. By a Dean and Prebendaries, and turned
into a Collegiate Church. An. 90
by a Dean and twelve secular Canons and Prebendaries, who turned it into a
Collegiate Church, placing therein besides petty Canons and others of the Quire
to the number of thirty. Ten Officers belonging to the Collegiate Diet, two
Schoolmasters, forty Scholars, and twelve Alms-men, with plentiful maintenance
for all; besides Stewards, Receivers, Registers, a Library Keeper, Collectors,
and other Officers, the Principal being the High Steward of Westminster, who is
usually one of the prime Nobility. Most of 7. By the Presbyterian Discipline,
An. 12
these Revenues were embezled, and ^^crilegiously disposed of in the late
Usurpation, after the Martyrdom of King CHARLES I. his present Majesty's most
Royal Father, as Dean and Chapters Lands. But upon the happy Restoration of
our King to his Crown 8. By a Dean and Prebendaries again, and so has remained
21. years.
and Kingdoms they returned again to their former Proprietors, and the
Government continues the same at this day.

. 15. As the Abbots of this Monastery The Privileges and honors formerly
belonging to the Abbots of this Monastery.
in former times had diverse high Privileges and Honors annexed to their
Function, as to be entrusted with the custody of the Regalia, for the
Coronation of our Kings and Queens, and to have a place of necessary Service on
those days of Solemnity, to exercise Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction in their
Liberties, and to sit as Spiritual Lords in Parliament, etc. so in all those In
what the Deans succeed them, and what not?
Rights, except that of Parliament, the present Deans of this Collegiate Church
succeed: who is likewise in Commission of the Peace within the City and
Liberties of Westminster; and with the Chapter is invested with all The Dean a
Justice of Peace, and having Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction.
manner of Jurisdiction both Ecclesiastical and Civil, not only within the City
and Liberty of Westminster, but within the Precinct of St. Martins le Grand
(which was first annexed thereunto by HENRY VII.) within the Walls of London:
And in the other, from that of the Archbishop of Canterbury. And when the
Convocation is adjourned from St. PAUL'S (for the convenience of being nigh the
Parliament when they sit at Westminster) hither, the Bishops first declare
(upon a The Deans Protestation, and the Declaration of the Bishops when they
meet here in time of Parliament.
Protestation made by the Dean there,) that they intend not thereby to violate
that high privilege, (which was granted to this Church by King EDWARD the
Confessor) viz That no Bishop or Archbishop may come there without leave of the
then Abbot, but now Dean, first obtained.

. 16. And as the Abbots in ancient The Abbots and Deans of this Church advanced
to great honor and places of Trust.
time were men generally well esteemed, although chosen by the Monks, and no
small Fa-vorites of their Princes, as may be gathered by the several places of
great trust and honor that were bestowed on them; As to be Archbishops of
Canterbury, Bishops of other Dioceses, Lord Treasurers, and Chancellours of
England, etc. so likewise have the Deans (since the Reformation) not come much
behind them in the like dignities and special honors.

. 17. By all which we may see The Conclusion.
how from Age to Age, especially for these last eight hundred years, what care
has been taken to add to the reputation of this our Church, by the several new
erections, reparations, and bounteous gifts that have been heaped thereon, the
great privileges and immunities that have been granted thereto with the
particular favors of our Kings in advancing the Governors thereof, and all
this as well since as before the Reformation, and the continuance thereof to
this day.

A Catalogue of the Abbots of Westminster.
Silvardus. Ordbrutius. Alswynus. Alfgarus. Adymerus. Alfnodus. Alsricus. S.
Wulsinus. Alswinus. Wolnothus. Edwinus. Galsridus. Vitalis. Gislebertus.
Herebertus. Gervasius de Blois. Laurentius. Walterus. Gulielmus Pos(...)
Radulphus P(...) Gulielm. de Humes. Richard. de Barking. Rich. de Crokesley.
Philippus Levisham. Richardus de Ware. Walter. de Wenlock. Rich. de Kedington.
Williel. Curlington. Thomas Henley. Sim. de Burcheston. Simon Langham. Nicolas
Litlington. Guliel* de Colchester. Rich. Harounden. Georgius Flaccet. Richardus
Sudbury. Edmundus Kirton. Thomas Milling. Johannes Estney. Johannes Islip.
Guilielmus Benson. Johannes Fecknam.
The Bishop of Westminster, Tho. Thurleby.

A Catalogue of the Deans of Westminster.
Gulielmus Benson. Richardus Coxe. Hugo Weston. Guilielmus Bill. Gabriel
Goodman. Lancelot. Andrews. Richardus Neyle. Georgius Monteine. Robertus
Tompson. Johannes Williams. Johannes Earl. Johannes Dolben, now Dean of
Westminster, and Bishop of Rochester.
A description or survey of the Abbey Church of St. Peter's Westminster with the
Monuments, Tombs, and Grave-stones therein as they are now standing, etc.

. 18. Having in the preceding The Survey of the Church both outside and inside.
discourse given you an information of the rise, progress, and continuance of
this our famous Abbey in its buildings in its Buildings, Government, and names
of her Governors in general; I shall now enter into the particular description
thereof by observing what is most worthy our remembrance; and therein I care
not if for once I play the Mystagogus my self, and lead my noble Traveller from
one Tomb to another, from one monument to a second, and so to a third, until we
have gone over them all, that his curiosity may not want a plenary satisfaction.

. 19. If then we intend to take a view of her outward shape and proportion,
before we come to behold her beauteous entrails, we shall see it On the
South-East part.
best, and least confused on the North and South-east parts thereof, as being
less encumbered with private buildings, by which she seems in some places
altogether hid and obscured. On the South-East part you behold that curious
Chapel of the Blessed Virgin, built King Hen. VII. Chapel.
by King HENRY VII. whose Battlements, Windows, Supports, and Adornments speak
no less the Magnificence of the Founder than the Mastership of the Inventer,
and skill of the Workmen; as being of that exact composure that nothing in the
whole world of the same kind is said to exceed, if equal it. On the North part,
you rather behold On the North side.
the Skeleton of a Church than any great comeliness in her appearance, being so
shrivelled and parcht by the continual blasts of the Northern Winds, to which
she stands exposed, as also the continual smoaks of Sea-Coal which are of a
coroding and fretting quality, which have added more furrows to her declining
years, that little of her former beauty now remains. On this side is a most
noble Door or Portal, with a Porch thereunto that opens into the cross of the
Church, and on each side thereof two lesser Portico's one of which only serves
at present for the convenience of entering therein. This Porch Solomon's Porch.
in former times has been of great esteem and reputation, assuming to its self
no less a name than that of the Porch of Solomon, that it has been a curious,
neat, and costly Porch in foregoing times, the remains thereof at this day do
in some measure declare; for therein were placed the Statues of the twelve
Apostles at full proportion, besides a multitude of lesser Saints and Martyrs
to adorn it, with several intaglio's, devices, and fret-works that helped to
the beauty thereof: But that it came in any proportion to the stately, rich,
and noble Porch of King Solomon is not to be imagined; nor can we think that
those who christened and gave it that name were so ignorant or vain as so to
believe, but as a thing excellent in those times, and far surpassing any of the
same kind; it was looked upon as a piece of work well deserving no common name,
and therefore had the title of Solomon's Porch appropriated thereunto.

. 20. But leaving the outward view of this ruinous building, let us The inside
of the Church.
see whether her entrails (the inside) be altogether as decayed and forlorn:
For though she seems by her outward shape and appearance to be clothed with
the disconsolate veil of Widowhood, yet if we enter by the great West door,
which leads you into the body thereof, you will behold her sound at heart, not
adorned with the gayeties of a new made Bride, yet endowed with all the graces
of a noble Matron, sufficient at once to attract the eyes and contemplations of
the Ingenious to admire her, and frighten away the vanity of Idle Fools by her
venerable countenance from despising her.

. 21. For the figure of this Church, The form thereof.
you will find it built in the form of a Cross, whose Vault and side Isles are
supported by eight and forty Pillars of Gray Marble, each distant from the
other eight foot, and from thence another row of lesser Pillars, double the
number of the first, and of the same Marble to the upper Roof or Vault sixty
foot. The Vault it self being supported by these Pillars, whose Arches turn not
upon the Semy-Circle, (according to the Roman manner of Architecture practiced
in our days) but meet in acute Angles, in imitation of the Gothic way of
building, and dividing themselves into several Squares, compose a most stately
Roof, wrought with diverse figured stands, and in some places curiously gilt
with Gold. The length being 360 The length, breadth, and height.
foot only to the Stairs of the Chapel of our Lady or HENRY VII. within the
Walls. The breadth of the Nave 75 foot, of the Cross 195 from the Chapel of
St. BENEDICT on the South to that of St. ERASMUS on the North 114 foot; from
the Chapel of S. EDMUND to that of St. JOHN BAPTIST 126 foot; and from that of
St. NICOLAS South to that of St. PAUL on the North 95, all being in your view
as you enter the Church; and adding thereto the Chapel of the Blessed Virgin
or King HENRY VII. which contains 122 foot in length, and 62 in breadth: The
whole Fabric will be no less than 482 foot long within the Walls thereof, as I
have measured it by a Line; a very noble and large Structure, almost equalling
in length St. PETER'S in Rome, St. PETER'S in York, etc. and surpassing many
famous Churches and Temples, as that of Solomon, only 60 Cubits long; the
Temple of DIANA in Ephesus, 425 foot; and the great Moske at FEZ, long 150
Cubits.

. 22. There are in this Church no less than ten Chapels, (besides those The
Chapels.
two of the Kings, or the Chapels of St. EDWARD, and the Blessed Virgin, and
those of St. KATHERINE, and St. ANNE, of whose situation I am ignorant) viz. on
the South four, those of St. BLASE, St. BENEDICT, St. EDMUND, and St. NICOLAS;
on the North six, those of St. ANDREW, St. MICHAEL, St. JOHN EVANGELIST, St.
ERASMUS, St. JOHN BAPTIST, and St. PAUL, which serve to flanck up this Church
notably to its advantage and credit. On each side the body or Nave under every
Window, and between each Pillar, you have the names in ancient English or Saxon
Letters, and under them the Coats of Arms of the several Kings, Princes, and
Noblemen, who flourished when HENRY III. re-edified this Church. On the South,
(1.) S. Edwardus Rex and Confessor. B. a Cross Patonce between five Martlets
Or. (2.) Henricus Tertius Rex Angliae. Gules. three Lions passant Ancient Arms
of Kings, Princes, and Noblemen, who were living in the year 1220. and
contributed toward the re-building this Church in the time of Henry III.
gardant O. (3.) Alexander Tertius Rex Scotorum. Or, a Lion rampant within a
double Tressure flory counter-flory, Gules. (4.) Raimundus comes Provinciae. Or
four Pallets Gules. (5.) Rogerus de Quincy comes Wintoniae. Gules 7. Mascals
conjoined, 3. 3. 1. Or. (6.) Henricus de Lacy comes Lincolniae. Quarterly,
Gules and Or a Bendlet Sab. and file of five Lambeaux. Arg. (7.) Richardus
comes Cornubiae. Arg. a Lion rampant, Gules crowned Or. within a bordure Sab.
bezanty. (8.) R. comes Rothesaiae. Gules three Lions rampant Argent. (9.)
Guilielmus comes de Ferrariis, and Derbiae. Vaire, Or, and Gules. (10.)
Guilielmus de Longaspata, comes Sarum. B. six Lions rampant Or. 3. 2. 1. (11.)
Guilielmus de Valentia, comes Penbrochiae, Barry of 10. Argent. and B. an Orle
of Martlets Gules. (12.) Rogerus de Mortuo-mari. Barry of 6. Or and B. an
Inescucheon Arg. on a chief, of the first, a Pale between two Esquires, based,
dexter, and sinister of of the second. (13.) Guilielmus de Percy. Or. a Lion
rampant dublee quevee B. (14.) Rogerus de Clifford. Checkie Or and B. a Fess,
Gules. (15.) Rogerus de Somerey. Or two Lions passant B. (16.) Johannes de
Verdon. Or, fretty, of eight pieces Gules. (17.) Robertus de Thwenge. Argent a
Fess Gules between three Birds vert, collared, of the second. (18.) Fulco
filius Warini. Quarterly per Fess indented Argent and Gules. (19.) Rogerus de
Monte Alto. B. a Lion rampant Argent, crowned Or. (20.) Rogerus de Venables. B.
2. Bars Argent. On the North, (1.) Fredericus Secundus Imperator. Or an
Imperial Eagle Sable. (2.) S. Lodovicus Rex Franciae. B. Semi de Flowers de
Lucies Or. (3.) Richardus Clare comes Glocestriae. Or three Cheverons Gules.
(4.) Rogerus Bigod comes Norfolciae. Or, a Cross Gules. (5.) Simon de
Monteforti comes Leicestriae. Gules a Lion rampant, double quevee Argent. (6.)
Io. comes Warennae and Surriae. Checkie, Or, and B. (7.) Humfridus de Bohun,
comes Herefordiae and Essexiae. B. a Bend Arg. cottised between six Lioncels
rampant Or. (8.) Guilielmus de Fortibus, comes Albemarlae. Gules a Cross
Patonce Varry. (9.) Edmundus comes Lancastriae. Gules, three Lions passant
guardant in Pale barways, Or, a file of five Lambeaux B. each charged with
three Flower-de-Luces of the second. (10.) Hugo de Vere, comes Oxoniae.
Quarterly Gules, and Or. in the first quarter a Mullet Argent. (11.) Johannes
de Dreux, comes Richmondiae. Checkie, Or. and B. a bordure of England, and
Canton Ermine. (12.) Henricus de Hastings. Or, a Manch. Gules. (13.) Rogerus de
Mowbraye. Gules a Lion ramp. Arg. (14.) Robertus de Stafford. Or, a Cheveron,
Gules. (15.) Robertus de Ross. Gules three Waterboudgets Argent. (16.) Robertus
filius Walteri. Or, a Fess between two Cheverons Gules. (17.) Johannes de
Balliol. Gules, an Orle Arg. (18.) Gilbertus Talbot. Bendy of ten Argent and
Gules. (19.) Warinus de Vernon. Or, a Fess B. (20.) Guilielmus de Malpas. Gules
three Pheons Argent.

. 23. About fifty and five foot A place set apart for the celebration of divine
Service.
from the great West Door in the midst of the body or Nave to the Screen that
separates the high Altar from the Shrine of St. EDWARD, and the Chapel of the
Kings, being near 152 foot in length, and 32 in breadth, is a place set apart
for the Quire, with all decent conveniences for the celebration of divine
Service, and preaching the Word of God; where (by the Pulpit) is a most comely
Picture of The Picture Richard II. King of England.
one of our Kings sitting in the Ornaments and Chair of Coronations, which is
said to be the Picture of RICHARD II. King of England; it is very beautiful to
behold, and well done, considering the distance of years since it was made: And
that it was designed for him is greatly confirmed by the report our Historians
give of his incomparable beauty, and admirable features, and that his Picture,
placed in the Kings Collection at his Royal Palace of Hampton Court, differs
very little therefrom. Ascending from this Picture by two or three Greeses or
steps, until you come to the Rails that compass in the High Altar, you there
behold that noble and most glorious inlaid Floor still remaining entire, The
inlaid Area by the Communion Table.
that was done by the command and charge of RICHARD de Ware, Abbot of
Westminster, in the year 1260. where in most artificial Work and delightful
Figures you have the Jasper, the Porphyry, the Lydian, the Touch, the
Alabaster, and the Serpentine stones, so laid and wrought to the Spectators
satisfaction that you are unwillingly drawn from the sight thereof; round the
Squares and great Circles, in Letters of Brass, are some of the Verses still
remaining, which when entire were thus to be read, concerning the duration of
the World.

Si lector posita prudenter cuncta revolvat,
Hic finem primum mobilis inveniet,
Sepes trina, canes and equos, homines, super addas
Cervos and corvos, aquilas, immania cete,
Mundi quodque sequens pereuntis triplicat annos,
Sphaericus Archetypum globus hic monstrat Microcosmum,
Christi Milleno bis centeno duo deno
Cum sexageno subductis quatuor anno,
Tertius Henricus Rex, urbs, Odericus and Abbas,
Hos compegere Porphyreos lapides.
. 24. On the North-side of this ^ich. de Ware, Abbot of Westminster, and Lord
Treasurer of England
Area was this Abbot buried, next to the Tomb of AIMERY de VALENCE Earl of
Pembroke, after he had been Lord Treasurer of England, and Abbot of this
Monastery twenty three years, he died on the Second of December 1283. but
nothing now remains on his Gravestone to distinguish it from the rest. Not far
from Thomas Henley, and Richard Sudbury Abbots of West. minster. Sir Tho.
Clifford. Anne Queen of England.
him was THOMAS HENLEY Abbot of Westminster interred. And RICHARD SUDBURY,
another Abbot of this Monastery, with Sir THOMAS CLIFFORD, Governor of
Berwick, but all the Brass and Inscriptions are torn away. On the South Side
was Queen ANNE, Wife to King RICHARD III. and Daughter to RICHARD NEVILL Earl
of Warwick, interred, who died not without suspicion of Poison, anno 1484. By
whom lies WALTER WENLOCK Walter Wenlock, Abbot of Westminster, and Lord
Treasurer of England*
Abbot of Westminster, and Lord Treasurer of England, who died at his Manor
of Pireford in Gloucestershire, on the twenty fifth day of December, 1307.
after he had governed this Church twenty six years, having a decent
Marble-stone plated, and laid over him by the South Door entering the Chapel
of St. EDWARD, of which there is nothing continuing at this day, save a guess
at the stones only. There are five noble Monuments still remaining, three on
the North, and two on the South part of this Sacriste, but no Inscriptions or
Epitaphs on any of them, nor are they visible but by withdrawing the Hangings,
which are hung before them for the better adorning this place.

. 25. The first on the South is a Anne of cleve Queen of England.
Tomb of Freestone unfinished, with these two Letters insculpt thereof A. C.
and this 1557. and a little Ballister or Rail thereto adjoining, which was
designed to remember ANNE of Cleve, Queen of England, Sister to WILLIAM Duke of
Cleve and Gulich, whom King HENRY VIII. repudiated when he took to Wife the
Lady KATHARINE HOWARD; she died in the year 1557. and lies buried here at the
head of King SEBERT.

. 26. The next is an ancient Sepulcher Sebert King of the East Saxons and his
Queen. vide Epitaph. 139.
of stone, Arched, where in a leaden Chest enclosed in Touch, lie the remains
of SEBERT King of the East Saxons, and ETELGODA his Queen, who in the year 605
began the foundation of this Monastery, as I have declared elsewhere; he died
on the last day of July in the year 616. and she the thirteenth of September
615. after they had finished this worthy design; and therefore in the year 1307
their bodies were removed by the Monks of this Abbey from the old Church,
erected by King EDWARD the Confessor, and placed here hard by the Sepulcher of
the Kings. The Canopy erected over this Tomb of eight panes of delicate carved
Wainscot, contained as many painted Figures, of St. PETER, St. JOHN BAPTIST,
King SEBERT, King EDWARD the Confessor, etc. with diverse Verses of Questions
and Answers under each of them, which are all defaced and washed away, and only
a Table of Verses adjoining to the Tomb (which you will find among the
Mounmental Inscriptions) is still remaining to inform you who it is that lies
there deposited.

. 27. On the North side, next to the Chapel of St. EDWARD, in a most noble
Monument of Freestone, canopied, painted, and adorned with Arms, and gilt with
Gold, his Image thereon cross legged lies EDMUND (...) Crouchback, Earl of
Lancaster, Son of King Henry III.
CROUCHBACK, Earl of Lancaster, and younger Son of HENRY III. who was born at
London on the sixteenth day of January, anno 1245. about eight years after he
was invested by the Pope into the Dominion of Sicily, made Earl of Chester, and
Lord High Steward of England during life, and after the death of his first Wife
AVELINE went into the Holy Land, afterward returning, he was by his Brother
King EDWARD I. made Earl of Champaigne; he founded the house of Nuns, called
the Minoresses without Algate in the Suburbs of London, and going into France,
he died at Bayon, from whence his body was brought, and honorably interred in
this place, and this Monument erected to his memory. This great Earl, by
BLANCH, his second Wife, Daughter to ROBERT Earl of Artois, (third Son to
LEWIS VIII. King of France) Widow of HENRY King of Navarre, Earl of Champagne
and Bry had Issue three Sons, THOMAS, HENRY, and JOHN, and a Daughter, who died
with her Brother JOHN in France without Issue.

. 28. Next to this Tomb of EDMUND Earl of Lancaster is such another like
Monument, very beautiful to behold, Canopied, and gilt with Gold, with an Image
thereon for AYMER Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, Cousin to King Henry III.
de Valence, (third Son to WILLIAM Earl of Pembroke, who was Son of HUGH le
BRUN Earl of March, in the Confines of France and Poictiers, by ISABEL his
Wife, Widow of King JOHN, and sole Daughter to the Earl of Angolesme, who took
his Surname from the place of his Nativity, and being Brother to HENRY III. by
his Mother, in June 1247 was sent for into England, etc) who was a great
Soldier in the Wars of Scotland, Flanders, France, etc. he was Guardian of the
M^rches of Scotland, Lieutenant and Captain General of all the Soldiers there,
General of the Kings Forces from the River of Trent Northwards unto Roxborough
in Scotland: But going to Rome he was taken prisoner by JOHN MOILLEY a
Burgundian, and sent to the Emperor, being obliged to pay 20000 pounds for his
ransom. After which he was again in the Scotch Wars, and Governor of
Rockingham Castle, and at the taking of THOMAS Earl of Lancaster at Borough
Brigge in the County of York, but being one of those who gave sentence of death
upon him at Pomfrat, as he was attending Queen ISABEL into France, anno 1323.
he was murdered on the twenty third of June the same year; his body being
afterward brought and buried here: He had three Wives, but had no Issue by
any. His first was BEATRIX Daughter to RALPH de NEAL Constable of France; his
second, one of the Daughters of the Earl of Bar; and his last was MARY
Daughter to GUY de CASTILION Earl of St. Paul.

. 29. At the head of AYMER de VALENCE is the third and last Monument on this
North side, which is likewise a very beautiful Tomb of Alabaster and gray
Marble, Canopied with curious worked stone, and gilt with Gold, her Image lying
thereon at full proportion, for AVELINE Aveline Countess of Lancaster, Daughter
in Law to King Hen. III.
Countess of Lancaster, first Wife of EDMUND CROUCHBACK Earl of Lancaster, and
fourth Son of HENRY III. (as is before said in the description of his
Monument.) She was esteemed a Lady in her time far surpassing all others in
beauty, and was the Daughter and Heir of WILLIAM de FORTIBUS Earl of Albemarle,
she was Countess of Holderness, and by her Mother Countess of Devon and the
Isle of Wight, leaving her Inheritance to the House of Lancaster, and her body
to be buried in this place, dying in the year 1269. without any Issue.

. 30. The rest of the Monuments about this Church are very numerous and noble,
Persons of the greatest dignity and honor being permitted by the License of
the Prince only to be buried in the Chapels thereof, of whom we shall speak
when we come to the particular places wherein they are deposited. In the mean
time we will take a survey round the body of the Church; and beginning on the
Eastside of the North Cross, the first Monument we meet with will be that of
the Lady MARY JAMES, Wife of Sir Mary James. vid. Epit. 3.
JOHN JAMES, and Daughter to Sir ROBERT KILLIGREW, Vicechamberlain to Queen
MARY, who died in the year 1677. being a neat Monument composed of a large
Pedestal of black Marble, on which is the Epitaph, and an Urn of white,
admirably polished, encompassed with an Iron Grate, garnished and adorned with
Gold. By which on a Pillar adjoining to the Chapel of St. Michael is a small
Monument of white Marble for GRACE SCOT, Daughter of Sir Grace Scot. vid. Epit.
2.
THOMAS MAULEVERER Baronet, who died in the year 1645. And against the Screen
of the said Chapel of St. Michael is a most noble Tomb and Monument of black
and white Marble, garnished and adorned with Arms, and warlike Trophies, on
whose Pedestal are placed the Images at full William Cavendish Duke of
Newcastle, and his Duchess, vid. Epit. 1.
proportion of WILLIAM Baron Cavendish. Viscount Mansfield, Earl of Ogle, Earl,
Marquess, and Duke of Newcastle, with MARGARET his Duchess, Daughter of Sir
CHARLES, and Sister to the Lord LUCAS of Colchester, who was esteemed in her
time a Lady of great learning and bountiful Magnificence beyond the usual
qualifications of her Sex. The Duke caused this Tomb to be made in his
lifetime, soon after the death of his Duchess, and being scarce finished, he
died himself on the twenty fifth day of December. in the year 1676. aged 84
years, and was buried here.

. 31. On the North side of this Cross are two small Monuments placed against
the Wall; The one, toward Sir William Sanderson, Knight, vid. Epit. 5.
the West for Sir WILLIAM SANDERSON, of Alabaster, with the Busto or head of
the same, he was Gentleman of the Chamber to the King, and writ the History of
MARY Queen of Scots, King JAMES, and King CHARLES the First, worthily
vindicating them from the vile aspersions of some virulent Pens of those times;
he died in the year 1676. The other, toward the East, or black Marble for
Colonel THOMAS BLAGGE, an eminent Thomas Blagge, vid. Ep. 4.
and faithful server of his King and Country in the late unhappy Wars, and
since made Governor of Yarmouth, in which Office he died in the year 1660.

. 32. On the West side of this Cross is a small black Marble stone to remem-
Doctor Dr. Will, Johnson. vid. Ep. 6.
WILLIAM JOHNSON, one of the Kings Chaplains, many of whose learned Writings
are abroad in the world; he died in the year 1666.

. 33. On the North side the Nave is a little Monument of black Marble and
Alabaster, adorned with Arms, for ELIZABETH EDMONDS of Sussex, Eliz. Edmunds.
vid. Ep. 7.
who died in the year 1667. Next to whom are two Tablets of black Marble, with
an Epitaph and Arms for PETER Dr. Pet. Heylyn. vid. Ep. 8.
HEYLYN D. D. a Prebendary, and Sub-dean of this Church, who (among many
others) writ that famous Cosmography and Geography of the whole World; he lies
here without any date of his death. Beyond whom is a very curious Monument of
black and white Marble, set up by Sir Edward de Edw. de Carteret, vid. Ep. 9.
Carteret Knight, to the memory of his Son Edward, a Child of seven years of
Age, who died in the year 1677. Below this you have another neat Monument of
white Marble, adorned with warlike Trophies for RICHARD le Rich. le Neve. vid.
Ep. 10.
NEVE Esquire, Captain of one of his Majesty's Ships of War called the Edgar,
wherein he lost his life valiantly fighting against the Hollanders in the year
1673. Hard by this, under the Arms of Johan. de Dreux comes Richmondie, is a
small Monument of white Marble, adorned with Arms for GILBERT THORNBURGH, one
Gilbert Thornburgh. vid: Ep. 11.
of the Kings Servants, who died in the year 1677. The next is a little
Monument of black Marble, with the Image of a woman kneeling in Alabaster, to
remember SARAH STOTEVILE, Sarah Stotevile vid. Ep. 12.
first Wife to EDWARD ELLIS Esquire and then to Doctor OTHOWEL HILL, J. C. who died
in the year 1631. And lastly under the Arms of Guilielmus de Malpas is one
large entire black Marble stone, veined and streaked with white, set up without
a Pedestal against the Wall, to commemorate PENELOPE, Penelope Daughter of
Robert Nedham Viscount Kilmurray. vid. Ep. 13.
the Wife of RANDOLPH EGERTON, and Daughter of ROBERT NEDHAM Viscount Kilmurray
in the Kingdom of Ireland, who died in Childbed in the year 1670.

. 34. On the South side the Nave is a Table of Arms placed to remember one
Peers Gruffith Esquire who died in Peers Gruffith. vid. Ep. 18.
the year 1628. Next to which, on the East side the great South door that
enters the Cloisters, is a comely Monument of black and white Marble, with an
Epitaph in Hebrew, Greek, and Carola Morland. vid. Ep. 20.
English for Carola, Daughter of Roger Harsnet, and Wife of Sir Samuel Morland
Baronet, who died in the year 1674. A little higher is another Monument of
black and white Marble, adorned with several warlike Trophies, and on the
Pedestal the representation of a Sea Fight well designed in basso relievo, to
remember two Friends who lost their lives together with the valiant Earl of
Sandwich in the year 1672. Sir Charles Harbord and Clem. Cotterel. vid. Ep. 21.
Bridget Radley. vid. Ep. 19.
viz. Sir Charles Harbord, and Clement Cotterel Esquire. Not far from this is a
little Monument erected for Bridget, the Wife of Charles Radley Esquire, of
white Marble, adorned with Arms. A small Monument by the little South door of
Sir Rich. Bingham Knight. vid. Ep. 22.
the Cloister is placed for Sir Richard Bingham a man famous for his warlike
Acts at home and abroad, of which his Epitaph gives you a particular; he died
in the year 1598.

. 35. On the West side the South Cross is a small Monument of black and white
Marble, set up to remember that learned Antiquary William Camden, Will. Camden.
vid. Ep. 23.
Clarentieux King of Arms, with his demi Effigies leaning on a Book, on whose
leaves are insculped Britannia: his Writings are highly esteemed by all men of
Learning; he died in the year 1623. Next to him lies that Magazine of
Literature, (but especially for his experience in the Oriental Tongues) Isaac
Casaubon, J. C. who Isaac Casaubon. vid. Ep. 25.
died in the year 1634. Then have you a Monument of white Marble placed for
Thomas Triplet, D. D. and one of Dr. Tho. Triplet. vid. Ep. 24.
the Prebendaries of this Church; who died in the year 1670. Beyond whom is
another small Monument of white Marble for Sir Richard Coxe, Knight, Sir
Richard Coxe Knight, vid. Ep. 26.
who died anno 1623. A little lower are two other Monuments of white Marble,
the one for Isaac Barrow, S. T. P. Dr. Isaac Barrow. vid. Ep. 29
and one of the Kings Chaplains: The other for William Outram, S. T. P. Canon
Dr. Will. Outram. vid. Ep. 27.
of this Church, and Archdeacon of Leicester, an eminent and learned Writer;
who died in the year 1679. and Dr. Barrow in the year 1677.

. 36. On the South side of this Cross, hard by the little East door, is a
decayed Tomb of gray Marble, very much defaced, and nothing of the ancient
Inscription remaining, which was in Latin, but of late there is another in
English to inform you that Edmund Edmund Spencer. vid. Ep. 28.
Spencer, a most excellent Poet, lies there intombed, who indeed had a sweet
and luxuriant fancy, and expressed his thoughts with admirable success, as his
Fairy-Queen, and other Works of his sufficiently declare; and pity it was such
true Poetry should not have been employed in as true a subject; he died in the
year 1596.

. 37. Next to him, on the East side of the same Cross, is a little Monument of
white and black Marble, with a Busto or head crowned with a Laurel, for Michael
Drayton, another memorable Mich. Drayton. vid. Ep. 30.
Poet, who rectified the fault committed by Spencer in applying his Genius to
the Histories and Antiquities of his own Nation, and native Country, witness
his Poly-Olbyon, which the learned Seldom has worthily embellished with his
notes; he died in the year 1631. And now come we to the first and last best
Poets of the English Nation Geffrey Chaucer, and Abraham Cowley, the one being
the Sun just rising, and showing its self on the English Horizon, and so by
degrees increasing and growing in strength till it came to its full Glory and
Meridian in the incomparable Cowley, whose admirable Genius, hard to be
imitated, but never equalled, has set the bounds to succeeding times. Chaucer
lies in an ancient Geffrey Chaucer. vid. Ep. 31.
Tomb, Canopied, of gray Marble, with his Picture painted thereon in plano,
with some Verses by; he died in the year 1400. And Cowley has Abrah. Cowley.
vid. Ep. 32.
on a curious Pedestal of white Marble a stately Urn placed thereon, and
environed with a Grate by the command and charge of the noble and illustrious
Duke of Buckingham; he died in the year 1667. universally lamented.

. 38. On the South side of the Quire are three stately Monuments, the first
Westward is that of Thomas Thomas Owen. vid. Ep. 17.
Owen, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, who died in the year 1597,
being a noble Monument of Alabaster, Marble, and diverse colored stones,
adorned with Arms, and gilt with Gold, his Image lying thereon in his Scarlet
Robes in full proportion. The Sir Thomas Richardson Knight. vid. Ep. 15.
next for Sir Tho. Richardson, Speaker of the House of Commons, and afterward
Lord Chief Justice of England, who died in the year 1634. being a fair Tomb of
black Marble, neatly adorned with curious wrought Brass, with his demi Effigies
in his Judges Robes and Collar of S's, all of the same Brass gilt. The last is
an Alabaster Tomb, adorned with Arms, and gilt with Gold where on a Quilt is
placed the Image William Thynne. vid. Ep. 16.
in Armor of William Thynne, a famous Commander at Muscelborough Field, and in
the Scots Wars, who died in the year 1600.

. 39. On the North side of the same Quire you have a noble Monument of
Alabaster, Marble, and diverse colored stones, whereon is placed the Image at
full proportion in his Sir Tho. Hesket Knight. vid. Ep. 14.
black tufted Gown of Sir Thomas Hesket, the Queens Attorney for the Court of
Wards and Liveries, and one of the Council of the North, who died in the year
1600.

. 40. And thus you have what Tombs and Monuments are to be found round about
the Body, Alleys, and the Cross of this Church: We will now see what persons
are deposited under the several Grave-stones that have any Inscriptions
thereon. And first in the midst of the Body or Nave there lies Gilbert
Thornburgh, (whose Tomb I Gilbert Thornburgh. vid. Ep. 34.
have mentioned before,) who was Servant to the King, and died in the year 1677.

. 41. In the North Alley, the body of Anne, Wife of Sir George Radcliffe, Anne
Radcliffe. vid. Ep. 35.
and Daughter of Sir Francis Trappes, who died in the year 1659. Ben. Johnson a
Poet Laureat, and so Ben. Johnson. vid. Ep. 36.
universally famous for the Dramma, that at this day his Works are in great
estimation. Martha, Wife of Gervase Martha Price. vid. Ep. 37.
Price Esquire, one of the Kings Servants, who died in the year 1678. There are
Grave-stones likewise placed for Edward de Carteret, Carola Morland, Vid.
Epitaph. 117. 42. 41. 44 33.
Mary James, Bridget Radley, William Outram, and Abraham Cowley, nigh their
Monuments.

. 42. In the South Alley lies Judith, Judith Isham. vid. Ep 45.
Daughter of Sir Justinian Isham Baronet, who died in the year 1679, having a
gray Marble stone placed here for her. And a little lower, the Lady Anne
Morland Anne Morland. vid. Ep. 43.
under a stone of black Marble, who died in the year 1680.

. 43. In the North Cross is a Gravestone Sir Hen. de Vic Baronet. vid. Ep. 40.
for Sir Henry de Vic Baronet, and Chancellor of the Garter, who died in the
year 1672. Another ancient gray Marble stone for Didacus Sanchez, a Didacus
Sanchez. vid. Ep. 39
Spaniard, he died in the year 1557. And one more for Mary, the Wife of Thomas
Mary Willis. vid. Ep. 38.
Willis M. D. and Daughter of Samuel Fell S. T. D. Dean of Christchurch, and
now Bishop of Oxford, who died in the year 1670. and with her lies her Daughter
Catharine, who died in 1667.

. 44. In the South Cross, overagainst Cowleys Tomb, are some remains of a man
in Armor, with a broken Inscription round the Verge, engraven on Brass,
whereby may be gathered that one Robert Haule lies Robert Haule. vid. Ep. 47.
there, who was murdered in this Church on the eleventh of August, Anno Dom.
1378. In the same Southern Cross lies John Osboldston Esquire, one John
Osbolston. vid. Ep. 46.
of the Kings Servants, he died in the year 1666. Another Gravestone for
Samuel Bolton, D. D. one of the Kings Samuel Bolton. vid. Ep. 48.
Chaplains, and a Prebend of this Church, he died in the year 1668. Another to
Sir William Davenant, a Sir William Davenant Knight. vid. Ep. 50.
Poet Laureat, and memorable for his excellent Poems, natural fancy, and
Dramatick Poesy in our time. Another for Thomas Chiffinch, Servant to his Tho.
Chiffinch, vid. Ep. 49.
Majesty; he died in the year 1666. And lastly, Thomas Parr, a man remarkable
Thomas Parr. vid. Ep. 51.
for his long life, who had lived in the Reigns of ten Kings and Queens of
England, being born in the year 1483. in the time of Edward IV. and died in the
year 1635, in the Reign of King Charles I. being of the age of 152 years.

The Chapel of St. Blase.
. 45. Having informed you of all the Tombs and Grave-stones (and to whose
memory they were there posited,) that you meet with in any part of the body and
side Isles of this so famous Church, we will now enter into the particular
Chapels thereof, and beginning in the South Cross, where the Dial and Clock
stands, and the place made use on at present as a Revestre, was formerly a
Chapel dedicated to Saint Blase, in which Chapel Nicolas L^^lington, Abbot of
Westminster, Nic. Litlington, Abbot of Westminster. vid.. 10.
whom I have mentioned before, was buried in the year 1386, after he had
governed this Monastery twenty five years. And Edward a Monk of Westminster,
who was Son of Owen Tuddor by Queen Katharine, the Widow of Henry V. and
Daughter of Charles VI. King of France; he was Brother to Edmund Earl of
Richmond, and Uncle Edward Monk of Westminster, Uncle to Henry VII.
to King Henry VII. There is neither Inscription or Epitaph remaining to
distinguish their Grave-stones from the rest. From hence going to the East Side
of this Cross, and next to Cowleys Tomb is a little

Chapel of St. Benedict.
. 18. Which is sometimes called the Deans Chapel, by reason some of the Deans
of Westminster have been buried therein, for whom there are two Tombs
remaining. On the South side, that of Gabriel Goodman, S. T. D. Dr. Gabriel
Goodman Dean of Westminster. vid. Ep. 54.
and Dean of this Church forty years; he founded an Hospital and School at
Ruthin in Denbighshire, the town where he was born; but dying on the
Seventeenth day of July in the year 1601. aged 73. was buried here, and had a
Monument of black and white Marble, with his Statue kneeling thereon, erected
to his memory, and is yet in being. On the North side one of his Predecessors
(under a raised Tomb of gray Marble, having his Effigy engraven thereon in
Brass, with Arms and Epitaphs,) was interred, viz. William Dr. Will. Bill, Dean
of Westminster. vid. Ep. 55.
Bill, S. T. D. who was Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, President of
Eaton, Dean of this Collegiate Church, and grand Almoner to the Queen; a man
liberal in his gifts to this College, by several pieces of Silver Plate, and
other Largesses bestowed thereon; he died on the fifteenth of July, in the year
1561. Next to him, on the same North side, is an ancient Tomb of Freestone,
mixed with gray Marble and Brass, with the Image of Alabaster, representing an
Archbishop in his Pontificalibus, under a Canopy of the same stone, placed
there to remember Simon Langham, Sim. Langham, Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Abbot of Westminster. vid. Ep. 56. and. 9.
that famous Monk, Prior, and Abbot of this Monastery, afterward Bishop of
Ely, London. and Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop of Praenest in Italy,
Cardinal S. Sextus, Chancellor and Lord High Treasurer of England, and the
Popes Legate here; he died in the year 1367 at Avenion, and was buried in the
House of the Carthusians there, which himself had founded, but afterward his
bones were translated, and interred here, hard by the Altar of St. Benedict.
Against the Frances Countess of Hertford, Grandchild of the Duke of Norfolk.
vid. Ep. 52
East Wall of this Chapel is a most stately Monument, above twenty six foot
high, most nobly adorned with Corinthian Columns and Pyramids of Alabaster,
Porphyry, Lydian, and diverse colored Marble, variously wrought, and curiously
gilt with Gold, on whose Pedestal is the Image of a Countess in her Robes of
estate, cumbant at full proportion, being erected by the command of Edward Earl
of Hertford, and Baron Beauchamp; (Son of Edward Duke of Somerset, etc. Uncle
to King Edward VI.) to the memory of his Wife the Lady Frances, who was
Daughter of William Baron Howard of Effingham Knight of the Garter, High
Admiral to Queen Mary, Lord Chamberlain and Privy Seal to Queen Elizabeth, and
Son of Thomas Duke of Norfolk; she died in the year 1598. In the midst of the
Area of this Chapel is a noble Tomb of black and white Marble, whereon are
placed the Images of Lyonel Cranfield Earl of Lyonell Cranfield, and his
Countess. vid. Ep. 53.
Middlesex, who was Lord High Treasurer of England, with that of the Lady Anne
his second Wife; he died in the year 1645.

. 47. Next to this Chapel you are let into the Area (or passage that leads you
round the Chapel of the Kings,) by an Officer of the Church, who attends there
to wait upon all persons that are desirous of seeing the Monuments within,
whose Fee is what the particular bounty of each Gentleman shall think
convenient to give him; you may therefore save the civil Officer that trouble,
and better inform your self by taking these directions; The first place you are
led into on this South side will be the Chapel of St. Edmund the Archbishop,
but before you enter therein I would not have you overpass a little Monument
between the Chapel of St. Benedict and this of St. Edmund, being a small
raised Tomb, adorned with diverse Three Children of Henry III and four Children
of Edward I.
colored stones, and Arched, under which are the Effigies of four Children
painted thereon in plano, but there is no Inscription or Table belonging
thereto; in this Tomb are enclosed the bones of Richard, John, and Katharine,
Children of King Henry III. and was set up by Edward I. King of England for
three of his Sons and a Daughter, which he had by Eleanor his Queen, Daughter
of Ferdinand III. King of Castile, viz. John, Henry, Alphonsus, and Eleonore.
From this Tomb we go into the

Chapel of St. Edmund.
. 48. On the right hand of the entrance you have a very ancient Tomb of gray
Marble, about three foot high, adorned with diverse Coats of Arms, which serves
as a Pedestal to support a Wainscot Chest, covered over with (...) Valence
(...)or. Earl (...) (...)broke ^^^. Ep. 67.
plates of Brass richly enamelled, and thereon the Image of William de Valence
Earl of Pembroke, with a deep Shield on his left Arm, in a Coat of Male, with a
Surcoat all of the same enamelled Brass gilt with Gold, and beset with the Arms
of Valence, viz. Barrule Ar. and B. an orle of Martlets Gules; round about the
inner ledge of this Tomb is most of the Epitaph remaining in the ancient Saxon
Letters, and the rest of the Chest covered with Brass, wrought in the form of
Lozenges, each Lozenge containing either the Arms of England, or that of
Valence, alternately placed one after the other, enamelled with their colors.
Round this Chest have been thirty little Brazen Images, some of them still
remaining, twelve on each side, and three at each end, divided by certain
Arches, that serve as Niches to enclose them: And on an outward ledge, at the
foot of each of these Images are placed a Coat of Arms in Brass, enamelled with
their colors. This William de Valence (for whom this curious Tomb was made)
was Son of Hugh le Brun, Earl of March in the Confines of France and Poictiers
by Isabel his Wife, Widow of King John, etc. as I have said before in the
description Vid.. 28.
of his Sons Monument, and being half Brother to King Henry III. was by him
advanced to great honors, who having married Joan, the Daughter of Warren de
Montechensey, died in the year 1304, and had this Monument erected to his
memory.

. 49. On the West side of this Chapel, and next to the Tomb of Edward Talbot
Earl of Shrewsbury, and his Lady. vid. Ep. 66.
William de Valence Earl of Pembroke is a most noble Monument for one of the
Successors of that renowned Family of the Talbots Earls of Shrewsbury, viz.
Edward the eighth Earl thereof, who died on the eighteenth of February 1617.
aged 57 years, and the Lady Jane his Countess, who was the eldest Daughter, and
one of the Coheirs of the last Lord Ogle of that name. On a large Table of
black Marble, supported by a stately Pedestal of Alabaster, and six Corinthian
Pillars, lie their Images at full proportion, in their Mantles of Estate,
painted, and gilt with Gold; at his feet, is placed a Talbot passant, and at
hers, a Griffons head coped, with the Effigies of a female Child beneath them,
all under a sumptuous arched Canopy of curious wrought, and diverse colored
stones, adorned with large Columns, warlike Trophies, Cherubims, Stems of that
illustrious Family, Coats of Arms, and Epitaphs.

. 50. Beyond which, more toward the South, is a comely Monument of Alabaster,
and various colored Marble, adorned with Arms, and gilt with Gold, with three
little Images on their knees, under as many arched Canopies of black Marble and
figured Alabaster. In the midst is that Sir Rich. Pecksal Knight. vid. Ep. 62.
of Sir Richard Pecksal Knight in Armor, who was Master of the Buckhounds to
Queen Elizabeth; On one side of whom is that of his first Wife the Lady
Eleonore, who was Daughter of William Pawlet, Marquess of Winchester, Lord High
Treasurer of England, by whom he had four Daughters, whose Statues help to
beautify the Pedestal of this Monument: on the other, his second Wife, who was
likewise named Eleonore the Daughter of J. Cotgrave, who after the death of
this her first Husband was remarried to Sir John Savage of Cheshire Knight, and
caused this Monument to be erected to his memory.

. 51. Next to this, within the Wall St. Bernard Brocas Knight. vid. Ep. 65.
directly South, between two Pillars of the Chapel Windows, is an ancient
Canopied Tomb, adorned and enriched with Gold according to the fashion of those
times, under which is an embattelled Pedestal of gray Marble, having thereon
the Image of a Knight in Armor, reposing his head on his Helm, ensigned with a
Blackamores head for a Crest, and his feet supported by a Lion couchant, with a
deep Shield on his left arm, almost broken away, with eight lesser Escutcheons
placed on the breasts of as many Cherubims, diversely set about the Tomb, but
all the painting wholly decayed and worn away, nothing remaining but a piece of
a broken Inscription in Brass on the ledge of the imbattelled Pedestal, whereby
we may understand that this Monument was erected for one Sir Bernard Brocas
Knight, Chamberlain to Anne Queen of England, who was Wife to King Richard II.

. 52. Against the same Wall, but John Lord Russel Son to the Earl of Bedford.
vid. Ep. 59.
more toward the East, is a noble Monument of Alabaster, black, and various
colored Marble, Canopied and adorned with Corinthian Pillars, Coats of Arms,
and gilt with Gold, on whose Pedestal is placed the Image of a man at full
proportion, leaning on his left side, and supporting his head by his left Arm
in his Robes of Estate, with another little Image of an Infant at his feet, all
in curious wrought Alabaster, painted and gilt with Gold, environed with a
Grate, and an Epitaph in Latin, Greek, and English, set up here to remember
John Lord Russel and his Son Francis a Child, by the Lady Elizabeth his Wife,
Daughter of Sir Anthony Coke Knight, and Widow of Sir Thomas Hobby; he was Son
and Heir to Francis Russel, who was the second Earl of Bedford of that surname,
but dying before his Father in the year 1584. and his Son Francis, anno 1580.
was buried here, leaving behind him only two Daughters, viz. Anne and Elizabeth.

. 53. Which Elizabeth is said to Elizabeth Daughter of John Lord Russel. vid.
Ep. 113.
have bled to death by a prick she received in the forefinger of her left hand
by a Needle, but with what truth I know not: Yet the Monument placed here for
her within the same Grate with her Father by the Lady Anne her Sister seems not
obscurely to point out as much: For on a Pedestal of black and white Marble,
shaped after the figure of a Roman Altar, made Column wise, is set the Statue
of this young Lady, reposing her self in a curious wrought Osier Chair, all of
polished Alabaster, melancholily inclining her cheek to her right hand, and
with the forefinger of her left only extended, directs us to behold the deaths
head placed at her feet, silently intimating, that from thence sprung the
Malady that brought her to the grave; wherefore we may not irrationally
conjecture, that having touched an Artery with the invenomed Needle, the
infection might so suddenly disperse it self (well known to able Physicians,)
that in a short time it might occasion her death, which by the Ignorant might
be imputed to the simple prick of her finger, a thing altogether unlikely and
absurd.

. 54. Next to this Columnial Monument Francis Holles, Son to the Earl of Clare.
vid. Ep. 58.
is another of the same form, but somewhat larger, composed of Alabaster and
white Marble, with the Statue of a noble Youth thereon, furnitured and equipped
like a Roman Hero, with Helm, Shield, Coat of Male, Buskins, Sandals, etc. of
polished Marble, which the illustrious Earl of Clare caused to be erected for
his third Son Francis Holles, who returning sick from the Wars in Flanders and
the Low Countries, died at the age of eighteen years, and was buried here, anno
1622.

. 55. Between these two Altar-like The Lady Katharine Knowles, Cousin German to
Queen Eliz. vid. Ep. 60.
Monuments, are two little Tombs fixed to the Wall above them against the East
side of the Chapel, both of Alabaster and black Marble, adorned with small
Corinthian Pillars, set about with Arms, and gilt with Gold: The one, which is
next to the door, for the Lady Katharine Knowles, chief Lady of the
Bedchamber, and Cousin German to Queen Elizabeth, and Wife to Sir Francis
Knowles Knight, Treasurer of the Household to the same Queen; she died at
Hampton Court on the fifth day of January 1568. and was honorably buried in
the floor of this Chapel. The other, for the Lady Jane The Lady Jane Seymour,
Cousin-German to King Edward VI. vid. Ep. 61.
Seymour Cousin-German to Edward VI. King of England, and Daughter of Edward
Duke of Somerset, Earl of Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp, and Baron Seymour, who
dying a Virgin on the nineteenth day of March, in the year of our Lord 1560, at
the age of nineteen years was buried here, and had this small Monument erected
by her Brother the Earl of Hertford to her memory. But the Latin Verses
mentioned by Stow and Camden to have been placed on this little Tomb are not
here now, but only the English Inscription.

. 56. In the Area or floor of this Frances Duchess of Suffolk, Grandchild to
King Henry VII. vid. Ep. 57.
Chapel, not far from the Monument of Francis Holles, is a raised Tomb of
Alabaster, about five foot from the ground, adorned with Arms and Inscriptions,
and gilt with Gold; joining to the four corners thereof are as many Corinthian
Pillars, supporting a Table of black Marble, whereon is placed the Image at
full proportion in her Robes of Estate, and at her feet a Lion couchant, with a
rich Jewel pendant at the end of a Chain, encompassing her neck, and falling
between her breasts, all curiously wrought, and admirably pollished, in white
Marble, erected here for the Lady Frances Duchess of Suffolk, anno 1563. she
was a Lady of great extraction, being Daughter to Charles Brandon Duke of
Suffolk, and Mary the French Queen, who was the Daughter of Henry VII. King of
England; she was married first to Henry Gray Marquess of Dorchester, who by
King Edward VI. was created Duke of Suffolk; and afterward to Adrian Stokes
Esquire, who set up this Monument to remember her; she had a Daughter named
Mary by her former Husband the Marquess of Dorcet, who died in the year 1578.
and was buried by her without any Monument, Tomb, or Gravestone.

. 57. By this of the Duchess of William of Windsor, and his Sister Blanch of
the Tower, Children of Edward III.
Suffolk is a little raised Tomb of gray Marble, on the top of which are placed
the Images of two small Children, a Boy and Girl in Alabaster, neither of them
being above sixteen Inches in length, at the feet of the Girl is a Lion
couchant, but part of the Boys feet and Tomb under him is broken away; there
being no Inscription or Epitaph thereon, but are reported to be two Children of
Edward III. King of England, viz. William of Windsor, so called because born at
the Kings Castle of Windsor, with his Sister Blanch of the Tower, for that in
the Tower of London her Mother was delivered of her, both lying under this
little Tomb.

. 58. On the left hand of the door John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, Son of
King Ed. II.
of this Chapel, and not far from this little Tomb is a most noble raised
Monument of gray Marble, set about with twenty four little Images of various
colored Alabaster and white Marble, under each of which are the blank
Escutcheons remaining, whereon had been as many several Coats of Arms depicted,
which are now wholly wholly worn away and decayed. On this Tomb is an Image of
admirable wrought Alabaster, in his Coat Armor, and a deep Shield on his left
arm, whereon is graven the Arms of England within a bordure of France, and was
placed here for John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, having two Angels on each side
supporting his head, and a Lion couchant at his feet, carved and finely
pictured of the same Alabaster, with a Canopy covering the whole with delicate
wrought Spires and Masons work, every where intermixed and adorned with little
Images and Angels according to the fashion of those times, supported by eight
Pillars of white stone of the same curious wrought work: But there is no
Epitaph or Inscription further to inform us. He was the second Son of King
Edward II. by Isabel Daughter to Philip le Bell King of France, and took his
Surname from the place of his birth, viz. at Eltham in Kent, he was advanced to
the title of Earl of Cornwall by his Brother King Edward III. made twice
Lieutenant of all England by the same King upon his Expeditions first into
France, and then into Scotland, during his absence. But attending his Brother
in the tenth year of his Reign into Scotland; he fell sick at St. Iohnstones
Town, and there died without Wife or Issue, and was afterward brought into
this Chapel, and here honorably buried, and had this Monument erected to his
Memory.

. 59. In the midst of the Area of this Elenore Duchess of Gloucester,
Daughter-in-law to King Edw. III. vid. Ep. 64.
Chapel, under a large gray Marble Tomb, about two foot from the ground, with
her Effigies engraven thereon in Brass, under a Canopy artificially pourtrayed,
adorned with Arms and devices of the same Brass, with an Epitaph circumscribed
in French, all remaining entire at this day, lies Elenore Duchess of
Gloucester, who was one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Humphrey de Bohun Earl
of Hereford, Essex, Northampton, and High Constable of England, and Wife of
Thomas de Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, Son to King Edward III. by whom she had
a Son, who died in his Infancy, and a Daughter, named Anne, who was Wife first,
to Edward Earl of Stafford, and afterward, to Sir William Bourchier Knight,
from this Anne by her first husband, the atinent Dukes of Buckingham were
descended, and by her last, the Bourchiers Earls of Essex; she died on the
third of October 1399.

. 60. There is another raised Tomb Humph. Bourchier, Son of the Lord Berners,
vid. Epit. 63.
of gray Marble, somewhat higher than that of the Duchess of Gloucester,
adjoining to Sir Bernard Brocas whereon is portrayed the Effigies of a man in
Armor, with his head on his Helm, ensigned with a Crest, and his feet
supported, the one by a Leopard, the other, by an Eagle, with diverse ancient
fashioned Shields, and Coats of Arms, all engraven on curious wrought Brass,
fixed to the Marble, and remaining entire at this day, with an Epitaph in
Latin Verse, insculpt on the same brass plates just under his Effigies, to
inform us, that Humphrey Bourchier, Son and Heir of John Lord Berners, lies
there interred, who married the Daughter and Heir of Frederick Tilney, and lost
his life in those Civil Broyls of the Houses of York and Lancaster, taking part
with Edward IV. against Henry VI. in the Battle of Barnet, from whence he was
brought, and here intombed. I know not how it came to pass, but certainly there
is a mistake in Mr. Camdens Collection of these Monuments, where he places this
Tomb to another Humphrey Bourchier, who was Lord Cromwell, and Son to Humph.
Bourchier Son of the Earl of Essex.
Henry Earl of Essex, who was slain at the same time at the Battle of Barnet,
and interred in this Chapel, hard by the Monument of William de Valence,
without any further remembrance of him: And for a confirmation that this Tomb
was made for the former Humphrey, Son of the Lord Berners, not only the Verses
of his Epitaph specify in part as much, but is most evident by his impaling
the Coat of Tilney, with quarterings remaining very visible at this day on the
same Tomb.

. 61. On the Floor or Pavement Robert Walby Archhishop of York. vid. Ep. 69.
of this Chapel adjoining to the foot of the Tomb of Elenore Duchess of
Gloucester is a large gray Marble stone, adorned with most excellent workmanship
of Brass, whereon is lively pictured, as he was accustomed to sing or say Mass,
with a Miter on his head, and a Crosier Staff in his hand, the Effigy of a
Bishop, with so much of an Epitaph round the Verge still in being, to inform us
that Robert Walby, Bishop of Durham, afterward of Chichester, and then
Archbishop of York, died on the fourth day of January in the year 1390. and was
buried here.

. 62. More toward the East, on Henry Fern, Bishop of Chester. vid. Ep. 68.
the same Pavement, is another gray Marble stone, with five Plates of Brass,
whereon are engraven as many Coats of Arms, with a Miter in the midst, and
round about the Verge an Epitaph insculpt on the like Plates of Brass, giving
us to understand, that Henry Fern, who was the eighth Son of Sir John Fern
Knight, was Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, and afterward Bishop of
Chester, who died in the year 1662. at the age of fifty nine years, and was
here deposited.

The Chapel of St. Nicolas.
. 63. On the right hand, as you Philippa, Duchess of York,
Grand-daughter-in-law to King Edw. III. vid. Ep. 78.
come into this Chapel is an ancient decayed Tomb of Freestone, with the Image
of a Lady lying thereon at full proportion, in her Robes of Estate, under a
wooden Canopy, curiously painted with Azure, and decked with Stars of Gold,
with our Savior on the Cross; Supported by Wainscote Pillars, and neatly
adorned with excellent carved Spires, and Coats of Arms depicted thereon,
erected here to continue the remembrance of Philippa, one of the Daughters and
Coheirs of John Lord Mohun of Dunster, who was first married to the Lord
Fitz-Walter, afterward to Sir John Golosre Knight, and lastly to Edward
Plantagenet Duke of York, (Son of Edmund of Langley, fifth Son of King Edward
III.) who was killed at the Battle of Agincourt; she died, and was buried here
in the year 1474.

. 64. Beyond this Tomb, toward The Lady Elizabeth Cecill, Daughter of the Earl
of Rutland.
the West, under an Arch in the Wall, lies the Image of a woman at full
proportion, leaning on her left Arm, in a Cypress vail, all of a mouldering
stone, which being decayed by reason of its brittleness, and that the Monument
is very plain, seems to be of much greater Antiquity than really it is, having
no Inscription, Paintings, or adornments but a Coat of Arms, where Cecill with
quarterings, Impaling Manors is to be seen, and was here placed for the Lady
Elizabeth, sole-Daughter and Heir of Edward Manors Earl of Rutland by Isabel
his Wife, Daughter of Sir Thomas Holcroft, of the Vale Royal in the County of
Chester Knight; she was Wife of Sir William Cecill Knight, commonly called Lord
Burleigh, Son and Heir apparent to Thomas Earl of Exeter, by whom she had Issue
William called Lord Ross; she departed this life the eleventh of May, anno
1591. and lies here, as the entering thereof in the Heralds Office, and those
Arms above, placed over her Effigies do sufficiently testify.

. 65. Next to this is a Monument Winifrid Marchioness of Winchester. vid. Ep.
77.
of Alabaster, Porphyry, and diverse colored stones, adorned and gilt with
Gold, having on the Pedestal the Image of a young man and woman kneeling, with
a little Babe in swaddling bands between them, and on a Table supported by this
Pedestal is a large Statue of a Lady at full proportion combant, in her Robes
of Estate of the same Alabaster, painted, and gilt with Gold, and environed
with a Grate, where the Lady Winifrid, Marchioness of Winchester is said to be
intombed, she was descended from the ancient Family of the Bruges, first
married to Sir Richard Sackvile Knight, Chancellor of the Exchequer, by whom
she had the Lord Buckhurst, and the Lady Dacres of the South, with other
Children, afterward to John Paulet Marquess of Winchester, whose Widow she
died in the year 1586.

. 66. On the South side of this Wi^^iam Sutton, alias Dudley, Bishop of Durham.
vid. Ep. 76.
Chapel is an ancient Tomb in the Wall of gray Marble, with his Portraiture
engraven on Brass in his Episcopal habit, with a Miter on his head, and a
Crosier Staff in his hand, canopied with an Arch of curious wrought stone,
under which William Sutton alias Dudley, Bishop of Durham lies interred; he was
the Son of John Lord Dudley, and died about the year 1482. as may be
gathethered from part of an Epitaph still remaining in Brass round the Verge of
his Tomb.

. 67. Here is a most noble and Mildred Cecill Lady Burlegh, and Anne Countess
of Oxford her Daughter. vid. Ep. 75.
Magnificent Monument toward the Southeast part Angle of this Chapel, set up
against the same Wall by the command and charge of William Cecill, Lord Burlegh
to the remembrance of his Wife and Daughter, being twenty four foot high,
containing diverse Arches and Canopies supported by Corinthian Pillars and
adorned with Pyramids, of Porphyry, Lydian, Touch, and various colored Marble,
curiously carved, and gilt with Gold. On the upper part of this Monument under
a small Arch is a little figure of an ancient man praying on his knees, and in
his Parliament Robes, with the Collar and Jewel of the Order of St. George
about his neck, to represent the aforesaid William Cecil Lord Burlegh, Lord
High Treasurer of England, Privy Counselor to Queen Elizabeth, and Knight of
the most noble Order of the Garter, who died on the fourth day of August in the
year 1598. and lay in state in this Church six days; afterward he was
translated to Stamford, where in St. Martins Church his body was interred. On
the Pedestal are two Images at full proportion cumbant in their Robes of Estate
of Alabaster, painted, and adorned with Gold, the furthermost of Mildred Lady
Burlegh, Wife of the abovesaid William, she was the eldest Daughter of Sir
Anthony Coke Knight, by Anne the Daughter of Sir William Fitz-Williams Knight,
who was a Lady of no less eminent in her time for her extraordinary Charity,
than for her Piety and great Learning, being well versed in the Greek and
Latin Tongues; she had many Children by her Husband, all dying in their
Infancy except Anne, Robert, and Elizabeth. She died in her grand Climacterick
year on the fourth day of April 1589* and was buried from her house at
Westminster in this Chapel. The other of her Daughter the Lady Anne, Countess
of Oxford, who married Edward Vere, Lord High Chamberlain of England, and the
seventeenth (of the name of Vere) Earl of Oxford, by whom she left Issue only
three Daughters, who dying at the Queens Palace of Greenwich on the fifth day
of June 1588. was brought and interred in the floor of this Chapel. On each
side of this Pedestal are two Canopies, supported by some little Corinthian
Columns, curiously painted with Azure, and gilt with Gold, underneath each of
which is a Deaths-head enchased in Crystal, with with these words, Mors Janua
vitae, and Mors mihi Lucrum; by the latter, at the head of their Mother and
Grandmother are three little Images of female Children kneeling, the Lady
Elizabeth, the Lady Bridget, and the Lady Anne Vere, and by the former, at the
feet of his Mother and Sister the figure only of a Youth kneeling, for Robert
Cecill, Son of the abovementioned William and the Lady Mildred his Wife, who
married Elizabeth Brook, Daughter of the Lord Cobham, all living when this
Monument was erected.

. 68. Beyond this, against the East The Lady Elizabeth Fane, Daughter of the
Lord Spencer. vid. Ep. 73.
Wall, is another comely Monument, where under an Artificial Canopy, the
Curtains withdrawn, and held up by two Corinthian Pillars of diverse colored
Alabaster and Marble, adorned and gilt with Gold, are two Images kneeling at a
Table, the one of a Knight in Armor, placing his left hand on a Deaths-head:
The other of his Lady, with a Book lying before her on the same Table, praying
and lifting up their eyes toward the Azure Sky, representing an Artificial
Heaven, painted on the roof of the Canopy, beset with Cherubims, little Angels,
and gilded Stars: On the outside of the same Monument are many larger figures
of Angels, naked Youths, and Cupids, all of polished Alabaster, with a Fame
standing on a bleeding heart, with a device and Motto, being set up here by Sir
George Fane of Buston Knight, in the County of Kent, for the Lady Elizabeth his
Wife, who was Daughter of Robert Baron Spencer of Wormleighton, who died in the
year 1618.

. 69. Under this Monument, close Nicolas Baron Carew and Margaret his Wife.
vid. Ep. 71.
to the Wall, is an ancient plain raised Tomb of gray Marble, with an
Inscription in Brass round the ledge still remaining, and some Coats of Arms on
the Pedestal, whereby may be gathered, that Nicolas Baron Carew, and his Wife
the Lady Margaret, who was the Daughter of Sir John Dinham Knight, were here
intombed; he dying on the sixth day of December in the year 1470. and she on
the thirteenth day of the same month and year following.

. 70. Next to this Tomb is a most Anne Duchess of Somerset. vid. Ep. 71.
noble Monument twenty four foot high, admirably adorned with curious wrought
stones, Pyramids, and Corinthian Columns of Porphyry, Lydian, and various
colored Marble, where under a large Arch, set forth with diverse ingenuities,
Coats of Arms, and other Adornments, and rich gildings, is the Image of a Lady,
lying at full proportion in her Robes of Estate, painted, and gilt with Gold,
and environed with an Iron Grate, being erected by Edward Earl of Hertford to
the remembrance of his Mother the Lady Anne, Duchess of Somerset, who was the
Wife of Edward Seymour Duke of Somerset, Earl of Hertford, etc. Knight of the
most noble Order of the Garter, and Uncle to King Edward VI. She was the
Daughter of Sir Edward Stanhope Knight, by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Sir
Foulke Bourchier Lord Fitz-warin, who by his Father was descended from Thomas
of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, Son to King Edward III. She died on the
sixteenth day of April anno 1587. in the ninetieth year of her age, having
Issue by her Husband three Sons, and six Daughters, and was here interred.

. 71. Before this Monument of the The Lady Jane Clifford, Daughter of Wi^^iam
Duke of Somerset. vid. Ep. 72.
Duchess of Somerset, on the Area, is a late erected Tomb of a curious form,
whose Pedestal is composed of four large Cherubims of rough Alabaster, which
support a square Table of admirable polished black Marble, rising every way
from the Superficies to a convenient height, whose Angles are all conjoined,
and covered by a Ducal Coronet of white Marble, encompassed with an Iron Grate,
and gilt with Gold, under which lies the Lady Jane Clifford, Wife of Charles
Lord Clifford and Dungarvan, Son and Heir apparent to Richard Earl of
Burlington, etc. She was the Daughter of William Duke of Somerset,
Granddaughter to Edward Earl of Hertford, and Great-grand-daughter to Edward
Duke of Somerset, who was Uncle King Edward VI. and therefore had this Monument
erected for her hard by her Great-grandmothers. She had Issue five Sons, and
six Daughters, departing this life on the twenty third of November 1679. in the
42. year of her Age.

. 72. On the left hand of the door The Lady Elizabeth Cecill, Daughter of
William Lord Cobham. vid. Ep. 70.
as you come into this Chapel is a little Table Monument of one entire black
Marble stone placed on a Pedestal of Alabaster, adorned with Arms, Epitaphs,
and gilt with Gold, for Elizabeth the Wife of Sir Robert Cecill Knight, Son of
William Lord Burlegh, Lord High Treasurer of England, and Privy Counselor to
Queen Elizabeth. She was the Daughter of William Brook Lord Cobham, and as a
remembrance of her had this Tomb placed here by her Husband in the year 1591.

. 73. In the midst of the Pavement Sir George Villers, and the Countess of
Backingham his Wife. vid. Ep 80.
of this Chapel is a most noble Tomb, composed of a black Marble Table, of one
entire Lydian stone, curiously polished, and supported by a Pedestal of black
and white Marble, embellished with diverse carved Figures, Coats of Arms and
Masons work. On this Table is placed the Image of a Knight in ^ompleat Armor
Cap a Pie, supporting his feet by a Lion couchant; with another of his Lady,
her feet resting on the like Lion, vested with a Mantle of Estate, and having
on her head the Coronet of a Countess, all wrought and graved out of curious
white Marble, and was set up here by George Villers, the first Duke of
Buckingham of that surname, to the remembrance of Sir George Villers Knight,
his Father, and the Lady Mary Beaumont, Countess of Buckingham, his Mother.

. 74. On the South side of this The heart of Anna Sophia, Daughter of
Christopher Harlee Count Bellomont, a Frenchman. vid. Ep. 81.
Tomb is a small Pyramid of white Marble, on the top of which is placed a
golden Cup, whose Pedestal of black Marble, adorned with Arms, Epitaphs, and
gilt with Gold, informs us, that the heart of Anna Sophia an Infant (Daughter
to Christopher Harlee Count Bellomont, Prefect of Paris, Privy Counselor to
the French King, and his Ambassador here in England, by the Lady Anne Robota
his Wife) is posited in the aforesaid Chalice, who died in the year 1605.

. 75. On the East side the Pavement Sir Humphrey Stanley Knight vid. Ep. 79.
of this Chapel, by the base of the Tomb of the Lady Jane Clifford, and not
far from that of the Lord Carew, is a plated Gravestone of gray Marble,
whereon the Effigies of a Knight in Armor is lively engraven, with an Epitaph,
and at each corner a Coat of Arms, informing us, that under that Stone lies the
body of Sir Humphrey Stanley Knight, one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to
King Henry VII. who died on the twelfth day of March anno 1505.

. 76. Leaving this Chapel, and keeping straight forward we go up by an easy
ascent of twelve Greeses or steps of Freestone thorough three Portico's, which
lead us to as many brazen doors, nobly and richly adorned with Grate-works,
Roses, Portcullises, and Flowers de Liz, the several badges of the Founder,
which lets us into the

Chapel of the B. Virgin Mary,
. 77. Or King Henry VII. as it is The Chapel of K. Hen VII.
vulgarly called, by reason that he commanded it to be erected, and was at the
charge thereof. This Chapel, so much admired by Strangers, and esteemed by us,
rather exceeds in beauty and excellent contrivance than equals the same
thereof, for if we respect the admirable Architecture, and most noble Roof, we
there behold a most delightful The Roof.
sight. On either side we are entertained with no less than 120 several Statues.
Statues of the Primitive Saints and Martyrs, and round about other lesser
Images and Antic figures, so excellently carved, and curiously engraven, that
many experienced in the Art of Painting have not neglected the copying them;
the curious workmanship of the Staules, with the rest of the Staules.
fine wrought Wainscot, that serves to adorn this Chapel, ought not to be
passed over without your observation; nor are the Windows (where Windows.
with this Chapel is further embellished) to be neglected, every light
composed of Diapered and well painted glass, each Pane containing either a Red
Rose, the Badge or Cognizance of the House of Lancaster, or a Text H, the
Initial Letter of this Kings name, each crowned with a Royal Diadem. But above
all, the magnificent and glorious Monuments and noble And Monuments therein.
Tombs of those illustrious Princes who have been interred and deposited here
deserve a more particular description.

. 78. To begin then with that of King Hen. VII. and his Queen. vid. Ep. 82.
the Founder of this admirable Fabric, which stands at the upper end of this
his Chapel, being all of solid Brass, about eighteen foot in length, six in
breadth, and nine in depth; open on the top, with a continual Battlement going
quite round, where in the midst of every Square, and at each Angle is a great
Rose, representing so many Bulwarks encompassing a Royal Fort; whilst on the
under part of this stately Structure, supporting these Battlements, are diverse
Pillars full of Niches, and in each Nich were as many brazen Statues gilt with
Gold, with other Images, of the Apostles, Fathers, and Doctors of the Church;
which in great part are now stolen away: The work that fills up the spaces and
squares between each of these Pillars from the bottom to the top is all
Gratework, representing the nature of a Vine, curling and twining its branches
to and fro for the convenience of the Dragons and Greyhounds to encounter or
chase on the other, with which Figures the whole work is interlaced. Round
about the cross bars, which go quite round the midst of this Tonument, is an
Epitaph in Latin Verse, made to the commendations of the Founder: On the North
and South side of this Case, or Fence, or rather small Chapel, to the noble
Tomb within, you have two brazen doors, which are seldom opened by reason the
Grate-work gives Spectators a sufficient view of the Tomb: Which Tomb is a
Pedestal of about five foot from the ground, of black Marble, every way adorned
with gilded brass, of admirable workmanship: on which Pedestal are placed the
Images, all of solid Brass, and gilt with Gold, in their Royal Habiliments, of
that great King Henry VII. of England, and Elizabeth his Queen, Daughter of
Edward IV. under each of whose Images are diverse Inscriptions in Brass gilt, to
inform you from whence they derived their Lineage and Descent. On the outside of
this brazen Monument there be two ancient Tables in writing, with many Verses,
composed by Skeleton, the Kings Orator and Poet Laureat, as he styles him, in
which he blazons forth the commendations and virtues of that excellent Prince
and Queen, which I have Vid. Ep. ^2.
transcribed for your satisfaction, and you may find among the Monumental
Inscriptions.

. 79. At the head of his Grandfather Edward VI. K. of England.
King Henry VII. was Edward VI. K. of England France, and Ireland, interred
under a brazen Altar, artificially wrought, and gilt with Gold, of which there
is nothing now remaining. He was Son to Henry VIII. by Jane Seymour his Queen,
being crowned the twenty eighth of January 1546. and died the sixth of July
1553. (as it is supposed) of an untimely death. The Altar and Sepulcher, before
mentioned, wherein the body of King Henry VII. rests, was made and finished
in the year 1519. by one Peter a Painter of Florence, for which he received no
more than one thousand pounds sterling for the whole stuff and workmanship, so
cheap and so excellent was work in those days.

. 80. On either side of the same Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derby,
mother to K. Hen. VII. vid. Ep. 83.
Chapel you have several of the Ancestors and Successors of the Founder
interred. On the South side, behind the staules of the Quire, toward the East,
is a noble raised Tomb of black Marble, curiously wrought, and adorned with
gilded Brass, Arms, an Epitaph round the Verge, and environed with a Grate,
whereon is placed the Image of a Lady in her Robes of Estate, all of solid
Brass, and gilt with Gold, with the model of two Pillars on each side her,
after which form she caused the noble structures which she erected to be
composed, under which lies Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derby, one of the
Daughters and Heirs of John Duke of Somerset, by Margaret the Daughter of the
Lord Beauchamp of Powick. She was first married to Edmund the Son of Owen
Tuder, by whom she had Henry VII. King of England, and afterward to Edward
Stanley Earl of Derby. She built two Colleges at Cambridge, Christchurch, and
St. John's, instituted a Divinity Lecture in either University, gave much to
religious Houses, and endowed her Foundations with ample Revenues, and after
she had seen her Grandson King Henry VIII. crowned, she died in the year 1509.

. 81. At the lower end, toward Margaret Coun^ess of Levenox, Grandmother to
King James. vid. Ep. 84.
the West of this side of the Chapel, is a comely Tomb of Alabaster, black and
diverse colored stones, and on the Pedestal six little Images of young men
kneeling, with two women all of the same Alabaster, set about with Arms, and
gilt with Gold, lies the Image at full proportion, in her Robes of Estate,
curiously painted, and gilt with Gold, of Margaret Countess of Levenox,
Daughter and sole Heir of Archibald Earl of Auguise, by Margaret, Queen of
Scots, his Wife, eldest Daughter to King Henry VII. She married Matthew Stuart
Earl of Levenox, by whom she had Henry Lord Darly, Father to King James VI. of
Scotland, and first Monarch of Great Britain. She died anno 1578.

. 82. Between these two Monuments Mary Queen of Scots, Mother to King James.
vid. Ep. 85.
of Margaret Countess of Richmond, and Margaret Countess of Levenox, is a most
stately Monument, erected by the order of King James for his Mother, Mary Queen
of Scots, whose Image in her Royal Habiliments, painted, and gilt with Gold, is
placed on a noble Pedestal of curious wrought Alabaster, overshadowed by an
arched Canopy, supported by eight Corinthian Pillars of black Marble, the
Capitals and Pedestals gilt, the Architrave adorned with Arms, and the whole of
an admirable composure. This Lady for whom this Monument was framed was
Daughter and Heir to James V. King of Scotland, the Son of James IV. and
Margaret his Queen, eldest Daughter to King Henry VII. of England. She was
married to Francis the Dauphin, afterward King of France, by the name of
Francis the Second, after whose death she married the Lord Darly, by whom she
had James her Son and Heir, during whose minority, being driven by her
rebellious Subjects from her Kingdom, and casting her self upon the protection
of Queen Elizabeth, she underwent the hard fortune to be imprisoned almost
twenty years, and at last was beheaded in the forty sixth year of her age anno
1587. being buried at Peterborough, but upon the coming of King James to the
Crown of England, he commanded her body to be translated from thence, and here
honorably to be intombed in a Vault underneath her Monument.

. 83. On the North side of this Mary and Elizabeth* Queens of E^gland. vid. Ep.
89.
Chapel, behind the Staules, you have another most Magnificent and Royal
Monument, made altogether after the same fashion with that of Mary Queen of
Scots, the Canopy supported by Corinthian Pillars, set about with Arms, with
the Image thereon of Elizabeth Queen of England, in her Royal Habiliments,
painted, and gilt with Gold, which was erected likewise by the order of King
James, for Mary Queen of England, France, and Ireland, (Daughter to Henry VIII.
by Katharine, Daughter to Ferdinand King of Spain, who succeeded her Brother
King Edward VI. to his Crown and Kingdoms, anno 1553. who after her marriage
with Philip II. King of Spain, died in the year 1558.) and Elizabeth ^er
Sister, Daughter likewise of King Henry VIII. by his second Wife Anne Bullen,
who after she had reigned forty four years, four Months, and eight days, died
on the twenty fourth day of March anno 1602. and was buried in the same Vault
by her Sister, just under this Tomb.

. 84. At the upper end of this The L^dy Sophia, Daughter to King James. vid*
Ep. 90.
North side, toward the East, within a Baluster, or Rail of Iron, you have
three small, but curious Tombs; that toward the North is a Child in a Cradle
made of Alabaster, finely engraven, and gilt with Gold, being set on a Pedestal
of black Marble, and was placed here likewise by the order of King James for
his Daughter Sophia an Infant, who was born on the 22 day of June, anno 1606.
and died three days after.

. 85. The other toward the South, The Lady Mary another Daughter of King
James. vid. Ep. 91.
is a neat raised Tomb of Alabaster and Touch, adorned with Arms, and gilt with
Gold, whereon is placed the Image of a Child lying at length, and leaning on
her left Arm, composed of white Marble, and lively painted, for another
Daughter of King James Monarch of Great Britain, viz. Mary, who died on the
sixteenth day of December anno 1607. being two years, five months, and eight
days old.

. 86. Between these is the third, Edward V* King of England, and Rich. Duke of
York his Brother. vid. Ep. 92.
where, in the Wall is a Nich cut on purpose, and a curious Altar of black and
white Marble, admirably polished, with two Crowns, and as many golden branches
of Palm, with an Epitaph engraven on the Pedestal, informing us, that his
present Majesty Charles II. Monarch of Great Britain, commanded this to be
erected to revive and perpetuate the remembrance of his Kinsmen those Princely
Youths who were most barbarously smothered to death with Pillows in the Tower
of London, by the cruelty of their unnatural Uncle King Richard III. viz.
Edward V. King of England, and Richard Duke of York his Brother, whose bodies,
so long sought for (but in vain) by reason of the sudden death of the Priest
who buried them, were lately found by undoubted circumstances on the
seventeenth day of July 1674. after Their (...)es found (...) Tower ^^ L^ndon*
an^ ^^anslat^d hither.
196 years obscurity: For some alterations being ordered to be made in the
Tower of London about this time, and ^h^ Workmen taking up the steps en^^ring
the Chapel belonging to the White Tower, they found these bod^^s there-under
deposited; which our most Royal Sovereign, out of his noble and compassionate
nature, pitying their unjust punishment, and hard fortune, commanded with all
decency and reverence to be translated, and reinterred here, among ashes
equally as Royal as their own, which was performed accordingly, anno 1678.

. 87. At the head of Mary and Elizabeth, Queens of England, in a small Vault,
capable of no more than two Coffins, are deposited in leaden Chests George
Monk Duke of Albemarle, and Edward Mountague Earl of Sandwich. These loyal and
most worthy Gentlemen, who as yet have no Monuments erected for them, but their
Banners, Pennons, Guidons, and other Ensigns of honor, are hung up here as
Trophies of their incomparable fame. The Statue of the Duke of Albemarle, in
complete Armor, with his Parliament Robes as a Mantle covering them, with the
Collar of the Order of St. George round his neck, a Battoon in his hand, and a
Coronet on his head, is likewise placed in a Press of Wainscot further to
remember him.

. 88. This George Monk was Son George Monk Duke of Albermarle.
to Sir Thomas Monk of Potheridge in the County of Devon Knight, who having
much delighted from his youth and practiced a military course of life as well
in forain parts as at home, after the Martyrdom of King Charles I. and the
expulsion of his Royal Issue, was entrusted by the Usurpers with the command of
one of their Armies, and made General in the North. But such was the integrity
of this illustrious Hero, and true loyalty to his Masters Children, that he
held correspondency with the King during his exile, and only waited the
opportunity (which was afterward put into his hands) of restoring him to his
Kingdoms; for which good services, and that by the Lady Frances, Daughter and
Coheir to Arthur Plantagenet, natural Son to King Edward IV. Wife of Thomas
Monk Esquire, his lineal Ancestor, he was descended from Edward Gray Viscount
Lisle, Son to the renowned John Talbot, sometime Earl of Shrewsbury, by
Margaret his Wife, of that valiant Earl from the famous Richard Beauchamp Earl
of Warwick and Aumarle, Regent of France, (whose eldest Daughter and Coheir
she was) he had by Letters Patent, bearing date the seventh day of July, in 12
Car. 2. these several Dignities and Titles of honor conferred upon him, and
the Heirs Males of his body, viz. Baron Monk of Potheridge, Beauchamp, and
Teyes; Earl of Torrington, and Duke of Albemarle, and shortly after instauled
Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter. He married Anne the Sister of Sir
Thomas Clarges Knight, and died on the fourth of January 1669. leaving
Christopher his Son and Successor. A Cenotaph was here erected, with his Statue
thereon, standing many days in the body of this Church, and on the day of his
interment there was a most solemn Funeral Pomp, with all the Nobility and chief
Gentry of the Kingdom attending him to the Grave, by the express order, and at
the charge of our present Sovereign, to whom he was most dear.

. 89. Edward Mountague, his Companion ^dw^rd Mountague ^arl o^ Sandwich.
both in life and death, was Son and Heir to Sir Sydney Mountague, de
Hinchinbrooke, in the County of Huntingdon Knight, who was youngest Brother to
Edward the first Lord Mountague of Boughton. This Edward (no less than his
f^llow-Souldier the Duke of Albemarle by land) became entrusted with the like
power of being Admiral by Sea, and by the same Usurpers, where for a time both
of them were forced to disguise their honest thoughts by a seeming compliance
with their unjust tyranny. By which means they became the chief and happy*
Instruments, without any opposition, of restoring again the Laws, Liberties,
Peace, and Tranquillity of these Kingdoms, and their lawful Sovereign, after
twelve years exile, to his undoubted Right and Inheritance: For which good
services he was made Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, a Baron of
this Realm, by the Title of Lord Mountague of S. Neots in Com. Hunt. Viscount
Hinchinbrooke, and Earl of Sandwich. But being Vice Admiral to his Royal
Highness James Duke of York and Albany, in the Sea Fight between the English
and the Dutch, on the twenty eighth of May, Anno 1672. had his Ship, called the
Royal James, most unfortunately set on ^ir^, where he lost his life in the
forty seventh year of his age, his body being afterward found on the Sea Coast
was taken up and brought to Westminster in great state, and here honorably
interred. He married Semina Daughter to John Lord Crew de Stene in Com. North.
and had Issue six Sons, Edward, Sydney, Oliver, John, Charles, and James, and
four Daughters, Jemina, Paulina, Anne, and Katharine.

. 90. On each side of the Founders George Villers, Duke of Bucking^^^ and his
Lady. vid. Ep. 8^.
Tomb are two small Chapels: In that on the North is a most Magnificent and
stately Monument for George Villers, that Great Duke of Buckingham, who was
slain at Portsmouth with a Poniard (in his Expedition to the Isle of Rea) by
the impious hands of Felton, a Lieutenant under his Command, in the year 1634.
^e married Katharine the Daughter and Heir of the Earl of Rutland, and had
several Children by her, viz. M^ry, Charles, (who died in their i^^^ncy) George
the present Duke of Buckingham, and Francis. This Tomb for its admirable
composure of Lydian, Touch, and diverse rich Marbles, and curious Statues of
solid Brass, and gilt with Gold, is scarce to be equalled in all Europe, for on
the East Wall of this Chapel there runs up a Compartment from the Pavement to
the Roof of black and white Marble, richly adorned, wherein all that is
excellent in Architecture, Carving, Masons work, or Sculpture, is there to be
seen; the variety of noble Columns, Embattlements, Arches, Niches, Pedestals,
Architraves, Statues, and infinite other Figures, all wrought in stone, or
burnished Brass, gilt with Gold, make ^ sweet harmony of composure, the little
Hymen's extinguishing their Torches, and weeping Cupids neglecting their
employments, with those large^ Statues of Mars, Neptune, Pallas, and Bounty,
that are placed at the four corners of the Pedestal, before as many* noble
Pyramids of black Marble, set about with Warlike Trophies, and supported from
their Pedestals by sixteen Deaths heads of gilded Brass, are subjects
expressing an universal mourning: But when we behold the Statue of this
illustrious Hero himself, with that awful Majestic countenance mixed with
greatness and affability; and the Image of his Lady lying by him, with a Fame
at their feet, even bursting her self, and Trumpets to tell the news of his so
sudden fall, we cannot but be concerned, yet pleased to see such lively
representations and speaking figures, which seem really to be affected with a
sense of sorrow and disconsolation.

. 91. On the South side of the Lodowick Stuart, Duke of Ri^^^ond, and his
Duchess Cousin* German to King James. vid. Ep. 86.
aforesaid Founders Tomb is the other Chapel, wherein is another Majestic and
Prince like Monument, little inferior to that of the Duke of Buckingham, but
of another manner of composure, for on a large raised Pedestal of black Marble,
richly adorned with curious wrought Brass, gilt with Gold, and set about with
Arms, are placed the Images of of Lodowick Stuart, Duke of Richmond and
Levenox, Earl of Newcattle upon Tine, and Lord Darnley, Lord High Chamberlain
of Scotland, and hereditary Admiral, Lord High Steward of his Majesty's
Household, first Gentleman of the Bedchamber, Privy Counselor, and Cousin
German to King James, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter; with
the Lady Frances his Wife, Daughter of Thomas Lord Howard of Bindon, Son to the
Duke of Norfolk, etc. The Statues of these two illustrious persons all of solid
Brass, gilt with Gold, in their Robes of Estate, lying upon the aforesaid
Pedestal, under a stately Canopy, thorough wrought, and curiously engraven, of
the same gilded Brass, resting it self on an Architrave of black Marble,
supported at the four corners by the Statues of Faith, Hope, Charity, and
Prudence, which serve as mourners in their Cypress Vails, continually to
attend, and seem to lament their departure, in which posture their Figures are
lively expressed all of the same Brass; on the top of this Canopy is a Fame and
round about diverse Cencers, Angels, Hymen's, Cupids, and other Imagery work, by
which the whole becomes very curious and magnificent.

. 92. At the feet of this Duke and Esme Stuart, Duke of ^i^^(...) his Grandson.
vid. Ep. ^^.
his Duchess, against the East Wall is a small Pyramid of black and white
Marble, with an Urn placed on the top, and a Coronet encompassing the (...)
gilt with Gold, for Esme Stuart, Duke of Richmond and Levenox, who was Son of
James Stuart Duke of Richmond, etc. And the Lady Mary his Wife, only Daughter
of George Duke of Buckingham. This Esme died at Paris on the fourteenth day of
August 1661. in the eleventh year of his Age* from whence he was brought and
interred here.

. 93. These are all the Monuments and Tombs that we meet with above ground in
this stately Chapel, except the Image of Lodowick Stuart Duke of Richmond, as
above, and his Duchess, which are placed in a Press of Wainscot, not far from
their Monument, in their Robes of Estate. But underground, and in the Vaults
there are many more.

. 94. In a Vault on the North side James King of England, and Queen Anne.
the Tomb of King Henry VII. was James King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, interred in a Chest of Lead covered with black Velvet, with Anne Queen
of England his Wife, Grandfather and Grandmother to our present Sovereign.

. 95. At the East end of this Chapel, under the great East Window is another
large Vault, with a light belonging thereto wherein are deposited in Chests of
Lead, covered with Velvet these persons following, viz.

. 96. Charles Earl of Doncaster, Charles, Earl of ^oncaster, Son to James Duke
of Monmo^th, Grandchild (by his natur^^ Son) to K Charles II.
eldest Son of James Duke of Monmouth, (Baron of Tinedale, Viscount Doncaster,
and Knight* of the most noble Order of the Garter, natural Son to his present
Majesty) by the Lady Anne, Daughter and sole Heir to Francis Earl of Bucklugh
in Scotland, he died on the ninth of February 1673. aged one year five months,
and fifteen days.

. 97. Next to him lies the Duchess The Duchess of Southampton, Daughter inlaw
(^y his natural Son) to K. Charles II.
of Southampton, Daughter of Sir Henry Wood, and Wife of Charles Fitz-Roy,
(natural Son to King Charles II.) Duke of Southampton, Earl of Chichester,
Baron of Newbery, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter.

. 98. By whom is posited Charles Charles Fitz-Charles Earl of (...), natural
Son to K Charles II.
Fitz-Charles, (natural Son to his pres^^t Majesty) Earl of Plymouth, Viscount
Totnes, and Baron Dartmouth, who in the Expedition of Tangier 1680. against the
Moors, fell sick of a Fever, and died there, but was afterward brought and
interred here.

. 9^. By him lies the noble Earl of (...) Earl of (...) Son to the Du^^ of (...)
Ossery, one of the Privy Council to our Royal Sovereign, Knight of the most
noble Order of the Garter, and eldest Son to James Duke of Ormond, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland.

. 100. On the North side of this The Lady Arabella Stuart* Cousin-German to
King James.
Chapel is another spacious Vault wherein are these following persons
interred, viz. The Lady Arabella Stuart, whose Coffin, wherein her Corpse do
repose, is the furthest next the North Wall of this Vault, much shattered and
broken, that her Skull and great part of her body may be seen, she was only
Daughter and Heir to Charles Earl of Levenox, (by the Daughter of Sir William
Cavendish Knight,) and Cousin-German to King James.

. 101. Upon this of the Lady Arabella Mary Queen of Scots, Mother to King James.
is placed the Chest or Leaden Coffin, wherein Mary Queen of Scots, (Mother to
King James, who was decollated by Queen Elizabeth, and was brought from
Peterborough hither, Vid.. 84.
as I have said before) lies intombed.

. 102. Nigher the entrance of the Henry Duke of Gloucester, Brother to King
Charles II.
Vault by the same North Wall is the leaden Chest of Henry Duke of Gloucester,
fourth Son to King Charles I. and youngest Brother to his present Majesty, who
died of the small Pox, soon after the restoration, anno 1660.

. 103. On this Coffin of Prince Henry (...)k* (...) Son to King James.
Henry Duke of Gloucester lies Henry Frederick his Uncle, ^ho was the ^^dest Son
of King James, and Prince of Wales, the l^^^ or case wherein ^is body ^^
unwrapped is shaped after the figure of his body, and so to be distinguished
^^om the rest of the Coffins i^ the (...) Vault; he died in the (...) bowels
ar^ buried in (...) of the Vault, a^ the head of the Princess Royal, as may be
(...) by an Inscription graven thereon in (...)

. 104. On the South side of this (...)s o^ (...) v^d* (...)
(...), at the lower and, is a large (...) of Lead, covered with black Velvet,
wherein the Corpse of Anne (first Wife to his Royal Highness, Prince James Duke
of York, only Brother and Heir now living of his present Majesty,) do repose;
She was Daughter to Edward Earl of Clarendon, and sometime Lord Chancellor of
England, who died at her Palace of St. James's on the last day of March, anno
1671. in the 34 year of her age.

. 105. In the midst of the Vault, ^li^. Princess of Orange, eldest Sister to K.
Charles II.
between the Lady Arabella Stuart and this Anne Duchess of York, lies the
Princess Royal (in a large Coffin or Chest of Lead) the Lady Elizabeth, eldest
Sister to his present Majesty, and Mother to Henry now Prince of Orange and
Nassau; She died on the twenty first of December, anno 1660.

. 106. On this is another leaden (...) Queen of ^oh^mia, Daughter to King
James. vid. Ep. 93.
Chest for the Princess Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia; she was the only Daughter
of King James the sixth of Scotland, and first of England, Wife to Frederick
King of Bohemia, and Prince Elector of the Empire, Sister to King Charles the
First, A^^^ to his present Majesty, and Mother to his Highness Prince Rupert,
Count Palatine, and Duke of Cumberland; she died at Leicester-house on the
thirteenth of Februarr, anno 1661. in the sixty sixth year of her age.

. 107. Charles Duke of Cambridge, Charles Duke of Cambridge, Nephew to K.
Charles II. vid. Ep 95.
eldest Son to his Royal Highness James Duke of York, (only Brother to his
present Majesty) by Anne his first Wife, who died at Whitehall on the fifth day
of May, anno 1661. aged seven months, his leaden Coffin covered with black
Velvet is placed on his great Aunts the Queen of Bohemia.

. 108. James Duke of Cambridge, James Duke of Cambridge, Nephew to K. Charles
II. vid. Ep. 96.
second Son to James Duke of York, etc. by Anne his first Lady, who died at
Richmond on the twentieth day of June, anno 1667. being four years old, whose
leaden Coffin, covered with Velvet, is likewise placed on his great Aunts the
Queen of Bohemia.

. 109. Charles Duke of Kendale, Charles Duke of Kendale, Nephew to King Charles
II. vid. Ep. 79.
third Son of James Duke of York, etc. by Anne his Wife, who died at St.
James's the twenty second of March, anno 1677. b^ing scarce a year old; he lies
in a Chest of lead, covered with Velvet, on his Uncle Henry Duke of Gloucester.

. 110. Edgar Duke of Cambridge, Edgar Duke of Cambridge, Nephew to K. Charles
II. vid. Ep. 98.
fourth Son of James Duke of York, etc. by the Lady Anne his first Wife, who
died at Richmond on the eighth day of June, anno 1671. and in the fourth year
of his age; he lies in a leaden Coffin covered with Velvet on that of the Lady
Anne Hyde his mother.

. 111. Charles Duke of Cambridge, Charles Duke of Cambridge, Nephew to K.
Charles II. vid. Ep. 99.
fifth Son of James Duke of York, etc. by the Lady Mary D'Este his second Wife,
who died at St. James on the twelfth day of December, anno 1677. aged only
thirty five days, he lies in a leaden Coffin, covered with Velvet, on the feet
of his great great Grandmother Mary Queen of Scots.

. 112. The Lady Henrietta, third The Lady Henrietta, Niece to King Charles II.
vid. Ep. 100.
Daughter of James Duke of York, etc. by Anne his first Wife, who died at St.
James's on the fifteenth day of November, anno 1669. aged about ten months, and
is deposited in a leaden Coffin, covered with black Velvet, on her great Uncle
Henry Frederick Prince of Wales.

. 113. The Lady Katharine, fourth The Lady Katharine Niece to K* Charles II
vid* Ep. 101.
Daughter of James Duke of York, etc. and Anne his Duchess, who died at St.
James's on the fifth day of December, anno 1671. scarce ten months old, and is
placed in a leaden Coffin, covered with Velvet, on that of her Mothers the Lady
Anne Duchess of York.

. 114. Katharina Laura, eldest The Lady Katharine Laura, Niece to King Charles
II. vid. Ep. 102.
Daughter of James Duke of York, etc. by his second Wife the Lady Mary D'Este,
who died at St. James's on the third day of October, anno 1675. scarce nine
months old, her Coffin of Lead, covered with Velvet, is set on that of her
Sister the Lady Katharine.

. 115. Isabella, the sixth Daughter The Lady Isabe^^a, Niece to K. Charles II.
vid. Ep. 103.
of James Duke of York, etc. by his second Wife the Lady Mary D'Este, who died
at St. James's the second day of March, anno 1680. in the fifth year of her
age, and her leaden Coffin, covered with Velvet, is placed on the Area, by the
side of her Uncle Prince Henry Duke of Gloucester.

. 116. Note that at the feet of most of these leaden Chests, except those of
the smallest Children, are several Urns or Pots of lead, covered with black
Velvet, wherein their bowels are conserved.

. 117. There is a small Vault adjoining Charles Earl of Levenox* Uncle to King
James. vid. Ep. 84.
to this, wherein are only two Coffins of lead, the one on the other, the
undermost of which is very much shaken and decayed, so that the Skeleton and
perched skin of the interred is to be seen, being the remains of Charles Earl
of Levenox, youngest Son to Matthew Earl of Levenox, and the Lady Margaret his
Countess, Grandfather and Grandmother to King James, he died anno 1576.

. 118. In the other Capsula or Chest Margaret Countess of Levenox, Grandmother
to King James. vid.. 81. and Ep. 84.
of lead is the body of the aforesaid Margaret, Mother to Charles Earl of
Levenox, and Grandmother to King James, of whom I have said more in the
description of her Monument, under which this Vault is made; she died anno 1578.

. 119. Coming down the stairs of this Chapel the same way we went up, the
first place we meet with on the North side is

The Chapel of St. Paul,
Wherein are these Monuments, viz. on Lodowick Robsert Lord Bourchier.
the right hand of the door as you come in is an ancient Tomb of Freestone, on
whose Pedestal are several Coats of Arms, carved and encompassed with the
Garter, on each side of which are two Lions sejant, and as many Eagles, each of
them supporting a Standard or Banner with the Arms of Robsert and Bourchier,
with quarterings: On this Pedestal are two Coffins of lead, enclosed and
covered with Wainscote and Oaken boards of a coped form, under a low arched
Canopy of the foregoing stone, without any Inscriptition, Table, or Epitaph,
but therein are deposited the remains of Lodowick Robsert Lord Bourchier and
his Lady. This Lodowick, or Lewis, being an Alien, born in the parts of
Henault, and succeeding Sir John Robsert Knight in the Captainship of St.
Savior le Viscount in Normandy was made a free Denizen of this Realm in the
sixth of Henry V. created Knight of the Bath in the eighth year of his Reign,
and was by Letters Patents at Trois in Champaine constituted the Kings
Standard Bearer, and afterward Knight of the Garter, and one of the Executors
to that King. He married Elizabeth Daughter and Heir to Bartholomew Lord
Bourchier, Widow of Sir Hugh Stafford Knight, and had summons to Parliament by
the Title of Lord Bourchier in the 3, 4, 5, and 7 of Henry VI. he died anno
1431. and had this Monument erected to his memory* being adorned and set out
with many Arms of the Nobility both of England and Henault, and several
Sentences intermixed in letters of Gold.

. 120. On the South side of this Anne Lady Cottington. vid. Ep. 11^.
Chapel, next to this Tomb of Lodowick Robsert Lord Bourchier, is a stately
Monument, above twenty six foot high, of admirable Workmanship, composed of
Lydian, Alabaster, and Touch: The joining of the Compartments, with the
Capitals and Pedestals of the Ionick and Corinthian Columns are framed of
artificial wrought Brass. The demi Effigies of a Lady is placed toward the
top, of curious Statuary work of the same brass, gilt with Gold, within an Oval
of black Marble, below which is an Altar of the same stone sweetly carved, with
other adornments, and was erected by that Loyal Gentleman Francis Lord
Cottington Baron of Hanworth, to remember the no less honorable and virtuous
Lady Anne his Wife, who was the Daughter of Sir William Meredith of the County
of Denbigh Knight, and dying on the twenty second day of February, anno 1633,
in the thirty third year of her age was buried here, leaving Issue behind her,
only one Son and one Daughter, viz. Charles, and Anne.

. 121. At the foot of this Monument Francis Cottington Baron of Hanworth, and
Lord Treasurer of England. vid. Ep* 119.
is another noble Tomb, lately erected for her Husband, the Lord Francis
Cottington of Hanworth, where on a Table of black Marble, supported by six
Columns of Lydian and white, placed on an ascent of three Greeses, and
environed with a Grate, lies his Statue at full proportion, on a Quilt, with
the Staff of his Office, and covered with a Cloak, all well designed and
insculpt in fretted Alabaster. He was Chancellor of the Exchequer to King
Charles I. Master of his Court of Wards, Constable of the Tower, Lord High
Treasurer of England, and twice Ambassador in Spain, where at length he died
in Exile, soon after the bloody Rebels had murdered his Royal Master, and
usurped his Inheritance; but by the pious care of that worthy Gentleman, his
Nephew and Heir Charles Cottington Esquire, his body was in the year 1679
translated from Valadolid in Spain, where he died, and honorably interred
here, who gratefully erected this Monument to his memory.

. 122. More to the Southeast Angle Frances Countess of Sussex. vid. Ep. 120.
of this Chapel is another noble Monument, twenty four foot in height, of
Alabaster, Marble, and diverse colored stones, set about with Corinthian
Pillars, supporting a stately Canopy, all curiously wrought, and gilt with
Gold, under which lies the Image of a Lady at full proportion, in her Robes of
Estate, painted and gilt with Gold; for Frances Countess of Sussex, who was the
Daughter of Sir William Sydney Knight, and Wife to Thomas Ratcliff Earl of
Sussex; whose bounteous liberality to all sorts of people* but especially to
Schools of learning and learned men, has gained her a never dying fame; she
died, and was buried here, anno 1589. with this comely Monument erected over
her.

. 123. Next to this, against the East Dudley Carleton Viscount Dorcester. vid.
Ep. 120.
Wall, is a well composed plain Monument of black and white Marble, having but
an half Canopy, supported by Dorick Pillars, with the Image of a man in his
robes of Estate and Viscounts Coronet, leaning on a Pedestal, all formed of the
like black and white Marble, for a remembrance of Sir. Dudley Carleton Knight,
Baron of Imbercourt, and Viscount Dorcester, who (after many employments, and
frequent Embassies, wherein he had served his Prince with great faithfulness
and honor) died at Westminster, and was buried here anno 1631.

. 124. Beyond which is a curious Sir Thomas Bromley Knight. Lord Chancellor of
England. vid. Ep. 123.
Monument, with his Image cumbant, in an embroydered Gown, at full proportion,
his feet supported by a Pheasant Cock, and on the Pedestal the Images of four
Sons, and as many Daughters, all on their knees, covered with a large Canopy,
supported by Corinthian Pillars, adorned with Arms, of Alabaster, Marble, and
diverse colored stones, painted, and gilt with Gold, for Sir Thomas Bromley
Knight, Lord High Chancellor of England, and Privy Counselor to Queen
Elizabeth, who died in the year 1587.

. 125. By this, on the North Wall, Sir James Fullerton Knight. vid. Ep. 124.
is another neat Tomb of black and white Marble, adorned with Arms, with a
Pedestal of the same, whereon are placed the Images of a Knight in Armor,
cumbant on a Quilt, with his Lady, whose feet are supported by a Bear couchant,
all of white polished Marble, with an Epitaph informing us, that Sir James
Fullerton Knight, Gentleman of the Bedchamber to King Charles I. lies there
interred; but the blank Table, whereon (if I conjecture aright) his Ladies
Epitaph was designed to be ingraved, leaves us in the dark concerning her, and
has been neglected by those who had the charge thereof.

. 126. There is a more stately Monument Sir John Puckering Knight. Lord Keeper.
vid. Ep. 122.
on this North side, about twenty four foot in height, on whose Pedestal of
white Marble lie the Images at full proportion of Sir John Puckering, in his
embroydered Gown, and his Lady, with eight lesser Figures of three Boys, and
five Girls kneeling at the foot of the said Pedestal, all of various colored
Alabaster, painted, and gilt with Gold, with a large Canopy overshadowing them,
finely wrought, and supported by Corinthian Pillars, with other Statues of the
Purse and Macebearer, Coats of Arms, Pyramids, and adornments of the same
colored Alabaster, Lydian, Porphyry, and white Marble. It Is Sir John was Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and Privy Counselor to Queen Elizabeth,
who died anno 1596.

. 127. On the Pavement of this Sir Giles Dawbney Knight of the Garter. vid. Ep.
117.
Chapel is a noble raised Tomb, encompassed with an iron Grate, where on a
curious Pedestal of Alabaster, set about with Arms, painted with Gold and blue,
are the Images of a Knight in Armor, with the Collar, Jewel, and Mantle of the
Garter, reposing his head on his Helm, and supporting his feet by a Lion
couchant; and his Lady, all of white pollished Marble, under which lies buried
Sir Giles Dawbney Knight, who was Lord Lieutenant of Calis, Lord Chamberlain to
King Henry VII. Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and Father to
Henry Lord Dawbney, the first and last of that surname, Earl of Bridgwater,
with Elizabeth his Wife, descended from the ancient Family of the Arundels in
Cornwall; he died anno 1507. and she 1500.

. 128. There lie buried likewise in this Chapel Charles de Granada a noble
Charles de Granada. Eliz. Comitiss. Ormond.
Spaniard; Elizabeth Countess of Ormond, Daughter of Thomas Lord Barkley; John
Viscount Thurles, a John Son of Tho. Com. Or^.
Child of Thomas Earl of Ormond, by the Daugter of John Lord Sheffield; Michael
Bishop of St. Asaph; Sir Arthur Michael Episc. St. Asaph. The Lady Gorge.
Katharine Com. Northumberland.
Gorge's Lady, who was the Daughter and Heir of Henry Howard Viscount Bindon:
And Katharine Countess of Northumberland, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of
John Nevil Lord Latimer, who was the Wife of Thomas Percy Earl of
Northumberland, none of them having any Monuments, Tombs, or Grave-stones. From
this you are led to

The Chapel of St. John Baptist,
. 129. Where on the right hand of the Entrance, along the South side, are
George Flaccet Abbot of Westminster.
three ancient Marble Tombs, and a stone Coffin: The first is a plain raised
Tomb of gray Marble, about a yard from the ground, Canopied with a comely Arch
of Freestone, adorned with Arms and Masons-work, which was made for George
Flaccet Abbot of this Monastery, but the Inscription and Epitaph round the
ledge is torn away.

. 130. On this Tomb is placed a stone Coffin, with a lid of the same, and a
Crucifix carved thereon, wherein is yet to be seen the bones and Skelliton of
an embalmed body, much defaced, (as it should seem by the removal of this
Capsula from some other place,) but whose body it is that lies therein I will
not aver, as meeting no evidence sufficient to confirm it. But that it cannot
be the body of Humfrey de Bohun, Earl of Essex, Hereford, and Northampton, who
was Lord High Constable of England, and the last of that name, (as the Officers
of the Church have received it by Tradition) is evident, for that he was buried
with his Father, Grandfather, and great-Grandfather, in the Abbey Church of
Walden in Essex, the ancient repository of that noble Family, as may be seen
more at large in the Monasticon Anglicanum, and in Sir William Dugdales
Baronage of England; yet two of his Children, which he had by Elizabeth Hugh de
Bohun and Mary his Sister, Grandchildren to Edward I.
the Daughter of Edward I. were buried here, viz. Hugh and Mary. And there is a
little Monument against the North Wall of gray Marble, under that of Thomas
Curey, erected for them, from whence this story might take its original; I am
inclined therefore to think that it were not improbable to believe it the body
of Thomas Mylling, Tho. Mylling Abbot of Westminster, and Bishop of Hereford.
Abbot of Westminster, and Bishop of Hereford, Privy Counselor, and Favorite
to King Edward IV. and Godfather to his eldest Son Prince Edward, who dying
about the year 1493. was buried in the midst of this Chapel, and that when the
large Vault and Tomb (which takes up a great part of the Area of this Chapel)
was made for Thomas Earl of Exeter, and his Ladies; this Coffin might be taken
up and set by here; and the rather for that in Camdens Collection of this
Churches Monuments, which were taken before the erection of the said Tomb,
there is no mention of such a Coffin as this, which had it been here in his
time, I am persuaded he would not have overpassed without some observation
thereon. Yet further, if we diligently take notice of the Coffin it self, with
the form of the Cross on the Cover, and compare it with many more of the like
fashion, both at Canterbury, York, Durham, etc. wherein are conserved the
bodies of some Bishop or Archbishop, it will add to the confirmation of this
opinion; but I submit to the more Judicious in Antiquities of this nature.

. 131. The next to George Flaccet Thomas Ruthall, Bishop of Durham.
Abbot of Westminster lies Thomas Ruthall, Bishop of Durham, (who was Secretary
to King Henry VII. and died in the year 1524.) in a comely Tomb of Freestone,
with an arched Canopy, variously adorned, and set forth with Arms, both of his
See and Family, under which is his Image in his Episcopal habit, with a Miter
on his head, and a Pastoral staff in his left hand, placing his feet on the
back of a Lion couchant, but there is no Epitaph or Table belonging thereto.

* 132. At whose feet is the third William de Collchester, Abbot of Westminster
ancient Monument, without a Canopy, or any Inscription, where, on a raised
Pedestal of Freestone, lies the Image of a Mitered Abbot, in the Vestments
wherein he was accustomed to sing or say Mass, with a Miter on his head, a
Crosier staff in his hand, and a Ring on his finger, a Spaniel Dog at his feet,
and two Angels supporting his Pillow, all of the same Freestone, curiously
ingraved, under which William de Colchester, Abbot of Westminster is said to be
interred.

. 133. Against the East Wall of this Henry Carey, Lord Hunsdon, Cousin Germ. to
Q. Eliz. vid. Ep. 129.
Chapel is a most magnificent and stately Monument, about twenty six foot
high, where by an ascent of Greeses of black and white Marble you are led to a
curious fashioned Tomb of an admirable composure, framed of the Porphyry, the
Lydian, Touch, Serpentine, Agate, Alabaster, and diverse colored stones, finely
wrought, and adorned with Gold: At the four corners whereof are as many
Pyramids of black Marble, Supported by Pedestals of the same, whereon are
placed threescore and four Shields of Arms, painted in their proper colors,
with the names, matches, and quarterings belonging to that noble Family. These
Pyramids and the Tomb are overshadowed by a glorious arched Canopy, every where
beset with Coats of Arms, Golden Slips, Branches, Pomegranates, Roses, etc.
with other flory and fruitwork, very pleasant and delightful to behold; on each
side of the outward part of this arched Canopy are two Magnificent Pyramids of
black Marble, adorned with Shields, Banners, Pennons, Cannon, Culverins,
Musquetons, Halberts, Half-pikes, Drums, Fifes, with other Instruments of War,
and warlike Trophies, carved on the same Marble, and gilt with Gold. Over the
Canopy are no less than twenty several Corinthian Columns, supporting and
composing various forms of Architecture diversely placed on the noble Arch,
whereby the whole becomes very beautiful and magnificent; which was erected
here by George Carey Lord Hunsdon (Governor of the Isle of Wight, Knight of
the Garter, Privy Counselor and Lord High Chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth) for
his Father the Lord Henry Carey Baron of Hunsdon, (Governor of Berwick,
Captain of the Gentlemen Pensioners, Justice in Eure on this side Trent, Knight
of the most noble Order of the Garter, Lord High Chamberlain, Privy
Counselor, and Cousin German to Queen Elizabeth, who died in the 71 year of
his age, anno 1596.) and for his Mother the Lady Anne, Daughter of Sir Thomas
Morgan Knight.

. 134. By these two illustrious persons, Thomas Carey, Son to the Earl of
Monmouth. vid. Ep. 127.
in the same Vault, lies Thomas Carey, second Son to Robert Lord Carey of
Leppington, Earl of Monmouth, and Brother to the last Earl of that surname; he
was of the Privy Chamber to King Charles I. and greatly favored by him, but
upon the death of that Royal Martyr he fell suddenly sick, and died in the
thirty third year of his age, having a little Monument of white Marble against
the North-east Angle of this Chapel, placed of late to his memory.

. 135. Next to which, directly Coll. Edward Popham.
North, are two large Statues at full proportion; The one, of a man in Armor;
The other, of a Lady in a Cypress Veil, of white Marble, both reposing
themselves, and resting their arms on a Table of black, under a Canopy, the
Curtains withdrawn, with an Achievement of Arms, all of curious wrought
Alabaster, but there is no Inscription or Epitaph, which was ordered to be
defaced upon the restoration of his Sacred Majesty* by reason it was set up
for one Colonel Edward Popham, an opposer of his Majesty's undoubted right to
his Kingdoms, but by the intercession of some of his Ladies Friends, who had
eminently served his Majesty* the stone was only turned whereon the Epitaph was
insculpt, and the Monument permitted to remain, Sed -- Nigro carbone notanda.

. 136. On the left hand of the Sir Thomas Vaughan Knight. Treasurer. vid. Ep. ^^5.
door of this Chapel, toward the West, being the first Tomb on that side, you
have under an ancient large Arch in the Wall a little Monument of gray Marble,
on which is portraitured and finely engraven the Effigies of a Knight in
Armor, reposing his head on his Helm, crested with an Unicorns head, coped and
crowned, and at each of the four corners a Coat of Arms insculpt of the same
brass, with several Caskets and Coffers, with an Inscription in part remaining
round the Verge of the Tomb, whereby may be gathered, that Sir Thomas Vaughan
Knight, who was first Chamberlain to Edward Prince of Wales, and afterward
Treasurer to his Father King Edward IV. lies underneath.

. 137. Here is a most noble Tomb Thomas Cecill, Earl of Exeter. vid. Ep. 126.
in the midst of this Chapel, raised about five foot from the Pavement of
black and white Marble, the Pedestal set about with fourteen Escutcheons of
Arms, and on the top the Images at full proportion of an Earl in his Parliament
Robes, with the Collar, George, and Mantle of the Garter, and his Countess in
her Robes of Estate, with a Garb supported by two Lions rampant, placed on a
Torce under the feet of the Earl, and a Griffon passant under those of his
Countess, all of the aforesaid white Marble, admirably polished, and curiously
engraven with an Epitaph round the Verge, expressing that Thomas Cecill, Earl
of Exeter, and Baron Burleigh, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter,
and Privy Counselor to King James, lies there interred, together with his
first Wife (whose Image that is on the Tomb) the Lady Dorothy Nevill, Daughter
and one of the Coheirs of the Lord Latimer: As likewise his second Wife the
Lady Frances Bridges, of the noble Family of the Lord Shandois, whose Effigies
is not here, though there be left room on the North side of her Husband, as it
should seem for that purpose.

. 138. On the South side, by the Charles Howard, Son to the Earl of Carlisle.
vid. Ep. 1^8.
foot of this Tomb, at the head ^f the entrance into the Lord Hunsdons Vault,
was Charles Howard, a Child of two years old, interred anno 1670. having a
little stone placed over his Grave, he was the third Son of Charles Earl of
Carlisle.

. 139. Coming from this Chapel Juliana Crew. vid. Ep. 14^.
of St. John Baptist (on each side the entrance) are two little Monuments of
Alabaster, black and white Marble, with some small Figures thereon, adorned
with Arms, and Epitaphs. That on the West for Juliana Crew, Daughter of Sir
Randolph Crew Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England, ^y Juliana Clepesby his
Lady, who was the Daughter and Heir to that ancient Family in the County of
Norfolk. She died on the twelfth of April, anno 1621.

. 140. The other on the East for the Lady Jane Crew, one of the Daughters The
Lady Jane Crew. vid. Ep. 150.
and Coheirs of Sir John Pultney of Mistertonpultney in the County of
Leicester Knight, and Wife of Sir Clyppesby Crew Knight, she died in the
thirtieth year of her age, anno 1639. and had this little Monument erected by
her Husband for her. Passing from these Monuments, we are led to

The Chapel of St. Erasmus,
. 141. Where by opening a door on your right hand you are let into the
undercroft, being something dark by reason of the vicinity of the houses
erected in the Churchyard, almost adjoining to the Windows: Yet you may see a
plain Marble Table, supported by four small Pillars of wrought Brass, and fixed
to a Pedestal of the same stone, where formerly had been placed the Skeleton in
his shroud, curiously insculpt, and composed of Alabaster, with an Epitaph
circumscribed, and several Verses thereon, which are all now taken away, except
the Table, etc. under which was John Islip, Abbot of Westminster interred. John
Islip, Abbot of Westminster. vid.. 12.
The fame of this Abbot, with his benefactions to this Church, I have
discoursed on elsewhere, yet I forgot to tell you how he designed a stately
Tower and Lanthorn, with a goodly Chime of Bells to be placed therein, over the
midst of the Cross of this Church; but finding the foundation of the old
Pillars too weak to support his Structure, the Bells were set up in one of the
Western Towers, where they remain to this day: Moreover he caused this Chapel
to be made and dedicated to St. Erasmus, and adorned the Roof with curious
Masons work, and neat Carvings, with several devices and intaglio's, and many
rebus's (a fancy much in esteem about that time) alluding to his name, as
sometimes you have one slipping boughs in a tree; otherwhile, an Eye with a
slip of a tree; and again, a Youth slipping from a bough of a tree, with a
Label proceeding out of his mouth with I slip thereon, and the like. The whole
Vault being interlaced with his Coat of Arms, (viz. Erm* a Fess between three
Weesels Gules,) and such like devices, as are the Windows in the Oratory above
full of the same. But before we take our leaves of this obscure place, (yet
well deserving our pains of seeing,) we must not let pass the memory of a noble
Gentleman who has a Monument placed here for him.

. 142. Against the East Wall whereof Sir Christopher Hatton, Knight of the
Bath. vid. Ep. 130, 131.
is a comely Tomb of black and white Marble, on whose Pedestal is the Epitaph,
and on one side the Image of a Knight in Armor, lively representing the
Original, with his Lady on the other, excellently figured in curious wrought
Alabaster, adorned with weeping Cupids, and mournful Hymen's, extinguishing
their Torches, with Arms and Paintings, which was erected by the Lady Alice,
Daughter of Thomas Fanshaw Esquire, the Kings Remembrancer, for Sir Christopher
Hatton Knight of the Bath her Husband, Son and Heir to Sir Christopher, Lord
High Chancellor of England, by whom she had twelve Children. He died on the
tenth day of September 1619. There is a small Table of black and white Marble
against the Wall on the East side of this Chapel, nigh the Windows that let in
light from the South side of the Church, containing a further Encomium of this
worthy Gentleman.

. 143. There was likewise buried The Lady Anne, Duchess of York
daughter-in-law to Edward IV.
here without any Tomb or Gravestone the Lady Anne, sole Daughter and Heir of
John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, Wife to Richard Duke of York, Son to King Edward
IV. but she dying without Issue, the Dukedom of Norfolk came to the Family of
the Howards.

. 144. Ascending from this undercroft by a pair of stone Stairs into the
Oratory it self, wherein nothing remains but some of the rebus's in the
Windows, as I have said before: It being at present made use of before. It
being at present made use on as a repository for those Statues of our Kings,
Queens, and Princes of the Blood Royal, which lay on their Cenotaphs when their
Exequies were celebrated in this Church; being here preserved in their Robes of
Estate with their Royal Habiliments and other Ensigns of Majesty, in Presses of
Wainscote, viz. Edward III. King of England, and Philippa his Queen, Henry V.
and Queen Katherine, Henry VII. with Elizabeth his Queen, and Henry Frederick
Prince of Wales in one Press, with Queen Elizabeth, King James, and Queen Anne
his Wife in the other. Descending again by the same Stairs, and leaving this
Chapel on our right hand, we cross over the Area to a wooden frame of four or
five steps, that brings us into that other most noted Chapel of this Church,
viz.

The Chapel of St. Edward the Confessor.
. 145. Because his body was translated hither from the old Church of his own
erection to this of King Henry III. where he had a new Tomb and Shrine (covered
with Gold,) built for him in the midst of this Chapel by the same King, a
great part thereof to be seen at this day. It is likewise called the Chapel of
the Kings, for that many of our Kings and Queens, until the time of King Henry
VII. were accustomed to be buried therein: But before I shall enter into a
description of any of their particular Monuments, I shall take leave to say
something concerning this religious King, and the Feretory made here for him.

. 146. He was the Son of King S. Edward the Confessor, his death, and Shrine.
vid.. 5, 6,
Etheldred and Emma his Queen, who (being long deprived of his Inheritance by
the usurpation of Canutus, Harold, and Hardi^nute the Danes, that had murdered
his Brother Edmund, and occasioned his flight into Normandy for his
protection,) at leng^h was restored to his Crown and Kingdom, where he became
so eminent for his sanctity, and remarkable for his holiness, that he was
observed to be the first who obtained that extraordinary privilege from God in
curing a disease of swelling in peoples throats, which was afterward thereof
called the Kings Evil, and has since been derived to all his Successors. He
was so compassionate and pitiful toward his Subjects sufferings and
oppressions, that he remitted the annual Pension of 4000 pounds, called
Danegelt, to the English Legates; So chaste, that he is said not carnally known
his own Wife; and so patient, that he was scarce ever seen to be angry. But
after his death, the many infirmities and cures of all sorts of diseases, which
are reported immediately to have followed at his Tomb, was the chief motive
that persuaded William the Conqueror to adorn his Sepulcher with a rich
Shrine, sparkling with Gold and Silver. Six and thirty years after this, his
body being taken out of the ground, and being found entire and incorrupt, with
his joints as flexible as if they had been alive, and his Garments preserving
their former freshness, struck such an admiration in the beholders, that every
where the news thereof ^ung for a miracle, and therefore his body on the
thirteenth day of October, in the year 1163, was translated by Thomas of Becket
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the presence of King Henry II. and another costly
Shrine prepared wherein to place it; and on which day he was solemnly Canonized
by the Bull of Pope Alexander III.

. 147. After this, upon the rebuilding of this Church by King Henry III. his
body was removed out of the old Church of his own erection into this Chapel
prepared for him, on which day a magnificent and Royal Feast was kept in the
Palace hard by as a commemoration of it, and a third Shrine prepared whereon to
place the other two and enclose his sacred body, part whereof is remaining at
this day. The upper part of this Feretory which we now behold was all covered
with Plate of the purest Gold, so artificially wrought by the most cunning
Goldsmiths, and set about with precious stones, that it amounted to an
inestimable value, the under part (which is still in being) was framed by the
command, and at the charge of Richard de vid.. 23.
Ware, Abbot of Westminster, with a part of those stones, and by the same
workmen, which composed the Pavement before the High Altar, curiously adorning
it with chequered and fine shining colored Marble: On each side the Base of
this Feretory are three small Niches divided by Serpentine Columns, supporting
the Arches for the sick and infirm to repose themselves when they came hither;
and I have seen a large Chest or Coffin, bound about with strong bands of Iron,
lying about the midst of the inside of this Shrine, where I suppose the body of
that pious King may still be conserved. There is now an Inscription in Letters
of a late hand, gilt with Gold round the midst of this Marble frame, which you
will find among the Monumental vid. Ep. 109.
Inscriptions, but heretofore there were other Verses engraven on the same
stone after this manner:

Anno milleno Domini, cum septuageno,
Et bis centeno, cum completo quasi deno,
Hoc opus est factum, quod Petrus duxit in actum,
Romanus civis, homo, causam noscere si vis
Rex fuit Henricus sancti praesentis amicus.
The Floor of this Chapel was likewise at the same time, and by the same
Abbot, inlayed with the like stones, a great part remaining though something
defaced at this day.

. 148. Under which Pavement, on Editha Queen of England.
the North side the Feretory of St. Edward, lies Editha Queen of England his
Wife, who was Daughter to Goodwin that treacherous Earl of Kent, she was a Lady
of a singular piety and sweet modesty, died in the year 1074. but has no
Monument or Gravestone erected for her.

. 149. On the South side the same Matilda Queen of England.
Shrine, under this beauteous Floor, was Matilda Queen of England interred; she
was the Daughter of Malcolme King of Scots, and Wife to King Henry I. who
brought unto him diverse Children, viz. William, Richard, and Mary, who perished
by shipwreck, and Maud the Empress, Wife to Henry V. Emperor, and Mother to
King Hen. II. of England. This Queen would every day in Lent walk from her
Palace to this Church barefoot and barelegged, and wearing a Garment of hair;
she would wash and kiss the feet of the poorest people; and give them Alms; she
founded the Priory of Christchurch without Aldgate, and the Hospital of St.
Giles in the Fields nigh London; she built the Bridge at Stratford over the
River Lea, and repaired many of the Highways, and afterward anno 1118. dying,
was buried in this Church without any Tomb or Monument.

. 150. Under the same Pavement Two Children of William de Valence, Earl of
Pembroke.
was John and Margaret, two Children of William de Valence Earl of Pembroke,
interred, having two small stones of gray Marble placed over them without any
Inscription, between the Shrine of St. Edward and the Tomb of King Henry V.

. 151. Henry, Son to Richard King Henry, Grandson to John K. of England.
of the Romans, and Earl of Cornwall, (who was the Second Son of John King of
England) returning from the Holy Land, whilst he was hearing Mass at Viterbium
in Italy, was slain by Simon and Guido, Sons to Simon Mountford, Earl of
Leicester, Anno 1269. his body being buried in the Monastery of Hailes, but his
heart placed in the Coffin with St. Edward.

. 152. On this Pavement is a large Tho. of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, Son to
King Edward III.
gray Marble stone, beautifully adorned and set about with fine Imagery work in
curious wrought Brass, between the Shrine of St. Edward and the Tomb of
Philippa his Mother, the Inscription being torn away, under which lies Thomas
of Woodstock, (sixth Son to King Edward III.) who was Earl of Buckingham, and
Duke of Gloucester, a man of great Nobility and Renown, whom Richard II. his
Nephew betrayed, and afterward caused him to be barbarously murdered at
Calis, anno 1397. He married Elenore, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of
Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, (who lies buried in St. Edmunds
Vid.. 59.
Chapel, as I have declared before) by whom he had Issue one Son, and three
Daughters, viz. Humphrey, who died without Issue; Anne, who was Wife of Edmund
Earl of Stafford; Joan, who died unmarried; and Isabel, who was a Nun at the
Minoresses in London.

. 153. Toward the North side of John Waltham, Bishop of Salisbury, and Ld*
Treasurer.
this Chapel at the foot of the Tomb of King Edward I. is another large gray
Marble stone, fairly set forth with fine ingraved brass, whereon is the
Effigies of a Bishop in the Vestments of his Office, with a Miter on his head,
and a Pastoral staff in his right hand, with the Pictures of the twelve
Apostles, divided, and embroidered on either side of him, and other artificial
Imagery work about it; the Epitaph round the Ledge being worn away, but was
here placed by the command of Richard II. (whose Favorite he was) to the
memory of John Waltham the twenty sixth Bishop of Salisbury, anno 1388. He was
constituted Master of the Rolls 1382, then Keeper of the Privy Seal, and in
the year 1391. Lord High Treasurer of England, in which Office he continued
until his death, which happened in the year 1395. and was buried in this place.

. 154. Here is likewise on the West The Chair of Coronations.
side the Feretory of St. Edward, hard by the Skreen that separates the High
Altar from this Chapel, the Chair or Seat whereon our Kings are accustomed to
be Inaugurated and Crowned. It appears extremely ancient both in its fashion
and materials, being made of solid, hard, firm wood, with a back and sides of
the same, under whose Seat, supported by four Lions curiously carved instead of
feet, lies that so much famed stone whereon the Patriarch Jacob is said to have
reposed his head in the Plain of Luza, it is of a bluish steel-like color,
mixed with some eyes of red, triangular rather than any other form, and being
broken resembles a Peble. The ruins of the Chair it self shows that heretofore
it has been fairly painted, and gilt with Gold, but at present it is much
defaced; you have a small Table of Verses hanging Vid. Ep. 116.
thereon, but by reason they give us little light concerning the ancient story
of this stone and Chair, I shall trouble your patience with a short Narrative
thereof, which is reported to have been first in Gallicia of Spain at
Brigantia; where Gathel King of Scots there sat on it as his Throne. Thence it
was brought into Ireland by Simon Brech, first King of Scots, who transplanted
it into that Isle about seven hundred years before Christ. It was brought out
of Ireland by King Ferguze, abut 370 years afterward, into Scotland; and in
the year of our Lord 850 was placed at the Abbey of Scone (in the Sheriffdom of
Perth) by King Kenneth, where the Coronation of his Ancestors usually had been
celebrated, who caused this Distich to be engraven upon it, Ni fallat vatum,
etc.

And to be enclosed in this wooden Chair; Afterward when Edward I. King of
England had overcome John Balliol King of Scots in many Battles, he returned in
the year 1297 to England, bringing with him great Spoils, among which this
Throne, with the Crown and Scepter of their Kings, were likewise taken, and
offered by him here at the Shrine of St. Edward, and ever since has been made
use on as the accustomed Throne whereon our Kings do usually ^it on the days of
their Inauguration. As to the Prophecy insculpt on this Stone, it seems
happily to be accomplished sometime since, when James VI. King of Scotland came
to the Imperial Crown of England, whose Grandson and Heir, King Charles II. our
present Sovereign, now enjoys it.

. 195. The North side of this Edw. I. King of England. vid. Ep. 10^.
Chapel is taken up by three noble Tombs; That toward the West is a plain
Monument of gray Marble, raised about five foot from the ground, being on the
right hand of the entrance, without any Inscription or adornments, more than a
Table of Verses, hanging by to inform you, that Edward I. King of England, Duke
of Normandy and Aquitaine, Lord of Ireland, and Son to King Henry III. (by
Eleanor, Daughter to the Earl of Province) lies there intombed. He took to Wife
Eleanor, Daughter to Ferdinand III. King of Castile and Lions, who warred often
with the Scots, and that successively, won Barwick, etc. and in the years 1308.
died, and was buried here.

. 156. Eleanora, first Wife to this Eleanor^, Q* of England. vid. Ep. 10^*
Edward King of England, lies under that neat Tomb Northeast of the Feretory of
St. Edward, whose Pedestal is composed of Freestone and gray Marble, whereon
are the Arms of England, Castile, Leon, and Pontois engraven, with a Sepulcher
painted on the backside, (to be seen in the Area) with diverse Monks praying
thereat, all in plano; on this Tomb is her Image in curious wrought Brass, gilt
with Gold, her hair dishevelled, and falling in very comely order on her
shoulders, her head crowned under a ^ine Canopy supported by two Cherubims of
the same curious gilded Brass, half encompassed (on her left side) with a
screen of Iron, wrought through in diverse pleasant forms and delightful
figures, an Epitaph carved on the ledge in French, and a Table hanging by in
Latin and English Rhyme, to tell us further that she was only Daughter to
Ferdinand III. King of Castile and Leon, by Joan his second Wife, Heir to Guydo
Earl of Ponthieu, by which the Earldom of Ponthieu, devolved of right to the
Kings of England* She was Mother of King Edward II. and died in the year 1298.

. 157. Between these two lie the Henry III, King of England. vid Ep. 108.
Father of this Edward King of England, viz. Henry III. under a most sumptuous
Monument, made Altarwise, of three ascents, the first, containing only a plain
Pedestal of gray Marble, wherein there be several Ambries and Lockiers, made
use of heretofore to lay up the Vestments and rich Copes belonging to the Altar
of St. Edward. The other is a composure of curious work, framed of diverse
colored Marbles and glittering stones, resembling those on the Feretory of S.
Edward, chequered, and gilt with Gold, supported at each corner by four twisted
or Serpentine Columns of the same speckled Marble, all brought from beyond the
Seas by his Son Edward on purpose to adorn this his Fathers Sepulcher, on the
top whereof is placed his Image in his Royal Habiliments, of solid Brass,
curiously wrought and gilt with Gold, having a Lion at his feet, an half Canopy
over his head, and an Epitaph in French round the ledge, all of the same gilded
Brass, with a Table of Verses hanging by to let us know, that this Henry King
of England, Son of King John, by Isabel, Daughter to the Earl of Angolesme, was
a pious Prince, and highly to be commended for all virtues. He built the
Chapel of our Lady* as I have said elsewhere; vid.. 7*
pulled down the Church of K. Edward, and erected that which is now standing,
giving thereto many Royal Gifts, of Copes, Jewels, and rich Vessels, that it
equalled in Riches all the Churches on this side the Alps; he made a golden
Vid.. 146.
Chest and Coffin wherein to repose the Relics of St. Edward, adorned his
Shrine, translated his body into this Chapel prepared for him, and was
himself, after he had reigned fifty six years and eighteen days, buried on the
North side thereof, under this stately Monument, anno 1273.

. 158. There is another small Tomb Eliz. Daughter of Henry VII. vid. Ep. 113.
of black and gray Marble, on the North side of this Chapel, at the feet of
King Henry III. which has formerly been adorned with Brass, and a little Image
thereon, but at present there is nothing remaining but part of the Model (being
one Pillar thereof) of the Chapel of King Henry VII. to whose Daughter the
Lady Elizabeth, which he had by his Queen, the Daughter of King Edward IV. this
little Monument was placed, who died in the year 1493. being not much above one
year old, and was buried under.

. 159. There are likewise on the Philippa Q. of England. vid. Ep. 112.
South side of this Chapel, or the Feretory of St. Edward three stately
Monuments, and one little Tomb. Toward the East lies Philippa Queen of
England, Wife to King Edward III. She has a curious neat black Marble Tomb,
with her Image thereon of polished Alabaster, her head crowned, and supported
by two Angels of the same; round about the Pedestal are thirty sweetly carved
Niches, wherein had been placed as many Images, with their Coats of Arms at
their feet, expressing who they were, in Alabaster painted and gilt with Gold,
as the remains of some of them at this day declare, which when entire were as
follows. At the head, William Earl of Henault, Father to the said Queen; John
King of France; Edward III. King of England her Husband; Lodowick, the
Emperor; and Edward, Prince of Wales, her eldest Son. At the feet, the King of
Navarre, the King of Bohemia, the King of Scotland, the King of Sicily, and the
King of Spain. On the left side of the Tomb, Jone Queen of Scotland; John of
Eltham, Earl of Cornwall; Jone, Princess of Wales; Lionel, Duke of Clarence;
Isabel, Countess of Bedford; John, Duke of Lancaster; Jone, Duchess of
Clarence; Edmund, Earl of Cambridge; Jone, Duchess of Lancaster; and Thomas,
Earl of Buckingham. On the right side, the Empress, Mother to the said Queen;
her Brother also, Marcus, Duke of Gelderland; Eleanora, Duchess of Gelderland;
John, Earl of Henault; Mary, Duchess of Britain, Lodowick, Duke of Bavaria;
the Countess of Pembroke; Charles, Son to the King of France, and the Duke of
Brabant. There is no Inscription or Epitaph about this Tomb, but a Table of
Verses in Latin, and English Meter, declaring her exemplary piety and virtues,
and that she was Daughter of William of Bavaria, Earl of Henault, who died in
the year 1369. and was buried here.

. 160. By her, in another sumptuous Edward III. King of Engl. vid. Ep. 111.
and noble Monument, lies Edward III. her Husband, whose Image all of solid
Brass, and gilt with Gold, in his Royal Robes, is placed on a frame of the same
Brass, circumscribed with an Epitaph in Latin, and fixed to a Pedestal of gray
Marble, round about which are many little Images still remaining, all of solid
brass, richly enamelled, and gilt with Gold, representing the Sons and
Daughters of this mighty Prince; on the right side was Edward, Prince of Wales;
Jone of the Tower given in marriage to the King of Spain; Lionel, Duke of
Clarence; Edmund, Duke of York; Mary, Duchess of Britain; and William of
Hatfield. On the left side, Isabel, Lady of Coucy; William, of Windsor; John,
Duke of Lancaster; Blanch of the Tower; Margaret, Countess of Pembroke; and
Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester. This Edward, the third of that name,
King of England since the Conquest, was Son to Edward II. by Isabel, Daughter
to Philip le Bell King of France, whose Brother dying without Issue, and she
being the next Heir, this King Edward first laid claim to the Crown of France
in right of his Mother, (notwithstanding their* Salique Law, by which the
Females are barred from the Inheritance,) and prosecuted the War so
successfully that he won Calais, recovered Aquitaine and Normandy; took John,
King of France; and David King of Scots Prisoners, and adding the Arms and
Title of France to his own, after he had reigned fifty years he died, and was
buried here under this noble Monument, having a Table of Verses Vid. ^^. 111.
affixed thereunto in English and Latin meeter.

. 161. At the head of King Edward Richard II. King of England, and Anne his
Queen. vid. Ep. 1^6, ^^^.
III. is the other stately Monument on this South side the Feretory of St.
Edward, composed much after the like form with that foregoing, having two
Images placed on a frame, and circumscribed with an Epitaph, all of solid
brass, gilt with Gold, on a Pedestal of gray Marble, meanly adorned, whereunto
is a Table affixed, informing us, that Richard II. King of England and France,
and Lord of Ireland, with his first Wife Anne, who was Daughter to Wenceslaus
King of Bohemia, and Emperor of the Germans, who died anno 1394. lie there
interred. This Richard was Son to Edward, Prince of Wales, by Jone, Daughter to
the Earl of Kent. After he had reigned twenty two years, he was deposed by
Henry of Lancaster, and not long after ( anno 1399.) was murdered, and buried
at Langley among the Dominicans; but in the year 1414. his body was removed
from thence by Henry V. King of England and nobly intombed here at Westminster,
who caused to be erected this Monument over him.

. 162. Between this Tomb of King The Lady Margaret, Daughter of Edward IV. vid.
Ep. 110.
Richard and that of Edward III. is a little small raised Monument of gray
Marble, whereon has been the Effigies of a Child engraven on Brass, now taken
away, but so much of the Epitaph remaining, whereby may be gathered, that under
that small Tomb lies Margaret, Daughter and fifth Child to Edward IV. King of
England and France, and Lord of Ireland by the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, who was
born the nineteenth day of April, Anno Dom. 1472. and died the eleventh of
December following.

. 163. On this Tomb stands an old The Sword and Shield of King Edw. III.
rusty Sword, seven foot in length, and eighteen pounds in weight, with a
Buckler or deep Shield, which are reported to be made use on by Edward III. in
his Wars in France, and are placed on this Tomb adjoining to his Monument as a
remembrance thereof.

. 164. The East side of this Chapel Henry V. King of England. vid. Ep. 1* 4.
of St. Edward is taken up by that magnificent Monument of Henry V. King of
England, enclosed within a small Chapel by it self, arched, of curious worked
stone, and set about with admirable carvings, Intaglio's, and devices, as trees
of Palm, Hearts Royal, and Swans gorged, with Crowns, and chained thereunto. On
the South side whereof is graved the Cavalcade and Ceremony of his own
Coronation, and on the North that of his Queens, with the Archbishops, Bishops,
and Nobility of the Realm assisting. On each side the curious Iron doors,
composed of grate work, beholding the Shrine of St. Edward, are two large
Statues of Mitered Abbots, with several other lesser Images of holy men and
devout women among the Primitive Christians in the adjoining Niches: In the
Chapel it self is a raised Tomb of gray Marble, whereon is nothing remaining
but part of a wooden Image without the head, which being made (as it is said)
of Silver, was sacrilegiously stolen from thence by the impious hands of some
pretenders to Reformation, who have likewise deprived and stripped it of the
fine embroydered and gilded Plates of brass, wherewith it was all over covered,
leaving us nothing now to behold but the frame to which they were affixed On
the South side of this Tomb is a Wooden Chest or Coffin, wherein part of the
Skelleton and perched body of Katharine Valois his Katharine Q^. of England.
vid. Ep. 115.
Qu. (from the waste upwards) is to be seen; of whom many fabulous stories are
reported for her lying here: But the truth is, that when Henry VII. caused the
old Chapel of our Lady (at the entrance whereof this Queen was interred) to be
pulled down, the Workmen finding her Coffin among others to be well nigh
perished and decayed, what remained of her body was taken thence, and placed in
this Capsula nigh her Husband, where it has continued ever since: Which is not
frequently shown to any, but as an especial favor by some of the chief
Officers of the Church. Over this Tomb is the Oratory or Chantry Chapel* where
the Obiits of this King and Queen used to be celebrated, and their
Anniversary's kept, there being two doors on each side the entrance, with
stairs to ascend into the same, where the Saddle which this heroic Prince used
in the Wars in France, with his Shield and other warlike furniture is to be
seen. On the backside of this noble Monument toward the Area has been several
paintings and other adornments, which are now washed away and defaced; but
there is still remaining an ancient Table in Latin and English meeter hanging
thereon. This Henry Vid. Ep. 114.
was the Son of Henry IV. King of England, and France, and Lord of Ireland, who
vanquished the French in many Battles, was by his Father made Regent of France,
and after his death crowned King at Paris, who having married Katharine Valois,
Daughter of Charles VI. King of France, leaving Issue by her Henry VI. King of
England, etc. he died anno 1422. and was buried here. His Queen Katharine
afterward married Owen Teudor, descended from Cadwallader, the last King of
the Britains, by whom she had Edmund Earl of Richmond, Father to King Henry
VII. Jasper Duke of Bedford, and Edward a Monk of Westminster. She died anno
1437.

. 165. The West side of this Chapel The West side of the Chapel of St. Edward.
of the Kings is wholly taken up by the Skreen that separates the high Altar
from this place, on the upper part whereof there is some indifferent Carving in
Freestone, wherein much of the Life of St. Edward and the ancient History of
this Church is represented. There are two doors, one on each side the same
Skreen, that serve more particularly on the days of the Coronation of our Kings
and Queens for the convenience of their retiring out of the body of the Church
to refresh and recreate themselves here, where likewise they are divested of
the Crown and Robes of St. Edward, by the Lord High Chamberlain of England,
after the Solemnity ended at the Altar, and again arrayed in those rich and
Royal Robes provided for them to wear that day, for which end there is a
Traverse erected here on those days of Solemnity covered with Tapistry, and
hung round with Arras for the greater splendor and Magnificence.

. 166. Coming back again (down The Area round the Chapel of St. Edward.
the same Stairs by which we ascended into this Chapel) into the Area, on the
North side we may take notice of these few Monuments and Grave-stones; against
the the back of the Tomb of Aveline Countess of Lancaster, is a small neat
Monument of white Marble and Alabaster, adorned with Arms, and an Epitaph, nigh
which there is a large Gravestone of black Marble on the Pavement, both placed
as a remembrance to that eminent and Loyal Prelate Brian Duppa, Tutor to his
present Brian Duppa, Bishop of Winchester, vid. Ep. 152, 153.
Majesty, who was Dean of Christchurch, Bishop of Chichester and Salisbury, and
upon the Restoration of the King to his Kingdoms after his Exile, was made
Bishop of Winchester, and Prelate of the Garter, who dying anno 1662. in the
seventy fourth year of his age was interred here. The Monument against the
South Wall, being but lately erected for him.

. 167. In this Area lies John Doughty, John Doughty, S. T. D. vid. Ep. 154.
S. T. D. and a Prebendary of this Church, under a black Marble stone hard by
the former, he died anno 1672, aged seventy five years. John Windsor, Nephew
John Windsor. vid. Ep. 155.
to Sir William, lies under a stone covered with plates of brass obiit 1414. By
whom lies William Amundisham, a William Amundisham. vid. Ep. 156.
Monk of Westminster, under another plated stone, he died anno 1420. A little
higher is another fair Marble stone, covered with brass plates, and their
Effigies graven thereon, for two more Monks of the same Abbey, viz. Thomas
Thomas Brown. vid. Ep. 158. Humph. Roberts, vid. Ep. 158.
Brown, and Humphrey Roberts, dying anno 1508. A fourth plated stone is here to
be seen, with Verses thereon, for one William Couper belonging to William
Couper. vid. Ep. 157.
the Archbishop of York. Something lower is another Gravestone for George Wild
Esquire, who died anno George Wild. vid. Ep. 151.
1649.

. 168. In the South Area, hard by Sir Tho. Ingram. Knight. vid. Ep. 143.
the Chapel of St. Nicolas, toward the ascent of King Henry the Sevenths, is
a comely Monument of Alabaster and white Marble, with an Urn placed on the top,
for to remember Sir Thomas Ingram Knight, Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council; he died anno
1671. There is a small Monument of Alabaster and black Marble, adorned with
Arms, and gilt with Gold, with the Busto or head of Richard Tufton Esquire,
Richard Tufton Esquire. vid. Ep. 144.
between the Chapel of St. Edmund and St. Nicolas, who died anno 1631, and had
this Monument erected here by his Brother Sir Humphrey Tufton for him. Against
the North Wall, on this side the Area, adjoining to the Tomb of Henry V. is
another small Monument of Alabaster, adorned with Arms, and plates of brass,
several little Images carved thereon, with his head in the midst of the same
brass gilt, for Robert Aiton Esquire, famous for Robert Aiton Esquire. vid. Ep.
142.
his Writings, Embassies, and exemplary Charity, who died at Whitehall, anno
1638.

. 169. On the Pavement are these James Cranfield, Earl of Middlesex. ^. vid Ep.
147. Lionel Cranfield Earl of Middlesex 3. vid. Ep. 145.
Grave-stones, toward the West, James Cranfield Earl of Middlesex, who died
anno 1652. And Lionel Cranfield, Earl of Middlesex, one of the Bedchamber to
his present Majesty, and second Son to Lionel, who was Lord High Treasurer of
England, he died anno 1674. By whom likewise lies his Anne Countess of
Middlesex, vid. Ep. 146. Edward Cranfield Esquire. vid. Ep. ^^8. Thomas Bilson
Bishop of Winchester* vid. Ep. 140.
Mother the Lady Anne, who died anno 1669. and Edward Cranfield, who died anno
1649. Not far from these is a gray Marble stone, with a plate of brass thereon
for Thomas Bilson Bishop of Winchester, and Privy Counselor to King James,
obiit anno 1616. There is a large gray Marble stone, with a little part of an
Inscription, and a Coat of Arms still remaining in the brass, whereby so much
light may be gathered that it was placed there for Sir John Golofre Knight, who
was second Sir John Golofre Knight.
Husband to Philippa Lady Mohun, afterward Duchess of York, he died anno
1396. By him is another plated stone for Cecill Ratcliff, chief Cecill
Ratcliff. vid. Ep. 141.
Gentlewoman to the Lady Dudley. For the rest of the stones I can be at no
certainty to whom they belong, and therefore I shall leave them without
troubling you with my conjectures, only giving you the names of some who are
Rich. de Barking, Abbot of Westminster.
said to be here deposited. Rich. de Barking Abbot of Westminster. chief Baron of the
Exchequer, and Lord Treasurer of England, who died an^o 1246, he was buried in
our Ladies Chapel, and had a Tomb of Marble set up for him before the Altar
there, which in the time of William de Colchester, Abbot likewise of this
Monastery, was taken down by Friar Comb, a Sacrist of this Abbey, who laid a
fair plain Marble stone over him, with an Epitaph inscribed in brass, which
stone (among many others) was removed at the time when King Henry VII. built
the new Chapel, and was placed at the foot of the steps ascending toward the
same, on the East side of this Area. Henry, eldest Henry, Son to King Hen. VIII.
Son of King Henry VIII. by Queen Katharine of Spain, died an Infant, and was
buried at the entrance into the Chapel of St. Edward. Ralph Selby* Doctor of
Laws, who died anno 1420, was buried under a plated stone of gray Marble on the
South part of this Area. Anne Buxal, Daughter of Ralph Selby. Anne Buxall,
Sir Alain Buxal Knight, and Wife to Sir John de Beverley, she died on the Sir
John Beverley Knight.
second day of October, anno 14^6, and was buried under a plated Marble stone,
not far from Ralph Selby. By her likewise lies her Husband Sir John Beverley
Knight, under a like stone.

. 170. In the Chapel of St. Edmund were buried Margaret, D^ughter Marg
Countess of Derby.
of Henry Clifford Earl of Cumberland, Wife of Henry Earl of Derby, who died
anno 1596. and George George Brideman.
Brideman* Custos of the Queens Palace at Westminster, he died anno 1580. By
whom is likewise interred his Wife, who died anno 1590. Before the high Altar
was buried one John John Leeke Archbishop.
Leeke, said to be an Archbishop, but I can find no such man in my Catalogues
of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and therefore I can say no more of
him. And now leaving this part of the Church, by the Monument of Brian Duppa,
Bishop of Winchester, we are let into the North Cross again, where on the right
hand, and against the East side are three small Chapels: The first is

The Chapel of St. John Evangelist,
. 171. The Skreen whereof was John Estney, Abbot of West. vid. Ep. 134.
made and adorned with several Carvings and Coats of Arms, by John Estney,
Abbot of this Monastery, painted, and gilt with Gold, who lies on the South
side under a gray Marble Tomb, with his Effigies thereon curiously engraven on
brass in the Vestments of his Office, with a Miter on his head, and a Pastoral
Staff in his right hand, having an Epitaph round the Verge, some part only
remaining at this time sufficient to inform us that he died on the twenty
fourth day of May, anno 1438.

. 172. Next to this is another gray Sir John Harpedon Knight.
Marble Tomb adjoining to the head of Abbot Estney, whereon is the Effigies of
a Knight in Armor, curiously engraven on brass, and reposing his head on his
Helm, with several Coats of Arms about the Tomb wrought in the same brass, but
the Epitaph round the ledge is torn away, under which lies Sir John Harpedon
Knight, who died anno 1457.

. 173. On the South side of this Sir Tho. Parry Knight. vid. Ep. 135.
Monument is another gray Marble Tomb, covered with a large stone, being nine
foot long, and four foot broad, where round the Ledge is still remaining in
brass an Epitaph, but the Verses and Coat of Arms (wherewith the top of this
Marble stone was further adorned) are wholly perished, under which lies Sir
Thomas Parry Knight, Treasurer of the Household, and Master of the Court of
Wards and Liveries to Queen Elizabeth, who died on the fifteenth day of
December, anno 1560.

. 174. In the midst of the floor of Sir Francis Vere Knight. vid. Ep. 133.
this Chapel is a most stately and Souldier-like Monument, every way suitable
to the person for whom it was made, viz. for Sir Francis Vere Knight, descended
from the illustrious Family of the Veres Earls of Oxford. He was Captain
General of the English Forces in the united Netherlands in the time of Queen
Elizabeth; and Governor of the Briel and Portsmouth, whose learned
Commentaries, set forth by himself in the English Tongue, shows him no less a
Master in the Art of War than learned in other Sciences; he died anno School, and
had this noble Tomb erected for him by the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, where on a
Pedestal of well polished black Marble, and an Epitaph in gilded letters round
the Verge, lies his Image wrapped in a Nightgown, and reposing himself on a
quilt, all of figured Alabaster, over which is a Table of Lydian or Touch,
shadowing this Image in the nature of a Canopy, supported at the four Corners
by as many Martial Knights in Armor, inclining their right knees toward the
ground, and resting the Tomb on their shoulders, whereon is placed his Helm,
Corsset, Curiass, Vibrace, Gauntlet, Spurs, and Shield, which together, with
the Statues themselves at full proportion are all composed of admirable white
Marble: That for curiosity and neatness this Tomb seems little inferior to any
of the more magnificent Monuments I have described elsewhere.

. 175. Against the East Wall of this Sir George Holles Knight. vid. Ep. 132.
Chapel, at the feet of his fellow Soldier and Kinsman Sir Francis Vere, is
another (...)nument erected by John Earl of Clare, to the remembrance of his
Bro^^er Sir George Holles Knight, a great Soldier, and Sergeant Major General
over the English Forces in the Low Countries, who dying at London, anno 1626.
was buried here. On a Pedestal (whereon is the Epitaph, with a Town
beleaguered, well designed in basso relievo, and two weeping Pallas's in
dejected postures lying on each side thereof, with Owls, the Emblems of
Sagacity and Vigilance, standing by them,) is a commanding Statue of curious
white polished Marble, boldly insculpt, and altogether furnitured like a Roman
Hero, one of his eyes (supposed to be lost) covered with Sables, a Mantle
falling from his shoulders, a Shield on his left Arm, whereon are depicted the
Matches of his Family, and a Commanders Battoon in his right hand, seeming,
like old Nestor, to be directing his Battallions even after his death.

. 176. In this Chapel, without any Monuments, Tombs, or Grave-stones, The Lord
Wentworth. Rich. Knevet.
lie Thomas the first Lord Wentworth. Richard Knevet Esquire, one of the
Gentlemen Pensioners to Queen Elizabeth, who died on the first day of November,
Sir Ed. Rogers.
anno 1559. Sir Edward Rogers Knight, Controller of the Household to Queen
Elizabeth, who died anno 1568. Will. Rogers.
William Rogers his Grandson, anno 1593. Sir James Crofts Knight, Controller of
Sir James Crofts Knight.
the Household likewise to Queen Elizabeth, who died anno 1590. Elizabeth, Eliz.
Fortescue.
the Daughter of Sir John Fortescue Knight, who died on the twenty first of May
1597. And Sir Edward Sir Ed* Spragge Knight.
Spragge Knight, who lost his life at Sea against the Hollander anno 1673. Next
to this is

The Chapel of St. Michael,
. 177. Where there is only (on the The Lady Katharine St. John's. vid. Ep. 136.
East side) one Monument of Alabaster, Marble, and diverse colored stones, with
the Image of a Lady in her Robes of Estate, lying at full length, with two
Children kneeling on the Pedestal, all of the same Alabaster, adorned with
Arms, and gilt with Gold, for the Lady Katharine St. John's, the Daughter of
Sir William Dormer Knight, and Widow of John Lord St. John's of Bletso, by whom
she had Oliver, who died an Infant, and Anne, married to William Lord Howard of
Effingham, eldest Son to Charles Earl of Nottingham, Lord High Admiral of
England. This Lady caused this Monument to be made in her life time, not long
surviving after, who died on the twenty third day of March, anno. 1614.

. 178. There were likewise buried Sir Hugh Vaughan Knight.
in this Chapel, without any Monuments, Sir Hugh Vaughan Knight, with Anne his
Wife who was the Daughter of Henry Earl of Northumberland, and Widow of Thomas
Hungerford. Sir Thomas Wharton Knight, afterward Thomas Lord Wharton.
Lord Wharton, who married the Daughter of Robert Earl of Sussex, and was
buried here Anno 1572. Elizabeth, the The Lady Eliz. Boorn.
Wife of Sir John Boorn Knight, Secretary to Queen Mary, she died on the twenty
second day of June anno 1576. And Sir William Trussel Knight, who Sir William
Trussel Knight.
was Speaker to the House of Commons at the deposition of King Edward II.

. 179. This Chapel, with part of the Chapels of St. John Evangelist and St.
Andrew, are now taken up, and the Monuments almost covered by the Scaffolds
placed here, being made use of at present for the lower Convocation House for
the Deans, Prebends, and Doctors, etc. as that of King Henry VII. is for the
Archbishops and Bishops when the Parliament sits at Westminster, which I should
before have informed you, as likewise that in the same Chapel Divine Service
is celebrated the^e every Morning at six of the Clock for the convenience of
the Scholars and the devout people thereby inhabiting.

The Chapel of St. Andrew.
. 180. Which is the last, yet not The fine Skreen belonging to St. Andrews
Chapel.
the least for beauty and comeliness, the Skreen thereof being richly adorned
with curious carvings and ingravings, and other Imagery work of Birds, Flowers,
Cherubims, Devices, Mottoes, and Coats of Arms of many of the chief Nobility
painted thereon, as Dukes of York, Bedford, Cambridge, etc. The Earls of
Lancaster, Exeter, Derby, etc. The Lords Bea^champ, Bardolph, Mohun,
Hu^gerford, Stafford, Ormond Nevil, Gray, Per^y. Molineux, Fitz-John, all done
by the command, and at the charge and cost o^ Edmund Edmund Kirton Abbot of
Westmister. vid. Ep. 137.
Kirton, Abbot of Westminster (about the time of King Edward IV.) who lies
buried on the South side of the Chapel, under a plam gray Marble Tomb, with an
Epitaph in brass round the Verge, who died anno 1466.

. 181. Against the East Wall is a Sir John Boroughs Knight. vid. Ep. 138.
slight Monument of Alabaster and black Marble, adorned, and gilt with Gold for
Sir John Bourgh Knight, Son of William Lord Bourgh (descended from the noble
Hubert de Bourgh, Lord Chief Justice of England and Earl of Kent, in the time
of King Henry III.) and the Lady Katharine, Daughter of Edward Clinton Earl of
Lincoln, Lord High Admiral of England. This Sir John was eminent ^or his
martial prowess having been twice Knighted in the Field, first by the Earl of
Leicester, Captain General, and Governor of the United Netherlands; afterward
at the Battle of St. Andrews by Henry IV. King of France and Navarre, but
boarding a Spanish Caract, laden with Gold, Spice, and Precious stones, he was
most unfortunately slain on the seventh day of March, anno 1594. in the thirty
second year of his age, and had this little Memorial placed here for him.

. 172. Here was likewise buried Thomas Lord Boroughs.
Thomas Lord Boroughs, Knight of the honorable Order of the Garter, and Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, who died prosecuting the War against the Earl of Tyroen,
then in rebellion, Henry Noell.
anno 1597. And Henry Noel, one of the Gentlemen Pentioners to Queen Elizabeth,
who died on the twenty sixth of February, anno 1596. both without any Monuments
or Gravestones.

. 183. In the midst of this Chapel Francis Lord Norris.
is a most magnificent and noble Monument, erected for Sir Francis Norris
Knight, afterward Baron Norris of Rycote, memorable for his warlike actions in
the Spanish Netherlands. On the Pedestal, raised on three ascents, composed of
black Marble, and Alabaster, is his Effigies, curiously carved, and ingraved
all in Armor of white Marble, richly gilt and adorned with Gold, on each side
of whom are the Images of three young men kneeling, in Armor, framed of the
same Alabaster, and gilt with Gold, over-shadowed by a glorious Arched Canopy,
supported by eight Corinthian Pillars, of diverse colored stones, set forth
with Arms, and other adornments, but there is no Inscription or Epitaph
belonging thereunto.

. 184. Many more persons of note have been interred in this Church, whose
Monuments are decayed and gone, or the Inscriptions worn or torn off from their
Grave-stones, as Rachel Rachel Brigham.
Brigham, Daughter of Nicolas Brigham, who had a marble stone laid over her,
hard by Chaucers Tomb, anno 1557. William Benson, Abbot of Westminster, William
Benson, Abbot and Dean of Westminster.
and first Dean of this Church, (after King Henry VIII. had disowned the
Supremacy of Rome,) was buried as you go into the Revestry. William Bedell, who
was Treasurer to William Bedell.
Cardinal Woolsey (Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor of England,) with
Cicely his Wife; and Sir Francis Sir Fran. Allen.
Allen Knight, a famous Soldier in the Low Country Wars, all these lying in
the South Cross. In the North Cross lies John Redman, S. T. D. who was John
Redman.
Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, and a Prebend of this Church, he died
anno 1551. Bartholomew Dodington, Bartholomew Dodington.
a learned man, and Greek Professor in the University of Cambridge, who died on
the twenty second of August, anno 1595. George Burden, Receptor George Burden.
John Gryffith.
of this Collegiate Church. John Gryffith, descended of an ancient Family in
Wales, he died anno 1597. And Thomas Brown, first chief Master of the Tho.
Brown.
School, then a Prebend, and afterward Sub-dean of this Church, who died anno
1585. May 2.

185. There were likewise buried here other memorable persons, for whom I
cannot ascertain any particular place, ziz. Harold, base Son of King Harald
King of England.
C^ute, after the death of his Father, was elected King of England by the
Danes, who caused Queen Emma, his Fathers Wife, after he had spoiled her of her
riches, to be banished, deprived Prince Aelfred (the Son of King Aethelred, and
Brother to King Edward the Confessor) of his eyes, and after he had reigned
four years, died at Oxford, anno 1040. and was buried here, says Matthew of
Westminster. John John Lord Wells.
Lord Wells, Knight of the Garter, who married Cecily, the Daughter of King
Edward IV. and died without Issue, was also here interred. Sir Fulk de
Novo-Castro Sir Fulk de Novo-Castro.
or New Castle, a famous Knight, whose body for its Nobility, and relation to
the Blood Royal of England, was commanded by King Henry III. in his own
presence, to be buried here, anno 1247. Richard de Wendover Rich. de Wendover,
Bishop of Rochester.
Bishop of Rochester, having the reputation of an holy man was interred here by
the Kings Order, anno 1250.

. 186. Here was likewise buried Hugolin, who was both Chamberlain Hugolin Lord
Treasurer.
and Treasurer to King Edward the Confessor: Edwin, Abbot of this Monastery
Edwin Abbot of ^estminster* Si^ Ge^ff^ey Man(...) S^^. Geoffrey Mandevile Jun.
in the time of the same King: Sir Geoffrey Mandevile Knight Seni^ur, and
Athelarda his Wife; and Geoffrey Man devile Junior: Sir James Berners Knight:
Sir James Berners. Oliver Lord Durdens. Peter Calhan. Tho. Peverel. Sulcardus.
Oliver de Durdens, a Baron of this Realm, and Brother to King Henry III. Peter
Calhan, a Citizen: Thomas Peverell, Sub-Prior: Sulcardus, that learned Monk and
Chronographer, who writ the History of this Church: The Lady Aeleonore,
Countess of Bar, and Eleonore Daughter to King Edw. I. Rich. Harounden Abbot.
Sir Will. Stoner. Will. Atclyffe. Katharine Daughter to the Duchess of
Norfolk^, Walter Hungerford. The Lord Salisbury. Will. Haverel. Tho.
Bounflower. Tho. Romayne. Joh. Alyngreth. Rog. Braharsen. Sir Rich. Rous.
Geoff. Haspall, Sir Joh. Shoreditch, etc.
Daughter to King Edward I. Richard Harounden Abbot of Westminster: Sir William
Stoner Knight: William Atclyffe, Secretary to King Edward IV. The Lady
Katharine, Daughter to the Duchess of Norfolk, married to Edward Aylmer:
Walter Hungerford, Son of Sir Edward Hungerford Knight: The Lord Salisbury:
William Haverell; Thomas Bounflower, and Philippa his Wife: Thomas Romayne:
John Alyngreth: Roger Braharsen: Sir Richard Rous Knight: Geoffrey Haspall: Sir
John Shoreditch Knight, and the Lady Helene his Wife: James Palmer Clerk, and
Joan his Sister; And John Blockley.

. 187. According to my promise I have now given you what information you could
reasonably expect in a subject of this nature, without imposing any thing upon
you for truth that has not the stamp and evidence of antiquity to confirm it,
I shall therefore trouble you a little longer by leading you out of the Church
into the adjoining Cloisters, which you are The Cloisters
let into by two Doors on the South side thereof, by that toward the West was
the Picture of our Savior Christ nailed to the Cross, the B. Virgin standing
on one side, and S. John on the other, curiously painted, and very pitiful to
behold, and round about the sides of these Cloisters were other noble
Paintings, with variety of Verses, alluding The Paintings
to the History of the foundation, and the Figures thereon; on every side
opposite to the Walls (where now are only frames of wood) was fine glazed The
Windows.
Windows of tinctured glass of diverse colors; and over the entrance into The
Chapterhouse.
the Chapter House (on the East Side of this Cloister, which is now the way
likewise into the Library) was placed The Library.
the Statue of the blessed Virgin with our Savior in her arms, and two Angels
on each side, all richly enamelled, and set forth with Gold and blue, some
Vestigia or footsteps of all which are still remaining whereby to judge of the
former splendor and beauty thereof.

. 188. For those Monuments of The Monuments.
the dead, which are to be found about these Cloisters, I shall not observe the
like order and method as I did in the recital of the foregoing Monuments in the
Church and Chapels, esteeming most of them of that inferior nature, that
reading their Epitaphs and Inscriptions you will receive light enough
concerning them. To which I shall refer you, and you will find toward the
latter end of this Book among the Monumental Inscriptions: But there are four
Grave-stones on the South side of this great Cloister that deserve our
particular inspection, and for that they have no manner of Epitaph or
Inscription now remaining, I shall not only inform you to whom they belong, but
give you the ancient Verses formerly insculpt about them.

. 189. The first is a plain white Vitalis, Abbot of Westminster.
Marble stone, heretofore covered with Plates of brass, under which lies
Vitalis Abbot of Westminster in the time of William the Conqueror, who died
anno 1082. and had this Epitaph ingraved thereon.

Qui nomen traxit e vita, morte vocante,
Abbas Vitalis transiit, hicque jacet.
. 190. At the feet of Abbot Vitalis Gislebertus Crispinus, Abbot of Westminster.
is a gray Marble stone, the Effigies of an Abbot carved deep thereon, a
Pastoral Staff in his right hand, but no Miter on his head, under which
Gislebertus Crispinus, Abbot of Westminster, who died anno 1114. in the time of
King Henry I. was interred, with these Verses formerly inlaid round the ledge
in brass:

Hic Pater insignis, genus altum, virgo, senexque,
Gisleberte jaces, lux, via, duxque tuis.
Mitis eras, justus, prudens, fortis, moderatus,
Doctus quadrivio, nec minus in trivio.
Sic tamen ornatus nece sexta luce Decembris
Spiramen Coelo reddis and ossa solo.
. 191. There is another stone of (...)tus, Abbot of Westminster.
white Marble, at the feet of Gislebertus, whereon is carved the Image of an
Abbot, with a Miter, Ring, and Pastoral staff in his right hand, of the same
Marble, under which lies Laurentius, another Abbot of this Monastery, who first
obtained from Pope Alexander III. to him and his Successors Abbots, the
privilege to use the Miter, Ring, and Gloves, he died anno 1176. and had these
Verses engraven round his Tomb.

Clauditur hoc tumulo vir quondam clarus in orb,
Quo praeclarus erat hic locus est, and erit,
Pro meritis vitae dedit illi laurea nomen:
Detur and vitae laurea pro meritis.
. 192. That large and stately plain Gervasius de Blois, Son of King Stephen,
Abbot of Westminster.
black Marble stone (which is vulgarly known by the name of Long Megg of
Westminster) on the North side of Laurentius the Abbot, was placed there for
Gervasius de Blois, another Abbot of this Monastery, who was base Son to King
Stephen, and by him placed as a Monk here, and afterward made Abbot, who died
anno 1160, and was buried under this stone, having this Distich formerly
thereon.

De regum genere pater hic Gervasius ecce
Monstrat defunctus, mors rapit omne genus.
. 193. There were likewise buried in this Cloister P. Vowel, who died P.
Vowell. Gabriel Goodman.
anno 1557. Gabriel, the Son of Gawin Goodman, by Helena his Wife, a Child, he
died anno 1576. Anne Birkhed, aged Anne Birkhead. Christopher Birkhead. Edw.
Bernard.
102 years, died anno 1568. and Christopher her Son, anno 1596. Edward Bernard,
a Kings Scholar, died anno 1584. Edward Grant, a Child, anno Edward Grant.
1587, And William Punter, anno 1597. Will. Punter,
whose Epitaphs are all worn away.

The Epitaphs, Inscriptions, and Coats of Arms, on the Monuments, Tombs, and
Gravestones, etc.
Over the Monument these Arms, etc. viz.
Cavendish. Three Bucks heads Cabosed, a Mullet. A. D. 1676. Duke of Newcastle
and his Duchess. vid.. 30.
difference, quartering

Ogle. A Fess between three Crescents, all within a Garter, Crest* on a Torce a
Snake nowed. Supporters, a Bull gorged, with a Crown, and Lion rampant. Motto,
Cavendo Tutus.

On each side these Arms, viz. Cavendish and Ogle quarterly as before, impaling
Lucas, a Fess between six Annulets.

1. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the Loyal Duke of Newcastle, and his Duchess his second Wife, by
whom he had no Issue, her Name was Margaret Lucas, youngest Sister to the Lord
Lucas of Colchester, a noble Family, for all his Brothers were valiant, and all
the Sisters virtuous: This Duchess was a wise, witty, and learned Lady, which
her many Books do well testify; she was a most virtuous, and loving, and
careful Wife, and was with her Lord all the time of his Banishment, and
Miseries, and when he came home, never parted from him in his solitary
retirements.

Hic situs est Heroes ille inclytus Willielmus Cavendish, de Balneo Miles, Baro
Ogle, jure materno, Vicec. Mansfield, Baro Cavendish de Bolesover, Comes de
Ogle, Comes, Marchio, and Dux de Novo-Castro super Tinam. Notingh. and
Northumb. Comitat. locum tenens: Praecipuus Regii Cubiculi Generosus: Carolo
Principi Curator potissimus, e secretioribus Domini Regis consiliis and
Nobilissimi Ord. Periscelidis Eques, Vir qui Fidelitatem, ac Fortitudinem,
Majestati Regiae ubertim indicans, conjuratione nequissima primitus exorta
Legionum omnium in Borealibus Regni Partibus ad tunc conscriptarum Capitaneus
Generalis merito constitutus; in praeliiis diversis (ubi prorsus Victor
extitit,) ac in Eboraci Civit. adversus Scotos munimine se fidum strenuumque
militem usquequaque comprobaverit, quapropter invalescente Rebellione a primis
morti destinatus totius rei familiaris jacturam longumque exilium (maximo autem
animo) inde sustinuit.

Vxorem (primo) Elizabetham fililiam unicam and haeredem Willielmi Baslet de
Blore in agro Staff. Armigeri duxit, e qu^ Filios Carolum sine prole dejunc^um
and Henricum honorum haer^dem* filiasque Janam Carolo Cheney de Chesham Bots,
Elizabetham, Johan Commit. de Bridgwater, ac Franciscam, Olivero Commit.
Bolingbrochiae enuptas sus^itavit. Diem obiit 25 December. anno salutis humanae
1676. aetatis suae 84.

Arms. viz.
Scot Parted per pale indented, a Saltire Counterchanged. A. D. 1645. (...)
Scot. vid. 3^.
Impaling

Mauleverer. Three Greyhounds current in pale barways.

2. Epitaph. viz.
Grace, eldest Daughter of Sir Thomas Mauleverer of Allerton Mauleverer in
Yorkshire Baronet, born in the year 1622, married unto Colonel Thomas Scot, a
Member of the honorable House of Commons, 1644. and died the twenty fourch of
February, 1645.

He that will give my Grace but what is hers
Must say her death has not
Made only her dear Scot
But virtue, worth, and sweetness Widowers. Ex terris.
Arms. viz.
James. Two Bars battelle Counterbattelle, Impaling A. D. 1667. Mary James.
vid.. 30.
Killigrew An Eagle displayed with two heads, within a bordure round'lee.

3. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies interred the body of Dame Mary James, late Wife of Sir John James
Knight, descended of the ancient Family of the Lords of Hostrick in the
Province of Holland. And Daughter of Sir Robert Killigrew Knight, sometime
Vice-Chamberlain to Mary, late Queen of England, and Wife of his Sacred Majesty
King Charles I. (of blessed memory) by whom he had Issue one Son, named John,
and one Daughter, named Elizabeth, which died in their Infancy. The said Dame
Mary James departed this mortal life on the first day of November in the year
of our Lord 1677.

Arms. viz.
Blagge. Two Bends ingrailed. Impaling a Lion passant A. D. 1660. Thomas
Blagge. vid.. ^1.
between three Flower-de-luces.

4. Epitaph. viz.
Thomas Blagge Armig. in agro Suffolciensi nobili and antiqua familia, vir
egregiis animi and corporis dotibus quibus arts honestas adjunxerat, clarus
militia, and domi Regibus Carolo primo and secundo fidus imprimis, and gratus,
a quibus utrisque, inter honoratiora cubiculi Ministeria adlectus, utilem
operam navaverat praecipue in Bello Arci Wallingfordiensi impositus quam
caeteris pene omnibus expugnatis diu fortiter tenuit, nec nisi Rege jubente e
praesidio excessit, nec minora pertulit Regis causa, diu for as in exilio
jactatus, saepe in patria captivus, fidei suae obstinationem ubique singulari
exemplo app. ob hoc sub Regis felicissimo reditu cohortis stipatorum Tribunatu,
and Praefectum Tarmuthe and Praesidii Langarensis donatus, potuit majora
sperare, sed immatura morte interceptus, Principem suum cui in adversis
constantissime adhaeserat jam muneratorem futurum insecundis deseruit: obiit
Christian, Pie, 14. die November, anno salutis 1660. aetatis suae 47.

5. Epitaph. viz.
M. S.
Gulielm. Sandersoni, equit. aurat. A. D. 1676. Gul. Sanderson. vid.. 31.
Regiae Camerae Generos. ordinar. viri a natalibus ab eruditione, ab invicta
suos erga Principes fide a scriptis, a candore, clari. Scripsit inter alia
inque lucem emisit vitarum Mariae Scotorum Reginae. Jacobi and Caroli primi,
Magnae Britanniae Regum Historias idiomate Anglicana: post varias clades sub
nupera perduellium tyrannide acceptas, post diuturnos labores domi peregreque
fortiter exantlatos, vitae hujus umbratilis satur plusquam nonagenarius, animi
tamen integer, transiit ad meliorem. Julii 15. anno Christianorum 1676.

H. M.
Conjugi optime de se merito quocum L. annos concorditer vixerat Brigitta
Edwardi Tyrelli Equ. aurat. filia, virginumque nobilium sereniss. Catharinae
Reginae Ancillantium, ut vocant, Matter. M. P.

6. Epitaph. viz.
M. S.
Musarum and charitum deliciae, Gulielmus A. D. 1666. Gulielm. Johnson. S. T.
P. vid.. 32.
Johnsonus, S. T. P. ab eleemosynis Carolo secundo, exuvias juxta deposuit.
Saepe naufragus, hoc tandem in portu quiescit anima cum Deo, cujus elogium erat
Deus Nobiscum; imaginem ejus si velis illius librum consule. Denatus erat anno
aetat. suae 57. salutis 1666. Mart. 4.

Arms. viz.
Edmonds. Argent, a Fess varry, and three Martlets in chief Gules.

7. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies buried the body of Mistress A. D. 1676. Eliz. Edmonds. vid.. 33.
Elizabeth Edmonds Spinster, the Daughter of Walter Edmonds of Bayleys Court in
the County of Sussex Gent. who departed this life the eighteenth of August, in
the year of our Lord 1667, aged 82.

Arms. viz.
Heylyn. Sable three Naggs heads erased Argent. Impaling, Gules two Bars,
Argent, on a bend, Or, a Torteaux between two Leopards heads Sable.

8. Epitaph. viz.
Hic jacet e propinquo depositum mortale Pet. Heylyn. S. T. D. vid.. 33.
Petri Heylyn, S. T. D. Hujus Ecclesiae Praebendarii and Sub-Decani, viri plane
mirabilis egregiis dotibus, ingenio acri and facundo, judicio subacto, memeria
ad prodigium tenaci, cui adjunxit incredibilem in studiis patientiam, quae
cessantibus oculis non cessarunt. Scripsit varia, and plurima quae jam manibus
hominum teruntur, and Argumentis non vulgaribus stilo non vulgari sufficit,
constans ubique Ecclesiae and Majestatis Regiae Assertor, nec florentis magis
utriusque quam afflictae: idemque Perduellium and Schismaticae factionis
Impugnator acerrimus, contemptor invidiae, and animo infracto plura hujusmodi
meditanti mors indixit silentium; ut sileatur efficere non potest. Obiit anno
aetatis 63. posuit hoc illi moestissima conjux.

Arms. viz.
Carteret. With quarterings, the first and fourth, Gules, a Fess of four
Lozenges Arg. a Crescent Sab. on a Cress. Arg. difference, 2d. Gules on a Bend
Arg. 3. Pheons of the first, 3d. B. 9. Billets, Or, Crest on a Torce of his
colors, a Squirrel sejant Or.

9. Epitaph. viz.
To the memory of their most beloved A. D. 1677. Edward de Carteret. vid.. 33.
Son Edward de Carteret Gentleman, (Son of Sir Edward de Carteret Knight,
Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, and first Gentleman Usher, daily Waiter in
ordinary to the King,) his Father and Dame Elizabeth his Mother have caused
this Monument to be erected, his body lies under the Stone beneath; he died
the thirtieth day of October 1677. aged seven years and nine months.

Arms. viz.
Le Neve. On a cross five Flowers-de-Lucles.

10. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Richard le A. D. 1773. Rich. le Neve. vid.. 33.
Neve Esquire, who after several engagements for his Majesty's Service, wherein
he behaved himself with honor and applause, being appointed Commander of his
Majesty's Ship the Edgar, was unfortunately killed in the flower of his age,
being but twenty seven years old, after he had signalized his valor to
admiration in that sharp engagement with the Hollanders, which happened on the
eleventh of August 1673.

Arms. viz.
Thornburgh. Ermine, fretty, and a chief, Crest on a Torce, a Fox passant.

11. Epitaph. viz.
P. M. S. G. T.
Qui Deo, Principi, and Amicis semper A. D. 1677. Gilbert Thornburgh. vid.. 3^*
fidus, ecce jacet Gilbertus Thornburgh, Aulicus, olim terrestris, nunc
coelestis. In posterum non dicendum erit -- Exeat aula Qui volet esse pius --
Cum illic tanta reluxerit pietas. Obiit die Mensis Octobris 6. Anno salutis
1677. aetatis 56.

(...).
Arms. viz.
Stotevile. A Saltire ingrailed, Ermine.

Ellis. On a Cross five Crescents, a Mullet difference. Impaling Stotevile.

Hili. A Cheveron Ermine between three Garbs. Impaling Stotevile.

12. Epitaph. viz.
Spe resurgendi hic jacet Sarah Stotevile A. D. 1631. Sarah Stotevile vid.. 33.
filia Thomae Stotevile de Brinkley in Comitat. Cantabrig. Armigeri; Vxor primo
Edwardi Ellis de Chesterton in Comitat. Cantabrig. Armigeri, cui peperit 6.
filios, and 3. filias: Vxor deinde Othowelli Hill, Doctoris in jure civili and
Cancellarii Dioces. Lincoln. cujus relicta. Obiit 2^. die Aprilis Anno Dom.
1631. aetatis suae 78.

Vivit post funera virtus.
Mors mihi lucrum.
Solus Christus mihi sola s^lus.
Arms. viz.
Egerton Gules a Fess Ermine between three Pheons Arg. Impaling

N^^ham. Arg. a Bend ingrailed B. between two Bucks heads cabosed Sable.

13. Epitaph. viz.
Penelope filia e pluribus lectissima Roberti A. D. 1670. Penel. Egerton. vid..
33.
Dom. Nedham, Vice-com. Kilnurray, and Helenae antiquiss. Dutton le Dutton in
Comitat. Palate. Chester, haeredis unicae. Conjux moestissimi Randolphi Egerton,
de Betley Cestri confinio Carolino nuper in exercitu Majoris Generalis,
supremoque (ut vocant) nunc regni concilio (Parlimento regio) Staffordiensium
Delegati, cujus in utrumque Carolum (Britanniar. Monarchas) immobilem fidem
resque praeclare gestas posteri non tacebunt, (cui nunquam nisi moriendo
gravis,) Heic juxta Egertonorum insignia, (illustriss. Baronum de Malpas) una
cum Randulpho filiolo, posita est ex voto: Quin ab illa magis, (credit) se
positum voluit Maritus neque vita functum alibi ponendum optat, filiolae dans
vitam perdidit, 13. Kalend. April. anno restitut. Humanae 1670. Britannicae 10.

Stat sine pede virtus.
Arms. viz.
Heskett. Argent on a Bend Sable, three Garbs Or, Crescent difference Gules,
Impaling, Argent three Cheveronels Gules between as many Martlets Sable.

14. Epitaph. viz.
Memoriae Sacrum.
Thomae Hesketto equiti aurato, ex A. D. 1600. Thom. Heskett. vid.. 39.
Antiqua and clara familia Heskettorum in Comitatu Lancastrensi oriundo. Curiae
Wardorum and liberationum Attornato, and a Regio consilio in Boreali Regni
part constituto, viro and summa juris scientia ita singulari vitae integritate.

Juliana uxor moestiss. viro charissimo amoris and observantiae ergo posuit.
Obiit anno salutis M. DC. die Octobris 15.

Arms. viz.
Richardson. On a Chief three Lions heads erased, quartering Ermine, on a
Canton a Saltire.

15. Epitaph. viz.
Deo. O. M.
Thomae Richardsoni Iceni Equitis A. D. 1634. Tho. Richardson vid.. 38.
Aurati, humanum depositum, ille juris municip. omnes gradus, examplavit;
conventus tertii ordinis ann. Jacobi Regis 21. and 22. Prolocutor extitit. Fori
civilis (communium placitorum vocant) supremum Magistratum quinquen. gessit, ad
summum tandem primarii per Angliam Judicis tribunal a Rege Carolo erectus;
expiravit anno aetatis 66. salutis 1634.

Thomas Richardson fill. unicus eques aurat. Bar. Scotiae designatus patri
incomparabili posuit.

Arms. viz.
Thynne. Barry of ten sable, and Or, quartering Argent a Lion rampan^, the tail
nowed Gules, Impaling, Or, on a Fess Gules three Besants, in chief a Greyhound
current sable.

16. Epitaph. viz.
Hi^ situs est Gulielmus Thynne Armiger, (...) ^584. (...) ^. 38.
^rater Johannis Thynne Equitis aurati, ex Antiqua Botteviliorum familia
oriurdus: qui in adolescentia magnam Europae partem perlustravit, in praelio ad
Mas^^lborough Eques catafractus contra Scotos pugnavit, and tandem aetate
consectus placide in domino obdormivit, 14. ^^e Martii 1584.

Johannes Chamberlain de Prestbury Armig. charissimo Affini hoc Monumentum
posuit.

Christus mihi vita and mors mihi lucrum. Phil. 1. Dies mortis aeternae vitae
natalis est.
Arms. viz.
Owen. Argent a Lion rampant and Canton sable, quartering eleven Coats: Arg. a
cross Patonce sable between four Cornish Choughs prop* a chief B. 2. Gules, six
Flower-de-lucies Arg. 3. Arg. on a bend B. three Garbs Or. 4. Arg. a Chev.
Gules between three Scorpions erect. sab. 5. Gules, an Eagle displayed with two
heads Or. 6* B. three Barrulets, and three Griffons heads erased in chief Or.
7. Gules, three birds, each perching on the stump of a tree erased Argent. 8.
Arg. a Fess between three birds in chief, and one in base sable. ^. Arg. a
Cheveron between three Talbots passant. sab. 10. Gules a Flower-de-luce Or. 11.
B. a Fess between six cross Croslets fitchy Or. Crest on a Torce of his
colors, two Eagles heads erased, endorsed Or.

On one side. Owen. With quarterings as before, Impaling Baskervile, viz.
Argent a Cheveron Gules between three hearts, crescent difference.

On the other. Owen. With quarterings as before, Impaling. Argent a Pomegranate
tree prop. full of fruit, Or.

17. Epitaph. viz. Deo Trino and uni sacrum.
Secundum Christi Redemptoris adventum A. D. 1598. Thomas Owen. vid. 38.
sub hoc tumulo expectat Thomas Owen Armiger, Filius Richardi Owen ex Maria
altera filia and haeres Thomae Oteley de Comitatu Salopiae Armigeri: Qui ab
adolescentia studiis juris municipalis Angliae innutritus, ita industria,
ingenio and judicio claruit ut primum electus fuerit dominae Reginae
Elizabethae serviens ad Legem, inde in consessum Justiciariorum communium
placitorum cooptatus. Inter quos cum quinque annos singulari integritatis,
aequitatis and prudentiae laud sedisset, and ex Sarah uxore charissima filia
and una haeredum Humfredi Baskervile quinque filios and totidem filias
suscepisset ( Alicia fideli uxore secunda superstite) pi^ in Christo obdomivit
21. die December. Ann. salutis 1598.

Rogerus Owen filius moestissimus Patri optimo and charissimo officiosae
pietatis and memoriae ergo hoc monumentum posuit.

Justorum animae in manu Dei sunt. Spes vermis and Ego.

Arms. viz.
Gruffith. Gules, a Cheveron Ermine between three old men's heads coped prop.
their Perewigs Or. quartering eight Coats: 1. Gules, a Saracens head erased
prop. banded about the forehead with a Wreath Or and B. 2. B. three Mullets Or.
3. B. a Lion rampant Argent. 4. Ermine a Lion rampant sable. 5. Per bend
sinister Ermine and Ermiues a Lion rampant Or. 6 B. a Lion rampant per Fess Or
and Argent, within a bordure of the last. 7. Gules, a Fess Ermine between three
Bucks heads Cabossed, parted per pale Argent and Or. 8. Gules a Lion rampant,
and six cross Croslets Argent.

18. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the Body of Peers Gruffith A. D. 1628. Peers Gruffith. vid.. 34.
Esquire, Son and Heir to Sir Ree Gruffith, and Grandchild to Sir William
Gruffith Chamberlain of North Wales, who died the eighteenth of August 1628*

Arms. viz.
Radley. Argent a Cheveron, Gules between three Adders sable. Impaling vert on
a bend indented Or, three Martlets sable.

19. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Mistress Bridget A. D. ^679. (...) (...)y. vid.. ^.
Radley the most deservedly beloved Wi^e of Charles Radley Esquire, Gentleman
Usher, daily Waiter to his Majesty, which place he parted withal, not being
able to do the duty of it, by r^^son of his great indisposition both of body
and mind, occasioned by his just s^^row for the loss of her; she charged this
life for a better the twentieth of November 1679.

Arms viz. Mo^land. Sable, a Leopards head jessant, a Flower-de-luce and Lion
of England in the Dexter* Chief all Or, with Ulster* Impaling

H(...). B. two ^a^s Danzette Ermine, between six cross Croslets Arg. 3. 2. 1.

20. Epitaph. viz.
(...)
(...)

(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
Carola, Daughter of Roger Harsnet A. D. 1674. Carol. Morland. vid.. 34.
Esquire, and of Carola his Wife, the truly loving (and truly beloved) Wife of
Samuel Morland Knight and Baronet, bare a second Son October 4. died October
10. Anno Dom. 1674. aetatis 23.

21. Epitaph. viz.
To preserve the memory of two A D. 1672. Sir Charles Harbord, and Clem.
Cotterel. vid.. 34.
faithful Friends, who lost their lives at Sea together May 28. 1672.

Arms, viz. Harbord. Quarterly three Lions rampant, a Crescent difference.

Sir Charles Harbord Knight. third Son of Sir Charles Harbord Knight, his Majesty's
Surveyor general, and first ^ieutenant of the Royal James, under the most noble
and illustrious Captain, Edward Earl of Sandwich, Vice Admiral of England,
which after a terrible ^ight, maintained to admiration against a Squadron of
the Holland Fleet, for above six hours, near the Suffolk Coast, having put off
two Fireships, at last, being utterly disabled, a few of her men remaining
unhurt, was by a third unfortunately set on fire. But he, though he swome well,
neglected to save himself, as some did: and out of perfect love to that worthy
Lord (whom for many years he had constantly accompanied in all his honorable
employments, and in all the engagements of the former War) died with him at the
age of 32. much bewailed of his Father, whom he never offended, and much
beloved by all for his known piety, virtue, loyalty, fortitude, and fidelity.

Arms. viz. Cotterel. A bend between three Escalop shells, a fille of three
difference.

Clement Cotterell Esquire, eldest Son of Sir Charles Cotterel Knight, Master
of the Ceremonies, and his Assistant to have succeeded in that Office, for
which he was very fit, having a tall ha^some person, a graceful winning
behavior, and great natural parts, much improved by study, and by converse in
most Courts of Europe, were firm to the Church of England, he learned not their
Vices, but Customs and Languages, understanding seven, and speaking four of
them as his own, though but 22 years old. Yet not content to serve his King and
Country at home, only his excess of courage, excited by a deep sense of honor,
could not be kept from going Volunteer with the Earl of Sandwich, with whom he
had been in Spain when his Excellence was there Ambassador Extraordinary, and
with whom, after having returned unwounded into his Ship, from being the first
man who had boarded a Dutch one of 60 Guns, and pulled down the Ensign of it
with his own hands, he also perished, universally lamented.

Arms. viz. Bingham. Gules, a bend cottised between six crosses formy Or,
quartering Ermine, a Lion rampant Gules crowned Or, Crest on a Torce of his
colors, a Rock prop. thereon an Eagle preparing to fly prop.

22. Epitaph. viz. To the Glory of the Lord of Hosts.
Here under rests Sir Richard A. D. 1598. Sir Richard Bingham. vid.. 34.
Bingham Knight, of the ancient Family of the Binghams of Bingham Melcombe* in
the County of Dorset, who from his Youth trained up in military affairs, served
in the time of Queen Mary at St. Quintins, in the Western Isles of Scotland,
and Conquet in Britain. In the time of Queen Elizabeth ^^ Lies in Scotland, in
the Isle of Candy, at the burning of Cabochrio in Turkey, in the Civil Wars of
France, in the Netherlands, and at Smerwick in Ireland. After he was made
Governor of Connaght where he overthrew the Irish Scots, expelled the
traitorous Ororcke, suppressed diverse Rebellions, and that with very small
charge to her Majesty, maintaining that Province in a flourishing estate by the
space of thirteen years. Finally, for his good service he was made Marshal of
Ireland, and General of Leinster, where at Dublin, in an assured faith in
Christ, he ended this transitory life the nineteenth of January Anno Dom. 1598.
aetat. 70.

This is done by Sir John Bingley, sometime his Servant.

Arms. viz. Offic. Regis Armor. Tit. Clarentieux. Argent St. Georges Cross, on
a chief Gules a Lion of England. Impaling Camden. Argent a Fess ingrailed
between six cross Croslets fitchy sable.

23. Epitaph. viz.
Qui side antiqua and opera assidua Britannicam A. D. 1623. Guliel. Camdenus.
Vid.. 35.
Antiquitatem indagavit, simplicitatem inna^^m honestis studiis excoluit, animi
s^lertiam candore illustravit Gulielmus Camdenus, ab Eliz^betha Regina ad Regis
Armorum ( Clarentii titulo) dignitatem ev^catu^, hic spe certa resurgendi in
Christo, S. E. Q Obiit. Anno Dom. 1623. 9. November. aetatis suae 74.

Arms. viz, Triplet. An Hind current regardant, shot through the neck with an
Arrow, and chief indented.

24. Epitaph. viz.
Hic requiescit vir reverendus Dr. Thomas A. D. 1670. Tho. Triplet, S. T. D.
vid.. 35.
Triplet, ex agro Oxoniensi Praebendarius hujus Ecclesiae qui postquam ad annum
aetatis septuagesimum pietate and cultus assiduitate Deo, Graecae linguae
peritia non vulgari, doctis largitate and continua beneficentia egenis, morum
innocua jucunditate, omnibus carum se praebuisset, ab hac vita ad meliorem
commigravit, Anno Dom. 1670. die Julii. 18.

Arms. viz. Casaubon. A Lion rampant, debrused by a Fess, thereon three Mullets.

25. Epitaph. viz. Isaacus Casaubonus.
(O Doctiorum quicquid est assurgite Huic tam colendo nomini)
Quem Gallia Reip. literariae bono peperit, A. D. 1614. Is^ac. Casaubon. vid..
35.
Henricus IV. Francorum Rex invictissimus Lutetiam literis suis evocatum
Bibliothecae suae praefecit charumque deinceps dum vixit habuit, eoque terris
erepto Jacobus Mag. Brit. Monarcha Regum doctissimus doctis indulgentiss. in
Angliam accivit, munifice fovit, posteritasque ob doctrinam aeternum mirabitur,
H. S. E. invidia major. Obiit aetern. in Christo vitam anhelans. Kal. Jul.
1614. aetatis 55.

Viro optimo immortalitate digniss. Thomas Mortonus Episc. Dunelm. jucundissime
quod frui licuit memor. Pr. S. P. cv. 1634.

Qui noscere vult Casaubonum non saxa sed cartas legate.

Superfuturas marmori and profuturas posteris.

Arms. viz. Coxe. Three barulets, on a Canton a Lions head erased, a Mullet
difference, Crest on a Torce a Naggs head erased.

26. Epitaph. viz.
Deo Optimo Maximo.
Hic in Domino requiescit Richardus A. D. 1623. Sir Rich. Coxe. vid.. 35.
Coxe de Porters Eques aurat. filius tertius Thomae Coxe de Beymonds Comitat.
Hertford Armigeri, in Hospitio regio per multos annos Oeconomicus, fidelitate,
diligentia and prudentia probatus, Reginae Elizabethae a Dietis, item and Regi
Jacobo, cui tandem factus est Magister hospitii digniss. vir religionis cultu,
morum comitate, corporis castitate, affectuum temperantia imprimis spectatus
erga been meritos amore suos, benificentia pauperes, caritate omnes, aequitate
clarus, Anno aetatis 60. coelebs, postquam se vita meliori multa vigilantia and
deductione praeparasset, Deo placide animam reddidit. 13. December. 1623.

Johannes Coxe de Beymonds Armiger, Frater secundus, Fratri e testamento haeres
amoris hoc monumentum posuit.

Deus non est mortuorum sed viventium.

27. Epitaph. viz.
Prope jacet, Gulielmus Outram, S. T. P. A. D. 1679. Gul. Outram. S. T. P.
vid.. 35.
ex agro Derbiensi Collegiorum apud Cantabrigienses S. and individuae
Trinitatis and Christi socius, hujus Ecclesiae Canonicus, and Leicest.
Archidiaconus. Theologus consummatus, and omnibus numeris absolutus, scriptor
nervosus and accuratus, concionator egregius and assiduus, primo in agro
Lincoln. postea Londini and tandem apud S. Margaretam Westminster. ubi confecit
postremum vitae suae cursum magna cum laud nec minori fructu; sed in tantis
laboribus, and animi contentione dum sacrarum literarum and sanctorum patrum
studio ardebat, ut in renum dolores inciderit; quibus diu afflictus, and tandem
fractus, aequissimo animo e vita discessit, Aug. 23. Anno Dom. 1679. postquam
impleverat annum quinquagesimum quartum.

28. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies (expecting the second A. D. 1596. Edmund Spencer. vid.. 36.
coming of our Savior Jesus Christ) the body of Edmund Spencer, the Prince of
Poets in his time, whose divine spirit needs no other witness than the works
which he left behind him. He was born in London in the year 1510. and died in
the year 1596.

Arms. viz. Barrow. Two Swords in Saltire, the dexter surmounted by the
sinister points upwards between four Flower-de-lucies.

29. Epitaph. viz.
Isaacus Barrow S. T. P. Regi Carolo A. D. 1677. Isaac Barrow S. T. P. vid.. 35.
secundo a sacris, vir prope divinus, and vere magnus, si quid magni habeat
pietas, probitas, fides, summa eruditio, par modestia, mores sanctissimi
undequaque and suavissimi, Geometriae Professor Londini Greshamensis, Graecae
linguae and Matheseos, apud Cantabrigienses, suos Cathedras omnes ecclesiam,
gentem ornavit, Collegium S. S. Trinitatis praeses illustravit, jactis
Bibliothecae vere Regiae sundamentis auxit, opes, honores, and universum vitae
ambitum, ad majora (...)us, non contempsit, sed reliquit seculo. Deum quem a
teneris coluit, cum primis imitatus est paucissimis egendo, benefaciendo quam
plurimis etiam posteris quibus vel mortuus concionari non desinit, caetera ut
paene majora ac scriptis peti possunt. Abi Lector, and aemulare. Obiit 4. die
Maii Anno Dom. 1677. aetatis suae 47. Monumentum hoc amici posuere.

Arms. viz. Draiton. Guttee, a Pegasus current in Bend, Crest on a Torce, the
cap, or chapau of Mercury within the beams of the Sun.

30. Epitaph. viz.
Michael Draiton Esquire, a Memorable A. D. 1631. Mich, Draiton, vid.. 37.
Poet of this Age exchanged his Laurel for a Crown of glory, 1631.

Do pious Marble, let thy Reader know
What they and what their Children ow
To Draitons Name, whose sacred Dust
We recommend unto thy trust.
Protect his Memory, and preserve his Story,
Remain a lasting Monument of his Glory,
And when thy ruins shall disclaim
To be the Treasurer of his name,
His name, that cannot fade, shall be
An everlasting Monument to thee.
Arms viz. Chaucer. Per pale Gules and Argent, a A. D. 1400. Galfr. Chaucer.
vid.. 37.
bend counterchanged.

31. Epitaph. viz.
M. S.
Qui fuit Anglorum Vates ter maximus olim,
Galfridus Chaucer, conditur hoc tumulo,
Annum si quaeras domini, si tempora mortis,
Ecce notae subsunt, quae tibi cuncta notant.
25. Octobris 1400.

Aerumnarum requies Mors.

N. Brigham hos fecit musarum nomine sumptus, 1556.
32. Epitaph. viz.
Abrahamus Cowleius, A. D. 1667. Abra. Cowley. vid.. 37.

Anglorum Pindarus, Flaccus, Maro,
deliciae, decus, desiderium aevi sui,
Hic juxta situs est.
Aurea dum volitant late tua scripta per orbem
Et fama aeternum vivis, Divine Poeta,
Hic placida jaceas requie, custodiat urnam
Cana fides, vigilen^que p^renni lampade musae.
Sit sacer iste locus, nec quis temerarius ausit
Sacrilega turbare manu, venerabile bustum.
Intacti maneant, maneant p^r secula dulcis
Cowleii cineres, serventque immobile saxum.
Sic vove^, Georgius Dux Buckinghamiae. Excessit e vita anno aetatis suae 49.
and honorisica pompa elatus ex aedibus Buckinghamia^is, viris illustribus
omnium ordinum exequias celebrantibus, sepultus est Dietertio Men. Aug. Annoque
Dom. 1667.

Arms. viz. Cowley. A Lion rampant within a bordure A. D. 1667. Abra. Cowley.
vid.. 41.
ingrailed, charged with eight Mullets.

33. Epitaph. viz.
Abrahamus Cowleius, H. S. E. 1667.

Arms. viz. Thornburgh. Ermine, fretty, and a chief.

34. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Gilbert Thornburgh A. D. 1650. Gilbert Thornburg. vid..
40.
Esquire, Gentleman of the Cellar to the King. who died the first day of
October 1667. in the 56. year of his age.

Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace, Psalm. 37. 37.
Arm. viz. Radcliffe. A bend ingrailed. Impaling Trapps. Three Cheval Trapps.

35. Epitaph. viz.
Hic jacet Anna Radcliff, Georgii A. D. 1659. Anna Radcliff. vid.. 41.
Equitis aurati conjux, and Francisci Trappes Equitis aurati, filia e Comitat.
Ebor, Obiit anno 1659. aetatis 58. Maii 13.

36. Epitaph. viz.
O rare Ben. Johnson. Ben Johnson. vid.. 41.


Arms. viz. Price. A. Lion rampant regardant Impaling a Ship at Anchor, the
Sails furled.

37. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the Body of Martha, the A. D. 1678. Martha Price. vid.. 41.
Wife of Gervase Price Esquire, Sergeant of the Office of Trumpets to King
Charles II. and Gentleman of his Bows; she died the seventh day of April 1678.
in the thirty eighth year of her age.

38. Epitaph. viz.
Maria uxor chariss. Tho Willis, M. D. A. D. 167^. Maria Willis. vid.. 43.
necnon D. D. Sam. Fell, S. T. P. and Ecclesiae Cathed. Christi Oxon. Decani
filia: faemina si quae alia pietate, prudentia, and morum suavitate insignis,
summo omnium ac imprimis mariti cum desiderio and luctu obiit in vigilia omnium
sanctorum Anno Dom. 1670. jamque hic conditur festi illius auroram expectans
aeternam; in eadem etiam humo Katharina eorum filia sepulta fuit postridie S.
Michaelis Anno Dom. 1667.

Arms. viz. Sanchez. On a cross flory five roundles.

39. Epitaph. viz.
Hic situs est Didacus Sanchez, de Riba-de-Neira, A. D. 1557. Did. Sanchez.
vid.. 43.
Hispanus, ex equestri Galaicorum stirpe creatus. Obiit Anno Dom. 1557. 16.
Kalend. Junii, divis Philippo and Maria Regibus.

Arms. viz. De-Vic. Three Cheval Trapps, Chief with the Escutcheon of Vlster.

40. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the mortal part of Sir Henry A. D. 1672. Sir Hen^y De-Vic Baromet.
Vid.. 43.
De-Vic Baronet, and Chancellor of the noble Order of the Garter. He departed
this life the twentieth of November 1672. He was married to Margaret Carteret,
the Daughter of Sir Philip Carteret of the Isle of Iersey, by whom he had
Charles De-Vic Baronet, and Anne-Charlotte De-Vic, marrieed to John Lord
Frescheville Baron of Staveley in the County of Derby, who caused this Stone to
be here laid to the memory of her dear Father.

Arms. viz. James. Two Bars batelle counter battelle, Impaling,

Kil^egr^w. An Imperial Eagle within a bordure, round'lee.

41. Epitaph. viz.
M. S.
Here lies the body of Dame Mary A. D. 1677. Mary James. vid.. 41.
James, late Wife of John James Knight, descended of the ancient Family of the
Lords of Hastritcht in Holland, and Daughter of Sir Robert Killegrew Knight,
sometime Vice-chamberlain to Mury Queen of England, and Wife of his Sacred
Majesty King Charles I. of blessed memory, by whom she had Issue one Son named
John, and one Daughter named Elizabeth, which died in their Infancy. The said
Dame Mary James departed this mortal life on the sixth day of November, in the
year of our Lord 1677.

Arms viz. Morland. A Leopards head jessant, a Flower-de-luce in the Dexter
chief point a Lion passant gardant, with the Arms of ulster. Impaling two bars
Danzette Ermine, and six cross Croslets.

42. Epitaph. viz.
Carola Lady Morland. 1674. A. D. 1674. Carola Morland, vid.. 41.


Arms. viz. Morland. A Leopards head jessant, a Flower-de-Luce in the Dexter
chief point a Lion passant gardaut, with the Arms of ulster. Impaling on a Fess
three Lozenges, a Crescent diff.

43. Epitaph. viz.
Anne Lady Morland, 22 Feb. 1679 / 8,. A. D. 1679. Anne Morland. vid.. 42.


44. Epitaph. viz.
Mistress Bridget Radley died November A. D. 1674. Bridget Radley. vid.. 41.
1674. for whom this Monument was erected.

Arms. viz. Isham. A Fess, and three Piles wavy in chief.

45. Epitaph. viz.
Exuviae Judithae Isham filiae Domini A. D. 1679. Judith Isham. vid.. 44.
Justiniani Isham Baronetti, quae obiit 18 die Maii 1679.

46. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of John Osboldston A. D. 1666. Joh. Osboldston. vid.. 44.
of Leland in the County of Lancaster Esquire, Page of the Bedchamber to King
Charles II. He died the first of March 1666. and was buried the fifth day of
the same month, aged sixty five years.

47. Epitaph. viz. A. D. 1378. Robert Haule. vid.. 44.

..................
Medolus, ira, furor multorum, Militis atque
..................
..... in hoc gladiis celebri pietatis asylo,
Dum levita Dei sermones legit ad aram:
Proh dolor! ipse meo Monachorum sanguine vultus
Aspersi moriens, chorus est mihi testis in aevum.
Et me nunc retinet sacer is locus Haule Robertum,
Hic quia pestiferos male sensi primitus enses.
..................
48. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Samuel Bolton A. D. 1668. Sam. Bolton. vid.. 44.
Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty Charles II. and
Prebendary of this Cathedral Church, deceased the eleventh of February 1668.

49. Epitaph. viz.
Hic situs est Tho. Chiffinch serenissimi A. D. 1666 Tho. Chiffinch. vid.. 44.
Caroli secundi a teneris annis in utraque fortuna fidus Assecla ac proinde a
Regiis Cimeliis primo constitutus, vir notissimi candoris and probitatis. Obiit
6. Id. April. A. D. 1666.

50. Epitaph. viz.
O Rare Sir William Davenant. Sir Will. Davenant. vid.. 44.


51. Epitaph. viz.
Thomas Par of the County of Salop, A. D. 1635. Thomas Par. vid.. 44.
born in anno 1483. he lived in the Reigns of ten Princes, viz. King Edward IV.
King Edward V. King Richard III. King Henry VII. King Henry VIII. King Edward
VI. Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles. Aged 152 years,
and was buried here November. 15. 1635.

Arms. viz. Or. on a Pile Gules between six Flowerde-luces B. three Lions of
England, quartering, 1. Gules two wings conjoined in lewre Or. 2. Varry. 3.
Argent, three demi Lions rampant Gules. 4. Parted per bend Argent and Gules,
three Roses in bend counterch. 5. Argent on a bend Gules three Leopards heads
Or. Impaling, Gules on a bend between six cross Croslets fitchy Argent, a
Mullet sable difference quartering. 1. England and a file of three Argent 2.
Cheque Or and B. 3. Gules a Lion rampant, Arg. Crests. 1. Out of a ducal Crown
a Phoenix burning in her Nest prop. 2. On a chapau Gules turned up Ermine, a
Lion passant Or, crowned Argent, on the shoulder a Mullet sable. 3. On a chapau
Gules, turned up Ermine, a Wyverne, viz. the Wings cheque Or and B. 4. Out of a
ducal Crown two Wings Gules, on each a bend Argent.

52. Epitaph. viz.
D. O. M. and Memoriae Sacrum.
Sub hoc tumulo in Christo obdormit honoratissima A. D. 1598. Franc. Comitissa
Hertfordiae. Vid.. 46.
Francisca Comitissa Hertfordiae, uxor charissimi and nobilissimi Edw. Comitis
Hertfordiae, Baronis de Bello Campo, filiii illustrissimi Principis Edwardi
Ducis Somerset, Comitis Hertfordiae, Vicecomitis de Bello Campo, and Baronis
Seymour.

Heroina amplissima familia nata, filia utique clarissimi Gulielmi Baronis
Howard de Effingham praenobilissimi Ordinis Garteriani sodalis, summi Angliae
Admiralii regnante Maria, Camerarii Regii hospitii and privati sigilli custodis
regnante Elizabetha; filius ille fuit illustrissi-Principis Thomae Ducis Norf.
Comitis Surriae, Comitis Marescalli Angliae, paterque honoratissimi Caroli
Comitis Nottinghamiae Baronis Howard de Effingham, Garteriani Ordinis sodalis
and summi Angliae Admiralii.

Clarissima haec domina omnibus virtutibus animi corporisque dotibus
ornatissima, quibus serenissimae Reginae singularem favorem and charissimi
mariti summum amorem consequuta est: gravi and diuturno morbo confecta, firma
in Christo fide, and invicta animi patientia in coelestem patriam demigravit,
cum vixisset annos 44. die 14. Maii, anno salutis 1598. and 40. anno
felicissimi regni serenissimae Reginae Elizabethae. Ad cujus perpetuam memoriam
in fidei conjugalis, sincerissimi amoris, and officiosae pietatis testimonium
moestissimus maritus Edwardus Comes Hertfordiae, etc. hoc monumentum multis cum
lacrymis posuit and consecravit.

Foy pour devoir. Desir n'a Repos.
Here lies intombed the noble Frances Countess of Hertford, dear Spouse unto
the noble Edward Earl of Hertford, and Baron Beauchamp, Son of (...) renowned
Prince Edward Duke of Somerset, Earl of Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp, and Baron
Seymour.

A Lady descended of right noble Lineage, being Daughter of the noble Lord
William Baron Howard of Effingham, Companion of the most famous Order of the
Garter, High Admiral to Queen Mary, and Lord Chamberlain of the Household, and
Lord Privy Seal to Queen Elizabeth, Son was he to the right noble Prince Thomas
Duke of Norfolk, and Earl of Surrey, Earl Marshal of England, and Father to the
Noble Charles Earl of Nottingham, and Baron Howard of Effingham, of the said
most noble Order of the Garter Knight, and Lord High Admiral of England.

This Lady, highly renowned for her many virtuous gifts and graces both of mind
and body, greatly favored by her gracious Sovereign, and dearly beloved of her
Lord, after long sickness, in firm faith in Christ and constant patience,
departed this life at forty four years of age the fourteenth day of May, anno
1598. in the fortieth year of the most happy Reign of our most gracious
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth. To whose memory the said Earl, her loving Lord
and Husband, much lamenting her death, in testification of his great love
toward her, and of his careful diligence in this doleful duty, does consecrate
this Monument.

Arms. viz. Cranfield On a pale three Flower-deluces: 2. On a saltire five
Martlets. 3. A Cheveron between three Scalop shells, 4. On a bend three
Martlets. Imp. 1. and 4. Billette, and a Fess Danzette 2. and 3. Five Roses in
Saltire, Crest to the first, out of a Ducal Crown an Antelops head coped. To
the second, a Griffons head and Wings charged with Flower-de-luces. Supporters,
an Antelope, and a Griffon.

53. Epitaph. viz.
M. S.
Lionelli Dom. Cranfield Middlesexiae, A. D. 645. Lyonel. Cranfield Com. Med.
and uxor prima. Vid.. 46.
Comitis, a Jacobo sagacissimo Principe in aulam acciti, and pro nativo ingenii
vigore, amplis tum honoribus, tum muneribus munificentissime decorati a
supplicum libellis, rei vestiariae, Orphanorum tutelae praefectus, and a
sanctioribus consiliis; subiit novissimae totius Angliae Thesaurariae
splendidissimam atque lubricam provinciam, in quibus, quam sedulo navarit
operam indicant tituli, Equitis aurati, Baronis de Cranfield Middlesexiae demum
Comitis atque alii vary collati, hinc gliscente invidia urgentur adversae
rerum procellae, dum animose movet lucentes (quae innocentiae conscientia)
forte jactatus tamen non naufragiis enatavit, sedata hieme figit Anchoram in re
lauta sereno senectutis ocio respiravit; hic depositus, dum lassum prius jam
luxatum corpus, nauclerus ille resuscitatum infusiore navigio, and coelesti
aeternitatis portu collocarit. Obiit Augusti 6, anno 1645. aetate plus minus 70.

Duas successive conjuges accepit, ex utrisque, suscepit prolem. Elizabetha
Prior, peperit foeminas; Elizabetham hodie Comitissam de Maulgrave; Martham
Comitissam de Monmouth; Mariam, quae ante nuptias diem obiit, ex Anna relicta
hodie Comitissa de Middlesex, and communi tumulo (modo Deus velit) inhumanda
cujus apponitur effigies; r^ti sunt Jacobus honorum haeres, Middlesexiae Comes;
Lionellus, and Edwardus superstites, Alterius sexus, Francisca Domina
Buckhurst; Susanna, ante octennium denata infans, haec Junii 25. 1647.

Arms. viz. Westminster. B. a cross Patonce between five Martlets Or, on a
chief of the last a pale quarterly France and England between two Roses Gules.
Impaling Go^m^n. Parted per pale Ermine and B. an Eagle displayed with two
heads Or, on a Canton of the second, a Martlet of the last.

54. Epitaph. viz.
D. O. M.
Gabriel Goodman Sacrae Theologiae A. D. 1601. Gabriel Goodman. vid.. 46.
Doctor, Decanus hujus Ecclesiae quintus, ^ai cum fumma laud 40. annos
praefuisset and Ruthiniae in Commit. Denbighensi ubi natus hospitalem fundasset,
Scholamque instituisset, vitae sanctimonia Deo, bonisque charus in coelestem
patriam pie emigravit, 17. Julii, anno salutis 1601. aetatis suae 73.

Arms. viz. Bill. Ermine two Wood Bills in saltire, on a chief a pale between
two Pellicans heads erased, charged with a Rose.

55. Epitaph. viz.
Hic jacet Guliel. Bill, Theologiae Doctor, A. D. 1561. Gul* Bill. S. T. P.
vid.. 46. Round the Verge.
Decanus Westmonast. Primarius, Collegii Aetonen. Collegii Trinitatis apud
Cantabrigiam, Praefectus, and serenissimae Reginae Elizabethae summus
Eleemosynarius. Obiit 15 Julii Anno salutis 1561.

Billus and ipse bonus fuit and virtutis Amator, Under his Effigies.

Et coluit doctos, doctus and ipse fuit.
Officii Custos erat atque Magister honesti,
Et been perfecit multa loquend^ pa^um.
Patria prudentem, fidum Regina ministrum
Perdidit and patrem pauper abesse gemit.
Et tria tale caput collegia moesta reliquit
Quale diu rursus non habitura reor.
Aut ego dilexi nimium (dum viveret, illum)
Aut Patriae magno concidit ipse malo.
Arms. viz France and Englan^ quarterly. A. D. 1367. Sim. Lan(...). vid.. 4^.


B. a cross Patonce between five Martle^s Or.

Gules a cross pattee between three Crowns Or.

The Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury.

The Episcopal See of Ely.

The Abbey of Westminiter. viz. Or on a chief, indented B. a Crosier Staff and
Miter of the first.

56. Epitaph. viz.
Simon de Langham sub petris his tumulatus, Round the Verge.

Istius Ecclesiae Monachus fuerit, Prior Abbas;
Sede vacant fuit electus Londoniensis
Praesul and insignis Ely, sed po^^e^ Primas
Totius Regni, magnus Regisque Minister:
Nam Thesaurarius, and Cancellarius ejus,
Ac Cardinalis in Roma Presbyter iste.
Pos^que Praenestinus est factus Episcopus, atque
Nuncius ex part Papae transmittitur is it huc,
Orb dolente pater, quem nunc revocare nequimus,
Magdalenae foesto, milleno septuageno,
Etter centeno, sexto Christi ruit anno.
Hunc Deus absolvat de cunctis quae mala ^essit
Et meritis matris sibi coelica gaudia donet.
Arms. viz. Stokes. Ermine three bars humett. B. each charged with five ears of
Corn Or, quartering Or, a Lion rampant Gules. Impaling

Brandon. With quarterings, viz. 1 and 4. barry often, Arg. and Gules a Lion
rampant. Or, crowned per pale of the first and second. 2. and 3 quarterly: 1.
and 4. B. a cross moline Or. 2. and 3. bendy Lozengy Ermine and Gules.

On one side these Arms, viz. France and England within a bordure Gobony Arg.
and B. quartering

Brandon with quarterings as before.

57. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the Lady Frances Duchess A. D. 1563. Fran. Duciss. Suffolcia.
vid.. 56.
of Suffolk, Daughter to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and Mary the French
Queen, first Wife to Henry Duke of Suffolk, and after to Adrian Stokes Esquire,
1563.

In clariss. Dom. Franciscae Suffolciae quondam Ducissae Epicedion.

Nil de^us aut splendour, nil regia nomina prosunt
Splendida divitiis, nil juvat ampla domus.
Omnia fluxerunt, virtutis sola remansit
Gloria, Tartareis non abolenda rogis.
Nupta duci prius est, uxor post Armigeri Stokes,
Funere nunc valeas consociata Deo.
Arms. viz. Holles. Ermine two Piles in point sable, A. D. 1622. Francis
Holles. viz.. 54.
quartering, Argent a Lion rampant Gules. 2. Sable a Crescent surmounted by a
Mullet Arg. 3. Argent three Cheveronels sab. Crest on a Torce of his colors, a
black head coped prop. bound about the forehead with a wreath Argent and B.

58. Epitaph. viz.
What so thou have of Nature, or of Arts,
Youth, Beauty, Strength, or what excelling parts
Of mind and body; Letters, Arms, and worth,
His eighteen years beyond his years brought forth;
Then stand and read thy self within this glass,
How soon those perish, and thy self may pass.
Man's life is measured by the work, not days;
No aged sloth, but active youth has praise.
Francisco Holles, Belgio aeger regressus, obiit Pride. Id. Augusti anno
Dominic. aetatis 1622. suae 18. Johannes Comes de Clare, filio natu tertio, and
merentissimo moerentissimus pater posuit.

Arms. viz. Russel Argent, a Lion rampant Gules, on A. D. ^584. John Dom.
Russel. vid.. 5^.
a chief sable, three escalop Shells Argent. 2. B. a C^^le and Fane Argent. 3.
Or, two Barrulets Gules a cresc. difference. 4. Gules three Fishes hauriant
barways Argent. 5. Sable a Griffon Sergreant, between three cross Croslets
fitchy Argent. 6. Sable three Cheverons Ermine a Crescent difference. 7. Sable
three Dove coats Argent. 8. Argent on a cross Gules, 5 Mullets Or, Impaling Or
a Cheveron Compony Gules and B. between three Cinque^oyls of the last;
quartering 1. Sab. a Fess between three Pheons Argent. 2. Or on the breast on
an Eagle displayed with two heads B. a Flower-deluce Arg. 3. Three Eaglets
displ. in bend between two Co(...)es. 4. Gules, a Fess compony Arg. and sab.
between six crosses patte fitchy in the foot Or. 5. Or, two bends, Gules. 6.
Bendy of ten Or, and B. 7 B. a Lion rampant within a bordure Argent, Crest to
the first, on a Torce of his colors, a Goat passant Arg. armed and ungued Or,
Crest to the second on a Torce of his colors, a Unicorns head coped Or,
between two Wings B.

59. Epitaph. viz.
Carmina aerumnosae Matris in supersti^es filias.
Plangite nunc natae, nunc flebile fundite Carmen,
Occidit heu v^strae gloria sola domus.
Mors rapit i(...)it is storentem stemmate claro,
Prae ignem literis, tum pietate patrem,
Haer^di comitis quin vos succrescite, tali
Ortu qui nituit sed bonitate magis.
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
Ejusdem in eundem Latin.
Mors mea crudeli laniatur saucia morsu,
Cum subit oblatae mortis Imago tuae.
Vere novo haeres comitis tu floris ad instar,
Vsque cadens miseras, meque measque sacis.
Quippe decor vultus, linguae, moresque probati,
Tum doctrina perit, sed viget alma fides.
Carmina aerumnosae Matris Dominae Elizabethae Russel in obitum filii.
En solamen avi, patris pergrata voluptas,
Ipsa medulla mihi tristia fata tulit.
O utinam Matter jacuissem lumine cassa
Solvissetque prior justa suprema mihi.
Conqueror at frustra, statuit quia Numen ad ipsum
Orbant terrenis, sola superna petam.
In obitum honoratissimi viri Domini Johannis Russelii soceri sui charissimi
Edw. Hobii Militis Epicedion.

Mors Russelle tibi somno suffudit ocellos
Men's tamen in Coelis nescia mortis agit.
Qui vitam sanctam meliori sine peregit
Vivit, and evicta morte superstes erit.
Quis, qualis quantus fueris tua stemmata monstrant;
Integra vita docet, morsque dolenda probat,
Sat sit privigno posuisse haec carmina pauca
Tu sibi mente parens, filius ille tibi.
Right noble twice, by Virtue, and by Birth,
Of Heaven loved, and honored on the Earth.
His Countries hope, his Kindreds chief delight,
My Husband dear, more than this worlds light,
Death has me reft: But I from death will take
His memory, to whom this Tomb I make.
John was his name; (ah was!) wretch must I say,
Lord Russel once, now my tear-thirsty clay.
Arms. viz. Knowles B. a cross refercile voided, and crucilly Or, quartering
Gules on a Cheveron Argent, three Roses of the field. Impaling,

Carey. viz. Argent on a bend sab. three Roses of the field. 2. Sab. two bars
nebule, Ermine. France and England within a bordure Gobony Arg. and B. 4.
Gules, a Fess between six cross Croslets Or. 5. Cheque Or and B. a Cheveron
Ermine. 6 Gules, a Cheveron between ten crosses patte Arg. 7. Gules, a Lion
passant gardant Arg crowned Or 8. Arg. a Chev. Gules between three Bulls heads
coped sab. armed Or. 9. Quarterly Arg. and sab. 10. Or, a chief indent. B. 11.
Arg. a Lion rampant sab. crowned, Gules. 12. B. a Fess between six cross
Croslets Or. 13. Sab. three dexter hands coped at the Wrists Argent. 14. Arg.
on a chief. sab. three crosses patte fitchy Arg. 15. B. a fret Arg and chief
Gules. 16. Gules, two bends wavy, Or, crests, 1. On a Torce Or and B. a maidens
head prop. 2. Crest, on a Torce Arg. and sab. a Swan prop. with wings expansed.

60. Epitaph. viz.
The right honorable Lady Katharine A. D. 1568. Kath. Knowles. vid.. 55.
Knowles, chief Lady of the Queens Majesty's Bedchamber, and Wife to Sir
Francis Knowles Knight, Treasurer of her Highness Household, departed this life
the fifteenth of January 1568. at Hampton Court, and was honorably buried in
the floor of this Chapel. This Lady Knowles and the Lord Hunsdon her Brother
were the Children of William Carey Esquire, and of the Lady Mary his Wife, one
of the Daughters and Heirs to Thomas Bullen Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond, which
Lady Mary was Sister to Anne Queen of England Wife to King Henry VIII. Father
an^ Mother to Elizabeth Queen of England.

Quae Francisce fuit tibi conjux en Katherina,
M^r^ua sub gelido marmore Knollae jacet,
Excid^ ex animo tibi mortua, sat scio nunquam,
Viva (...) v^vo semper amata fuit.
Illa tibi (...)es sex and bis quinque marito
Protulit, aequalis foemina, masque fuit.
Haec tecum multos utinam vixisset in aunos,
Et tua nunc conjux facta fuisset anus.
Noluit at Deus, hoc voluit sed sponsa maritum,
In coelis maneas, O Katherina tuum.
Arms. viz. Seymour Or, on a pile Gules between six Flower-de-luces B. three
Lions of England, this being an augmentation Coat. 2. Gules two Wings conjoined
in lewre, pendant, Or. 3. Varry. 4. Arg. three demi Lions ramp. Gules. 5.
Parted per bend Arg. and Gules, three roses in bend counterchanged. 6. Arg. on
a bend Gules, three Leopards heads, Or, Crest out of a ducal Crown Or, a Phoenix
burning in her nest prop.

61. Epitaph. viz.
The noble Lady Jane Seymour, A. D. 1560. Jane Seymour. vid.. 55.
Daughter to the renowned Prince Edward Duke of Somerset* Earl of Hertford,
Viscount Beauchampe, Baron Seymour, and to the right noble Lady Anne, Duchess
of Somerset, his Wife, departed this life in her Virginity at the age of
nineteen years the nineteenth of March Anno 1560. in the second year of the
most happy Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and was honorably buried in the floor of
this Chapel, to whose memory Edward Earl of Hertford, and Baron Beauchamp, her
dear Brother, has caused this Monument to be made.

Arms. viz. Pecksal. Argent on a cross flory, ingrailed sab. between four
Cornish Choughs prop. a Mullet diff. Or, Crest on a Torce of his colors, a
Blacks head coped prop.

On one side. Pecksall. As before. Impaling Pawlet. viz. Sab. three swords
points in point Arg. Hilts and Pomels Or.

On the other. Pecksall. As before, Impaling, Cotgrave. Viz. Gules a Fess
danzette Ermine between three Bugle horns stringed Or.

Round about the Tomb. Cotgrave. As before. Impaling Arg. 4. Ermine in cross
Crescents diff.

Cotgrave. Impaling. B An Eagle displaied Argent.

Cotgrave. As before. Impaling, Gules a Lion rampant between three cross
Croslets fitchy Or.

Pawlet. Impaling barry of 6. Ermine and Gules.

Pawlet Impaling, Gules three Water budgets Erm.

Pa^^e^. With a Crescent difference impaling P^wlet.

Pecksall. Impaling sab. a Lion ramp. gardant Or.

Then Gules three Bugle horns Or.

Arg. on a chief Gules, two Mullets pierced Or.

Gules three Pheons Argent.

Gu^es three c^ose Helmets Or.

The last impaling Arg. two bars sab. a Crescent diff.

Barry of six Or and Vert a bendlet Gules.

Gules two close Helmets in chief Arg. and a garb in base Or. Impalin, Gules a
Lion ramp. within a bordure ring Or.

62. Epitaph. viz.
Deo and Posteris.
Gloriosam in Christo resurrectionem hic A. D. Sir Richard Pecksall, vid.. 50.
expectat Richardus Pecksall, Eques auratus, prudentia and probitate
clarissimus. Qui primo duxit Aeleonoram filiam Gulielmi Paulet, Marchionis
Wintoniae and summi Angliae Thesaurarii quae illi quatuor filias peperit,
postea Aeleonoram filiam J. Cotgrave, quae Johanni Sauvage, Equiti aurato de
comitatu Cestriae renupta, conjugi charissimo officiosae pietatis ergo in
perpetuam fidei conjugalis memoriam hoc monumentum suis sumptibus Libens
Lubensque posuit.

Nascendo morimur, vita altera morte paratur,
Non mors sejungat, quos Christus junxit amore.
Amplior in coelo domus est, ne creed caducis.
Ut vivas vitae sit tibi cura tuae.
Arms. viz. Bourchier. A cross ingrailed between four waterboudgets quartering
billette and a Fess, A. D. Hum. Bourchier. vid.. 60.
over all a file of three, Impaling a Cheveron between three Griffons heads
erased. 2. Three Barrulets, a bend ingrailed. 3. Three Crescents. 4. A Fess
between two Cheverons. 5. Three Cheveronels. 6. Three Flower-de-luces within a
bordure.

63. Epitaph. viz.
Hic pugil ecce jacens Bernet fera bella cupiscens.
Certat ut Aeacides, fit saucius undique Miles,
Vi cecidit vulnus, Mars porrigit arma cruore,
Sparsim tincta rubent, dolor en lacrymabilis hora,
Lumine nempe cadit, quo Christus morte resurgit,
Bourchier Humfridus clara propagine dictus.
Edwardi Regis qui tertius est vocitatus,
John Domini Barners proles and parvulus haeres,
Quartus and Edwardus belli tenet ecce triumphum,
Quo perit Humfridus, ut regis vernula verus
Cyronomon mensae sponsae Regis fuit iste,
Elizabeth sibi sic sua virtus crescit honor,
Armis conspicuus quondam charusque Britannis
Hic fuit: ut coelis vivat deposcite votis.
Arms. viz. France and England (within a bordure) quarterly. Impaling a bend
cottised, between six Lions rampant, quartering two bends. Then the second Coat
Impaling quarterly, first and fourth a Lion rampant; second and third Cheque.

64. Epitaph. viz.
Cy gist Eleonore de Bohun eisne fille A. D. 1399. Eleonore Duchess of Glouc.
vid.. 59.
and un des heirs l' honorable Seigneur Mons. Humfrey de Bohun, Conte de
Hereforde, d' Essex, and de Northampton, and Conestable d' Engleterre, Femme a
puissant and noble Prince Thomas de Woodstock, Fitz a tres excellent and
trepuissant Seigneur Edward Roi d' Engleterre puis le conquest tierz, Duc de
Gloucestre, Count d' Essexie, and de Buckingham, and Constable d' Engleterre;
que morrust le tiers jour d' October, l' an du grace M. CCC. XC. IX. de qi alme
Dieux face Mercy.

Amen.
65. Epitaph. viz.
Hic jacet Bernardus Brocas Bernar Bdrocas.
miles quondam Came. Anne Regine
Angl............................................................

Arms. viz. Talbot. Gules a Lion rampant within a bordure ingrailed Or. 2. B. a
Lion rampant within a bordure Or. 3. Bendy of ten Argent and Gules. 4. Gules
three Garbs within a bordure of Scotland Or. 5. Barulle Arg. and B. an orle of
Martlets Gules. 6. Or, three Escutcheons varry, each charged with three
Barrulets Gules. 7. Parted per pale Or. and vert, a Lion rampant Gules. 8.
Gules two Lions passant Argent. 9. Gules, three Lions passant Argent. 10.
Cheque Or and B. a bendlet Gules. 11. Gules on a Saltire Argent, a Martlet sab.
12. Or fretty of eight pieces Gule, on a Canton parted per pale Ermine, and the
first a Ship at anchor sab. 13. Gules a Lion rampant Or. billette sab. 14. Arg.
a bend between six Martlets Gules. 5. Or, a fret. Gules. 16. Argent a Lion ram.
parted per Fess Gules and sable, Crest on a Chapau Gules, turned up Ermine, a
Lion passant Or. Supporters, two Talbots Argent. Motto. Pressed da Compie.

On one side, Talbot, as before* Impaling.

Nevil Gules on* a saltire Arg. a Martlet sab.

Talbot and Ormond. viz Or a chief indented B.

Talbot and Stafford. viz. 1. France and England quarterly, a bordure Argent.
2. and 3. B. a bend Arg. cottised between six Lions ramp. Or. 4. Or, a a
Cheveron Gules.

Talbot and (...)gs viz. Argent a Manch sable.

Talbot and...... viz. Gules 3 Escalops Arg.

T^^bo^ and ^^^lan^. viz. Or two bars B. on a chief quarterly of the last and
Gules, in the first and fourth quarter two Flower-de-luces, and in the second
and third a Lion of England, all of the field.

On the other side. Ogle. viz. Arg. a Fess between three Crescents Gules. 2.
Or, an Orle B. 3. Or, an Eagle diplayed vert, crowned Argent. 4* Argent two
bars and Canton Gules, thereon a cross moline Or. Impaling

Carn^by, viz. Arg. two bars B. and three hearts in chief, quartering, parted
per pale G. and B. a Lion ramp. gardant Or.

Ogle and Radcliff. viz. Argent two bends ingrailed sab.

Ogle and L^mley. viz. Argent a Fess Gules between three Parrots vert, collared
Or.

Ogle and Gasco^^. viz. Argent on a pale sab. a Congers head coped Or

Ogle and Rirkeby, viz. Argent two bars and Canton Gules thereon, a cross
moline Or.

Ogle and H^lton, viz. 1. and 4. Argent two bars B. 2. Gules 6. Annulets Or. 3.
Sab. three Swords, their Hilts and Pomels meeting in the Nombrill, and their
points extended to the three Angles of the Escutcheon Arg.

66. Epitaph. viz.
Memoriae S.
Edwardo ex inclyta Talbotorum familia A. D. 1617. Edw. Talbot Earl of
Shrewsbury and his Lady. vid.. 49.
Octavo Comiti Salopiae, Weisfordiae, and Waterford, Domino Talbot Com^ de
Badenhaugh, Valence, Montchency, Strange de Blakemere, Gifford de Brimesfield,
Clifford de Corsham, Furnival, Verdon, and Lov^toft, viro omnibus titulis
undequaque pari: moribus etiam adeo integris juxta ac suavissimis ut eorum
laudi nihil omnino detraxerit titulorum magnitudo, candore and pietate haud
minus quam genere fuit insignis nec ullo procerum solenni vitio tinctus, sine
fastu nobilis, sine jactantia potens, fine superstitione religiosus, mente ac
manu muni^icus: fortunae semper securus, tota illi vita fuit semita recti and
innocentia qualis per invidiam emersit, nec metam nec terminum recepit. Ita
demu^^ posteritatis certus per conscientiam (du^ viator erat,) and fama jain
fruitur desaecatissima and ea post vitae aerumnis re^uie cujus se participem in
horas exoptat moestissima conjux Jana Cutberti Baronis Ogle Haeredum
primogenita, quae lacrymis ^mmersa pie monumentum hoc P. Obiit ^ie 8.
Februariis, 1617. anno aetatis 57.

^^^s. viz. V^len^e Barule Arg. and B. Martlets A D. 1304* Will. de Vale^ce
Com. Penbroc^^. vid.. ^8.
^ans number placed in Orle Gules.

^rgent, a manch Gules.

^endy Lozengy, Arg. and Gules.

^rg. 3. Cheverons Gules.

^rg. a Lion rampant Gules*

^arry of 10 Argent and B. a bendlet Gules.

^arry of twelve Arg. and Gules a Lion rampant sab*

^^les three Lions passan^ gardant Or*

B. s^m^ ^^ Flower-de-Luces Or.

O(...)pl(...) with two heads sab.

(...)d ^^^wer*de-luces Or, a (...) Argent.

Arg^^^* a ^^^n ramp. Gules crowned Or, within a ^ordur^ s^ble ^^^^nty.

67. Epitaph. viz.
Anglia to^a d^l^s, (...)ritur quia regia proles,
Qu^ ^^^rer^ s^les* q^^m continet infima moles,
Gul^^lmus nomen (...)ne Valentia praebet,
(...) cog(...)* ^^am tale da^^ ^i^i debet.
(...) valuit va^^dus, vi^c^ns v(...) valor,
(...) pl(...) mo^^^que vigore,
(...)s and (...)s (...)lia se^^ans,
(...)s ac (...) devotus praemia spec^a^s;
M^^^q^e ^r^centis cum q(...)r inde retentis,
(...), hunc ^^rs proprio ferit ense.
(...) repet^* ^^^m sit via plena timore,
(...) ^^^e ^^ ^oriturum, and inscius horae.
(...)s Christ^, coelos ^ntr^t precor iste
(...), q^^^ pr^tulit omnibus hisce.
(...) vi^ (...) M^^^rs, Impaling, parted per bend (...)*

^ (...) between three Roses on a chief a Lion (...)d^nt between two books,
with bo^^^s*

Three ^^^^ only.

68. Epitaph. viz.
Hi^ jacet Henricus Fern, S. T. D. ^. 662. Fer^^.. ^2.
Johannis Fern militis (civitati Eboracensi a secretis) filius natu octavus;
Collegii S. Trinitatis Cantabrig. Praefectus; simul Cestricensis Episcopus,
sedit 5. tantum s^ptimanis. Obiit Martii 16. anno Domini 1662. ^t^tis 59.

Arms. viz. A cross patonce between five Martlets, A. D. ^390. ^o^. (...).
vid.. 61.
Impaling quarterly first and fourth, a fret ingrailed, second and third
England.

69. Epitaph. viz.
Hic fuit expertus in quovis jure Robertus
De Walby dictus, nunc est s^b marmore strictus;
Sacrae Scripturae Doctor fuit and geniturae,
Ingenuus medicus and plebis semper amicus.
Praesul Auduren. post haec Archos Dublinen.
Hinc Cistertren. tandem primas Eboren.
Quarto K. Janu. migravit cursibus anni
Sepultus mill^ni ter C. novies quoque den i
Vos precor orate, quod sint sibi dona beatae
Cum sanctis vitae requiescat and hic sine lite.
Arms. Cecill. With quarterings, viz. Barry of ten A. D. 1591. Elizab. C^cil*
vid.. 72.
Arg. and B. Six Escutcheons sable, each charged with a Lion rampant of the
first. 2. Parted per pale B. and Gules a Lion rampant Arg. supporting a tree
vert. 3. Sab. a plate between three Towers triple towred Arg. 4. Arg. on a bend
Cottised Gules, three Cinq'foyles Or. 5. Arg. a Cheveron between three
Chesrooks Ermines. 6. As the first. Impaling.

Brook. With quartering, viz. Gules on a Chevero^ Arg. a Lion ramp. sab. 2.
Gules on a Cheveron O^ three Lions ramp. sab. 3. Arg. seven masca^ conjoined
Gules. 4. B. two bars nebule Argen^ 5. Gules a Fess Arg. between six cross
Croslets O^* 6. Varry and three bendle^s Gules. 7. Arg. a Cheveron between
three Eagles legs erased a laqui^ sab. 8. Or* on a bend Gules three Goats
passant Ar^ 9. Sab. on a Cheveron between three Bulls hea^ cabossed Arg. a
Flower-de-luce Gules. 10. Gul^ a Fess compony Arg. and sab. between six cros^
patte fitchy in the ^oot Arg. 11. Or, two ben^ Gules. 12. Barry of ten Arg. and
B.

70. Epitaph. viz.
Vxor.
Reginae ^ ^ameris, Baronis filia ^hari
Fida Equitis conjux Elizabetha fui,
Vnus amor nobis, una indivulsa volupta
Cor unum, una fides inviolata fuit,
Ille mei si quando potest deponere curam
Ille potest animae non memor esse suae.
Maritus.
Si lacrymis constaret amor (charissima conjux)
Prosequ^rer lacrymis funera saepe tua.
Nam mihi quam ^ueris redamata, tuum pia sponsa
Testatur meritum, conscius ipse mihi:
Sed nec amor patitur socia regnante dolor,
Et Christi Major t^ sibi strinxit amor.
Ergo tuo dilecta bono ^um pace fruare,
Spero mihi tecum portio pacis erit.
A Brook by name, the Baron Cobham's Child,
A Newton was she by her Mothers side:
Cecill, her Husband, this for her did build,
To prove his love did after death abide.
Which tells unto the world that after come,
The worlds conceit whilst here she held a room.
How Nature made her wise and well beseeming
Wit, and condition, silent, true, and chaste:
Her virtues rare wan her much esteeming,
In Court with Sovereign still with favor graced.
Earth could not yield more pleasing earthly bliss,
Blessed with two Babes, the third brought her to this.
1591.

Arms. Seymour. With quarterings, viz. Or, on a pile Gules between six
Flower-de-luces B. three Lions of England. 2. Gules two wings conjoined pendant
Or. 3. Varry. 4. Arg. three Lions ramp. demi Gules. 5. Per bend Arg and Gules,
three Roses in bend counterch. 6. Arg* on a bend Gules three Leopards heads Or.
Impaling,

Stanhoppe With quarterings, viz. Quarterly Ermine and Gules. 2. Vert, a ^out
of Wolves current in pale bar-ways Or. 3. Sab. a bend between six cross
Croslets fitchy Argent. 4. Arg. a Cresc. diff. Gules between three sal^ires
humettee, ingrailed sab. Crest to the first* a Phoenix out of a Ducal Crown Or,
burning in her nest prop. Motto, Foy pour Devoir. Crest to the second on a
Torce Arg. and Gules, a Castle B. a demi Lion ramp. issuing out of the
Battlements Or, holding a Fire-ball prop. Motto, De Di^^ and de Roy.

29. Epitaph. viz.
Inclyta conditur hic Anna Somersetensis A. D. ^^87. Anne (...)ss. S(...).
vid.. ^^.
Ducissa, charissima conjux illustrissimi Principis Edwardi ducis
Somersetensis, Comitis Herfordiae, Procomitis Bellicampi and Baronis Seymour,
Garteriani ordinis equestris celeberrimi sodalis, Edwardi sexti Regis avunculi
and Gubernatoris, ejusque regnorum, Dominiorum* ac suditorum protectoris
dignissimi, exercituumque Praefecti, and l^cum-^enentis Generalis, Thesaurarii,
and Comitis Mariscalli Angliae, Guberna^^ris and Capitanei insularum de
Garnesey, and Iersey, sub cujus prospero auspi^^o toties and tam foeliciter de
Scotis Edinburgi, Lethae, and Musselburgi praelio devictis gloriose triumphatur.

Heroina quidem natalium splendore illustrissima, utpote filia praeclari
Equitis Edwardi Stanhoppe, and suae conjugis Elizabethae filiae Fulconis
Bourchier Domini Fitz-Warini a quo Batho^^^ Com(...)erm sunt orti. Filius (...)
Gulielmi Fitz-warini Baronis fratris germani Henrici Comitis Essexiae, and
Johannis a Berneriis dynastae. Quos Gulielmus Oxinensis (...) in Normannia
Comes eorum genitor susceperat ex Anna filia and sola Haerede Thomae de
Woodstock Ducis Gloucestriae, junioris filii magni Regis Edwardi tertii, and
Al^on^rae con^orti^ suae cohaeredis Humfredi decimi de Bohun, Comitis
Herefordiae, Essexi^ and Northamptoniae, Constabulari^ Angliae.

Pulchram marit^ num^rosam ^^^ ^tri^sque sexus prolem ^^ixa es^, Edwardum
scilicet Hertfordiae Comitem, H^nricum* alterum Edwardum, Annam Warwicensent
Comitissam Margare^^m Ja^am, Mar^am, Katharinam, and Elizabetham, and ad
fatal^m maturae s^n^^^^tis ^oram cum (...) ^^n^g^na^^a p^rveni^^^^, a^erno
nu^^^i sp(...) firma in Ch(...) ^ide pl^^^d^ and ^^ (...) reddidit, 16. Kalend*
Aprilis, die Pas ^al^ (...) ^ salutis 1587.

Edwardus (...) Hertfordiae Comes acerbo in (...)s* d(...) ^^renti hoc
m^^^m^ntum (...) ^^^oris ^rf^o quo abundavit viv^, and (...), sed, amoris causa
pro (...) d^votissime consecravit.

Here lies intombed the noble Duchess of Somerset Anne, dear Spouse unto the
renowned Prince Edward Duke of Somerset, Earl of Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp,
and Baron Seymour, Companion of the most famous Knightly Order of the Garter,
Uncle to King Edward VI, Governor of his Royal Person, and most worthy
Protector of all his Realms, Dominions, and Subjects, Lieutenant General of all
his Armies, Treasurer and Earl-Martial of England, Governor and Captain of of
the Isles of Guernesey and Iersey, under whose prosperous conduct glorious
victory has been so often and so fortunately obtained over the Scots,
vanquished at Edinburgh, Leith, and Musselborough field.

A Princess descended of noble Lineage, being Daughter to the worthy Knight Sir
Edward Stanhoppe by Elizabeth his Wife, that was Daughter to Sir Foulk
Bourchier Lord Fitz-warin, from whom our modern Earls of Bath are sprung, Son
was he to William Lord Fitz-warin, that was Brother to Henry Earl of Essex, and
John Lord Berners, whom William their Sire, sometime Earl of Ewe in Normandy,
begat on Anne the sole Heir of Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, younger
Son to the mighty Prince King Edward III. and of his Wife Eleonore, Coheir
unto the tenth Humfrey de Bohun that was Earl of Hereford, Essex, and
Northampton, High Constable of England.

Many Children bare this Lady unto her Lord of either sort, to wit, Edward Earl
of Hertford, Henry, and a younger Edward, Anne Countess of Warwick, Margaret,
Jane, Mary, Katharine, and Elizabeth, and with firm faith in Christ, and in
most mild manner rendered she this life at 90 years of age, on Easter day the
sixteenth of April, anno 1587.

The Earl of Hertford Edward her eldest Son, in this doleful duty careful and
diligent, does consecrate this Monument to his dear Parent, not for her honor,
wherewith living she did abound, and now departed flourishes, but for the
dutiful love he bears her, and for his last testification thereof.

Arms. Boil viz. Parted per bend crenelle.

Seymour. viz. Two wings conjoined in lewre pendant.

72. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the honorable the Lady Jane Clifford, young^st Daughter to A. D.
1679. Jane Cl^ff^rd. vid.. 71.
William Duke of Somerset, Grand Daughter to Edw^r^ (...) ^^ Hartford, and
great G^^nd-Daughter to Edward Duke of Somerset, etc. Uncle to King Edward VI^
^rotector of his Realms, and Governor of his Royal Person. She was married to
the Right Honorable Charles Lord Clifford and Dungarvan, Son and Heir apparent
to Richard Earl of Burlington in England, and Cork in Ireland, Lord High
Treasurer of Ireland, and to Elizabeth his Countess, sole Daughter and Heire^s
to Henry late Earl of Comberland, Lord Clifford, etc. the last Male of that
noble Family.

She had Issue five Sons, and six Daughters, of whom two Sons and and three
Daughters are now living. She lived an honor to the Family she was descended
from; and the great comfort of that into which she was married, and died, much
lamented, on the twenty third day of Navember in the year 1679. aged 42 years,
4 months, and 17 days.

Arms. Fane With quarterings, viz. 1. and 4. B. three left hand Gantlets Or. 2.
and 3. Gules on a saltire Arg. a Rose of the field. Imp^ling

Spencer With quarterings, viz. ^. and 4. quarterly Arg. and Gules, in the
second an^ third quarter a fret Or, on a bend sab. three escalop shells of the
first, ^and Or, on two bars Gules, three water budgets Arg. Crest to the first
on a Torce of his colors a Gantlet Or, holding a Sword Arg. Hilt and Pomel Or,
Crest to the second out of a Ducal Crown Or, a Griffons head coped, with wings
Arg. gorged with two bars gemells Gules.

73. Epitaph. viz.
Domina Elizabeth Fane antiquiss. nobilitata A. D. 1618. Eliz. Fane. vid.. 68.
natalitiis, propria virtute clarior. Filia Roberti Baron. Spencer de
Wormleighton, praenobilis Georgii Fane de Buston Com. Cant. militis uxor casta,
pudica, pia, spiritum Redemptori suo ardentissimis votis voceque forti
saepi^sque iterata commendavit.

Anno
Dom. 1618. magna fama. Aetat. 28. superstite. Conjug. 10. prole nulla.
Moestissimus Conjux conjugi incomparabili P. L. M.

Qui sui corporis figuram tanquam illa mortuus, junxit cineres ossa socianda
spondit.

Arms. ^a^^w. Three Lions passant in pale barway^* impaling

D^^h^^. v^z. A Fess of four fusils Ermine.

74. Epitaph. viz.
Orate pro animabus Nicolai Baronis A. D. 1470. (...)to Carew and Uxor. vid..
69.
quondam de Carew, and Dominae Margaretae uxoris ejus filiae Iohannis Domini
Dinham militis, qui quidem Nicolaus obiit sexto die mensis Decembris, Anno Dom.
1470. and praedicta Domina Margareta obiit 13. die mensis Decembris Anno 1470.

Arms. Cecill. viz. Barry of ten Arg. and B. six Escutcheons sable, each
charged with a Lion rampant, of the first, all within a Garter of the Order of
St. George, Crest on a Torce of his Colors, a Garb Or, supported by two Lions
rampant, the one ^* the other Arg. Supporters two Lions rampant Ermine. Motto,
Corunum via una.

On one side. Vere. viz Quarterly Gules and Or, in the first quarter a mullet
Argent Impaling Cecill as before.

On the other. Cecill. As before, Impaling Coke* viz. Or, a Cheveron compony G.
and B between three Cinq'foyles of the last.

75. Epitaph. viz.
Si quaeratur quis sit hic vir senex genua A. D. Mildreda Bar^nissa Burleigh,
and Anna filia ejus Comi^iss. Oxon. vid.. 67*
flectens, canitie venerabilis, toga Parliamentaria amictus, ordinis Garteriani
Eques, quae etiam sunt illae duae foeminae nobiles splendide stolatae, quique
sunt ad earum capita and pedes genibus nixi ex sequenti sermon senis and ex
inscriptionibus cuique subjectis haec omnia intelliget.

Illa cujus Imago est infima, fuit, heu fuit, mea Mildreda uxor long
charissima, altera mea fuit Anna mea filia dilectissima. Mildreda vero uxor mea
ab Anno Dom. 1546. vixit mecum perpetuo ad annos 43. conjunctissime fuitque
particeps omnium fortunarum mearum temporibus and secundis and adversis,
regnantibus Regibus Henrico octavo, Edwardo sexto, Reginisque Maria, and
Elizabetha jam foelicia sceptra tenente, peperitque mihi multos liberos, sed ad
maturam aetatem tantu^ tres pervenerunt, nempe duae filiae Anna and Elizabetha,
ac filius unus Robertus, Anna autem filia mea semper fuit mihi in deliciis
atque in matrimonium data Edwardo Veero illustriss. Comiti Oxoniae, Domino
magno Camerario Angliae, ex eoque sit comitissa Oxon. peperitque viro suo
praeter aliquot liberos non d^^ superstites, filias tres adhuc vivas quarum
imagines visuntur genua flectentes, ad caput matris: prior est Domina
Elizabetha, secunda est Domina Brigitta, tertia Domina Susanna, vixit ista mea
filia Anna a teneris annis multa cum laud semper apud omnes, tum in aula, tum
domi, tam virgo valde pia and pudica, quam uxor vere casta suo viro, tandem
magno moerore meo ac matris nobis praerepta, spiritumque reddidit Deo qui illum
dedit, cujus corpus and animam post Deo redditum, ego and uxor mea multis cum
lacrymis, sub hac mole lapidea reponi curavimus, non multo autem post sequitur
matter filiam de qua quanquam nunquam sine lacrymis serio cogito, aliqua tamen
occurrunt quae moerorem meum paululum l^^^ri^ (...)ur, nempe cum in memoriam
repeto, (...)o^^^ per totam vitam suam versa(...)in(...) sacrarum literarum,
and sanctorum virorum scriptis, iisque maxim Graecis, ut Basilii Magni,
Chrysostomi, Gregor. Nazianzeni, ac aliorum similium. Maxim autem me
consolatur (quod quidem jam post mortem omnibus magis patet quam cum viveret,)
recordari quanta beneficia secreto in doctos quantasque eleemosynas in pauperes
contulerit.

Quomodo etiam Collegia in utrisque Academiis donariis ornaverit ad
sustentationem scholarium redditibus perpetuis, praesertim in Collegio divi Jo.
Evang. Cantab. dotaverit, de egenis etiam fovendis in villis Rumfordiae unde
ortum familiae habuit; and Chestoniae ubi aedes nostrae sitae sunt, curam
magnam habuit: Ita ut singulis primis Sabbatis omnium mensium, and comm^atus,
and pecuniam perpetuo pauperibus, maximeque viduis and Orphanis Chestoniae
degentibus, and ad frequentes conciones verbi Dei ibi habendas distribui
curraverit; ac in utrisque cisdem villis pauperibus mechanicis perpetuis
temporibus singulis bienniis pecuniarum bonam summam utendam distribui
ordinaverit. Post ista autem multaque alia ejus generis praestita officia and
Deo and patriae mihique conjugi ac liberis suis, doc^isque and pauperibus*
sponte in anno suo climaterico videlicet 63. spiritum reddidit D^o, quarto
Aprilis, anno 1589. ^ujus corpus ego maritus and pater adjungendum duci corpori
filiae nostrae Annae, Paulo ante isto lapide repositae ut conjunctae
res^rvarentur ad spem resurrectionis, Ecce adhuc quatuor alios viventes
Robertum meum unicum ex Mildreda filium ad pedes matris, ac tres alias virgins
Dominam Elizabetham, Dominam Brigittam, ac Dominam Susannam, Annae meae tres
filias ad capita matris and Aviae genibus incumbentes. Sed quo pergo? Fi^em and
loquendi and plorandi faciam, solumque hoc affirmo spectaculum hoc mihi tam
plenum esse doloris, ut quanquam aliquam mixtam consolationem offerant hi
relicti mihi optimae spei dulces liberi, tamen neque hi quatuor mihi valde
chart, neque dilectus filius meus major natu Tho. Cecilius Eques auratus, neque
omnes qui ex eo prognati sunt ac jam vivunt nepotes* ac neptes numero undecim,
cui etiam jungo puerulum suavem Gulielmum Paulet Luciae Ceciliae neptis meae
filium ex Guil. Paulet Marchionis Winton. filio ac haerede, unquam dolorem meum
huic spectaculo adhaerentem deleturi sunt.

Hic infra meis oculis lacrymis suffusis animoque maximo moerore oppress,
apparent imagines duarum illustrium foeminarum, quae dum vixerant, fuerant mihi
supra omne genus humanum long charissimae.

Anna Comitissa Oxon. filia Gulielmi Cecilii Baronis de Burghley, nata est
quinto Decembris, Anno Dom. 1556. Vxor fuit Edwardi Very illustrissimi Comitis
Oxon. anno aetatis suae 15. ex cujus connubio matter fuit plurium liberorum, sed
reliquit tantum tres filias virgins superstites, Dominam Elizabetham Vere,
aetate jam 14. Dominam Brigittam Vere aetate 5. annorum, tertiam infantulam
Dominam Susannam. Vixit haec Anna virgo semper pudica and casta, uxor erga
virum in amando mire constans, filia in parents per omnia obsequens, in
colendo Deo valde diligens, and devota, febri ardenti c^^^epta certa spe regni
coelestis spiritum ultimum cum anima ardentissimis precibus Deo and Creatori
and Redemptori suo reddidit quinto Junii Anno Dom. 1588. in Palatio Reginae
Elizabethae Grenwici.

Robertus Cecilius, filius Gulielmi Domini de Burghley and Mildredae Dominae de
Burghley natus est primo Junii Anno Dom. 1563. parum ante matris obitum
ambiebat conscia matre nobilem virginem Dominam Elizabetham Brook ^n privato
Cubiculo Reginae inservientem, filiam praeclari Baronis Regni W. Dom. de Cobham
eamque post mortem matris consensu patris in uxorem duxit ultimo Augusti, Anno
Dom. 1589. memoriam hic colit magno cum dolor piissimae matris and charissimae
sororis, agnoscitque patrem jam grandaevum, omni obsequio sibi charissimum, in
quo si permanebit dies sui prolo^gentur super terram quam Dominus Deus dabit
sibi

Mildreda primogenita filia Nobilis Dom. Anton. Coci equitis aurati, viri pii
and insigniter docti omniumque literatorum Moecenatis opti^i, matrem habuit
Dominam Annam filiam Domini Gulielm. Fitz-Williams Equitis aurati, utroque
parente propter eorum antiqua stemmata e multis familiis magnatum hujus regni
deducta, clara and nobilis; sed propter eruditionem conjunctam cum constanti
Christianae religionis professione, and Latinae and Graecae linguarum
singularem cognitionem quam solummodo a patre docente accepit non minus clara,
and ab omnibus doctis eximie laudata. Vxor anno aetatis suae 20. fit Domini
Gulielmi Cecilii Domini de Burghley, posteaque ratione viri titulo Baronis
regni nobilitati facta est Baronissa de Burghley, multos ei peperit liberos,
sed tres tantum qui ad aetatem adultam pervenerunt: nimirum Annam, Robertum,
and Elizabetham.

Anna conjuncta fuit connubio Edw. Comiti Oxoniae ut hic supra patet: Robertus
jam vivit, hic ad pedes matris ac sororis genibus flexis, Elizabetha moritur
statim a morte viri Gulielmi Wentworthi primogeniti filii Tho. Domini Wentworth
sicut supra a patre commemoratur. Ista pia D. Burghleia vixit ad aetatem
sexaginta trium annorum, multaque testimonia reliquit pictatis in Deum,
charitatis in doctos and pauperes, quae dum vixerat, celavit sub aliorum
virorum bonorum nominibus, quae tamen coram Deo fuerunt tam cognita, etiam post
vitam sine ullo dubio in Coelis sibi certo reposita. Obiit vero supremum diem
quarto die mensis Aprilis, Anno 1589. in aedibus viri sui Dom. Burghleii
Westmonasterii.

Domina Elizabeth Vere, filia illustrissima Comitis Edwardi Oxon. and Annae
uxoris filia Domini de Burghley nata 22. Junii anno 1575. agitque annum 14. and
dolet graviter and non sine causa ob amissam aviam and matrem, sed consolatur
quod ser^^^ss^ma Regina eam habet in cubic^lo privato servientem. Dom. Brigitta
secunda filia dicti Comitis Oxon. and Annae nata sexto Aprilis, anno 1584. and
and quanquam vix excessit annum quartum ^um m^^r^s corpus in sepulchrum
reponer^t^r, tamen n^n absque lacrymis agnovit ^reptam matrem and pa^lo post
aviam. Ver^m non ^st rel^cta Orphana cum habeat patrem vive(...) and Avum
charissimum ^^torem maxim sollicitum. Domina Susanna tertia filia nata 26.
Maii anno 1587. quae per aetatem non potuit agnos^^re aut aviam, aut matrem,
verum solum jam agnoscit Avum charissimum qui omnium harum curam habet, ita ut
nec pia edu^atione, nec congr^a vivendi ratione destitu^ntur.

Arms. The Episcopal See of D^tham, viz. A Cross Gulielm. de Dudl^y. via.. 66.
between four Lions rampant, Impaling Du^l^y with quarterings, viz. 1. and 4.
Two Lions passant in pale bar-ways. 2. and 3 A cross patonce.

76. Epitaph. viz.
Hic jacet Guilielmus de Dudley e familia Baronum de Dudley, Dunelm. Episcopus,
obiit Anno Dom..................

Arms. Paulet, With quarterings, viz. Sab. three Winifride Marchionis. Winch.
vid.. 65.
swords points in point Arg. Hilts and Pomels Or. 2. B. six Mascalls* three and
three Argent. 3. G two Lions passant gardant Argent. 4. Barry of six Erm. and
Gules. 5. Barry of six, Or and Vert, a bendlet Gules. 6. Arg. a Fess G. between
six Lions ramp. B. 7. Or, two Cheverons and Canton Gules. 8. Or, a Cross voided
Gules. 9. Arg. on a chief G. two Mullets pierced Or. 10. Barry of six, Or and
B, a saltire Gules. 11. Arg. two bars, and in chief an Escutcheon Gules. 12.
Arg. a Fess and three Martlets in chief Gules. 13. B. a Fess between three
Flower-de-luces Or. 14. Gules, three water-bougets Erm. 15. Arg a Fret and
Canton sab 16. Argent, six Martlets sab. 3. 2. 1. Impaling

Bruges, viz. 1. and 4. Arg. on a Cross sab. a Leopards head Or. 2. Arg. a Fess
between three Martlets sab. 3. Arg. three Hatchets prop. Handles G.

77. Epitaph. viz.
Hic jacet in tumulo clarissima foemina, primum
Fortunata bonis clarisque parentibus, illi
Solicit aetatem tenerae slexere puellae
Ad studium verae virtutis, and optima facta,
Externo addentes internum lumen honori.
Post adolescentis foelicior extitit aetas,
Cum matura, viro veteri de stemmate nupsit,
Qui genus a proavis long ante trophaea Gulielmi
Normanas que acies, patria de gente trahebat,
Quo cumjucunde transegit tempora vitae,
Donec mors illum rapuit: post fata mariti
Moesta diu vitam tenebris luctuque trahehat:
Sed melior tandem viduam fortuna revisit,
Nobilitate potens, ubi Marchio amabilis illam
Connubio accepit f^rmo, propriamque dicavit:
At nunc ter foelix transcendit spiritus astra,
Cumque suo regnat, coluit quem ante omnia, Christo.
Arms. Dur Eboraci viz. France and England quarterly, a file of three, each
Label charged with three Torteaux. Impaling

Mohun. viz. Or, a Cross ingrailed sable.

On one side. Fitz walter. viz. Or a Fess between two Cheverons Gules. Impaling

Mohun as before.

On the other. Golofre. viz. Barry Nebulee of eight, Argent and Gules on a bend
sable three Bezan^s. Impaling

Mohun as before.

78. Epitaph. viz.
Philippa filia and cohaeres Johannis A. D. 1474. Philip. Ducis* Eboracen.
vid.. 63.
Dom. Mohun de Dunster, uxor Edwardi Ducis Eboracensis moritur Anno Dom. 1474.

Arms. Stanly. With quarterings, viz. 1. Quarterly first and fourth, on a bend
three Bucks heads cabosed; Second and third on a chief indented three roundles.
2. A Cheveron between three Martlets. 3. Two Houboys Cheveron-ways, and nine
cross Croslets. 4. Three Lions passant in pale barways.

79. Epitaph. viz.
Hic jacet Humfridus Stanley miles A. D. 1505. Sir Humphrey Stanley. vid.. 75.
pro corpore excellentissimi Principis Henrici septimi Regis Angliae qui obiit,
12. Martii anno Dom. millessimo quingentessimo quinto, cujus animae propitietur
Deus.

Amen.
Arms. V^l^^^. With quarterings, viz. On a Cross five Escalop shells. 2. A Fess
between three Cinqfoyls. 3. Six Lions rampant. 4. Three Martlets. 5. A Cheveron
between three cross Croslets sit^hy. 6. Parted per pale a Lion rampant. 7. A
bend between six ^ullets of six points. 8. A Cross in the first and last
quarter an annulet. These three Crests on as many Helms and Torces; viz. 1. A
Lion rampant crowned. 2. A plume of Ostrich feathers. 3. A S^aggs head erased
billette.

At the feet in a Lozenge Shield these, Beaumont. With quarterings, viz. Semy
de Flowerde-luces and a Lion rampant. 2. A Cross potent between four Crosetts.
3. Three Garbs. 4. A Cross. 5. Seven Mascals conjoined. 6. A Cinq'foyle Ermine.
7. Fretty of eight pieces and bordure round'lee. 8. A pale. 9. A Lion ramp.
crowned. 10. Semy Flower-de-luces and fretty. 11. Three piles in point, on the
midst an Escutcheon. 12. A Lion rampant. 13. A Saltire. 14. Three Garbs. 15. A
Wolves head erased. 16. An Eagle displayed. 17. A Lion rampant. 18. A Fess
between three Cinq'foyls. 19. Three Cockatri^^s displayed. 20 On a Cheveron
three Boars heads erased* ^upported by two Lions rampant.

80. Epitaph. viz.
Bonae Memoriae Georgio Villerio Sir Georg. Villers and Commit. Buckingh. vid*.
73.
Equiti aurato marito B. M. juxta se P. charissima conjux Maria Comitissa
Buckinghamiae. S. P. F. F.

D. O. M.
Ossa Mariae de Bellomonte, Comitissae Buckinghamiae, e quinque potentissimorum
totius Europa regnorum Regibus: idque per totidem immediatos descensus,
oriundus. Vixit annos 62. menses 11. dies 19. hoc mon. V. I. C.

Arms. Harle. viz. Argent two pales sable.

^obo^^. viz. Or, five piles wavy, three descending from the chief, and two
ascending from the base, Gules on a chief B, a Lion passant of the field.

81. Epitaph. viz.
D. O. M.
Adsta V^ator and misertus humanae sortis A. D. 1605 Cor Annae Sophiae Harlee.
vid.. 74*
haec p^rlege. Annae Sophiae primo aetatis diluculo festina fatorum saevitia
extinctae corculum in hac urna jussit recondi Christopherus Harlaeus, A. F.
Bellomonte comes Prefect. Palate. Paris, a secretis Reg. consiliar. and nunc
apud S. Magnae Britanniae Reg. Christianiss. Gal. Regis legatus, una cum uxore
dilectis. Anna Robota: hoc leve graviss. luctus monumentum manibus chariss.
filiolae and posteritatis memoriam pietatis laudem and melioris vitae
expectationem ambo parents junctis lacrymis moestiss. P. anno Domini 1605.

Hoc te volebam, abi and vale.
Quod nuper igne spiritali turgidum,
Vitam ciebat aureo in corpusculo
Tactum potente conditoris dextera
Isto recumbit frigidum cor marmore
Solo creatum flosculum Britannico
Suo revulsum cord corculum pater
Vltro relinquens propr^is natalibus
Custodiendum pignus urnae credidit,
Donec remissa lenis aura ^oelitus
Venis redonet palpitare denuo
Et membra cordi copulata in posterum
Non separanda coelitum inserat choro.
Arms. France and England quarterly. Impaling quarterly, A. D. 1509. Hen. VII.
Rex. Vid.. 78.
1. France and England quarterly. 2. and 3. A Cross. 4. Barry of six, an
Escutcheon on a chief, a Pallet between two Esquires based dexter and sinister,
all within the Order of St. George, viz. the Garter supported by a Dragon and a
Greyhound collared.

82. Epitaph. viz.
Septimus Henricus tumulo requiescit in isto Round the bars of the outward Tomb.

Qui Regum splendour, lumen and orbis erat;
Rex vigil and sapiens, comes, virtutis amator,
Egregius forma, strenuus atque potens.
Qui peperit pacem regno, qui bella peregit
Plurima, qui victor semper ab host redit:
Qui natas binis conjunxit Regibus ambas
Regibus and cunctis foedere junctus erat.
Qui sacrum hoc struxit templum statuitque sepulchrum
Pro se, proque sua conjuge, proque domo.
Lustra december atque annos tres plus compleverit annis:
Nam tribus octenis regia sceptra tulit.
Quindecies domini centenus fluxerat annus
Currebat nonus, cum venit atra dies,
Septima ter mensis lux tunc fulgebat Aprilis
Cum clausit summum tanta corona diem.
Nulla dedere prius tantum tibi saecula Regem
Anglia, vix similem posteriora dabunt.
Septimus hic situs est Henricus Gloria Regum Round the Ledge or Verge of the
inner Tomb.

Cunctorum, ipsius qui tempestate fuerunt,
Ingenio atque opibus gestarum and nomine rerum,
Accessere quibus naturae dona benignae:
Frontis honos, facies augusta, Heroica forma:
Junctaque ei suavis conjux perpulchra, pudica,
Et foecunda fuit, foelices prole parents,
Henricum quibus octavum terra Anglia debes.
Hic jacet Henricus ejus Nominis septimus, Under the Kings Image.
Angliae quondam Rex Edmundi Richmondiae comitis filius, qui die 22. Augusti
Rex creatus statim post apud Westmonasterium die 30. Octobris Coronatur, Anno
Domini 1485. moritur deinde 21. die Aprilis, anno aetatis 53 Regnavit annos 23.
menses 8. minus uno die.

Hic jacet Regina Elizabetha Edwardi Under the Image of the Queen.
quarti quondam Regis filia, Edwardi quinti Regis quondam nominati soror:
Henrici septimi olim Regis conjux, atque Henrici Octavi Regis matter inclyta.
Obiit autem suum diem in Turri Londoniarum die 2. Febr. Anno Dom. 1502. 37
annorum aetate functa.

EULOGIUM On a Table adjoining to the Monument.
Per Skeltonida laureatum Oratorem Regium.

Huc pia Calliope propera mea casta puella
Et mecum resona carmina plena Deo:
Septimus Henricus Britonum memorabilis heroes,
Anglica terra tuus magnanimus Priamus.
Attalus hic opibus, rigidus Cato, clarus Acestes
Sub gelido clausus marmore jam recubat.
Sic honor omnis, opes, probitas, sic gloria Regum,
Omnia mutabunt mortis ad imperium.
Anglia number lacrymas? rides, lacrymare quid obstas?
Dum vixit lacrymas: dum moritur, jubilas.
Tanta tamen penses, dum vixerat Angligenenses
Vibrabant enses: bella nec ulla timent,
Vndique bella fremunt nunc, undique praelia surgunt.
Noster honor solus filius ecce suus.
Noster honor solus, qui pondera tanta subire
Non timet: intrepidus arma gerenda vocat.
Arma gerenda vocat, superi sua coepta secundent
Vt quatiat Pallas aegida saepe rogat:
S^rs tamen est versanda diu, sors ultima belli
Mirmidonum Dominus Mart silente ruit.
Et quem non valuit, validis superare sub armis
Mars: tamen occubuit insidiis Paridis:
Nos incerta quidem pro certis ponere rebus
Arguit, and prohibet Delius ipse pater.
Omnia sunt hominum dubio labentia fato,
Mart sub incerto militat omnis homo:
Omne decus nostrum, nostra and spes unica tantum,
Jam been qui regnat, hunc Jovis umbra tegat.
Vt quamvis mentem labor est inhibere volentem,
Pauca tamen liceat dicere pace sua;
Pace tua liceat mihi, nunc tibi dicere pauca
Dulce meum decus, and sola Britanna salus.
Summa rei nostrae remanet, celeberrime Princeps,
In te praecipuo qui modo sceptra geris.
Si tibi fata favent, faveant precor atque precabor,
Anglia tunc plaude, sin minus, ipsa vale.
Polichronitudo Basileos.

Tetrastichon veritatis.
Foelix qui bustum formasti Rex tibi cuprum,
Auro si tectus fueras, fueras spoliatus,
Nudus prostratus, tanta est rabiosa cupido
Vndique nummorum: Rex pace precor requiescas.
Amen.

Orator Regius Skeltonis laureatus in Another Table hanging on the same
Monument.
singular meritissimumque praeconium nobilissimi Principis Henrici septimi
nuper strenuissimi Regis Angliae, hoc Epitaphium edidit. Ad sinceram
contemplationem Reverendi in Christo Patris ac Domini Johannis Islippe Abbatis
Westmonasteriensis optime meriti. Anno Domini 1512. pridie Divi Andreae
Apostoli, etc.

Tristia Melpomenes cogor modo plectra sonare,
Hos Elegos foveat Cynthius ille meos.
Si quas fata movent lachrymas: lacrymare videtur,
Jam been maturum si been mente sapis.
Flos Britonum, Regum speculum, Salomonis imag^,
Septimus Henricus mole sub hac tegitur,
Punica (dum regnat) redolens rosa digna vocari,
Jamjam mar^e^c^^ ce^levis umbra fugit.
Multa nover^an^^s ^ortunae, multa faventis,
Passus: and in^ractus tempus utrunque tulit.
Nobilis Anchises, armis metuendus Atrides,
Hic erat: hunc Scotus Rex timuit Jacobus.
Spiramenta animae vegetans dum vescitur aura,
Francorum populus conticuit pavidus.
Immensas sive divitias cumulasse quid horres?
Ni cumulasset opes forte Britanne luas.
Vrgentes casus tacita si mente volutes:
Vix tibi sufficeret aurea ripa Tagi
Ni sua te probitas consulta mente laborans
Rexisset satius, vix tibi tuta salus.
Sed quid plura cano: meditans quid plura voluto,
Quisque vigil sibi sit, mors sine lege rapit:
Ad Dominum qui cuncta regit pro principe tanto,
Funde preces quisquis carmina nostra legis.
Rifrigerii sedem, quietis Beatudinem, Luminis habeat claritatem.

Amen.
Arms. France and England quarterly. Impaling semi A. D. 1509. Marg. Comiss.
Richmond and Derby. vid.. 80.
de Flower-de-luces.

France and England quarterly Impaling Quarterly 1. France and England
quarterly. 2. and 3 A Cross. 4. Barry of six, an Escutcheon on a chief, a pale
between two Esquires based dexter and sininister.

France and England Impal. Quarterly 1. and 4. Quarterly 1. and 4. A Castle. 2
and 3. A Lion ramp. 2. and 3. Three Pallets. Impal. four Pallets, and two
Flanches, each charged with an Eagle displayed.

Quarterly, 1. and 4. Quarterly 1. and 4. on a bend three Bucks heads cabosed.
2. On a chief indented three roundles. 3. Cheque. 2 and 3. Three armed Legs
conjoined in triangle; over all an Escutcheon of pretense, thereon a Lion
rampant: all these Impaling France and England quarterly within a bordure
Gobony.

83. Epitaph. viz.
Margaretae Richmondiae septimi Round the Verge of the Tomb in brass.
Henrici matri Octavi aviae, quae stipendia constituit tribus hoc c^nobio
monachis, and doctori Grammatices apud Wimborn, perque Angliam totam divini
verbi praeconi: duobus item interpretibus literarum sacrarum, alteri Oxoniis,
alteri Cantabrigiae, ubi and collegia, duo Christo and Iohanni ejus discipulo
struxit. Moritur An. Dom. 1509* tertio Calend. Iulii.

Elegia.
In serenissimae Principis, and Dominae, A Table adjoining to the Tomb.
Dominae Margaretae nuper Comitissae de Derby, strenuissimi Regis Henrici
septimi Matris sunebre ministerium per Skeltonida laureatum Oratorem Regium 16
die mensis Augusti, Anno salutis 1516.

Aspirate meis Elegis pia turma sororum,
Et Margaretam collacrimate piam.
Hac sub mole latet Regis celeberrima matter
Henrici magni quem locus iste fovet.
Quem locus iste sacer celebri celebrat Polyandro,
Illius en genitrix hac tumulatur humo.
Cui cedat Tanaquil (Titus banc super astra reportet.)
Cedat Penelope carus Ulissis amor;
Haec Abigail velut Hester erat pietate secunda,
En tres jam procer^s nobilitate pares.
Pro domina precor implora, pro principe tanta
Flecte Deum precibus qui legis hos apices.
Plura refer piget, calamus torpore riges^it,
Dormit Moecenas, negligitur probitas:
Nec juvat aut modicum prodest nunc ultima versu
Fata recensere (mortua, mors reor est)
Quaeris quid decus est? Decus est modo dicier hircus
Cedit honos hirco, cedit honorque capro.
Falleris ipse Charon, iterum surrexit Abyron,
Et Stygios remos despicit ille tuos.
Vivitur ex voto, mentis praecordia tangunt
Nulla sepulchra, ducum nec monumenta patrum,
Non Regum non ulla hominum labentia fato
Tempora, nec totiens mortua turba ruens.
Hinc statuo certe periture parcere chartae,
Seu Juvenalis ovat eximius Satyrus.
Distichon execrationis in fagolidoros*
Qui lacerat, violatque, rapit, praesens Epitoma,
Hunc laceretque voret Cerberus absque mora.
Hanc tecum statuas Dominam precor O sator orbis
Quo regnas rutilans Rex sine fine mane^s.
CALON AGATON CUM ARETA RE IN PA.

Arms. Quarterly 1. and 4. quarterly, 1. and 4. France within a bordure Gules,
semi de f^rmaulx Or. 2, and ^ Or, a Fess Chequee Arg. and B. within a bordure
ingrailed Gules. Over all an Escutcheon of pretense Arg. thereon a Saltire
ingrailed between four Cinq'soyles Gules. Over all a file of three Argent. 2.
Gules three armed Legs joined in triangle prop. 3. Gules, three Lions rampant
Argent. Impaling Scotland. Supporters a Fox and a Unicorn. Motto. In my defense.

At the feet in a Lozenge Shield these Arms, viz. Quarterly, 1. B. a Lion ramp
Arg. crowned Or. 2. Or, a Lion rampant Gules. 3. Or, five piles meeting in
point B. 4. Or, a Fess Chequee Arg. and B. on a bend Gules, three Fermaux of
the field. Over all, an Escutcheon of pretense Arg. Thereon a man's heart Gules,
on a chief B. three Mullets Or. Supporters* a Savage man and a Buck. Motto.
Jamai^ Dar^iere.

84. Epitaph. viz.
Margaretae Duglasiae Matthaei Stuarti A. D. 1578. Margareta Comitis. (...)
vid.. 81. 1^8.
Levonisiae comitis uxori Henrici VII. Angliae Regis ex filia nepti potentiss.
Regibus cognatione conjunctissimae, Jacobi VI. Scotorum Regis Aviae, matronae
sanctissimis morib. and invicta animi patientia incomparabili, P.

Margareta Potens virtute potentior ortu
Regibus ac proavis nobilitata suis
Inde Caledoniis, australibus inde Britannis,
Edita principibus, principibusque parens.
Quae mortis fuerant solvit laetissima morti,
Atque Deum petiit: nam fuit an^e D^i.
Henry, second Son to this Lady, was Vid.. 1^7.
King of Scots, and Father to James VI. now King. This Henry was murdered at
the age of 21 years, and is here entombed.

Absolutum cura Thomae Fowler hujus Domini Executoris October. 24. 1578.

Here lies the noble Lady Margaret, Countess of Levenox, Daughter and sole
Heir of Archibald, Earl of Angus, by Margaret Queen of Scots his Wife, that was
eldest Daughter to King Henry VII. who bare unto Matthew Earl of Levenox her
Husband four Sons, and four Daughters.

This Lady had to her Great-Grandfather, King Edward IV. to her Grandfather
King Henry VII. to her Uncle King Henry VIII. to her Cousin-German, King Edward
VI. to her brother King James, of Scotland the Fifth; to her Son, King Henry I.
and to her Grandchild, King James VI.

Having to her Great-grand mother, and Grandmother two Queens, both named
Elizabeth; to her Mother, Margaret Queen of Scots; to her Aunt, Mary the French
Queen; to her Cousin-Germans, Mary and Elizabeth, Queens of England; to her
Niece and Daughter-in-law, Mary Queen of Scots.

Arms. Scotland. viz. Or, a Lion rampant within a double tressure flory,
counter flory Gules, within the Order of St. Andrew. Supported by two Unicorns
chained, etc. Motto. In my defense.

Scotland. Impaling France and England Quarterly.

Scotland. Impaling quarterly, 1. Barry of 8. Arg* and Gules. 2. B. semy de
Flower-de-luces Or* 3 Arg. a cross potent between four Croslets Or. 4. Or,
three Pallets Gules. 5. France within a bordure ingrailed Gules. 6. Parted per
pale Or and Arg. two Lions ramp. combatant: The one fable, crowned Argent; the
other Gules crowned Or. 7. B. crusilly, and two Dolphins hauriant, endorsed Or.
8. As the first, over all an Escutcheon of pretense; Gules on a bend Or, three
Eagles displayed sab.

Scotland. Impaling Or, three bars wavy, Gules.

Scotland. Impaling France and England quarterly, within a Bordure Gobony Arg.
and B.

85. Epitaph. viz.
D. O. M. Bonae Memoriae
Mariae Stuartae Scotorum Reginae A. D. 1587. Maria Regina Scot. vid*. ^2. 101
Franciae dotariae, Jacobi V. Scotorum Regis filiae, and haeredis unicae,
Henrici VII. Ang. Regis ex Margareta majori natu filia (Jacobi IV. Regni
Scotorum matrimonio copulata) proneptis, Edwardi IV. Angliae Regis ex
Elizabetha filiarum natu maxima abneptis, Francisci II. Gallorum Regis
conjugis, coronae Angliae, dum vixit, certae and indubitatae haeredis, and
Jacobi Magnae Britanniae monarchae potentissimi matris.

Stirpe vere Regia and antiquissima prognata erat, maximis totius Europae
Principibus agnatione and cognatione conjuncta, and exquisitissimis animi and
corporis dotibus and ornamentis cumulatissima: verum ut sunt variae rerum
humanarum vices, postquam annos plus minus viginti in custodia detenta,
fortiter and strenue (sed frustra) cum malevolorum obtrecta^ionibus, timidorum
suspicionibus, and inimicorum capitalium insidiis cons^icta esset, tandem
inaudito and infesto Regibus exemplo securi percutitur.

Et contempto mundo, devicta morte, lass^to Carnifice, Christo servatori animae
salutem, Jacobo filio spem regni and posteritatis, and universis caedis
infaustae spectatoribus exemplum patientiae commendans pie intrepide cervicem
Regiam securi maledictae subjecit, and vitae caducae sortem cum c^l s^^s regni
perennitate commutavit. V^t. Idus Febr. Anno Christi 1587. aetatis 46.

Si generis splendour pare si gratia ^ormae,
Probri nescia men's, inviolata sides,
P^ctoris invicti robur, sapientia, candor
Nix^que solantis spes pietate Dei:
Si morum probitas, duri patientia fraeni,
Majes^^s, bonitas pura, benignae manus,
Pallida ^ortunae possint vitare tonantis,
F^lminaque montes templaque sancta petunt;
Non praematura fatorum sort perisset
Ne^ fi^ret moestis tris^is Imago genis.
Jure Scotos, Thalamo Francos, spe possidet Anglos,
Triplice sic triplex jure corona beat.
Foelix ^e^ nimium foelix si turbine pulsa
Vi^ina^ sero conciliasset opem.
Sed cadit ut terram teneat nun^ morte triumphat
Fructibus ut sua s^irps pullulet inde novis.
Victa nequit vinci nec carcere clausa tenenti
Non occisa mori sed neque capt^ capi.
Sic vitis succisa gemit ^oe^undior uvis,
Sculptaque purpureo gemma decore micat.
Obruta frugifero sensim sic cespite surgunt
Semina per multos quae latuere dies.
Sanguine sancivit foedus cum plebe Jehov^
Sanguine placebant numina sancta pa^res:
Sanguine conspersi quos praeterit ira penates*
Sanguine signata est quae modo credit hu^us.
Parce Deus, satis est, in^andos siste dolores
Inter ^un^stos pervolet ill^ dies.
Sit Reges mactare nesas, ut sanguine posth^c
Purpureo nunquam terra Britanna flu^t.
Exemplum pereat ^aesae cum vulnere Christae;
Inque malum praeceps author and actor eat.
Si meliore sui post mortem part triumphet,
Carnifices sileant, tormina, claus^ra, cruces,
Quem dederant cursum superi regina peregit:
Tempora laeta Deus, tempora dura dedit.
Edidit eximium fato properante Jacobum
Quem Pallas, Musae, Delia fata colunt.
Magna viro, major natu, sed maxima partu,
Conditur hic Regum filia, sponsa, parens,
Det Deus ut Nati and qui nascentur ab illa
Aeternos videant hinc sine nube dies.
H. N. gemens

1 Pet. 2. 21. Christus pro nobis passus est relinquens exemplum ut sequamini
vestigia ejus.

1 Pet. 2. 22. Qui cum malediceretur non maledicebat, cum pateretur non
comminabatur, trajebat autem judicanti just.


Arms. Stuart. Quarterly. 1. and 4 B. three Flower-de-Luces Or, on a bordure.
G. semy de fermau^x of the second. The 2d. and 3. Or, a Fess Chequee A. and B.
within a bordure ingr. G. Over an Escu^cheon of pretense A. thereon a Saltire
ingr. between four Roses G. Impaling

Howard. 1. G. on a bend between six cross Croslets fitchy, A an Escu^cheon, O.
thereon a demi Lion in a double tressure flory counterstory, with an Arrow
struck through the mouth, all of the first. 2* England, and a file of three A.
3. Chequee Or and B. 4. G^a Lion ramp. Ar.

86. Epitaph. viz.
Depositum illustrissimi and excellen^issimi A. D. 1639. Lodowick Stuart Dux
Richmondiae. viz.. 91. 93.
Principis Lodovici Stuarti Esmei Leviniae ducis filii, Joannis propatrui
sereniss. Regis Jacobi Nepotis, Richmondiae and Leviniae ducis, Novi Castelli
ad Tinam and Darnliae Comitis, etc. Magni Scotiae camerarii and Thalassiarchae
hereditarie. Sacri Palatii Jacobi Regis seneschalli, cubiculariorumque
Principalium primi. Regi a sanctioribus consiliis. San-Georgiani Ordinis Equ.
Scoticorumque per Gallias Cataphractorum Praefecti, viri excelsi ad omnia magna
and bona nati, ad meliora defuncti. Vixit annos 49. menses 4. dies 17.

2 Samuel 3. 38. Chronog. An IgnoratIs, qVIa prInceps, and VIr Magnus obIIt
hoDIe. 16. Februar. primo generalium Regni comitiorum designato.

Illustrissima and excellentissima Princeps Francisca Richmondiae and Leviniae
Ducissa Domini Thomae Howardi Bindoniae filia, Thomae Howardi Norfolciae
D(...)is, ex Elizabethae Edwardi Ducis Buckinghamiae filia, neptis, Lodovici
Stuarti Richmondiae and Leviniae Ducis uxor. Charissimi conjugii nunquam non
memor conjugi optime merito sibique posuit hoc monumentum. Obiit 8. die Mensis
October. Anno Dom. 1639.

87. Epitaph. viz.
S. M.
H^^ in urna includitur cor, infra requiescit A. D. 1661. Esme Stuart. Dux
Richmond vid.. 92.
corpus Illustrissimi Ducis Esme Stuart; parents qui quaerit, sciat illum a
patre Jacobo primum Leviniae deinde Richmondiae and Leviniae duce eundem
honoris titulum accepisse, a matre vero Maria, Georgii ducis Buckinghamiae
filia unica, vitam and spiritum hausisse, quem postea Parisiis efflavit,
aetatis suae anno 11. Mensis Augusti die 14 anno salutis humanae, 1661.

Arms. Villiers. On a Cross five Escalop shells Impaling

Mannor^. Two bars on a chief quarterly, two de lizes, the first and fourth,
and a Lion of England in the second and third.

88. Epitaph. viz.
Perenni Memoriae
Celsissimi Potentissimique Principis A. D. 1634. George Villiers Dux Buckingh.
vid.. 90.
Georgii Villiers, Ducis, Marchionis. Comitis Buckinghamiae, Comitis
Coventriae, vice-comitis Villiers, Baronis Waddon, Angliae, Hiberniae, Walliae
Thalassiarchae, omnium artium propugnaculorumque maritimorum ac classis Regiae
moderatoris, Equorum* Regiorum Magistri, Quinque portuum and appendicum domini
tutelarii, Castri Dovernensis Praefecti, omnium Regiorum saltuum,
theriotrophiorum ac nemorum cis- Trentanorum Justiciarii, Castri Regii
Vindesorii Praesidis, Monarchae Britannico ab intimis cubiculis, senatuum
sanctiorum Angliae, Scotiae, and Hiberniae consiliarii, Equitis nobilissimi
ordinis Periscelidis, consilii polemici Domini Praesidis, Academiae
Cantabrigiensis Cancellarii dignissimi.

Tantus tamen Heroes, omnibus corporis and animi dotibus memorabilis, duobus
potentissimis invicem Regibus intimus, charissimus omnibus, togae juxta sagique
artibus florentissimus literarum and literatorum fautor amplissimus in omnes
been meritos, liberalitatis inexhaustae, denique singulari humanitate and omni
morum suavitate incomparabilis, immani teterrimi paricidae facinore trucidatus.
Communi invidiae, quae semper virtutis and honoris comes individua
innocentissimo sanguine suo immeritissimo litavit.

Katharina vero Heroina splendidissima comitis Rutlandiae filia and haeres
unica prolis, summae spei utriusque sexus, D. D. D. D. Mariae, Caroli, (qui in
cunis obiit) Georgii, Francisci, novissimi posthumique felicissima ab ipso
matter facta: suavissimam charissimi conjugis sui memoriam q^a pietate, quo
honor potuit prosecuta. Hos titulos (non vanitati litatura sed optimorum
principum munificentiam testatura) praefigendos curavit: tristesque exuvias
and* quicquid ipsius adhuc coelo non debetur, honorario hoc monumento
moestissima inclusit anno Ephochae Christianae, 1634.

P. M. S.
Vanae multitudinis improperium hic jacet cujus tamen On a small plate of Brass
against the Wall on the East side this Chapel by the Monument

Hispania Gallia Belgia Prudentiam, Fortitudinem, Industriam.
Tota Europa mirata est Magnanimitatem. Quem
Daniae, and Sweviae, Germaniae, Transilvaniae, and Nassauviae...... Veneta
Respub. Sabaudiae and Lotharingiae Palatinus Comes Imperator Turca Papa Reg.
integerrimum, Princip. ingenuum, Philo-basilea, Duces Politicum, Fidelem,
Pacificum, Christianum, Protestantem,
Experti sunt. Quem
Anglia Cantabrigia Buckinghamia Archithalassum habuit. Cancellarium habuit.
Ducem habuit.
Verum siste viator, and quid ipsa invidia sugillare nequit audi.

Hic est ille calamitosae virtutis Buckinghamius maritus redamatus, pater
amans, filius obsequens, frater amicissimus, affinis beneficus, amicus
perpetuus, dominus benignus, and optimus omnium servus. Quem Reges adamarunt,
optimates honorarunt, Ecclesia destevit, vulgus oderunt. Quem Jacobus and
Carolus Regum perspicacissimi, intimum habuerunt, a quibus honoribus auctus and
negotiis onustus, fato succubuit antequam par animo periculum invenit. Quid jam
Peregrine? Aenigma mundi moritur; omnia suit, nec quidquam habuit, Patriae,
Parens and Hostis audiit. Deliciae idem and querela Parlamenti. Qui dum
Papistis bellum infert insimulatur Papista, dum Protestantium partibus
consulit, occiditur a Protestante. Tesseram specta rerum humanarum, at non est
quod serio triumphet malitia, interimere potuit, laedere non potuit, scilicet
has preces ^undens expiravit. Tuo ego sanguine potiar (mi Jesu) dum mali
pascuntur meo.

Arms. On one side.
France and England. Quarterly within a Garter* supported by a Lion rampant
gardant Or, crowned with a Royal Diadem, and a Dragon Gules. Motto, Dier and
Mon Droit.

On the other. Scotland Impaling France and England quarterly, supported by a
Unicorn Arg. gorged, with a Crown and Chain reflexed over the back, Or, and a
Lion ramp. Arg. Motto, Beati Paci^ici.

89. Epitaph. viz.
Memoriae Aeternae
Elizabethae, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae A. D. 1602. Elizabetha Regina
Angliae. vid.. 83,
Reginae R. Henrici VIII. fill. R. Hen. VII. nept. R. Edw. IV. pronept. Patriae,
Parenti, Religionis, and honorum Artium altrici, plurimarum linguarum peritia,
praeclaris tum animi tum corporis dotibus regiisque virtutibus supra sexum
Principi incomparabili Jacobus Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex
virtutum and Regnorum haeres been merenti pie posuit.

Memoriae Sacrum.
Religione ad primaevam sinceritatem restaurata, pace fundata, moneta ad justum
valorem reducta, rebellione domestica vindicata, Gallia malis intestinis
praecipiti sublevata, Belgio sustentato, Hispanica class profligata, Hibernia
pulsis Hispanis and Rebellibus ad deditionem coactis pacata, redditibus
utriusque Academiae lege Annonaria plurimum adauctis, toto denique Anglia
ditata, prudentissimeque annos 45. administrata: Elizabetha Regina victrix,
triumphatrix, pietatis studiosissima, foelicissima, placida morte Septuagenaria
soluta, mortales reliquias dum Christo jubente resurgant immortales, in hac
Ecclesia celeberrima ab ipsa conservata, and denuo fundata, deposuit.

Obiit 24. Martii, anno salutis. M. DC. II. Regni XLV. Aetatis LXX.

Regno consors and urna hic obdormimus Elizabetha and Maria sorores in spe
resurrectionis.

Arms. in a Lozenge Shield, France and England quarterly. 2. Scotland. 3.
Ireland. viz. B an Harp. Or, strings Arg. 4. As the first.

90. Epitaph. viz.
Sophia Rosula Regia, praepropero fato A. D. 160^. Sophia Stuart. vid.. 84.
^ecerpta and Jacobo, Magnae Britanniae, ^ranciae, and Hiberniae Regi, Annaeque
Reginae, parentibus erepta, ut in Christi Rosario reflorescat, hic sita est,
Junii 23. Regni Regis Jacobi 4. 1606.

^rms. The same with those of her Sister before* going.

91. Epitaph. viz.
Maria filia Jacobi Regis Magnae Bri^nniae, A. D. 1607. Maria Stuart* vid.. 8^.
Franciae, and Hiberniae and Annae Reginae primaeva infantia in Coelum reepta,
mihi gaudium inveni, parentibus ^esiderium reliqui, die 16. Decembris ^607.
congratulantes condolete. Vixit ^nos 2. Menses, 5. dies 8.

92. Epitaph. viz.
H. S. S.
Reliquiae Edwardi V. Regis Angliae A. D. 1483. Edward V. Re^ A^gl. and Ri^.
D^^ Ebor. vid.. 86.
and Richardi D^^is Eboracensts. Hos fratres Germanos, Turre L^ndonensi
conclusos, inje^^^sque cul^itris suf^ocatos, abdite and (...) tumulari jussit
Patru^s Richardus per^idus regni praedo, ossa desideratorum din and ^^^tum
quaesita, p^st annos 190. etc. Scalarum in ruderibus (s^^lae istae ad s^^ellum
Turris albae nuper d^^^bant) al^e desossa, judiciis certissimis reperta 17. die
Julii, Anno Dom. 1674.

Carolus II. Rex clementissimus acerbu^ sortem mi^^ratus inter ^vi^a monume^ta,
Principibus ins^li^issimis justa per^olvit, Anno Dom* 1678. Annoque Regni sui
30.

In the great Vault on the North side this Chapel are these Inscriptions
following engraved, some on Plates of Silver, others on Brass, fixed to the
leaden Chests, viz.

93. Depositum
Serenissimae and potentissimae principissae A. D. 1661* Eliz^^ Queen of
B^^emi^. vid. ^. 106.
Elizabethae Reginae Bohemiae, rel^ctae Frederici Dei gratia Bohemiae Regis
Archidapi^eri and principis Electoris s^cri Romani Imperii, Filiae unicae
Jacob^, sororis Caroli primi and amitae Ca^ol^ ejus nominis s^cundi Mag. Brit.
F^^n^ and Hib. Regum. Quae in aedibus ^ob^^^^s Licestriae die Jovis 13. ^eb.
piiss^me in Domino obdormivit, Anno a Chr^^^o (...) 1661. aetatis suae
sexagesimo sexto.

94. Depositum
Illustrissimae Principissae Annae ^xoris A. D. ^67^* A^^^ (...) of (...) vid..
1^^
potentissimi Princ. Jacob. Duc. Ebo^ Fratris unici Caroli istius nominis
se^undi Angl. Scot. Franc. and H^bern Regis Serenissimi, and filia nobilissimi
Dom. Edwardi Comitis Clarendonis dudu(...) summi Angliae Cancel^ar^i quae in
^^l^ Reg. St. Jac. dicta ultimo die Martii i^ Domino obdormivit, ^tatis suae
tricesimo qua^to Anno Dom. 1^^1*

95. Depositum
Celsissimi Principis Caroli Ducis A. D. 1660. Charles Duke of Cambridge. vid..
107.
Cantabrigiae filii Primogeniti Jacobi Ducis Eboracensis qui natus 22. di^
Octobris 1660. Obiit in aula Whitehall quinto die Maii, 1661.

96. Depositum
Illustrissimi Principis Jacobi Ducis A. D. ^667. James Duke of Cambridge.
vid.. 108.
Cantabrigiae, etc. filii secundogeniti and haredis potentissimi Principis
Jacobi Ducis Eboraci qui in Aula Regia Richmondiae vigesimo die Junii in Domin^
obdormivit aetatis suae quarto, annoqu^ Dom. 1667.

97. Depositum
Illustrissimi Principis Caroli Duci^ A. D. 1677. Charles Duke of Kendale.
vid.. 109.
Candaliae, etc. filii tertiogeniti Potenti^^imi Principis Jacobi Ducis Eborac^
qui in Aula regia St. Iacobi dicta vig^ simo secundo die Maii in Domino
obdormivit, vix annumhabens. An. Dom. 1677.

98. Depositum
Illustrissimi Principis Edgari Ducis A. D. 1671. Edgar Duk^ of Cambridge.
Vid.. 1^0*
Cantabrigiae and filii quartogeniti and haeredis Potentissimi Principis Jacobi
Ducis Eboraci, qui in Aula Regia Richmondiae, 8. die Junii in Domino obdormivit
aetatis suae quarto. Anno Dom. 1671.

99. Depositum
Serenissimi Principis Caroli Ducis A. D. ^677. Charles Duke of Cambridge.
Vid.. 111.
Cantabrigiae filii quintogen^ti Serenissimi Principis Jacobi Ducis Eboraci,
etc. ex conjuge Maria D'Este, qui in Aula regia St. Iacobi dicta duodecimo die
Decembris Anno Domini Milessimo sexcentessimo septuagessimo septimo in Domino
obdormivit, aetatis suae tricessimo quinto die.

100. Depositum
Illustrissimae Dominae Henriettae filiae A. D. 1669. The Lady Henriet. Stuart.
vid.. 112.
natu tertiae Potentissimi Principis Ducis Eborati. Quae in Aula regia St.
Iac^bi dic^a 15 die mensis Novembris in Domino obdormivit december circiter
mensium (...)is. Anno Dom. 1669.

101. Depositum
Illustrissimae Dominae Katharinae filiae A. ^. 1^71. The Lady (...) Vid.. 1^^.
quartogenitae Potentissimi Principis Jac^^i Ducis Eboraci, in Aula Regia St.
Iacobi dic^a, quinto die Decembris in Domino obdormivit vix december menses
habens, anno 1671.

102. Depositum
Illustrissimae Dominae Katharinae Laurae A. D. ^675. The Lady K^th^r. La^ra.
vid.. 1^4.
ex secundis nuptiis filiae primogenitae Potentissimi Ppincipis Jacobi Ducis
Eboraci quae in Aula Regia St. Iacobi dic^a t^rtia die Octobris obdormivit vix
nov^m menses habens. Anno Dom. M. CD. LXXV.

103. Depositum
Illustrissimae Dominae Isabellae filiae A. D. 1680. The Lady Isabella Stuart.
vid.. 115.
septimogenitae S^renissimi Principis Jacobi Ducis Eboraci, etc. and conjuge
Maria D'Este quae in Aula Regia St. Iacobi dicta secundo die Martii Anno Domini
Mill^ssimo sexcentessimo octogessimo in Domino obdormivit, aetatis suae ^nno
currente quinto, annoque Dom. 1680.

104. Edwardi Primi Regis Angliae A. D. 1308. E^w. I. King of England. vid..
15^.
Epitaphium.
Mors est moesta nimis magnos quae jungi^ in imis, On a Table adjoining to the
Tomb.

Maximamors minimis* conjungens ul^ima primis*
Nullus in orb fuit homo vivens nec valet esse
Qui non morte ruit: est hinc ex^re necesse.
Nobilis and fortis, tibi tu considere noli,
Omnia sunt mortis, sibi subdit sin^ula soli,
De mundi medio magnum mors i^pia movit,
Anglia prae taedio sa^is anxia plangere n^vi^:
Corruit Edwardus vario ven^ratus honor,
Rex nuper ut Nardus fragrans virtutis odore,
Cord Leopardus, invictus and absque pavore
Ad rixam ^ardus, discretus and Eucharis ore,
Viribus armorum quasi gigas ardua gessit,
Colla superborum prudens per praelia pressit,
Inter Flandrenses fortuna sibi been favit,
Vt quoque Wallenses, and Scotos suppeditavit,
^ex bonus absque pari stren^e sua regna regebat:
Quod natura dare potuit bonitatis habeba^,
Ac^io ju^titiae, pax Regni, sanctio legis,
^t f^ga nequitiae premunt praecordia Regis:
Gloria tota r^it, Regem c^pit hae^ modo fossa,
Rex quan^oque fuit, nunc nil nisi pulvis and ossa,
(...) i^^e Dei quem cord coleba^, and ore,
(...) e^ nullo permista dolor.
(...) Rex and valuit sua magna potestas,
(...)uit, pax magna fuit, regnavit honestas.
(...)wardus Primus Scotorum malleus hic est.
1308.

Pactum serva.
Edward I. King of England his Epitaph.
Death is too doleful, which does join
T^^ high estate full lo:
Which coupleth greatest things with least,
And last with first also;
N^ man has been in world alive,
^or any there may be,
Which can es^ape the dint of death,
Needs hence depart must we.
O noble and victorious man.
Trust not unto thy strength,
For all are subject unto death,
And all must hence at length.
Most cruel fate from worldly stage
Has rest a worthy Wight;
For whom all England mourned loud
To see his doleful plight:
Edward is dead, which was adorned
With diverse graces here,
A King or fragrant Nardus hight,
A gracious Princely Peer.
In heart, the which was Lybard like,
Right puissant, void of fear:
Most ^ow to strife, discreet, and wise,
And gracious every where.
In Arms a Giant fierce and fell,
Attempting famous Facts,
Most prudent did subdue the proud
By feat of martial Acts:
In ^^nders Fortune gave to him
By lot right good success;
In Wales he wan: the Scottish rout
With Arms he did suppress.
This King without his like alive
Did firmly guide his Land:
And what good nature could conceive,
He had it plight at hand.
He was in justice, and in peace,
Excelling: Laws took place,
Desire to chase all wicked works
Did hold this Kings good grace.
He now does lie intombed here,
Which f^rthered each good thing,
Now naught he is but dust and bones,
Which was a worthy King.
The very Son of God, whom erst
This King did love right dear
Has given to him immortal blisses
For his good living here.
Otherwise.
Whil's^ lived this King, by him all things
Were in most godly plight:
Fraud lay hid, great peace was kept,
And honesty had might.
Pactum Serva.
105. Epitaph. viz.
Ycy gist Alianor jadis Run A. D. 1298. El^anor^ Qu. of England. vid.. 156.
Round the ^edge.
de Angletere Femme al Ren. Edward Fitz. etc.

Aeleonorae Reginae uxoris Edwardi Primi Epitaphium.
Nobilis Hispani jacet hic soror inclyta Regis, On a Table.

Eximii consors Aleonora thori
Edwardi primi Wallorum Principis uxor,
Cui pater Henricus Tertius Anglus erat.
Hanc ille uxorem ^nato petit omi^e Princeps
Legati munus suscipit ipse bono.
Alphonso fratri placuit foelix Hymen^us,
Germanam Edwardo nec sine dote dedit,
Dos praeclara fuit, nec tali indigna marito,
Pontivo Princeps munere dives erat.
Foemina consilio prudens, pia, prole beata,
Auxit amicitiis, auxit honor virum.
Obiit Anno Domini 1298. and anno Edwardi Regis primi 26.

Disce mori.

The Epitaph of Queen Aleonore Wife of Edward I.
Queen Elenor is here interred,
A worthy noble Dame,
Sister unto the Spanish King,
O^ Royal blood and fame.
King Edwards Wife first of that name,
And Prince of Wales by right:
Whose Father Henry just the third,
Was sure an English Wight,
Who craved her Wife unto his Son,
The Prince himself did go
On that Embassage luckily
As chief, with many more.
This knot of linked marriage,
Her Brother Alphonse liked;
And so *tween Sister and this Prince
The marriage up was strik^d.
The Dowry rich and Royal was,
For such a Prince most meet:
For Pontive was the marriage gift,
A Dowry rich and great.
A woman both in counsel wise,
Religious, fruitful, meek,
Who did increase her Husbands friends,
And larg*d his honor eke.
She died in the year of our Lord 1298. etc. Learn to die.

106. Richardi secundi Regis Angliae A. D. 1399. Richardus II. Rex Angliae.
vid.. 161*
Epitaphium.
Prudens and mundus Richardus jure secundus Round the Verg.

Per fatum victus, jacet hic sub marmore pictus.
Verax sermon fuit, and plenus ratione:
Corpore procerus, animo prudens ut Homerus.
Ecclesiae favit, elatos suppeditavit,
Quemvis prostravit regalia qui violavit,
Obruit haereticos, and eorum stravit amicos:
O clemens Christ, tibi devotus fuit iste,
Votis Baptistae salves quem protulit iste.
Hic jacet immiti consumptus morte Richardus. Fuisse foelicem miserrimum.

On a Table.
Perfect, and Prudent, Richard by right the Second,
Vanquished by fortune, lies here now graven in stone,
True of his word, and thereto well resound;
Seemly in person, and like to Homer, as one
In worldly prudence, and ever the Church in one
Vpheld and favored, and casting the proud to ground,
And all that would his Royal State confound.
Anno Dom. 1399.
107. Annae Ricardi secundi Regis Angliae Anne Queen of England on a Table.
vid.. 161.
uxoris Epitaphium.
Sub petra lata nunc Anna jacet tumulata,
Dum vixit mundo Richardo nupta secundo,
Christo devota, fuit haec facilis, been nota
Pauperibus prona semper sua reddere dona,
Jurgia sedavit, and praegnantes relevavit,
Corpore formosa, vultu mitis, speciosa
Praebens solamen viduis, aegris medicamen.
Anno milleno, ter centum, quarto nonageno,
Julii septeno mensis migravit amaeno.
Hoc jacet Anna loco Britonum redimita corona,
Cui v^r Richardus jure secundus erat:
Cui Pater illu^^ris, gnata, generoque superbus,
Romae ter foelix induperator erat.
Wenceslaus illam magna comitante caterva,
Londinum mis^t laetus ovansque pater:
Cujus in adventu ludi, spectacula fiunt,
Regali pompa, regia virgo venit:
Sed bona sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo,
Reges, Reg^nas mors capit, omne rapit.
Haec Regina fuit magna de stirpe Quiritum,
Omnibus illa fuit foemina chara viris.
Larga coloratis virtutum splendida gemmis,
Nunquam laeta parens, nam sine prole jacet.
Forma fragilis.

An Epitaph on Queen Anne, Wife to King Richard the Second*
Queen Anne, Richard the Seconds Wife,
Lies buried in* this place:
Adorned with the Britains Crown*
With whom she found much grace.
Whose noble Sire of Daughter proud,
Of Son-in-law full glad,
Of Rome thrice happy Emperor was,
And that large Empire had*
Wenceslaus, so called by name,
Who thus in joyful plight
Sent her to London guarded well
With valiant men of might.
Against whose coming Plays were made,
And Sights and Shows were seen,
With Princely pomp to gratify
This noble Virgin Queen.
But all men's treasures last not long,
They hang but on a twine,
Or slender thread; death Kings and Queens
Does all catch up in fine.
This Queen was of the Royal Race
Of Romans by descent:
Of all beloved, most dear to most,
In honor relucent.
Full liberal and bountiful,
Adorned with virtues rare:
No Child she had, but issueless
She lies without such care.
Favor fades.

108. Epitaph. viz.
I^y gift Henri jadis Ren. de Angleterre, A D. 1273. Round the ^erge. vid.. 157*
Seigneur de Hirlande e Du^ de Aquitanne le fiz. l* Ren. John, etc.

Tertius Henricus jacet hic pietatis amicus
Ecclesiam stravit istam, quam post renovavit. On a Table.

Reddet ei munus qui regnat trinus and unus.
Tertius Henricus est Templi conditor hujus. 1273. Dulce bellum inexpertis.

The friend of pity and almsdeed,
Henry the Third whilom of England King,
Who this Church brake, and after his meed
Again renewed into this fair building:
Now rests here which did so great a thing,
He yield his meed that Lord of Deity,
That as one God, reigns in Persons three.
109. Epitaph. viz. A. D. 1065. St. Edw* Confess. vid.. 145. 146.

Omnibus insignis virtutum laudibus heroes,
Sanctus Edwardus Confessor, Rex venerandus
Quinto die Jani moriens super aethera scandit.
Sursum corda. Moritur, Anno Domini, 1065.

110. Epitaph. viz.
Margareta illustrissimi Regis Angliae A. D. 1472. Margaret. fill. Edw. IV.
vid.. 162.
and Franciae Domini Edwardi quarti and Dominae Elizabethae Reginae
serenissimae (...)sortis ejusdem filia, and quinta proles, (...)ae nata fuit
19. die mensis Aprilis Anno (...)omini 1472. and obiit 11. die December(...)is,
cujus animae propitietur Deus. (...)men.

(...)obilitas and forma, decorque, tenella juventus
(...)simul hic ista mortis sunt condita cista,
(...)t genus and nomen, sexum, tempus quoque mortis,
(...)oscas cuncta tibi manifestat margo sepulchri.
(...)11. In obitum Edwardi Tertii Regis A. D. 1377. Edward ^II. Rex. Angl.
vid.. 160.
invictissimi Epitaphium.
Round the Verge, and on a Table

(...)ic decus Anglorum, flos Regum praeteritorum,
(...)rma futurorum, Rex clemens, pax populorum,
(...)rtius Edwardus Regni complens Jubilaeum
(...)victus Pardus, pollens bellis Machabaeus,
(...)spear dum vixit regnum pietate revixit,
(...)mipotens rexit jam coelo coelice Rex sit.
Tertius Edwardus fama super aethera notus.
Of English Kings here lies the beautiful flower
Of all before passed* and a mirror to them
A merciful King* of peace conservator, shall sue;
The third Edward: the death of whom may rue
All English men* for he by Knighthood due
Was Libard invict, and by feat martial
To worthy Machabe in virtue peregall*
Pugna pro patria.
Anno Dom. 1377.
112. Philippae Reginae uxoris Edwardi A. D. 1369. Philip. Regin. Angl. vid..
159.
tertii Epitaphium.
Gulielmi Hannonis soboles postrema Philippa, A Table.

Hic roseo quondam pulchra decore jacet.
Tertius Edwardus Rex ista conjuge laetus
Materno suasu nobiliumque fuit,
Frater Johannes, Comes Mavortius heroes,
Huic illam voluit consociare viro.
Haec junxit Flandros, conjunctio sanguinis Anglis,
In Francos venit hinc Gallica dira lues.
Dotibus haec raris viguit Regina Philippa,
Forma praestanti, Religione, fide.
Foecundae nata est proles numerosa parenti,
Insignes peperit magnanimosque duces.
Oxonii posuit studiosis optima nutrix
Regineas aedes, Palladiamque Scholam.
Conjux Edwardi jacet hic Regina Philippa. Obiit Regina Philippa Anno Dom. 1369.

Disce vivere.
The Epitaph of Queen Philippe, Wife of Edward the Third.
Fair Philip William Henaldes Child,
And youngest Daughter dear*
Of roseat hue and beauty bright,
In tomb lies hilled here.
Edward the third through Mothers will,
And Nobles good consent,
Took her to Wife, and joyfully
With her his time he spent.
His Brother John, a martial man,
And eke a valiant Knight,
Did linck this Woman to this King
In bonds of marriage right.
This Match and Marriage thus in blood,
Did bind the Flemmings sure
To English men, by which they did
The Frenchmens wrack procure.
This Philip flow*d in gifts full rare,
And treasures of the mind:
In Beauty bright, Religion, Faith,
To all and each most kind.
A fruitful Mother Philip was,
Full many a Son she bred,
And brought forth many a worthy Knight*
Hardy and full of dread.
A careful nurse to Students all,
At Oxford she did found
Queens College, she, dame palace School*
That did her fame resound.
Queen Philippe died in the year of our Lord. 136* Learn to live.

113. Epitaph. viz.
Dormit non mortua est.
Foeli^issimae Memoriae sacrum Elizabethae Eliz. R^sse^. vid.. 53.
Russelliae posuit Anna soror m^rens.

114. The Epitaph A. D. 1422. Henric^s ^. R* Angl. vid.. 164.
On Henry V. King of England. On ^ Table.

Gallorum mastix jacet hic Henricus in Urna, 142^ Domat omnia virtus.

Pulchra virumque suum sociat tandem Katherin^* Otium fuge.

O merciful God what a Prince was this,
Which his short time in martial acts spent,
In honor of conquest that wonder to me it is,
How he might compass such deeds excellent,
And yet for that his mind nothing detent,
All ghostly health for his soul to provide,
Out of this world ere he fatally should slide.
So though I had Tully his eloquence,
Or of Seneca the grave morality,
Or of Solomon the perfect sapience,
Or the sweet Ditties of Dame Calliope;
Yet might I not in Prose, or other ditty,
Accordingly advance this Princes fame,
Or with due honor to enhance the same.
Considering his Acts, whereof parcel appear
In this rude work, with many more left out,
The time also was less than ten year*
That he so shortly brought all things about,
By divine grace furthered out of doubt,
That mightful Lord he holy his ghostly knight
With grace and honor to pass this worlds ^ight:
And to have reward double and condign,
And first for martial A^ts by ^im done,
To be advanced amon^st the Worthies nine,
And for his virtues used by him eftsoon, done:
With many good deeds which he on earth had
Above the Hierarches* he is I trust now stall^d,
That was in earth King of Kings called.
115. Katherinae Reginae uxoris Henrici A. D. 1437. Katherin^ Qu. of England.
vid.. 164.
quinti Epitaphium.
Hic Katherina jacet Francorum filia Regis,
Haeres and regni Carole sexte tui,
Henrici quinti thalamo bis laeta jugali,
Nam sic vir duplici clarus honor fuit.
Jure suo Anglorum, Katherinae jure triumphans
Francorum obtinuit jus, decus imperii.
Grata venit laetis foelix Regina Britannis,
Perque dies celebrant quatuor ore Deum.
Edidit Henricum gemebunda puerpera Regem,
Cujus in imperio Francus and Anglus erat,
Non sibi nec regno foelici sidere natum,
Sed patri and matri religione parem.
Post ex Owino Tiddero tertia proles,
Nobilis Edmundus te Katherina beat,
Septimus Henricus quo non praestantior alter
Filius Edmundi gemma Britanna fuit.
Foelix ergo uxor, matter ter, filia foelix,
Ast Avia haec foelix terque quaterque fuit.
Otium fuge.
Obiit Anno Domini. 1437.
The Epitaph Of Queen Katherine, Wife of Henry V.
Here lies Queen Katherine closed in grave,
The French Kings Daughter fair,
And of thy Kingdom Charles the Sixth,
The true redoubted Heir:
Twice joyful Wife in marriage matched,
To Henry Fifth by name;
Because through her he nobl'd was,
And shined in double fame;
The King of England by descent,
And by Queen Katherines right.
The Realm of France he did enjoy,
Triumphant King of might.
A happy Queen to English men,
She came right grateful here:
And four days space they honored God,
With mouth and reverend fear.
Henry the Sixth, this Queen brought forth,
In painful labors plight,
In whose Empire a Frenchman was,
And eke an English wight.
Under no lucky Planet born,
Unto himself, nor Throne:
But equal with his Parents both,
In pure Religion.
Of Owen Tiddor after this,
Thy next Son Edmund was,
O Katherine a renowned Prince,
That did in glory pass.
H(...) the S^v^^th a Britain Pearl,
A (...) of Englands joy,
A (...)ss Prince was Edmunds Son,
A good and gracious Roy.
Therefore a happy Wife this was,
A happy Mother pure:
Th^i^e happy Child, but Grandam she,
More than thrice happy sure.
116. Solium Regni Scotici.
Rex Edwardus I. cum devictis Scotis, triumphator Vid.. 1^4.
1297. rediisset Sceptrum and coronam Regum Scotiae, una cum solio in quo
Scotorum Reges inaugurati solebant in Ecclesia Westmonasteriensi Deo obtulit.

Si quid habent very vel chronica, cana sidesve,
Clauditur hac Cathedra nobilis ecce lapis.
Ad caput eximius Jacob quondam Patriarcha
Quem posuit cernens numina mira poli;
Q^^m tulit ex Scotis spolians quasi victor honoris,
Edwardus Primus, Mars velut armipotens,
Scotorum domitor, noster validissimus Hector,
Anglorum decus, and gloria militiae.
Arms. viz. Carteret. A Fess of four Lozenges cress. on a Cressant diff.

117. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Edward de Ed. de Carteret vid.. 41.
Carteret, Son of Sir Edward de Carteret, Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod.

118. Epitaph. viz.
Dedicated to the Memory of Anne, A. D. 1635. Anne Cottingt. Vid.. 120.
the pious and beloved Wife of Francis Lord Cottington Baron of Hanworth in the
County of Middlesex, Daughter of Sir William Meredith of the County of Denbigh
Knight, and of Jane his Wife, Daughter of Sir Thomas Palmer of Wingham in Kent
Knight and Baronet, who having lived in long and perfect conjugal affection
died full of Christian comfort the twenty second day of February 1633. aetatis
33. having had one Son and four Daughters, of which F^ances, Elizabeth, and
Anne died before her; Charles and Anne now living, 1635.

Arms. Cottington viz. A Fess between three Roses. Crest, a Bucks head coped.
Supporter, two Eagles.

119. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies Francis Lord Cottington of A. D. 1652. Francis Lord Cottington.
vid.. 121.
Hanworth* who in the Reign of King Charles I. was Chancellor of his Majesty's
Exchequer, Master of his Court of Wards, Constable of the Tower, Lord High
Treasurer of England, and one of his Majesty's Privy Council. He was twice
Ambassador in Spain, once for the said King, and a second time for King
Charles II. now reigning. To both which he most signally showed his allegiance
and fidelity during the unhappy Civil Broyls of those times, and for his
faithful adherence to the Crown (the Usurpers prevailing) was forced to fly his
Country, and during his Exile died at Vallidolid in Spain on the nineteenth day
of June, Anno Dom. 1652. aetatis suae 74. whence his body was brought, and here
interred by Charles Cottington Esquire, his Nephew and Heir, Anno Dom. 1679.

Arms. Sidney, With quarterings, viz. Or, a Pheon B. 2. ^arry of ten Arg. and
Gules, a Lion rampant Or, crowned parted per pale of the first and second. 3.
Arg. two bars and three Escutcheons in chief sab. 4. Arg. three Cheverons Gules
and file of three. B. 5. Arg. on a bend sab. three Lozenges of the field. 6.
Quarterly Arg. and G. an E^carbuncle pomette and Horette Or. 7. B. a Chev.
between three Mullets Or. 8. Argent three Lions rampant Gules. Impaling

Ra^cl^^fe With quarterings, viz. Arg. a bend ingrailed sab. 2. Or, a Fess
between two Chev. G. 3. Arg. a Lion ramp. sab. crowned Or, within a bordure B.
4. Or, a Saltire ingrailed sab. 5. Gules, three Fishes hauriant Arg. 6. Arg.
three barrulets G. 7. Or, semy de Flower-de-luces sab. 8. Arg. an Eagle sab.
perching on a Child in swaddling bands, Gules, Crest on a Torce of his colors,
a Porcupine B. Quils, Collar, and Chain reflexed over the back, all Or.

120. Epitaph. viz.
Inclytae Heroinae Franciscae Comitissae A. D. 1589. Frances Com. Sussex. vid..
122. ^
Sussex ex nobili and Antiqua Sydneiorum familia ortae, illustrissimo,
sapientissimo, and bellicosissimo viro Domino Henrici Ratcliffe Comiti Sussex
nuptae, faeminae multis rarissimisque dotibus, tum animi tum corporis ornatae,
in sanguine conjunctos, in amicos, in pauperes, in captivos, and praecipue in
verbi divini ministros liberalitate and charitate prae caeteris insigni, quae
lectionem sacrae Theologiae in Ecclesia Westmonasteriensi Collegiata legendam
instituit, and quinque millia librarum per testamentum legavit, quibus vel
extr^^retur Collegium novum in Academia Cantabrigiensi, vel (ad augmentum Aulae
Clarensis in ead^m Academia) perquireretur annuus census: de quo perpetuo ali
p^ssint magister unus, december socii, and Scholares viginti. Opus certe
praeclarum and nunquam satis la^datum. ^ixit annos 58. most. est 9. Mart. and
sepulta fuit die 15. Aprilis. Anno Dom. 1589.

Here lies the most honorable Lady Frances* sometimes Countess of Sussex,
Daughter of Sir William Sydney of Pensehurst Knight, Wife and Widow to that
most noble, most wi^e, and most martial Gentleman Thomas Ratcli^^e Earl of
Sussex* a woman whilst she lived adorned with many and most rare gifts both of
mind and body, toward God truly and zealously religious to her Friends and
Kinsfolk most liberal* to the poor Prisoners, to the Ministers of the Word of
God always most charitable. By her last Will and Testament she instituted a
Divinity Lecture to be read in this Collegiate Church, and by the same her
Testament, gave also 5000 lib. toward the building of a new College in the
University of Cambridge, with sufficient yearly revenue for the continual
maintenance of one Master, ten Fellows, and twenty Scholars, either in the
same College, or else in another House in the said University already builded,
commonly called Clare-Hall. She lived 58 years, and died the ninth of March,
and was buried the fifteenth of April, 1589.

Misericordia and Charitate, Pietate and Prudentia, Fide Conjugali.

Beati mortui qui in Domino moriuntur.
Omnia plena malis, fert Deus unus opem,
Veni Domine Jesu, veni cito.
Arms. C^rle^on. With quarterings, viz. 1. and 4. on a bend three Mascals. 2.
On a bend three Martlets. 3. A Pallet wavy between six Roses and canton Ermine,
Crest. out of a ducal Crown an horse-head coped. Supporters an Horse and
Mastive. Motto, Non ad perniciem.

On one side. Carleton. Impaling Garrard. viz. On a Fess, a Lion passant.

On the other. Carleton. Impaling a Cheveron between three roundles.

121. Epitaph. viz.
AE. M. S.
Dudleius Carleton, Antonii ex Jocosa A. D. 1631. Dudley Carleton vid.. 123.
Goodwin, filius secundus. Martii Anno Christ, 1573. Brightweili in agro
Oxoniensi natus, exacta variarum Europae nationum, linguarum, morum, jurium,
legum notitia quaesita frequentibus pro serenissimis suis Regibus Jacobo
(inclytissimae memoriae) atque Carolo (qui diutissime regnet) ad Christianos
Reges, Principes, Republicas legationibus susceptis and absolutis, primario
negotiorum secretiorum and maxim arduorum munere sanctiorumque consiliorum
arcanis fideliter aeque ac prudenter administratis; atque ob multam virtutem
primum Equitis aurati, post Baronis ab Imbercourt and tandem vicecomitis
Dorcestriae titulo and honor; and (quod multo majus) omnium quotquot videre,
amore, ornatus.

Bino (ferente vitae curriculo) conjugio: priori and diuturniori cum Anna
Garrarda; posteriori and breviori cum Anna Vice-comite Bayning (utraque and
genere and forma splendida vidua) contracto, and alterutro nec sterili nec
tamen fertili donatus.

Tandem die 15. Febr. Anno Christi, 1631. Westmonasterii denatus, animam Deo,
exuvias terrae reddens, triste sui desiderium Regi, regno and bonis omnibus
reliquit, ex priore conjuge, quae in aliquibus defunctis legationibus fida,
viro vivo fuit, atque etiam mortuo, hic sepulta manet comes: tulit pu^rum
paucis* diebus hac luce fruentem, ex posteriore conjugio quod (jam Regis Caroli
secretarius primarius) vix ^iennio ante obitum subiit in utero reliquit
n^^^^turam posthumam, quae and ipsa paucis m^ns^bus genitorem ex hac vita in
meliorem est subsecuta.

Arms. Puckering. With quarterings, viz. 1. and 6. Sab: a bend of five Fusils
cottised Arg. 2. Arg. a Mullet peined Sab. 3. Erm. on a Fess G. three Annulets
Or. 4. Arg. three Pallets Vert 5. Arg. two bends, the one ingrailed, the other
plain sab. Crest on a Torce of his colors, a ^uck springing forward Or.

On each side in Lozenge Shields.
Gules, three Rakes in pale bar-ways Arg. Handles Or.

122. Epitaph. viz.
Juris prudentia, pietate, consilio, multisque A. D. 1596. Sir John Puckering.
vid.. 126.
aliis virtutibus insignis Johannes Puckering miles a s^reniss. Elizabetha
Angliae Regina in secretius consilium ac summum magni sigilli Angliae Custodiis
munus ascitus, cum 4. annis singulari fide and aequitate jus dixisset, placide
in Domino obdormiens hic situs est. Vixit annos 52. Obiit 30. Aprilis anno 1596.

Causarum Imperii, and curarum pondere fesso
Vivere poena fuit, mors mihi somnus erat.
Divitiae, fasces, legiones, stemmata, honores,
Temporis haec spolium, praedaque mortisatrae.
Virtus incendit vires.
Hanc posuit statuam dilecto sponsa marito,
Foederis and fidei testem pignusque jugalis.
Spero videre Dominum in terra viventium.
Arms. ^romley. With quarterings* viz 1. and 4. Quarterly per Fess indented G.
and Or. 2. Arg. on a Chev. within a bordure ingrailed Gules five Bezan^s. 3.
Gules on a Fess Arg. between six Flower-deluces Or, three cross Croslets sable.
Over all a Crescent difference Or. Crest on a Torce of his colors, a Phesant
Cock prop.

On the Pedestal these Arms. ^romley. Impaling Arg. a Cheveron Gules fretty, Or.

Bromley Impaling Arg. on a Cheveron sab. three Besants.

Bromley. Impaling Arg. a bend ingrailed B. cottised, Or.

123. Epitaph. viz.
Consilio, Pietate, ac jurisprudentia, insignis A. D. 1587. Sir Thomas Bromley.
vid.. 24^
Thomas Bromley Miles, a serenissima Elizabetha Angliae Regina in secretius
consilium, ac summum Cancellariae munus ascitus, cum octo annos singulari ^ide,
animi moderatione, ac aequitate jus dixisset, praepropero ^ato lugentibus bonis
omnibus ereptus, hic situs est. Vixit annos 57. obiit 12. Aprilis, anno 1587.
reliquit ex Elizabetha e Fortescuorum familia ^xore superstites liberos octo.
Henricus filius patri optimo posuit.

Justicia and Aequitate. Labor and Industria. Studio and Diligentia.
Arms. Fullerton. Quartering, viz. 1. and 4. Or, three Bears heads coped Gules.
2. and 3. Arg. on a Fess sab. three Mullets of the first, annulet difference.
Impaling a bend in^railed. Crest on a Torce of his colors, A Bears head coped.

124. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the remnants of Sir James Sir James Fullerton. vid.. 125.
Fullerton Knight, first Gentleman of the Bedchamber to King Charles I. Prince
and King, a gracious rewarder of all virtue, and severe reprover of all vice; a
professed renouncer of all vanity. He was a firm Pillar to the Commonwealth, a
faithful Patron to the Catholic Church, a fair Pattern to the British Court.
He lived to the welfare of his Country, to the honor of his Prince, to the
glory of his God: He died fuller of faith than of fears, fuller of resolution
than of pains, fuller of honor than of days.

Arms. Quarterly, 1. and 4. A Saltire. 2. and 3. A bend ingrailed between two
Flower-de-luces.

125. Epitaph. viz.
Thomas Vaughan...... and Sir Thomas Vaughan. vid.. 136.
Thesar, Camer. Edwardi quarti, a^ Camerer. Principis and primogeniti
dicti......... requiescat in pace.

Amen.
Arms. Cecill. With quarterings viz. 1. and 6. Barry Thomas Cecill. Earl of
Exeter. VIZ.. 137.
of ten, six Escutcheons, each charged with a Lion rampant. 2 Per pale a Lion
ramp. supporting a Tree. 3. A roundle between three Towers triple towred. 4. On
a bend cottised three Cinq'foyls. 5. A Chev* between three Chesrooks Ermines,
all within the Garter.

Cecill. Impaling on a Cross a Leopards head, a Crescent difference.

Cecill. Impaling, quarterly, 1. On a Saltire an Annulet. 2. Fretty on a Canton
parted per pale, a Ship at Anchor. 3. A Fess between six cross Croslets. 4.
Quarterly in the first quarter a Mullet.

Cecill. Impaling fretty a Canton Ermine.

C^c^^l Impaling, on a Chev. between three Roses slipped, three Flower-de-luces.

Cec^ll. Impaling, quarterly 1. and 4 two bars, a chief quarterly* in the first
and second a deliz, in the third and fourth a Lion passant gardant. 2. and 3.
Three three water-budgets.

Cecil. Impaling, a Fess, two roundles in chief, and a Martlet in base.

Three Swords points in pile, a Crescent difference impaling C^c^ll.

A Griffon sergreant, holding an Escutcheon between the legs, charged with
another Griffon sergreant. Impaling C^c^l.

A Saltire between twelve crosses patte, Impaling Cec^ll*

A bend ingrailed between six Billets Impaling Cecill.

A Chev. between three Garbs, Impaling C^c^^l.

On a pale an Eagle displayed. Impaling C^c^ll.

126. Epitaph. viz.
Thomas Cecill Comes Exeter, Baro Round the (...)
de Burleigh ordinis Garterii Eques, Regi Jacobo a sanctioribus consiliis, cum
chariss^^is d^^bus uxoribus ejus Dorothea Nevil ex nobili Domini Latimeri
familia, and una cohaeredibus prima uxore, and Francisca Bridges ex nobili
familia Chandois secunda uxore, cum firma sp^ resurrec^^onis he in monumento
compos^t^ obdormiunt.

A^mes. C^^y With quarterings, viz. 1. On a ben^ three Roses. 2 England within
a bordure. 3. ^ Fess between six cross Croslets. 4. Chequee a Cheveron Ermin,
Crest on a Torce a Swa^ crowned.

127. Epitaph. viz.
H. S. E.
Magnae stirpis vir majoris indolis A. D. 1648. Th^mas Carry. vid.. 13^.
Thomas Carry, qui obiit anno aetatis s^^ 33. quod est nobilitatis Comitis
Monmouth filius natu secundus, quod vero v^rt^tis illus^re documentum, quod
Carolo primo Regi, cui a cubiculis servie* bat erat dilectissimus, cujus pio in
affect^, usque superstes non ante annum 1648. quo omnia eximia interire necesse
^rat, penitus defunctus est. Nobilissima familia quasi natura in eo formando,
totas prosapiae vires prodiga consumpsisset, Haerede deficiente masculo
expiravit, extincta est,

Abi viator luctusque, and venerationis stupor^m mis^e.

128. Epitaph. viz.
Charles Howard, third Son of the A. D. 1668. Charles Howard vid.. 138.
Right Honorable Charles Earl of Carlisle, who was born the fifth day of
September Anno Dom. 1668. and died the third of April 1670. and lies here
interred.

Arms. Carey With quarterings, viz. 1. Arg. on a bend sab. three Roses of the
field, a Crescent difference. 2. Sab. two bars neb. Erm. 3. France and England
quarterly within a bordure Gobony, Arg. and B. 4. Or, six Lions rampant sab. 5.
England within a bordure Arg. 6. Or, two bars Gules, and three Torteaux in
chief. 7. G. a Fess between six cross Croslets Or. ^. Cheq*. Or. and B. a Chev.
Erm. 9. G. a Chev. between ten Crosses patte Arg. 10. Or. a Fess between two
Chev* sab. 11. G. a Lion passant Arg crowned Or. 12. Arg. a Chev. Gules between
three Bulls heads coped sab. armed Or* 13. Quarterly sa^* and Arg. 14. B. three
Dexter hands coped at the Wrist Arg. 15. B. a fret. Arg. and chief Gules. 16.
Arg. On. a chief sab. three Crosses patte of the first. 17. Or. a Cross G. and
file of three B. 18. Or. a chief indented B. 1^. Three covered Cups Or. 20
Gules two bars wavy, Or. Crest on a Torce a Swan prop. all within the Garter
supported by.

On the Pyramids about the Monument. (...) viz. Gules a Fess between six cross
Croslets Or.

(...) Cheque Or and B. a Cheveron Ermine.

(...) Gules, a Lion passant Argent, crowned Or.

(...) Argent two Lions passant in pale B. crowned Or.

(...)ar B, a Cheveron Arg. between three Pears Or.

(...) Or. a Fess between two Chev. sab.

M^^d^^^. Argent two bars Gules.

Gw^re A bend ragule coped.

^ent. England, a bordure Argent.

(...) France and England quarterly within a bordure Gobony Arg. and B.

(...) Barry of six, Or. and B. a bendlet Gules.

W^k^, Or, two bars Gules, three Torteaux in chief.

(...) Or. two bends wavy Gules.

^e^c(...)* Or. two bars Gules.

S^en^e^. Sab. two bars nebulee, Ermine.

Carey. Arg. on a bend sab. three Roses of the field, Crescent difference.

^^ia^* Or, three piles in point B.

^ursey. Arg. three Eagles displayed Gules.

H^rcourt Or, two bars Gules.

Holland. B. a Lion ramp. gardant, and five Flower-deluces Arg.

(...) Arg. a manch Gules.

E^^^ville. Barry of ten G. and Arg. a Lion ramp. Sab.

(...) Parted per pale Or and Gules, three roundles counterchanged.

N^w^urg^. Bendy Lozengy, Or and B. a bordure Gules platte.

Bracton. Sab. three Mullets Or and chief indented Ermine.

Hankfort. Sab. Chev. barry nebulee of four Arg. and Gules.

Barkley. G. a Chev. between ten crosses patte Arg.

P(...) Arg. two bars and Canton B. thereon a Cinq'foyle Or.

Ormond. Or, a chief indented B.

Ho^. Quarterly Sab. and Argent.

Bull^^. Arg. a Chev. G. between three Bulls heads coped sab. armed Or.

C^^ict. Or, an Eagle displayed G. on a chief of the last, a Swan between two
Annulets Gr.

F^st^^f. Quarterly Or and B. on a bend Gules. three Escalops Arg.

Holway. Gules a Fess between three Crescents Arg.

Ma^^ma^^. B. three dexter hands coped at the Wrist Argent.

W^^^ingham. Erm on a chief sab. three Crosses patte Argent.

M^cm^^c^. Sab. three Garbs Arg

Fitz John. Quarterly Or and Gules* a bordure varry.

M^rsha^l Gules a Li^n ramp. Arg.

Stron^b^w. Or, six Lions rampant. 3. 2. 1. sab.

129. Epitaph. viz.
Sepulturae familiae de Hunsdon consecratum.

In domino hic obdormit Henricus Carey, A. D. 1596. Hen. Carey, Baro ^^nsdon.
vid.. 133.
Baro de Hunsdon, villae Berwici limitisque tam orientalis quam med^i versus
Scotiam olim Praefectus: Pentionariorum Generosorum Capitaneus; Forestarum cis
Trentam Justiciarius summus; Garteriani ordinis Eques Auratus; Dominae Reginae
Camerarius; a sacris consiliis, eid^mque consobrinus. Vna cum illo conditur
uxor charissima filia Thomae Morgan equitis aurati, quae plures ill^ liberos
peperit, e quibus sunt superstites, Gregorius, Johannes, Edmundus, Robertus,
Equites Aurati: Catharina, Comitissa Notinghamiae, Philadelphe, B^ronissa
Scroope, and Margareta, Domina Hoby, obiit 23. Julii 1596: aetatis 72.

P^tri optimo Georgius Carey filius, B^ro de Hunsdon, ordinis Garterii socius,
Vectae insulae Praefectus, Reginae Elizabethae Camerarius, and a sacris
consiliis: maritoque charissimo Anna uxor, honoris and memoriae ergo, sibique
and suis mortalitatis memores posuerunt.

A^m^. ^^t^on. With quarterings, B. a Cheveron between three Garbs Or. 2. Barry
bendy Lozengy indented one within the other Arg. and Gules.

Arg. a Cross Patonce between four Martlets Gules. 4. Arg. an Eagle displayed
sab. 5. Arg. on a bend sab. three covered Cups Arg. 6. Sab. a Cross ingrailed
Ermine. 7. Sab. a Saltire Or. 8. Sab. a Fess Humet. Arg* a Crescent diff. 9. B.
five Cinq'foyles in cross Arg. 10. Arg. three Bendlets and Canton sab. thereon
a Tower triple towred of the first. 11. Arg. on a chief Gules, three
Flower-de*luces Or. 12. Erm. on a Fess B. three Crosses moline Or. Impaling

Fanshaw, viz* Or, a Cheveron between three Flowerde-luces sab.

130. Epitaph. viz.
Christopherus Hatton ordinis Balnei A. D. 16^9. Sir Christopher Hatton. vid..
142.
Eques cognominis summi Angliae Cancellarii Haeres, foeliciter duxit uxorem
Alisiam Fanshaw, Thomae Fanshaw Armigeri Regiae Majest* a memoriis filiam: ex
qua liberos suscepit 12. reliquit 6. Christopherum, Johannem, Franciscum, and
Gulielmum, Elizabetham, and Janam. ipse praeiit September. 10. 1619. illa
sequutura adhuc anno 1623. expectat socianda viro and Christo.

131. Epitaph. viz. Vbi vota saepe fervida hic gelidos semel deposuit artus
vividae pl^nos spei.
Christopherus Hatton ille Cancellarii Sir Christopher Hatton. vid.. 14^.
florentis haeres, ipse flos Equitum, boni quem vivum amabant mortuum
desiderant, nam fuerat ille vir amicorum trahax tenax amorum, comitus expers
doli simplex sine hamo prominens benignitas, ut mensa sic men's obvia and semper
patens, quin and beatus prole multiplici tamen fratres and orbus ^iliorum
suppares dilexit, auxit, fovit, exemplum supra pia charitatis earendo sen^iunt
quam solida pietas, quantus in doctos amor, clerique cultus, clericis doctis,
piis ubique notum, reliqua fletus obruit.

Futura tumuli socia quae thalami fuit
Alisia, moerens statuit hoc viro ac sibi
Non dividendum morte contubernium.
Arms. ^oll^^. With quarterings viz. Ermin two piles in point sab. 2. Argent a
Lion ramp. Gules. 3. Sab. a Crescent surmounted by a Mullet Arg. 4. Arg. three
Cheverons sab.

132. Epitaph. viz.
Georgio Holles, Eq* Anglo-Brit. clariss* A. ^^* 16^^. Sir G(...)s vid.. 1^5.
pen^^i^. oriundo rerum militar. sic a pueritia dedito ut castror. Alumnus
nasci videretur, qui post G. cuncta quae de^er^nt nobilem stipendia in Belgia
fecerat ordin. ductor suae gentis supremus vulgo Sergiant Major Generalis,
declaratus est. Augustaeque Trinobantum pacifice excessurus. Hic propter Franc.
Verum Imper. suum and consanguin. cui tamen periculis quam sanguine conjunctior
ambitu honestiss. componi voluit. Joannes Fr. Comes de Clare Fr. meritissimo
maerentissimus. P. vixit A. 50. M. 3. D. 4. obiit. 14. Kal. Junii. A. D. 1626.

Arms. V^re. With quarterings, viz. Quarterly a Mullet in the first quarter. 2.
A Lion ramp. vulned on the shoulder. 3. Barry wavy of six. 4. A Sal^^re between
twelve Apples sliped. 5. A bar between two bars gemels. 6. Three Cheverons. 7.
A fret on each joint a roundle. 8. A Lion ramp. debused by a Fess, therein
three crosses patte fitchy. Crest on a chapau. a Boar passant.

133. Epitaph. viz.
Francisco Vero Equiti auroto, Gal^redi A. D. 1608. Sir Fran. Vere. vid.. 174.
F. Joannis Comitis Oxoniae nepoti, Brieliae and Portsmuthae Praefecto,
Anglicarum copiarum in Belgio Ductori summo: Elizabetha uxor viro charissimo,
quocum conjunctissime vixit, hoc supremum amoris and fidei conjugalis
monumentum moestissima and cum lacrymis gemens, posuit.

Obiit 28. die Augusti An* salutis 1608. Aetatis suae 54.

A^m. Es^ner. viz. on a Fess ingrailed between three Crosses patte, three
Martlets. Two Keys in Saltire with a Miter in chief. On a chief indented a
Crosier Staff and Miter.

134. Epitaph. viz.
Hic jacet Dominus Johannes Estney A. D. 1438. John Estney. Vid.. 171.
quondam Abbas hujus loci, qui obiit 24. die mensis Maii, Anno Dom. 1438. cujus
animae propitietur Deus.

Amen.
135. Epitaph. viz.
Hic jacet Thomas Parrey, miles, Thesaurarius A. D. 1560. Sir Tho. Parry. vid..
173.
Hospitii ac Magister curiae Wardorum and Liberationum Elizabethae Reginae.
Obiit 15. December. Anno Dom. 1560.

Arms. Dormer. With quarterings, viz. B. ten Billets. 4. 3. 2. 1. Or. On a
chief of the last a demi Lion ramp. issuant sab. 2. Gules on a Chev. between
three Fishes naiant Arg. three Martlets sab. On a chief indented of the second
three Escalop shell* of the first. 3. Arg. on a Chev. sab. between three
Ogress. three Roses of the field. 4. Arg. three Flower-de-luces, B.

136. Epitaph. viz.
Memoriae. S.
Catherina Domina St. John filia Gulielmi A. D. 1614. Kath. St. John's. vid..
177.
Dormer de Eithrope Equitis Aurati, vidua Joannis Baronis St. John de Bletnesto
cui pep^rit Oliverum filiolum tenella ^tate d^sunctum, and. Annam uxorem
Gulielmi Domini Howard de Effingham, primogeniti filii Caroli Comitis
Nottinghamiae Angliae Thesaurarii, etc. cum mors sit certa, and posterorum cura
incerta mortalitatis memor certissima spe in Christo resurgendi hoc sibi
monumentum vivens posuit. Obiit die 23. Mensis Martii anno salutis 1614.

137. Epitaph. viz. A. D. 1466. Edmund Kirton vid.. 180.

Pastor pacificus, subjectis vir moderatus,
Hac sub marmorea petra requiescit humatus
Edmundus Kirton, hic quondam qui fuit Abbas
Bis Denis Annis cum binis connumerandus,
Sa^rae scripturae Doctor probus, immo probatus,
Illustri stirpe de Cobildic generatus:
Coram Martino Papa proposuit iste,
Ob quod multiplices lauds habuit and honores.
Qui obiit tertio die Mensis October. An. Dom. 1466.

138. Epitaph. viz.
M. S.
Coelis coelestis, pars terris reddita terrae:
Vt grave descendit, sic leve summa petit.
Corporis hoc fanum, Burghensis nominis orbis
Est Mausolaeum, spiritus ipse Polus.
Magnanimus and illustrissimus vir Jo. A. D. 1594. Sir Jo. Bourgh. vid.. 181.
Bourgh nobilissimi Baronis Dom. Guliel. Bourgh a fortissimo Hero Huberto de
Burgho, olim Cantiae Comite oriundi, and nobiliss. foeminae D. Cat. Clinton
filiae D. Edward. Clinton Lincoln. Comitis nuper Angliae Admirallii filius, ob
res terra and mari gestas clarissimus, Duisburgi Gubernator, bis Equitis Aurati
honor donatus, primum in Belgio ab illustriss* Comite Licestriense Reginae Ma.
and Ord. Belgiorum Imperatore, deinde ab Henrico quarto Gal. Rege post
victoriam in agro St. Andreano. Demum ob expugna^um and in Angl. invectam
ingentem Hisp. ^avem caraca vul. de gemmis* auro, arg^nto, aromatibus Indicis,
etc. on^s^a ^ ^^vali dignus corona and applausibus exceptus. Dum nimis hosts
cordatum licet and strenuum, tanquam viribus suis imparem, fatali animi
securitate contemnit, multo cum suorum luctu, and patriae damno morte immatura
an. viz. aetatis suae 32. Martii 7. 1594. praereptus, hic universae
resurrectionis tubam expectat. Tanti interim viri memoriam fugitivam revocans
hoc quale^unque amoris pig^us, donec magnificentius virtutibus, genio and
nomine monumentum dignius paretur.

G. B. A. M. P. Anno Dom. 1595.
Gladius meus non salvabit me,
Psalm. 43. Tu es enim Domine qui vitae and mortis habes potestatem and deducis
ad portas mortis and reducis.

Sap. Cap. 6.
139. Epitaph. viz.
Labilitas, brevitas mundanae prosperitatis, Sebert R. Oreent. Saxonum. vid..
26. A Table.

Coelica praemia, gloria, gaudia danda beatis
Sebertum certum jure dedere satis.
Hic Rex Christicola verax fuit hac regione
Qui nunc coelicola gaudet mercede coronae,
Rex humilis, docilis, scius, and pius, inclytus iste
Solicit, nitide, tacit, placide (bone Christ)
Vult servire tibi perficiendo sibi.
Or^at mores, spernit flores, lucis avarae
Gl^^cens multum, Christi cultum latis^care
Ecclesiam nimiam nimio studio fabricavit,
Hae^ illaesa manus quae fundamenta locavit
Hic s^ptingentis annis terra cumulatus
Christi ^lemen^is instinctibus inde levatus.
Isto sub lapide nune jacet ipse, vide.
Atque domum Christo quia mundo fecit in isto
Nunc pro mercede coeli requiescit in aede.
Respi^e mortalis promissio sit tibi talis.
Accipies si des, nil capies, nisi des.
Es Christo qualis, Christus erit tibi talis.
Dapsilis esto sibi, largus eritque tibi.
Effectus non affectus si reddere possis
Debet censeri; si nihil reddere possis
Tunc bonus affectus pro facto debet haberi.
Sicut de lignis per aquam depellitur ignis
Sic mala commissa fiunt donando remissa,
Reddet ad usuram quod quis dat nomine Christi,
Nam vitam puram pro parvo dat Deus isti.
140. Epitaph. viz.
Memoriae sacrum.
Hic jacet Thomas Bilson Wintoniensis A. D. 1616. Tho Bilson. vid.. 169.
nuper Episcopus and serenissimo Principi Jacobo Magnae Britanniae Regi
^otentissimo a sanctioribus consiliis, qui quum Deo and Ecclesiae ad ^nnos
undevi^inti fideliter in Episcopatu deservisset, mortalitatem, sub certa spe
resurrectionis ^xuit, decimo octavo die mensis Junii Anno Dom. 1616. aetatis
suae 69.

141. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies Cecill Ratcliff, sometime Cecil Radcliffe vid.. 169.
chief Gentlewoman with my Lady of Dudley, one whose soul God have mercy upon.
Amen. Mercy, grace and forgiveness,

Arms. Alton. viz. on a Cross ingrailed between four Crescents a Rose.

142. Epitaph. viz.
M. S.
Clarissimi omnigenaque virtute and eruditione, A. D. 1638. Sir Rob. Aiton.
vid.. 168.
praesertim Poesi ornatissimi Equitis, Domini Roberti Aitoni, ex antiqua and
illustri gente Aitona, ad castrum Kinnadinum apud Scotos, oriundi, qui a
Sereniss. R. Jacobo in cubicula interiora admissus, in Germaniam ad
Imperatorem, Imperiique Principes, cum libello Regio Regiae authoritatis
vindice legatas ac primum Annae demum Mariae serenissimis Britaniarum Reginis
ab Epistolis, Consiliis and Libellis supplicibus, necnon X^nodochio Sanctae
Katharinae Praefectus, anima Creatori reddita hic depositis mortalibus exuviis
secundum Redemptionis adventum expectat.

Carolum linquens, repetit parentem
Et vale dicens Mariae revisit
Annam, and aulai decus alto Olympi mutat honor.
Obiit Coelebs in Regia Albaula, non sine maximo bonorum omnium luctu and
moerore, aetatis suae 68. salut. humanae. 1638.

Hoc devoti gratique animi testimonium optimo pa^r^^o Jo. Aitonus. M. L. P.

Musarum decus hic; patriaeque, aulaeque, domique,
Et foris exemplar, sed non imitabile honesti.
Arms. Ingram. viz. A Cheveron between three Talbots passant. Impaling

B^ll^si^. viz. A Cheveron between three Flowerde-luces.

143. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies interred, in full assurance A. D. 1671. Sir Tho. Ingram. vid.. 168.
of a glorious Resurrection, the body of the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Ingram
Knight, who for his eminent loyalty, sufferings, and services to and for their
Majesty's King Charles I. and II. was (by the later) made Chancellor of the
Duchy of Lancaster, and one of his most honorable Privy Council.

He married Frances, Daughter of Thomas Lord Viscount Fawconberge, by whom he
had Issue Mary, (his only Child) who died in the twelfth year of her age Anno
Dom. 1651. and lies likewise here interred, he was primitively religious, and
eminently (without ostentation) charitable, an excellent Subject, a most
affectionate Husband, and a faithful Friend, and to the great grief of his Lady
and Relations, and loss to his Prince and the Public, he exchanged his earthly
for an heavenly habitation the thirteenth day of Febr. 1671. to whose dear
memory this Monument was erected by his disconsolate Lady.

Arms. Tuf^o^. With quarterings, viz. 1. and 6. Sab. an Eagle displayed Ermine
within a bordure Arg. 2. Gules a Cross Arg. and file of five B. 3. Gules, a
Cheveron between three Lions gambs, erected and erased in bend, within a
bordure all Argent. 4. B. a Cheveron Or, between three Swans Arg. 5. Per bend
sinister Sab. and Or, a Lion ramp. counterchanged, over all an Escutcheon of
pretense, quarterly 1. and 4 Sab. three Leopards heads Or, jessant as many
Flower-de-luces Arg. 2. G. a Fess Ermine. 3. Arg. on a bend B. between two
Lions ramp. Gules three bezants. Cres^ on a Torce of his colors, a Lion marine
S^jant Arg.

144. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Richard Tufton A. D. 1631. Rich. Tufton. vid.. 168.
Esquire* third Son of Sir John Tufton of Hothfield in Kent Knight and Baronet:
by Christian Brown his Wife, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Sir Humphrey
Brown Knight, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, and Anne his Wife,
Daughter to George Earl of Kent. Which Sir John Tufton left Issue married, by
the aforesaid Christian his Wife, Nicolas Baron of Tufton, and Earl of Thanet,
Humphrey Tufton Knight, the aforesaid Richard Tufton and William Tufton Baronet
of Ireland, Cicely Countess of Rutland, and Mary Viscountess of Dunbar, the
rest died unmarried. This Richard married Crisogon, youngest Daughter and
Coheir of Herbert Morley of Gline in Sussex Esquire. The other Daughter of the
said Morley being Margaret; and the eldest was married unto Sir Humphrey Tufton
before named, who occasioned this Monument to be erected in memory of his
Brother Mr. Richard Tufton, who departed this mortal life, leaving is^ue John,
Mary, and Christian, the fourth of October, Anno Dom. 1631.

Arms. Cranfield. viz. On a pale three Flower-deluces. Crest out of a ducal
Crown an Antelops head coped.

145. Epitaph. viz.
Near interred lies the body of A. D. 1674. Lyonel Cranfield Vid.. 169.
Lyonell Earl of Middlesex, Baron Cranfield of Cranfield, in the County of
Bedford, one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber. He was second Son to
Lyonel Earl of Middlesex, Lord High Treasurer of England, the last of that
honorable Family; he died the 26 day of October in the year of our Lord, 1674.

146. Epitaph. viz.
Under this Marble lies the body of A. D. 1669. Anne Com. Mid. Vid.. 169.
Anne Countess Dowager, Wife to Lyonell Earl of Middlesex, Lord High Treasurer
of England; She departed this life the third day of February in the year of our
Lord, 1669.

147. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies James Cranfield Earl of A. D. 165^. James Cranfield Com. Midd.
Middlesex, who died the sixteenth of September, Anno Dom. 1652.

148. Epitaph. viz.
Mr. Edw. Cranfield lies here, he died A. D. 1647. Edw. Cranfield. vid.. 169.
March 16. 1647.

Arms. Cre(...)e. With quaterings, viz. a Lion ramp. 2. Semy de Cinq'^oyles and
fretty of eight pieces. 3. Quarterly, on a bend, three Mullets. 4. Three
Martlets within a bordure ingrailed. 5. An Eagle displayed debrused by a
Bendlet. 6. A Fish hauriant with two Rings in the mouth. 7. A Saltire between
twelve Crosets. 8. As the third. 9. On a chief three roundles. 10. A Lion ^^mp.
11. ^arry of six. 12. Quarterly Erm. in the second and third three Pallets
within a bordure.

149. Epitaph. viz.
Juliana Crewe, virgo pientissima, charissima, A. D. 1621. Juliana Crewe. vid..
139.
and unica filia Ranulphi de Crewe Equitis aurati, Regii tribunalis Capitalis
Justiciarii, ex Juliana de Cleppesby conjuge, vetustae familiae de Cleppesby in
agro Norfolciensi cohaerede suscepta. Redemptoris adventum hic expectat,
vernante aetate, in patriam abiit, 22 April. 1621.

Arms. Crewe A Lion ramp* on the shoulder a file of three on a Crescent diff.
Impaling

P^ltney* viz. A Fess danzette and three Leopards heads in chief.

150. Epitaph. viz.
Dominae Janae Crewe pietate, fo(...)a, A. D. 1639. J^ne Crew^. vid.. ^40.
pudicitia inter paucas egregiae ^iliae and cohaeredi D. Johannis Pultney de
Mister^on Pultney in Com. Leic. militis, nepti D. Johan. Fortescu de Salden in
Com. Bucking. militis ex Margeria filia, matri Johannis* Annae, Ranulphi Crewe
superstitum and Franciscae Crewe prima infantia praemortuae and consepultae
optimae uxori amore and admiratione virtutum moerens maritus Clippesby Crewe
miles hoc monumentum posuit. Obiit aetatis suae anno trigesimo secundo die
mensis Decembris 1639.

Arms. W^ld. With quarterings, viz. 1. and 4. on a chief three Martlets, 2. and
3. a Cross, a Crescent difference.

151. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of George Wild A. D. 1649. George Wild. vid.. 167.
Esquire, lately a Member of the honorable House of Commons in Parliament, Son
of George Wild, late Sergeant at Law, deceased, and youngest Brother of John
Wild Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. Obiit 15 die Jan. 1649. In vita honest.
in lege and literis erudit. in morte fortis and pius.

Arms. Winchester Ep^sc. See, viz Gules two Keys indorsed, the one Or* the
other Arg. a Sword interposing in bend sinister of the last Hilt and Pomel of
the second. Impaling

Duppa. viz. B. a Lions Gamb erased in Fess between two bars chance Or, on a
Canton of the last a Rose Gules.

152. Epitaph. viz.
M. S.
Mortalitatis exuvias hic deposuit vir A. D. 1662. Brian Duppa. vid.. 166.
immortali memoriae sacratus Brianus Duppa qui Grenovici natus Anno Dom. 1588.
ex^unte nempe die Martii 10. Scholae Regiae Westmonasteriensis primulum (ubi a
Lanceloto Andrews tum decano Hebraicem didicit) mox aedis Christi apud
Oxonienses Alumnus; Magister artium in Collegium omnium animarum cooptatus,
dein sanctae Theologiae Doctor and Capellanus Palatinus factus aedi Christi
postliminio redditus est, cui praefuit Decanus per decennium; at virum tantum
sublimiores expectabant curae, majora desiderabant munia, admotus Augustissimae
spei Principi tutor; exinde triplici infula ornatus, totidem ipse ornavit
Ecclesias, Cicestrensem, Sarisburiensem, and demum reduce Carolo, Wintoniensem*
quo nomine and auratae Periscelidis antistes audiit, 74. aetatis annum
ingressus Anno Dom 1662. jam ineunte nimirum Martii die 26. Richmondiae, ubi
erudiendo Principi operam antea navarat, ubi calamitosis temporibus been
latuerat, ubi and Hospitium insigne ex voto exstruxerat, inter ipsos pene
pupili Regis amplexus piam animam efflavit.

Arms. Winchester Ep^sc Se^. Impaling Duppa as before within the Garter,
ensigned with a Miter.

153. Epitaph. viz.
Hic jacet Brianus Winton. Vid.. 166.


154. Epitaph. viz.
Johannes Doughty, S. T. D. hujus A. D. 1672. John Doughty. vid.. 167.
Ecclesiae Praebendarius. Obiit 25. December. 1672. aetatis suae 75.

154. Epitaph. viz.
In obitum Johannis Windsore Epitaphium. A. D. 1414. John Windsore. Vid.. 167.


Est bis septenus M. Christi. C. quater annus,
Vespera Pascalis dum septima lux fit Aprilis
Transiit a mundo Johannes Windsore nomine notus,
Cord gemens mundo, confessus crimine lotus,
Fecerat haeredem Gulielmus avunculus istum,
Miles and Armigerum dignus de nomine dignum.
Dum juvenilis erat bello multos perimebat:
Postea poenituit, and eorum vulnera ^levit,
Recumbens obiit, hic nunc in carcere quiescit.
Vivat in aeternum Spiritus ante Deum:
106. Epitaph. viz.
Hic jacet Frater Gulielmus Amundisham A. D. 1420. Guliel. Amundisham. Vid..
167.
quondam Monachus hujus loci, Receptor nostri canonici, qui obiit Anno Dom.
1420. mense Julii, die decimo quarto, cujus animae propitietur Deus.

Amen.
157. Epitaph. viz. Guliel. Couper. vid.. 167.

Totius hoc tumulo sepelitur scriba Britannis,
Et Eboracensis praesulis Oeconomus.
Couper erat nomine Gulielmus, sudor acerbus
Augusti hinc nonis sustulit e medio.
Incumbat mollis tellus facilisque sepulto
Nam durus nulli, difficilisve fuit.
Miserere mei Deus, secundum magna(...) misericordiam tuam.

158. Epitaph. viz. A. D. 1508. Tho. Brown, and H^mph. Roberts. vid.. 167.

O Deus aeterno donetur munere vitae,
Thomas Brown Monachus juncta sepulchra tenens
Illius hic pietas rogat hoc te spesque fidesque,
Te rogat hoc verus religiosus amor.
Surreptum monachi fraterni deplangite mundi,
Proque illo crebras fundite quaeso preces.
Libera me Domine de morte aeterna in die illa tremenda, cum coeli movendi
sunt, cum veneris judicare seculum per ignem.

Domine ne memineris iniquitatum nostrarum antiquarum.

Robertus Monachus jacet hic Humphrey vocitatus*
Quem dolet extinctum religiosa cohors.
Nam bonus and prudens and Thesaurarius olim,
Contulit huic sacro commoda multa loco.
Virgin nate dea, Deus O qui vota, precesque
Exa^dis, famulum transfer ad astra tuum.
Obiit Idus Februarii. 1508.

Credo quod Redemptor meus vivit and in novissimo die de terra surrecturus sum,
and in carne mea videbo Deum Salvatorem meum.

Cito anticipent nos misericordiae tuae quia pauperes facti sumus nimis.

In the Cloisters.

Arms. Godfrey. With quarterings, viz. 1. and 4. Sab. A D. 1640* Edw. Godfrey.
a Cheveron between three Pellicans heads erased, Or, a Crescent diff. 1. B. a
Fess Or, between three cross Croslets fitchy Arg. 3. Arg. a Fess between six
Escalops Gules. Crest on a Torce of his colors, a Pellicans head erased Or.
Motto, Post spinas palma.

On one side. Godfrey. As before. Impaling Lambard, viz. Gules a Cheveron
Varry, between three Lambs passaut Argent. Word, Christus Pellicanus and Agnus.

On the other. Godfrey. Impaling Isl^^, viz. Argent a Fess ingrailed, and three
Flower-de-luces in chief sab* Word, Rara est ut lilia nigra.

159. Epitaph. viz.
P. M. S. A small Monument of Ar labaster adorned with Arms and gilt with Gold
against the East wall.

Edwardi Godfrey qui Patri suo Thomae Godfrey de Hodiford in Sellinge in Agro
Cantiano Arm. filius erat 13. proles vero 15. matri autem 11. and 13. quem
primum ex 16. natis matter lactabat, qui licet plus triennio lactebat, foelici
tamen evasit ingenio, puer optimae spei and indolis dux and decus 5. classis
hujus Scholae. Obiit 8. die Junii, anno salutis 1640. aetatis 12.

Honoratiss. Reverendissimoque in Christo patre Johan. Dom. Episc. Lincoln.
Decano Rich. Busby Archi.

-- Subnotat mortuos
Adnotat electos in Regios Alumnos.
Margarita Lambard, Lambardus, Thomas, Sarah Isles, Filii Gemini filius Jana,
Thomas, Petrus, Richardus, Johannes, Edmundus, B. Eliz. Michael, Thomas,
Edwardus, Katharina, Benjamin, Sarah.

Ecce possessio Jehovae sunt filii merces est fructus ventris,
Psalm. 127.
160. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Katharine A. D. 1620. Kath. Stopes. A plain stone in
the East wall*
Stopes, the loving Wife of William Neile: She was the kind Mother of seven
Children, whom she brought up with her own breasts, her life and behavior may
be a pattern for the Ages following; she was pretty without pride, modest
without sullenness, a good houswife without curstness, exquisite at her needle,
courteous of behavior, and right godly of conversation, whose soul rests in
Jesus Christ, to whom she committed it at her death. Obiit August 24. 1620.
Also by her are buried Mr. Roger Parker, a Servant to Queen Elizabeth: Dorothy
Neile, one of her Daughters, and Cibell Clarke, her Daughter Mildreds Daughter.

Arms. Agard. viz. A Cheveron ingrailed between three A. D. 1610. Arthur Agard*
Boars heads erased, quartering three Boars heads coped. Impaling on a chief
indented three covered Cups. Crest to the first. On a Torce a Bugle-horn
stringed* To the second on a Torce a covered Cup.

161. Epitaph. viz.
..... A small Monument by the door of the Chapter house against the East wall.
..... Arthurus Agard antiquor..... hic prope reposit..... 62. annos.....
diligens scrutator..... and Margareta uxor ejus qui Obiit..... December. 1610.....

Arms. Fox. viz. Erm. on a Cheveron three Foxes A. D. 1677. Edward, John, and
Stephen Fox.
heads erased, on a Canton a Flower-de-luce.

162. Epitaph. viz.
Hic infra situs est, juxta Edwardi, Johannis, A small Monument against the
North wall of Alabaster and black Marble.
and Stephani, trium fratrum cineres, selectissimus Adolescentulus Jacobus Fox,
honoratissimi Domini Steph. Fox equiti Aurati and Elizabethae uxoris, filius
natu quintus, parents filio and filius parentibus quam dignissimus. Summa
pietate, vel puer quoad Deum; singulari studio erga parents, prisca
simplicitate inter omnes, percarum Veneri and Apollini ca* put, indubitatus
Adonis and Hyacinthus necnon per dotes animi and corporis, nunc Dei olim
hominum amasius. O parents miseremini parentum. O filii ex illo transcribite
filium! O posteri vestrum deflete damnum. Vario literaturae genere excultus
admirandi sua floruit Antithesis. Sub puero vir delituit alter in vitae
cunabulis and in morte Hercules, dum morbillorum perfidia sublatus, videatur ex
igne and tunica molesta evolasse ad coelos. A. D. 13. Call. December. Anno Dom.
1677. aetatis 12. cum semisse.

163. Epitaph. viz.
Here lie interred two Children of A grave* stone on the North side* Edward and
John Fox.
the right Worshipful Sir Stephen Fox of Farley in the County of Wilts Knight,
viz. Edward Fox, his fourth Son, aged six years and one month, who died on the
nineteenth day of October. 1669. and John Fox his sixth Son of the age of one
year, who deceased upon the seventeenth day of November. in the year of our Lord
1667.

164. Epitaph. viz.
Franciscus Newmannus e Collegio omnium A. D. 1649* Fran. Newman^ Another small
stone in the North wall.
animarum apud Oxonienses nuper socius, H. S. E. diem obiit Pride. Id. Dec. ^nno
partae salutis, 1649.

Exuta jam carne animarum in sede
receptus vere Neander factus est,
Arms. Gawen. viz. Erm. on a Saltire ingrailed B. five Another small Monument
against the North wall by the West door.
Flower-de-luces Or. Impaling Winchcombe, viz. B. on a Cheveron ingrailed
between three birds Or. Three Cinq'foyles of the field. On a chief of the
second a Spears head between two Flower-de-luces of the first.

165. Epitaph. viz.
Anne the eldest Daughter of John A. D. 1669. Anne Winchcombe.
Winchcombe of Berks Esquire, Wife of William Gawen, the younger of Westminster
Gent. died in Childbed of her first Child the eighth of November. Anno Dom. 1669.
and lies interred under this stone.

Vraye femme obeissante jusques a la morte.

Arms. Gawen. As before, Impaling Bush. viz. Sab. a Cross botony between four
Lions ramp. Arg. within a bordure Gobony of the second and first.

166. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Mrs. Anne Another small Monument by the former. A. D.
1659. Anne Gawen.
Gawen, Wife of Mr. William Gawen, who died the twenty sixth of November. 1659.
Near her lie also five of her Children, and also Mr. Isaac Bush, and Frances
his Wife, Father and Mother of this Anne.

167. Epitaph. viz.
M. S.
Richardi Booker, qui in Agro Horsamiae Another co(...)ly Monument of Alabaster
and black Marble against the North Wall. A. D. 1655. Rich. Booker.
Sussexiensi Anno Dom. 1630. natus, post jacta apud suos bonarum literarum
fundamenta in Collegio primum Regio Westmonasteriensi, Dein SS. Trinitatis quod
apud Cantabrigienses est educatus, utrumque ornavit, illustraturus etiam si
vixisset, quippe ingentis plane spei juvenem: Stupendi si quis unquam alius
ingenii, judicii vel in pubertate plusquam virilis, memoriae usque ad invidiam
foelicis, Musis and Apollini percharum caput, sertoque brevi redimendum l^^reo
ce^ flosculum caeteris laetiorem. Invida mors primo statim vere decussit. Heu
quanto vel tuo etiam Lector si quid sapis cum dispendio.

Anno scilicet aetatis 25. Domini ver^ 1655. a morbillis crudeliter extinctus
est, praeclarum seculi lumen and decus alioquin futurus, ut ab hoc discas, ista
qui legis marmore magna repent ruere summisque negari stare diu.

168. Epitaph. viz.
In memoria aeterna erit Justus.

Underneath lies buried the body Another stone in the North wall. A. D. 1659.
Rich. Gouland.
of Mr. Richard Gouland, Master of Arts, and the first keeper of the Library of
this College, to which he has given a large Legacy to be bestowed on some
choice Books. A man truly Orthodox, of an undissembled piety and uprightness,
of a singular candor and fidelity to his friends, well skilled in the
Languages, and otherwise very well furnished with the best and choicest
learning, who after a painful and wearisom Pilgrimage in a weak and sickly
body, departed this life to the seat of the blessed the tenth of November 1659.

169. Epitaph. viz.
Memoriae sacrum. On a Gravestone on the North side. A. D. 1659. Rich. Gouland.

Sub hoc Marmore requiescit D. Richardus Gouland artium Magister and
Bibliothecar. hujus Collegii nuper custos, etc. 1659.

170. Epitaph. viz.
Underneath lies the bodies of three A black stone by the Northwest door
against the wall.
Sons of Mr. Christopher Chapman, Richard, Christopher, and Peter Chapman:
Peter died the eleventh of September 1672. Richard, the first of Feb. 1672. and
Christopher Chapman, Master of Arts, died the twenty fifth of March 1675.

Arms. Palmer. viz. Per Fess Argent and sab. a pale counterchanged three Lewres
in the first of the second. impaling Partridge. viz. Gules on a bend between
two Lions ramp. Or. three birds vert.

171. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies interred the body of Katherine A small Monument against the West
wall. A. D. 1675 Kath. Palmer.
Palmer Widow, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of John Partridge late of
London Gent. who was the second Wife of Andrew Palmer Esquire, Assay-Master of
England to Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles I. She departed this
life in full assurance of a glorious Resurrection the fourth day of January in
the 75. year of her age, Anno Dom. 1675.

Arms. Wa^dr^n. viz Argent, three Bulls heads trunked sable, armed Or.

172. Epitaph. viz.
Elizabeth Waldron, the third Daughter A small Monument against the South wall
A. D. 1675. Eliz. Waldron.
of Dr. Thomas Waldron, Physician in Ordinary to King Charles II. and his
Household, died Feb. 5. 167 5 / 6. being aged nineteen years, four months, and
four days, and here underneath was buried the ninth day of the same month being
Ashwednesday.

Arms. Man. On a Fess battelle counterbattelle between three Goats passant,
three roundles.

173. Epitaph. viz.
Here underneath lies buried Thomas A Gravestone on the Eastside. A. D. 1676.
Thomas Man.
Man Gentleman Sewer to the King; who died the twenty first day of January
1676. beloved by all good men that knew him for being ever loyal to his Prince,
and faithful to his Friend, aged 55 years.

174. Epitaph. viz.
M. S.
Hic jacet quicquid mortale fuit Mariae Another. A. D. 1661. Mary Bulmer.
Bulmer Guil. Green de Lanmoth in Comitatu Eboracens. Armig. filia; quae tamen
virtutum magis quam natalium splendore claruit, habuit Gulielm. Bulmer
Generosum, quem nullo unquam dolor affecit praeterquam moriendo. Guil. tantum
peperit sed instar multorum filium probae spei, adolescentem aedis Christi
Oxoniensis brevi nimis alumnum juxta quem immatura prius morte abrept. sentiri
voluit amantissima matter ut quem vivum unice dilexerat, vel mortue
amplecteretur mortuum: pridie Calendas Feb. anno salutis 1661. aetatis
suae..... Animam Deo reddidit, corpus sepulchro, famam posteris.

Arms. Bulmer. viz. A Lion rampant billette.

175. Epitaph. viz.
M. S.
Charissimi juvenis Gulielmi Bulmer, e Another by the former. A. D. 1658. Will.
Bulmer.
Comitatu Eboracensi quem ob ingent. corporis and animi vires, nativo candore,
and morum suavitate conjunctas: sed dum Londini parents reviserat, febre
sublatus studiosi omnes aedis Christi Oxoniensis inter quos literis incumbens
medicinae designatus fuerat unice deflent: iidem moestissimi parents Gulielmus
and Maria Bulmer, P. P. 1658.

Arms. Humphrey. On a Cross botony, charged with Escalop shells ^ans number.
Impaling three Lions heads erased collered.

176. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies interred the body of Another. A. D. 1674. P^l. Humphrey.
Mr. Pelham Humphrey, who died the fourteenth of July, Anno Dom. 1674. and in
the twenty seventh year of his age.

Arms. Coke. viz. Per pale three Eagles displayed.

177. Epitaph. viz.
Clemens Coke Collegii Westmonasteriensis Another on the North side A. D. 1668.
Clement Coke.
Alumnus Regius, filius Roberti Coke armig. filii* Clementis Coke de Langeforde
in Comitatu Derbiae interioris templi socii, filii natu minimi Edw. Coke Equ.
aurati nup. capitalis Justiciarii ad placita coram Rege tenenda assignati. Diem
suum clausit extremum octavo Augusti 1668. aetatis suae 18.

178. Epitaph. viz.
Hic jacet Tho. Nurse, M. D. fide Another of gray Marble inlayed with white at
the foot of the steps of the Northeast door. A. D. 1668. Tho. Nurse.
spectator, hoc spectaculum judica sed ut tu judicaberis, discede and cogita.
Obiit anno Dom. 1668. mensis Jun. die 19. aetatis suae 69.

Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15.

Pater noster mortuus est, nec fuit in seditione Corae quae concitata est
contra Dominum. Number. 27. 3.

Quando Dathan and Abiran contra Dominum rebellarunt. Chapter 26. 9.

179. Epitaph. viz.
Donec expergiscetur e somno suo, sub Another on the North side A. D. 1670.
Thomas Legate.
hoc mormore requiescit quicquid mori potuit Thomae Legate ex agro Essexiensi
Armig. mariti, patris, subditi, amici, vicini, (ah! quid dicam) viri profecto
undequaque desideratiss* qui placide obdormivit in Domino, Aprilis 15. anno
salutis reparatae Milless. Sexcentess. sexagessimo, aetatis suae 63.

180. Epitaph. viz.
Here lie the bodies of three Sons of Another. A. D. 1670. 1674. 1677. Thomas,
Thomas and Gilbert Knip^.
Mr. Thomas Knipe, the first Thomas who died the twenty fourth of Febr. 1670.
being six days old; the second also Thomas who died the second of Nov. 1674.
being a year and nine months old; the third Gilbert Knipe, who died the 25 of
January 1677. being eight months old.

181. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Anne Fitch Another. A. D. 1670. Anne Fitch.
who departed this life, June 12. 1670.

182. Epitaph. viz.
Mary Tucker. 1670. Another. A. D. 1670. Mary Tucker.


183. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies interred the body of William Another. A. D. 1670. William Blount.
Blount a Kings Scholar, Son of Anthony Blount Gent. who departed this life
the sixth day of May 1670. aged eighteen years.

184. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of John Oxenham Another* A. D. 1680. John Oxenham.
of the Inner Temple London Esquire his life was most eminent, and death truly
pious, he was married almost five years to the youngest Daughter of Richard
Newman Esquire, he was near thirty years of age, and departed this life the
third of October 1680. one Brother and three Sisters of his Wives lie by him.

185. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Lewkenor Another. A. D. 1676. Lewkenor Halsey.
Halsey, a Kings Scholar, Son of Richard Halsey of the County of Sussex Clerk,
who departed this life the 28. day of September. 1676. aged 19 years.

186. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Mr. Edward Another on the South side. A. D. 1665. 1675.
Edward and Marg. Woodroofe.
Woodrooof who deceased Nov. 16. Anno Dom. 1675. in the 54 year of his age, and
of Margaret his Wife, who departed this life the tenth of Feb. 1665.

187. Epitaph. viz.
Under this stone lies buried the bodies Another. A. D. 1676. Mary and Dorothy
Pipe.
of Mary and Dorothy Pipe; Mary died in the year 1665. and Dorothy the
sixteenth of June 1676.

188. Epitaph. viz. Another. A. D. 1648. Elen. Line.

Mrs. Elenor Line, June 5. 1648.

191. Epitaph. viz.
John Gavan of St. Paul's Covent Garden, Another. A. D. 1666. John Gavan.
departed this life the 21. of Aug. 1666. aged 58 years.

His flesh interred here contained a spirit
Who by Gods mercy and his Saviors merit,
Departed in that constant hope, of dust,
Eternally to reign among the Just.
To live, die well was his whole endeavor.
And in a span di'd to live for ever.
190. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Frances and Another. A. D. 1659. Frances and Eliz.
Riggs.
Elizabeth the Daughters of Edmund Riggs Gent. which said Frances died the 31.
of October. 1659. of the age of four years; And Elizabeth the... April 1660. aged
three years.

191. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of..... Aston, Another. A. D. 1644.... Aston.
Clerk of her Majesty's Robes, he ended this mortal life the eighth of May,
1644.

191. Epitaph. viz.
Depositum Johannis Evans Genesis qui Another. A. D. 1657. Joh. Evans.
vitam hanc pro aeternitate foeliciter mutavit, Jan. 26. Anno Dom. 1657. virtus
pro Pyramide.

Arms. Faireborne. viz. An Hawk or Falcon with Bells and Wings expansed within
a bordure invect. Erm. Crest on a Torce, a Gantlet holding a Sword, on the
point of which a Moors head.

192. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies John Faireborne, the sixth Another. A. D. 1679. Joh. Faireborne.
Son of Sir Palms Faireborne Knight, and Dame Margaret his Wife, who died at
the age of two months and two weeks, and was buried here Feb. 25. 167 8 / 9.

Arms. Thompson. viz. On a Fess wavy three Estoyles, on a Canton a Sun in its
glory. Crest on a Torce an hand and arm coped at the elbow, holding three Ears
of Genny Wheat.

193. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies interred the body of John, Another on the West side. A. D. 1679.
John Thompson.
Son of John Thompson of St. Martins in the fields Gent. and Anne his Wife, who
was born upon the fifth of July 1676, and died the 21. of Feb. 167 8 / 9.

Arms. Baber. viz. On a Fess three birds heads erased, a Mullet difference.
Impaling Erm. on a Cheveron, three Foxes heads erased* a file of three over
all. Crest, on a Torce a Cock, the Wings erect.

194. Epitaph. viz.
Here lies the body of Stephen Baber Another on the North side A. D. 1679.
Stephen Baber.
Gent. only Son and Child of Benjamin Baber Gent. one of the Aldermen of the
City of Bath, by Elizabeth his Wife, who was born October. 19. 1663. and departed
this life March 23. 1679.

In the Little Cloister.

195. Epitaph. viz.
In memory of Mr. Thomas Smith of A little stone against the North wall toward
the West. A. D. 1663. Thomas Smith.
Elmely Lovet in the County of Worcester, and Batchelour of Arts, late of
Christ Church, Oxford, who through the spotted vail of the small Pox, rendered
a pure and unspotted Soul to God, expecting, but never fearing death, which
ended his days March the tenth Anno Dom. 1663/4;. aetatis suae 27.

The virtues which in his short life were shown
Have equaled been by few, surpassed by none.
196. Epitaph. viz.
John Wilson Doctor in Music here A Gravestone on the Eastside. A. D. 1673.
John Wilson.
interred died the 22. of February 1673. aged seventy eight years, ten months,
and seventeen days.

FINIS.
These Monuments and Grave-Stones following have been Erected in
Westminster-Abbey since the first of April, Anno Domini 1681.
viz. in the Chapel of King Henry VII.
IN the great Vault on the Southside the same Chapel was lately Interred (in a
Coffin of Lead covered with black Velvet) the Body of Charlotta Maria, seventh
The Lady Charlotta Maria, Niece to K. Charles II. Vid. Ep. 206.
Daughter of his Royal Highness James Duke of York and Albany, etc. (only
Brother and Heir to his present Majesty) by his second Lady Maria d' Este, who
died at S. James's the sixth day of October. Anno Dom. 1682. aged only seven
weeks and three days. Her Coffin stands on that of her Brothers Charles Duke of
Cambridg. In the

Chapel of S. Edmund.
Lies Edward Lord Herbert, Baron Edward Lord Herbert. Vid. Ep. 204.
of Cherbury* having a Gravestone of Black* Marble laid over him just before
the sumptuous Monument of Edward Earl of Shrewsbury. He died on the 9th. of
December, 1678. Before the Door of the

Chapel of S. Nicholas.
Lies Ann, Lady Apseley, who Ann, Lady Apseley. Vid. Ep. 205.
was Wife to Sir Peter Apseley. She died on the 5th. day of September, Anno
Dom. 1681. and was Buried under a Black Marble Stone before the entrance into
this Chapel.

In the Body of the Church.
On the South Side are these Monuments and Grave-Stones, between the Arms of
Johannes de Dreux comes Richmondiae, and Henricus de Hastings, is a noble
Monument of White Marble environed with a Grate, erected by the Right Honorable
Robert Viscount Rob. and Rich. Cholmondeley. Vid. Ep. 199, 200.
Cholmondeley, for to remember his two Sons, Robert and Richard. Robert died on
the 10th. of Febr. 1678. and Richard on the 5th. of June, 1680. There is a
Gravestone hard by the same Monument of Black Marble farther to remember them.
Next to this is an other curious Monument of White Marble encompassed with a
Grate for Edward the Son of Sir Edward Edw. Mansel, Vid. Ep. 201.
Mansel, Baronet, who died on the 20. of June, 1681. Not far from which
Monument, but more toward the East is a Stone of Black Marble to remember,
Margaret Margar. Stradling. Vid. Ep. 207.
the Wife of Dr. George Stradling, who died Sept. 19. Ann. Dom. 1681. And then
at the lower end of this North Isle you have a Gravestone of Black Marble
placed on the remains of Col. Rand. Egerton, Rand. Egerton, Vid. Ep. 203.
of whose Quality and Employments his Epitaph gives you a particular. He died
on the 20th. of October, 1681.

On the South Side by the Monument of Bridget Radley is a most curious Monument
of White and Black Marble, with some Figures in Basso * relievo for Sir Palms
Sir Palms Fairborne. Vid. Ep. 198.
Fair-born Knight, Governor of Tangier, who was shot by the Moors on the 24th.
of October, 1680. Not far from this is an other comely Monument of Black and
White Marble for the Lady Ann Morland, Ann Morland, Vid. Ep. 197.
with an Epitaph in Hebrew, Ethiopick, and English: She died on the 20. of Feb.
167 9 / 8 0. To the Monument of Sir William Sanderson in the North Cross there
is an addition, for to remember his Lady, who Bridge. Sanderson, Vid. Ep. 202.
died on the 17. of Jan. 1681. in the 88th. year of her Age, and Mother of the
Maids of Honor to her present Majesty.

In the Cloisters.
On the North side the great Cloister is lately revived an old Inscription
which for some years has Will. Lawrence, Vid. Ep. 211.
not been legible, for one William Lawrence, who died Anno Domini 1621. and by
which Stone in the Wall is another Inscription placed to the Monument of
Edward, John and Stephen Fox, Sons of Sir Stephen; further to inform us, that
two other Children William and Will* and James Fox, Vid. Ep. 210.
James lie likewise there interred; the old Epitaph being wholly taken away.
There is a little Stone on the West Side for John Banester, John Banester, Vid.
Ep. 208.
a man curious in the Composition of Music; another on the South for John
Collins, and Grave-Stones John Collins, Vid. Ep. 209. Nich. Johnson, Vid. Ep.
212. Ann Tufton, Vid. Ep. 213. Sackv. Whittle, Vid. Ep. 214.
for Nicholas Johnson Esquire Mrs. Ann Tufton, and Sackvil Whittle Esquire who all lie
on the North-side this great Cloister. Their Qualities and times of their
Deaths you will find in their respective Epitaphs, etc.

Arms. Morland, viz. Sable a Leopardshead jessant a Flower-de-luce, and Lion of
England, in the dexter chief point all, Or, with the Escutch* of Ulster.
Impaling, Fielding, viz. Argent on a Fess B. 3. Lozenges Or, a cressant
difference Gules.

197. Epitaph, viz.
Being in Hebrew and Ethiopick A. D. 1680. Ann Morland.
Characters, is here left out.

ANNE, George Fielding, Esquire and of Mary his Wife, the truly loving (and as
truly beloved) Wife of Samuel Morland, Knight and Baronet: died Feb. 20. Anno
Dom. 167 9 / 8 0. Aetat. 19.

Arms. Fairborne, viz. An Hawk preparing to fly with Bells, within a bordure
Ermine. Crest, An armed Hand or Gantlet holding a Dagger erect thereon, a Turks
head with a Turbant. The Word, Tutus si fortis.

198. Epitaph, viz. Sacred
To the immortal memory of Sir A. D. 1680. Sir ^almes Fairborne.
Palms Fairborne, Knight, Governor of Tangier; in execution of which Command
he was mortally wounded by a Shot from the Moors, then besieging the Town, in
the 46th. year of his Age. October 24th. 1680.

Ye sacred Relics which your Marble keep,
Here undisturbed by Wars in quiet sleep:
Discharge the trust which when it was below
Fairborne's undaunted Soul did undergo,
And be the Towns Palladium from the Foe.
Alive and dead these Walls he will defend,
Great Actions great Examples must attend.
The Candian Siege his early labor knew,
Where Turkish Blood did his young hands imbrew.
From thence returning with deserved Applause,
Against the Moors his well-flesh'd Sword he draws;
The same the Courage, and the same the Cause.
His Youth and Age, his Life and Death combine,
As in some great and regular design,
All of a piece throughout and all Divine.
Still nearer Heaven his Virtues shone more bright,
Like rising flames expanding in their height,
The Martyr's Glory crowned the Soldiers Fight.
More bravely British General never fell,
Nor Generals Death was e're revenged so well,
Which his pleased Eyes beheld before their close,
Followed by thousand Victims of his Foes.
To his lamented loss for time to come,
His pious Widow consecrates this Tomb.
Arms. Cholmondeley, viz. Two close Helmets A. D. 1678. Ro^. Cholmondeley.
in chief and a Garb in base, a cressant diff. And again the same Arms with a
Martlet difference.

199. Epitaph, viz. A. D. 1680. Rich. Cholmondeley.

Hic jace^t sepulti duo ex filiis nobilissimi Domini Roberti Vice-comitis
Cholmondeley, qnorum alter Robertus, natu secundus, annorum nondum
quatuordecim, Puer optimae spei, Virginalis vericundiae, Ingenii virilis,
hujusce Collegii Regius Alumnus, and nobile ornamentum: laudabiles in literis
Latinis, Graecis, Hebraicis progressus generosa indole honestavit. Scires,
antiqua Cholmondeleiorum familia ortum, Obiit 4. Non. Feb. An. Salutis. 2678.
Alter, Richardus natu quartus annorum duodecim, tanta bonae indolis edidit
specimina ut facile agnoscas fratrem. Obiit Non. Jun. An. Dom. 1680.

Arms. Cholmondeley, twice with the same Arms and difference as before, etc.

200. Epitaph, viz.
Here lies interred the Bodies A. D. 1682. Ro^. and Rich. Cholmondeley.
of Robert and Richard Cholmondeley, Sons to the Right Honorable Robert Lord
Cholmondeley, 1682.

Arms. Mansel, A Cheveron between three Manches. Crest on a torce, an Eagle
preparing to fly.

201. Epitaph, viz.
Here under is buried the Body of Edward Mansel, eldest Son of A. D. 1681. Edw.
M(...)
Sir Edward Mansel of Morgan in the County of Glamorgan, Baronet, who died the
20th. day of June, 1681. and in the 15th. year of his age.

202. Epitaph, viz.
Huic adjacet lectissima matrona Domina Brigitta, Prosapia and connubio A. D.
1681. Brigit S(...)rson.
nobilis, nobilior virtutibus; erga Principes fide, pietate in conjugem,
beneficentia omnibus, cui, Jan. 17. Anno Aetatis 88. Christi 1681. vita
defunctae Christiana, Domina Esthera Nurse, ex sorore Neptis testamento haeres,
and dignatione regali nobilium virginum Praefecturae succedaneo. H. M. S. P.

Arms. Egerton. A Fess Ermine between three Pheons. Over all an Escutcheon of
pretense with Banning and Murray. Quarterly, viz. 1 and 4. 2 Bars, on each as
many Escalop-shells. 2 and 3. Three Mullers, within a double treasure flory
counterflory. Crest, on a Torce a plume of ^ive Ostrich-feathers. Motto. Supra
spem spero.

203. Epitaph, viz.
Randolph Egerton of Betley in A. D. 1681. Rand. Egerton.
Staffordshire, Esquire; Major General of Horse to King Charles the First, and
eldest Lieutenant and Lieutenant Colonel of his Majesty Charles the Second's
own Troop of Guards, under the Command of his Grace James Duke of Monmouth.
First Married to Penelope Daughter of the Right Honorable Robert Viscount
Kilmurrey of the Kingdom of Ireland, and now to Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of
Henry Murray, Esquire (one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber, King
Charles the First) by Ann Vicountess Banning. Obiit 20. October. 1681.

Arms. Herbert. Parted per pale. Three Lions Rampant. Motto, Fortitudine, and
Prudentia.

204. Epitaph, viz.
Edward Lord Herbert Baron of A. D. 1678. Edward Lord Herbert.
Cherbury in England and Castle-Islands in Ireland, died the 9th. of December
1678. in the 46th. year of his Age, and lies Buried under this Stone.

205. Epitaph, viz.
Ann, the Wife of Sir Peter A. D. 1681. Ann Apseley.
Apseley, Knight, who departed this life September 5. 1681.

206. Epitaph, viz.
Depositum
Illustrissimae Dominae Charlottae-Mariae, A. D. 1682. Charlotta-Maria Stuart.
filiae septimo-genitae serenissimi Principis Jacobi Ducis Eboraci, etc. ex
conjuge Maria D'Este, Quae in Aula Regia St. Jacobi Dicta, sexto die Octobris,
anno Domini Millesimo, sexcentesimo, octogesimo secundo in Dimino obdormivit.
Aetatis suae septima hebdomade and tertio die, Annoque Domini, MDCLXXXII.

207. Epitaph, viz.
Here lies the Body of Margaret A. D. 1681. Ma. Stradling.
Stradling, Wife to Dr. George Stradling, Prebendary of this Church, who died
September 19. Anno Dom* 1681.

In the Cloisters.

208. Epitaph, viz.
Here lies the body of Mr. John A. D. 1679. John Banester.
Banester, who departed this life the Third of October, 1679.

209. Epitaph, viz.
Here lies the Body of John A. D. 1681. John Collins.
Collins, born the 7th. day of Sept. Anno Dom. 1657. and deceased the 18th. day
of May, 1681.

Arms. Fox. Ermine on a Cheveron three Foxes heads erased. A Canton charged
with a Flower-de-luce.

210. Epitaph, viz.
Hic juxta obdormiunt, inter Edwardi, A. D. 1677. A. D. 1680. James and William
Fox.
Johannis, and Stephani trium fratrum cineres, Gulielmus and Jacobus Fox,
honoratissimi Domini Stephani Fox Equitis aurati and Elizab. uxoris filii:
parents filiis, and filii parentibus quam dignissimi.

Quos vivos amor, morientes morbus, and mortuos sepulchrum conjunxit, uterque
varia literatura excultus, admiranda sui floruit Antithesis, and sub juvene
maturans virum; patriae and honoribus nasci habebatur, quos major natu ard^is
par negotiis, in regiarum copiarum quaestura per totam Angliam sibi conciliavit.

Vterque in vitae cunabulis, and in morte alter Hercules, dum morbillorum
perfidia sublatus ex igne and tunica molesta ad ^oelos evolasse videatur.

Gulielmus, Obiit Apr. 17. 1680. Aet. An. 20. Jacobus, Obiit Nov. 19. 1677.
Aet. An. 13.
211. Epitaph, viz. A. D. 1621. Will. Lawrence.

With diligence and trust most exemplary, Did William Lawrence serve a
Prebendary, And for his pains now past, before not lost, Gained this
remembrance at his Masters cost.

O read these Lines again! you seldom find
A Servant faithful and his Master kind.
Shorthand he wrote, his Flower in prime did fade,
And hasty Death short hand of him has made.
Well couth he Numbers, and well measured Land,
Thus does he now that Ground whereon you stand;
Wherein he lies so Geometrical,
Art makes some, but thus will Nature all.
Obiit December. 28. 1621. Aetat. suae 29.

Arms. Johnson. A Fess of five Lozenges between three Lions heads erased.
Crest, out of a Ducal Crown an Horse head coped.

212. Epitaph, viz.
Here lies Nicholas Johnson Esquire A. D. 1682. Nich. Johnson.
Play Master of his Majesty's Landforces, who died the 20th. of Apr. 1682.

213. Epitaph, viz.
Here lies the Body of Mrs. Ann A. D. 1680. Ann Tufton.
Tufton, Daughter of Sir Richard Tufton and Margaret his Lady (his second Wife)
who died in the Year of our Lord 1680.

214. Epitaph, viz.
Here lies the Body of Sackvil A. D. 1680. Sackv. Whittle.
Whittle, Esquire Surgeon to his Majesty's Person, who departed this Life the
19th. of February, 1680. being in the 50th. year of his Age.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
Note that Abb. after a name stands for Abbot; Ar. Episc. for Archbishop; Bar.
for Baron, or B^roness; Com. for Countess; D. for Duke or Duchess; Dom. for
Lord; E. for Earl; Episc. for Bishop; Ebor. for York* Fill. for Son or Daughter*
Marq. for Marquess; R. for King or Queen; S. for Saint; and Visc. for Viscount.

A.
ADymerus, Abb. Page 20 Aelianore, Vide Elianor Agard 351 Aiton 160, 337
Albemarle, E. 29* 39. D. 96 Alexander III. R. Scot. 28 Alfgarus, Abb. 20
Alfnodus, Abb. ibid* Alfricus, Abb. 20 Alfwinus, Abb. ibid. Allen 174
Alphonsus, fill. E. I. 56 Alyngreth 176 Amundisham 159, 347 Anduren, Episc. 243
Andrews 21 Angus, E. 89, 275 Angolesme, E. 37, 147 Ann, R. Angl. uxor R. II.
301 Ann, R. Angl. uxor R. III. 33 Ann Cleve, R, Angl. uxor H. VIII. 34 Ann
Bullen, R. Angl. uxor H. VIII. 92 Ann, R. Angl. uxor Jacob. I. 103, 134 Ann D.
Ebor. fill. D. Norf. 133 Ann D. Ebor, fill. E. Clar^nd. 106 Ann, D. Som^rset 7^
Ann, Com. Monmouth 103 Ann, Com. Middlesex 55 Ann, Com. Oxford 74 Ann, Bar.
Hunsdon 125 Ann, fill. E. Northumb. 169 Apsley 2. 11 Aptot 326 Aquitaine, D. 145
Archibald, E. Angus 89 Arabella, fill. E. Lenox. 105 Arthure, fill. E. IV. 96
Artois, E. 36 Arundel 119 Asaph, Episc. 120 Aston 365 Atcliffe 176 Anduren,
Episc. ^43 Aveline, Com. Lancast. 36, 39 Aumarle, E. 96 Aylmer 176 Aymer, Vide
Valence.
B.
BAber 36^ Balliol, Visc. 30 Balliol, R. Scot. 141 Bonning 319 Banester 5. 13
Barrow 45, 208 Barners, Dom. 69. 237. 249 Barkley 327 Barkley, Dom. 119
Barking, Abb. 21, 162 Bardolph, Dom. 171 Bar* E. 38. 176 Basset 184 Baskervile
197 Bath, E. 248 Bavaria, D. 150 Bayning, Visc. 319 Beatrix, Com. Pembroke 38
Beauchamp 326 Beauchamp, E. of Warw. 96 Beauchamp, Visc. 221. 235. 248
Beauchamp, Bar. 54. 221. 235 Beauchamp; Dom. de* Powick 88. 171 Beauford 32^
Beaumont, Com. Buckingh. 8^, 265 Bedford, E 61, ^50 Bedford, D 171, 157 Bedel
174 Bell^mont 265. Vide Beaumont B(...)mp Vid^ Beauchamp B^ll^s^s 339 B^ns^n*
Abb. 15, 21, 173 Bernard 181 Berners 176 Beuerley 163 Bigod 29 Bill 53, 21, ^26
Bilson 161, 337 Bingham 44, 203 Bingley 204 Bindon, Visc. 1^0 Birkhead 181
^l^gge 41, 186 Blanch de la Tour, fill. E. III. 66, 151 Bl^nohe, Com. Lancast.
36 Blount 363 Blockley 176 Bohun, E. Heref. and Essex 29, 68, 121, 141, 238
Bohemia, R. 107, 149, 152, 291 Bolingbrock, E. 184 Bolton 51, 219 Bo^k^r 355
Boorn 169 Boroughs, Dom. 172 Bottevile 196 Bourchier, Dom 112, 113 Bourchier,
E. Essex 70 Bourchier, Dom. Berners 60 Bourchier, Dom. Cromwell 70 Bourchier,
Dom. Fitz waren 248 Bourchier, fill. Dom. Berners ^37 Bourgh 171 Bourgh, E Kent.
and Dom. 334 Bought^n, Bar. 97 Bounflower 176 Boil, Dom. C^iffo^d, and^ 250
Brandon, D. S^^^. 65, 2^8 Bracton, 327 Braharsen 176 Brabant, D 150 Brewer 3^6
Brech, R. Scot. 143 Bridgwater, E. 1^9, 184 Bridges. Vide Bruges Brigham 173,
210 Brian. 326 Britain* D. 150, 151 Bri^tains, R. 157 Brideman 163 Brocas 60,
^39 Brook, Dom. Cobham 81 Bromley 117 3^1 Brown 159, 174, 340, 348 Bruges,
Marq. Winch. 74, 261 Bruges, Com. Exe^^r 1^^, 3^4 Bruges, Dom. Shandois 1^9*
3^4 Brun, E March 37 Bry, E. 37 Buckingham, E. 141, 150, 238, 264, 283. Marq.
283. D. 68, 99, 211, ^81, 282, 283 Buckhurst, Dom. 74, 225 Bucklugh, E. 103
Bullen 327 Bullen, E. Wiltsh and Ormond 234 Bullen, Ann R. Angl. 92, 234 Bulmer
359, 360 Burlington, E. 80, 240 Burleigh, Bar. 73, 74, 257, 324 Burcheston,
Abb. 21 Burden 174 Bush 354 Buxal 162
C.
CAdwallader, R. Britt. 157 Calhan 176 Camden 45, 204 Cambridg, E. 150 D. 171.
292, 293 Candale, D. Vide Kendale. Canterbury, Arch. Episc. 54 Carteret 42, 49,
190, 215 Carey, Bar. 125, 233 Carey, E. Monmouth 126, 324 Carew, Bar. 78, 252
Carnaby 240 Carleton, Visc. Dorcest. etc. 116, 318 Carlisle, E. 325 Carict 327
Cavendish, Bar. and D. Newcastle, etc. 183, 40 Casaubon 45, 205 Casnake 326
Castilion, E. S. Paul 38 Castle-Island Bar. Castile, R. 145 Cecil, Dom.
Burleigh 75* 81. 128. 243. 253. 257 324 Cecil, E. Exeter 128. 324 Cecily, fill.
E. IV. 174 Chamberlain 197 Chaucer 46* 210 Chair of Coronations 142* 312
Chandois, Bar. 324 Chapman 357 Champaigne, E. 36 Charles, E. Lenox 111 Charles,
E. Doncaster 103 Charles, E. Plymouth 104 Charles, D. Camb. 108, 109 Charles,
D. Kendal 108 Charles, fill. R. Gall. 150 Charles de Granada 1^9
Charlotta-Maria, fill. D. Ebor. 12 Cheney 184 Chester, Episc. 70, 243 Chester,
E. 36 Cherbury, Bar. 2 Chiffinch 51. 219 Chichester, Episc. 70. 243. 158. 345
Chichester, E. 104 Cholmondeley, Visc. Clarentieux, R. Arm. 204 Clare, E. 29,
63. 167. 229, 230 Clarendon, E. 106. 291 Clarke 351 Clarges 96 Clarence, D 150,
151 Cleppesby 129. 343 Cleve, D. 34 Clifford 29. 33 Clifford, E. Cumberl. 163.
250 Clifford, Dom. 250. 241. 80 Clinton, E Lincoln 171 334 Cob^am, Bar. 77 245.
258 Coke 61. 76. 253. 258. 361 Colchester, Abb. 21. 123. 162 Collias 13 Comin,
Dom. 240 Comberland* Vide Cumberland. Comb 162 Cork, E. 250 Cornwall, E. 28,
6^. 140. 150 Cotterel 44 201 Cotgrave 59. 236 Cottington, B^r. Hanworth 114,
115, 313, 314 Coventry, E. 283 Couper 159 347 Coucy, Dom. 151 Cowley 46 49.
211, 212 Coxe 21 45 206 Cranfield, Bar* and E. Middl 5^. 161. 224. 241. 342
Crewe 129, 130. 343 Crewe, Dom. 98 Crispine, Abb. 20. 179 Crokesley, Abb. 21
Cromwell, Dom. 70 Crofts 168 Crouchback. Vide Edmund Cumberland, E. 193. 250. D.
107 Cursey 326 Curlington, Abb. 21
D.
DAcres, Dom. 74 D'avenant 51. 219 Darley, Dom. 89, 90. E 280 Dartmouth, Bar.
1^4 Dawbney, E Bridgwater 119 De-carteret 190 Derby, E. 28. 88, 89. 163. 17^
D'Este, D. Ebor. 109. 293 De-vi^ 215 Devon, Com. ^39 Dewalby 24^ Dinham 78 252
Dodington 1^4 Dolb^n 21 Dorcester, Visc. 116. 319. Ma^q. 6^ Dormer 169. 333
Dorothea, Com. Exeter ^28 Doncaster, Visc. and E. 103 Doughty 1^9. 346 Draiton
46. 209 Dreux, E. Richm. 30 Dublin, Ar. Episc. 243 Dudley, Dom. 74. 261. 337
Duglas, E. Angus, 274 Dungarvan, Bar* 250 Dunbar, Visc. 341 Dunstan, S. 6 Duppa
158. 345 Durham, Episc. 70. 74. 123. 206. 261 Durdens, frat. H. III. 176 Dutton
193
E.
Earl 21 Edgar, R. Angl. 6 Edgar, D. Cantabr. 109 Editha, R. Angl. uxor. S.
Edw. 139 Edmonds 42. 189 Edmond Crouchback, E. Lancast. fill. H. III. 30. 36
Edmond of Langley, fill. E. III. 72 Edward, S. and Confess. R. Angl. 7. 27. 135.
304 Edward I. R. Angl. 12. 145 295 Edward II. R. Angl. 12. 151 Edward III. R.
Angl. 149, 150. 133. 305 Edward IV. R. Angl. 153 Edward V. R. Angl. 93. 290
Edward VI. R. Angl. 87 Edward, Monk of Westminster. 52. 157 Edward, D. Ebor. 72
Edwinus, Abb. 20. 175 Effingham, Bar. 222 Egerton 43. 193 Ellis 43. 192
Elianore, R. Angl. uxor. E. I. 145. 298 Elianore, Com. Bar. fill. E. I. 176
Elianore, fill. Edw. I. 56 Elizabeth, R. Angl. uxor. H. VII. 86. 134 Elizabeth,
R. Angl. uxor. E. IV. 157 Elizabeth, R. Angl. fill. H. VIII. 92 287 Elizabeth,
R. Bohem. 107. 291 Elizabeth, fill. E. I. 121 Elizabeth, fill. H. VII. 148
Elizabeth, P. Orange, fill. Car. I. 107 Elizabeth, Com. Ormond 119 Elizabeth,
fill. E. Rutland 72 Elizabeth, fill. Dom. Russel 62 Elizabeth, fill. Dom.
Bourchier 113 Ely, Episc. 54 Essex, E. 29. 68. 238 248, 249 Estney, Abb. 14.
21. 164. 331 Estovile 226 Ethelgoda, R. or. Sax. 35 Evans 366 Ewe, E. 249
Exeter, E. 73. 171. 324
F.
FAirborne 366 Fane 78. 251 Fardinand, R. Hispan. 91 Fardinand III. R. Cast.
and Lion 145 Fastolfe 327 Fanshaw 132. 328 Fawconberg, Visc. 339 Fecknam, Abb.
17, 21 Fielding 6 Fell 50. 214 Fern 71. 242 Ferrers, E. Derby 28 Ferguze, R.
Scot. 144 Fitch 362 Fitz-Charles, E. Plym. fill. Car. II. 104 Fitz-John 177. 327
Fitz-Roy, D. Southamp. fill. Car. II. 104 Fitz-Walter, Dom. 72. 30 262
Fitz-Waren, Dom. 29 79 248 Fitz-Williams, 76. 258 Flaccet, Abb. 21. 120
Fortescue 168. 321. 344 Fortibus, E. Albemarle 29. 39 Fowler 275 Fox 352, 353
Frescheville, Dom. 215 Fredericus II. Imp. 29 Fredericus, R. Bohem. 107 Francis
II. R. Gall. 90 France. Vid^ Gallia. Francis, D. Rich. and Lenox 101 Francis,
D. Suffolk 65 Frances, Com. H^rtf. 54 Frances, Com. Suss. 116 Frances, Com.
Exeter 129 Fullerton 117. 322 Furnival, Dom. 241
G.
GAlfridus, Abb. 20 Galliae, R. 29. 36. 90 Garrard 318 Gascoine 240 Gathel, R.
Scot. 143 Gaunt 326 Gavan 365 Gawen 353, 354 Gelderland, D. 150 Gervasius de
Blois, Abb. fill. R. Steph. 20. 180 Gerard 326 Gifford, Dom. 241 Gislehertus,
Abb. 20. 179 Gloucester, D. 68. 105. 141. 141. 238. 249. E. 29 Godfrey 349
Golofre 72, 161. 263 Goodman 21. 53. 181. 225 Goodwin 139. 318 Gorge 120
Gouland 356 Grant 181 Green 359 Gray, Marq. Dorchest. 65. Visc. Lisle, 96. 171
Griffith 174 Gruffith 44, 199 Gulick, D. 34 Gware 326
H.
HAlsey 364 Hanworth, Bar. 114. 313 Hankford 327 Harsnet 44. 201 Harbord ibid.
Harle 82. 265 Harcourt 326 Haronden, Abb. 21. 176 Harpedon 164 Harold, R. Angl.
174 Hastings 30. 240 Haspal 176 Hatton 132. 328 Haule 50. 218 Haverel 176 Henry
II. R. Angl. 139 Henry III. R. Angl. 11. 27. 303. 137 Henry V. R. Angl. 134.
155. 308 Henry VI. R. Angl. 156 Henry VII. R. Angl. 14. 86. 134. 157. 266 Henry
VIII. R. Angl. 162 Henry IV. R. Gall. 172 Henry V. Imp. 139 Henry, R. Scot. 275
Henry, R. Scot. 275 Henry, R. Navarre 37 Henry, fill. E. I. 56 Henry, fill. Rich.
R. Romans 140 Henry, fill. E. Lancast. 37 Henry, fill. H. VIII. 162
Henry-Frederick, P. Wa. fill. Jacob. 106. 134 Henry, D. Glocest. fill. Car. I.
105 Henrietta, fill. D. Ebor. 109. 293 Henault, E. 149, 150 Henley, Abb. 21. 33
Hertford, E. 221. 235. 248, 249, 250 Hereford, E. 29. 238. 249 Hereford, Episc.
122 Herebertus, Abb. 20 Herber^ Dom. 2 Hesket 48. 194 Heylyn 42. 189 Hill 43.
192 Hilton 240 Hinchinbrooke, Visc. 98 Hispaniae, R. Vide Spain Hobby 61. 232.
328 Holles, E. Clare 63. 167. 229. 230 Holland 326 Holway 327 Holderness, Com.
39 Holcroft 73 Hoo 327 Howard, D. Norf. 101. 133. 281. 223 Howard, E. Surrey
223 Howard, E. of Nottingh. 169. 223. 333 Howard, E. of Carlisle 129. 325
Howard, Bar. Effingham 169. 222. 333 Howard, Dom. Bindon 101. 281 Howard, Visc.
Bindon 120 Hugh, fill. E. Essex 121 Hugolin 175 Humphrey 360 Humes, Abb.
Hunsdon, Dom. 327. 3^^ Hungerford 169. 171. 1^^
I.
JAmes 40. 49. 185, 215 James, R. Angl. 90. 103. 134 James, D. Ebor. 106 James,
D. Cantab. 108 James, D. Monm. 103 James, E. Ossery 104 Imbercourt, Bar. 116.
319 Ingram 160. 339 John, R. Gall. 149, 150, 152 John, fill. E. I. 56 John, fill.
H. III. 56 John of Eltham, D. Cornw. fill. E. II. 67 John, fill. E. Pemb. 140
John, fill. E. Lanc. 37 John, D. Summers. 88 John, Visc. Thurles 119 Johnson,
Will. 42. 188 Johnson, Ben. 49. 213 Johnson, Nich. 5 Jone de la Tour, fill. E.
III. 151 Isabella, R. Angl. uxor. Johan. 37. 147 Isabella, R. Angl. uxor. E.
II. 67. 151 Isabella, fill. D. Ebor. 110. 195 Isham 50. 217 Islip, Abb. 14. 21.
131. ^70 Isles 349 Isle of Wight, Com. 39
K.
KAtherine, R. Angl. uxor. H. V. 156. 134. 310 Katherine, R. Angl. uxor. H.
VIII. 34. 91. 162 Katherine, fill. H. III. 56 Katherine, fill. D. Ebor. 110. 294
Katherine-Laura, fill. D. Ebor. ibid. Katherine, D. Buckingh. 99 Katherine, Com.
Northumb. 120 Katherine, fill. D. Norf. 176 Kedington, Abb. 21 Kendal, D. 108.
292 Kent, E. 139. 153. 171. 326. 334. 341 Killigrew 40. 184. 215 Kilmurray,
Visc. 43. 193 Kirkeby 240 Kirton, Abb. 21. 171. 333 Knevet 168 Knipe 362 ^^owls
63. 233
L.
LAcy 28 Lambard 329 Langham, Abb. 13. 21. 54. 227 Lancaster, E. 30. 36. 38.
171. D. 150, 151 Latimer, Dom. 120. 128, 324 Laurentius, Abb. 20. 180 Laurence
4 Leek 163 Legate 362 Leicester, E. 29. 140. 172. 291. 334 Leneve 43. 191 Lenox,
E. 89. 111. 274. D. 280. ^ 282 Leppington, Bar. 126 Levisham, Abb. 2^ Lewis, V.
R. Gall. 36 Lincoln, E. 28. 171. 334 Lions, R. 145 Lisle, Visc. 96. 326
Litlington. Abb. 13. 21. 52 Lodowick, Imp. 149 London* Episc. 54 Longespee, E.
Salisb. 28 Lovetoft, Dom. 241 Lucas, Dom. 41. 182 Lucius, R. Britt. 3 Lumley
240 Line 364
M.
MAcmurch 327 Mailmans 327 Malpas, Bar. 30. 194 Man 358 Mansfield, Visc. 40.
183 Manors, E. Rutland 73. 282 Manduit 326 Mandivile 175 Mansel 9 Margaret, R.
Scot. fill. H. VII. 89, 90. 275 Margaret, fill. E. IV. 153. 305 Margaret, fill.
Comb. Pemb. 140 Margaret, Com. Rich. and Derb. 88 Margaret, Com. Derb. 163
Margaret, D. Newcastle 40 Margaret, Com. Lenox 89. 111 Margaret, Com. Shrewsb.
96 Margaret, Bar. Carew. 78 Mary, R. Scot, fill. Jac. V. 90. 105. 277 Mary, R.
Angl. fill. H. VIII. 91 Mary, fill. H. I. 139 Mary, fill. H. VII. 65 Mary, fill.
Jacob 92. 289 Mary, Com. Pemb. 38 Mary, fill. Marq. Dorch. 6^ Mary, fill. E.
Essex 121 Marshal, E. 223 Marshal 3^7 March, E. ^^ Matilda, R. Angl. uxor. H.
I. 139 Maud, Imp. fill. H. I. ibid. Mauleverer 40. 184 Meredith 114, 3^3
Meschemes 3^6 Michael 1^^ Middlesex, E. 161. 224. 341, 342 Mildred, Bar.
Burleigh ^^ Milling, Abb. 21* ^ Mohun, Dom. de Dunster 72. ^^^171, ^6^ Moilley
^6 Molineux 71 Monmouth, E. 126. 225. D. ^^3 Monchency, Dom. 240 Monteine 31
Monte-alto 29 Monte-forti, E. Leic. 29. ^4^ Monte-chency ^^ Mo^cke, D.
Albemarle 95 9^ Morland 44. 49, 50. 201. 2^6* 217 Morton ^^6 Morgan 126. 328
Morley ^4^ Mortuo-mari (...)8 Mountford. Vide Monte-forti. Mountague, E.
Sandwich (...) Mowbray, D. Norf. 30* 1^ Mulgrave, E. 2^5 Murray
N.
NAssau, P. 107 Navarre, R. 37. 149, 172 (...)l 38 (...)e 43. 191 (...)il, E.
Warwick 33 (...)il, Dom. Latimer 120. 128. 171. 234. 239 (...)castle, B. 101.
280. Marq. 183. D. 40. 182 (...)ton 244 (...)burgh 326 Newman 353 Newberry,
Bar. 104 N(...)l 172 N(...)olk, E. 29. D. 133. 176. 223. 281 (...)thampton, E.
238. 249 (...)rthumberland, E. 120. 169 (...)rmandy, D. 140 (...)rris, Bar. de
Rycot 172 (...)ttingham, E. 169. 223. 228. 333 (...)vo-castro 175 (...)rse 361
O.
OGle, Bar. 58. 182, 183, 240, 241. E* 40. 183 Orange, P. 107 Orchard 326
Ordbruthius, Abb. 20 Ormond, E. 119. 171. 234. 239. 327 D. 104 Osboldston 51.
218 Ossery, E. 104 Oteley 198 Outram 45. 49. 207 Owen 47. 197 Oxenham 363
Oxford, Episc. 50 Oxford, E. 29. 76. 165. 254. 257. 331
P.
PALmer 176. 313. 357 Papilon, Abb. 20 Par 51. 220 Parry 332 Parker 351
Partridg 357 Pawlet, Marq. Winch. 59. 74. 236. 261 Pecksal 59. 236 Pembroke, E.
28. 37. 150, 151 Percy 28. 171. E. Northumb. 120 Peverel 176 Philippa, R. Angl.
uxor. E. III. 149. 133. 306 Philippa, D. Ebor. 72 Philip II. R. Hispan. 92
Philip le Bell, R. Gall. 151 Picard 327 Pipe 364 Plantagenet. D. Ebor. 72. 96
Ponthieu, E. 146 Poole 16 Popham 127 Postard, Abb. 20 Potheridg, Bar. 96
Praenest, Episc. 54 Price 49. 213 Province, E. 28. 145 Puckering 114. 320
Pultney 130. 343 Punter 181
Q.
QViney, E. Winchest. 28
R.
RAdley 44. 49. 199. 217 Radcliffe 49. 213. 240 Ramond, E. of Provence 28
Ratcliffe 161. 337. E. Sussex 116. 316 Redman 174 Richard II. R. Angl. 31. 152.
300 Richard, E. Cornwall 28. 140 Richard, Fill. Hen. III. 56 Richard, D. Ebor.
93. 133 R. E. Roths. 28 Richmond, E. 30. 88. 157. 268. 272. D. 101. 280. 282
Richardson 48, 195. Bar. 196 Riggs 365 Robote 82. 265 Robert, E. Artois 36
Robsert. Dom. Bourchier 112, 113 Roberts 159. 348 Rochester, Episc. 21. 175
Rogers 168 Romain 176 Ross, Dom 30. 73 Rothsai, E. 28 Rous 176 Rupert, P. 107
Russel 308. Dom. 61. 230 Rutland, E. 73. 99. 240, 241. 284 Ruthal 123 Rycot,
Bar. 172
S.
SAcvile, Com. Buckhurst 74 Saint-Johns, Dom. 169. 333 Saint Paul, E. 38
Saint-Neots, Bar. 98 Salisbury, Episc. 142. 145. 158 Salisbury, E. 28. Dom. 176
Sanderson 41. 187 Sanchez 50. 214 Sandwich, E. 97, 98 Savage 59. 237 Scot 40.
184 Scotland, R. 28. 89. 143, 144. 149. 152 Scroop, Bar. 328 Sebert, R. or Sax.
5. 35. 335 Selby 162 Seymour, Bar. 64. D. Some. 79. 221 E. Her^f. 235 248. 250
Shandois, Dom. 129 Sheffield, Dom. 120 Shoreditch 176 Shrewsbury, E. 58 96. 240
Sicily, R. 36. 149 Sidney 116 315 Silvardus, Abb. 20 Skeleton 268 Smith 367
Somerset, D. 79. 88. 222. 235. 248 250 Somery 29 Sophia, fill. Jac. R. Angl. 92.
289 Southampton, D 104 Spain, R. 91, 92* 149, 150 Spencer 49. 208. 326. Bar.
78. 251 Spragge 168 Staveley, Bar. Stafford 30. 113. 171 239 E. 68. 141.
Stanhope 79 248 Stanley 83. 263. E. Derby 89 Stotevile 43. 192 Stokes 228
Stopes 350 Stoner 176 Strange, Dom. 240 Stradling 3 Strongbow 327 Stuart 104.
E. Lenox, 89. 274 D. Richm. 101, 102 Sudbury, Abb. 21. 33 Suffolk, D. 65. 228
Sulcardus 176 Surrey, E. 29. 223 Sussex, Com. 116. 169. 316 Sutton 74
T.
TAlbot 30. E. Shrewsb. 58. 96. 239 Te^dor 157. 88 Teyes, Bar. 96 Thanet, E.
341 Thornborough 43. 49 192. 212 Thomas de Woodstock, D. Gloc. fill. E. III. 68.
141. 151. 238. 249 Thomas, fill. E. Lancast. 37 Thompson 366 Thurlby 21. 16
Thurles, Visc. 119 Thwenge 29 Thynne 48. 196 Tilney ^9 Tindale, Bar. 103
Tompson 21 Toney 326 Torrington, E. 96 To^n^s, Visc. 104 Trapps 49. 212 Triplet
45. 204 Trussel 169 Tucker 363 Tuder 88. 157 Tufton, Bar. 160. 340, 341. E.
Than. 341 Tyrel 188
V.
VAlence 240, 241. 38. E. Pemb. 28. 56. 37. 242 Valois 156 Vaughan 127, 169,
323 Venables 2^ Verdon 28. 241 Vernon 30 Vere 165. 253. 331. E. Oxf. 30 Vic 50
215 Villers 82. 264. Visc. and Buckingh. D. 98. 283 Vitalis, Abb. 20. 179 Vowel
181
W.
WAddon, Bar. 283 Wake 326 Walby 70. 253 Waldron 358 Walterus, Abb. Wales, P.
106. 149, 150, 151 Waltham 142 Warwick, E. 33. 96. 249. 326 Ware, Abb. 21. 32,
33. 137 Warren, E. 29 Waterford, E. 240 Weixford, E. ibid. Wells, Dom. 175
Westminster, Abb. 225. 227 Wentworth, Dom. 168. 259 Wenlock, Abb. 21. 33
Wenceslaus, Imp. 152 Wendover 175 Weston 21 Wharton, Dom. 169 Whittle 16
Wichingham 327 Willis 50. 214 Wiltshire, E. 234 Wild 159. 344 Wilson 368
Williams 21 William, D. Cleve 34 William of Windsor, fill. E. III. 66. 151
William of Hatfield, fill. E. III. 151 Winchester, E. 28. Marq. 73. 59. 236.
257. 262 Winchester, Episc. 158. 161. 337. 345 Windsor 195. 346 Winefrid, Marq.
Winch. 73 Winchcomb 353 Wolsine, S. Abb. 6. 20 Wolnothus, Abb. 20 Woodroof 364
Wood 104
Y.
YOrk, Ar. Episc. 70. 252 York, D. 72. 93. 106. 133. 161. 171. 151. 262. 290,
291
FINIS.

