THE Fundamental Truths OF CHRISTIANITY, Briefly hinted at by way of Question
and Answer.

To which is added a TREATISE OF PRAYER In the same Method.

By GEORGE KEITH.

LONDON; Printed in the Year M DC LXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
Friendly Reader,
AS there is nothing more necessary to be understood and minded, than the
Doctrine of Christianity, which in it self is plain and easy; so nothing has
been more clouded, obscured, and burdened by the wild and numerous Notions of
Carnal Minded Man, by which true Wisdom has been darkened. The Author of the
ensuing Treatises (who is now removed out of Europe) has been blessed with a
singular Faculty of expressing himself both briefly and clearly (as is well
known to such as have perused his Writings) which inclined me to present these
to the public. I hope Reader thou will find them answer this Character, and
therefore it is left to thy Judgment, upon trial, by

Thy Sincere Friend R. B.
London the 27th of the 5th. Month, 1687.
ERRATA.
PAge 14. l. 6. for oud read and, l. ult r. is the Faith; in the second
Preface, p. 2. l. 6. f. When r. Where, p. 29. l. 3. f. that r. who, p. 31. l.
24. dele must, and add, they wait (...) them the more, p. 55. l. 21. si has r.
have, p. 57. l. 25. f. no r. nor, p. 62. l. 23. r. upon what, p. 108 l. 5. dele
of, p. 113. l. 2. r. tempore, p. 122. l. 8. f. leisure r. service. p. 127. l.
22. f. there r. here.

THE Fundamental Truths OF CHRISTIANITY Briefly hinted at by way of Question
and Answer.
Quest. OF whom have we our Being, our Living, and Moving, and all the good
things we enjoy?
Answ. Of God.

Q How know we that?
A. There is somewhat in our own hearts that declares it unto us.

Q. Is that our own Natural Reason as men?
A. Tho we might gather it even from Reason as men; yet there is somewhat in us
that does more convincingly and manifestly declare it unto us, than our own
Rseaon as Men.

Q. How do we distinguish it from Reason?
A. Very plainly, because it often teaches us this and many other true things,
when we are not exercising our Reason, but still and quiet in our minds; yea,
it often preventeth all reasonings in us, and in a more ready and immediate way
Convinces us than Reason can do.

Q. How so?
A. Because Reason teaches us things by a way of Discourse and Inference,
gathering a second thing from a first, and a third from a second, and a fourth
from a third, etc. which way is but Mediate, and Commonly is wearisom and
tedious.

Q. How does that other teach us.
A. By setting the things before our understandings simply and immediately,
even as when the outward Light gives us to see the shapes and color of
outward things immediately, without the need or use of our Reason.

Q. How may this other thing be called which is in us, a distinct principle
from our Reason as Men?
A. It may be called (according to Scripture) a Spiritual and Divine Light
which has the same use to the mind that the outward Light has to the eye.

Q. What other Names has it according to Scripture?
A. The Word of God, because thereby God speaks his Mind and Will, unto the
Hearts and Souls of Men, as one man speaks his mind to another by the Word of
his Mouth.

Q. Is this Light and Word God himself?
A. It is one immediate manifestation of him, which tho it may be distinguished
from him, yet is not, nor cannot be divided or separated from him, for he is
with it and in it, and is the Fountain and Life of it.

Q. What other difference is there betwixt our natural Reason, and this
Principle?
A. Our Natural Reason may be corrupted, and is often corrupted, and so may teach
us contrary things, unto what this teaches, but this is altogether
uncorruptible.

Q. What other difference is there betwixt them?
A. The Teachings of our Natural Reason, even of things that may be true, are
but dry and barren, and void of that living virtue, influence and vigor, which
the teachings of this principle have, for this principle is quick and powerful
and pregnant, or full of Heavenly and Divine Virtue and life.

Q. But do they not differ originally, as to their very Nature and Being?
A. Yea they do, the one is Natural, the other Supernatural; the one is Humane,
the other Divine; the one is an essential property of the Humane Nature, the
other is the free Grace and Favor of God given unto man to dignifie and exalt
him above his natural estate and condition; if so, he may be more than a
natural man, even a Son and Child of God; yea, to have a Name better than of
Sons and Daughters.

Q. Is this Principle given unto all men?
A. Yea, it is given unto all men.

Q. For what end is it given unto all?
A. That they may become the Children of God thereby, and may live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present World, as the Children of God; that so
after this life (in this present World) they may live with God in the World to
come, in the fullness of everlasting Joy, Peace, and Happiness.

Q. By whom does this Grace or Gift come upon all Men?
A. By Jesus Christ, as John declated The Law (said he) was given by Moses, but
Grace and Truth comes by Jesus Christ; and of his fullness have we all received
Grace for Grace.

Q. Is Jesus Christ himself given unto all Men, or only His Grace?
A. He is given unto all men, in so far as he is sent of the Father unto all,
and is come unto all, and is both offered of the Father as his Gift, and does
also offer himself unto all, so that his Grace is not alone without him, nor he
alone without his Grace, they are given together, and are offered together, and
are received together.

Q. How is Christ and his Grace to be distinguished?
A. No otherwise than as the light, warmth, and influence of the Sun, is from
the Sun himself, which proceeds from the Sun as out of his fullness, according
to John his declaration, who said, Out of his fullness have we all received
Grace for Grace.

Q. How is Christ Jesus come unto all? Is he come outwardly as a man unto all?
A. He is not come outwardly as a man unto all, tho he is come even outwardly
as man for all (so that all may receive the benefit of his outward coming as
man, who are not wanting unto themselves) but he is come inwardly unto all, as
the true Light, that Lightens every man that comes into the World, and not only
as the Light, but as the Resurrection and the Life.

Q. How is he the Resurrection?
A. Because he quickens and makes alive the Soul unto God, and raises it
out of its Sin, in which as in a Grave it has lain dead and corrupted, as to
the Life of God.

Q. Is this the general Condition of Men.
A. Yea, the general Condition of Men in the first state, is, that they are
dead in their Sins and Trespasses.

Q. All men therefore do need Christ, not only to be a Light unto them, but to
be the Resur rection and the Life also.
A. Yea, for they want not only Light unto their Understandings, but they want
Life unto their Hearts, and unto all their inward Powers and Affections which
are dead (as unto God) so that they cannot move toward him, nor in his
Service, but as they are quickened and influenced by him.

Q. How does Jesus Christ minister Light and Life unto the Souls of Men?
A. By his shinings and breathings in their Hearts.

Q. Is that Immediately, or Mediately, or both?
A. Both Immediately, and Mediately.

Q. How Immediately?
A. Even without all outward means, as by his Free Love and Favor, preventing
them before the use of any outward means, and by ministering unto them who have
not, nor never had the outward means, for he is the Light of the World,
according to his own Testimony, and as John declared of him, He Lights every
man that comes into the World, that all through him might Believe, and
Believing might have Eternal Life. Now if he lights all men, then surely he
lights as well those who have means, as those who want them, and those who
want, as those who have them, as truly tho not as equally: And therefore seeing
they who want the outward means are Immediately Enlightened and Taught, then
surely they who have the outward means are also; otherwise, their privilege
should be the less who have the outward means, and theirs the greater who want
them.

Q. How Mediately?
A. By the shining and breathings of his own Light and Life, in and through his
Faithful Servants, and their Testimonies, whether by Words or Works; all which
have a manifestation and ministration of Light and Life in them, to increase
and raise up Light and Life in them, unto whom they minister.

Q. But if God and Christ minister Light and Life Immediately unto men, are not
all means useless and unnecessary?
A. We are to distinguish betwixt things that are absolutely necessary, and
things that are necessary in some respect; also betwixt things absolutely
necessary, and things very useful and profitable; for many things are greatly
useful, which are not absolutely necessary: And thus, though men have no
absolute need of outward means for the conveyance of Light and Life unto them,
yet the outward means are very useful and helpful unto them.

Q. Give us one Example in another case?
A. All men have a Principle of natural Reason in them, which without all
outward means (either of Men or Books) teaches them Immediately some things
belonging to Natural Reason; and yet none will deny, but that both Men and
Books are very useful and profitable to further us in the knowledge of Natural
Things, and in the exercise of our Natural Reason, to the further improving the
same.

Q But are the Immediate Teachings of God and Christ of absolute necessity unto
every man, to give him the True and Saving Knowledge of God?
A. Yea, they are; for indeed all outward means could do nothing, without the
Immediate Teaching and Ministering of God and Christ, by his Holy Spirit, Light
and Life; because the Immediate is the Ground and Foundation, or Principle,
for, or because of which, the outward means are useful and profitable.

Q. Give us one Example in another case.
A. The same as before, for if Men had not an outward and immediate Principle
of Natural Reason in them, that taught them immeidately some things belonging
to Natural Reason. All the Men and Books in the World, though never so
convincing, could not gain ground upon them, but because Men have a Principle
of Reason in themselves, therefore when things of Reason are presented and
offered to them, by Men and Books, they embrace them and receive them, not
simply, or only because the Men and Books say so, but because the innate
Principle of Reason in themselves says so, and does witness and answer to the
same things.

Q. By this it would seem that Men are taught many more things mediately than
immediately.
A. Yea surely, for according to the aforesaid Example, what men are there
(except Fools and Idiots) but the Principle of natural Reason in them, teaches
them in the things of natural Reason, above an Hundred to one, more than any
Book or Men ever did, or can do? As is manifest in the daily Occurrences and
Occasions in the outward life. A man's natural Reason teaches him a Thousand
things which he never learned from Men or Books: Even so the Children of God
are taught of God many Divine and Spiritual things, which Men nor Books never
did, or could teach them.

Q. By all this it seems that the Knowledge of Divine and Spiritual things,
must flow from a Divine and Spiritual Principle in the Heart, and that they
cannot be known and learned sufficiently, from or by the natural Principle of
natural Reason.
A. It is even so; for though the natural Reason in a subservient way may be
made use of, yet it can no more reach unto the things that are Spiritual and
Divine, nor indeed so much, as a Blind-man by all his Reason can reach unto
Colors, to judge of them distinctly: or a Deaf-man to judge of Sounds, etc. For
even as the things of sense are judged or known by a principle of their own
Nature, which Reason cannot Immediately reach unto by descending. So the things
of Faith, which are Divine and Spiritual, are judged and known by a principle
of Faith that is of their own Nature also, to wit, Divine and Spiritual, which
Reason cannot immediately reach unto by its ascending: but as a Man having the
Natural Exercise of his Senses, can use his Reason in Natural Things that are
sensible; so he who has the use of his Spiritual Senses, can use the same
Reason in Spiritual Things, to wit, in a subservient and subordinate way.

Q. What is the first thing required of Men, that they may learn of God and
Christ Jesus, so as to become wise through those immediate Teachings?
A. That they believe those Teachings, and receive them in the love of them.

Q. How can they do that?
A. Not of themselves, but there is a Virtue in all the Teachings of God and
Christ, that is operative and effectual to cause men to believe them, and
receive them, and the truth of them in love.

Q. What is next required of them?
A. That they continually apply their whole Minds, Souls and Hearts, unto this
Spiritual and Divine Principle in them, and unto God and Christ therein, that
it may have its universal influence in them and upon them.

Q. How can they do that?
A. By its own drawings, or rather by the drawings of God and Christ in it.

Q. What is the universal Influence?
A. It is not only of an enlightening nature as to give knowledge, but it is of
a quickening nature, and of a leavening, healing, and purifying, and
sanctifying nature; more particularly, it has these two properties, 1. To
kill, consume, and destroy Sin both in Fruit and Root, Stock and Branch. 2. To
beget Righteousness and Holiness, which comprehends all the Fruits of the
Spirit, such as Love, Meekness, Temperance, Patience, Humility, Joy, Peace,
Hope and Confidence, etc.

Q. How is the Grace or Gift of God conveyed unto Men at first, and how is it
received?
A. As a small thing, even as a Seed, the least of all Seeds.

Q. And how is it multiplied and increased in Men's Hearts?
A. By its growth in them; for if it does not grow in them it does not
multiply, but remains as dead and barren as unto them, though living in its
own nature.

Q. How does it grow in Men.
A. By getting root in the Hearts, even as a grain of Corn, by getting root in
the Earth.

Q. How does it get root?
A. It has a Native Virtue and Influence in it, whereby it takes root in the
Heart naturally, if Men do not resist it; and tho the Ground where it seeks
to take Root, be foul and unfit, yet it has a cleansing and fitting Virtue in
it, to prepare the Ground and make it good and fit, but it requires Man's
consent and concurrence, which it acts and God in it, and with it draws and
moves effectually the Heart of Man unto.

Q. But may these drawings and movings be commonly resisted?
A. Yea they may, and so the work of Man's Salvation may be hindered by Man
himself, and that both in the beginning, or when begun in its progress.

Q. Does God teach Men all things necessary unto Faith and Godliness by this
Principle.
A. Yea, as he is faithfully and chastely waited upon, believed and followed.

Q. But has he not his order in teaching, or does he teach all at once.
A. He has his order, and does not teach all at once, but line upon line, here
a little and there a little, according as a Man can bear, through the gravity
of his Principle in them.

Q. What are the first things he teaches in and by this Principle?
A. To deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, to Live Soberly and Righteously, to
Live Godly. And when they have ascended by those degrees, he brings them into
his Holy Mountain, City, House, Kingdom, oud Paradise, where he gives them to
enjoy of these Pleasures and Delights, that because of the Sweetness, Beauty
and Glory of them, are beyond all utterance or thoughts of Man's Heart.

Q. What are the first beginnings of Gods Work in the Heart after convincement,
or enlightening the Understanding?
A. Faith and Repentance.

Q. What is Faith?
A. It is a cleaving of the Soul and Heart of Man unto God and Christ,
according to the inward Revelation of his Divine Power, Mercy and Goodness, in
the shinings of his own Divine Light, Life and Spirit within him.

Q. Is then the object of Faith God and Christ, as inwardly revealed?
A. Yea.

Q. What Faith then have they, who say, Inward and Immediate Revelation is not
the common privilege of Men, nay, not of the Saints in these days?
A. They have not the true Faith, which is the faith of Gods Elect, that
works by love, and purifieth the Heart, and is fruitful of good works; but
their Faith is but a Dream and Imagination, which as it findetn them in their
Sins, so it leaves them to live and die in them.

Q. What is Repentance?
A. It is a change of the Mind, and of all the Powers of the Soul, and its
affections from Sin and Unrighteousness, unto Holiness and Righteousness; so
that whereas it loved, desired, and rejoiced in. Sin before, and had a distaste
of all Righteousness and Holiness, and an aversion and alienation therefrom,
now it has a distaste of Sin universally, and an aversion and alienation from
it; and a true and intimate love of all Righteousness and Holiness, desire
after it, and joy therein, and more abundantly after and in God and Christ,
whose it is.

Q. How is this Repentance wrought?
A. By degrees, through the power of God, his Life, his Love, his Judgment, his
Mercy, his Goodness, revealed in his own Light by his own Spirit, as the Heart
is turned thereunto, and continues in a steady and fixed application unto the
same. This naturally and gently melts and thaweth the Heart, and breaks it
into pieces; yea, changes it from a Heart of Stone into a Heart of Flesh, and
makes it naturally to savor and relish the things of God, which it hated
before, and to disrelish and distaste the things of Dishonesty and
Unrighteousness, which it loved before.

Q. What Rule (or Law) has God given unto Men, to Serve, Obey, and Worship him?
A. Even the same Divine and Spiritual Principle aforesaid, the Word of God,
that is nigh unto us, even in our Mouths and in our Hearts, that we may know
it, believe it, and obey it. This is the Law or Rule of the New Covenant, who
walk after this Rule, Peace is and shall remain upon them; neither is there any
Condemnation unto them, but Justification and Approbation from henceforth and
for ever.

CONCERNING PRAYER.

I. Some QUESTIONS answered.

II. Some REASONS given, why all PRAYER in Words, whether only conceived in the
Heart, or uttered and expressed by the Mouth, should be by the help of the Holy
Spirit, helping us to conceive those Words.

III. Some Objections or seeming Reasons brought, for using set Forms of
PRAYER, read out of a Book; as if that reading were PRAYER, Answered: Also a
few Words concerning Singing or Praising God with a Psalm.

By G. K.

Printed in the Year 1687.

To the Loving and Friendly Reader.
SInce It pleased the Lord to give me some knowledge by experience, what True
Prayer is; after that I was turned with many others to his Marvelous Light, to
believe and walk in it, wherein the deep things of God are seen and opened.
Many true and fresh, and living openings have arisen in me concerning Prayer,
the nature, use, ends, and manner of it, and how true and right Prayer is, and
ought to be acceptably performed; how the Spirit of God assists and helps his
Servants and Children to Pray; how he works not only upon their wills and
affections, to quicken and excite them, and make them fruitful with good and
holy desires, in the art, or exercise of Prayer; but also how he works upon the
Understanding, and all the Intellectual Powers, to enlighten them, and give to
Man a true and real sense and understanding of his wants, or of the wants of
others, for whom he prays, and also of the Love, Mercy, Bounty, and
Compassion of the Lord, and the readiness and nearness of his helping hand to
supply all his and their wants abundantly. When the Inward and Spiritual Eye is
opened by the Lord, to see the Well of Living Water, where the thirsty Soul may
drink: And also to see the Lords Table that is richly spread, where it may eat
abundantly and be refreshed, and bless and praise the Name of the Lord, for all
his great and rich Mercies and Blessings. And if the Spirit of the Lord did not
enlighten the Understanding and Mind of Man, to teach him what to seek and pray
for, but only did warm, and heat Men's affections, all this would be but a blind
Devotion, which all true Protestants cry out against, etc.

That Heavenly and Sacred Fire, that God sends down into the Hearts of his
People, is not a dark obscure Fire, but shining and enlightening, and has
Light as well as Heat in it. The Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, is not only
a Spirit of Love, but a Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding.

And though there is a kind of Prayer, that may be, and often is, without Words
either expressed or conceived in the Understanding; because there is a degree
of Understanding in Man, that transcendeth all Words: I mean such Words as we
commonly use, which are the signs of things signified by them, as Aristotle
defines Words: Verba sunt signarerum. i. e. Words are the signs of things. In
which high degree of Understanding, the Spirit and Mind of Man, reaches to the
Divine and Heavenly things themselves, without these words, where the things
are words themselves; or where the words and things are not distinct: But the
thing is its own word, and the word that signifies it as the thing it self.

But Aristotle so much admired for his worldly Wisdom and Philosophy as it
seems, knew not this Mystery, nor yet do his followers. Notwithstanding of
which, because the Lord who is Infinitely Bountiful and Gracious unto men, does
not only inlighten and shine upon this highest part of Man's Understanding; but
also causes his Light and Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding to descend to the
lowest degree thereof, even to his Reason and Imagination (for the very
Imagination of man is said in Scripture to be wrought upon by the Spirit of
God; see Isa. 26. 3. That which is Translated in, and according to the Hebrew,
signifies Imagination.) See also, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. Keep this for ever in the
Imagination of the Thoughts, etc. Which inferior and lower Powers of man's
Soul, cannot reach to Divine things, without the signs of Words: Therefore it
pleases God to work upon the Understandings of Men, so as to make them
fruitful to bring forth good and pertinent Words of Truth, as well as upon
their minds and affections, to bring forth the fruits of Holy and Spiritual
desires: Wherefore the Apostle Prayed to the Lord, that God would establish the
true Believers in him, in every good word and work. 2 These. 2. 17. Whence I
conclude, that good words are as real a Fruit of the Spirit, as good works or
desires; and these good words must not be borrowed words from the mouths or
lines of others made ready to our Hands, but must spring from the inward
fruitfulness of our own Understandings, as the spirit of the Lord does water
them, and make them fruitful after a Heavenly sort. For it is not the Corn that
lies upon the ground, though ever so abundantly, which has grown in another
Land or Country, that denominates the Ground where it lies, to be fruitful;
but that is only a fruitful Ground which brings forth from within it self, as
it is assisted by the Heavenly Rains and Influences, the like Corn, or any
other Grain that is good and profitable. And therefore it is not the abundance
even of Scripture Words, which a man receives into his memory, or bare natural
Understanding, that simply makes his Mind and Understanding fruitful unto God,
but the inward sense and mystery of Scripture words must be opened in him by
the Spirit of the Lord, and then the Understanding of a man, by the help of the
Scripture words, being inwardly and spiritually opened by the Holy Spirit,
brings forth, as it were, as so many Seeds a plentiful Harvest, where the good
Ground of the good and honest Heart, yields its fruit, some Thirty, some
Sixty, and some an Hundred Fold; and always with some increase: So that
although Scripture words have a most excellent service and use to the Children
of God, and their minds and understandings are made fruitful, with the
Spiritual knowledge and opening of them by the Spirit of the Lord: As the ground
or soil is with seed sown in it; yet the understanding is not confined to the
strict and precise number of scripture words; but yields an increase of other
words from the same spirit, and of the same tendency and signification: As the
seed that is sown, yeildeth more Grains than what was sown. These and such like
openings in great plenty, to the praise of God, have livingly sprung up in me
as concerning Prayer, time after time, and have at the present writing been
livingly brought to my remembrance, with an addition of many more, which here I
present to all Friendly and Loving Readers, to whose hands this may come for a
general service; where I have handled and treated of things, I hope soberly and
fairly, in the spirit of Love and Meekness, not naming any Persons or Parties
by way of reflection to provoke them to anger or dislike; only with some
Fervency. But yet in true Love I have reproved and argued against those who
pretend to Pray by the Spirit without a set Form, and yet deny the spirits
Immediate Teachings and assistance. And tho I aim against Reading set Forms of
Prayer, so as to make that Reading to be Prayer it self; yet I am not simply
against Reading of Prayers, which have in any measure proceeded from the spirit
of God in the Ages past.

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS CONCERNING PRAYER:
And some Reasons that all Prayer in words, whether conceived in the Heart, or
uttered and expressed by Mouth, should be by the help of the Spirit, helping us
to conceive those words: With an Answer to some Objections, or seeming Reasons,
brought for using set Forms of Prayer read out of a Book. Also concerning
Singing or Praising God with a Psalm.
Quest. WHat is Prayer?
A. It is a calling upon the Name of God (through Jesus Christ) and the asking
of him in Faith, the things which we should, or do desire.

Q. What are these things which we should desire and ask of God by Prayer?
A. They are many, but may be reduced to these Three Heads.

1. The things which are for God's Glory, and the Sanctifying his great Name in
the Earth.

2. The things which we stand in need of, or want as to our selves.

3. We are also to Pray for others, even for all men, that they may be saved,
whose Day of Salvation is not expired; yea, for our greatest Enemies. Also we
are to Pray for the Church of God in general, that God may build her up more
and more, preserve and defend her, multiply his Graces, and pour out his Spirit
more abundantly upon her, and upon her Members, in their respective places; and
especially for those who have a public Ministry in the Church, that he may
more and more qualify them for so great a work, and open an Effectual Door
unto them; and that it may please the Lord to increase the number of Faithful
Laborers to work and labor in his Vineyard. And lastly we are to pray for
Kings, and all in Authority, that God may incline their Hearts to do good and
just things in the Earth, that we may live a quiet and a peaceable life, in all
Godliness and Honesty, which is the true end of Government and Magistracy, its
being Appointed and Ordained of God.

Q. What are the things which we are to Pray for as to our selves? Are they
only Spiritual things, and such as belong to the Soul? or are they Temporal
things also; such as Riches, or increase of Corn, Wine and Oil, or Health? If
one be in Sickness and Liberty, if one be in in Prison? And if it be not lawful
to pray for Riches, or great plenty of Worldly and Temporal Things? May we not
at lest pray for our necessary Provision, as Food and Raiment, as Christ taught
his Disciples saying, Give us this day our daily Bread.
A. As for Riches or great Plenty of Worldly and Temporal Things, we find no
Precept nor Example to commend it as a lawful Thing unto us to Pray for, in all
the Scripture; nor indeed are they to be sought for (although when it pleases God
to bestow them, in blessing Men's sober and lawful Callings and Employments,
they are to be received with Thanksgiving: and God is to be Praved unto, that
he may give those who have them a Heart to use them to his Glory; and that they
may be as Faithful Stewards of them, especially to Minister unto others who are
in necessity) for many Tentations and Snares do follow Worldly Riches, next as
to Temporal or Wordly Necessities, as Food and Raiment, or Health in time of
Sickness, and Liberty in case of Bondage or Imprisonment; and other such like
things: I do not say* it is unlawful to pray for them, providing it be with a
due submission to the Will of God, who knows best what is good for us. So that
sometimes Sickness, and sometimes Imprisonment is best for us, and other
Worldly afflictions, Trials and Exercises of our Faith, and we stand in need of
them, and they are sent to us from God for some good end and purpose: and
therefore we should mainly desire that all these things may be Sanctified unto
us, and the end and purpose of God in doing us good, may be fully answered in
all of them. But I do not find it commanded any where in Scripture, or laid
upon us as a necessary duty, to pray for any Temporal or Worldly Thing
whatsoever: for Christ did not teach or command his Disciples to seek, or be
careful what they should Eat or Drink, or wherewith to be Clothed; but (said
he) Seek first the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof, and all these
things shall be added unto you: So here is a promise that God will give us
these things, although we do not ask for them. And he said further, The
Gentiles seek after these things; importing, that even to pray unto God for
Temporal Necessities, was but a part of the Gentiles Religion, which was but
low and weak in respect of the Christian Religion, which leads further to ask
Spiritual and Heavenly Things, and little or nothing to mind Worldly or
Temporal. And Christ said unto them further, For your Heavenly Father knows
that ye have need of all these things, Matthew. 6. 31, 32, 33. Hereby signifying,
that if we did not seek them they would be given us, because we have a
provident and tender Father, that regards us and all our Necessities, even as
the Fathers of our Flesh provided for us, and gave us things we wanted, when we
neither did nor could ask them, as in the time of our Infancy; and as to these
words which Christ taught his Disciples to pray, saying, Give us this day our
daily Bread. That cannot be proved that that Bread was the Natural Bread, that
the Natural and Outward Body wants. And Jerome, one of the Fathers, so
called, who lived above twelve hundred years ago, did read or translate the
words, Give us this Day our Super substantial Bread; the which Translation,
many, called Learned Men, say; the Greek will bear. But passing the
Translation, it is very unlikely and improbable, that it can be meant of
Natural Bread, which is but a Temporal and Corruptible thing; for it is the
first Petition in that Prayer, in relation to our selves (the three former
Petitions relating especially unto God) and it is placed in order before that
Petition, wherein he taught them to Pray for Forgiveness of Sins; and the next
following, That we be not led into Tentation, but that God would deliver us
from Evil (or the evil one (to wit the Devil.) Now the matter of the two last
Petitions being Spiritual things, how unprobable is it that Christ would teach
them to seek first a Temporal thing, such as the Outward and Natural Bread is,
before those Spiritual things; when at the same time he bids them Seek first
the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof: which comprehends all
Spiritual things.

Q. But does not our Heavenly Father know all the Spiritual things which we
have need of, as well as the Temporal, and therefore why should we pray for the
one more than the other?
A. We do not pray for Spiritual things, as if we were to inform the Lord that
we want them; or as if he did not know that we wanted those things before we
pray unto him; for he knows most perfectly all our wants, even the most
Inward and Spiritual, before we pray unto him, from whose all-seeing Eye
nothing can be hid, whether past, present, or to come: But the great cause why
the Lord will have us to pray unto him for Spiritual things, is, that thereby
our desires are enlarged the more after them; our love is excited unto them,
and all the Graces and Virtues, and gracious Gifts of Gods Holy Spirit in us,
are thereby quickened and ^et on work in true Prayer; all which tend to our
Sanctification, and promoting us in the same. And seeing the substance of
Prayer consists in the Souls desire after God, so as to be joined and united
unto him, and be refreshed with his Love and Divine Influences of his Life; and
to partake more abundantly of his Spirit; and to taste and feed upon his living
Word, which is the same to the Soul that Bread and Meat, and Drink, o^ any most
comfortable thing is unto the Body; and that the Souls desire after those
Heavenly and Divine Enjoyments, is enlarged in and by true Prayer: this, as it
were, both gives and increases the Souls appetite after God, and prepares the
Soul for the enjoyment of him, by raising it on high, above all worldly things
and the desires thereof; and accordingly Damascen and Augustine did well
describe Prayer to be the ascent or lifting up of the mind unto God. Now the
Souls Appetite after God, and the Divine things of his Kingdom, is as necessary
to it as Hunger and Thirst is unto the Body: for as the Bodily Hunger and
Thirst, 1. Makes the Nourishment which the Body receives, comfortable and
pleasant unto it. And 2. It is a sign of Bodily Health in ordinary Cases. And
3. It causes a good Digestion, so that the Body is the better and the more
Nourished; even so it is as to the Souls Appetite and Desire after God, and the
Refreshings that come from his Heavenly Presence, the which in Scripture is
called a Hunger and Thirst, as Christ said, Blessed are they that Hunger and
Thirst after Righteousness, etc. And said David, My Soul thirsts for God,
Psalm. 42. 2. The Soul which thus hungers and thirsts after God, and the
enjoyment of him, when it receives this enjoyment in any measure. Oh! How
sweet and comfortable it is to the hungry Soul, but the full Soul even loathes
the Honeycomb, whereas to the hungry Soul every bitter thing is sweet; yea,
even the Judgments and Chastnings of the Spirit of the Lord, which are sent
unto the Soul, as it has need of them, are sweet and precious unto it. 2. The
Spiritual Hunger and Thirst of the Soul, is always a sign of the Souls Health
and prosperous Condition. And 3. The Inward and Spiritual Food and Nourishment
that the Soul receives, even that Living Bread and Water of Life, which comes
down from Heaven, does the more nourish up the Soul unto Eternal Life, and
causes it to grow the more up into the Heavenly Image and Similitude of God
and Christ; in all Holiness and Righteousness, and Spiritual Beauty and Glory,
and also in Spiritual Might and Strength; and likewise in Wisdom and Counsel,
and Knowledge and Understanding. The more that the Souls Desires are enlarged
after God, so the more the Soul desires the more it feeds upon the Bread of
Life; which Bread is Christ the living Word; and the more it feeds the more
it grows, and is nourished up unto his Heavenly and Divine Image: and the
more it is nourished and grows, the more again it desires after God. And
besides, In the true desire of the Soul after God and Christ, there is a true
attractive Virtue, so to speak, which draws or sucketh the Water of Life out
of the Wells of Salvation, Isa. 12. 3. And both draws Life from Christ (the
Fountain of it) into the Soul, and draws the Soul after Christ: Even as the
desire that we have after the Air, causes us to suck or draw it in to the
inward parts of the Body: and as the Infants desire after the Mothers Milk,
causes it to suck and draw at the Breast, thus the Souls desire after God and
Christ, draws in a sweet and Heavenly Divine Breathing of his blessed Spirit,
which it again breaths forth in Holy Breathings of Prayers and Thanksgivings:
and those Souls, whose desires are living and fresh after God, as new born
Babes (as the Scripture says) They desire the sincere Milk of the Word that
they may grow thereby. And thus it may appear why we should pray rather and
mostly, if not only and altogether for Spiritual and Heavenly, then for Carnal
and Earthly Things; because the desire of Spiritual and Heavenly Things, does
purify and sanctify the Soul, and raises it up after them, and makes the
Soul like unto them; yea, transformeth into the nature and likeness of them;
for Love and Desire have a wonderful transforming power in them, whether
Natural or Spiritual. And therefore the love of Heavenly and Spritual Things,
makes the Soul Heavenly and Spiritual; the love of God in the Soul, makes it
Godly and God-like, and the love of Christ makes it Christ-like, and to
resemble him in his manifold Graces and Virtues: but the love and desire of
Earthly and Worldly Things, makes not the Soul Heavenly and Spiritual, but
rather Earthly and Worldly; and therefore they are little or nothing to be
desired, in comparison of those Heavenly and Spiritual Things.

Q. How and after what manner is Prayer to be distinguished?
A. Prayer is either Private or Public, as also it is either Mental or Vocal.
Mental Prayer is the Cry of the Heart unto or after God, as it is said, Lam. 2.
18. Their Heart cried unto the Lord. And as the Prophet Isaiah, 26. 9. said,
With my Soul have I desired thee in the Night, yea, with my Spirit within me
will I seek thee early. Again, Mental Prayer may be either with words conceived
in the Heart, but not expressed with the Mouth and Lips, as that of the Psalms
4. 4. Commune with your own Heart upon your Bed: Or as the old Latin has it,
Speak in your Hearts, etc. and be still. And such kind of Mental Prayer was
that which Abraham's Servant used, Genesis 24. 45. And (said he) before I had done
speaking in my Heart, etc. As also that of Moses in the Red Sea, Exodus 14. 15.
And the Lord said unto Moses, wherefore eryest thou unto me. But we read not
that any words of Prayer were expressed by Moses at that time; or that (to wit,
Mental Prayer) may be without all words, so much as conceived in the mind, in a
deep silence of all words, such as that in the Psalms 62. 1. Where according to
the Hebrew it is, Truly my Soul is silent unto God. For seeing the substance of
Prayer consists in the Souls desire after God, and that desire may be in the
Soul without words, so much as conceived; even as a natural desire after Meat
or Drink, may be in us without words, therefore there is a Praver that may be
in the Heart or Spirit of Man, without words, so much as inwardly conceived;
the which Prayer is often times the most effectual and permanent, for it may
remain continually in the Soul, without any intermission, as it does in every
good man; by which Prayer he does pray continually, or without ceasing, as the
Scripture requires; for the Souls desire after God, may remain a constant and
perpetual thing, by which it continually prefleth after God, as the stone
continually inclines to the center; or as the Needle of the Compass, that is
well touched with the Lodestone, and has drunk in, or received the magnetical
virtue thereof, continually points Northward; and if it be at any time
diverted by any violent motion, it cease not until it has arrived at its
former station: And thus it is with the soul that is effectually touched with
Gods living Arm and Power, that its desire is continually after him; and that
desire causes in it a continual motion toward him, and to his holy and
blessed will to know and perform it. Vocal Prayer is that which is made unto
God, both with the Heart and Mouth, in words audibly uttered or expressed. And
betwixt Mental and Vocal Prayer, there is a mixed sort, where the words are not
audibly expressed to the hearing of others, but yet come up from the Heart into
the Mouth, where they are secretly or silently whispered, such as the Prayer of
Hannah was, 1 Samuel 1. 12, 13. And it came to pass as she continued praying
before the Lord, that Eli marked her Mouth. Now Hannah she spoke in her Heart,
only her Lips moved, but her Voice was not heard, etc.

Q. May Vocal Prayer in words that are audible to others at some distance, be
used in private, when a man is alone by himself?
A. Upon some solemn or extraordinary occasions it may be used, as if such a
wicked Law should be made that no man should pray unto God, as in the case of
Daniel, cap. 7. Where it was decreed that none should ask any thing for thirty
days, but of the King; Daniel found himself the more concerned to bear a
testimony against such a Law or Decree, that even his private Prayer came under
the observation of his accusers, so that he could not satisfy himself with
mere inward and mental Prayer, which none of them could observe. And it seems
it had been Daniel's custom formerly so to do, he living among Idolaters, that
so he might more abundantly bear a Testimony against their false Worship, and
for the true Worship of the True and Living God. Again, 2. Vocal Prayer in
private may be the more freely used, when any has the opportunity of some
remote or retired place, where none are within the reach of hearing them; for
sometimes the earnestness and pressure of Spirit, in their earnest wrestling
with the Lord, may provoke, and constrain some to use Vocal Prayer, and
sometimes the using of it, helps them that are weak, to excite and make them
more servent and lively; but it is to be used with great wariness and
discretion, when used in private, to take away all occasion of Ostentation or
Hypocrisy, which is too incident to many, who pray, or cry out their private
Prayers, of purpose that others may hear them; as the Pharisees did of old,
whose Hypocrisy Christ sharply reproved; and he taught his Disciples the best
manner to perform their private Devotions Matthew. 6. 6. But thou, when thou
Prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy Door, Pray to thy
Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward
thee openly. Now as this Closet, or secret Chamber, may partly be understood to
be outward, when men have the opportunity thereof, or any outward place of
retirement; yet because it often falls out to good Christians, that they have
no Closet, or outward Place of Retirement, many being often confined to a Prison,
where they must always be in Company with others, and sometimes with bad
People: In that case the Lords Servants have the Closet of their Hearts to
retire into, at all times, where they may freely pray unto the Lord in secret:
and here also they must be careful to shut their Door, to wit, the Door of
their Heart, whereby shut out and exclude all idle and wandering Thoughts and
Imaginations, yea all thoughts even of their Lawful occasions, that their
hearts and thoughts may be wholly exercised for that space of time, toward the
Lord, as he shall be pleased to assist them.

Q Is it not requisite and necessary that every true Christian set apart some
time every day, in a Solemn way for Meditation and Private Prayer (as well as
that some time is set apart once or twice every Week by a company of Christians
for public Worship) where opportunity can be had?
A. That some part of our time is to be set apart for private Prayer and
Meditation, and waiting upon God, as well as for public Prayer and Worship, or
any other Religious performance, is most clear from the practice and example of
the Servants of God, both in the Old and New Testament; for not only the
Prophets of old, under the old Testament, used frequent times of retirement to
give themselves in a Solemn and peculiar way, to waiting upon God, Meditation,
and Prayer; as did Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, Elijah, Daniel, etc.
But Christ himself used such Solemn times, and so did the Apostles. As
concerning Christ, it is said, Matthew. 14. 23. And when he had sent the
Multitudes away, he went up into a Mountain apart to Pray: And when the Evening
was come, he was there alone. And a little before his Passion, or outward
suffering, at the place called Gethsemane, Matthew. 26. 36. he retired from his
Disciples, and Prayed alone at three several times, saying, O my Father if it
be possible let this Cup pass from me! Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. Next as for the Apostles, we find in the Acts, cap. 10. 9. That Peter
went up upon the House (in some upper Chamber) to Pray about the Sixth Hour.
Which according to the Jewish Account of Hours, was the middle of the Day. And
no doubt Peter made it his frequent practice to retire himself thus unto
Prayer. And Paul after his Conversion (lodging at the House of Judas) was
exercised in Prayer, when Ananias was sent to him; at which time he had a
Vision of Ananias his coming; as Peter had of the Vessel coming down from
Heaven, as he was at Prayer in private, in the House of Simon the Tanner: Thus
we see how the Lord did bless and countenance such solemn private exercises of
Prayer, unto his Servants. And no doubt the same was the practice of the other
Apostles, and servent Christians of those times: But as to any limited time for
Prayer, we find no Precept in the Scripture for Christians, or those who live
in Gospel Times. Under the Law, Morning and Evening Sacrifices were to be
offered up, which no doubt were accompanied with Prayer by the Faithful. David
said, Morning and Evening, and Midday, he would call upon the Lord, yea, Seven
times a Day; and Daniel used Thrice in the Day to pray unto the Lord. And
surely the Devotion and Fervent Zeal of Christians, should be no less in Gospel
Times, than was theirs under the Law; but rather more and more frequently
exercised: Although Christians are not under any tie or command given in
general; as to the number of times, how often to be retired out of all worldly
occasions; to give themselves solemnly to Prayer every day; that and many other
things being wholly left to the direction and guidance of the Holy Spirit,
which as it teaches all true Christians what and how to Pray; so no doubt it
shows also the times when; which times are frequent even of the Holy Spirit,
his moving of the Souls and Hearts of true and tender Christians, who are
become acquainted with the movings and leadings of the same. And if by outward
occasions such true and tender Christians may be diverted, or hindered by some
inevitable lets or hindrances, as to the outward; as often falls out that they
cannot have either convenience of time or place to be so frequently retired, in
the outward posture of Prayer; they will, and ought to take care to supply it
another way; that every day (at least inwardly, if not outwardly) they have
frequent times to be retired into the Closet of their Hearts (the Door of their
Hearts being shut) and there in secret to Pray unto the Lord, laying aside all
wordly thoughts for that time. Nor is it safe to neglect this exercise, or lay
it aside upon the pretense of the constant and continual sort of Prayer, which
consists in the Soul's desire after God, and may well be without all words, so
much as inwardly conceived; for no doubt the Prophets and Apostles had this
constant sort of Prayer, that consists in a manner wholly (or for the most
part) in the will, and desire, and affections of the Soul, which kept their
Hearts continually in a godly and spiritual frame; but notwithstanding of this,
they used also frequent Solemn times of that other kind of Prayer, which
exercises not only the will and affections, but the understanding also,
whereby they spoke unto God, at least in their Hearts, words of Prayer which
some call discursive Prayer, or the Prayer of Meditation, the which is
frequently necessary to be performed by every true and good Christian, for the
strengthening and increasing the Prayer of the will and desire which ought to
be a continual thing, and without the said discursive Prayer used at least in
the Heart, and that frequently the prayer or desire of the will grows flat
and dull, yea languisheth and is ready to die, and be extinguished, unless it
be helped and assisted with discursive Prayer and Meditation, in the frequent
exercise of it: For discursive Prayer when duly and rightly performed, exciteth
and stirs up the Prayer of desire, even as the blowing of the Bellows, makes
the Fire to burn the better, and raises it into a bright and burning Flame.
And the Prayer of desire, which is principally lodged in the will and
affections, is like the continual motion of the heart, in the body of a living
man, which must be preserved, and assisted with Eating and Drinking, and other
outward Labors and Exercises of the Body, without which the inward motion of
the Heart would soon fail, and he extinguished. Nor is it sufficient for any to
excuse their not using this kind of Prayer, by speaking to God in their Hearts,
upon a pretense of not being called or moved thereunto by the Holy Spirit; for
whoever do not find themselves frequently called and moved to such a Divine and
Heavenly Exercise, so exceeding necessary to every true Christian, it is too
manifest an evidence that they are carnal and earthly; also that they have
quenched the Spirit, and resisted the same, and that they are got into a false
liberty of their fleshly will, out from under the Yoke and Cross of Christ,
whereas all such who keep under his blessed Yoke and Cross, to crucify self,
and all the thoughts and desires thereof, are kept in a living, tender, and
sensible condition of Soul and Heart, and these feel the callings and movings
of the Holy Spirit, to be frequent in them, to Prayer, Meditation, giving of
Thanks, and all other necessary Duties, and such continually watch unto Prayer,
and are still waiting for the Spirit's gentle and soft breathings, and the more
they wait for them the more they find them, and have experience of them.

Q. How, and after what manner does the Spirit help and assist the Faithful to
Pray in words, either inwardly conceived, and spoke only in the heart unto God,
or outwardly expressed in the audience of others? Does he give or dictate to
them all, and every one of the words of their Prayer, just so many in number,
and neither more nor less, and does he make use only of their Understanding,
and other powers of their Soul, in a passive way, so as only to receive what is
delivered unto them; as the Conduit or Water-pipe, only sends out the Water
that is put into it, or as the Wax or Clay only shows the figure or form of
the impression it has received from the Seal?
A. It is somewhat hard and difficult to express the manner of the Spirits
helping us to pray in words; for all the Operations of the Spirit, are better
and more clearly felt and perceived in the Souls of them, who witness them,
than they can be uttered or expressed in words. And it is very hard to express
the manner of the natural Operations of a man; as how he sees, hears,
smells, tastes and feels, or how he speaks, and how the words arise from
his mind and heart, until they come to his mouth; and how the Mouth, Tongue and
Lips, do utter them: And if these natural Operations, whereof we have daily
experience, are so hard to be explained (as to the manner of them; how much
more hard and difficult are they, which are Spiritual and Supernatural, to be
clearly explained and expressed in Words, unless the Lord give an ability in a
good measure? However, somewhat may be said to those who have a single and
honest desire to be informed, that may be of service unto them; but as for such
who are only curious to pry into this Mystery, and lie at the ^atch to take
advantage, they are like to receive no satisfaction.

And now to the Question, I Answer directly and positively thus; that the Soul
and its powers, are not wholly and altogether passive, and merely receptive, or
recipients in this case (as Water-conduits, or Wax and Clay in respect of the
Seal) but partly passive, and partly active; as the Earth is in the production
of its Fruits and Vegetables; or as the Womb of the Mother is in bringing forth
of her Children, for both the Earth and the Woman, are active as well as
passive, in the production of their respective Births, and bring them forth
from the Seeds which they have received. And hence it is that true Prayer, as
it is a Fruit of the Spirit, who has ^own the true seed of it in the Soul, and
causes it to grow with its Divine and Heaven^y Influences; so is it also a
Fruit of the Soul, which the Soul being quickened and made a^ive unto God, and
made fruitful with the Divine-feed it has received, and the Divine
over-shadowings of that Holy Spirit of promise brings forth unto God. And hence
it is that dead and fruitlesssouls in Scripture, which are empty of good
Fruits, are compared to dry and barren Trees, and also to barren Ground, as the
good and honest Heart in the Parable, is compared to good Ground, which brought
forth some an Hundred Fold, and some Sixty, and some Thirty. And said John the
Baptist to the Pharisees, Bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance; for now the
Ax is laid to the Root of the Tree, every Tree therefore that brings not
forth good Fruit, is hewed down and cast into the Fire. Now true Prayer is one
of these good Works and Fruits, which the Souls of the Faithful bring forth
unto God the Husbandman, as a natural Tree brings forth its natural Fruit,
from a principle of activity in its own Nature, as it is assisted and helped by
the influences of the Heavens, and especially the heat and warmth of the Sun,
and the Heavenly Dews and Rains. And certainly the Prayers of the Prophets and
other Holy Men and Women recorded in the Scripture, were of this sort; God
moved and wrought upon their Souls, and the powers and faculties thereof, from
the highest to the lowest, and caused them all to concur, and made them
fruitful to bring forth Holy Prayers and Praises unto God: And thus was it also
with them in respect of their Preaching and Writing the Holy Scriptures, in
doing of which they were not bare passive Instruments; but partly active, and
partly passive for most part at least, as is demonstrable from the variety of
style, and different manner of expression used by the Writers and Penmen of
the Holy Scripture, the Holy Spirit acting upon them, according to the
diversity of their natural, as well as spiritual Capacities, and gifts whether
natural or acquired wherewith they were endued. So that as the Fruits of the
Earth, with their beautiful forms and shapes, and diversity of Colors, proceed
not from the Earth alone, nor from the Sun and Heavens alone, but from both
acting partly together, and as the Child which the Mother brings forth, in the
comely and beautiful linements and proportion of its form, is not the Mothers
Child alone, but the Fathers also. So all true Preaching and Praying, which
proceeds from the Spirit of God: and also true and right Meditation and
Thanksgiving, or any other true spiritual and acceptable Performances, is a
Birth of two Parents, whereof the Faithful Soul is the Mother, and God by the
working of his Spirit is the Father: And therefore it is that all Faithful
Souls in Scripture, are called the Spouse of the Lord, and the Church is called
Christ's Wife; because as the Wife brings forth true and lawful Children to
her Husband lawfully begot of him; so the Faithful Soul brings forth as it were
Spiritual Children unto God and Christ (whose Father God is) by the working of
his Holy Spirit: And these Spiritual Children are good Words and Works which
the Soul brings forth unto God, by the help of his Holy Spirit. And therefore
all such Preaching, and Praying, and Thanksgiving, which proceed not from the
Spirit of God in its inward workings upon the Soul: And also, all kind of
Meditation, or any other performance or work, that is offered up unto God,
without the said inward working of the Holy Spirit, is but a spurious and
bastard-brood, and cannot therefore be received and accepted of the Lord, who
only accepts what is of his own begetting in the Soul. For what man will
accept of a Bastard as if it were his own Child?

Now in this does appear both the Wisdom and Love of God, that he has made the
Soul an active as well as passive Instrument, to join and cooperate with him
in his work and service, and in all what he requires of it. And that there are
none of the powers or abilities of the Soul or Faculties of it, from the lowest
to the highest; but they may be actively employed in some part of his service,
as the Imagination, the Memory, the Reason and Understanding of Man, and its
institutive Faculty, which being opened and made alive in man, through the Work
of Regeneration, can see and behold God, as he does reveal and discover himself
to his Children, many times without all words, so much as inwardly conceived,
or remembered, though all times it pleases God to make use of Words, and
through them, as through the Lattess, to show himself unto the Soul; as also,
God makes use of the Will, Love and Affections of his People, in the day of
his power, making them a willing People, giving them not only to think and
understand what his good and acceptable, and holy will is, but also to will and
to do it. For thus the Faculties and Abilities of the Soul, which God has
given it, are most nobly and excellently exercised, when they are exercised in
his service immediately, and attain to their noblest and best end; and herein
is the Wisdom and Love of God also manifest, that the Soul being thus made
active with all its powers, abilities, and faculties, in the works and service
of God, as co-works with him; the Soul it self is the more delighted, and has
the more joy and pleasure in those works, when it reflecteth on them, and
considers them, as having a share in them, as the Mother has in the Children
whom she has conceived and brought forth; for as it is natural to all Mothers
to love their own Children whom they have conceived and born, and suffered for,
so is it also natural to the Soul to love its works which it has wrought in
God, and take delight or pleasure in them, as God does in his; and as the
Mother loves her own Children whom she has conceived and born, and traveled
in great pangs to bring forth into the World, more than she loves any other
Children whom she has not born, although these other may be more beautified,
so the Soul loves and delights most in those works which it brings forth
(as the fruit of its Womb) through the assistance of God's Holy Spirit, and it
is well allowed of the Lord so to do, provided it be with due moderation, for
this is a part of our own reward, even to rejoice in good works, which the Lord
has enabled us to perform, but the praise is wholly and alone to be given unto
the Lord for them all, for he it is who has given to the Soul its being, and
powers, and every ability both Natural and Spiritual, so as without him it
could not do any thing that is good, neither Spiritual nor Natural. They, are
therefore greatly mistaken who think (as some foolishly and idly have done, and
Printed it against us) that because we plead for the Spirits Immediate
Revelation and Teaching, and Immediate assistance to help us in attaining the
true knowledge of God, in right and true Meditations, Preachings, Prayers,
Thanksgivings, etc. That therefore we lay aside not only the use of the
Scripture, and other outward means and helps, but also the whole use of our
Reason and Understanding as men, and of any other faculties and abilities of
our Souls, and become as so many dead and unactive Truncks, Stocks or Stones,
or as if we did judge that the Divine Revelations, Inspirations and Motions of
God's Holy Spirit, helping us to know and understand Divine things, to
Meditate, to Preach, and Pray, and give Thanks, etc. did pass through us, as a
Sound passes through a hollow Cave, or as Water through a bare Conduit. These
and such like absurd consequences, are but the idle and foolish dreams of men's
vain imaginations, who (as it too much appears) have never had any experience
of, or acquaintance with the operations of the Holy Spirit in their own Hearts.
Know then that we do believe, know and witness it to be Truth, that when God's
Holy Spirit inspireth us immediately, and moves us to Preach, or Pray, or give
Thanks, as it did Holy Men of God of old, and Holy Women also, even Daughters
as well as Sons, and Maidservants, as well as Menservants, and so does at
this day; the said Holy Spirit works upon our Understandings and Reasons, as
we are Men and reasonable Creatures, and upon all the powers and abilities of
our Souls, according to their several capacities, and the Graces and Spiritual
Gifts we have received from God, and all that is in us of parts, whether
natural or acquired, or supernatural, and makes them serviceable to us, and
active in the work and service of God, more or less as he pleases. And thus
when we pray or give thanks in Words, as we receive these words from the Lord
(when the Prayer and Thanksgiving is purely and rightly performed) so they also
spring up in us from the fruitfulness of understanding, and those parts and
graces which God has given us, and our Hearts and Souls, and Spirits, are the
Mothers that bring them forth, and the good matter and purposes whereof they
declare, together with the good life, virtue, and force or energy that is in
them, or does accompany them. Hence true and right Prayer in Scripture is
called A pouring out of the Soul and Heart, so that somewhat of the very inward
strength, virtue and power of the Soul and Heart of man, yea of his Spirit, or
what is most noble and excellent in him goes forth in words, whether of
Preaching or Praying, or giving of Thanks, as he is truly and fervently
exercised in the same, by the moving and enabling of the Holy Ghost (according
to which David (Psalm. 103. 1.) stirred up not only his Soul to praise the Lord,
but all that was within him [note] to bless his Holy Name.) Which tender and
sensible hearers, whose Souls and Hearts God has quickened and made alive, are
well sensible of, and can and do well distinguish betwixt a dead and a living,
or a barren and fruitful Ministry, whether in Preaching or Prayer. Habet enim
nescio quid latentis energiae viva vox, and transmiss^ per aures in animos
audientium fortius sonat; Which is in English thus, The living Voice (says he)
has I know not what, something of a secret energy or power, and being
transmitted through the Ears of the Hearers into their Hearts and Minds, does
sound the more effectually. And if this be true of a natural Speech, when it
comes from a man's heart, and is spoke but with a natural Fervency, that it
reaches forcibly the natural Faculties of the Hearers (which borrowed
speeches, or those which come not from the heart, but from the bare
understanding and memory cannot do.) How much more is it apparent in words and
speeches that are Spiritual, which come both from the Heart livingly touched,
and affected with the sense of the things whereof the words declare, and also
from the Spirit of the Lord? Hence it is said, that Christ spoke as one having
authority, and not as the Scribes; and the Apostles Preaching was with power
and the Holy Ghost, and so no doubt was their Praying.

Q. Is it any part of Gospel Worship or Prayer to read set forms of Prayer out
of a Book, whether in private or public, or whether all Vocal Prayer used
either in private or public in Families, or large Congregations, should not be
as the Spirit of God, helps the Speakers to conceive, and gives them an
utterance to bring forth Words of Prayer or Thanks giving; we cannot believe,
nor are we convinced in Conscience?
A. To read set forms of Prayer out of a Book, whether in private or public,
and call that reading, Prayer, is any part of Gospel Worship, or true and real
Prayer, but rather one of the many Inventions and Traditions of Men since the
Apostasy, and falling away from the true Faith did enter among (those called)
Christians, who retained the Name, but losed the power and Spirit of the true
ancient and primitive Christians. For surely if it had been any part of Gospel
Worship, Christ or the Apostles would have mentioned it, and the Scripture
would have born record of it, as they do of all the parts of Gospel Worship and
true Christian Religion: And if it had been the Will of God, that such a way of
Worship should have been used in the true Church as a common Liturgy or set
Form of Prayers, it would have been used in the Apostles days; for none were so
fit to have given forth such forms of Prayers, after Christ his Ascension, and
giving of the Holy Ghost, as the Apostles were, who were so abundantly
replenished with the Holy Spirit. But neither the Apostles, nor their immediate
Successors either made or used any such set Forms of read Prayers. Nothing of
this kind was known in the Church, either in Justin Martyr or Tertullian his
time, who lived above Two Hundred Years after Christ; for Tertullian tells
plainly the manner how Christians Prayed in his time, Ex pertore sue Monitore,
per Spiritum Sanctum. i. e. From the Heart without a Monitor (or any thing
outwardly to teach them) and by the Holy Spirit.

But Secondly, They who plead for using read set Prayers in the Church, do
acknowledge they were not in use nor practiced in the Apostles days, nor in the
days of their immediate Successors; for they grant that in those early and
primitive times, they who prayed in the Church as the mouth of the whole
Congregation, were assisted and guided by the Holy Spirit, and that their Words
both of Prayer and singing Psalms, were by immediate Inspiration. So that it is
as clear as the Noonday, that when these Divine Gifts of Praying and Singing
by the Spirit were lost, and the Holy Spirit himself (the Author and Fountain
of those Gifts) was in great measure departed from, the invention of reading
ser Forms of Prayer took place. The first Instance that I find of Peoples being
put to use a composed or set Form of Prayer made by another, was that Form of
Prayer which Constantine the great composed, and gave to his Soldiers to say,
but yet they were not to read it, but get it by Heart; and we must consider
that Constantine himself, at this time, was but a young Christian, and the
purity of Spiritual Worship began to decline apace even in his days, and most
of his Soldiers were Heathens and no Christians; so that what they did was no
president to us. But neither in Constantine's time, nor a considerable space
thereafter do I find, that any made or composed Prayers beforehand, were used
in the Church. It seems the Third Council of Carthage, about the year after
the Birth of Christ, 397. did first ordain Set Forms of Prayer in the Church,
to prevent or hinder men's uttering any thing, either ignorantly or rashly that
might be contrary to the Doctrine then received. And to say the truth, it is
altogether unfitting that men should use extemporary words of Prayer, who do
not know the leading and assistance of God's Holy Spirit to direct them in the
words and matter they utter, for it cannot be expected, but that frequently
they will speak amiss, and deviate or wander into impertinent expressions, or
words contrary to Truth, whose Hearts and Tongues are not guided by the Spirit
of Truth, even as a Ship, if she be let loose to Sail without a Pilot, or one
to rule the Helm, cannot but go astray, and of two I have always judged it the
least inconvenience, since God gave me a right understanding what Prayer is,
rather to use a Set Form of sound words, than to allow or permit men (without a
reproof) to presume to speak words of Prayer unto God, of their own extemporary
conceiving, without the guidance and direction of the Holy Spirit, and who do
not so much as pretend unto it, as many do not. As for those who are against
the using of Set Forms of Prayer, upon a pretense of Praying by the help of the
Spirit, and yet plainly deny and vigorously oppose all Immediate Inspiration
and Revelation, since the Apostles days, I cannot see how they can clear or
rid themselves of a contradiction, and of being guilty of an horrid Impostor
and Cheat; for when they argue with such as are for Set Forms of Prayer, they
seem to be altogether for Praying by the Spirit, and make it the main Argument
against Set Forms of Prayer, that they quench, and limit the Spirit, but when
they argue with these who are indeed for Praying by the Spirit, and who do
affirm, that the Spirit of God is to be kept unto in Prayer, and not to be
limited neither as to a Set Form of words formerly made and composed by
others, nor as to a set time, when man or men please, to begin or end; nor as
to the persons who may or do Pray in Assemblies. Here these are as great
limiters* of the Spirit as any, for they can, and do Pray when they will, and
how long they will, begin and end when they will, which does evince, that they
have not a regard to the Spirits time and season of moving them to Pray,
otherwise they would silently wait for it, seeing few (if any) upon Earth, are
so replenished with the Spirit, as to be ready upon all occasions, and at all
times to Pray vocally, or in words by the Spirit as the Mouth of the Assembly
of the People unto God; and to be sure, as no Prophecy came of Old in the will
of man, so no motion of the Spirit comes now in the will of men, and men
cannot use the Spirit or its help, either to Preach or Pray, as they use a
natural habit of Writing, or Singing, or Playing upon a Musical Instrument,
which habits they can use at any time, according to their natural will and
pleasure, because they have the command over them, and are, as it were, Masters
of those natural habits and Arts. But it were the highest presumption, for any
man to think that he has the command of the Spirit, to use it when, and where,
and how he pleases: For the best of men, are and ought to be the servants or
Ministers of the Spirit, as Paul and the other Apostles were; and therefore the
Spirit did command, lead and order them in all their Services, and so it did
all other true and faithful Ministers, who were therefore to attend unto it,
and wait the seasons of the Spirits movings, as those who at the Pool waited
for the stirring of the waters by the Angel, and therefore true Christians and
Ministers are bid, Watch unto Prayer. And said Christ unto the Apostles, Wait
for the Promise of the Father, which ye have heard of me, Acts 1. 4. Again, If
those men were for the true liberty of Praving by the Spirit, they would
suffer; yea, not only suffer, but encourage any other in the Congregation to
Pray vocally; or in words by the Spirit as well as they, according to the
practice of the ancient and primitive Church, when the gift of Praying and
Singing by the Inspiration of the Spirit did remain, but no such thing is
permitted by these Men, who will suffer none but themselves, and such as they
give power unto, to use vocal Prayer in their Assemblies, as if these Men
because forsooth, they are Masters of a few Natural Arts, or at least called
so, were Masters of the Spirit, and that holy and blessed Spirit of Truth, must
speak in none but whom they please and give leave unto; yea, the Holy Spirit of
God must be silent in his Children and Servants at their will and command.
These and many other instances, which could be given, do evince, that these
men, though they pretend to pray by the Spirit, are as great strangers unto it,
for most part, and unto true praying by the Spirit, as they who have no such
pretense; and they who have no such pretense, as to pray by the Spirit, in
respect of conceiving and uttering the words of Prayer, are an hundred fold
more ingenious and more commendable, on that account, for their plainness and
ingenuity; who, as they have not that Divine Gift of Praying in words by the
Spirit, so do not pretend unto it, but simply and plainly speak it out, that
they have it not; which is a great deal more honestly done than those do who
have it not, and yet pretend to it, and that pretense deceives simple People,
as if their Prayers were by the Spirit, because they conceive them ex tempore,
though the raw indigested matter of their Prayers, and unsound expressions as
they often use, as well as the great deadness and want of life, that does
accompany their Prayers, for the most part, sufficiently demonstrate they are
not from the Spirit of God. But that which adds to the cheat and imposture, to
make it the greater, is, that some, yea, many or them have got an Art, by
affected Eloquence, or some new invented Phrases, followed with a mighty
seeming Zeal and Fervency of Spirit, to play upon the Peoples Natural
Affections and Passions, and excite them at their pleasure, which the ignorant
People for want of a Spiritual Discerning, do imagine to be the real work and
effect of Gods Holy Spirit, when for most part, it is nothing else but the
animal and natural Passions in the Hearers, excited either by Art in the
Speakers, or at least by the same or like Passions in them, who speak both in
their Preachings and Prayings, for like stirs up and begets its like,
according to that of the Poet, Si vis me flere dolendum est primum ipsitibi, i.
e. If thou will have me weep, thou must first weep thy self before me. And
though I am far from condemning any true tenderness and contrition of Heart, or
inward meltings of the Soul, which are caused by the real working of the Holy
Spirit, which may have its visible Effects, even the shedding of Tears in him
that Preaches or Prays; and that more or less abundantly: yet the
hypocritical show and affection of such a thing, without the reality thereof,
is loathsome and abominable; and as great a Transgression against the Law of
Heaven; as false and counterfeit Money or Coin is against any Earthly Law: And
yet such hypocritical Tears and Flashes of fained Devotion, kindled up by
Sparks of their own raising, abounding among too many of that Tribe and
Generation, as if they were the effects of Gods Holy Spirit, when alas it is
far the contrary. But to such as have any measure of Sobriety and Ingenuity
among them, I propose this Question to be answered in plainness and simplicity
by them.

1. How can they pretend to pray by the Spirit in words, and yet they deny all
immediate Inspiration and Revelation; which alone guided and assisted those who
prayed by the Spirit in words, recorded in the Holy Scriptures?

2. By what Rule or Touchstone do they know when they are assisted and helped
by the Spirtt to pray in words, and when not, seeing they deny the Holy Spirit,
as he does inwardly reveal himself in Men's Hearts, to be the rule in any case?

3. When they are not moved by the Holy Spirit, and that they do not find
themselves so moved as to pray in words, whether in that case, seeing they will
needs pray, as well when they want the Spirits help, as when they have it, and
that they plead: Natural Men, who have not the Spirit of God, may be true
Ministers of Christ, and may and ought lawfully to Preach and Pray, if they
have an outward Call, from them; they should not rather use the set Forms of
Prayer, than their own bare invention and wandering imagination: for here their
great Argument against set Forms of Prayer, has no place, to wit* the limiting
or stinting the Spirit of God; because he who prays in words without the
Spirit, whether by a Book or ex tempore without a Book, is in one and the same
case, if none of them pray by the Spirit, for he who has not the Spirit,
cannot properly be said to limit or stint it. But to this I know they will
reply, that natural and unconverted men, though they have not the Grace of the
Holy Spirit to sanctify and say them, yet they have a Gift of Preaching and
Praying by the Spirit, that may be useful and edifying to the Church, they have
Gratia gratis data (as they call it) but not Gratia gratum faciens, i. e. Grace
freely given them, but not Grace rendering them acceptable unto God; and for
this they give the instance or Example of Balaam. To this I answer, this
distinction used so much of Gratia gratis data, and Gratia gratium faciens,
has not any warrant from Scripture, but is borrowed in express words from
popish Schoolmen and Jesuits, whom at other times they call Locusts, Come out
of the bottomless Pit. And as for Balaam, it was somewhat an extraordinary
case, whereby God showed his mighty Power that he had over his Spirit, to cause
him to Prophecy good things concerning Israel, contrary to his own
inclinations; and to bless instead of cursing them: but an extraordinary
Example is not to be made a Rule or President unto us. And indeed they have but
a sad pattern of him, whom rather they follow and imitate for most part, in
loving and taking the wages of Unrighteousness, then in Prophesying or speaking
by the Spirit of God, as he did, at these few extraordinary times. And though
he prophesied some words by the Spirit, yet we do not read that ever God made
him the Mouth of the Congregation, to pray by the Spirit, which is the present
case. And besides, though he Prophesied twice or thrice by the Spirit of God,
which was extorted from him, contrary to his own evil mind and inclination; yet
he was no true Prophet of God, but bears the infamous mark of a false Prophet
to this day; and we do not read that ever any one Soul was converted to God by
his Prophesying or Ministry. God can command the Devils, if he please, to
confess to Christ, as some of them did of old, which yet is no president for
wicked men, in whom the Devil rules, to Preach and Pray in the Church. Now,
whereas they say, Men may have a Gift of Prayer to use it in the Church, from
the Spirit of God, and yet be not sanctified by the Spirit. I ask them, Is it
such a Gift as can secure them from speaking impertinent and unsound words,
contrary to the truth: if yea, then they have an infallible Gift, which seeing
they will not grant unto themselves, no more will they unto these others. And
if it cannot secure them from unsound and impertinent words, but leaves them at
liberty as much to use unfound words as sound; and that the corruption of their
Hearts, who are but mere Natural Men, will soon cast the Balance, and bias
them rather to use the unsound words than the sound. Is it not more safe in
that case, at least the less inconveniency of the two, rather to be tied and
limited to use 2 form of sound words, then that their corrupt and unrenewed
Hearts. However, so much they imagine it is to be helped with an unsanctified
Gift, of an abused Eloquence, should be left at liberty to speak unto God, and
utter before him whatever it pleases. But if we shall search to the bottom,
what this Spiritual common Gift of the Spirit is, we shall find it to be no
other but some mere Natural Gift of Memory, Elocution, and a ready or quick
Fancy and Imagination, which many Heathenish Idolatrous Priests have had as
much as any of them; improved with some acquired Arts of Grammar, Logic and
Rhetoric, and words of Scripture abused and misapplied by them: and that which
crowns all, some more than ordinary degree of confidence; that when they are
thus furnished, and can or do Preach and Pray by those mere natural and
artificial helps at best, to call them and baptize them into the name of a
Spiritual Gift, or the Spirits help and assistance. But leaving these men, and
their ex tempore praying without the Spirit, which thus far I found my very
Soul and Spirit concerned to discover, in true love and compassion, to their
abused and betrayed Hearers and Followers; and to them also if they can receive
it. I shall return to plead a little further, for the true and right manner of
praying in words by the Spirit, as he is pleased to give assistance, both in
the conceiving and utterance, without any set Form, either read out of a Book,
or repeated from the Memory without a Book. Because,

3. This way of Praying does alone and only answer to the liberty of the
Spirit, which is free, even the Holy Spirit of Truth, and neither will nor can
be limited, and who seek to limit him, he departs from them, in so far and
remains still in his own freedom, although such who seek to limit the Spirit by
using Set Forms, may and do quench the Spirit, as unto themselves. But they
think there is no limitting, or quenching, or grieving of the Spirit in the
case, because they believe there is no such gift in the Church remaining since
the primitive times, as to be helped by the Spirit to Pray in words, either in
the conceiving or uttering them. They grant indeed so far the help and
assistance of the Spirit, and acknowledge it altogether necessary to Pray
acceptably unto God, that the Holy Spirit stir up our desires and affections,
and excite in us his own Graces, and the doing of this, as they say, is a
sufficient helping of us by the Spirit, as well when a set Form of Prayer is
used as otherwise. But why do they believe there is no such gift remaining in
the true Church, seeing they generally confess it was in the Church, both in
the Apostles days, and some considerable time since. They say it ceased with
the ceasing of the gift of Tongues and Miracles; but what ground have they for
this? That is a bad Argument, that because some of these Gifts which were
extraordinary, and less necessary, did cease or discontinue, that therefore
this allo did cease with those other. And seeing they do not profess to have
the Spirit or Gift of Discerning, whereby to know, whether this Gift be in the
Church or no. How do they know but some have it? And as they say, the Spirit is
ceased in respect to help us to pray in words; so others do as confidently say,
to wit, the Socinians and Pelagians, that it is ceased in all other respects,
and there is no need of it, either to help us to conceive words of Prayer, or
excite our Affections, but that man by his free will, helped by the Scriptures,
without any immediate help of the Spirit, can pray sufficiently, both with good
Words and fervent Affections. And yet even these will say, they are helped by
the Grace of the Spirit, to wit, mediately and remotely, by means of the
Spirit. Again, Why do they limit and stint the help and operation of the
Spirit, only to the Will and Affections, and to exciting the Graces of the
Spirit in us. Does not the Spirit operate upon the Understanding, as well and
as nearly, and immediately and closely, as upon the Will and Affections? Are
there not intellectual Graces and Gifts of the Spirit, to wit, such as properly
belong to and are seated in the Understanding, as well as such that belong to
the Will? Do not we read in Scripture, as well of the Spirit of Wisdom and
Knowledge, Counsel, Understanding, as of the Spirit of Love and Meekness, etc.
And if they will grant that there are such intellectual Graces, that belong to
the Understanding, as well as others that belong to the Will; shall not these
intellectual Graces, be made fruitful by the Spirit and Understanding, in whom
they reside and are placed, as well as these other in the Will. Again, Will
they not grant that the Spirit helps us to conceive Words, at least in
Meditation? Or will they confine us to see
Forms of Meditation, as well as of vocal Prayer? I suppose not, seeing no such
set Forms are yet extant: and they themselves take liberty to their Meditations
upon religious matters, and preach to the People these said Meditations; and
yet I suppose they will reckon at times, the Spirit helps them to conceive
these Meditations, which cannot be conceived without words. And further, The
words of these set Forms of Prayer, whence came they? Had the Spirit no
influence upon the Understandings of those Men, who conceived them to help and
assist them in those Conceptions? If they say nay, they will render the set
Forms of Prayer of small value; what the People in that respect. But if they
say the Spirit did help them to form these Conceptions, of the words of their
set Prayers, then such a Gift is not ceased in the true Church, for it was in
these men, who penned and conceived those Prayers; it may as well be in men now
to conceive other words of Prayer. But

4. Praying by a set Form, not only tends to limit and stint the Spirit and
quench it, in regard of its operations, but also it tends to make the
Understanding, and diverse other Faculties and Abilities, or Powers of our
Souls, and the intellectual Graces and Virtues seated and planted in them,
altogether barren and unfruitful, in respect of Prayer, which yet ought to
exercise the Understanding, as much as any other thing; as Paul said, I will
pray with the Spirit, I will pray with the Understanding also. For if the
Understanding be limited to a set Form of Words, then there is no room nor
place, nor liberty left for it to bring forth Prayer in any other Forms, the
which seems verily as absurd to me: As who would limit the Earth to bring
forth only such a limited and determined number of Forms of Vegetables, Flowers
and Fruits; and not only so, but to limit her as to length, breadth, and depth
of each Form, which we know is an impossible thing: for the Forms of all living
and growing things, must have liberty to spring out from their respective
Seeds, Principles, and Causes; otherwise they will not grow but wither and die:
And as the Forms of Vegetables must not be limited and stinted to such peculiar
Figures and Dimensions, much less the Forms of Animals, and yet far less the
Forms and Figures of Men's Bodies and Faces. For among all the many millions of
Mankind, that have been or are upon the Earth, never were any two found, but
did more or less, differ in outward Form and Figure, in the Face or
Countenance. And surely as differing as Men's Bodies and Faces are; so much, or
rather more, do the Thoughts or Conceptions of their Understanding differ; and
to limit them all to one Form of inward conceptions of Words, is as vain as to
stint and determine all Men to have one and the same Form of Visage or
Countenance. And he who would go about to limit the Figure of the Child's Body
and Face, in the Mothers Womb, to another shape and form than God and Nature
has designed to have, would do amiss, and be occasion of causing the Womb to
miscarry, and render it barren, rather than any way to help it. I know it is
answered by some, that the fruitfulness of the Understanding, may show it self
in other Exercises and Performances, whereas man also may use his Gifts freely,
as in Preaching, Writing, Conference, etc. But why not in Prayer, as well as in
these other for to restrict; yea, and to hinder and stop the fruitfulness of
the Understanding, and the intellectual Graces seated therein; in one respect
is of a tendency to stop its fruitfulness; and render it barren in other
respects. A Woman that is with Child; and has twins in her Womb, that is hard
for to make her miscarry in the one, but she will miscarry also in the other;
and he that seeks to kill one of the Twins in the Mothers Belly, shall be in
hazard to kill the other also. But why should the one be killed or choked more
than the other? Or why should the Divine Begettings of Gods Holy Spirit in the
Understanding of the Soul, as also in its Reason and Imagination be strangled,
more than these in the Will and Affections, feeing they have both one Father,
which is God, as they have one Mother, which is the Soul. And also seeing what
is begot by the Spirit of the Lord, in the Will and Desires, or Affections of
the Soul, has a great dependency what is begot by the same Spirit, in the
Understanding and Reason. For the Children and Servants of God, they love him
as reasonable Creatures; and on reasonable accounts, and for reasonable causes;
yea, they have the best and greatest reasons for to love him; and those reasons
are presented to the Soul by the Holy Spirit in the Understanding and
reasonable Faculty. And it is generally acknowledged, that the Will and
Affections do commonly follow the dictates and suggestions of the
Understanding, and according as the Thoughts of the Understanding, whether good
or bad, do most prevail in the Soul, the Will and Affections, with the Desires
thereof, do embrace what is presented, whether it be a true and real good, or
only seeming and apparent. So that the Wills and Affections of all Men, are
swayed by the strongest Dictates, which raise and spring up from their
Understanding, and intellectual Faculties, whether true or false: And thus
either Wisdom or Folly rules the Wills of all Men, with their Desires and
Affections, and consequently all their Actions. All good Men are led by wise
and good Counsels, which the Holy Spirit begets in them; and all bad and evil
men, are led by foolish and evil Counsels. And hence it is, that every good man
is a wise man, and every wise man, who is truly so, is a good man, and every
bad or evil man, is a fool, and is called so in Scripture, and all sin and
wickedness is folly, and the real effect and fruit of it; Seeing therefore all
good inclinations, motions and Affections in the will of Man, Rise from good
and wise Counsels in the Understanding and Reason of Man, we must needs say
that the Holy Spirit does operate in both Understanding and Will; and begets
those good and wise Meditations and Conceptions of Truth, in order of Nature,
before the good Inclinations and Affections, which afterward he begets and
causes to arise in the Will. But these good and wise Meditations and Counsels,
cannot be without words, at least inwardly spoke or conceived in the Reason, or
rational Understanding of Man. And therefore the Spirit of God does no less
help and assist the Understanding or Reason of Man; to conceive good Words,
then it does help the Will to conceive good Desires and Affections. It is
therefore a great mistake and error of judgment, in those who think, that the
Spirit of God does only excite or beget in his Children, good Desires and
Affections, but does not suggest unto them, or help them to conceive good words
of Meditation, and that as well to pray and give thanks as to preach. And
seeing Preachers are not stinted to set Forms of words in Preaching, why should
they be any more stinted to set forms in Praying, I cannot understand, for the
Spirit of God is as near and ready to assist in the one as in the other; And if
it be said that men Preach not ex tempore, but by study and long premeditation,
and therefore they are in less danger to utter or express unsound and
impertinent words in their deliberate and long premeditated Sermons, than in
their extemporary Prayers. To this I Answer, 1. It is found by frequent
experience; that even in those long studied and premeditated Sermons many men
have uttered very impertinent and unsound, yea, false and hurtful words and
expressions, for it is not much or long time to study or premeditate a
Discourse that makes it good or soundp; seeing they who err in their
understandings; and have received or drunk in wrong and false Doctrines and
Principles of Religion, and wrong and false Traditional Glosses and
Interpretations of Scripture, may Preach very unsound and erroneous Sermons,
although they have taken a long time to study and prepare them. 2. According to
the former Reply, If men shall study beforehand their Prayers as well as their
Sermons, then they are in no greater danger to speak impertinent and unsound
words in Prayer than in Preaching, but rather they are less obnoxious to such a
danger, because in Prayer men commonly do not meddle with matters of
controversy, or disputable points of Doctrine, as indeed it is not proper. 3.
He who preaches or prays by the true and real assistance of the Holy Spirit
as he keeps faithfully and carefully unto the same, although what he does either
Preach or Pray proceeds from premeditation. It being impossible that the
mouth can utter any thing, but the heart or mind of man, must first conceive
it, which is a true and real kind of premeditation, yet he need eth not any
long time for the said premeditation. For when his heart and Soul is once well
prepared and fitted to be the instrument of the Spirit, whether in Preaching or
Pray ing, etc. (The which preparation of the Heart, at times, may require a
considerable season, longer or shorter, as the man is more or less grown up in
Virtue and Holiness) i^ the least space of time imaginable, as in moment or
instant, when it pleases the Lord to assist the understanding by the Divine
influences of his Spirit, it can be and (...) is made fruitful to bring forth,
and conceive as many solid and living Meditations (...) Truth, as may
sufficiently yield matter. (...) discourse, in true and sound and living words
for diverse hours. But if the Spirit should not suggest so much matter of
discourse, in so short a space as a moment or instant; but only as much as to
furnish the Speaker with two or three Sentences, or perhaps but one Sentence at
first, before that one Sentence be well spoke, further matter may and does often
arise from openings of life in the understanding of the Speaker to speak more,
and so continually still new matter may be and often is afforded, to continue his
speech longer or shorter, as it pleases the Lord to require, or as in the
wisdom of God a service is seen or felt. And indeed various and manifold, as
well as wonderful are the ways of the Lord toward his Servants, whose mouths
he does open either in Preaching or Praying in the Assemblies of his People.
For sometimes as one waits upon the Lord in pure silence, and in holy fear
and reverence, his heart at the present time being empty of all thoughts or
meditations, in respect of any particular subject or matter of discourse, and
not having one particular Subject more than another in his view, but his mind
and Conscience singly exercised toward God, suddenly, and as in the twinkling
of an eye a particular subject is presented unto him, or the opening of some
particular place of Scripture (and here the Lord chooses his Text for him, and
ground of his discourse; or if it be to Pray, the matter of his Prayer) and his
heart that was empty before of thoughts, as to these matters is now filled with
living thoughts and meditations concerning them, being made fruitful to bring
them forth by the shower or Rain of the Divine influence of the Holy Spirit, in
a moment or twinkling of an eye. And at other times the case is otherwise, as a
little at first given, and then a little more, as it pleases the Lord to
order, and as the condition either of the Speakers or Hearers does require it;
as even in natural conceptions of natural things, those men, who have a
fruitful understanding, and a quick and ready invention, upon any fit occasion,
how suddenly, and as in a moment will plenty of good and pertinent matter arise
in them to discourse of. If in a Lawyer to discourse of the Laws; if in a
Physician to discourse of Physic, or in a Philosopher to discourse of Moral or
Natural subjects of Philosophy, the which extemporary and ready discourses,
when they come from a man's heart, and the real fruitfulness of his
understanding, have always more acceptance, and authority with the intelligent
and discerning Hearers, than long studied or premeditated Speeches, which
according to the Proverb, Smell of the Lamp, and have more of Art than of
Nature in them, and more of Form than Substance. And extemporary discourses
that flow and spring freely from the fruitfulness of a man's understanding, and
the noble and generous parts or faculties of a well composed and clear mind,
are like fresh waters that have newly streamed from the living Spring or
Fountain of them, that on that very account are more sweet and pleasant than
discourses long since premeditated and treasured up in the memory, which
through their oldness, contract a certain tincture, and lose of their freshness
and sweetness of savor, even as water long kept in a Cistern. And if these
extemporary discourses of Natural things, flowing only from a natural
fruitfulness of man's understanding, have more acceptance and authority with
the judicious Hearers, than long studied Sermons, dressed up with paint of Art,
how much more are those extemporary Speeches to be valued, and how much greater
authority have they, and true and real acceptance with all discerning Hearers,
whether in Preaching or Praying, which proceed from the rich and fruitful Soil
of a good and honest heart, abundantly watered and made fruitful with the
descendings of the venly Showers and Rains of Gods holy and blessed Spirit.

And if it be yet again Replied, That the limitting or confining of him that
prays to a Set Form, does not hinder the fruitfulness of his understanding,
for his mind and understanding is still at liberty to have as many and as
various good and holy Meditations and conceptions of thoughts and words, as is
possible for him to contain or comprehend; only he is outwardly limited to
those forms, as to his Tongue and Mouth, whereas his mind and understanding
does remain free to abound in the greatest variety of good and holy thoughts
and meditations: For the people who hear, they may also abound in these good
thoughts and meditations, who notwithstanding do not open a mouth in the
Assembly, either to Preach or Pray.

To this I Answer, As there are many good thoughts and meditations which God
gives unto men, for their own particular comfort and profiting, such as these
which the people have who do not speak; so there are also many which God gives
for the comfort and profiting of others, and especially of the Church. And
these ought not to be suppressed, but uttered and brought forth in the Lord's
leading and ordering, according to his appointed time and season. And if the
Lord move and require a man to bring forth these good things out of the good
Treasure of his heart, as certainly at one time or another he will so move and
require, where these good things are given to the man, not for himself alone,
but also for others. Is it not a plain limitting and confining the Spirit and
mind of a man, not to give him liberty either in Preaching or Prayer, to
bringforth what the Lord has put in his mind for that very purpose? Is not this
like the hindering the Child to come out of the Mothers Belly, when its
appointed time is come, and to make her Womb its Grave, then which what can be
imagined more cruel? But

5. There is this great hurt and inconveniency to limit and confine both
Speakers and Hearers to Set Forms of Prayer, the one to Speak and Read them,
the others to Hear them, that it cannot be supposed, that those Set and stinted
Prayers will either always, or at most times suit and agree with the present
states and conditions of the people. The Scripture says, That words spoken in
season, are like pictures of Gold in Apples of Silver. And concerning Isaiah,
it was said, That the Lord had given him a Word in Season to the weary Soul.
And indeed a word spoken in season, whether it be in Preaching or Praying how
sweet and comfortable it is? Now these Set Forms of Prayer being to be used
according to the Calendar, such Prayers on such a day, and others on other
days, as the Calendar, or order of the Service requires: Can these Forms be
always, or for most part seasonable to the peoples states and conditions,
unless it could be supposed, that the inward states and conditions of men's
Souls and Spiris should regularly vary, according to the Seasons and Days of
the year, which were most absurd to think or imagine. Or how do these Set Forms
of Prayer, which tell us daily what to Pray for, agree with Paul's words, Romans
28. The Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should
Pray for as we ought. And if it be said, That most of those Set Forms are
conceived in such general words, that they may suit or agree with all the
various states and conditions of the peoples Souls. To this I Answer, To suit
or agree with them in a general way is one thing, and to suit them in their
particular cases and circumstances is another. And besides, it is not upon the
bare words of Prayer so much that relieveth and comfort the Souls of people,
as the life that goes along in words that are uttered from the heart of the
Speaker, as God gives him a sense of the various and several states and
conditions of the Hearers, according to which sense of their various States, he
is furnished both with suitable words, and a suitable degree and measure of life
to accompany them, wherewith to minister in Prayer, and whereby the faint and
weak desires of the Hearers many times are enlarged and strengthened. But it
can never be supposed, that he who only reads a Set Form of Prayer out of a
Book, according to the order of the Calendar, or repeats it from his memory,
can Pray with either such fit and suitable matter of words, or can minister that
suitable degree and measure of life, that the Hearers require and stand in need
of, for where the words are not seasonable, life will not join with them, to
make them effectual and profitable to the Hearers. I know it will be hard for
these who have not the inward experience of the workings of the Divine Life and
Spirit in their own Souls, to believe or imagine, how the Speaker, who is
assisted to Preach, or pray with the Spirit of God, can have a distinct and
clear feeling of the several states and conditions of the people, and in that
sense and feeling be enabled by the same Spirit, who gave this sense to him, to
minister to them all that which is seasonable, both for matter and life.
However this is abundantly known and witnessed to those who have an inward
experience of life, and its workings in themselves to be a truth; for as in the
natural body, one member has a sense of its fellow members, and the more noble
that one member be, its sense of the other members is the more universal, full
and comprehensive: Even so is it in the Body of Christ, which is his Church;
and how can it be otherwise, when as the Scripture says, All the single
hearted, and upright minded Professors of Christ are of one heart and soul, as
expressing a greater unity and sympathy, or fellow feeling, than that of the
body; as if to be of one Soul, were more than to be of one Body; for if the
parts of the Body have a sense one of another, much more the powers and
faculties of the Soul have a discerning and sympathy one with another.

6. And lastly, To add no more here (although many more reasons might be brought)
against the using of Set Forms of Prayer, the whole Superstructure depends
upon a false and wrong bottom or foundation, viz. an Opinion, that immediate
Inspiration and Revelation is ceased or discontinued in the Church, and in and
among true Christians, as well as false; for I dare say, If they who are so
zealous for using Set Forms of Prayer, did but believe that Immediate
Inspiration and Revelation did remain in the true Church of God, and in and
among true Christians, this would presently end the dispute, and determine the
Controversy betwixt them and us, for when Immediate Inspiration and Revelation
was in the Church, as in the Apostles days, and for some considerable time
thereafter, they readily grant, that men then prayed and sung Psalms ex tempore
without Book, by the Spirit; and therefore if they did now believe that such a
dispensation is restored and restoring again, and was never altogether lost
among true Christians, although much impaired and diminished by reason of the
general Apostasy and prevailing power of darkness that was over the greatest
part of those called Christians, they would lay aside their Set Forms, and wait
for this Divine Gift. But it were too long and unseasonable a labor in this
place, to prove that Immediate Revelation and Inspiration does remain in and
among all true Christians, I shall therefore refer the Readers to what our
Friends have writ on that subject, and particularly to two Treatises of mine.
And withal, I beseech all sober and impartial people, laying aside all
prejudice, to weigh and consider, upon what slender and weak Arguments that
Opinion is built, which says, That Immediate Inspiration and Revelation is
ceased in and among all true Christians. And above all, I recommend them to the
Light of Christ Jesus, and the manifestation of his holy Spirit of Truth, in
every one of their hearts and Consciences, that bears witness to every
necessary Truth, as they hearken to it, and with their minds turned to the said
Light, and Spirit of Truth, to read and search the Scriptures diligently, in
that very respect as the Noble Bereans did of old, and the Lord give them
understanding in that and all other necessary things. I shall now proceed to
Answer the most ordinary Objections, that seem to have most weight for using
Set Forms of Prayer, whether in the Church or in private.

1. It is Objected, That Set Forms of Prayer and Blessing the People were used
in the Jewish Church, under the Law, as Numb. 10. 35. when the Ark set forward,
Moses commonly said, Arise, O God, let thine Enemies be scattered, let them
also that hate thee, flee before thee; and when it rested, he said, Return, O
Lord, to the many thousands of Israel. And Numb. 6. 23. Aaron and his Sons,
were on this wise to bless the people, saying, The Lord bless thee and keep
thee, the Lord make his face to shine favorably on thee. And Joel the Prophet
taught the People to pray, saying, Spare thy People, O Lord, give not thy
Heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should rule over them, wherefore should
they say among the people, Where is their God, Joel 2. 17. And yet under the
Law, people had the Spirit of God, and were to pray by the Spirit, and Moses
and Aaron who were to use these Forms of Prayer and Blessing, were endued wiih
a great measure of the Spirit, and able enough to have conceived other Forms of
Prayer and Blessing.
Ans. From their using Set Forms of Prayer and Blessing under the Law, to argue
for the use of them under the Gospel, will not hold good, for not only
Sacrifices, and Offerings of Beasts, but many other things were both commanded,
and allowed under the Law, which are not under the Gospel. And although Moses
and Aaron, and many others in those days had great plenty of the Spirit; yet
for the sake of the people, who generally were weak and rude, they were to go
along with them, in those Rudiments. No doubt Moses and the Prophets saw to the
substance and end of those Shadows and Figures, and knew well enough that the
blood of Bulls and Goats could not wash or purify the Conscience, and yet
because of the general dispensation of the Law, which was to continue until the
fullness of time, wherein Christ should be revealed, they were to remain in the
practice of these things, which were afterward to be abolished. And though
under the Law, some Forms of Prayer and Blessing the People were to be used,
yet they were but few, and very short, and such as did proceed from the Spirit
of God, the matter and words of such Forms seem to carry in them some
extraordinary Majesty or Glory, and to have some deep and profound
signification and force with them more than ordinary, as we know, some
Scripture words and sentences have more than others, as that Spirit is felt
from whom originally they came. And though all the Scripture words did proceed
from the Holy Spirit, yet some have proceeded from a greater measure of it, and
more depth of the Divine Wisdom, and hold forth somewhat of more Majesty, and
deep inward sense and mystery, and are commonly accompanied with a greater
measure of the Spirit, when they are used either in Reading or hearing them
Read, or in Meditation, and may be also used at this day in Prayer, as the same
Spirit does move any of his Servants thereunto, either in part or in whole. But
we do not find that even under the Law, or at any time before, the Lord did
limit and confine his People, or Servants to such a precise number of Set Forms
of Prayer, and made unlawful unto them, to use any others when they prayed in
public, or that any one was ever forbid to whom God had given any spiritual
gift (of uttering words either of Prayer, or of a Psalm or Song ex tempore, by
the help and moving of the Spirit) to make use of it. But on the contrary, we
find that many prayed ex tempore by the inspiration of the Spirit, what the
Lord did give them, or put into their mouths of words, both in private and
public, as Solomon's prayer at the Dedication of the Temple; also Esdras's
Prayer, Chap. 9. and the Levites Prayer, Nehem. 9. and Daniel's Prayer, Dan. 9.
and for private Prayers, David's Prayers in the Psalms, and Asaphs, also Moses,
and Samuel, and Habbakkuk their Prayers with many others under the Law, are
clear instances; and before the Law, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob their Prayers.
Nor do we find that ever a Book of Prayers, containing so many Prayers in
number, to be said or read in order, was ever made in the Church by any of the
Prophets as Prayer, or as any part of Worship in the Law. For though diverse
excellent forms of Prayers are recorded in Scripture, and put into Books, yet
they were not appointed by the Lord to be read or used in so many words;
without adding or diminishing, as Prayers. But they were read in the
Congregation as other parts of Scripture, pattly for information, and partly to
excite the Spirit and gift of Prayer in the Hearers. Excepting only some very
few short forms as above mentioned, which did not hinder or stop the liberty of
the Spirit of Prayer to express it self ex tempore in any other words. And
those few Forms they used as Prayers and Blessings, we do not find they read
them out of a Book; when they prayed them, but spoke them from their hearts,
where they were livingly, as it were, Writ and Recorded. And tho the words of
these short Forms were formerly conceived, and in that respect were old or
ancient, yet as they uttered or pronounced them in a fresh and living sense of
God's Spirit and power, which never waxes old; this gave them always a new
luster, and put a new Savor of life in them, and made them, as it were,
always new to them. And thus it is at this day, with the Servants of the Lord,
whom he has endued with a Spirit of Prayer, who when they Pray (either in
private or in public) do frequently find and feel Scripture words of Prayer,
formerly conceived and uttered by the Servants of the Lord, as Moses, David,
etc. to arise in them from a fresh and living sense of the Word of Life, to
speak them forth in Prayer, and this without any limitation of the Spirit of
Prayer, but coming freely in the liberty of the Spirit, and also of Heart, Soul
and Understanding; and the liberty of the Spirit of Prayer, as also of the
Heart and Understanding of him that Prays is manifest; in this, that it is
the free choice of the Spirit what words of Scripture to make use of, and to
bring into the Remembrance of him that Speaks, who does not also limit or
confine the Man's Understanding only to those Scripture Words; but gives him
liberty to make use of any others that freely arise or spring up in him, in
unity with the life, as it is opened in him, as a Fountain or Well of Living
Water.

2. It is Objected, That Christ taught his Disciples, to Pray in a set Form of
Words, who even then were endued with a measure of the Spirit, Matthew. 6. 9.
Luke 11. 2.
Answ. Though they are endued at that time with a measure of the Spirit, yet it
was but small in respect of what was to follow: And we must remember, that as
yet the dispensation of the Law remained in force; and if Moses prescribed unto
the People under the Law some short (but of a very excellent composure) Forms
of Prayer and Blessing without limiting them only to these; well might Christ
teach his Disciples this short form of Prayer, which is of a most excellent and
wonderful composure; in regard of its plainness and simplicity, and yet most
comprehensive, in respect of the largeness and fullness of matter expressed in
so few Words; a most worthy Pattern of all our Prayers, and of all that we can
ask or desire; for it is a sum of all the Prayers that ever was or can be made
by any of the Servants of God, and whatever is lawsul to be prayed for, is most
easily reducible to some of the Petitions of the said Prayer; and though it
has great plainness and simplicity of Words, yet great depth of matter, and
may be compared to Solomon's Temple, which had not only the outer Court, but
the Holy place within it; and within the Holy place, the most Holy, or Holy of
Holies: For beside the Letter and Words of it which answer to the outer Curt,
it has a Holy inward Sense or Understanding, which none can reach or come
into, but who are made a Royal Priesthood unto God; as none were to enter into
the Holy place, but such as were Priests under the Law. And although many
Christians have reached to the inward Sense of the whole Prayer in great part,
yet who can say he has reached to the full depth of it, and most inward Pith or
Marrow thereof, which is as the Holy of Holies? It is a Question if any ever
reached into the most inward Sense and Understanding of it, but Christ Jesus
himself who spoke and uttered it, in whom dwelt all fullness and riches of
Wisdom and Understanding, who is our High Priest, made higher than the Heavens,
and all the Angels that dwell in them. But,

2. Christ did not limit them only to this Form of Prayer, nor did he give them
a Book of Forms of Prayer, or any other Forms that we read of but this only,
which therefore was rather to be a Pattern and Example unto them, according to
which they were to Pray, than tie or confine them to the precise number of the
Words of it, as is clear from Matthew. 6. 9. After this manner therefore (said
he) Pray ye. And although Luke (11. 2.) has it, When ye Pray, say, Our
Father, etc. Yet Luke may be expounded by Matthew, as one place of Scripture is
often expounded by another. So that Luke may very well be understood according to
Matthew his words, thus, When ye Pray, say, (viz, after this manner) Our
Father, etc. Nor can this one only short Form of Prayer be a sufficient
argument to make a large Book of Forms of Prayer, and impose them by constraint
upon Christians: For either this one Form of Prayer taught by Christ was
sufficient for the Apostles without any other, or it was not; if sufficient for
them, why not also for all other Christians? And yet I know not any sort of
these called Christians who confine themselves only to it; or are willing so to
do, but think it needful to express their Prayers frequently in other Words;
for variety and change of Words (when the matter is the same) does help to stir
up and beget in men the more Fervent Affections. But if that one only Form was
not sufficient to the Apostles, it is clear that Christ did not intend by
teaching them that Form, to give them or their Successors an entire System or
Scheme of Common Prayer, but as is already said, to be a Pattern or Example
unto them, and also to afford unto them matter of Meditation, as the Holy
Spirit should open the deep and comprehensive Sense of it unto them; so that by
a due and serious, and deliberate Meditation upon all the parts and words of
it, by the help of the Spirit they might be stirred up unto Prayer, their
hearts being lifted up unto God upon the Meditation on every part of it, by
saying Amen thereunto, or expressing the inward desire and prayer of their
hearts in the same or more words, as the Holy Spirit should be pleased to
enable and assist them. And though I cannot, and dare not recommend it to be
read or said as a Prayer twice or thrice every day, in a dead formal customary
way, as too many do, nor can I limit any to the strict and precise number of
words in it to pray by, without using any more or, less words, lest thereby I
should seem to limit the Holy Spirit who is most free in all his Workings. Yet
I can and do freely thus far recommend it, even unto all Christians, as well
great as small, as a most worthy subject of their frequent Meditation, which
the Spirit of the Lord will not be wanting to incline them unto, and assist
them in. And how often in the Day, Week, Month, or Year they are to Meditare
upon it, or how long their Minds and Hearts are to dwell upon the Thoughts and
Meditations of it, or any other places of Holy Scripture, no outward rule can
be given, but must all be left to the free ordering and leading of the Spirit,
which I certainly believe as it is regarded and minded, will be found very
frequent. For it is a great part of the Spirits Work and Office to bring the
Scripture words, and especially the words of Christ to our remembrance, and the
more useful and necessary any words of Scripture are unto us; no doubt the Holy
Spirit that Faithful Remembrancer, will bring them to our Minds, the more
frequently and seasonable: And I know no words in all the Scripture that are
more necessary and profitable unto us to be remembered, and often meditated
upon, than those very words contained in this excellent Form of Prayer taught
by Christ. And indeed, not only these few Words of Prayer taught the Apostles
by Christ, but any other words of Prayer, whither Recorded in Scripture, or
that are Writ and Recorded any where else, that have proceeded from a true
Breathing and Spring of Life, in these who first conceived and expressed them
in word or writing, may be and are of great service. So that Forms and words of
Prayer which proceed in the least measure from the Spirit of Prayer, we are not
against, but for, and our Souls have often been greatly refreshed and quickened by
them, and the Spirit of Prayer, yea true Prayer and Supplication has often been
excited in us, at the reading or hearing read such Prayers, as are frequently
to be found not only in the Scriptures, but in the Books of true Martyrs, and
Witnesses of Jesus: What precious Words of Prayer have often dropped from them?
althongh but a little of those is recorded; and it might be wished more of
these precious words of Prayer or Thanksgiving, and other Testimonies that came
from the Spirit of God in them, which flowed from them had been preserved if it
had been the will of God. How often when we hear, or read, or call to mind these
precious Words of Prayer, or some part of them, that any Servant or Handmaid
of the Lord has uttered, either at the Hour of their Death, or any other time
by the Spirit of the Lord, which we find upon record in true History? How often I
say, and how purely does Life spring in us, and bear its Living Witness, to the
Original and Fountain of those Prayers, out of which they have proceeded, even
the Pure and Holy Spirit of God and Christ? And what pure inward, living,
powerful and comfortable Touches of the same Spirit have we felt at such times,
confirming our Heavenly and Spiritual Unity with those dear and precious
Servants of the Lord. Therefore I say, we are not against Words or Fruits of
Prayer (for all Words have a Form) that have at any time come, or do and may
come from the Spirit, but are very much for them as fit and proper Subjects of
Meditation and Occasions (as the Spirit of the Lord is pleased to concur) to
excite the Grace of Prayer in us thereby, or any other Divine Grace and Gift,
as does often come to pass. Also all such Prayers are excellent patterns and
examples unto us of Prayer; but yet we cannot set them up to be read or heard,
as our Prayers, so as to tie and confine our selves, or others, to the precise
number of the words contained in them. Not can we acknowledge that the bare
reading or repeating the Words, are a Prayer, as many do ignorantly imagine,
for all true Vocal Prayer comes from the Heart, as it is moved and wrought upon
by the Holy Spirit, and the Words of Prayer simply considered, are not properly
the Prayer (otherwise every one that has and uses the words should pray those
Prayers which is far otherwise) but the words are but the signs and expressions
of the Prayer which was in those who first conceived them, and are called
Prayer only by a Figure or Metonymie of the Sign for the thing signified. And
whereas it is objected by some, that these Forms of Prayer, as they are good
and fit patterns of our Prayers, so they may be used by us as Prayers, even as
some Weights and Measures, which are kept as Standards to make other Weights
by, may be used themselves, as Weights and Measures.

I answer, the comparison and example in this case is most unequal; those
Weights and Measures being but dead things, whether they be Standards, or those
which are made by them. But all true Prayer is a living thing, and must have a
living Form of its own, and cannot borrow the Form of another, even as a Rose,
or Tulip, or Lilly, or any other Flower or Vegetable, or Fruit of the Earth, as
it springs up out of the Ground, must have its own proper living Form and
Figure; and though it may be like to other things of its kind, yet it is
distinct from them, and may, yea and does always more or less vary from them
in form and shape, or figure and quantity (as well as Color, and Taste, and
Smell (at least as to the degree) and no art or device of Man can bring forth
an Herb or Fruit of the Earth precisely of the same quantity and shape, with
any other of the same kind: And so it is as to true Prayer in great part; and
although one Prayer may be like another as to the words, and may have the same
words when the Prayer is short, as containing perhaps one or two Sentences, yet
in this case the one Prayer does not borrow the words of the other Prayer, but
both the Prayers have their own proper form, that naturally spring from that
Divine Life, and inward Sense and Understanding in the Soul from whence they
come. As it was in those Prayers of Christ a little before his Passion, when he
prayed three times, saying the same Words; which instance some bring for using
a constant set form of Prayer; for who will, or dare say, but that those few
Words thrice uttered by him, did immediately spring from Life in him, and not
from a bare remembrance of the Words formerly spoken. And besides, the time
being so short betwixt those three Prayers, they may be said to be as well one
as three, the frame and bent of his heart remaining the same the whole time,
and the desire of his heart being still one and the same, and after one thing,
to wit, That the will of his Father might be done; when his Prayer was rather a
breathing forth of his earnest desire after one only thing, and consisted at
this time more in the will and affection, than in the Understanding (though it
was in and with great Understanding also) then that called Discursive Prayer,
where the Understanding and Reason is much exercised; the which sort of
Breathings, after one thing expressed in one or two Sentences, and sometimes in
one or two Words, yea sometimes but one only Word, as to say, Father (according
to Gal. 4. 6.) is commonly called the Prayer of Aspiration, and by others
Ejaculatory Prayer, and by others the Prayer of the Will; which differs much
from that other kind of Prayer which is Discursive, where the Understanding and
Reason is much exercised, and the Mind is filled with many Thoughts and Words
of Prayer inwardly conceived, and the desires of the Soul are excited after
diverse things: In which case its almost impossible, that at several times a man
can pray the same words without adding or diminishing, if he speak from his
Heart and not from a bare Remembrance. For even in Natural Discourse upon any
Natural Subject, a man that speaks from his Heart and the inward Fruitfulness
of his Understanding, he will vary in expression, though the subject of his
Discourse be the same. And therefore to argue for the using a constant set Form
of Prayer, from the Prayer of Aspiration, which has but one Sentence or Word
in it many times, to Discursive Prayer which has commonly many, holds not
good, and is as improper and unequal as who would say, when the Child cries
unto the Father twice or thrice every day, Father give me Bread, using the same
words; that therefore in all the Child's Discourse at any time to his Father,
in answering his Father any question, or asking any other thing of him, and
using many arguments to prevail with him that he may obtain it, he should still
use one and the same Form of Speech. We find by daily experience, that in
Converse and Society of men with men, they do not bind themselves to the same
Forms of Speech, as they discourse and talk one to another; and if they did, it
would make their Converse very barren and unfruitful, and would look very odd,
and import in him that always used these same words on the same subjects of
Discourse, either want of Understanding and Judgment, or some pedantick
affectation: Although in all intercourse of Speech, there are some short Forms
that are constantly and commonly used: And if two Men should preach on the same
Text, and have the same subject of Discourse, if they should both use the same
Form of Words in kind and number, without addition or diminition, it would be
generally concluded, that the one had stolen his Discourse from the other, or at
least borrowed it, and not conceived it from his own Mind and Understanding.
For as much as one Man's Child differs from another in Form and Figure of Body;
as much or rather more, does the birth of his Mind and Understanding, in
conceiving and uttering the matter of his Discourse differ from another; yea*
as the Children of one and the same Father and Mother (though ever so many) do
considerably differ one from another in Form and Figure, especially of the
Face: So every Man's Speech or Discourse, whether in Preaching or Praying, will
somewhat differ one time from another, if he bring it from his Heart and
Understanding, and not from his bare Memory, although the style and manner of
expression may be much the same. And commonly those Men whose Understandings
are naturally more pertinent and fruitful, when they Speak or Write on the same
Matter or Subject, the Forms of their Speech or Writing do most differ, and so
it may in Prayer; whereas other Men whose Understandings are not so Fruitful in
Words, but they may be as Fruitful, and sometimes more Fruitful in Good and
Holy Affections, when they Preach or Pray the Forms of their Words and Speech,
may seem to be well near the same, though always there will be some
difference, as much as one Child who is very like to his Brother, does differ
from him, or as one Apple may be like another of the same Tree, and yet when
narrowly considered, do still differ. And here these last Men's Prayer, whose
Hearts and Wills are more fruitful in Holy Affections than their Understandings
are, in great variety of Words and Eloquent Expressions, may, and often do Pray
with more Life, and Authority or Power, than the other; because the main
strength and force of Prayer, consists in the good and holy Will and
Affections. But in this and all other things, as every one has his proper
gift, one so, and another otherwise, so he is to exercise it, and not to limit
or confine one another, but give liberty to each other in the Holy Spirit of
Truth, and growing up together in God's Heavenly Garden, as lovely Plants and
Flowers, each one having their proper Shapes, Forms, and Fruit, all of a sweet
and pleasant smell and taste, and of a lovely Beauty, and all useful and
profitable one to another, and to the Church of God in general, without any
envy or grudging, but rejoicing in the manifold and various Graces and Gifts of
God freely bestowed upon all, and all growing and springing from the same Holy
Root and Ground. And now these two main Objections being Answered at length
(which did require the opening or explaining of diverse things which may be of
service to some) I shall proceed to answer some others, wherein I may be more
brief.

3. They object, That some having good Hearts, and great Love, and strong
Affections toward God, and Heavenly and Divine things, yet have weak Heads and
Understandings, and are not able well to conceive Words of Prayer in their
Understandings. And therefore should not these be helped by hearing or reading
set Forms of Prayer, well and Piously composed?
Answ. None have such weak Heads or Understandings if they have good Hearts, or
any measure of True Love and Affections toward God and Divine things, but the
same Spirit of Love which beget in them those good desires and affections, has
been, and is also in them a Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding to beget in
them, or help them to conceive good Thoughts and Words of Prayer sufficient for
them (as is above proved and made apparent; for the Spirit of God works upon
the whole Soul and all its powers and abilities, and as well upon the
Understanding as the Will, and whatever the Will cleaves unto, or the Heart
loves, is first proposed and represented to the Understanding in Thoughts, as
lovely and desirable. And if a Man have not El^cution, either none or small,
God requires but of every man as he gives him; and he who cannot Pray with
his Mouth (as in the case of those who are Dumb) if he pray with his Heart
shall be accepted. But he who can read a Prayer, if his Heart and Understanding
were as well, and as much exercised in Divine and Spiritual things, as in
Earthly and Temporal, and had as great a love to them, and delight in them,
would soon find himself furnished with Words ex tempore, whereby to express the
desires of his heart to God: And indeed in true and real Love, there is for
most part an admirable Force or Virtue to make a man Eloquent, both to praise
the thing he loves most, and also to find out Reasons and Arguments, wherewith
to persuade to the obtaining it. He who loves a Woman and greatly desires to
have her to be his Wife, he needs not go to a Book and steal or borrow an
Oration or Form of Discourse to speak unto her, in order to persuade her; and
if he did, it would but coldly come from him; and if she did know it (as a very
small measure of good discerning cannot but discover it) that it was a borrowed
Speech, she would not perhaps accept it, nor answer it. But the natural and
simple words that flow from the love of his Heart, would most prevail and have
the greatest force. It is not Eloquence or Excellency of Speech, that God
requires or regards, the profit and service of it is unto men, and not unto
God. It stirs up men's Affections to make them the more servent; but does not
more prevail with God, than more simple and mean words; yet God will have every
man to use his own Gift, and it is but want of Love to Divine and Heavenly
things, and want of exercise in improving and stiring up the Gifts which God
has given them, that makes them think extemporary prayer by the help of the
Spirit, to be so hard and difficult. Why may not Men find Words and Expressions
as ready and easy, wherewith to seek a thing of God by the help of his Spirit,
as they find them wherewith to seek a thing from Men, which few or none do in
borrowed Forms of Speech composed by another, unless it be to some King or
great Person, that some who are feeble minded and want courage, make their
address, by borrowed Words, or by something writ on a Paper, or by some other
they get to speak for them? But none of all these things is necessary in this
case; for God invites the weakest and meanest to call upon him, as well as the
strongest, and the meanest words, where the Heart is sincere are accepted of
him; yea, suppose the words were broken and imperfect, and not according to the
Grammar of the Language, they may be used (at least) in private. And as for
public Prayer in the audience of an Assembly or Congregation; these whom God
calls to such an Employment or Office, he will no doubt sufficiently qualify
and furnish them, for he who made the mouth, can easily put words in it. As
when Moses excused his being sent to Pharaoh for his want of Eloquence. The
Lord said unto him, Who has made man's Mouth? or who makes the Dumb, or Deaf,
or the Seeing, or the Blind? Have not I the Lord? Now therefore, go and I will
be with thy Mouth, and teach thee what thou shall sav. Ex. 4. 11. And tho the
Lord sent Aaron to assist him, who was naturally more Eloquent; yet God also
put Words in Moses his Mouth, as well as in the Mouth of Aaron. And when Moses
Prayed unto God in the Mount, that Israel might prevail over Amalek, we do not
read that Moses borrowed any words from Aaron, or that Aaron put any words into
his mouth; only Aaron and Hur, helped to hold up his Hands. And surely Moses in
his Prayer here, used not any Form of Prayer borrowed from Aaron, or any body
else; although some from this passage [and Moses his being less Eloquent than
Aaron] have argued for using set Forms of Prayer. But we cannot find it in
Scripture, that Moses stood with a Book of Common Prayer in his Hand, and Read
or Prayed out of it upon the Mountain, but that he had in his Hand a Rod.

4. They Object, That many by Reading or Hearing read set Forms of Pious and
Godly Prayers (both in public and also in private) have found their Souls and
Hearts refreshed thereby, and what they did read or hear read, has often stirred
up true and living Breathings in them, and hearty Desires and Supplications,
with Thanksgivings unto God. And it is hard and uncharitable to judge that all
they who read or hear set Forms of Prayer (in private and public) and seldom
or never use Extemporary Prayer, are altogether void of true Devotion, and
never Pray by the Spirit, because they always (or for the most part) Pray by
the Book.
Answ. I do readily grant that Reading, or hearing Read Words of Prayer,
whether in public or private (if these Words have been originaly conceived by
the Spirit of Gods help and assistance) may and do at times refresh the Souls
of True Christians, and may and do excite or stir up true and living
breathings, and hearty Desires and Supplications in them, with Thanksgivings
unto God at Seasons: But then it is so, when the Reading or Hearing those words
of Prayer, are put in their true and right place, and accounted and valued to
be what they are indeed, and not another thing, which is to say, when hearing
or reading those words of Prayer, are accounted hearing and reading as they
are, and not Prayer, which they are not for hearing and reading are things
differing in Nature and Kind from Praying, and ought not to be confounded with
the same; and the greatest service and advantage that reading or hearing words
of Prayer read by another unto us, have or indeed can have, is but Preparatory,
to excite or stir up unto Prayer; and then only can they do so much, but as the
Spirit of the Lord is pleased to concur and give his assistance with them. But
if People confound these so differing things, and set up the bare reading, or
hearing what is read in the place or room of true Prayer, as if they were true
Prayer it self, they may provoke the Lord to withdraw that concurrance and
assistance of his Spirit, from reading and hearing those words, however so
good, yea tho Scripture words, and altogether blast, and make ineffectual and
unprofitable those exercises, which otherwise and in themselves considered, are
lawful and profitable. For the Lord who is a God of order, he will not have the
nature of things confounded but kept distinct: He will not have a thing
judged or esteemed to be what it is not, or above what it is; the tendency of
which in this very case, is downright Superstition and Idolatry; as to judge
that to be Prayer and Divine Worship, which is no such thing; for whatever is
not true Prayer and Divine Worship, and yet is called so, and really so judged
and esteemed, is false and a sort of Idolatry. For I know no midst betwixt true
Divine Worship, and Idolatry under that head of Worship, seeing all pretended
Divine Worship is either true or false; and if false, it is a sort or kind of
Idolatry. Now it deserves to be well examined and considered, whether the
putting reading, and hearing read set Forms of Prayer, either in public or
private, in so high a place as many put them (if not most or all who use them)
has not provoked the Lord to deny that concurrence and assistance of his
Spirit unto those exercises, which otherwise he might and would give,
especially when those read Prayers do altogether exclude those real Prayers,
which come from the Spirit of God, as he enables the Speakers to conceive and
bring them forth in words, without any set Form. And why is it that many
sensible and tender Souls feel no Virtue in many or most of those read Prayers,
and on the contrary feel great deadness and heavyness, and great weights and
burdens in hearing them? which has occasioned many to with draw, and seek
where to find a People, where true and living Prayer and Praises are to be
found, which effectually reach to the Soul, and carry their Souls and Hearts
along to join with them. For neither is it true Prayer to hear the words of him
that prays most effectually by the Spirit of God, but where the Heart and
Soul joineth and goes along by the moving of the same Spirit both in Speaker
and Hearers, that is true Prayer: Again, if People should not so far mis-place
those things, as to judge reading, and hearing read Prayers to be Prayers, or
any part of Divine Worship; yet if they lean too much on them, and rely more
upon them than they should, and have more an eye and regard unto them than unto
the Spirit of God; this also will make their reading and hearing, or any other
exercise ineffectual unto them, and altogether unprofitable.

But Secoudly, I shall neither be so hard nor uncharitable (but am very far
from it) as to judge that all they who hear or read set Forms of Prayer in
private and public, and seldom or never use Extemporary Prayer by the help of
the Spirit, giving them to conceive or express words of Prayer, are altogether
void of true Devotion, and never Pray by the Spirit: For my Charity is so large
and free in that respect, that I believe among all People, Jews and Turks, as
well as Christians, and many of those called Heathens, if they do believe in
one only God, and are Faithful to what they know, they are at times visited
with gentle breathings of the Spirit of God, which helps them truly to Pray
unto him, with desires and affections, and true breathings of the Soul after
him. It is one thing what the Lord does by high and sovereign acts of his
wonderful Mercy and Condescendence to the Children of Men; and another what he
does to them, upon terms of their doing what he only requires of them, and is
pleased with, in them.

5. It is Objected, If the Spirit of God does dictate unto any Men in our days
the words of their Prayers, in that case, those words would be as good
Canonical Scripture, as any of the Prayers of David, or of other Holy men, and
their Psalms recorded in Scripture; which were absurd to affirm.
Answ. These words of Prayer which come truly from the Spirit of God, helping
and assisting the Speakers to conceive and express them, are no doubt real
Divine Testimonies of God's Spirit, Light and Life, according to their measure;
but to compare or equal them to Scripture (as we do not) so to infer it is
unequal. For if all the Divine Testimonies which originally did livingly and
purely proceed and spring from the Spirit of God, hadbeen writ, and aded to the
Scripture, the bulk or volumn of it had been too great; yea many Volumns would
not have contained them, and it had been impossible for men to have read them
all. Therefore God has Wisely and Graciously ordered it by his Divine
Providence, that a part of these many Testimonies which have come from his
Spirit should be left upon record, and preserved to all future Generations,
which were writ by some of the most Eminent of his Holy Prophets and Apostles,
and which have been unquestionably received in all Ages among the best sort of
Christians, who have had a true discerning, to favor these Holy Writings and
Testimonies, and that what has been so writ, should be generally received as
unquestionable Testimonies and Oracles of God's Holy Spirit, and acknowledged
as a public Standard, Rule and Touch-stoue, whereby to judge and examine all
Doctrines and Principles of Religion held forth by any. Now it was altogether
necessary that this public Standard and Touchstone of all Doctrines and
Principles of Religion, should not be too large and voluminous, but compendious
and easy to be read over, and diligently searched and examined in a short
time, to find how the Doctrines and Principles Preached by others, did agree,
or disagree with them, as the Spirit of the Lord should give an Understanding,
and so according to receive or reject them. And God in his Infinite Wisdom has
seen fit that the Writings of the ancient Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists,
should only be this public and universal outward Standard, as having some
peculiar excellency in them of plainness and briefness, and comprehending much
matter in few words, and writ from a deeper and larger measure of the Divine
Wisdom, to which no writings or words since uttered, are comparable in
equality, or in the service they were designed for. And more might be said as
to this matter, to show the excellency of the Scriptures above all other
writings or words, the Scriptures being generally received and believed, and
that worthily, to be pure and infallible Testimonies of Truth, without any
mixture of humane weakness, error or mistake, as they were originally writ and
continue at this day; as to the main, and giving sufficient evidence and
witness to necessary Truths, which we are not bound to believe equally
concerning any other writings, as being wholly and throughout Infallible, and
therefore may take leave to question them, and accordingly as we find them to
agree or disagree with the said public Standard of the Scriptures Testimony to
receive or reject them, in part or in whole. And admitting or granting that
many Testimonies of Good and Holy Men, their Preaching, Praying and Writing,
should wholly agree to the Scriptures Testimony, and that they have also
proceeded from a measure of the same Spirit, purely and without all mixture,
yet they are not to be made equal with that which by the Appointment of God,
and general consent of Christians, is made the public Standard of Truth: As in
respect of an outward Testimony, for in all Cities and Corporations the public
Standard of Weights and Measures is of greater and more Authority, than any
others however so just and agreeable to them. And this Objection has no more
force or weight against Preaching and Praying by Divine Inspiration now, than
it had Two or Three Hundred Years after the Birth of Christ, when it is
generally confessed the gift of Preaching and Praying by the Immediate
Inspiration of the Spirit, did remain in the Church, and yet their words were
not held equal to the Scripture in that day. And tho we may not add our Words
and Testimonies (the purest of them) to be any part of Scripture, yet we dare
not be so Presumptuous as to say, there never was, nor ever shall be more
Scripture, than what we have at present; for it is probable more of equal
Authority with what we have, has been, but is lost, and possibly some judged
Apocryphal; by one sort may be of equal Authority and value with God, and other
good men, with other parts of Scripture that are acknowledged. Neither are all
Christians yet agreed upon the number of the Books of Scripture, but it
suffices that so much is generally agreed upon, as is sufficient to be a
public Standard. And lastly this Objection can be equally retorted upon the
makers of it: For they do hold, That all the Words in their Set Forms of
Prayer, are either plain express Scripture Words, or deduced and deduceable
from them, by just and necessary consequence of Truth, and what is so deduced,
are the real Commands and of Oracles God; as they (or at lest as most of them)
say; as in the example of Infant Baptism, which they hold to be a command of
God, consequently a Divine Oracle, and yet they confess it is no where
expressed in Scripture, but only by consequence deduced from it; the which
notwithstanding is justly denied by many to be any firm or sure consequence of
Scripture. And if none of their set Forms of Prayer have come originally, no
not in the least measure from the Spirit of God in those who Penned them, it
seems a great derogation to those Prayers, and to render them of small value
with the People; therefore such who use this Objection against us, should take
heed lest they derogate from their own Prayers, and so fall under the censure
of their own Brethren. But perhaps some will acknowledge, that the Spirit helped
those who Penned these set Forms of Prayer, not only by exciting or moving
their affections, but also by working upon their Understandings, and make them
fruitful to conceive the matter or words of these Prayers, but not Immediately,
or by an Immediate Divine Inspiration, as the Spirit wrought in David and
others who preached and prayed by Immediate Inspiration, so as to make no use
of their judgment and reason, to find out the matter, or choose the words they
expressed. To this I answer, that David, or any other of the Prophets and
Apostles, when they were Immediately Inspired to Preach, or Pray, or Write,
made no use of their Judgment and Reason, or other Faculties and Abilities of
their Souls; or that the Spirit of God which wrought in them, made no use of
them, but as mere passive Subjects and Recipients, is a thing commonly alleged
by those men, but no where proved, either from express Words of Scripture, nor
from any just and necessary consequence therefrom. Yea the contrary is manifest
from Scripture, that the Spirit of God wrought upon, and used the Understanding
and Rational Faculties, and Abilities of the Prophets and Apostles, not as mere
passive Instruments always, or most frequently, but made them fruitful to
work, and cooperate with him; as Paul, who Preached and Prayed by Immediate
Inspiration (as they do confess) said, That he had labored more abundantly
than the other Apostles: which was not a mere bodily laboring, but a
traveling or laboring in Spirit more especially, wherein his Understanding
and rational Faculties were concerned, as well as his Will and Affections,
which is also clearly implied in his following words, Yet not I, but the Grace
of God with me. So that it was not he alone, nor the Grace alone, but the Grace
of God co-working with him, that caused this earnest and servent laboring in
Paul's Soul. Nor is there any more reason to say, that the Understandings and
Reasons of the Prophets and Apostles when they spoke by Immediate Revelation,
were wholly passive, than to say, their Wills and Affections were wholly
passive, or their Mouths and Tongues when they spoke. And the diversity of
Style in the Penmen of the Scriptures (which varieth not only according to the
natural gifts and parts (wherewith they were more or less endued) but also
according to their Education and Acquired Parts) does sufficiently show, they
were not altogether passive. The styles and manner of expression used by
Isaiah, Paul and Luke, clearly show their Education, differing from the homely
style of Amos a Countryman, who said, He was no Prophet, nor the Son of a
Prophet. Paul said he could Pray not only with the Spirit, but with the
Understanding: meaning certainly that his Understanding might be active and
fruitful, both to himself and others also. It Is true, the same Paul speaks of
a case, wherein the Spirit Prays, but the Understanding is unfruitful, as it
happened at times when a man was so inspired and moved by the Holy Spirit, that
he spoke in an unknown Tongue, as appears from 1 Cor. 14. 13. Wherefore let
him that speaks in an unknown Tongue, pray that he may interpret. And in this
case it is like, that as the Soul's Understanding was unfruitful, so it was
unactive, and was used only by the Spirit, as a passive Instrument like a Pen
in the Hand of a ready Writer: As when the outward Ear of a man receives the
Voice of a strange Language, which he does not understand. There are other
cases also, wherein the Understanding and Rational Faculties of man may be laid
aside, and not used by the Spirit of God, when he Immediately Inspireth him; as
when the highest and most noble Faculty of a Man's Soul or Mind is excited, and
wholly employed and exercised by the Spirit, which by some is called the Spirit
of the Mind, by others the Visual or Intentive Faculty of the Soul, which sees
God as he is pleased to reveal himself; and whereby a man has a sense or
perception of Divine or Spiritual things, without any use or exercise of his
Understanding, Reason or Imagination, as in a Spiritual Rapture and ecstasy.
But for most part the Understanding and Reason was used and employed, yea and
the Memory also, by the Prophets and Apostles, so as to remember what they had
read or heard, and seasonably to apply it to the present occasion, when they
spoke or writ by Immediate Revelation or Inspiration. For Immediate Revelation
or Inspiration does not exclude the use of means whether inward or outward, it
only implies a most near and close, or intimate conjunction and union of the
Spirits Operation with the Soul in the use of means, as well as when they are
not so used: And Solomon, who is generally acknowledged to have writ both the
Books of the Ecclesiastes and Proverbs, by Divine Immediate Inspiration and
Revelation; yet he says, Eccles. 12. 10. He sought to find out acceptable
words, etc. So that the Spirit of God made use of that Faculty or Ability of
his Soul (which is called by Logicians Invention) as well as his Judgment; not
that he had any trouble or difficulty to find out those acceptable words, but
the Spirit making his Understanding Fruitful with plenty of matter, and
seasonable and suitable Words, he freely and without any trouble or disquiet of
his mind, used such acceptable words.

6. It is Objected, That even they who pray ex empore by the Spirit in a
Congregation of People, do stint or limit the Spirit in the Hearers, and their
Understandings and Attensions, to consider what they who speak say, no less
than if they heard a Set Form of Prayer read unto them.
Answ. This is altogether denied; for first, the Spirit of God in one can never
be thought to stint the same Spirit, or limit the operation thereof in another,
or many, because the Spirit is the same in both, and does ever accord and agree
with it self in all its operations, and what it moves the Speaker to Speak, it
moves and inclines the Hearers to consider, and where true Unity is witnessed
with one inward voice and cry of their Hearts, they speak the same things unto
God, their Hearts at every Sentence, saying Amen, to what they feel and
perceive to come from the Spirit of God in them who speak. Nor does it hinder
the understanding and attention of the Hearers, in being exercised toward the
Spirit's workings and openings in themselves: For many, yea and most times,
what the Spirit speaks through one, does excite the understandings of the
Hearers into more faithfulness, so that they have more opened and revealed unto
them by the Spirit, than what the Speakers words did import; as often also the
like falls out in Discoursing upon a natural subject, where the words do
signify more to some Hearer, than they do to the Speaker himself, exciting
clearer and fuller notions or ideas of Truth in him: And thus even natural arts
have been perfected, when the first Inventers had but some small beginnings;
others by those beginnings have been excited to find out more perfect things;
as the bringing of the first words of a Sentence to a man's Memory which he
has forgot, does often excite his Memory to remember the whole Sentence. Nor is
the Mind of Man so strait or narrow, but it can well enough attend to what
another Man says in Preaching or Prayer, and also to what God inwardly does
suggest, or reveal unto him: And the liberty of the Hearers understandings and
Spirits is manifest in this also, that after one has Prayed in words, if the
same Spirit reveal any thing to be spoken in Preaching or Prayer by any of the
Hearers, he is free to do it without giving any offense, which was the order
prescribed by Paul, to the Church of Corinth.

7. It is Objected, That set Forms of Prayer are most for the edifications of
the People, who by often hearing of the same Prayer can commit it to Memory,
and so it passes to the Understanding, and remains with them; whereas
extemporary Prayers pass away for most part, as a Sound, and are little
remembered.
Answ. This also is altogether denied, viz. That set Forms of Prayer are most
for the edification of the People; for admitting or supposing that the Hearers
commonly by often hearing these set Forms had them all perfect in their Memory,
yet it will not follow that they have a true understanding of them; for men may
and do remember many things which they do not understand. But again, either
these set Forms of Prayer are few or many; if few, they cannot give a large
understanding to the People, if many, they cannot be well remembered by them,
and if they were as many as would fill many Volumns, they cannot give so great
occasion to edify and inform the understanding, as these Prayers which proceed
ex tempore, by the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit in Holy men, which must needs
be many more, and containing much more matter, than the greatest Book of ever
so many set Forms of Prayer can. For on this account it is as I reckon, why men
are not tied to set Forms of Preaching, but are allowed freely to exercise
their gift, because that is more edifying to the People, than set Forms to
Preach by would be unto them. And the same reason is as good concerning Praying
as Preaching. And tho words of ex tempore Prayer without the Spirit, pass away
as an empty transient sound, yet by and with the help of the Spirit both in
speakers and hearers, they take impression both upon the understanding and
memory of People, who are made tender and sensible: And tho all or most of the
words spoke be not remembered, yet if they have that good effect to open the
understanding, and work holy Affections in the Souls of People, it is
sufficient to edification: For where a thing is well understood, a man needs
not concern his memory much about it: As he who understands the reasons and
grounds of rules and precepts of Art, he can practice the things belonging to
that Art better with his understanding, without thinking on those rules, then
he who only has the rules of Art in his memory, but understands not the
reasons and grounds of those rules. Nor can these forms be so edifying as
extemporary Prayer by the true Spirit of God, because they cannot so
universally in all particulars reach to the various states and conditions of
Peoples Souls. And to say that all the various states of Peoples Souls, if
there were a thousand of them, are comprehended under the words of those
general set forms does not satisfy. For as on the one account set forms are
too few, and strait or narrow to reach all particular states, and seasonable
times; so if generals can serve, these set forms commonly used are too many;
because one only set form of Prayer contained in a few words may in general
reach to all Peoples states, and surely none does or can better do that, than
the Prayer which Christ taught his Disciples. And if men deny that they have
any assistance of the Spirit to help them to conceive these set forms of Prayer
which they use, were it not better to collect together forms of Prayer out of
the Old and New Testament, putting all these words and sentences together which
are most to the same purpose, or if belonging to several purposes that have
some fit connection together; and so the words of their Prayer would be pure
Scripture words, without any mixture of the words of man's Wisdom, which are
often times very unsound.

8. They Object, That many who Pray extempore contradict one another in thrir
Prayers, ask contrary things; and therefore both such Prayers cannot be from
the Spirit of God, which as it is one in Nature, so in Operations, ever
agreeing and in unity with it self.
Ans. The whole weight and stress of this Objection, lies upon Persons and
Men, and not upon the Principle, to refute or refe^ it in the least, and as for
these who most commonly pray contrary one to another, they are such, who do not
pretend or lay claim to pray by Divine Immediate Inspiration. But if both sides
should lay claim thereunto, and yet contradict one another in their Preaching
or Praying, it only proves that the men are faulty, sometimes on the one side,
and sometimes on the other, and sometimes they may be faulty and wrong on both
sides, but the Principle remains still unblamable: nor has this Objection
more weight now than in the days of the true Prophets of old, against whom the
false Prophets both Preached and Prayed, and pretended to be also Divinely and
Immediately Inspired, as well as the true. And lastly, This Objection can be
well enough retorted, for they who pray by Set Forms, may pray contrary one to
the other. The Greek and Latin Churches had both Set Forms of Prayer, and
prayed one against another, as well as preached, when that great Zeal and
Schism came to be between them. And how many Preach against one another, who
pretend to Scripture and good Reason, and also to good Literature, which yet is
no just reflection on any of these three things, but only on the Men or
Persons, who abuse them.

9. It is objected, That Paul in his Epistles used the same Forms of
Salutations and Prayers, both at the beginning and end of them frequently, and
therefore he could not be against Set Forms, who used them so much himself, as
Grace, Mercy and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, at the
beginning of diverse of them, and at the end, Grace be with you, etc.
Answ. These little short Forms, being (as is already said upon another
occasion) expressions and significations of the Prayer of Aspiration and
Affection, and not of that called Discursive Prayer, which require diverse
Sentences, do not infer that Set Forms may be used in Discursive Prayer. For
when the Heart and Affection is earnestly and zealously bent and moved to
desire one only thing, it may be expressed in one Sentence, and as often as that
Affection is renewed, the expression of it in the same Sentence, as it freely
arises in the Heart, may be renewed also: but men find it not so in Discursive
Prayer, or other Discursive Exercises. As when men at this day commonly write
Epistles one to another, they retain some little common Forms of Salutation, at
the beginning and end of their Epistles, which are commodious and not thought
strange not disliked. But if a Man, yea, if a Schoolboy at School, should
always write to his Father or Kindred, the same words throughout, without any
alteration, they would say he were a fool and void of understanding, to be so
barren as to have no new matter in his Epistles, even when daily occasion is
given.

10. It is Objected, That God is not delighted with variety of words, and
novelty of matter and method in new styles, and flourishes of Tropes and
Figures, and is far unlike those squeemish Stomachs, or delicious and lustful
Appetites, who every day seeks after variety of Dishes, or else they cannot
be satisfied; at being the Heart that he requires.
Answ. It is true, God is not delighted with variety of Words and Sentences as
Man is, or after the manner of Men: but yet, he requires that every man make
use of the Graces and Gifts which he has given him; and they being the works
of God, and proceeding from him, he may be said to delight in them, and in
their manifold Variety, as he does in all his other Works, although not after the
manner of men, yet after such a way and manner, as becomes his infinite
Greatness and Perfection. And tho it be the Heart that God mainly requires and
regards; yet he commands us to love and serve him, with our whole man,
which is our reasonable service; and we are to love him with all our
Understanding, as well as Heart, as the Scripture says, and the best and most
fruitful part of our Understanding; and all the Gifts belonging to it, our
Judgment, Reason, and Elocution, may and ought to be employed in his Service,
and in this particular Service of Praver, as Holy Men of old, who used their
Understanding and Reason, and such Elocution also and variety of Expressions,
as God had given them: and so ought every Man to do, as the Spirit of the Lord
leads him, and works upon him; and those Gifts he has given him without
affection or stretching and straining beyond his measure. And tho we find no
affected or artificial Eloquence in Words of Man's Wisdom, which is carnal and
from below, yet a true Eloquence and excellency of Speech is to be found in
many places of Scripture, both in the Preachings and Prayers of the Lords
Servants that stand on Record, far surpassing all the Eloquence that either the
Masters or Disciples of that artificial Eloquence, so much admired in the
World, ever arrived or ever can arrive at, merely as such. And likewise the
same Argument may be retorted, in respect of using any words at all in Prayer,
whether extempore or by Set Forms, because to speak properly God is not moved
by any words, and has need of them, who knows all oue most secret Thoughts
and Desires without words. And if it be said that words are used to Men,
because they have a leisure to excite their affections; then I say, and variety
of words with new matter, as the Heart of Man conceives them by the help of
the Spirit has the like service, and that more effectually, as abundant
experience does prove; then Set Forms of Prayer, read out of a Book, especially
when the Reading is accounted Prayer, whereof we find no instance in Scripture,
that ever at any time Reading was accounted Prayer, though Prayer of the Heart
and Affection may and often does follow and accompany serious Reading and Hearing.

11. They Object, That Solomon forbids men to be rash with their mouth, or to
let their Heart be hasty to utter any thing before God; for God (says he) is
in Heaven, and thou upon Earth, therefore let thy words be few.
Answ. But he does not conclude, therefore let thy Prayer be in a Set Form of
Words. For here only he reproves vain Repetitions, and the Pharisaical Spirit,
which thought to be heard for their much speaking, as Christ did also reprove
the same. And certainly Solomon was far from forbidding all extemporary Prayer,
in these words, Eccles. 5. 2. Which may very well be conceived in few words as
well as marry; for he used it himself at the Dedication of the Temple, as at
other times, although I shall willingly grant, that ex tempore Prayer without
the Spirit (where the mind of man irreverently rambleth and wandreth into airy
Imaginations) is here and every where else forbidden in Scripture: And whereas
some also except against ex tempore Prayer, as being monstrous like, because of
the smalness or shortness of time, betwixt the conception and birth of that
kind of Prayers; however this argument may be used against ex tempore Praying
without the Spirit, that can have no place against Praying by the Spirit,
unless such Objectors will also cry out against the ex tempore Prayers made by
the Prophets and Apostles of old, as being monstrous or Monsters on that
account; but I hope they will be more sober. And tho in some respect the time
be very short, as perhaps a moment or instant betwixt the conception and birth
of Prayer, as to the words or expressions, yet the Substance and Root of
Prayer, wherein the very Essence and Life of true Prayer does chiefly consist,
is long time conceived in the Soul, before its outward Birth or Expression in
the Mouth, and is a constant abiding thing in the Soul.

12. Many who pretend to pray by the Spirit, and have used, or do as yet use ex
tempore Prayer, discover many weaknesses in those Prayers, as vain Repetitions,
impertinent Sayings, light and airy Phrases, and unsound Matter and
Expressions, to the causing many People to abhor the Sacrifices, rather than to
be piously and religiously affected with those Prayers. And seeing few, if any
have a Spiritual Gift of Praying ex tempore, with words conceived by the help
of the Spirit; and that yet public Prayers in Congregations and Assemblies of
People are necessary; is it not better to use Set Forms of Prayer in sound
Words, then to adventure on ex tempore Prayer without the Spirit.
Answ. As for all these weaknesses, which Men have discovered or may discover
in ex tempore Praying, they reflect, as is said, upon the Men, but not upon the
Principle. And when most of these Weaknesses have appeared, it is in Men, who
pray without any pretense unto immediate Inspiration of the Spirit, or belief
that they have it: and such Men, I confess, should lay aside their ex tempore
Praying, and wait upon the Spirit of God, to receive help from him to pray,
first believing that it is to be received, as it is waited for. And these also
who pretend to pray by the Spirit, and yet do nothing so, but are merely guided
by their floating and airy Fancies and Imaginations, should desist from such a
practice, and come with silence both outward and inward, and in the same wait
for the true Spirit of Prayer to help their infirmities, whether with Sighs and
Groans that cannot be expressed, or with distinct and audible expressions. But
surely, these who indeed pray by the Spirit, keeping close and chastely to the
same throughout, from first to last, bewray none of these Weaknesses; and
though they may use Repetitions, yet if the Spirit move to use them, and that
there be any virtue or savor of Life in them, they are not vain but
profitable, and like the warbling Notes, repeated Sounds of a skilful Musician,
in a musical Descant, which rendered the method more sweet and pleasing; and
such serious, grave, and weighty Repetitions we find often in the Psalms of
David. And these also who use Set Forms of Prayer, have need that they use not
vain Repetitions; for some who have heard these Set Forms, have been as much
disgusted and offended with the many Repetitions they find there, as others
with those elsewhere. Now it may at times happen, that a man may be partly
assisted and helped by the Holy Spirit to conceive words of Prayer, and good
and servent Affections, and yet through Humane Weakness, may discover some
frailty in his Prayer, who yet is not altogether to be rejected or discouraged.
But great care ought to be had by all, who make mention of the Name of the
Lord, that they bring forth nothing but that which is pure and without mixture,
even a pure Offering and Sacrifice unto the Lord, who is pure. And suppose few
or none, in many places or Congregations, have the Spiritual Gift of praying ex
tempore, by the Spirit helping them to conceive the words of Prayer, yet there
is no need of praying by a Set Form; for if the Principle and Doctrine of
Truth, were once received and believed, that God gives his assistance by his
Spirit to all who desire it, and whom he thinks worthy of it, or fit to bestow
it on, for the edification of others, to pray ex tempore, with words truly
edifying, quickening and refreshing, as People did but wait a little time in
sincerity for such a Divine Gift, it would be given to a sufficient number of
them, and until it be given it is better to pray with affection of Heart,
though without all words, and wait in silence for a further gift and measure of
the Spirit, then to be rash or hasty to pray without the Spirit, either ex
tempore or in a Set Form. And to help the weaknesses of many who cannot bear
well long, or much silence, such as are serious and best affected, as they find
a freedom and liberty in the Lord, may read unto the People, or unto their
Families, the Holy Scriptures, which was an ancient custom in the Primitive
Church; but that Reading is not to be used as Prayer or Worship, but only as a
mean to excite Prayer and good Affections and Defires in them, as it pleases
the Lord to concur and give his Blessing unto the same, and also for
Information and Doctrine.

What is there said all along in this Treatise of Praying by the Spirit,
helping to conceive the words of Prayer, is also to be understood of Singing
and Praising God with a Psalm; and the Reasons and Arguments drawn from
Scripture for the one serve equally for the other; for all Singing and Praising
with a Psalm or Psalms, in Gospel times, was a Spiritual Gift, as is clear in
the Church of Corinth, when some had a Psalm to utter or express in words (and
others went along with them in Unity of Spirit, making Melody in the Heart,
though not a^ audible noise, pronouncing the same words) as some had a Doctrine
and some a Revelation, some an Interpretation, 1 Cor. 14. 26.

THE END.

