A SERMON, Preached before Sir MARMADVKE LANGDALE At his entrance into BARVVICK.

By I. K. a Native of the same place, sometimes Preacher of Gods word there.

Hosea, Chap. 3. verse. 5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and
seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord, and
his goodness in the latter days.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, 2 Cron. 35.25.
THE sphere of this Text is Lamentation; the Poles whereon it mov^^^, Josiah
and Jeremiah: In the upper the etheriall part of this sphere w^^^ see the blood
of Josiah; in the nether the watery hemisphere, we have the tears of Jeremiah.
And as the caelestiall Spheres, have their first moover above them: So is there
in this Text a third person, the Spirit of God; who only being above the King
and the Prophet placed them here in the Firmament of his word, and by this his
Testimony has consolidated the blood of Josiah, and the tears of Jeremiah
into fixed Stars; wherein all men may read their common condition, and
Kingdoms calculate their own Nativities and dissolutions: So in this dark
Sphere of Lamentation, Josiah dying, Jeremiah crying, we find yet the Spirit
of God testifying; though in the cold Region of the revolting Judah, both King
and Prophet be eclypsed, the one by death, the other by sorrow; yet are they
here caught up into the clear Orb of the Scripture (torres eruti deigne) and
there memorated to all Posterities by the uncloudeable testimony of the spirit
of God; Zach. 3.2.
in whose sight since the death of his Saints is precious, Psalm 116.13.56.8.
and he puts all their tears into his bottle; therefore are these things noted
in his book, therefore are Josiah and Jeremiah recorded here as Monuments,
and their blood and tears turned into Rubies and Pearls, to make Bracelets to
adorn the Spouse of Christ.

Here first we see in Mourning and dying the condition of us all in this
world, sorrow and death play all our game. Lugemus, aut lugemur omnes in vicem:
It is an hard question, whether at our entering we begin sooner to weep, or to
dye. But in our progress whereas dying has no intervals, sorrow seems to
admit some interludes, but in a wise man's apprehension they are but delusions.
Look into the Stage of the world you shall see two serious Actors, the Dyer,
and the Mourner: All the rest play the fool, or the counterfeit; whereupon the
judicious spectator, Eccle. 2.2.
Solomon, called out to laughter, in^anis, thou art mad, and to mirth, Quid
frustra deciperis? And the great Job said of himself, Job 29.24.31.23.
if I laughed on them, they believed it not; so seldom did he, so little could
he laugh, qui semper, quasi tumentes super se fluctus, timuit Deum, who thought
continually he heard God, like the mighty billows of the Sea rolling over his
head: But the Son of God, quoties ve^o elle, Isai 53 3. Psalm. 88.15.
how often did he impropriate the Title of vir dolorum, the man of sorrows? From
my youth up thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind; Luke 17 50.
and again, I have a Baptism to be baptized withal, (...), and how am I
straightened till this be fulfilled? For well knew the Son it was the will of
the Father, that sorrow should be the diet and viands of man in the course of
this life, where the feathers and down we rest upon have their quills and
thistles; the Rose we smell her pricks, the meat on our Tables cries out to
us, Mors in olla, there is death in the pot. This habitual sorrow (for the
fits of worldly mirth, quamvis non intempestivis amaenitatibus, are but
recesses from it, and I neither condemn every act of joy, Genesis 35.18.
nor justify every motion of sorrow) this habitual sorrow, from which
Bennoni, the son of sorrow, was called Benjamin the son of strength, and by
which the sorrowful Iabez became more honorable then all his brethren; 1.
Cron. 4 9.
this habitual sorrow, I say this commanding sadness, this mastred and well
rayned pensiveness, is wisdom in the mind, valor in the heart, salt in the
wit, discipline to the flesh from whence there breaks forth a Majesty in the
very countenance. It is indeed the balance of the soul, without which a light
and empty heart, like an unpoysed Bark, danceth aloft to the flattry of the
winds, which will quickly lay her low.

But we have every where so many causes of the one of these two, sorrow, that
the other, death, might be jealous we forget him, and surprise us suddenly: if
with the statue of sorrow in Jeremiah, the spirit of God had not erected also a
monument of death in Josiah: and justly, for the same which David calls the
valley of the shadow of death in the 23. Psalm, he calls the valey of Baca in
the 84. for sorrow is says Basil, (...) the shadow of sin and mortality:
now, as if a man were placed so high above the earth, that night, the shadow of
it could not reach to him, he should have continual day: so those souls only
that have wrought so high, that the (...), the last point of this shadow of
sin, Mortality, is below their feet, those have no sorrow, unless it be to
look down upon us and see, quanta sub nocte jaceret nost ^a dies, in what a
true night of lamentablenesse we walk here on earth, which yet we thicken with
gross conceits of false mirth; the best use then of natural life, is the
thinking on death: O that they were wise says, Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
that they would consider their latter end! Sion remembered not her later end,
therefore she came down wonderfully, Lam. 1.9.
says our Jeremy in this Lamentation, yea in spiritual life Paul desired to
know nothing here but Jesus Christ, and him dying: 1. Cor. 2.2.
sleep like a Publican, takes excise of our life, only the rest of it is our
own: he that thinks not on death is asleep: what we deny to the one Brother
the other takes away. O how I love thee thou meditation on death, since not
time but thou measurest life and make it mine! Through this narrow dark
optic of the meditation on death; our eyes, helped with the watery spectacles
of tears pierce through the chrystalline Heaven, and look to eternal life:
John confesses of Peter and himself, Jo. 20.10.
who ran to the Sepulcher, and presently returned home, that they missed of
that dignation which was afforded to Mary, who stayed there looking into the
tomb, and weeping: her constant adhering to the Sepulcher had the honor to
see the vision of the Angels, and her weeping, the grace to hear the first
salutation of her glorified savior, who appoints says Esai to them that
mourn, Esaias. 61.3.
and gives them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of
praise for the spirit of heaviness: thus are we taught in the first place by
mourning in Jeremiah, and dying in Josiah; how well mourning becomes an holy
soul, and repent ut emoriantur humani loves, how suddenly death unthrones our
mortal Gods.

Mourning and Death were our first lesson, and the second is like unto it,
mourning for the dead: Which mourning for the dead in the Text takes hold by
this connexture, and of burying the dead in the verse before, and he was buried
among his Fathers Tombs, and they mourned for him: This testimony of the
spirit of God gives sufficient weight and reverence to the Doctrine. Howbeit in
these miserable times, under color of reforming superstitious abuses, decent
and allowed expressions of devotion are so endangered to be extirpated, that
the piety here enjoined must so far enjoy the impiety of the age, as to have a
few words bestowed upon the point.

Death is (...), a fatal debt, which we owe to nature for living after our
Father Adam and mourning a natural debt, which our children owe to us for
dying before them; deny the living to mourn, and deny the dead are dead. The
rude Laconian more reproved the indolency of the Stoic, when he answered him,
(...). My sorrow is the flux of Nature: For the God of Nature is so careful
not to have this piety in mourning for the dead obliterated, that he has
twisted it upon those tender strings of our natural relations and affections,
which we feel to crack within our selves, when our friends heart strings
break, and then our bowels towle their last knell. The first dyer was Abel,
Abel the just, and his Father Adam mourned long for him, till by the birth of
Seth he was comforted (...), as by a mortal resurrection, type of an eternal,
says Nissen; noting that Abel, that is mourning, must continue with Adam till
Seth, Achates must attend upon AEneas, till the resurrection, when says John,
Rev. 21.4.
there shall be no more death nor sorrow. Those Timons that will neither
retain humanity in themselves, nor endure it in others, what think they of
the Son of God? Whom this slinty wisdom of theirs, and abstracted Divinity
could not withold from sorrowing for the dead. No, he was Mediator betwixt the
living and the dead, and therefore as in his person he assumed our infirmities,
so by his practice he justified this sympathy of the living with the dead: He
groaned in the spirit, (...), he troubled himself, he wept, Jo. 11.33.
both in compliance with Martha and Mary his mourning, and for destitution of
Lazarus his dying Friend. Job 39.14.
This was the spirit of our Dove; not like the Ostrich, that is hardened against
her own, as if they were not hers, and leaves them in the dust, quia privavit
eam Deus sapientia, says Job. because God has deprived her of wisdom. These
vain glorious contemners of sorrow for the dead, would they wash their horny
eyes with tears might see, how death while they deny him one thing, sorrow
takes from them two, both their piety and their Friend: Truly these buryers of
Nature alive are of the same veins with the Donatisticall Circumcellions,
though they have not so much of the blood in them, and of the same dye, though
they be not yet so deep dipped.

But they are not farther from humanity that are offended with mourning for the
dead, then they are from Christianity that quarrel with their burialls and
funerals: consult the Scriptures, whereas burying is simply called (...), (the
rich man dyed and (...), Luke 16.22. Genesis 50.2.
was buried) the word which both the Septuagint uses of Jacob in the old
Testament, and Matthew in the new, of our Savior is (...), Mat. 26.12.
which signifies not only burial, but decent funerals, and is completed in
that word which Luke uses of those devout men who lamented greatly for
Stephen, and (...), Act. 8.2.
took care and order for his funeral: Paul in joines that all things should
be done (...), 1 Cor. 14.40.
decently, Ma. 15.43.
and Mark appropriates to Joseph of Arimathea the style of (...), the
honorable Joseph, because of the solemn inhumation, decoravit honesto funere:
Mat. 26, 10.
this care of burialls and charge of funerals is by our Savior called a good
work, by Jacob a deed of mercy, by Luke an Act of devotion, Genesis 47, 29.
Act, 8, 2.
and Paul makes Ioseph's charge concerning his bones an effect of faith: then
not to be needlessly long in showing that burial refers to the hope of the
resurection (and was ordained from God from the beginning, In Act. 8.2.
says Calvin, in honor to the body, to which the resurrection is promised,
and which, even after separation, is candidatum resurrectionis, says
Tertullian) our own Josiah in his reformation of both Kingdoms was so
religiously respective hereof, 2. King 23.18.
that he looked among the tombs carefully, and would not suffer the bones of
the Prophet to be disturbed: yea Jesus the blessed, yesterday, to day, and for
ever the same, justified the costly, and therefore envied, Mat. 26.12.13.
anointing of his body under the name of Sepulchralis, a Funeral charge. I am
sure for the charge of that Funeral Ointment, her Funeral Sermon shall last
till the general hour glass of the world be run, and shall outlive all the
long windy Sarments and Canons are bolted against burials and Funeral Sermons,
vae tibi, miser, said Augustine of Judas, bonus odor occidit te? The odor of a
decent funeral is to a Judas like the smell of the Angels perfume, that drove
the Devil away from Tobias. Tob. 8.3.
Does any startle at this illustration as Apocryphal? Let him look into the
Canonical Scripture, he shall find that at Moses death God himself preached
the Funeral Sermon, Josh. 1.2.
Deuteronomy. 34.6. Jude v. 9.
and he that buried the body, he, says the Text, was at least an Angel, though
the Devil contended against it, and disputed about it. O miserable abusers of
the name of Christians! Indeed uncircumcised Jews, whose souls are too narrow
to comprehend the relation of their own bodies, which unfortunate vessels as
long as they have the salt in them, they can put to any lustful or sensual
use, still reserving in themselves spirituality forsooth (as Irenaeus says the
Valentinians did) but as soon as they are parted from their souls, they count
them no more then dust and corruption, and the slight burialls they afford them
but an humane formality, done in the remembrance of the natural relation they
had to the party alive. Thus they proceed from Stoicisme to Epicurisme; first
Pharisees, then Saduces.

But you, beloved, conceive rightly of the mystery which is your hope: the
separation and dissolution of the body, though it seem to nature like the
irrecoverable falling drop of rain into the Sea, takes not away the natural
relation of the body which is twofold. One of the material body to it private
soul, of which Job said, Job 19.26.
though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not
another, though my reins be consumed within me. And Paul, this corruptible
must put on incorruption, Cor. 15.53.
this despicable, this numericall corruptible, arguing from the exemplary cause
the second Adam, to all the faithful; and again concluding from the final
cause to all men generally, we must all appear before the Tribunal of
Christ, that every one may receive in his body the things he has done. Cor.
5.10.
Whereupon, as Hierome reports, the Church of Aquileia, that when they
pronounce the belief (observe that of ancient the belief was rehearsed in the
Congregations, for visible confession of the faith is the form of the visible
Church) speak that Article emphatically, of this flesh, pointing every one to
his forehead: Of the latter relation of the mystical body, which is the body
and soul of the believer to Christ, know you not, says Paul, 1 Cor. 6.15.
that your bodies are the members of Christ? And again, this is a great
mystery, but I speak of Christ and the Church: Ephesians. 5.31.
For that, two shall be one flesh, verius intelligitur, says Augustine, de
Christo and Ecclesia, has its full truth in Christ and the Church: Now the
reason why God would suffer this vessel of flesh consigned to glory, fall into
corruption, and not translate it presently as he was able, into corruption, may
be thus gathered from his word. It stood with the wisdom and power of the
great Maker (all whose gifts are (...)) not to let that earthen vessel which
himself had framed in the confines of spirituality, and now by the envy of the
Devil was blemished, to continue ever in that deformity; but rather to return
it into the lump, and mould it over again; and this council of the Almighty
we read first foretold in the old Testament, Jer. 18.6.
then fulfilled in the new. God is the Potter, and we the clay, says the same
our Jeremy who prophesied of the buying of the Potters field, Mat. 27.9.
when by the envyer of the Potter this vessel was deformed, Jesus Christ
overcomming the Malignant defacer, purchased of God with the price of his own
blood the moulding again of the Vessel which he had redeemed from the enemy:
Wherefore he gave us a manifest trial in his own body, which though he
suffered to dye to purchase the remaking of all the rest; yet it (as it needed
no new molding for any stain, and to be returned into the lump, so) could not
be held of death, nor see corruption. So the grave is the Potters field,
purchased with Christ's blood, and burying the placing of the shivered vessel
in Godslimbeck, to be new cast, when he shall with fire calcine the whole mass
of the world, and carnis aurum e limi sordibus excusato censu eliquabit, says
Tertullian, alluding to that of Malachy, Mal. 3.17.
And they shall be mine in the day when I make up my jewels.

Therefore, my beloved Brethren, be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
every work of the Lord, and duty of devotion: forasmuch as you know your
labor is not in vain in the Lord, but what is done herein to the Body is not
Bodily, but Spiritual, and full of glorious hope; as if your now departing
soul should whisper thus to the Body, fear not dear sister, our instant
separation, nor thy following dissolution: I know that our Redeemer lives, and
I have entrusted him with thee; so that he is both a Proprietary, and a
D^positary, and by this my last Testament I bequeath thee to him, who with his
own blood purchased of the great Potter thy reparation, and whom the God of
Peace brought again from the dead by the blood of the everlasting Testament: I
know whom I have trusted, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep thee whom
I have committed unto him against that day.

We have learned from the Text that Religious mourning, and decent burial are
to be performed to every Christian, and that sorrow and death continue, after
Noah, a general inundation we find, in that J^siah dyed, and Jeremiah
lamented.

And Jeremiah lamented. Observe how the spirit of God dwells upon, and delights
in enlarging this Testimony: what an honorable Crown of suffrages
encompasseth this, Jeremiah lamented. First imediately before the Text, the
tide of tears brake in upon Jerusalem; then surrounded Juda, then overflowed
all Judah and Jerusalem, universus Juda, and Jerusalem luxerunt: yet still
the flood swells, and with it the expression of the spirit of God moving upon
the sad face of the waters, and Jeremiah lamented: as if all the former tears
had been in Jeremiah's tears drowned, crowned, wept over again. Then
presently after the Text (for, like a Sepia, Jeremiah deals his black dole
round about him) first all the singing men and the singing women, the whole
quire, replicant, resownd Jeremiah's epicediall anthemes: further they made
them an ordinance in Israel, these pious Homilies are enjoined to both
Kingdoms by an Ecclesiastical constitution: can there be any more yet? yea,
Ecce scripta sunt, Behold they are written in the Lamentations, recorded, and
acknowledged by the spirit of God as his own: made part of Gods word; so that
we may say, to this day God laments for the King by Jeremiah.

Jeremiah lamented, one of the Priests, Jer. 1.1.
of the sons of Aron: sacerdos e sacerdotibus, says Hierome, to whose holy
order Gods own word made it a profanation to mourn for the dead: Levit 21.1.
upon the death of the King the divine Law admits a prohibition; upon such an
occasion the head used to sacred unction, is bedowed with tears, and the water
has got above the oil, thus Jeremiah the Priest lamented.

Jeremiah lamented, the Prophet, the egregious Prophet, Jer. 1.5.10.
sanctified in the womb, known before formed, set over the Nations and
Kingdoms to root out and pull down, to build and to plant. This Jeremiah the
Prophet lamented.

Jeremiah had often had just cause to mourn for himself: v. 8.
in the 20 chapter I cried out, I cried, violence and spoil: because the word
of the Lord was made a reproach to me, and a dirision daily. In the 18 chapter
they said come, let us divise devices against Jeremie, let us smite him with
the tongue. v. 18.
In the 37 chapter, he was apprehended and accused of treason, v. 15.
and falling away to the enemies of the State, and thereupon smitten and cast
into the dungeon: yet all this writ him not in the black letter, and great
charactet of a Lamenter; but now some occasion has presented it self, that by
the pen of the spirit of God chronicles him a Lamenter to all posterities. O
Lord what is done that thy Jeremie, (quid ruus AEneas?) thy own Jeremie, Jer.
25.15.
whom thou appointedst, to give the cup of thy fury into the hands of all
Nations, must now himself drink it up, and again fill it with eyes, and with
those lips empty it again? as the Canaanites said of Joseph's mourning for his
Father Israel: Genesis 50.11.
this is a grievous mourning to the Egyptians: this is such a catyclisme of
tears that to find the object of them, and observe the swelling of this Nilus
whose head yet lies higher) we must search higher then the Prophet himself:
and higher then the Prophet himself if we will search, we must mount up to a
paramount; for so are we directed by him that was himself both King and
Prophet: know ye not, quoniam Princeps, 2 Samuel 3.38.
and maximus, that a Prince, and he the greatest, is fallen this day in
Israel? would then Giant sorrow find a fit object? ascend above the Prophet
to the King: would it have a fit mouth to express it self? Return from the
King to the Prophet: So as the oil on both their heads is above all liquors,
sorrow becomes superlative, both for matter and manner, lamentation in her
exaltation, both for subject and object; Jeremiah and Josiah: All mourn but as
Hierome reads it, Ieremias maxim, and justly, maxime^ pro maximo, The King is
dead, and the Prophet must be chief Mourner at the Funeral: It Is his place.
it is his portion, it is his honor; stand back puling vulgars, make roothe for
Ieremiahs sorrow: Pull all those blubberd papers off the Hearse. Here Is one
short endless Epitaphe, Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, the Priest and the
Prophet for the King.

Indeed there is such a sympathy and continuation of nature betwixt King and
Priest, Psalm. 77.20.
that David acknowledged but one hand in Moses and Aaron; of ancient
Pontificium capitis was the Kings, and Pectorale judicii the Priests: From the
beginning the Diadema, and the Insula, the Crown, and the Miter were swadled
together in the primogeniture, which necessity, and (...) is expressed by the
same Hebrew word Cohen, signifying both King and Priest, and though by
necessary dispensation in this world this kindred of Unctions obtain in most
places several stations and officials; yet we both enjoy now spiritually, 1
Pet. 2.9.
and expect eternally hereafter a reunion of both a Royal Priesthood, a
Kingdom of Priests: In the mean time God has neither committed the people to
a King only in a secular care, Exodus 19 6.
nor to the Priest only to be catechized in the principles, and taught the
Mysteries of Divinity; but the King is to provide them means, and keep them
to the use thereof to their supreme felicity, and the Priest to direct them to
discharge those offices and actions, which in other men are merely morally
good, in order to the same eternal capacity, and upon default, durum judicium
erit his qui praesunt, says Solomon, Wisd. 6.6.
sharp judgment shall be to them that are in high places. Wherefore whether
in Gods just chastisments, or men's unjust opposition; the King and the Priest
are like Hypocrates twins, both joy and grieve together: so Jeremie in this
Lamentation, Lament. 2.6.
God has rejected in his indignation the King and the Priest, and Hosee of the
other Kingdom, Hos. 3.4.
Israel shall abide many days without a King and a Prince, and an Ephode: at
once Moses had his Dathan, and Aaron his Chorah: at once Jerusalem her
Samaria, and the Temple it Dan and Bethel: the anointed heads have such a
symbolicall quality, that like Gods own Harpstrings equally tuned, and set to
one another, the one cannot be struck but the other shakes; ye cannot touch his
Anointed and do his Prophets no harm: whereupon their grand and leading
enemy, strains himself and puts to all his force (as Samson did) to pull down
at once the two pillars of the State the King, and the Priest, as knowing that
when there is no King in Israel, then there is no open vision, but the word of
God is precious even in the multitude of Micah's Jonathans. Justly then, if the
King be either naturally dead, as Josiah here, or civilly, and unnaturally, as
David by Absalom, the Prophet is he that must Lament, when the breath of the
nostrils is gone, what is the breath of the mouth but a groan?

Did then Jeremiah's sorrow look through Josiah, as waters run through pipes
to waters, to that cloud which upon this sunset must obscure his Office, and
dignity? indeed our first parents, covering themselves with leaves, taught
their children so to plume their yas thoughts before they let them fly abroad,
that our complaints for the most part look at others when they aim at our
selves: and this simulation of love and sorrow none meet with so often as
Kings, who therefore are often sold, said Diocletian, by their favorites: for
their fortunes can easily exhale and exalt vapors (which sometimes turn to
State terrifying comets) but their virtues cannot make them sixth stars: their
dependence suddenly Creates crocodile friends, that weep not out of love of
the King, but themselves, that look upon the King as their benefactour, not as
the public good; for that requires a largeness, and singlenes of heart: an
heart not like the horse-leech crying ever, give, give; but like a clear
glass, which receiving the King as the light of Gods countenance, diffuseth
the beams all abroad, and improves the warmth to the common good: but the
contrary contraction of heart comes from those three which Paul ranks in the
first file of the murraines of our times, 2 Timothy 3.2.
self-love, coveteousnesse, and pride. The first two, self-love, and
coveteousnesse, adulterating the love, and abusing the favor of the King: make
way to the third, pride, to abollish hate of him, to induce hate, and to
elevate respect, and to breed contempt of him, which is more dangerous then
hate Now this shruken coldness, and selfaiming has so spread through the
poison of the enemy of mankind and order, that the sincere and large-hearted
love of a King, as a King, is so rare (pauci Reges non regna colunt) that it
may be reckond among Pancirollus his vetera deperdita: but the resisting him,
even to open war, one of Goodwin's, nova reperta, yea from licentiousness in
contemning the person, this Luciferian infection is grown up to boldness to
contemn the profession, Pride has budded, Ezech. 7.10.
says Ezechiel, violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness. The Donatists
in Constantine's time objected to the Orthodox Divines, Quid vobis cum Regibus
terrae, quos nunquam Christianitas nisi invides sensit? what have you to do
with the Kings of this world, who have ever been enemies to Christianity?
neither were they so confuted by Augustine, but that the Cadmean progeny is
revived in our age, faecunda vulpa saecula, when a cursed Nadab has dared to
throw this strange fire from the Alter Damascenum upon our Alter, innatum est
omnibus Regibus contra Christum odium, all Kings bear an inbred hate to Christ.

These are the foxes that spoil our Vine, Cant. 2.15. Rev. 9.3.
and our tender Grapes: these are the Locusts that come, says John, out of the
bottomless pit, and have no King, Prove. 30.27.
says yet go forth by bands. And certainly this self-love, coveteousnesse,
and pride (which corrupts the love to the person, and countermines to the
authority of the King, and to do both, divides both) is a symtome of Gods
rejection of a Kingdom, and the people. Break an entire looking-grasse, that
one perfect face, (...), which shined in it while it was whole, appears no
more: but in place of it so many breaches, so many puppit phisnomies strive to
represent the great face, and mock the sight. Marcellinus observes that the
glory of Rome began to retrograde when the great ones began to seek every one
his own ends, and impropriate to himself, hinc leges, and plebiscita,
coactae, Et cum consulibus turbantes jura Tribuni; so a private Tricipitina
wrought a public precipitation. The Prophet Hosee, Hos. 10.3.1.
when he was to prophecy that now Israel should say, I have no King, premised
this disposition to the Anarchie, Israel is an emptying Vine, that fructifies
only to it self, that does (...), luxuriate it self, but bears no fruit to
the dresser: a people whose shoulders, like the Acephali, are above the face:
see what the depravation, and deprivation of the love of a King can do.

On the contrary, the love of men to their King comes from him, by whom Kings
reign over men: this God imprinted first by nature in that manifest impression
which the public benefit of a King makes in all men, quanto discords
liberate samentibus utilius sit u^um esse, an serviant, says Pliny, that it
is better for men to be subject to one, then to be allwaies jangling in untuned
liberty: who is, says Cyprian, pax populi, tutamen patriae, etc. the peace of
the people, the security of the Country, the immunity of the Commonalty, the
joy of men: Wherefore before the Emperors gate in Rome was an Oak planted
betwixt two Bay-trees; signifying that the felicity of the people depends upon
the virtue and prosperity of the King. The Macedonians were sensible of this,
who being put to slight by the Illyrians, sent the next day for their Infant
King into the field in his cradle, and then rallying their forces overthrew the
Illyrians; showing that the day before they wanted not valor, but a King; Even
a dumb man had conned this dictate of Nature so perquire, that seeing the King
assaulted, he brake the string of his tongue, and cried out, (...), If thou
be a man, do not kill a King.

Again God confirmed this mandate of love to a King by the Magna Charta of his
word (God spoke once, Psalm 62.11.
twice I heard it, once for the matter, twice for the manner) There went says
the sacred History, Sam. 10.26.
with the King a band of men, whose hearts God had touched, but the children of
Belial despised him who touched their hearts? ^ Sam 9.20.
And on whom said the Prophet to the King, is all the desire of Israel; is it
not on thee and thy Fathers house? 2 Samuel 21, 17.
The Israelits acknowledged to their King, thou art the light of Israel, thou
art worth ten thousand of us. And when the Spirit of God came upon the General
of the Army of Judah, 2 Samuel 18.3.
he said to the King, thine are we David, and on thy side, thou Son of
Iesse: Peace, peace be to thee, and peace be to thy helpers, for thy God
helps thee. And least yet Lucifers behavior should incarnate on earth (for
some turbulent spirits, says Calvine, count not Christ's Kingdom advanced, nor
themselves at Christian liberty, unless they shake off all humane subjection)
God has coupled together and fastened to his own assertion the vindication of
Kings, and joined together his own and their both love and despite. The Lord
his God is with him, Numb. 23.21.
and the shout of a King clangor victoriae Regis, is among them: who strove
against Moses and Aaron, when they strove against the Lord? And again, their
King shall pass before them, and the Lord on the head of them: But facing
about, he cursed God and the King, was the high attaindure of any person, and
the dire curse of a Nation; they shall fret themselves, and curse their King
and their God. Thus both Nature and Scripture injoyne and knit to the love of
the true God, the true love of the King, even of Julian the temporal Lord,
says Augustine, for the eternal Lords sake. Nature in Esops last charge to
his Son Ennus, (...), chvming to the Scripture Peter's injunction to all
Christians, Fear God, Honor the King.

Now if it be impiety not to mourn for their deaths, for whose lives it is
iniquity not to pray, if Samuel mourned for a rejected King, and David told the
Daughters of Judah, of an evil King, that it was he that clothed them with
scarlet and delights, and put the Ornaments of gold upon their apparel; if the
word of God that injoynes love of the living, justify sorrow for dying Kings
(quod defles illud amasti) How could the man whose eyes were open which heard
the words of God, which saw the vision of the Almighty, who was not ignorant
that a people is in better condition under an evil King, then without all
government, who perceived that in their Kings untimely death, the Lord of
Hosts called to weeping and mourning; who was both Priest and Prophet, how
could he but lament for Josiah?

Yea lament he did, yea lament, and ausus and potuit, though Pharaoh were in
the Land yet warm with the Royal blood: Yea he durst not but lament greatly;
and profess sorrow for his Kings death, least the peoples slighting or soon
forgetting it might be imputed to his example ( tali dedicatore nostri gemitus
gloriamur, but that rather they might say with Tertullian in the like case) his
love rejoices in sorrow, and triumphs in black, as the devotion of those that
preferred the pity in burning Steven, before the fear of their own lives. He
durst mourn for his King yea mourn he did for Josiah, tanquam pro unigenito,
says Zachary, as for an only son, tanquam pro primogenito, as for a first
borne Son the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo was like the
mourning for the great shepherd, Christ, says the same Zachary, Zach. 12.11.
who now in Josiahs death had broken both his staves, Beauty and Bands: For
Josiah, as for Jesus: for Josiah dying among them, as for Jesus departing from
them, pro Christo Domini, ac pro Christo Domino: Wherefore the Spirit of God,
who enrolled in the book of Jasher, and bad teach the children of Judah the
staves of Saul's funeral song called the Bow, has also eternized among his
own dictated manuscripts, Jeremiahs lamentations for Josiah.

In which Lamentations that particular (or rather general) verse, Lament.
4.20. The breath of our nostrills, the Anointed of the Lord, was taken in their
pits, may be called the nave of the wheel, whose several beams integrate
that whole book. Calvin upon this place taunts the reverend Hierom with gross
error, for saying that this book of Lamentations was Ieremiahs funeral song
for Josiah; and adds, that the cited verse is wrested to Josiah: And yet the
same Calvin himself in another place of his Comments says, in 12 Zach. 11.
and justifies it (against his own exposition upon the place) from Scripture,
that Jeremias in hoc lugubri carmine respexit proprie ad Josiam, sicuti
testatur sacra historia, in this mournful song did aim properly at Josiah,
as the holy History of the Bible testifies: Then coting particularly the
foresaid verse, he adds, after Iosiahs death ( in cujus anima vivebat anima
populi, in whose soul the one soul of the people lived) that people was a
mere carcass, and the taking away of Josiah was an evident sign of Gods wrath
against them, and that Gods favor was extinct with that King, quia felicitas
populi, because the happiness of the people depended upon the King, and Regia
dignitas, and the Regal Dignity was a sure pledge of Gods favor to them.

Thus this word, Josiah is dead, was to Judah another Ichabod, where is the
glory? The beauty of Israel is stained by thy waters, O Megiddo: with Josiah,
vale Lex, vale Moses, farewell the Arc, farewell the milk and honey of the
promised Land: upon the setting of this Sun the Manna in the pot melts, the
blossoms on Aarons red blast, and the Almonds become bitter Almonds: From
Iosiahs death the Prophet dates the fall of Jerusalem. By the violation of
Iosiahs head Jerusalem her self is become sacrum caput and her Epitaphe is
prepared in this word, Josiah is dead, that is (as Chrysostom expoundes that
of the Angel to the blessed Virgin, Luke, 1.31. They shall call his name)
(...), the people and the success, (...) shall find and verify that Josiah
is dead. O Jeremy, would thou had been only a mourner here and not a
Prophet; but I find thee no where more a Prophet then in mourning here. The
Prophet knew that in Gods purpose Jerusalem was now (...), devoted to ruin,
that the Temple was already demolished in her pattern in the Mount, that the
Angels had deserted the Sanctuary, and the people were casheered in the High
Counsel in Heaven; yet was it enough for deploring Jerusalem, Temple,
Sanctuary, people and all, to lament one Josiah, even divine providence so
disposing that so precious an head should not be violate till God had rejected
the whole body, Luke, 23.31. si haec in viridi, quid fiet in arida; if this be
done in the green tree, what shall become of the dry one? Needs must the
people be outlawed, when their King is thus rapt from them, in whom they had
truly (...), as Plato said, (...), whose arm was a measure, and whose
religious mind was a Law to them; and what but epidemicall death could be
expected, when the devotion of so zealous an head could kindle no fire in the
paraliticall body: He that delivered Abraham's Cousen, vexed with the filthy
conversation of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.7. knew how to deliver David's own, and
reserve a rebellious Generation to emminent judgment: Wherefore to the soul
of Josiah the Angel called, as once to Lot the husband, Genesis 19 22. Escape thou
and fly away to bright Zoar, the mountain of the vision of God, and leave thy
unbelieving wife (who of (...) is become (...)) to be made to all Nations a
monument of rejecting the Law, and not harkening to her King and husband; what
panegiriques would the heathen (who knew not God, only had natural love of
loyalty and virtue) have made, had they had a King that would have suffered
loss of power, estate, glory, liberty, wife and children; yea whatsoever
stupefied Subjects prefer before a King, rather then consent to the profaning
of Gods service, and the enslaving the persons and estates of his people;
nothing could make their misery more miserable, nor more convict them of their
rebellion, then that their best King was made their last. Indeed this honor
was due to Iosiahs piety, and this solace to his Funerals that none should
succeed him, whom none could second, and that by the sequel of Iosiahs death
all Kingdoms might learn how much the weal of a State depends upon the life,
and how close the ruin of it follows upon the want of a religious King: All
were defective says the son of Syrach, but David, Hezechiah, and Josiah. Our
Posterity will read a Chronicle of England, not Apocryphal, that will make
them as much wonder at us, as admire the story; till this day all were
defective but Elizabeth, James, and Charles, when of three virtuous and
religious Kings, the third is untimely taken away, the people that by having
the two first would not learn to appretiate a King, are by the loss of the
third taught what it is to have none. Daughters of Jerusalem, Jeremy weeps
not for Josiah, but weeps for you and your children; for sin the Mother, and
desolation the brood, lest the days come, lest the lamentable days come, in
which they shall say, blessed are the Inhabitants that have no possessions, and
the parents that are not indebted to children for education.

The Spirit of God testifies here the blood of Josiah, and the tears of
Jeremiah, to the end that the people should trace the tears of the Prophet
through the blood of the King; first to their own impending punishment, and
thence to their past sins: For if you look, O Daughtet of Judah to the acts
of Jeremiah himself, he had already lived long, if to your own aggravation of
wrath, too long; if to your need of such a King to stand in the gap, he dyed
too soon, if to the honor of his own remembrance he shall never dye, but all
Posterities shall copy out from Josiah.

Compositum vis fasque animi, sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and in^octum generoso pectus honesto.
And the remembrance of Josiah shall be like the composition of the perfume
made by the art of the Apothecary, sweet as honey in all mouths, as music at
a banquet of wine, Eccles. 49.1. For that name that entered before his mortal
life, goes not out with it and that which attended not for his birth, will not
wait on his death: But as it was imposed by Prophetical breath, so in
Prophetical tears it is embalmed, and continued to all Posterities, which
shall wonder and be amazed (even the Kings of the earth and all the Inhabitants
of the world, Lament. 4.12.) and not believe that the enemy could have entered
the ports of the Daughter of Zion, having so religious a King, under whose
shadow they lived securely among the Heathen, Lament 4.20. But hearing withal
that this King was so taken away, they shall acknowledge that the God of Israel
dealt therein with that people and Josiah in the same manner as he dealt once
with David and them, 2 Samuel 24 1. He that suffered David to sin in numbering
the people, for the sin of a number whom he would destroy, suffering also
Josiah, so zealous for the Law and the weal of the people, to go against the
word in the mouth, and fall by the sword in the hand of Necho, 2 Chronicles. 35, 22.
That the Bulwark which stood in the way of the destroyer once broken down,
the flood of the wrath of God, qua data porta ruat, might thenceforth break in
upon a rebellious Nation, that so they might be punished by his death, who was
suffered to slip for their punishment, and by whose righteous life they would
not be reformed* As for that one act of Josiahs going to war, against Pharoh,
piety forbids us to think that Josiah would have done it, had he been
forbidden by the mouth of Jeremiah, or any of Gods Prophets. But in the mouth
of Pharaoh what more authority could this interdiction expect from Josiah, then
that commination from the mouth of Zenacherib obtained of Hezekiah; 2 King.
18.25. Indeed we who now have the story written since by the holy Ghost read
that Josiah hearkened not to the word of Necho from the mouth of God, 2 Chronicles.
35.2^. But if this were a ruin (and such an one was Moses his at the waters of
Meribah, so subtle that it must be a quick eye can discern it) we may say
with Gregory, pro qualitatibus subditorum disponuntur acta regentium; the
actions of Kings are (by Gods permission and overruling hand) disposed
according to the desert of their Subjects, justus interim Judex, etc. In the
mean time the just Judge vindicates those sins of the King at their hands,
for whose sake he was suffered to slip: Here the sin of Judah came to it
height, in their greater guiltiness of his lesser sin. Their sin had it
complement in his slip, and their punishment it beginning from his death. O the
just and unsearcheable judgments of the great King: From this judgment we
are taught how sacred a relation is betwixt a King and his people; so strong,
so near is it, that he that atempts to part them, had better half cleave a
great Oak, and forcing the sides to open, stand betwixt them at their sudden
clapping together again: See the piety of this potent relation on the Kings
part in Moses, Exodus 32.32. O forgive the sin of this people, or else blot me
out of the book thou have written: See it in David, what have these sheep
done? Let thy hand be upon me and my fathers house, 2 Samuel 24.17. On the
Subjects part, how strong and indelible this natural love to their King is
(though indeed the wife be more subject to the tempter) we read in those
sensitive creatures, in which Rege incolumi mous omnibus una* amisso rupere
fidem, in natural men, which upon the violent death of their King (even after
a good successor was possessed) have never rested till the doers were
punished, as in Domitia^ some have died for pity to their King, as in Otho and
the best, Optimus, Emperor executed that which Nerva coted to him out of Homer,
(...)* But where the knowledge of God was, this zeal was ever more warm. The
people said to Samuel, who is he that said Saul shall not reign over us? Bring
the men that we may put them to death, 1 Samuel ^ 1.1^. And the same people that
were deluded by Absalom to rebel against David their King, after the fit was
over, were so ^ealous for him, that they were at strife through all the Tribes
of Israel, who should be first in bringing back the King, and expiating their
rash folly with redoubled Loyalty, 2 Samuel 19.42.

The strength of this relation is the reason that: God sometimes punishes a
King for the peoples sake, as here in Josiah, sometimes the people for the
Kings sake, as in Saul, 2 Samuel 21.1. And sometimes lets the King transgress,
that he may punish the people, as in David, 2 Samuel 24.1. This solemn course of
Almighty God in punishing is the strength of the current of Jeremiahs
Lamentations for Josiah; so drawing, (...), the people from that one act of
Josiah to consideration of their past sins, and from the death of Josiah to
their present judgment, and so to God himself.

And this is the decumanus fluctus; now have tears swelled to their
Land-marke, springing from sorrow for common death, and vulgar mourners to the
chief mourner the Prophet, and the hyperocall sorrow for a King; then rising
from the death of a King, to the loss of a Josiah, thence to the consequent of
the loss it diffuseth, then swells again to the departure of the great
shepherd, thence passes to the motive cause of all these, sin. At last it
mounts up to the efficient and disposer, Almighty God: So our Jeremy in this
Lamentation for Josiah, Lament. 3.42.39 We have transgressed and rebelled, and
thou have not pardoned; and again, wherefore does a living man murmr, a man,
for the punishment of his sin? For even those, whom God has forsaken, grieve
at their punishment (they have not cried to me with their heart, when they
howled upon their beds, says Hosee, Hos. 7.14) but this is a sign that the
party under punishment is yet a man, a live man,, when the soul stumbles not,
and stops either murmuring at the punishment, or at the second cause
quarrelling; but leaping over and rising above both second causes and
punishment, ascends to God, arguing thus with our Jeremy in this Lamentation,
Lament. 3.37 Who is he that says it, and it comes to pass, when the Lord
commands it not? Out of the mouth of the most high proceeds not evil and
good: Thus persuing our sins to God, we find in him both judgment and
mercy; judgment by which he has (but from us) to punish mercy, in which he
has (of his seminarium miserecordiarum) to be gracious, and repent him of the
evil, upon the evils repentance. 2 Cor. 1.3. Whereas if we stay in our
afflictions, either out of dullness or impatience at the second causes and
instruments, by higher pressures, we become hardened, and dejected by greater;
moreover in the men that oppress us, we shall find only insultation and
matter of provocation, is my complaint says Job, Job ^1, 4. to man, if it were
so, how should not my spirit be troubled? And David, let me fall into the hands
of the Lord, for great are his mercies: but let me not fall into the hand of
man, 1 Chronicles. 22.13. And our Jeremy in this Lamentation, Lament. 3.21.22. This
I recall to mind, therefore I have hope, it is of the Lords mercy that we are
not consumed, because his compassions fail not.

Upon this apprehension of both judgment and mercy in God Jeremy was
comforted, and expressed it in this Lamentation, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scripture may have hope, the same word Littenoth signifies both
Lamentation and consolation; for comfort takes best from one that laments with
us, and he condoles truly that uses all means to comfort: I called upon thy
name O Lord, and thou did hear my voice, Lament. 3.53.54.55.56.57.58. Thou
drewest near in that day, and sayedst, when I called fear not, O Lord thou
have pleaded the causes of my soul, thou have redeemed my life. Thou have
redeemed, observe Jeremy, that lamented for the loss of Josiah his King, was
comforted in the promise of Jesus his Redeemer.

Thus the soul, having at last wrought up to Gods judgment, finds there
mercy also And in this mercy of God meets again with the great Shepherd that
had deserted it, and from this shepherd obtaines grace, both to repent of it
own ruin (which offended God and blancht the shepherd) and to judge
charitably of others in the same condition: By which grace it proceeds to
patience, both to endure the present affliction and to wait for deliverance,
Heb. 11.35. (whether present deliverance, or a better resurrection, Mat.
12.20.) when and in what manner, the wisdom of God shall (by sending forth
judgment unto victory upon impenitent sinners, and the Son of righteousness
with healing to contrite hearts) work out the redemption, Mal. 4.2.

The end, beloved, of every Text we preach to you is, that you wind your
selves into the truth it holds forth: And the aim of this my present Text is,
that you conform your selves to it celestial semblance. To be self centred
is earthly and sensual; but to move for the public good is heavenly and
spiritual: If therefore there be any fellowship of the spirit, says Paul, 2
Philip. 4. Look not every one on his own things, but on the things of others;
for by embracing this (...), as Ignatius speaks, this true gallantry of
harmonious love (while every one seeks the good and bewailes the evil of
every one) a private evil is so divided, that it is heavy to no man, and a
particular good so communicated, that it redoundes to all. Now, he that will
seek the good of all, must observe the course which he takes who rules all
(here our Text requires conformity to an higher heaven then the material) and
diffuse as he diffuseth, else he may confound when he thinks to communicate.
And we read that God led his people, while he delighted in them, by the hand
of Moses and Aaron: But that in his displeasure, the Sun, the greater light
is turned into blood, and the lesser, the Moon into water, Ps. 77.20. We have
here the spirit of God testifying, in Josiah dying and Jeremiah crying,

Parumne ad vos, said Jeremy in this Lamentation, Lament. 1.12. (as leaving
this bridge for Posterity to pass from Judah to England) Is it nothing to you?
Yea our Syon may asselfe the words and go on with them: Behold and see, si
major est ullus dolor quam dolor meus, that lesser is all other sorrow then my
sorrow: I have had successively (I would, I could say succesfully) three
religious, virtuous, orthodox Princes, Elizabeth, James* and Charles. I had a
glorious face of a Church* a Church, the very eye and excellency of all other
Churches. In Henry the 7. by my King I was freed from the division of Roses,
bitterer then wormwood, sharper then the thistle: In Henry 8. I shaked off by
my King the Ecclesiastical Tyranny of Antichrist: In Edward 6. purity of
Religion sprang up with my King, which though it was watered with the blood of
Martyrs under Mary, that sister without breasts; yet grew it the more glorious
under those my three envies of all Kingdoms, Elizabeth, James, and Charles:
But now facta est in pace amaritudo mea amarissima* may I say with the sick
Hezekiah, behold upon my peace is come great bitterness, Esaias 38.17. My
bitterness was great in the opposition of Heretics, greater in the death of
my children, the Martyrs; but now in my peace my bitterness is become
greatest, by the desolation of my dearest children, the King and the Prophet.
Of whom since God had promised me, Zach. 6.13. The counsel of peace shall be
betwixt them both; I said with my self, as Job did, I shall dye in my nest, my
bow shall be renewed in my hand* Job 29 18.30.26. But when I looked for light,
eruperunt tenebrae, then darkness surprised me; Egyptian darkness, my
waters were turned into blood, and my Land brought forth frogs in my Kings
chambers; palpable darkness; not only such as learned judgments can
discern, but such as all hands but the actours feel and tremble at.

Parumne ad vos (turning again for the people) is it nothing to you? is the
case of Josiah so lamented by Jeremiah nothing to you? Ier. 5.31. Do my people
love to have it so? And what will you do in the end thereof? Shall that of
Josiah be verified in you? Esaias. 26.11. Lord when thy hand is lifed up, they
will not see, but they shall see. They will not see that the guilt proceeds
from them; but they shall see that the judgment runs to them They will not see
that the judgment looks at them* while it is snatching at the Crown, and the
Ephod; but they shall see it and be astonished, when (those being taken away) it
shall seize on them irrecoverably. This (...), by whatsoever sinister passages
and tumults it makes now an eddy at the King and Prophet, will wind about
again, and with a crooked turn empty direct judgment elsewhere. It is your
glory, that as the vindication of God and the King, the sympathy of the King
and the Prophet; so the welfare and ruin of the people and the King make up a
trinity of combinations, a threefold cord that cannot be broken: If you serve
the Lord and not rebel against his word, both you and your King shall be nigh
unto the Lord your God; but if you do wickedly, you shall be consumed both you
and your King, said Samuel to the desirers of change of Government.

Beloved, if that conformity to the celestial semblance of the Text (in being
every one in commune bonus, good not to himself alone, but to the public, in
his private calling) would satisfy the whole end of the Text and our present
case, I could dismiss you with a compendious method of that duty; namely that
(since every man's civil activity cannot extend so largely) his devotion may
come home to every man's door, to his Sons, and his Daughters, to his
Garners, his sheep and oxen, to his peace and tranquillity, yea to his
disposure to the Lord his God; For all this is done by praying for the King.
This were enough in a composed State, but it is not so with me, said Job once,
Job 9.35. The greatest of all the men of the East, and our Syon now, my Crown
is cast to the ground, and the Sun is gone down upon my Prophets. Mic. 3.6.

Therefore when the foundations are cast down, what shall the righteous do?
As he propoundes our case who had experience of it, and he adds the
resolution, the Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lords Throne is in Heaven,
Psalm. 11.3.4. Observe the Symetry of the parts; on earth foundations in the
plural, the King and the Priest; but unity in the pattern in Heaven the Lord,
yet (in proportion to the building on earth) expressed likewise as in the
plural, the Temple and the Throne. If then you would have your days on earth
as the days of Heaven, as Moses exhorted the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 11.21. Do as
he commands in whom Heaven and Earth are revealed and reconciled. Render to
Caesar, and render to God, Math. 22, 21. Here Is both Caesar propounded and
God, and yet but one (...); yea and first it is said to Caesar: For of the good
we can render to God, Caesar is the Minister to us, and what obedience we
render to Caesar is rendered to God as the terminative object. After all the
rendering to Caesar there remains a rendering to God, and in all the rendering to
Caesar there is a further rendering to God. Render therefore to Caesar, and
render to God, sed and ipsum Caesarem reddite Deo, but restore Caesar himself
to God; as he is a foundation restore him to God by acknowledging him to be
from God, as he is a shaken foundation, restore him to God, to the service that
God has ordained him for, and to the means to perform the same: For you owe
to the pattern in Heaven (and through the foundation on earth must render)
justitiam Throno, Templo preces, justice to the Throne, prayers to the Temple;
the Throne in Heaven requires of you justice too, and the Temple in Heaven
prayers for the King on earth. Discite justitiam moniti, and non temnere Divos.
Take heed Subjects, how you deal with Kings, he that must judge betwixt you
is a King, not a Subject. Restore then to God his King, lest you be like those
Giants, the Aloades, that sacrificed to their God Mars, and yet fettred his
hands. Let us conclude with our Jeremy, and his Lamentation, Lament 5. verse.
21.22. Turn us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned; renew our days as
of old, unless thou have utterly rejected us, and cast the nice upon us.

Gloria Deo and Christo.
FINIS.

