Mr. George Keith's ACCOUNT OF A National Church, AND THE CLERGY, etc.

Humbly Presented to the BISHOP of LONDON: WITH SOME QUERIES Concerning the
Sacrament.

LONDON Printed, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster, 1700.

Mr. George Keith's Account.
Of a National Church, etc.
I Cannot in the least Acknowledge -- that ever any National Way Cast up, p. 36.
Church can be a true Church of Christ: -- It were indeed greatly to be wished,
that not only this Nation, but all the Nations of the Earth were the true
Church of Christ. But Men should not make such Preposterous haste, to make
Nations Churches by mere humane Law, and Power; bare Humane Laws, and Edicts,
and Degrees, will never do it; For indeed this has been the Ground and Rise of
all the Persecutions that have been in Christendom; But those that will have a
National Church, they will have all others to bow to them, and join with them,
-- and -- is always a Persecuting Church, (it is her very Nature) so it must
always be exceeding Hypocrital: seeing it begets Thousands to be its
Children and Members,
by the mere Will and Power of Man, which only makes Hypocrites.

Concerning the Teachers.
The Teachers -- have been generally and for the most part, p. 40. 41.
Self-seeking, Worldly-minded, and Covetous Men, who loved Pleasures and Riches
more than God. And this the Magistrate did well know, and saw the best way to
prevent them, was to Bribe them with Augmentations and Benefices -- The
Preachers of the Waldenses were Laymen most of them, and P. 42. Ib.
wrought with their Hands; as the Teachers of the Primitive Church did, and had
no set Stipends or Sallaries, but Preached freely.

And they are very Blind who see not, that upon this Foundation Immed. Rev. p.
136.
of denying immediate Revelation, or teaching of God's Spirit, depends their
Church-Ministry, and the whole Clergy, and their so called Theology, and
Philosophy-Schools, and Colleges; for if once People were Persuaded, and
Convinced that God did teach, and would teach them, who wait on him; Such and
many more Things, and in a more Excellent way than they are taught by them, for
such great Sums of Money, then they would turn their Backs upon them, and their
Colleges would become like, the Abbacies at this Day, (which lodged that
Profane Rabble of Papist-Monks, and Friars, who pretended to as great
Spirituallity as the National Priests do) an Habitation for Owls and Ravenous
Beasts, and then down should all the Proud, Lording, Lofty, Clergy, with their
many Degrees of Doctorships, Lordships, and Masterships
pass; who being Strangers to the True Knowledge, which is Life, Peace, Joy,
and Satisfaction, in full Assurance to the Soul; are vainly puffed up in their
Fleshly Minds, by the Form of Knowledge, in the Letter, as I was my self,
whilst among them, and thought all Men Idiots, and Unlearned, who were not
skilled in that Literal Knowledge. --

And I was Convinced that I was yet Ignorant of the True Knowledge of God, I
came to vallue one Dram of the Living Knowledge; (from God himself) so to
speak, before all the Tallents of that other, which I had Labored so much for,
and had Cost me so much Travel and Money, and I saw it was all but Loss and
Dung; and it lay upon me from the Lord to depart from these Teachers, who could
not point me to the Living Knowledge of God, where I could find it: And I came
and heard Men and Women, who were taught of God, who pointed me to the True
Principle; and though some of them could not Read a Letter, yet I found them
Wiser than all the Teachers I ever formerly had been under; and now the Lord
has brought me into a Measure of the same Living Knowledge from his own Mouth;
and if People were Convinced that there is such a Blessed and Glorious
Dispensation, and so freely attained, they would turn their Backs from the old
Formal Clergy, and wait upon the Lord for Knowledge, and these they would only
hear, who were taught of God themselves. Ibid. 30, 31. Although the Schoolmen
and National Teachers Doctrine, who generally being Men void of all Sense and
Feeling of God, have in the Blindness of their Minds, and in the Wisdom from
below, that is Carnal, Earthly, and Devilish, framed and invented this perverse
Doctrine for their own Gains and Ends.

Concerning the Members of the National Church.
The Members of the National Churches, generally are a p. 192.
Mixed and Confused Rabble of Godless Atheists.

Concerning Baptism with Water.
I say that Baptism with Water is not meant, because not Expressed, nor by any
true and just Consequence, is proved Truths Defense, etc. p. 135.
to be meant in Matthew. 28. 19.

Concerning the Scriptures.
It is only the Words that Christ himself Speaks, that are Spirit and Life, and
they who seek Life in the Letter, seek the Immed. Rev. p. 96.
Living among the Dead; for it declares of the Life, but it is not therein, but
in him.

Concerning Singing and Artificial Music.
As for the Singing on a Book, and with Artificial Music, Presb. and Ind. etc.
p. 53.
and Notes or Tones; It is no part of Gospel Worship, being no where either
Commanded or Practiced in the New Testament.

Concerning Names and Habits,
Is it not the Popish Church, thy Grandmother, who has Rector Correct. p. 122.
taught this Distinction of Laick and Clergy, Secular and Spiritual? For these
she only calls the Clergy and Spiritual, who are either Priests, or Bishops,
or Popes, or in some such Order: But the rest of the People she calls Laics,
as to say the Vulgar and Common People; and Secular, as to say, Worldly and
Temporal; Whereas the Apostle calls the whole Body of the People that
believes, the Clergy, or Inheritance of the Lord -- Have they the less i. e.
of the Spirit, 123.
because they are Tradesmen, and Farmers, and Shepherds, and Fishermen, and
Ploughmen? And have ye (i. e. that call your selves the Clergy) the more,
because you Labor not with your Hands, but live upon the Sweat of other Men's
honest Labors; or because ye have Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, -- or because ye
are called Masters, and walk in Long Robes, and have the Chief Places in
Assemblies?

Again, are not these, called Teachers of the Man-made Ministry, Ambitious? Do
they not affect great Titles? And The Rector Corr. p. 125.
if it be Sin to affect them, is it not, because they are Vain and Sinful? Have
not some of the Clergy (so called) greater Titles now, then the Rabbis had of
Old? As your Grace, your Holiness, Most Reverend Father in God? etc.

Concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper (so called G. K. Querieth,
1. What Scripture has he and his Brethren to call that Eating of Bread, and
Drinking of Wine, once or twice in a Truth's Defense, etc. p. 148, 149 150.
Year, in the Public Assembly, the Sacrament?

2. What Scripture have they to Instruct them how often they should use it, as
once, twice, or four times every Year? And if they have none, was it not then
left to the People, according to the Query, at least as to the time?

3. What Scripture have they for Consecrating it? or when did Christ say,
Before ye Eat it, Consecrate it?

4. When did Christ give only the Power to a Priest, or Presbyter, or ordained
Minister, to Consecrate it, so as without the said Consecration by some Priest,
or ordained Minister, it is no Sacrament? And seeing every Christian may Eat it
as well as the Minister, why may he not also Consecrate it, as well as he,
seeing every true Christian is a Priest?

5. Where did Christ appoint that these Words Take, eat, this is my Body,
should be the words of Consecration? And have ye not received all this from the
Papists, and not from Christ?

6. Seeing ye Commonly say, that this Sacrament of the Supper is come in the
room of the Passover, and under the Law every Family had Power, without a
Priest, to Celebrate the Passoever; why has not also every Family under the
Gospel, as much Power without any ordained Priest or Minister to Celebrate that
called the Supper?

7. Seeing every true Christian feeds daily by Faith upon the Body of Christ,
according to the Protestant Doctrine, and ought daily to remember the Death of
Christ in all their Eating and Drinking, which is also sanctified unto them by
the Word of God and Prayer, what peculiar Virtue or Efficacy has your
Sacramental Eating, more than ordinary Eating, when done with Godly Fear,
Prayer, and Thanksgiving, and Rememoring the Lord's Death?

8. Seeing it is clear from Luke 22. 17, 18, 19, 20. that Christ did take the
Cup twice, once before he gave them the Bread, and once after, bidding them do
the same; Why take ye the Cup but once? Was this only a bare Circumstance?

9. Is not the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 15. 16, 17. to be understood of quite
another Bread and Cup than that which is Visible and Outward, when he says, I
speak as unto Wise Men, judge ye what I say: (Did he not say this, because he
was to speak of the Bread and Cup in the Mystery, as it was Altogether a
Spiritual and Invisible thing, to wit, The real Body and Blood of Christ
spiritually received, which none but the spiritually Wise could understand?)
The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of
Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ? For we being many are one Bread; for we are all Partakers of that one
Bread. Is it not clear from all this, that Paul speaks not of any Visible or
Corruptible Bread, but of Christ himself, as he is Spiritually and Invisibly
received by Faith, whom he calls the same Spiritual Meat and Drink, which the
Fathers received of old? See the same Chapter, Verse. 3. 4.

10. Do any receive the Supper of the Lord, or say with the Lord, but such as
Open to him, and hear his Voice, according to Rev. 3. 20? And is not this
Supper (or supping with the Lord) Altogether Inward, Spiritual, and Invisible?

Gal. 2. 18. If I Build again the things which I Destroyed, I make my self a
Transgressor.
FINIS.

