THE Kitchin-Physician: OR, A GUIDE FOR GOOD-HOUSEWIVES IN Maintaining their
Families in health.

Wherein are described The Natures, Causes, and Symptoms of all Diseases inward
and outward, incident to the Bodies of Men, Women, and Children.

Prescribing natural, useful, and proper Medicines both in Physic and
Surgery, as well for the prevention as speedy Cure of the said Distempers.

Adorned with Sculptures, showing the proper place of every Distemper in the
Body.

Published for the common good of City and Country, By T. K. Doctor in Physic.

London: Printed for Samuel Lee, Stationer, over against the Post Office in
Lumbard-street. 1680.

To the READER.
I Have here set before your view, a prospect of the rich Garden of Nature,
adorned with nothing but its own simple qualities; which at first was not
obliged to any of the Learned to Translate it into Galenical Compositions, or
any Artificial Experiments, but was made use on by our Forefathers, for their
relief in Sickness and Malady, long before Physic was brought into a
Profession, and the Professors of it courted by the Ignorant, when they
received (in ordinary and common Distempers) little more than a bare Complement
from them, save only referring them to their Mother Nature, the true and
original Healer of such Diseases. And although this small Attempt may receive
Opposition from some meanspirited Physicians, whose Interest may be invaded by
the Publication of it, and who are Impostors of Physic, with pretended
Universal Medicines: Yet my design is, (though bred up a Physician) to leave
this as a Legacy to my Country, before my gray hairs go down to the Grave,
purely to make them their own Physicians in cases not dubious, nor requiring
the utmost improvement of Nature, into a well-digested and consulted conclusion
of Art. And by the way, I would not have the Reader think, that I have the
least ill Opinion of the Elaborate Inventions, and ingenious Experiments of the
Learned, in bringing Physic to the utmost perfection; for I have a great
adoration for all such worthy Improvers of Nature: but I am not of Opinion,
that their assistance is necessary in common and ordinary distempers, which
many times the diligent Nurse, or Housewife, by her plain and common Experience
in Herbs and Plants, cures, when they by their sublime and too high strained
applications, leave the Patient in a desperate condition. And therefore I hope
these my poor endeavors will be kindly entertained by such of my Countrymen
as will not entertain prejudice thereto beforehand; and do not fear that any
Learned Physician will think ill of this Publication, (especially if what it
contains be true and certain, as I hope it is) his Business and Employment
being of a far higher nature, De ordine Naturae, and seeming rather by his
great attempt, as it were, to dispute with our great Mother her self, in
matters where she is sometimes at a Ne plus ultra. This I thought good to
premise to the sober Reader, and heartily wish that it may answer my honest
design therein. Farewell.

T. K.

A TABLE of the several Distempers incident to the Bodies of Men and Women,
answering the before-going Cut; to which the several Paragraphs in the ensuing
Book do likewise particularly refer, in Arithmetical order.
1. HOw to clear the Face. 2. How to take away Sunburning from the face. 3. Of
Freckles, Spots, or 4. Wrinkles in the Face. 5. How to soften the roughness of
the Skin, and take away the Chops of the Lips and Hands. 6. How to make your
hands that are yellow and wrinkled, smooth. 7. How to take away Wa^^^ 8. To
lessen the appearance of a vein between the Eyes. 9. How to cure a Red Face.
10. Against Burning and Blistering. 11. How to cure the Pox, and Vlcerations
proceeding from thence. 12. To make Pock-holes smooth. 13. To take away Scabs
and Scurf which eat into the skin. 14. Against White Scabs or Sores. 15. How to
remedy the shedding or falling of the Hair. 16. How to make white or gray hairs
black. 17. How to kill Nits and 18. Lice. 19. How to cure the stinging of
Venomous Beasts. 20. A perfect cure for the Headache, occasioned by Heat, Cold,
or Drunkenness. 21. A Cure for the Ulcers of the Skull. 22. How to cure
Madness. 23. To cure the Lethargy. 24. To proc^^^ Sleep. 25. To cure the
giddiness of the Head. 26. How to cure the Falling Sickness, and to be
preserved from it. 27. How to cure the dead Palsy. 28. How to cure the
Apoplexy. 29. How to cure the shaking Palsy. 30. How to strengthen the Eyes.
31. To cure (...) that are subject to water. 32. To cure weeping Eyes, and
Humors that fall down into them. 33. To take away the Redness of the Eyes. 34.
To cure the Inflammation of the Eyes. 35. To take red spots out of the Eyes.
36. To cleanse the Eyes from all filthy matter. 37. To take spots and webs out
of the Eye. 38. To take away the pain of the Eyes. 39. To cure the pain of the
Ears, proceeding from hot causes. 40. A Remedy for Thickness of Hearing. 41.
Against Deafness. 42. Against Worms in the Ears. 43. Against Noise in the Ears.
44. How to cure little Boils or Ulcers behind the Ears. 45. Against the
Swelling or King's Evil in the Neck. 46. Against the stopping of the Nose. 47.
How Humors that run out of the Nose may be stopped. 48. A remedy against
Sneezing. 49. A Medicine to recover the Smelling, when it is lost or corrupted.
50. To staunch the excessive Bleeding of the Nose. 51. To cure the Boils and
Ulcers of the Nose. 52. A Remedy against the stinking of the Nose. 53. A Remedy
against the stinking of the Mouth. 54. How to cure an Vlcerous Mouth. 55. To
cure excessive slabbering. 56. How to cleanse the Teeth, and keep them sound.
57. To fasten loose Teeth. 58. Of Hollow Teeth. 59. A Remedy against the
Toothache. 60. Of sharp Teeth. 61. A cure for a stinking Breath. 62. A cure for
the Squinancy. 63. Against Hoarsness. 64. Against Pursiness, or shortness of
breath. 65. A Remedy for a Cough. 67. A cure for the Plurisie. 68. A cure for a
Consumption. 69. A cure for the Passion of the Heart. 70. A Remedy against
Faintness. 71. A cure for a constant Ague. 72. For a quotidian Ague. 73. For a
Tertian Fever. 74. For a quartan Ague. 75. For Shaking, and in an Ague. 76.
Thirst, in an Ague. 77. A cure for the Plague, and swelling So^^ thereof. 78. A
Remedy for hanging Breasts. 79. A cure for an Vlcerated Breast. 80. How to
breed and increase Milk. 81. To dry up Milk. 82. A Remedy to prevent any evil
which may come by the Biting of Adders, or other venomous Creatures. 83. A
Remedy against the Hiccough. 84. A cure for Belching. 85. To strengthen the
stomach. 86. A cure for a Nauseating stomach. 87. An help against Vomiting in
an Ague. 88. A cure for an aching stomach. 89. A cure for the Worms. 90. A cure
for the griping of the Guts. 91. A Remedy against all Obstructions. 92. A cure
for the Flux. 93. A Remedy for the bleeding of the Paps. 94. A cure for the
pain of the Paps. 95. A cure for an hot Liver. 96. How to cure the Obstructions
of the Liver. 97. A Remedy for the Jaundice. 98. A cure for the Black Jaundice.
99. A cure for the Dropsy. 100. A cure for the Obstruction of the Spleen. 101.
A Remedy for the pain of the Spleen. 102. A cure for the Colic, occasioned by
Gravel. 103. A Remedy for the Stone in the Reins. 104. For the Stone in the
Bladder. 105. A Remedy for hot Pissing. 106. A cure for those who cannot hold
their Urine. 107. A Remedy against drop-pissing. 108. A Remedy against painful
Pissing. 109. A cure for the Inflammation of the Privy-Members. 110. A cure for
an Inflamed Womb or Matrix. 111. For the Rising of the Mother. 112. For the
sinking downward of the Mother. 113. A Remedy for the White Flux. 114. For an
excessive Menstrual Flux. 115. For the stopping of the Monthly Flux. 116. How
to take away Barrenness. 117. A Remedy against Miscarrying. 118. To procure
Ease in hard Labor. 119. To ease pangs or Throws after Childbearing. 120. A
Remedy against the perturbation of the Mother. 121. For a Rupture. 122. A cure
for the Gout. 123. For a Red swelling. 124. For a windy Swelling. 125. A Remedy
against Apostems, Tumors, or hard swellings. 126. Against Vlcerous Swellings.
127. A cure for the Itch. 128. For Boils and Ulcers. 129. Ulcers of the Nails.
130. Bad Ulcers. 131. Cancker. 132. Knobs. 133. For a Fall. 134. Bruises. 135.
Fresh Wounds. 136. All kind of Wounds. 137. Shot-Wounds. 138. Stamped Sinews.
139. Stung Sinews. 140. Sinews cut through. 141. Inward Wounds. 142. Biting of
a Mad Dog. 143. Biting of a Serpent. 144. Kibes on the Heels. 145. Stinking
Feet.
THE Kitchin-Physician: OR, A guide for good House-wifes, In maintaining The
Health of their Families.
AS it is necessary for the preservation of Health, to keep our Houses neat and
cleanly; so we should be careful to keep our Bodies free from putrefying
Diseases. And because the Faces of Men (especially of Women) are (more than any
other part of the Body) exposed to view; I will write of Medicines which adorn
that part, by adding Comeliness and Beauty thereunto. Beauty is a blessing
which every one ought to preserve, and not to neglect.

1. Of Medicines and other Remedies which are appropriated to the Skin, Hair,
and Teeth.
For the Cleansing of the Bodies of Men and Women, Bathings are very useful,
and may be thus made.

Take of Sage-leaves, Flowers of Lavender, and Roses, of each one handful, with
a little Salt; let all these boil in Fountain or River-water to a Bath.

Or, take Rose Water, Wine-Vineger, and Salt, of each a little; let them boil
together in common water, (as much as in your discretion you shall think
sufficient) until there remain two or three Pails: afterward put a Wheaten-Roll
or Loaf therein; then rub the whole Body with the same: and after you have so
done, go into a lukewarm Bath, and remain there as long as you can.

Or, take water of Orange-flowers, Red and White Roses, of each one ounce, six
Lemon-Pills, Cloves a quarter of an ounce, Flower de Luce of Florence the
eighth part of an ounce; let these Ingredients soak five or six hours in the
aforesaid waters; then strain them through a clean cloth, and add thereunto
five Pints of sweet Almond-Milk; these being mingled together, are for the
washing of your Body, (having first bathed in a Bath of lukewarm water.)

The virtues of these Baths are these: They comfort the Sinews, they take away
all foulness of the skin, they exhilerate and refresh the Spirits. These and
the like are useful for Men and Women: but the following Ingredients are most
proper for Women, forasmuch as their chiefest virtue is to make the Face fair,
to procure and preserve Beauty; of these Imbellishments men have no need. And
they may be performed without Painting-stuff, which impaireth Beauty. These
waters are made of such things, that (for the most part) are gotten in Gardens.
Painting is pernicious; for it is the cause of wrinkles; of a stinking breath,
of black and loose teeth, of redness of Eyes, weakness of sight, deafness, and
other infirmities, which happen to those who paint their faces, and take more
care to appear (by that impudent means) beautiful, than to preserve the Health
of their whole bodies. These are the evil effects of the use of Sublimated
White-lead, and such like things, which are as dangerous as: the Plague. And
now I will show*

How to make the face Beautiful, White, Smooth, and Red.
By the use of these following Beautywaters, Ladies may preserve their
Complexions, with safety to their Health.

An excellent Water.
Take of white and smooth shaled Beans, one pound, let them soak nine or ten
days in Whitewine; then (having pounded them sufficiently in a Stone-Morter)
put them again into the said Wine, adding thereto, of Goats Milk two quarts, of
Flour of Rice half a pound, the whites of twelve Eggs: all this you must set
over a little fire in a Colb, or Stilling-glass. With this stilled water the
Face is to be washed at night when you go to Bed.

Another Water.
Take a wheaten Loaf of two pounds, the whites of eight or ten Eggs, strong
Vinegar according to discretion; mix these all together, and being put into
water, still them through a glass.

Another Water.
Take twenty four Eggs, and having washed them clean, break them, and beat
them, shells, yolks, and white, well together, adding thereto, White Wind two
pints, Goats Milk one pint, Flour of Beans one handful: put these into hot
water, then still them through a Colb or Stilling-glass. Let this water thus
stilled, stand fifteen days in the Sun, then it will be fit for your purpose.
When you use it, warm a little of it, and dissolve therein Burra, Sugar Candy
powdered, of each a like quantity: with this you must wash your Face in the
Morning and at Night.

Another Water.
Take the Crum of White-bread, Flowers of Lillies, Roses, of each one pound;
Elder-berries, Flour of Beans, of each half a pound; strong Wine-Vinegar, Goats
Milk two pints, the whites of four Eggs; distill them together through a Glass,
as above, in hot water.

Another Water.
Take five Lemmons and cut them in pieces, three Apples, Sugar, Alum, of each
an ounce; distill them through a Glass, as before.

Another Water.
Take the Roots of Pignuts being well washed, cut them into small slices, and
put them into a glased pot, (containing five English pints) half full, twelve
Egg-shells well washed and bruised, one pint and somewhat more of White Wind,
Rain and River-water, until the pot be full; let all these boil together, until
a third part be boiled away, adding thereto the crum of a small white Loaf,
Spanish Green of the bigness of a Bean. Bind all these in a little bag; bray or
bruise the said Decoction on a Tile, while it is lukewarm, at last put into it
one ounce of Sugar. Wet a fine cloth therein, and wash your face at Night and
in the Morning, without wiping it.

Another Water.
Bore the Stem (or Trunk) of a Birch-Tree with an Iron Bore, and much water
will run out of it, which is useful on this occasion, and also to take away
Sun-burning. There are many other Waters that clear the Face, which I pass by
for brevity sake; I shall only add hereto

The Dove or Pigeon-water, which is made thus.
Take two white Pigeons, pluck them, draw out their guts, throw them into a
Stilling-glass, upon a rank of leaves of Ash-herb, (called Fraxinella, or wild
Ditany,) Lambs Tongue two handfuls: lay them upon the floor, then add thereto
fresh Butter four ounces, Oil of sweet Almonds three ounces, Buras, Champher,
Burnt Alum, and Sugar Candy powdered, the crum of a white Loaf, the whites of
twenty five Eggs, two handfuls of the kernels of Grapes, Goats Milk four pints.
Let these soak ten or twelve hours in the stilling-glass, well stopped. Let it
distill slowly in a water-Bath (or balneo Mariae) put the divided Water into
Flasks, in a cool Cellar, then strain it through a clean and fine Cloth. Wash
your face with this water in the morning and at night with a little cloth.

Besides these waters, there are also diverse Ointments of great use: and Oils
and Pomades.

Ointment.
Boil two Eggs hard, cut them in the midst, take out the yolk, fill the hollow
with the powder of burnt Wine-stone; join the half parts together, and tie them
with a thread; put them into a dish, and set them in a moist Cellar. The
Wine-stone will melt, whereby the moistness running through the white of the
Eggs, will alter (together with that which comes thereby) to an Oil, such as
you desire.

Oil of the Acorns of an Oak, being pressed out, as that of Almonds, and
mingled with that of the Egg-shels, is useful to make the face beautiful. Also

Oil of Myrrha, made like the Oil of Wine-stone, with the white of Eggs. Also
There is an Ointment made of the Marrow of the Bones of a Weather, and is thus
to be extracted.

Take of the bones of a Weather, (when it is full Moon) as much as you please,
let them boil long in water, then break them in pieces. Let them boil again in
the water three or four hours, then take them from the fire, and let them be
cold; then gather the fat which will swim upon the the water, and Anoint your
Face therewith at night when you go to bed, and the next morning. Wash it off
with the water of Bean-Blossomes, or of Flower-de-luce.

Another Ointment is made of Pigeons dung, and campher'd Rose Water.

Another Ointment or Pomade.
Take Goats grease half a pound, fresh unmelted Hogs grease four ounces, cut
into small pieces; put it into a glazed earthen pot, with a Pippin cut in
pieces, Juice of Orange, Rose Water a glass-full, White Wind half a glass-full;
put the pot upon the fire, and let it boil a little. When the Grease is melted,
and incorporated with the Apple, strain it through a Sive, or Serse, into an
earthen pot glased, and half full of fresh water. When it is cold, take it out,
and wash it five or six times in Rose Water, every time renewing the water. To
a Pomade.

Another excellent Pomade.
Take Goats grease two ounces, Pippins two, Flower-de-luce Roots of Florence
one ounce, a whole Lemmon; chop the grease, and cut the Apples and Roots in
pieces. Add thereto, of the Marrow of a Weathers feet two ounces. Let it boil
together in a sufficient quantity of Rose Water, in a glased pot, upon a gentle
fire, until the Lemmon be consumed, keeping the pot well covered. Then take it
from the fire, and strain that which is in the pot through a clean cloth; you
must pound that which is gone through, and mix that which is pressed out fresh,
without fire, with the Oil of Sweet Almonds. When it is mingled together, then
wash it with water of Bean-flowers, white Flower-deluce, Roses, of each the
like quantity. This being well mixed, and made, you may keep in a glass well
covered. With this excellent Pomade you may Anoint your Face at night, and wash
it off the next day in the morning with Rainwater.

2. How to take away Sun-burning.
The Face may be preserved from the burning of the Sun, and from Cold, by these
following Salves and Medicines.

Take Goats grease half a pound, being first washed in clear water; pound it in
a little Mortar, then boil it in Rose Water, and after strain it through a fine
cloth; with Oil of Sweet Almonds one ounce, Sugar Candy a quarter of an ounce,
new white Wax as much as is enough. Boil all these in a glazed pot, over a soft
fire, to the convenient thickness of a Salve, stirring it about continually,
that it may become white, and be kept from burning. Being boiled, it must be
kept in a Glass (close stopped) for the use of a Salve.

For the same use serves also a Salve made with Mastick, and with the Marrow
of an Heart, or Ox. An Ointment of Mastick with harsh Oil, the water of the
white of Eggs.

A Pomade made with white wax, Campher, and Oil of Sweet Almonds, pressed out
with fire; this Pomade takes away Sun-burning.

3. How to take away Freckles and Spots.
Take the Meal of Lupins, the Gall of a Goat, the Juice of Lemons, and white
Alum; mingle these to a Salve: Anoint therewith the Spots and Freckles.

Or, mingle together the Oil of Bitter Almonds, Honey, Roots of Flower-de-luce
and Wax; then wet them with water of Bean-flowers, Orange, and Myrtle.

Another Salve to take away Freckles, Rubies and Saphires which appear in the
Face.
Take water in which Rice has been boiled, distilled water of Turpentine, with
Oil of Wine-stone, one ounce of Mastick, half a Loaf (that is, a quarter of an
ounce) of Campher: mix these with the whites of Eggs.

Another.
Take distilled water of Radish-seed, and of great Spear-Root, (having been
soaked before four days in the Sun in water,) stilled Oil of Egg-shels, Oil
which is pressed out of the Seed of Cotton-herb, the juice of the Root, and
little Berries of Briony or wild Vine, the juice of Ladies-mark, with
fig-bean-meal, (which is a kind of Pulse, of an harsh and bitter taste,) the
fresh Flowers of Jasmin, (being rubbed in pieces upon the place of the
distemper,) Pigeons dung, being soaked in strong Wine-vinegar, Meal of
Fitches, and seed of the Herb Rocket, mingled with honey, oil and water of
Roses, with fresh Butter, and Pignut-Roots, made to a Salve, Lentiles boiled
soft, and mixed with the juice of Pomegranate.

4. How to take wrinkles out of the Face and Hands, and to make them white.
Take the Lees of Linseed oil, put it in Rainwater to soak.

Or, take the juice of Lemons, and some corns of Salt, mixed together; wash the
wrinkles of the face and hands therewith.

5. How to take away the Chops of the Lips and Hands.
Take the white of an Egg, and beat it with the powder of Mastick.

Or, take the Oil of the yolks of Eggs, or Oil of Wax, and anoint therewith the
Clefts or Chaps.

6. How to make the Hands that are Yellow and Wrinkled, smooth and white.
Take two pounds of Mellons, with their Skins or Rines, and a good quantity of
Eggs without their shells: distill all this together, and keep the water, not
only to wash your Hands, but your Face.

Another smoothing Water.
Take Goats Milk six pounds, white or red Roses, small yellow Prunes, of each
three pounds; crumbs of a white loaf, two pounds; Roots of Flower-de-luce, two
ounces: distill these in hot water, through a glass.

Or, Boil Roots of Nettles in Vinegar and White Wind; wash your Hands with this
Decoction at night when you go to bed, and the next morning wash them clean
with fresh water and soap.

Or, take fresh Butter, Oil of Sweet Almonds, Lambs Suet; let these soak ten or
twelve hours together, then melt them over a little fire, in a glazed earthen
pot, adding thereunto white wax, with a little Musk or Civet: make this into a
Salve.

Or sometimes you may wash your hands with sweet-sented water and soap, or with
stilled water of Bread, or with water and Rolls of bread. To these waters you
may add sweet-scented water, as water of Orange-flowers, Damask-water, or a
little Oil of Cloves, Cinnamon, or the like.

7. How to take away Warts off the Face or Hands.
The juice of Lemmons kills Warts, but better the water of the same juice,
distilled through a glass. Or the juice which is pressed out of the Flowers and
Leaves of white Wool-blade.

Also the juice of the Leaves of great Spear-herb. Also wart-Cicory, either
eaten in Sallets, or laid upon the face or hands, or other parts, cures the
same to admiration.

Also the Milky juice of Woolfs Milk, and that of the wild fig tree, Oil of Red
Copper, or Spanish Green, Brimstone, the grease which is gotten from the old
Cask of an Oyl-Vessel, made hot before a great fire, the juice that is pounded
out of the sprouts of Purslane, (without the leaves) in a little Mortar, adding
thereunto a little Salt; this will cause the Warts to vanish away in four or
five days, when they are anointed therewith.

Or, lay on the Warts the Powder of Savil, or white-Daffadil (Hermodactyl) with
Honey, Vinegar, and Sea-Onion, mixed with the juice of Marigolds: sheeps-dung
soaked in Vinegar, cures hanging-Warts, being laid thereupon.

8. To take away Blood-Veins in the Face.
Sometimes a Vein appears unhandsomely between the Eyes, for which it is good
to lay on the forehead this Plaster.

Take Mastick one ounce, Sandal-wood half an ounce, Margaret-flowers three
quarters of an ounce; mix these together, and spread them upon Leather, with
the fine filing dust of Steel. Upon the Vein you shall only lay Mastick and
Sandal-wood, renewing the Plaster once a day; rub also therewith the upper
part of the Vein, for the better reception of the Remedy.

9. How to cure a Red Face.
Wash it with water in which Chaff or straw of Barley or Oats has been boiled.

Or, Peach-kirnels four ounces, peeled Gourd-seed two ounces; pound and press
them so hard, that Oil may come out of them to the substance of an Ointment,
anoint therewith the Pimples and red places.

10. How to heal Burning and Blistering.
Against all burning and blistering occasioned by fire, make a Decoction of
Radishes, which lie on unquenched Lime.

Or, take an Onion roasted in the Ashes: or, Oil of Nuts with water: or, the
yolks of Eggs beaten with Oil: or, Hens-dung mixed with Oil of Roses.

Or, the Moss of an Haw-thorn-tree, the thinnest you can get; dry it in the Sun
or Oven, make a powder thereof, preparing it with the Milk of a woman that
gives suck to a Male-child; make a Salve thereof, and anoint therewith the
burnt place.

Or, take salt water or pickle, wet a linen cloth therein, and put it upon the
burnt place.

Or, take common Soap, Honey, and Butter, or juice of Onyons, or Oil of Eggs.

Or, let Loam, red Copper, or Spanish-green, or Pellitory of the Wall, or
Campher, be steeped in wine and water; pour it often out of one pot into
another, then wet a cloth in this water, (that first is made lukewarm) and lay
it upon the burnt place.

Or, take the white of two Eggs, beat them with Oil of Nuts and Rose Water,
adding thereto water wherein unquenched Lime has been extinguished; stir it
well about, and let the water stand until you have occasion for it. And to the
end that no scar may remain after the burning is healed, you must wash the
burnt place often with Lambs-tongue-water, in which a little Alum is dissolved.

Or, you may use an Ointment of hogs-bread Roots* pounded with House-leek: but
Brandy is better to wash the Scars of the burnt place, whether they be in the
face or other parts of the body.

11. How to cure the POX, and Vlcerations thereof.
Take water ten pints, quench therein rough iron, until the half be found in
the water. Then lay therein to soak unquenched Lime one pound; strain it, and
melt in that which is gone through or strained Campher, Spanish-green,
Red-copper, of each twenty Grains. This water is good to cleanse and dry the
Ulcers.

Or, boil clear water in a new earthen pot, and when it begins to boil, put
therein unquenched Lime; then put it out into another new pot; then let it
stand: scum it till it be clear; the Lime will remain in the bottom like a pap;
then pour out the clear water, without stirring the Lime, and put it into a
clean glass well stopped for use. In this water dip a little cloth, (the water
being made lukewarm) and lay it upon the Ulcers instead of a Plaster,
renewing it often.

12. To take away Pockholes, and make the skin smooth.
Take of the Oil of St. Johns-herb one ounce, Venetian Turpentine half an
ounce; melt it in a glazed pot, and as soon as it begins to boil, take it from
the fire, and work it into a Salve; anoint therewith the scars and spots,
continuing to do so till the holes be stopped.

Or, take the stilled water of the white of Eggs, boiled hard with shells; of
Snails, of Calves, of Weathers, of Goats-feet, of Bean-flour, Dragonwort, (i.
e. Serpentaria.) These waters you shall use single, or mingled together, and
with that bathe the face when you go to bed, having prepared the same with the
steam or smoke of warm water: or, decoction of the chaff of Oats, Oil of Dates,
Flower-de-luce, Myrrha, (Pistacies.)

Or, take three Ounces of the Oil of Flower-de-luce, Rosen, Capons-grease, of
each one ounce; wash them well in Rose Water: add thereunto four whites of Eggs
half boiled in their shells, Oil of Sweet and Bitter Almonds planched, of each
one ounce; pound them in a Marble Mortar, mingling therewith a quarter of an
ounce of the powder of Melon-seed; work it to a Salve.

Another.
Take the Powder of Silver-scum, burnt Bones of a Calf, dry Reed-Roots, bitter
Almonds, Pompion or Melon-seed, Radish-seed, Meal of Rice, Beans, Fig-beans, (a
kind of Pulse of an harsh and bitter taste*) Turkish-beans, white-Cicory, of
each as much as you shall think fit or convenient: dissolve these in
Rose Water, and mix them to a Salve.

There is another Salve made with Oil of Almonds and Brimstone, with Asses
grease, juice of Reed-Roots and Honey; Roots of a white-Vine boiled in the Oil
of Olives, the powder of a Crab-fish burnt, the Ashes of Wine-stone, and of
Myrrha; spread this Salve upon the face, being made wet with the steam or smoke
of water. It is very useful to heal the scars and black-spots of the pox.

13. To take away Scabs and Scurff, which eat into the skin.
Take the juice of Purslain, Lambs-tongue, Nightshade, and Lemons; if this be
not sufficient, then add thereto red Wine-stone: apply this mixture to the
place eaten in by the Scabs.

Or, lay the Root of the Herb Patient a soaking for one day, in strong
wine-vinegar; cut it in slices, and with one of the slices chafe the fore place
three or four times a day.

Or, take of Aloes half a quarter of an ounce, Sublimate ten grains, water of
Lambs-tongue-leaves, Nightshade, (as much as you shall judge sufficient) of
each a like quantity; boil all these together, to the consumption of the half,
and work them to an Ointment.

Or, take Gum of the black-cherry-tree, a little Brimstone, and twice as much
Salt; put these to soak in strong wine-Vineger, rub therewith the sore place,
or chafe it in with fasting spittle, or with the gum which runs out of the
Vine; but first mix them with Saltpeter, and pounded Tobacco, (viz. the juice
and herb pounded together.)

14. To take away white Scabs and Sores.
Wash the Patients head with Oxepipe, until it bleed, and then spread thereupon
the Powder of the dung of a white hen, dried in an Oven.

Or, Soot of the Chimney bruised, and mixed with strong Vinegar.

15. How to prevent the falling of Hair, and to make Hair grow.
Rub the bare place with Red-cloth until it bleed; then rub it with a Salve
made of Honey, Flax-seed-Oyl, Powder of Gnats; roast these upon a Tile.

Or, rub it with a Mouse-turd and Honey, or with burnt Nut-shells, which are
mixed with Wine and Oil.

16. To make white or gray Hairs black.
Take bruised Gall-nuts, fry them in an Iron-pan till they be very black, drop
thereon (by little and little) the Oil of Olives, stirring it constantly till
it be well incorporated: hold them over the fire till it be dry, then bruise
them to powder, adding thereto Red-Copper, Rosemary, Crystal Salt, (Sal
Gemmae) dried clay, or Pot-earth, and Cloves pounded small; this being done,
take Alum, shells of Nuts and of Pomgranats, of each a like quantity; boil
these in wine, until they be as black as Ink, then strain them, and put the
aforesaid Powder therein; but first, before you apply it to the Head, moisten
the Head with a very good Lie. Then wash it with this Wine, and keep it covered
five or six hours, then rinse it with wine and water; then dry it, and the hair
will continue black for five or six Months.

17. How to kill Nits.
Make a Decoction of the Lie of Wormwood, Acorns, and Nuts, in strong
wine-Vineger.

18. How to kill Lice.
Chafe the place with the juice of brine, mixed with the Oil of Anis, or of
Juniper, or with a Decoction of Lice-herb, (Staphisagria.) Or boil Bacon in a
Leaded-pot, and white Frankincense, of each a like quantity, to the stifness of
a Salve strain it, and keep it for your use.

19. How to cure the stinging of venomous Beasts.
If a Mouse, Spider, Fly, Wasp, Horse-leech, or any venomous beast, by stinging
or biting, have caused the flesh to swell, then you shall stroke gently the
place which is hurt, with the juice of Southern-wood, and the pain shall
immediately cease, and the swelling also will diminish.

Or, lay thereupon the dung of an Ox or Cow hot, or smear it with fasting
spittle.

20. A cure for the Headache.
If it be occasioned by heat, you shall lay thereupon little slices of Gourd,
or a fine cloth dipped in Rose Water, juice of Lambs-tongue, Nightshade,
Lettice, or Purslain put into White Wind.

Or, beat the white of two Eggs with Rose Water, wet Tow in it, and lay it to
the forehead

Or, wash your head with lukewarm water, wherein wine and Sage-leaves have
been boiled, or Roses and Prune-flowers; with this Decoction wash the Legs and
Feet. If the pains be so great that the understanding be prejudiced, then lay
upon the top of the Head, forehead, and Temples, a Poultis of the white of an
Egg, Bolus Armenius, sour Apples boiled; or in Betony-water and Wine-vineger:
but if the pain proceeds from Drunkenness, then make a small cushion of Venus
Hair and Roses, and bind it about the forehead: or you shall receive the
vapor of boiled Coleworts: or as soon as the Head begins to ache, eat one or
two bitter Almonds: or drink grated Hartshorn in River or Fountain Water, or
mix it with the hair of the dog that bit you.

But if the Headache be occasioned by cold, then lay upon the Head little bags
filled with Barley, and roasted-salt, Sage, Marjoram, Thyme, Annis, and
bay berries, Juniper Berries, as hot as you can endure it.

21. How to cure inveterate Headache, and Ulcers of the Skull.
Roast in the ashes a little piece of the uttermost rind of an Onion, wet and
sprinkled with the Oil of Roses, or Laurel-berries; put it into the Ear, on
that side the pain is: it is also necessary to keep a good Diet, without which,
all Remedies are in vain. Therefore in all kind of Head-achs drink but little
Wine, and eat but a little; let your Victuals be good, and such as will feed
little; as the flesh of young Hens, Stewed Lettice, Purslain and Sorrel, Milk
of Sweet-Almonds, with peeled Barley: eat no windy Herbs, nor sodden-meat, nor
Milk alone, which is very bad in this Distemper, and for all sorts of Agues:
let the Patient discharge himself of all disturbances of Mind, neither let him
read nor write much, but with quietness expect by Gods Blessing the operation
of these means.

22. A Remedy against Madness.
For the cure of Madness occasioned by hot sicknesses, bind on the Head the
Lungs or whole Pluck of a Weather newly killed, or a Chicken or Pigeon split on
the midst of the back; put it on the Patients Head, or anoint the forehead
(especially the Temples) with Oil of Roses, Vinegar, and Poplar-salve, or with
the juice of Nightshade, Oil of Roses, and Wine-Vineger.

23. A Cure for the Lethargy.
Make a little cushion filled* with Coleworts boiled in Vinegar, and bind it on
the forehead.

Or, let the fume of strong-Vinegar ascend into the Patients nostrils.

Or, the sent of Rhue, and the seed of (Nigella) Partridge-feathers, old
shoopatches, Ass-claws, or man's hair, burnt.

Or, bind on the forehead a Plaster of Mithridate, and on the right Arm the
Head of a Bat.

24. To procure Sleep.
Bind about the head a little cushion made of Lettice-seed, and juice of
Nightshade, or Woman's Milk that gives suck to a Girl.

Or, lay under the Pillowbere an Apple of Mandragora, or anoint the soles of
the feet with the grease of a small Weazel.

25. A Cure for the dizziness of the Head.
If the Head be subject to giddiness, take Aquavitae, Syrup of Gilliflowers, or
confection of Anacardina.

26. A Cure for the Falling Sickness.
To cure and preserve from the Falling Sickness, called also St. John's Evil,
drink for Nine days together about half a drinking-glass of Petty-mullein, or
Longwort, or the water of the flowers of a Siccamore-tree, or Coriander, or the
Powder of Piony-seed, five or six days together.

Or, rub the Head with a little stone which is found in the nest of a Swallow;
or wear a Ring about the neck, or on the finger, in which the claw of an Elandt
is enclosed; but let not the claw eat the flesh of the neck or finger. Also it
will be cured, if you tickle or nip the neck under the great Tooth, or if you
anoint their Lips with Man's Blood.

27. How to cure the Dead-Palsey.
To cure and preserve from the Dead-Palsey, drink in the winter a spoon-full of
Aquavitae and Sugar, and then eat a piece of White-bread; or instead of
Aquavitae, Taret-water, (which we shall describe hereafter.)

28. How to cure the Apoplexy.
Chase the afflicted places with Oil of Bay Berries, and Beavers Wine; mingle
therewith some Aquavitae; you may also use Cynnamon-water, or St. John's Herb,
or preserved Sage, Rosemary, Field-Cypress, Balm, and Mithridate; make also
dry-stewings, with a Decoction of Lavender, Balsom, and Marjoram.

29. How to cure the Shaking-Palsey.
Drink for a great while, the Decoction of Field-Cypress, Petty-mallein, and
Sage; eat also the kernels of Pine-Apples.

30. How to strengthen weak Eyes.
Take Fenickle, the Herb Vervin, Eyebright, Rhue, and Roses, of each a little
quantity; distill them, drop into the Eyes every morning and evening three or
four drops of this water.

Or, of the distilled water of Rotten-Apples; also it is good to receive the
fume of the waters in which Fenile, Eyebright and Rhue have been boiled; or to
drink every morning half a glass of the wine of Eyebright, or to prepare a
Powder of dried Eyebright with Sugar; take thereof every morning two or three
spoonfuls before you eat.

There is a stone to be found in an Oxgall, which being put into the Nostrils,
will make the sight very clear.

Also you may use Wine in the morning, made of Stone-Rhue-Roots.

31. A Cure for the running of the Eyes.
Lay a Plaster upon the forehead made of Snail-slime, beaten with
Frankincense and Aloes, till it be as thick as Honey.

32. A Cure for Weeping Eyes.
All humors which fall into the Eyes may be dried up by a Decoction made of
the leaves of Betony, Fenickle-root, and a little Frankincense; wash the Eyes
therewith.

Or, by a Decoction of Chervil; mix therewith the juice of Rue, with scum'd
honey.

Or, bind behind the head Rolls of Amber, which have a great virtue to hinder
the humor or Rheum that falls down the Throat.

Or, drop into the Eyes the distilled water of a Man's Gall, and the Herb
Salandine.

Or, anoint the corners of the Eyes with blacking, which is made of Butter
burnt in a Lamp; this Remedy dries up all running of the Eyes, and is
convenient for all Running-sores and Fistula's, which come of Humors and
Rheums.

33. To cure the Redness or Inflammation of the Eyes.
Lay a Linen Cloth, or Tow of Flax, which is wet in the white of Eggs, and
well beaten with Rose or Lambs-tongue-water; or take a sower rotten-Apple,
mingled with womans-Milk, and anoint therewith the Eyelids.

Or, make a Garland of Damask-Roses, or the Preserve of Roses, and other things
drawing together; lay these upon the Temples of the Head, and they will hinder
the humor which occasions the redness.

Or, soak in Womans-Milk little slices of Veal, or of the neck of an Ox newly
killed; lay them upon the Eyes, and Tow upon them.

Or, take the Urine of a young Child; take it in a Copper Vessel or Metal; let
it stand covered with a fine cloth twenty four hours: of this gather together
the Rust, and mingle it with Rose Water; put it into a glass with a narrow
neck, stop it well, and drop some of it into the Eyes in the morning and at
night, or prepared Tutty.

But against the inveterate redness of the Eyes, take white Copperas, to the
bigness of a small Nut bruised, (there are several sorts of Flowers so called)
white Alum, of each the twenty fourth part of an ounce, Fountain Water one
pint: mingle these together to an Eye-water, or boil them together until the
water be clear; drop three or four drops of this into the Eyes: or, make a
Plaster of Leaven, or of the remainder of Flax-seed Oil, Gum of
Arabia-Dragant, Mastick, and Cam^her.

34. To cure the Inflammation of the Eyes.
Take the Lungs of a Weather newly ^ill'd, (or of an Ewe) lay it upon the Eyes:
or, take the pap of a sweet roasted-apple, mix it with Barley-meal,
Womans-milk, Rose Water, and white of Eggs.

Or, water of Marygolds, the Eye of a Wolf; or the little stones which are
found in the bellies of Swallows, being hung about the neck, have the same
virtue.

Or, take a piece of Frankincense upon the point of a stick, set it on fire
with a wax-candle, extinguish it in four ounces of Rose Water; continue the
lighting and extinguishing thereof thirty times, then strain it through a clean
cloth to an Eye-water; drop some of it into the corners of the Eyes at night
when you go to bed, and if you please, mingle with the water some woman's Milk.

35. To take red Spots out of the Eyes.
Make a Plaster of green-wormwood pounded in a woman's Milk and Rose Water. Or,
drop into the Eyes the blood of the wing of a Pigeon or Turtle-dove; this last
is good when the Eye is hurt with a blow.

36. To cleanse the Eyes of Matter.
Wipe them, and stroke them gently with a Sapphire wet in cold water.

37. To take Spots and Webs out of the Eyes.
Take the new-laid Eggs of a black Hen, roast them hard in hot ashes, cut them
in four equal parts, take out the yolks, fill them with white-sugar-candy
^ruised, then strain them through a clean ^innen-cloth very hard; this water or
Oil ^s good to drop into Eyes, at any time of the day or night.

Or, you may make a water of white-Coperas, Sugar Candy, Rose Water, and the
white of Eggs hard-boyled; strain these through a linen cloth, drop this in^o
the Eyes at noon, after dinner, and at light when you go to bed. Also the
^owder of white-beans only put into the Eyes, is very good.

Or, take prepared Tutty scraped small ^ne ounce, Broad-sword half an ounce;
soak his in Rose Water and white wind, of ^ach about one pint; let it stand six
weeks together in the Sun, in a well-stopp'd-glass, when the Sun shines bright,
but ^ake it away when it shines not; stir the glass twice or thrice a day, to
an Eye-^alve. These Remedies also serve against Red and Blear'd-eyes.

38. To take away the pain of the Eyes.
Make a Decoction of Camomile, Mel^lot, and Fenickle-seed, boil these in water
and white wind, dip therein a four-doub^^ cloth, wring it hard, and apply it to
the Eyes: or, bath the Eyes in woman's Milk, beaten with the white of an Egg.

39. To cure the pain of the Ears.
If it proceeds from an hot cause, tak^ Oil of Roses, with a little Vinegar;
spo^^ them into the Ears, and lay thereon a small bag of Camomile, Melilot,
Flax*seed boiled in Milk: but if the pain (...) occasioned by Inflammation,
then take the blacking of the smoke of boiled pitch (...) mingle it with a
little Oil of Roses, an^ pour it warm into the Ears: if the pai^ be occasioned
by cold, put into the E^^^ Cotton, made sweet with one grain o^ Musk.

40. To help thickness of Hearing.
Drop into the Ears the juice of a wild-vine, or of Onion mingled with Honey o^
Oil, wherein Affodel-roots have been boiled.

41. A Cure for Deafness.
Make a Salve of the following Ingredients; take Goose-grease two ounces, melt
it over a soft fire, mingling with it powder of Aloes half an ounce; this you
shall put into the Ears with Cotton: or take the juice of Radish-skins, mingled
with Oil of Roses, or the fat of an Eel, with Oil of bitter Almonds, or the
juice of an Onion mingled with Honey, or Powder of Aloes dissolved in
white wind, and dropped warm into the Ear. Then to sneeze with the Root of
Hellebore, or let the fume of Ash-wood be received into the Ear, which you may
do, by firing a stick of Ash-wood at the one end, and putting the other end to
the hole of the Ear, into which the smoke will easily enter: the stick must be
of a young shoot without knots. This is of great virtue for the cure of
Deafness, although it be of 25 or 30 years; but against natural Deafness there
is no remedy.

Or, take Wormwood, Cammomile, Thousand-leaf, Hysop, St. John's Herb, Fine-mint,
Rosemary, Saintory, Savory, of each one handful; boil these in white wind, to
the consumption of one third part thereof, and let the hot smoke into the Ear
through a Funnel, and then drop some of the following Oil into the Ear, and
stop the Ear with Cotton in which Musk has been.

Or, take Oil of Olive two ounces, Mallows one ounce and a half, Oil of Onions,
sweet Almonds, of each one ounce; put all these together into a flask with a
long neck, set it on a fire that is not too hot, boil them until the juices be
half consumed; then take the dust hence, and put therein powdered Castoreum,
Coloquint, Mastick, Spikenard, of each the sixteenth part of an ounce; then
take the flask, and being well stopped, boil it in a little kettle full of water
(like a Balneum Mariae) for three hours; then put it in the Sun a little while,
to cause the Oil to be clear; then strain the Oil through a thick cloth, and
add thereunto Musk ten grains, to an Oil; keep it safe and carefully in a
well-stop'd flask for use.

42. A Cure for the Worms in the Ears.
Take the Milky juice of a Fig Tree or Figgs, also the juice of Capers,
Wormwood, Futher-wood, Fine-mint, Santory, the rind of an Acorn-tree, or the
rind of green Acorns alone, or mingled together.

43. A Cure for the noise in the Ears.
Drop therein Oil of Spikenard, Bayberries, Bitter-Almonds, or of Rhue, with
some Brandy, or Eels-grease, or Brandy where Carraway or Anniseed have been
soaked.

Or, take Saw-dust of Cedar-wood, fill therewith a little Taffata-bag of
Crimson, as big as an Almond; let it soak in Brandy quite through, then put it
somewhat deep into the Ear, stop it in, and let the Patient lie down to sleep
on that Ear.

44. To take away little Ulcers from behind the Ears.
Make a Plaster of Barley-meal boiled in Honey-water, add thereto the juice of
five-leaved-grass (an Herb that kills fleas) and Oil of Flower-de-luce, or a
Plaster made of Goats-dung, unsalted Butter, and the Lees of Nut-oyl.

45. Against the Kings Evil.
Take Betony and Sorrel-leaves and Roots, squeeze out one pound of the juice,
and Bertram bruised one ounce, Spanish-green half a quarter of an ounce: mingle
these together, and warm therewith the Crop or Swelling; hang also about the
neck, the Roots of Selandine and Lambs-tongue.

Or, when the Moon decreaseth, and is near the Sun, then cut off the feet of a
great frog, and hang them about the neck.

Or, take a good quantity of Tobacco, bruised in a clean Mortar, and apply its
juice to the Crop or Swelling nine or ten times: the said swellings are brought
to Ulcers, by laying thereunto Cow or Oxdung, made hot in Vine or
Colewort-leaves, among the ashes, and being mingled with Vinegar.

46. A Remedy for the stopping of the Nose.
When the Nose is stopped by humors that fall into it, and hinder the fetching
of breath, then to open the same, take the juice of Beets and Marjoram, mingled
with the Oil of bitter-Almonds, and snuff it up.

Also the smoke of Tobacco, received into the mouth through a little Funnel,
and let go through the Nose, is good alone.

47. For a dropping Nose.
This is cured by Medicines which are proper for the brains, whereby such
humors are stopped and dried up. In this case it is good to use Rubbings,
Perfumes, in little caps and bags; also sneezing is very good.

48. To procure Sneezing.
Blow into the Nose powdered Peper, Berthram, (Staphisagria) Flower-de-luce
Roots of Florence; mingle these flowers and grease, and anoint the Nostrils: if
sneezing trouble you, it is cured by scratching the soles of the feet, and
palms of the hands, by rubbing the Eyes and Ears, by smelling white
Flower-de-luce, by washing or bathing the hands in warm-water.

49. To recover the Smelling when it is lost.
Make a Persume of Nardus-seed, Averone, Rhue, and other Herbs which have a
strong sent; or smell to water-Mint.

50. To staunch Blood.
You may stanch the bleeding of the Nose, by putting the Thumb on that side of
the Nose out of which the blood issues.

Or, put about the neck a string of Jasper-stone, or tie the uppermost joints
as fast as it is possible, and put into the Nose a Tent of Dove-nettles; also
keep in your hand the Roots and Leaves of Agrimony; or take rainwater in your
Mouth, or Sage-flower, or other woolly fruits being put into the Nose; or lay
upon the forehead Camphire, or use the juice of Lambs-tongue, or of Nightshade.

Or, lay upon the Temples and round about the neck, (especially on the great
Vein) cooling herbs, as Nightshade, Lambs-tongue, Lactuce, or stinging
nettles, bruised with Salt and wine-venegar; the Herb Periwinckle put under the
Tongue, has the same virtue.

Also you may make a Girdle or Bracelet of Thousand-button, called St.
Innocentius; some hold a white-Mallow on the side of the bleeding nostril; Many
Coutrymen stench all sorts of bleeding, in what part of the body soever.

With Hogs-dung wrapped up in Cotton, and put it to the place that bleeds: or,
blow into the Nose the powder of a three-cornered stone which is found in the
of a Carp.

Against too much bleeding at the Nose, the Powder of Sandarica is very good,
beaten with the white of an Egg, and said upon the forehead with a cloth.

Also the juice of Onion and Wine-vinegar put into the Nostrils with a little
cloth, or the water of Mint drunk, or red-Coral drunk with Wine; or to anoint
the forehead with a Salve made of Dragon-blood, Mastick, Frankincense, and the
whites of Eggs mingled together. Con^rariwise, you may cause the Nose to bleed
with a sheaf of corn, or Thousand-leaf, when you put the sharp end into the
Nose before the herb; and the contrary comes ^o pass when you put the stump or
end that is cut off in first: such various man^ers of the use of things, often
bring forth diverse cures.

1. To cure Biles and Ulcers in the Nose.

Take the juice of Veyl, and of sower Pomegranates, and mingle them together.

52. Against the stinking of the Nose.
Snuff up the Decoction of Marjoram, fine-Mint, Cloves, Ginger and Musk, and
boil them in whine-wine or vinegar: of Sea-Onyon, (Acetum Squilliticon.)

Or, use Sirrups, as of Diacodium, and the like: or hold in your mouth little
Pellets of Bolus Armenius, Sealed Earth, Amberstone, Dragon-blood, Cloves, and
Musk.

53. A Remedy for a stinking Mouth.
Wash it with Wine wherein is boiled Anniseed and Cloves; also Musk, Mastick,
of blew Flower-de-luce Root.

54. To Cure Ulcers and Sores in the Mouth.
Rinse it with a Decoction of the leaves of Nail-herb, (Pelosella,) Welch-root,
Golden-Rod, or the flowers of wild Pomgranates, Lambs-tongue, Agrimony, and
Roses; adding thereto some Alum, with wine in which Annis and Gilleflowers
have been boiled, or with stilled water of Hart's-tongue, or with Treacle-water,
distilled with the like quantity of Rosemary and Brandy; among which, a little
Bolus Armenius must be broken. The Decoction of Hen-pease, (Elatina) of
Pilosella made with wine, and gargled, dries the Soars of the Mouth, and takes
away the rawness of the Tongue which comes by an Ague.

Also it is a singular Remedy to touch the Ulcers with a drop of the Oil of
Copperas, or to anoint the ulcerating place in the Palate of the Mouth, or on
the Tongue, with Oil of Roses.

55. Of the Cure of excessive Slabbering.
It is cured by Gargle-waters, that are drying and drawing together, made with
the Decoction of Roses, Flowers of wild-granats, Lambs-tongue, and Alum boiled
in water and wine. It Is also good to eat Biskets, Roasted meat with Mustard, to
chaw a Raze of Ginger, and to drink good wine. But slabbering is excited with
Raisons, dry Figs, or with Mastick held in the Mouth in the morning fasting.

56. How to cleanse the Teeth, and keep them sound.
Of filthy Teeth.
The Teeth being useful Instruments, ought especially to be preserved clean and
fast: brown and black Teeth should be kept white, and loose Teeth fastened, to
the end they may be clean, without pain, and serviceable: the fittest time for
this work is in the morning.

How to Cleanse the Teeth.
You should rub your Teeth and whole Mouth and Gums, the Palate and Tongue,
with a clean course cloth, rubbing off the slime which grows upon them in the
night.

When you wash your hands, you should rinse your Teeth with fresh water that is
not too cold, (if the Teeth be weak.)

Then you shall make them fast, clean, and white, with these following Powders,
with which you shall rub not only the Teeth but the Gums, and then rinse them
with Red-wine.

How to order your Teeth before Dinner or Supper.
The waters you shall use in the morning and at noon; for before you go to
dinner, you shall rinse the Teeth with water not too warm nor too cold, to
cleanse the Gums from the humors which fall down from the Brain, that in
eating they mix not with your Meat. Flesh or spoon-meat being eaten, or soopt
too hot, is very noxious to the Teeth; so is wine and water drunk too cold,
(although many take delight therein in Summer.)

After Dinner or Supper.
After you have eaten and drank warm meat and drink, you must not immediately
eat or drink any thing that is cold; nor on the contrary, when you have eaten
any thing that is cold, you are not presently to eat that which is very hot,
but use a moderation between both.

Hard Meats are noxious to the Teeth; therefore it is best to eat such meat as
is tender, lest you break your Teeth, or loosen them: you should therefore
forbear to break any hard thing with your Teeth; nay, not to bite a thin thread
a sunder.

Other qualities of Meats are likewise to be considered: for fat and lean,
sweet and sour things being too much used, are hurtful to the Teeth.

Physicians also observe, that husked or peascod Fruits, Milk-meat, Cheese,
Sugar, Sweetmeats, Tarts, Radishes, Figs, and most Orchard-fruits when they
are raw, also Oils and Fat, make the Teeth black.

Nevertheless, you need not, (but according to discretion) abstain from all
these Meats; but from those which do most occasion the distempers of the Teeth
wherewith your are troubled.

Of Pickt-Teeth.
After dinner or Supper, you shall rinse your Teeth with Water mixed with a
little wine-vinegar, or with clear Wine. After you have cleared your Teeth of
Meats which stick to them, this must be done softly, with Tooth-picks not made
of any Metal; nay, not of Gold or Silver, but of wood, which has some virtue
of drawing together, and are of a good smell: as of Mastick-wood, Rose-wood,
Cypress, Rosemary, Myrtle-tree, etc.

Next, rub your Teeth with Powders, which will keep them good, white, and
clean: As of Myrrh, Cinnamon, burnt-Allum, burnt Pumice-stone, of each a like
quantity; each being pounded small apart, and after mingled together.

Crumbs of bread with common Salt, is very useful to rub the Teeth therewith
after Meals, and then to rinse them with clean water mixed with a little
vinegar, or with Red-wine, this will fasten the Teeth in the Gums.

There are diverse other things, whereof Powders may be made to cleanse the
Teeth and make them white, of which some serve to comfort the Gums and make
them grow when they are eaten off, for the security of the Teeth.

The Causes of the Toothache.
And other Powders are good to cure the Toothache, which is variously
occasioned; as being hollow, corrupted, full of worms, and from other causes.
The Medicines which serve for this purpose are these.

Take Pearls, red and white Corals, Ivory, Crystal, white-marble-stone,
Alabaster, Bertram, Hellebore, Hartshorn, Mastick, Sea-scum, or Fish-bone,
good Wine-stone, white-Copperas, stone-Salt, (Salgemmae) Crab's-eyes,
Egg-shells, Snail-shells, Oyster-shells, dry Roses, the Root of Flower-de-luce,
wild-Caliga, Venus-hair, burnt-wheat, and Barley-bread, Thamaris, Spica-Nardi,
Dragon-blood, Roots of Hart's-tongue, Flowers of wild Pomgranats, Cinnamon, and
Cloves. All these you shall reduce into fine Powder, each apart, to join them
together as necessity requires.

Also Oil and water of Copperas make the Teeth white; But some allow not of
this, because of their burning heat, and because they imagine they will loose
the Teeth.

Indeed the water may better be used than the Oil, and with less danger,
especially when you mingle it with common water, and rub the Teeth and Gums
with it a Month together.

Of the aforesaid (and other like) Ingredients, a Powder may be made, and used
very useful for the Teeth, with which you may rub them in the morning fasting.

A Powder for the Teeth.
Take the Powder of clean Crystal one eighth part, and one sixteenth part of an
ounce, red and white Coral, of common Salt, of each the eighth part of an
ounce; Pumice-stone, Sea-scum, of each the two and thirtieth part of an ounce;
Alabaster-stone, white Marble-stone, Rock-Allum, Root of Flower-de-luce of
Florence, Crimson-berries, Cinnamon, of each the sixteenth part of an ounce;
prepared Pearls, the twenty fourth part of an ounce: make all these into a fine
Powder (mingled together.)

Preserves for the Teeth.
Of such Powders you may make Preserves, if you put honey thereto, with which
you may rub your Teeth and Gums in the morning.

Another Preserve may be made to make the Teeth white and fast, and the Gums
hard and strong, which will also cure a stinking breath, proceeding from the
Teeth, and it is thus prepared.

Take of a wheaten-loaf three ounces, red and white Coral, Hartshorn, of each
half an ounce, Alum one sixteenth part of an ounce, Pellitory of the wall,
Venus-hair, of each one handful, Egg-shells four or five; put these together in
an earthen-pot, set it in the Oven when the Bread is taken out, till they be
turned into ashes; then take of these ashes four ounces of Cinnamon the 4th
part of an ounce, of Cloves or Gilliflowers, Bread-sword, of each the eighth
part of an (...), Spica-Nardi, Calamus, of each the s^^^^enth part of an ounce,
well cleansed Oil of Roses, as much as will be necessary; mingle the aforesaid
Ingredients, being reduced to a Powder) and add thereto vinegar of Seaonion one
ounce; work this into a Preserve: when you have rubbed the Teeth with these
Preserves, then rinse them with wine.

With the aforesaid Ingredients you may make very useful waters to rinse the
Teeth in the morning fasting.

As, take wild Mulberries when they are green one pound, leaves of the
Mastick-tree half a pound, Agrimony one handful, Roots of Flower-de-luce,
Dragon-blood, of each three ounces: distill these through a glass, to a
Tooth-water, and keep it in a glass for your use.

The following water is much commended for keeping the Teeth white.

Take Rose Water and common-water, of each four ounces, burnt Alum powdered
one quarter of an ounce, whole Cinnamon the eighth part of an ounce; put all
these together upon a soft fire, and let it boil until a third part thereof be
consumed; take it off then, and when the water is cold, strain it through a
cloth; put it into a glass, and keep it for your use.

A Water to make Black Teeth White.
This following water cleanses the Teeth, how filthy and slimy soever, and
makes Black Teeth White.

Take Live-brimstone, and Alum, of each one pound, Wine-vineger four ounces
(some take instead of vinegar) the Spirit of Copperas; draw water out of these
through a Colb-glass, with a slow fire, that the water may not smell of the
Brimstone.

For to make the Teeth White.
For to make the Teeth White, it is good also to rub the Teeth with Pellitory
of the Wall, Roots of Beets, crust of barley-bread, Goats-horn burned to ashes;
you may put all these things into an earthen pot, and put it into the Oven with
several Batches of Bread, till they become ashes: or rub your Teeth with honey
and ashes of Vine-leaves which have not born any Grapes.

To preserve the Teeth from filthiness.
For to keep the Teeth clean, and to preserve them from all filthiness, wash
the Mouth every morning and evening with Fountain Water one pint, Rose Water
six ounces, Alum, Cinnamon, of each a quarter of an ounce: boil this in a
leaded earthen-pot, until one third or fourth part is consumed.

Or, wash the Teeth with Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, prepared with white wind,
and the same boiled until two third parts are wasted.

57. How to fasten the Teeth when loose.
It is good to wash the same with Rose Water and Alum mixed together: or, the
Roots of five-finger-grass, and Alum.

58. For to prevent hollowness of the Teeth.
Hold in the morning under your tongue, a course large corn of Bay Salt, let it
melt, and rub your Teeth therewith. After that you have used all Remedies, it
will be good for the preservation of the Teeth, to rub them oftentimes with
Roots of Marsh-Mallo's, by which means they will be smooth and bright: these
Roots are especially useful, for they make the gums fast, and leave a good
smell behind. When you prepare them, you shall cut the Roots off four or five
fingers long; if they are gross and thick, then you shall cut them through
again in the length, for to make thereof pieces that are of the thickness of a
little finger: next you shall let them boil six hours in clean water, with
Salt, Alum, and root of Flower-de-luce; at last you shall dry them, which must
be done quickly, and not slowly, lest they rot; therefore you shall put them in
a hot Oven if it be in wintertime, when you cannot have the benefit of the Sun.

59. A Remedy against Toothache.
The Toothache proceeds from diverse as well cold as hot causes; in case it is
occasioned by cold, then use these following means.

You shall rinse the Teeth with strong vinegar, in which Wormwood is boiled;
Strawberries, or red-wine, in which are boiled leaves of Strawberries, with
Lavender, Sage, and Marjoram; or White Wind wherein the leaves and Nots of the
Cypress-tree, Juniper Berries, and Roses, Mirtle-leaves, are boiled; or the
Flowers of Lavender, Cinnamon, Fenickle, Roots of Sparagus boiled in Wine: oil
of Juniper-tree is good being put in the Teeth if they are hollow; but this
following is better.

Oil of Pepper, Cloves, Sage, Bame, Oil of Spike and Aquafortis, being gently
put into the hollow Tooth with Cotton, takes away the pain, and breaks it if
it is corrupted.

If the Toothache proceeds from an hot cause, then you shall put to the painful
Teeth Oil of Poppeys, Mandragora, Henbane-seed, together or alone; or in want
of oils, the Mandragora and Henbane mixed with Wine; or Henbane Roots mixed with
Rose Water and Wine-vineger; or you shall hold in the Mouth Wine-vineger
wherein Campher has been boiled: from what cause soever the Toothache
proceeds, you shall appease the pain with Oil of Henbane-seed, which is made
after this manner: sprinkle the seed of Henbane with Brandy, then put it into a
glass, which you shall cover very close, put it in a kittle full of water, and
let it boil four and twenty hours; then take the glass out of the water, and
put the seed before it is cold into a little linen bag, and then press out the
Oil.

This pain is also helped with the Roots of Thousand-leaf, or of Agrimony,
being held between the Teeth: and the same operation has the Root of Bertram
(Pyretrum.)

Likewise against the Toothache, you may boil the Root of Henbane, or of
Mulberries, in vinegar and Rose Water, and hold the water in the Mouth: or take
a head of Garlic, let it roast in the hot ashes; then bruise it, and put it as
hot as ^ver is possible to the Teeth, and put some of it into the Ear, on the
side where the ^ain is nearest. Some bruise a head of Garlic, and put it upon
the Artery or great Vein of the Arm, on the painful side.

Or take Bertram bruised, (one quarter ^f an ounce) Rosemary, Sage, of each ^ne
handful, large Figs, to the number of ^hree; let these boil in half a pint of
wine, until the Wine is all consumed; then lay ^ne of these Figs upon the
painful Tooth, ^s hot as you can bear it.

Or, put very hot upon the Temples of ^he Head, a plaster of Pitch, beaten
Gal^^uts and Alum: it is good also to lay upon the Teeth the juice of Garlic,
Rue, Tansie, (Matricaria) or any hot Oil, as of Sage, which is excellent on
this occasion; or wash and rinse oftentimes your Teeth with a Decoction of
Pennyroyal boiled in Wine, till two third parts are consumed. Some hold for a
secret, that a Tooth of a Man wrapped up in Taffeta, or a Bean with a hole, in
which a Louse is ^hut up, being hanged about the neck, and that these drives
away the greatest Toothache that can be.

Great care has always been taken to drive away heavy and intolerable
Toothach, and to preserve the Teeth, because of the necessity of their service;
for which two things the most choicest means have been searched for; insomuch,
that if the Proverb be made true in this point, that Necessity is the Mother of
Arts, I have amongst many innumerable means or remedies which are found for the
Teeth, brought forth a small number, as being the choicest and most approved:
and when all these Remedies will not help you, and that there is not any more
hope of being delivered from the pain, then you must draw them. Sometimes the
Teeth are spoiled because of the putrefaction, but you must not inconsiderately
begin this, but first consult about it well, and then employ thereto a man that
has skill therein, for fear of the many dangerous Symptoms, which are many
times occasioned thereby, when by a mischance the good Tooth is taken for the
bad, or that it is drawn out with too great force, whereby the blood runs out
in abundance, insomuch that the Patient runs the hazard of his life: it were
rather to be wished, that the corrupted Tooth might fall out through any other
means, than by force: but the difficulty lies in the finding out of those
things which have such a property and virtue.

Some have used to put into the holes and hollowness of the Teeth, the ashes of
earthworms, or mice-turd, or of the Tooth of a Heart, and these ashes shall
cause the Tooth to fall out immediately: or they put thereupon
Mulberry-kernels, or put a soaking fifteen days in strong Wine-vinegar, beaten
Mulberry-Roots; after the soaking, the same being dried in the Sun, they make a
Powder thereof, to put it on the Tooth; or put thereon the brains of a
Partridge, or the juice of Cherry-leaves; or put into the hollowness of the
Tooth the juice of the Herb Salandine, and strong-water.

60. Of Teeth set an edge.
The Teeth grow blunt by sharp or sour victuals, especially such as are of a
bad quality, viz. green, sour, and unripe fruit, whose roots are full of sour
and tart juice, as well as because of vapors which climb out of the stomach
unto the Teeth: for to be rid of this trouble, it is good to eat old and strong
Cheese, or Nuts, or Almonds, or to rub the Teeth with the like: or also by
holding of Purslain, or a Decoction of it in the Mouth: or to hold in the Mouth
the Milk of an Ass: or by rubbing the Mouth with Wine, after that you have
rubbed the Teeth with Salt and Sage.

61. A Cure for a stinking Breath.
For to cure a stinking breath, (from what cause soever it proceed) it is good
to wash the Mouth with vinegar of Sea-onion, or with the Decoction of the
leaves of Mint, the Herb Baulm, Sow-thistle, Roots of Flower-de-luce, of wild
Galiga, Annis-seed, Fenickle-seed, and Paradise-corn; to gnaw Nutmegs,
Flower-de-luce Roots, Clove-Gilliflowers, or to hold in the Mouth a little
Pill, which is made after this manner.

Take Gum-dragant one ounce, Dragons blood half an ounce; let it soak two days
in Rose Water, and then add thereto, in a little stone-morter, Sugar an ounce
and a quarter, Cinnamon three eight parts of an ounce, Musk one scruple; this
being pounded with a Pestle in Rose Water, and it being dried, make it for use
to small Pills.

The bad sent occasioned by the eating of Garlic, Onion, or Leeks, goes away
by gnawing fresh Nuts, or leaves of Rue, of Fenickle, or Parsley.

For to make the breath smell sweet, when it sents not, it will be necessary to
rinse the mouth the Morning before with Cinnamon Water, and to hold the same a
little while in the mouth, or with the water called Aqua Imperialis, or with
Treacle-water, or to use the Roots of Master-wort, or of Flower-de-luce, or of
Angelica or Mastick.

62. A Cure for the Squinancy.
Against Squinancies, make a Poultis of a whole Swallow-nest, boiled in
White Wind, and then mingle it with Oil of Cammomile and sweet Almonds, and put
it outwardly upon the Throat; or drink immediately water of Carduus Benedictus,
with one eighth part of an ounce of the powder of a Boars tooth; or anoint the
place with a Salve of Lint-seed-oyl and the foregoing Powder; or put thereupon
a Pultis of the Turd of a young sound youth or strippling, who has been
nourished for three days together only with Bread of Lupinum which is well
baked and kneaded with Salt and leaven, and who has drunk nothing but red Wine,
adding thereto as much Honey.

63. Against Hoarsness.
Forasmuch as the Speech is of a great moment, the want and necessity of which
causes us to seek for means which may take away all hindrances, and assist the
same: amongst one of the most troublesome is Hoarsness, which makes men speak
softly, and with great difficulty. This will be cured by the following means,
by which the Voice shall become clearer and more perceptible.

The Patient shall take at night going to bed, two ounces, or [four or five
thin small spoonsful] of Wine, in which good Figs and Raisons have been boiled
for two hours together, with Sugar, Cinnamon, and Cloves.

Also water wherein red Coleworts have been boiled, adding thereto one ounce of
Syrup of Venus-hair; and that he shall take in the morning.

The Voice is also made clear by little Cakes made of Diairis-powder, and taken
in the morning and at night.

Also Syrup of Jujuben, as also the decoction of Elicampane made with Vinegar
and with Honey, in which Liquoris has been boiled, performs the same.

An excellent Remedy against this evil, ^s to take this at night when you go ^o
bed; for it makes the almost-lost ^peech to be restored again.

Brandy-Syrup.
Put one ounce of fine Sugar that is ^oudered in a little flat dish; pour
thereupon of the best Brandy as much as is ^ecessary for to cover the Sugar
suffici^ntly; put the dish upon a Coal-fire, and ^t the Brandy afire with a
burning-paper, ^^newing the same as often as the flame ^oes out: Stir the Sugar
without ceasing ^^ll it cease burning. All the remaining ^^quor which shall be
left on the bottom ^f the little porenger, not being above ^ne spoonful and a
half, the Patient shall ^ake while it is hot. Then you shall per^^me his
Nightcap with Frankincense, ^arnish or Gum of Juniper-tree, Mastick, ^orax,
Benzoin; nay, you shall take Tow (...) Flax which perfume, and lay it upon ^he
head.

Diet.
But whatsoever is the cause of the ^oarsness, it is necessary to abstain from
sour and salt Victuals, from raw Fruits Fish, and slimy things; also from
Beans Pease, Chestnuts, and other windy things as well as from heavy bread; from
drinking Wine between Meals, from sleeping in daytime, from going in the cold,
wind or in the Sun: but above all, from straining his Voice by loud speaking,
or ha^^ going; silence and quiet being one part of the Cure.

64. Of Shortness of Breath.
Against shortness of the breath, or di^ficulty in breathing (otherwise call^^
short-winded) besides the means whi^^ are good against the Cough, this
followin^ Liquor is good, and very useful, bei^^ made of these following, like
unto a Co^serve.

Take large Raisons without stones o^ ounce, two great Figs, one Date, d^
Hysop, Venus-hair, Liquoris well was^ Fox-lungs, distilled water of Scabiosa, ^
each the eighth part of an ounce; Pen^dice two ounces, Syrup of Liquoris, ^
each enough to the third parts of ^ Conserve: of which Syrup, you shall u^ with
a little stick of Liquorish, a wh^^^ after Dinner, before or after that you ha^
used a Decoction of the following. Take Venus hair, Marubium, of each one
handful, Ani-seed, Licorish, Dates, Dry-figs, Seed of Fenickle, Ladies-mark,
boiled in a pint of water, so long, till one third part is consumed; use this
every morning two hours before breakfast; and presently after it, or a little
before it, eat a little cake of Diairis, or Diahysopum; anoint the Breast with
a Salve which is made of this following.

Take Oil of Sweet Almonds two ounces, fresh May-Butter one ounce, a little
Saffron, New wax, (as much as is enough) melted and mingled to a chafing Salve.

For as much as the short-windedness is worse than the Hoarseness or Cough, you
must take greater care in your Diet when troubled with the short-windedness,
than if you have a Cough. Therefore you must abstain from the aforesaid, and
all other windy Meats; and contrariwise you shall feed upon peeled Barley,
boiled in sweet Almonds-milk with Sugar, the juice of red Cabbage; or, you
shall eat of old Cock with Hysop and Saffron; you shall eat Hens, Pigeons, and
the like, roasted Figs, Raisons, Dates, sugared kernels, Pine-Apples, Almonds:
moderate motion is good, but above all, it is very bad to bestir himself much
before dinner; and the perturbation and distraction of the mind is far worse.

65. A Remedy for a Cough.
Take Hysop, Colts foot, of each one handful; Figs, large Raisons, Liquorish,
of each one ounce; boil this in water, till two third parts are wasted, and
drink thereof twice a day, two hours before dinner, and one hour before supper.

Or, let the Patient drink twice a day of Red cole-worts, with a handful of
Coltsfoot, and one or two small stalks of Hysop; and these things must boil a
little time.

66. Against the pain in the side.
Against the pain in the side, (Pleurisis*) drink immediately Syrop of Violets,
or others that are proper for the Breast, with two half ounces of Nettle-seed
or Ashen-tree-seed, or water of Carduus Benedictus, our Ladies-Thistle, or of
Bryer, or in a spoonful of white wind, the powder of hasel-nut-shells, the
eighth part of an ounce, eighteen grains of Red-Coral; these things being well
mingled together, add thereto the Seed of Melions, Gourds and Cowcombers,
(being very useful for this purpose) this you shall take lukewarm, ^s soon as
it is possible after you perceive the Distemper. Or, roast in the hot ashes ^
sweet Apple: when it is roasted enough, then mingle it with the juice of
Lickorish, Starch, and white Sugar; give the Pa^ient this twice a day, two
hours before ^inner or supper: or, take the eighth ^art of an ounce of the
powder of a ^oars Tooth, with juice of sweet-Almonds and Sugar Candy: or, with
the ^uice of Red-coleworts, barley-water, or ^^e like things that are
specifical for the ^reast: or make ashes of the pisle of an Ox, and give the
Patient thereof to ^rink, the eighth part of an ounce, with white wind, or with
Carduus Benedictus, ^r Barley-water; if this be used before ^^e third day, it
is a special Remedy.

How to make Ashes of the Pisle of an Ox.
Their Ashes are made in this manner; They cut the Pisle in pieces, laying it
upon an even hearth, covered with a new ^ot, and round about the same fiery
burn^^g coals, or hot ashes, renewing the same ^ many times, till it is turned
into ashes; for which, almost a whole day is required* but if this pain
continues, let him use ^ Decoction of Roses, Poppies, or on^ eighth part of an
ounce of the powde^ thereof, with the water of Scabiosa, and Pimpernel, and
Syrrup of Hysop; otherwise with Syrrup of Violets: but if ther^ is not any hope
to be cured by this, the^ take one of the best sweet Apples, tak^ out the
kernels, and fill it again wit^ fine white Frankincense; wrap it up ^^ Tow or
Flax, and let it roast slowl^ in the ashes, and give him this to ea^^ who is
troubled with the pain in the sid^

67. Against vomiting of Blood.
Against the Vomiting of Blood, dri^^ stilled water of the first budding or
puttin^^ out of Oak-leaves, or the Decoction Wall-wort, Lambs-tongue,
Thousand-bu^ton, or of Horse-tail; or let him swallo^ down a little piece of
Mastick, bu^ Hartshorn, Goats-horn, Bolus Armeni^^ Terra sigillata, red Corals
or Amber; the powder of the innermost little shells Chestnuts, or Cork, or
Hogs-dung roa^^ with unsalted Butter; this you shall gi^^ him to eat.

68. A Cure for the Consumption.
For the comfort and ease of those who are in a Consumption, these means are
useful: The Patient shall drink every morning four hours before meat, a little
draught of Milk of a she-Ass, or of a Bitch fresh milk'd, putting every time
therein one ounce of pounded ^oaf-Sugar; he shall take every hour Preserve of
Roses, or loaf-Sugar, or of the powder of small Cakes, called Diatragacanth: it
is very good to drink every morning fasting a full glass of water, which is
stilled in a bath (balneum Mariae,) made of all these Herbs, viz. of
Coltsfoot, Wall-wort, Venus-hair, Hysop, of each a like quantity, with snails
without the shells, being washed very clean: the water of Snails stilled alone,
is good also against this distemper, as well as for all other dry and lean
persons: he shall use little Cakes made of two ounces of Pimpinella, powdered
with Sugar, which he shall take every morning, being dissolved in three ounces
of Pimpernella water: it is very wholesome to take in the morning of this
following powder, a quarter of an ounce, and immediately after take two
spoonfuls of Surrup of Jujuben, or for want of that* take stilled water of
Coltsfoot, or of Barley-water (Ptisane.) This Powder is made in this manner.

Take of the four great cooling seeds together, one ounce and three quarters,
Quince-kernels almost half an ounce, white Poppy seed somewhat more then half
a^ ounce, Liquorish balls, pounded Hysop, Starch, Gum-Arabick, three sixteen
parts of an ounce, Gum-Diatragacanth, Pe^^dice, as much as of all the rest
together; this being each asunder well pounded, and reduced to Powder, must be
well mi^^ together to a Powder.

69. To cure the Palpitation of the Heart.
The Patient by the advice of the Physician, must either bleed or purge, that
if it be possible the cause of the Malady may be taken away.

The outward Remedies against his sickness, (when it is accompanied with an
Ague) will be to drink every morning the Surrup of Lemmons, or the juice of
Sorrel with Rose Water, Purslain with Sorrel.

Let the Patient smell to Spices that ar^ of a good scent and cooling; as
Roses, Flowers of Violets, and Vinegar.

Also wet a cloth in stilled water of Lambs-tongue, Roses, and Sorril, with a
little wine-vineger, and put it upon the left breast.

But if the passion of the Heart be without an Ague, then take Imperial water,
(Aqua Coelestis) Cinnamon Water, Aqua Vitae or Brandy; drink of each of these
apart in the morning fasting: or, distilled water of Ox-tongue, in which three
ounces of Cloves have been boiled, or six ounces of the water of Confilie, the
Herb Balm, with two ounces of Sugar mixed therewith: or, the weight of a Crown
of the Conserve of Diameschum. Let him drink with it distilled water of good
wine, or water of Ox-tongue, or the Confection of Hyacinth, (which is very
good) or the Conserve of Gilliflowers, and Rosemary, or such like.

Also take the water of Ox-tongue, Balm, and Bourage, (a pound together) good
red-Wine half a pint, sugar of Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each a quarter of
an ounce; mingle all these together, warm it in a dish upon an hot Tile, then
wet therein a Scarlet or linen cloth, and put it upon the left breast.

You shall put in a little bag the Powder of Sandalwood with the aforesaid
well-scenting Spices, and heart-strengthening Powders, and lay it warm upon the
left breast.

The aforesaid pleasant scents comfort the Heart, therefore the Patient should
often smell to them, whether you prepare them for Perfumes, Waters, Powders, or
sweet-balls made of Benjamin, Storax, Labdanum, Ambergreese, Civet, or other
rich Perfumes, wherewith you may per^ume the sick parties Chamber and Clothes.

Also these Perfumes are good to hang about the sick parties neck, about the
bigness of a pea: or, to drink two or three ounces of the distilled water of
Ox-tongue, and of Balm.

Also this following water is esteemed a special Remedy: Take of the Hearts of
three Oxen, and the Hearts of three Hogs, Nutmegs, Cloves, Seed of Basilicon,
of each three eight parts of an ounce; flowers of Burage, Ox-tongue, Rosemary,
Marygolds, of each an handful; let these soak one night in Old Malligo or
Hipocras.

70. To cure the faintness of the Heart.
It Is good to press and bend the joint of the Heart or Physick-finger, or to
rub the same with a piece of Gold and Saffron: for from this finger, the virtue
goes to the Heart.

But forasmuch as this is a very bad and heavy distemper, and a forerunner of
death, therefore it is called a timely death. For which a speedy Remedy must be
provided, and be always in readiness: if it be but cold water, which they must
sprinkle on the Patients face, adding thereto Rose Water, if it may be gotten
time enough.

Their fingers, arms, and legs must be tied, and rubbed hard: they must pull
the sick by the hair, and give him a little wine to drink.

Or, give him some Aqua-vitae, or Metheglin, made a little warm, or Imperial
water, (Aqua Coelestis) or let him smell good wine-vineger, or rub and anoint
his Breast with Aqua vitae, (made a little warm,) by which Motions and Drink
the dispersed vitals will gather themselves again to the heart.

These means are good for men, but not for women, although you are assured the
faintness* proceeds not from the Matrix; if it does, sprinkle not any water on
her face, but let her smell fumes that stink, putting them into her Nostrils.

Such as, Divel-turd, Beverswine, Partridge Feathers burnt on the fire, old
shoosoals burned: or you shall perfume her below with Benzoyn, Storax, Musk,
Amber, Civet, and the like.

If the faintness proceeds from the decay of the spirit, as it often does,
after a great bleeding, looseness or sweat, then it is not good to bind the
arms and legs, nor to sprinkle cold water on their face, but it is most
expedient to give them good wine, and of the aforesaid waters to drink, and to
nourish them with good Victuals, as Chicken-broth, and the like nourishing,
soft, and delicate food.

71. Against continual Burning Fevers.
Bind upon the Pulse-veins of both Arms the juice of stinging Nettles, mingled
with Poplar Salve: or take an Onion, the middle being taken out, then fill it
with Mithridate, and bind it fast upon the pulse of the Right-arm.

Or, two yolks of new-laid Eggs, with foot of the chimney well pounded, mingled
with Salt and strong vinegar; bind it with a linen cloth about the arm.

Or, take the heart of a frog, and bind it on the Heart or Backbone of the
Patient, or lay it on his Liver, or lay upon the hollow of the foot a living
frog.

Many make a drink of bruised field-Sorrel, to drink in the greatest heat, and
make of the remainder a Poultis to lay upon the back of the Patients hands.

Others perform the same with the juice of a great Lemon: others lay
flea-herb-seed, or five-leav'd grass a soaking in water one night, and then
putting Sugar into this liquor, they give it the Patient to drink.

72. Against Quotidian Fevers.
It is good to drink (a little before the fit comes) the juice of Betony and
Plantine leaves; or to drink in the morning a Decoction of the Roots of
Ladies-mark, Parsley, Radish, and Asparagus, the leaves of Betony and
Hart's-tongue, red Spanish Pease, and the middle bark of an Alder-tree.

Or, drink every morning and night, two leaves of five-fingers Herb, with a
draught of white wind: or the Roots of Poppies, and drink a draught thereof
about an hour before the fit comes; and in the mean time forbear sleeping. Also
bind upon the pulse of the Arms, a Pultise made of noble Say, Hysop, Wormwood,
Parsley, Mint, and three-leaved-grass with white spots; pound these with
wine-vineger to a Poultis, and make thereof small plasters for the pulses.

73. A Remedy for the Tertian Fever.
Soak pounded Patience Roots, three or four hours in white wind; strain the
juice through a fine cloth, (that it may make about sixteen ounces) and let the
patient drink it an hour or two before his Fever comes: or put the same a
soaking in half wine and water, with Platine Root.

Or, take about half a pint of Lambs-tongue, Purslain, or Pimpernel-water, a
little before the fit come: or, drink every day in the morning and at night,
three leaves of five-finger Herb in wine.

Or, take the juice of Ladies Mark, Sage, wine-vineger, of each an ounce;
mingle these together to a potion, take it three hours before the Fever come.

But the best Remedy in the world, is to drink two ounces of the juice of
Pomegranats in the morning fasting, five hour before the fit come, and to bind
upon t^^ wrests sleep-browns, and in the hollow ^^ the feet piles as big as a
pea, made of a^ ounce of Poplar-seed, and one half ounce of Spiders-web put
thereon, until the fit be past: Or, you may (an hour before the fit come) lay
this poultis upon the pulses: Sage, Nettle, Rhue, of each an handful, plucked
before the Sun rise; Salt, Soot, of each as big as a Nut; pound these together
with wine-vineger to a poultis.

Others do more commend a Salve made of Earthworms boiled in Goose-grease;
anoint the forehead therewith, and the patients Temples, before his fit
comes: or, put to his Neck the horns of a flying Heart, (Horbeder) this is a
singular Remedy.

74. How to Cure a Quartan Fever.
Take two white loaves, as hot as they come out of the Oven, let them soak in a
pot of wine-vineger; still it through a Still, and give the patient of this
stilled water to drink about half a pint, two hours before his Fever come: or,
the juice of the female wool-herb is a spec^al Remedy, being pressed out with
white wind, before it buds, and taken a little before the fit comes.

The juice of the Herb Coltsfoot has the same virtue: also the Decoction of
the Roots and leaves of Iron-herb, boiled in white wind.

Also the Decoction of clean-Mint, Poley, Oreya, Oxentongue, Borage, Betony,
Thime, Agrimony, the rind of Thamarisk Root, Ash, and Sparagus Roots boiled up
together in white wind: or the powder of Myrrha drunk with Maligoe; likewise
pills of Myrrha and Triacle, of the bigness of a Spanish pea, swallowed down an
hour before the fit come.

Also distilled water, or the Decoction of Carduus Benedictus, drunk before the
fit come, is very good.

Also the juice of Wormwood and Rhue settled and clear: or the juice of
Lambs-tongue drunk with honey-water. Also the pounded Root of Mans-ear, dried
in the Sun, or in an Oven, the eighth part of an ounce, taken half a quarter of
an hour before the fit come.

Also if you drink one ounce or two of the juice of bruised Alder-roots, once,
twice, or thrice before the fit come, it will leave you: or having purged,
drink white wind wherein Sage has been steeped a whole night; besides, anoint
the backbone, the hollow of the feet, the palms of the hands, the forehead and
the Temples, with Treacle, Mithridate, or Scorpion-Oyl: the Oil of Bay Berries,
mingled with Brandy, has the same virtue.

Some superstitiously eat Sage for nine days together, the first day nine
leaves, the second eight, and so consequently every day one less, until the
nine days be past.

75. A Cure for the Shaking in the Ague.
Eat before the fit come, a peeled head of Garlic.

76. Against Thirst in an Ague.
Hold upon your Tongue a three comered stone, which is found in the head of a
Carp, a stone of a Snail, a piece of Crystal often laid in water, a piece of
Silver or Gold, or leaves of Roman Sorril, of Purslain, of Stan-crop, or peeled
seed of Cucumbers, House-leek leaves.

77. A Remedy against the Plague.
Make distilled water of the Queen of the fields, steeped before in White Wind:
or put a piece of Gold, or, of its filings, or leaves of beaten Gold, a soaking
in the juice of Lemons twenty four hours; mingle this with Wine-vineger, and
with the powder and decoction of Angelica-roots, and give it to him that has
the Plague: or take two old Oaker-nuts, one Fig, ten leaves of Rhue, one corn
of Salt, bruise these together, then mingle them, and roast them in the ashes,
and sprinkle them with Wine to an Antidote, and give it to the infected person.

Or, take an head of Garlic, leaves of Rhue, the Herb Salandine, of each
twenty; pound them together with White Wind, and a little Brandy that is let
through, to a potion; of this let him drink half a pint.

Three quarters of a pint of Wine, six ounces of the Water of Orange-flowers,
drunk, drives away the Malignity of the distemper by sweating: so does the
juice of Marygolds, Gilliflowers, and of the Herb Scabiosa.

Upon the swelling of the Plague, you must lay a hot loaf being opened in the
middle: or a white Onion filled with Treacle or Mithridate, made soft with the
juice of Lemon, well stopped and roasted in the ashes till it is enough; then
bruise it, and lay it upon the swelling.

Also they may drink the juice that is pressed thereout, and lay the remainder
upon the swelling; which has the same virtue.

Against the Carbunckle, or other pestilential swellings, take pounded Rhue,
with sour Leaven, Figs, Spanish flies, Onion, Sea-Onion, unquenched Lime, Soap,
Ammoniack, and a little Venice-Treacle; make a plaster thereof, lay it to the
swellings, and it will break them.

Or, dry a Toad, either in the Sun or in the Oven; make her into powder, lay
the powder on the swelling, it will draw out the poison.

Or, put thereupon a living Frog; if he dies, lay on an other, and renew this
often, till the Frog remains alive, so you shall draw out all the poison.

78. A Cure for Hanging-Breasts.
Make a Salve of the remainder of the dregs of Flax-seed Oil, a little gum of
Arabia, Dragant, Mastick, and Campher, or Partridge Eggs; renew it often.

Or, wash them with the distilled water of fresh Pine-Apples, or with the juice
of wild Pine-Apples.

79. A Cure for Vlcerated Breasts.
If the Breast be ulcerated because of the superfluity of suck, take mire out
of the Grinders or Cutlers trough, and cover the Breast therewith, and the pain
will Goard-cease in one night; you may add thereunto a little Oil of Roses.

But if the Teats be much infected, lay thereupon the pap of Rice-Meal, or the
flour of the best Wheat, boiled thick in Red-wine, as hot as you can suffer it.

80. How to increase Milk.
Use often Fenickle-juyce, or drink the juice of Ladies-mark, or of Beets; or
powder of the Root of our Lady-Thistle, adding thereto fresh Fenickle-seed, and
a little burnt powder of the fore-feet of a Cow, with Wine, or Chicken-broth,
or such like: or, fine powder of Mountain Crystal, drunk with Wine or
Mutton-broth; or, eat boiled Coleworts, prepared with Pepper; or, boiled Roots
of Neck-herb with Pepper.

81. How to dry up Milk.
Lay upon the Teats the Roots of the Herb Salandine, bruised and boiled: or,
bath the Breasts with sour vinegar water, or lay thereupon a pap of Bean-Meal;
or of Rhue, Sage, Mint, Wormwood, Fenickle, and rolls sodden and mingled with
Cameles Oil, or fresh and green Goard-leaves, or bruised and pounded Crab-fish.

82. Against any hurt by swallowing down Horse-leeches.
If any in drinking have swallowed down any Horse-leech, or such like, give him
to drink wood-lice, with strong vinegar.

If a Serpent be crept into the body of any being asleep, having his mouth
open, nothing is better than to receive through a funnel in the mouth, the
smoke of an old shoo-sole: or drink a Decoction of Iron-hearb boiled in
white wind, probatum est.

If you have eaten bad Mushromes, then drink Honey-Vineger, with pounded
hens-dung, and you shall presently be freed from any harm, or suffocation of
the stomach; or drink lie of Vine-branches with a little Salt.

83. Against the Hiocough.
It is good to stop and retain oftentimes the breath, to stop both Ears,
keeping up the head, and the mouth open, looking upwards.

Also endeavor to sneeze, to use labor, to suffer thirst, to throw cold water
on the patients face, and to make him afraid.

84. Against Belching.
It is good to eat fasting, pounded Fenickle, Anis, Carawaies, and Coriander:
or to drink twice or thrice in the morning the Decoction of Bay Berries boiled
in wine, with the aforesaid seeds, and to lay upon the stomach a little bag of
wormwood, Rhue, Marjoram, and water-Mint.

85. To strengthen the Stomach.
If the weakness of the stomach proceed from an hot cause, then (if the patient
perceive after eating and drinking a pain in the head, and stinking belching,
with vomiting, accompanied with excessive slabber, and an inclination to
vomit,) it will be convenient a loaf* and an half, or an ounce and a quarter of
Hiera-simplex, with the Decoction of Spanish pease, or two or three ounces of
water of Wormwood, and after Meals, to use prepared Coriander, abstaining to
drink suddenly after it, or to sleep in the day time.

Also 'twill be good to take once a week, a Confection of Myrobalan, to
strengthen the stomach; but if the patients mouth be dry, thirsty, and
brackish, let him take Syrup of Roses, Sorrel, and of Quince, with Cicory, or
Endive-water, or boiled water made cold again; then let him take Bitter-holly
as above.

You shall anoint the stomach with Oil of Roses and Quinces, and lay thereupon
a Plaster of red-Roses, Sandal-wood, and other cooling and heart-strengthening
things; but none that are heating, lest you increase the evil.

If the weakness of stomach proceed from tough slime in the top of the stomach,
which causes a sour wind, and hinders concoction; take Pills proper for the
same, by your Physicians advice.

In this case Anis and Fenickle is good after meals, and toasted bread soaked
in boiled Wine, Hypocras, or Malmsey.

For outward Remedy, it is good to anoint the stomach with Oil of Mastick, and
of Nardus, and sometimes to lay upon it the same toasted Bread, soaked in good
Wine, covered with powder of Cloves and Nutmegs; or to wear on the stomach a
Plaster of these following things, Mastick, Labdanum, of each an ounce,
powdered or pounded Wormwood, and Mint, of each one eighth part of an ounce,
Turpentine as much as is needful to mingle the other to a Plaster; this being
mixed according to art, you shall spread it upon a piece of Leather.

This weakness of the stomach proceeds manytimes from slime, which falls down
from the head, whereby the stomach being cold, does with difficulty digest what
it receives.

The best Remedy is fasting, whereby the stomach is emptied at leisure,
digesting the meat slowly. But when the pain is very great, then vomit to empty
the stomach from that which troubles it; or drink spiced Wine or Hypocras.

Then strengthen the stomach by heat and good sents, as with Heart-strengthning
Powders and Flowers, put into little bags, and lay them upon the stomach; they
may be made of Cammomile, Marjoram, Rhue, Wormwood, Cloves, Cinnamon, and
Nutmegs.

And for the clearing of the stomach, let the Patient a little before meals
take a little pill, or powder of bitter holly (Hiera simplex) or if the stomach
be much out of order, then let him take in the morning three or four hours
before dinner, three of the aforesaid little Pills.

Let the patient eat little, and light meats, and such as will easily digest;
as boiled meat, and flesh easy of digestion.

Let him drink good wine, yet little, seldom water, but never sour wine, or
new wine. After Meals let him take a spoonful of this following Powder, (which
the stomach will digest,) Take Aniseed, Lemon-seed, Cinnamon, Liquorish,
scrapings of Ivory, one sixteenth part of an ounce, loaf-Sugar as much as is
necessary; mingle this to a fine powder.

Let the patient be well clothed against the cold; let him keep his head and
feet moderately warm, and always dry; let him keep to his stomach a piece of
Crimson cloth, upon which let him spread Gilli-flowers, Cinnamon, and other
well-sented powders; or a Kites skin, or other soft skin to keep his stomach
warm.

86. Against the Loathing of the stomach.
From the great abundance of Slime, of course and tough humors, the stomach is
brought to loath that which it receives, and agrees not with the patients
taste, being continually hindered by reason of continual dryness and bitterness
in the mouth, sometimes vomiting yellow stuff as bitter as gall: for a Remedy,
the Gall is to be cleansed, the patient is to bleed, and use such means as may
conduce to his recovery: to make him hungry, let him drink in the morning a
Decoction of Wormwood, or juice of Mint; and for the sharpning of the Appetite,
and comforting the stomach, let him take fig-beans made in sweet-water, then
pound them with wine-vineger, and so drink them.

The same effect has the Gum of the Cherry-tree taken with wine and water.

Also a Decoction of wild Chervel, or course Marjoram, as well as Indian
Pepper, and the kernels of the fruits of Sance-tree, (Berberries.)

Also the seed of young Rapes with sugar, or the same seed laid in pickle and
Oil: but in case none of these means will help, then give the patient all sorts
of Meats, according to his will and discretion, (although they be not good for
him.) He shall also satisfy his desire in his ordinary drink, and use clean
juice of Pomegranats alone, or mixed with wine.

87. Against Vomiting.
Take a slice of Tosted-bread, let it steep in Clarret-wine, and spread
thereupon powder of Mastick, and lay it warm upon the stomach, renewing it
every three hours.

Or, take water-Mint two handfuls, red-Roses one handful; let them boil up in
wine: then take Toasted-bread, well soaked in wine, two ounces; mix these with
powder of Mastick, one eighth part of an ounce to a Poltis, to prepare the
stomach against the Symptom.

But if the Vomiting be accompanied with a Fever, then soak and boil the Mint,
Roses, and Toasted-bread, in vinegar.

Also Mint, or water-Mint bruised, mingled with Oil of Roses, and laid upon the
stomach, is good against all kinds of Vomiting; besides, it is good after Meals
to swallow a mouthful of water: or to eat a piece of Quince-Herb, without
drinking suddenly after it: or to swallow in the moming with Wine, two hours
before breakfast, five or six whole pepper-grains: or Syrup of Mint or
Wormwood, or green Ginger.

Likewise it is expedient to bleed by Cupping-Glasses, on the lowermost part of
the stomach, or under the Navel, without pricking, especially when you eat; and
to rest after Meal without speaking or coughing.

88. A Cure for the pain of the Stomach.
Fill a dish with hot ashes, sprinkle them with Wine, cover the dish all over
with a cloth; hold this warm to your belly: or lay warm upon the stomach a
little bag of Salt very warm.

Or, take crumbs of Bread, as hot as they come out of the oven, put it in the
Oil of Cammomile; after it has soaked therein, wrap it up in a linen cloth,
and lay it upon the belly.

Or, fill the bladder of a Hog with decoction of Laurel, Oreya, Marjoram, Mint,
Thime, Cammomile, Nipta, Melilot, Anis, and Fenickle; lay it warm upon the
stomach, and renew it when it begins to be cold.

Or, knead a cake of Rye-leaven with Wine, and an handful of Wormwood,
water-Mint, and Roses, and lay it to the belly.

89. To kill the Worms in Children.
Let them eat confection of Rhabarbar, or the Preserve of Peach-tree flowers.

Or, drink distilled water of Gentian.

Or, the juice of Lemons, water-Mint, Basilicon, Purslain, Rhue, or Wormwood.

Or, a small draught of Wormwood-Wine, with the Powder of Earthworms, first
dried, and then burnt upon an hot Tile, and afterward pounded small.

Or, the eighth part of an ounce o^ the Powder of Carduus Benedictus, or
Corallina.

Or, lay upon their Navel a Poltis of Wormwood, and an Ox-gall, in the decrease
of the Moon.

90. A Cure for the Griping of the Guts.
There is nothing better than to carry about one a Ring, or little box of
Silver, in which is enclosed a small piece of the Navel of a newborn Child;
let the Ring touch the flesh.

Also, let the Patient (during the pain) drink a small draught of the best
white or red-wine.

Or, drink four or five ounces of Oil of Nuts, of Flax-seed, of Peach-tree
kernels.

Or, drink Cammomile-water, or water in which Hempseed has been boiled: or,
Wine, in which stamped Elicampane-Root has been soaked ten or twenty hours:
or, the Powder of the pizzle of a Stag, drunk with water: or, Hens-dung, with
Hypocrass made of honey and wine.

The little bones which are found in Woolfs-dung being bruised; nay, the dung
of the Woolf bruised, and drank with Wines, is good against the Colic.

Or, take the Heart of a Lark newly killed, and bind it to the calve of the leg.

Also a Clyster made of pickle.

Also, a fresh skin, or the net of the guts of a Weather newly killed, and laid
warm to the belly.

Also a Plaster made of Wolfs-dung.

Or, take hot ashes, and put them in a dish or pot, pouring thereupon a glass
of good red-wine: cover it with a cloth four double, and lay it upon the belly,
this will give present ease.

91. Against Oppilation.
Against Oppilation, and for the mollifying of the belly, eat in the morning
sweet black Cherries, Peaches, Figs, or Mulberries; drink the first juice of
Coleworts, Beets, the leaves of Peet-cheefe, or of Lettice without Salt.

Or, lay upon the belly pap made of the Root of Hogs-bread, the Gall of a Bull
mixed with honey: Colloquint-leaves: or, make a Stick-pill of Bacon, Mallow, or
Beets.

92. A Remedy for the flux of the Belly.
The looseness or flux of the belly is of two sorts: first, the Dienteria,
which is most dangerous: it is occasioned, when that which is eaten is by
reason of great Indigestion thrown out as it was taken in, without any stinking.

The second is the looseness called Diarrhoea, when there is only a single
flux and course of waterish and slimy humors.

There is a third flux called the red-flux, or Dissenteria, wherein blood is
mixed with the Excrement, or when the sick voids blood only.

Looseness Dienteria.
Concerning the first, (because such fluxes happen seldom, but by a strange
accident, or to those who dye because of extreme Age, and because the same is
dangerous) they who are not able to pay the Physician, may make use of the
following Remedy.

Let the sick take Surrup of Wormwood, with honey of Roses: or, with the water
of Betony, Fenickle, and Wormwood, four or five mornings, of each a spoonful.

The patient shall excite vomiting, (in case he be not inclined thereto) by
some means, (which are useful thereto.)

Next, he shall strengthen the stomach with with Oil of Nard, Spicknard, Mint,
and Wormwood.

Or, with a stomach-plaister of Galenus, spread upon leather, and laid to the
belly.

Or, you may put to the stomach a little bag filled with Wormwood, Mint, and
dry Marjoram.

In the morning let him take a little piece of the small Cakes which are made
of Aromatic powder, (which you may have at the Apothecaries) called Aromaticum
Rosatum.

Also a little of a well-sugared Lemon-Pill; and before he eats, let him take
some Marmelade.

Second Looseness, Diarrhoea.
For the second, that this looseness or flux of humors is not always a
sickness, but rather a benefit of nature, and wholesome to him that has it, if
it be not accompanied with a Fever, if it lasts not long, and if there be not
any bloody flux to be feared.

When this looseness is without a Fever, you must let it take its course for
three or four days, that the body may be exonerated of bad and superfluous
humors.

At the end of that time, (if it be accompanied with a Fever,) or if you fear
a bloody flux (being threatened by one drop of Blood) then you shall use these
Clysters or Infusions which are drawing.

Take Mint, Sage, Marjoram, Benagie.

It Is good to use Milk wherein Iron or Steel has been quenched; or half Milk
and half water boiled to the half.

Or, powder of Hearts pizle drunk with water: or, roasted Rice: or, the eighth
part of an ounce of pownded Mastick, with the yolk of an Egg.

Also you may make a Plaster of wheaten Meal, soaked in red-wine, and baked in
an oven, and laid warm to the belly.

Bloody Flux.
Against the Bloody Flux, give the sick red-Wine to drink, dried powder of
Hare-blood, of powder of mans-bones, of a dogs-turd (the dog having fed three
days upon Bones only;) let these be dry, to make a powder of

This you shall give the sick twice a day, for two or three days, with Milk
wherein fiery flint-stones have been quenched.

Or, give him to drink stilled water of Burse, Prince-print: or, of the first
sprouts of Oaks: or, a Decoction of Bloudwort: or, powder of Lambs-tongue-seed:
or, of burnt snails, and of bramble-berries, with a little pepper and
gall-nuts: or, of burnt-Goats or Stags-horn: or, of the pizzle of an Heart,
prepared as was showed before, Sect. 66.

Drink also (to stop the flux) the Decoction of Dove-Nettles: use broth wherein
Coleworts have been well boiled: or, the juice of Granates; nay, the Granate
Apples themselves, oftentimes Rhabarbar.

It Is good also to use Sallats of Lambs-tongue and Sorrel.

Infusions and Glisters may be made of Lambs-tongue and Horse-tail, and of all
kind of stopping things. The Diet may be found Sect. 114. of the Monthly Flux.

93. How to stop the excessive bleeding of the Vein under the Tongue.
Drink Lambs-tongue-water, with the eighth part of an ounce of Coral, hot Iron
Scales pounded; warm them with a Decoction of Wool-leaves: or, instead thereof,
a pap made up of burnt paper, the remainder of Lead: or, of Bolus Armenius,
with a little of the white of an Egg: or, powder of burnt or unburnt
Oyster-shells; mix these with a little fresh butter, and lay it in a pap upon
the Vein.

94. A Cure for the pain of the Paps.
Make a little pap of the crumbs of a white-loaf steeped in sweet Milk; mingle
it with two yolks of Eggs, a little Saffron, and Poplar Salve.

Or, you may make an Ointment of unsalted Butter, Flax-Seed-oyl, the yolk of an
Egg, and a little wax.

Or, you may make an Ointment of fresh Butter, and burnt Cork; which is better
than the perfume of grated Ivory.

95. Against a hot enflamed Liver.
Eat with your Meat Lettice, Sorril, Purslain, Cicory, and Hops; and drink
sometimes stilled water of the same Herbs: or, Endive-water: the water also in
which these Herbs have been boiled is very good.

96. To Cure a stopped Liver.
Drink the Decoction of the Roots of Cicory, Parsley, Fenickle, Ladies-mark,
Dogs-grass, stinging Palm, Sorril, Venus-hair, Hops, and saw-dust of Ivory.

Also give the patient sour Surrup of Sea-Onion, (Oxymel Squilliticum.) Women
sometimes have Obstructions in the Liver, when their Monthly flux is hindered:
in such case they should bleed on the Mothevein, (Saphena) being situate about
the Ankle, within the foot; and she should take at the new of the Moon, seven
or eight mornings together, half an ounce of Triphera magna, and three ounces
of the water of St. John's Herb, Hysop, of Fenickle, or its decoction; and of
opening Roots boiled in water, and one third part of wine.

97. A Remedy for the Jaundice.
Drink fasting one eighth part of an ounce of Goats-dung, after it has stood
nine days in white wind.

Or, a Decoction of Strawberry-leaves and Roots: or, take Mare-sprigs,
white-brambles or briars, about an handful, plucked before Sunrising,
Parsley-Roots two or three; pound them with White Wind, (as much as will be
necessary) strain the wet through a cloth or sive to a potion, and drink
thereof morning and night the quantity of half a drinking-glass; this is an
excellent Remedy, but not to be used by any woman with Child, but instead
thereof bind on her Pulses, and in the hollow of her feet, leaves of
Mare-sprigs, Oak, Salendine, and Malrove, bruised with a little wine to a pap.

Or, Earthworms washed in White Wind, then dried and reduced to powder; take
of this a small spoonful, with some Wine.

Or, the patient may drink the decoction of Wormwood or Malrove: or, he may
drink several days together, fasting, his own Urine: or, a little Wine with
Goats-dung.

Three leaves of wild-Rocket carried in the left hand, cures (as some report)
the Jaundice.

98. To Cure the Black Jaundice.
The black Jaundice proceeds rather from the Milt, (or Spleen) than from the
Liver.

After the use of Syrrups, Potions and bleeding is good: or to set
wind-cupping-glasses, without pricking, on the left side of the Milt.

Then lay a piece of Felt thereon, being wet with good white-vineger made warm,
and keep it to it while it is warm, warm^ng it three or four times.

Then anoint the Milt (four or five days together) with a Salve of Dialthaea;
and the following four or five days (or longer) wear thereon a Plaster made of
Gum Ammoniack, melted in strong vinegar, and spread upon leather.

99. How to Cure the Dropsy.
Make a Potion of bruised Bryne-seed in white wind: or, of the Flower of blew
Flower-de-luce-wort: or, of Mans-Ear: or, drink for some days fasting your own
water.

Honey-water is a certain Remedy, with powder of Glass burnt seven times, and
extinguished again, mingled with the juice of blew Flower-de-luce in white wind.

Lay upon the swollen place a Poltis of hot Cow Dung; with which, it is reported,
a certain Physician of Mysia cured all Dropsies: or, lay on the Swelling live
Snails, unwash'd, bruised with their shells.

100. A Cure for the Oppilation of the Milt.
The Milt receives the black-gall, cleansing and purifying the Blood, that it
may the better nourish. As long as it is in good order, it makes a man cheerful
and merry, but when it swells, and grows bigger than is fit, by too much
black gall, the Oppilation or stopping of the Milt is occasioned, which
hinders good Blood; hereby nourishment is corrupted, the Members suffer and
dry up, the Heart is sad, the Face is black, and after meal the patient will
find a pain in his left side.

Whether it proceeds from an hot or cold humor, the Cure may be this.

Open the Milt-Vein, (Salvatella) which is between the heart-finger and the
little finger of the left hand.

If the pain be accompanied with thirst, loathing, or dryness of the Tongue,
it is a sign the stopping proceeds from a hot humor.

Then let the patient take four or five mornings fasting, Syrrup of Endive, or
Hart's-tongue.

Then let him take a Potion of half an ounce of the juice of Roses, and three
ounces of the Decoction of Hart's-tongue and Caper-Roots, which the patient
shall take five or six hours before dinner.

Also half an ounce of Cassia, and six eighth parts of an ounce of prepared
Sene-powder, with water of Hart's-tongue.

These cleansing Potions being used, anoint the Milt with oil of Roses, or
Flax-seed: or, lay thereupon a Plaster of the aforesaid Oils with Flax-seed
and Caper-Roots: or, of Nightshade, Purslain-seed, and Powder of Lambs-tongue
mingled with wine.

If the sick have but little desire to eat, and cannot well digest what he has
eaten, or has sour belchings, it shows that his sickness proceeds from black
gally cold humors.

Then given him a Syrrup of Staecha, and of Hart's-tongue: or, vinegar of honey
setting of water, (Oxymel diureticum,) with a Decoction of Hart's-tongue and
Caper-Roots: you may (increasing this Decoction) add thereto Roots of
Ladies-mark, Parsley, Mint, and Thamarisk.

Then purge the black gally humor with this Potion.

Take Diacatholicum one ounce, prepared Sene-powder a quarter of an ounce,
water of Wormwood, or Hart's-tongue, or of the aforesaid Decoction three ounces,
to a Potion.

As for outward Remedies, you must anoint the side of the Milt with Oil of
Flower-de-luce, and of Dill, or with sweet Butter, or Suet, Hens-grease, or
Partridge Suet; mingle all these together.

Or, you may chafe the left side with the Salve of Dialthaea: let the sick
drink White Wind, or the Decoction of Hartshorn, night and morning.

Let him also eat two Figs, with the powder of Pepper, Hysop, and Ginger; let
him mingle his Wine with steeled water: he shall also use Capers, with Oil and
Wine-vineger.

101. For the pain of the Milt.
Against the pain and heaviness of the Milt, drink Wine in which Hearts-tongue,
Asparagus, and Hops have been boiled.

Or, drink often fasting, juice of red-Coleworts which are half boiled.

Or, the Decoction of Roman-Wormwood, Hart-wort: or, of small Santory or
steeled-water.

102. Against the pain of the Gravelish Colic.
Make a Decoction of the leaves and flowers of Camomile, boiled in half
White Wind and half water, until a third part ^e consumed; give this to the
patient to drink lukewarm, and the pain will cease.

103. A Remedy for the Stone of the Reins.
You shall often drink of Birchen sprigs. This water must be gotten in the
spring, because the stock or rind being then cut, yields much water.

Also the Fruit of Eglantine or sweet-Brier before it be ripe, well sugared, in
the fashion of a Marmelade: the seed which is enclosed in the Fruit being
taken, (at the last quarter, and on the first days of the following New Mood.)

You shall often drink Wine with the powder of the Herb Rest-harrow, or of
Rhine-berries, or Gum which grows on the rind of the Vine: or seed of
Goose-grass pounded small: or, distilled water of Radish and Nettles, with some
Sugar: or, water of Bryne-grass: or, of wild (...) or, the juice or water of
Raddish, mingled with the Powder of burnt Egg-shells, Medlar-stones,
Partridge-Eyes, Magpye-brains: or, the innermost skin of the stomach of a Hen
or Capon: or, take the Roots of Eringo-Thistle, the Heart first taken out and
made very clean; let it soak in Fountain Water eight hours; boil it to the
consumption of the half, adding thereto bruised Liquarish. Let it cool slowly;
and use it in the morning fasting.

For outward remedies, lay a Pultis upon the Reins, of Pellitory of the wall:
or, of the Roots of Cypress, and leaves of the Roots of Alicampain boiled in
Wine; but the best Remedy is, To prepare a Bath of water, in which are boiled
the leaves of water-Parsley, Mallow, Poppies, Violets, Pellitory of the wall,
and Camomile-flowers; lay this on the Reins while you are in the Bath, a little
bag with Rolls, and water-Parsley.

104. To take away the Stone of the Bladder.
Drink the juice of Lemon with white wind: or, bruise Medlar-stones, first
washed in Wine, and then dried into a Powder.

Also the seed of Bryne, Pimpernels, Asparagus, Stone-break, Mellons, Pompeons,
little Citrons, bruised in White Wind.

Or, make Powder of Spongy-stones, and of the stone which is found in the head
of a Crab.

Or, Hasel-nut-shells: or, Gum of black-Cherries, taken with White Wind, or the
juice of Radishes: or, distilled water of the Husks of Beans, red Fitches, and
the seed of Poppies.

But beyond all, is, Glass made fiery hot, and quenched in water of Beans; or,
Stone-break bruised small, and given to the patient; it breaks the stone in
what place of the body soever.

If it be in the Bladder, Egg-shells, out of which a little Chicken has been
taken and hatched, made into fine Powder, taken with White Wind, water of
Beans, stilled through the Helm, is excellent against the detention of the
Urine, and stone of the bladder.

105. Against Scalding Urine.
Use the Decoction of the four cold seeds: also, when you make water, hold your
Privities in sweet Milk.

Or, take one eighth part of an ounce of the froth of the Sea made into Powder,
and one ounce of the Marrow of Cassia; then take the pap of Cassia, with
wine-vineger, and lay it upon the Reins, and other cooling things: never sleep
on your back.

106. To prevent Pissing in Bed.
Eat often of a Goats-lung roasted: or, drink Wine with the Powder of the
Brains and small Eloes of a Hare: or, of the bladder of an Hog, Sheep, or Goat:
or, the Powder of the Root of Liver-wort: or, Crow-foot, (Bistorta) or, of
Tormentil, with the juice of Lambs-tongue: or, Sheeps-Milk: or, the ashes of
the flesh of an Hedg-hog.

107. Against Drop-Pissing.
Take whites of Eggs, Snails, of each one pound, of the four great cold seeds,
small seeds, of each half an ounce, Lettice-water half a pound, Marrow of
Cassia four ounces, Turpentine three ounces; bruise what is to be bruised, set
it soaking one night, and then still it through an Helm, in a warm water-Bath,
to a Potion.

Let it stand before you use it: let the patient drink of this stilled water
half an ounce, and one part of an ounce of Sugar of Roses, continuing to do
this some time.

108. A Remedy against painful Pissing.
Drink the juice that is pressed out of common Black-Cherries: or, out of
winter-Cherries, or the Decoction of the Roots of Radishes, Sorril,
Eringo-Thistle, Elicampane-Root, white-brambles or briers, Sparagus, Grass, or
of the Herb Rest-harrow.

Besides, lay upon the yard, and round about the Privities, a pap made of
fleas, mixed with the Oil of Bitter Almonds: or, with the fat of a Rabbet: or,
which is better, put into the yard two or three fleas or Wood-lice: or, drink
White Wind, with bruised Cheeslips, which are found in Cellars: or, make them
into powder, and drink them with White Wind: or, the stilled water of the rinds
of Rest-harrow-wort, soaked before in Malmsey.

109. Against the Inflammation of the Yard.
Take Cow Dung with flowers of Camomile, Brambles, and Melilot, to lay upon the
Clods; this will take away the Inflammation immediately; also the pap which
shall be described, Sect. 110.

110. Against the Inflammation of the Matrix.
Make a Clyster of the juice of Lambs-tongue, Nightshade, or of Stancrop.

Or, lay thereupon the pap of Barley-Meal, the rind of Pomgranats, with one of
the three aforesaid Juices.

111. Against the rising of the Matrix.
Chafe the Legs downward, and tie them stiff: also bleed by Cupping-glasses
upon the thigh: rub the belly downward, from the little hole of the Heart, unto
the Navel.

Let the patient smell to such things as stink; as burnt Partridge-feathers,
shoo-soles: hold underneath her Gilliflowers, Marjoram, Amber-grease, Civet, or
Wool-leaves, of the uppermost of the shoot.

Also let her drink Wormwood-water, with Mithridate about the bigness of a bean.

Or, fifteen red or black small grains of Piony, bruised and put into
White Wind: or, a leaf of great Burs laid under the hollow of the foot.

Let the patient drink every night when she goes to sleep, three spoonfuls of
White Wind, wherein an ounce of wild-Vine-root has been soaked and boiled.

If the woman be big with Child, let her lay close with her Husband: he
aforesaid Remedies are dangerous for a woman with Child.

112. Against sinking of the Matrix.
Let the patient vomit, rub her Arms, and tie them stiff, and set
Cupping-glasses on the Breast, without pricking; let her smell to things
well-scented: you may use below other stinking things; let her drink tart
red-Wine, with powder of Hartshorn, or of dry Laurel-leaves.

Or, make a Poultis of bruised Garlic mingled with water: or, of green bruised
Nettles.

This being put to the belly, will bring the Matrix to its place: or, take the
leaves of Poppies boiled in Oil and Quailsuet, and lay it to the belly as a
Poultis: or, the ashes of Egg-shells out of which Chickens have been hatched,
mingled with pitch, and laid upon the belly: or, the leaf of great Burs laid
under the hollow of the foot, draws the Mother downward; but being laid to the
Crown of the head, draws it upward.

113. For the white Flux.
First, let the body be cleansed, then drink the juice of Lambs-tongue, or
Purslein-water, with Powder of Amber, Coral, Bolus Armenius, Terra-sigillata,
prepared Steel, Sponge burnt in a pot, and Sea-shells, first burnt, and then
washed in Wine and dried.

Concerning outward Remedies, make a Lie of the Ashes of an Oak, Fig-tree-wood:
or, of young Willow-trees, in which you shall boil the rinds of Liver-wort or
Crowfoot, (Hestorta) Periwinckle, winter-Roses, with a little vinegar and salt;
with this you shall make a Bath, and sit therein to the middle of the body.

114. Against the Monthly Flux.
Let the patient drink the juice of Lambs-tongue, with the powder of the dried
bones of Sheep: or, powder of St. James's shells, Coral, Hartshorn,
burnt-Egg-shells: Powder of Fullers wool-cards, or Scales of Iron, first soaked
in vinegar, and made into powder.

Concerning outward Remedies, lay on the Navel hedg-Snails well bruised: or,
the husks which lie between the kernels of the nuts, being burnt, bruised
small, and mingled with Wine: or, make a pap of Chimney-soot: or, take the
black which is scraped from the bottom of a Kettle, mingled with the white of
an Egg: or, the juice of Dove-nettles, or of Wool-hearb; this you must lay upon
the loins, or the lower part of the Belly.

Or, fill a great bag with Bay Salt, put it in fresh well-water, and lay it
behind the hollow of the Loins.

Or, the Gum of a black Cherry-tree, soaked in the juice of Lambs-tongue, and
put it into the Matrix by little spouts: or, lay upon the Breast the leaves of
Salendine.

The greater part of the Remedies that are useful for this disease, are also
good against the Bloody Flux; so also is the Diet.

The sick person should be in a place where the air is moderate, and abstain
from heat and cold; let her not work much, but sleep long; let her rub her Arms
and Shoulders, and bind her Arms hard from the shoulder to the elbow.

Let her put Cupping-glasses under her Breasts, on the back, and under the
shoulders; let her avoid all perturbations of mind, as Anger, Sadness, Fear,
etc. let her eat a little and often; let her keep her belly loose: Oppilation
binds up the body, and causes the pressing down of the Fundament, and motion
of the blood.

115. To provoke the Monthly Flux in Women.
Give them to drink every morning two ounces of St. John's Herb, or the
Decoction of Grass, Nardus-seed, Cicers, the Roots of Ladies-mark, Radish,
Cinnamon, Saffron, and Fullers-cards; to which you may add Myrrha, to the
bigness of a bean.

Or, the juice of Eringo-Thistle, and of Fullers-Cards, mixed with white wind.

Outward Remedies may be these; make a Bath of River-water, wherein Mugwort,
Mallow, Poppies, Camomile, Melilots, and the like Herbs have been boiled. In
this Bath rub the hips and the thighs downward, with a little bag full of St.
John's Herb, Chervil, Salendine, water-Parsley, Betony, Nardus-seed, and the
like.

Or, take a quarter of an ounce, or the eighth part of an ounce of
Harts-marrow, wrap it in a fine linen cloth, which must be put deep into the
woman, after her body is prepared and purged.

116. Against Sterility or Barrenness.
Let the Barren Woman, (four days after her Monthly Flux) drink the juice of
Sage, with a little Salt, continuing the same a long time.

Or, take the Female of a Heart that is with young; kill her, and draw out her
belly, the Fruit with its windings; take out the Fruit, and let the windings
(Secundinae) be dried in an Oven, out of which Bread has been newly drawn:
then break into morsels that part of the windings which was next to the Fruit,
to a Powder.

Give her this Powder to drink three mornings a little after midnight; with
three or four spoonfuls of Wine; let her not rise in four hours after she has
taken this.

This following Potion is of great virtue.
Take young sprigs of wild Vine-leaves, of Agrimony, St. John's Herb,
Thousand-leaves, Gamander, Goats-leaf, Hart's-tongue, Pimpernel, field-Cypress,
Violets green, of each an handful; one hundred Pepper-corns, Commin-seed half
an ounce, A^gelica, fine Cinnamon, Galiga, Ginger, Cloves, Nutmegs, Spike, of
each a quarter of an ounce: pound all these together, and let them soak two
days in white wind; boil them to two third parts, then strain the wine, and
mingle therewith as much scum'd honey as is necessary: make ^hereof a Syrup;
let the Woman take of this in the morning and at night a spoonful, with Wine,
or distilled water of the Herb Balm

117. To prevent Miscarrying.
Let her when she is quick with Child, ^ake of the Powder of Crimson, or
Scar^et-grain, and fine Frankincese, of each ^ like quantity, with the white of
an Egg: or, the Powder of the Pisle of an Ox, (as is described in 66. for the
Plu^isie.)

Or, that she always wear on her fingers ^ Diamond, which has virtue to keep
the Child in the Womb.

Or, take a Snake, dry it; pounded and ^pplied with crumb'd bread, it is very
good to hinder Miscarrying: but especially the Eagle-stone being worn about the
left shoulder, or hanged on the same arm or side, keeps the Child in the Womb*

118. To quicken the pain of a Woman in Labor.
Tie within the thigh, near the Groin, an Eagle-stone: as soon as the Child is
born, take the stone away, and give the Woman to drink, a Potion of the
Decoction of St. Johns-herb, Rhue, Depham, and Poppies: or, of the juice of
Parsley pressed out with vinegar, or White Wind, or Hypocras, wherein the Powder
of the rinds of Cassia, Cinnamon, Date-stones, and Roots, of Cypress, of red
Easters flower-de-luce, and Camomile-flowers, or the juice of Good Henry have
been steeped; lay these with White Wind, or the leaves of the same, upon, or
round about the Matrix.

If the Woman in Labor faint, give her Bread that has been soaked in
Hypocrass, or a spoonful of Clarret-water, which is thus made.

Take a pint of Brandy, grated Cinnamon about three ounces: having soaked three
days, strain it through a clean cloth, adding thereto one ounce of fine Sugar,
Rose Water six ounces, to a Claret Wine; let it stand in a well-stopped Glass
for use.

This Water, or rather Wine, is not only good against the Distempers of the
Matrix, but against swouning, faintness, weakness of the stomach, and other
defects.

119. To cause the second or Afterbirth.
To cause it to come forth, the aforesaid means are good; but you may take
lukewarm the Powder of Beans, Saffron-flowers, or Marygolds, with White Wind,
or Hypocrass.

120. Against following Pains.
Against after-following pains, drink a little spoonful of Claret-water,
described before, Sect. 118. or, water of Peach-flowers: or, Powder of the
Roots of Wall-wort, Peach-kernels, Nutmegs, Amber, and Ambergreese, with
White Wind.

Outward means, or a Pap to lay on the Belly.

Take hard boiled yolks of Eggs, and fry them with the Oil of Nuts and Jesmin;
add thereto Powder of Dill and Commin, or Flax-seed, Bean-meal, unsalted
Butter, Oil of Rhue, and Dill, with Powder of Camomile-leaves.

121. For a disturbed. Matrix.
Lay upon the Belly a Pap made of Cow Dung, Sheep or Goats-dung, with Commin,
Aniseed, Fenickle, and Parsley-seed, with a good quantity of Wine: or, in want
of this Pap, you may cover the belly with a fresh-Net of Weather, Sheep, or
Goat.

Or, lay a dish of Platanus-wood, or an earthen Cruise upon the Navel; but
^^^st anoint the corners of the Cruise with an head of Garlic.

122. Against Burstenness, or a Rupture.
Lay upon the place a Pap of Bean-meal and Wine: or, a Pap of Wall-wort, Dasy,
ship-pitch, and a little Mastick, then lay thereupon a small cloth, made wet in
the juice or moistness which flows out of the little Fruits of the Elm-tree:
or, make a Pap of that which remains in the Paper-mills after the Paper is
made, and tie it thereupon.

In the mean time drink for nine days together, a Potion prepared of the Roots
of Solomon's Seal and Sanickle.

Or, put red-Snails in an earthen pot, dry them in an hot Oven, and make them
into Powder; give this to Children for fifteen days together, or longer if
necessity requires, with Pap or Broth, if they suck; but if they be froward,
then still the Snails with hot water, and give it them fifteen days as
aforesaid.

Or, make a Powder of black-Bramble, and give them an eighth part of an ounce
thereof in a morning for some days together.

123. A Cure for the Gout.
Take new wax and fresh Butter, of each two pounds, let it boil up together,
then pour it thus hot into good Clarret-wine, as much as shall be necessary;
when they are mixed together, take them out, and make them up in a Lump, of
which you shall take some part, and lay it on the ill-affected part.

Another.
Take the leaves of Lyon-foot two handfuls, Oil of Linseed eighteen ounces,
White Wind four pints and an half; boil it till it is half wasted; rub with
this Decoction the painful place.

The same is performed with the Oil of Spike, and juice of white Poppies, of
each a like quantity, with Oil of Olives in which Frogs have been boiled till
the flesh goes off from their bones.

Also Oil of Cinnamon, Wax, and Salt, mixed together, of each a like quantity.
But against all sorts of Gouts, it is good to lay upon the painful place a
Poultis of red-Coleworts, with the juice of wild-Elder, Bean-meal,
Camomile-flowers, and Roses grossly pounded: or, scraped Wall-wort, which is
newly gathered, spread it upon a linen cloth.

Or, take the Roots and Leaves of Alder, leaves of Scabiosa, Daisy, and
wild-Sage; boil them in Wine together, strain them, and add thereto Spike-oyl,
Brandy, Ox-grease, of Cow-feet: or, take a goose plucked, and clean within;
fill it with great Chestnuts chopped small, and mingled with a little Salt; roast
it, and keep the Chestnuts for a chafing Salve.

Lay also on the pained place a little Doge, this will take away the pain.

But this is most excellent; make a plaster of Frogs, because the chief
Ingredients are Frogs, (Emplastrum de Ranis) oil of white flower-de-luce is
very good, which operates better old than new.

That these Remedies may prove effectual, it is good to cleanse exorbitant
humors, that the Patient may be prepared for the application of necessary
Remedies; therefore let him observe this diet, let him drink but little wine,
or rather not any.

Against the Gout in the hands and feet, use the decoction of St. Johns-herb in
oil of Olives, (as much as you shall judge sufficient) boil it two third parts,
make it to an Ointment or Chafing Salve, and anoint therewith the painful
places; let the Patient drink the Decoction of wild-Cypress, with the eighth
part of an ounce of Elder-berries.

Against the Gout of the Hip, lay on the painful place a pap made of a common
wheaten-loaf; that is, of the crumbs thereof, boiled in Cows or sheeps-milk,
adding thereto two yolks of Eggs, with a little Saffron; or make a Pap of the
Roots and leaves of Mallows, Roots of Marsh-Mallowes, or leaves of Violets,
flowers of Camomile, and Melilots; boil all together in water, or tripe-broth,
and mix them or knead them together with the yolks of Eggs, Flax-seed, Meal,
Hogs-suet, and oil of Camomile.

Or, take Cow Dung, Bean-meal, wheaten Rolls, and crum; knead them together
with honey and vinegar. If the painful place look whitish, and be much swelled,
then add to the aforesaid pap black pitch, with a little brimstone; it is also
good to press the juice out of Ivy-leaves and Alder: then let it boil with Oil
of Rhue, and Earthworms, with a little wax, for an Ointment or chafing Salve.

Or, a Poultis of Cow or Ox-dung, made warm in the ashes, with Colewort or
Vine-leaves; but if you will draw out the humor which lies in the joints,
then lay this Poultis thereon.

Take the dung of wild or tame Pigeons, oil of old Tile, of each one ounce,
Garden-cress-seed, Mustard Seed, of each a quarter of an ounce: mingle these
together.

124. A Cure for Red-swellings.
Make a Poultis of the leaves and flowers of Violets, leaves of Nightshade,
flowers of Camomile, Hen-bane, and Melilots boiled together in water-vineger.

Strain it through a sive, and lay it on the swelling: or, take the juice of
Stan-crop, a litte red-wine, and Barley-meal, make this into a pap; but in case
there be an hardness by the swelling, then put hereupon Goats-dung, which will
soften all hard-swellings, especially the inveterate hardness of the knees;
mingle it with Barley-meal, and water-vineger to a pap.

125. For Hard-swellings.
Take Mallows, Poppies, Pellitory of the Wall, Wool-herb, Roots of
Flower-de-luce, flowers of Camomile, and Mellilot, Poppies-seed and Flax-seed;
boil these together (of each a like quantity) in wine, water, and vinegar:
strain them, then add thereto Meal of Beans and Barley, powder of Camomile and
Roses, Hens-grease, and fresh butter; make this to a Pap, and lay also upon the
swelling an hot pap of the Lees of Bee-hives, mingled with white wind, and
fried in a pan.

126. Against Windy-swellings.
Take dried Salt, and put it between two small clothes upon the swelling: or, a
Poultis of the Lees of white wind, wheaten-rolls, and Ox-dung newly made.

127. To ripen Vlcerated Swellings.
Lay thereupon the dung of a Goose that has fasted three days, after she has
been fed with Eels newly killed; lay thereupon long gnawed raw-wheat: or, a pap
of the Roots and leaves of Mallow, white Poppies, Roots of flower-de-luce, and
the Crumbs of a white-loaf: boil these together, and strain them: add hereunto
the yolk of an Egg, and some Saffron. If it be a cold swelling, add to the
decoction of the pap, the Roots of wild-Alder, wild-vine, flowers of Camomile
and Melilots, Onion, with wheaten leaven.

128 Against Scratching, Scurvy, and other Itchings on the hands, or other
parts of the body.
Take lukewarm Smiths-water, put therein an handful of Salt, and rub the hands
or other parts therewith; and when the Scabs are dry, anoint it with the Cream
of Cows-milk.

Or, take two parts of Venetian Turpentine, washed five or six times in
Rose Water, or other cold water: add hereunto a good quantity of Butter newly
salted, the yolk of an Egg, and the juice of a sour Orange, make this into a
Salve; chafe herewith the Itchy place before the fire.

For young Children.
Take the juice of Nettles, and Poplar-salve, mingled together: or, soot of the
Chimney, with strong vinegar; rub the itching place red, and then anoint it
therewith.

129. To bring an Ulcer to Distillation.
Take raw wheat long ears, or Wheat-meal, the yolk of an Egg, Honey, and
Hog's Grease; make thereof a plaster, and lay it to the Boil.

Or, lay thereupon sheeps-dung soaked in wine-vineger, if you will suppurate
the Ulcers and make them soft: or, make a pap of Bean-meal, of Womans-milk,
leaven, and large figs, and apply it to the Ulcers.

130. Against Ulcers and Swellings about the Nails.
Lay upon it a little Worm which is is found in the midst of Fuller-Cards when
they are dry.

131. Against Vleers that are hard to be Cured.
Gather May-dew before Sunrising, wring your sheets in which you gather the
dew; boil, and scum it: while it boyleth, put into it Lint of fine-linnen, and
lay them upon the Ulcers: when you begin to see fresh or clean flesh, then boil
in the dew a little Alum, and white-Frankincense, by this means you shall cure
it.

Or, take Powder of Oyster-shells, raw or burnt: or, the dung of a Dog, who
has eaten for three days together nothing but bones: or, make a powder of
rotten-Wood.

132. Against a Canker.
Take honey of Roses, Mase, Alum, Salt, and White Wind; boil these together to
the half; strain this water through a cloth, and keep it to wash the Canker:
or, the distilled Water of Cow Dung.

Against the Canker called Noli me ta^gere, which is the worst of Cankers, lay
Tobacco upon it.

133. To take away Knobs.
Take old and rotten Cheese, bruise it with Water where Bacon has been boiled;
make it into a Plaster, and lay it upon the knobs.

Or, bruise Corulus Indi, (which comes out of the Levant) with Myrtle* and
wine-vineger, and lay it upon the knobs.

Or, take nine pints of the Urin of a man, Balm, Canker-flowers, of each two
handfuls; let them boil slowly in a new well-stopped earthen pot, to the
consumption of the half; then press out the herbs, and put thereto Brandy that
is strained through, four ounces; boil these together half an hour, and add
thereto Oil of Rosemary, and of Spike, of each one ounce, Quicksilver a
quarter of an ounce; mingle these together with a flat-spoon to a Salve, with
which you must chafe the knobs before the fire.

134. Against an hurt by a fall.
Let them drink White Wind, with the 16th part of an ounce of Powder, made of
Mummy, Tormentil, Raponticum, and Parmacety: or, Garden-Cresses, prepared seed
of Housleek, and Sugar Candy; of each an equal part.

135. Against blew spots.
Soak a little bag full of Salt in boyling-water, and bath the spots therewith.

136. A Cure for fresh Wounds.
Take Garden-balsome, Wall-wort, Daisy, and a little Salt; pound these
together, and lay them on the Wound.

Or, drop into it the juice of Tobacco: or, lay on the juice with its Herb,
(which is best) this will heal it in three days: or, take Elm-Apples, flowers
of St. Johns-Herb, Rosemary, and knobs of Roses; put these together in a glass,
with Oil of Olives; stop it close, and put it in the Sun, until by consuming it
seems to be rotten; strain it several times through a linen cloth, keep it
in a glass, and when you see occasion, drop some of it into the Wound.

Or, make a Salve of the juice and leaves of Tobacco: or, take green Agrimony,
Betony, Pimpernel, of each one handful; pound them together in a Mortar, and
put them into a glazed pot, with four pints and an half of White Wind: cover
them well, and boil them upon a gentle and clear fire, to the consumption of
the half; cool it by little and little, the next day make it a little warm, and
strain it through a sive as much as you can, adding thereto white-pitch,
(melted apart) one pound, wax half a pound, Turpentine and Mastick, of each one
ounce; mingle these to a Salve.

Besides, make a Plaster of black Rosinpitch, Brimstone, and white
Frankincense, of each a like quantity; bruise these, and mix them with the
white of an Egg: lay it upon the wound after the blood is stanched, washed off,
and the wound close up; bind up the Wound with Cobwebs, and Rowlers; let them
lie for several days on it.

Or, boil the leaves of Carduus Benedictus in Wine, with Wheaten-meal, till it
be as thick as a Salve; then wash the Wound with Wine twice a day, and dress it
with this Salve.

Or, wash the Wound with a decoction of Canker-flowers: or, (which is more
expedient) take dirt from under the pails, and lay it to the Wounds, which will
heal it presently.

137. Against old and new Wounds.
Take the leaves of Lambs-tongue, Dogs-rib, Mallows, good-Henry, noble-Sage, of
each a handful. These Herbs being well washed and distilled, must be pounded;
then take of Hog's Grease the fourth part of an ounce melt it in a pan, and boil
it with the aforesaid Herbs, till the juice of the Herbs is consumed.

Add thereto Virgins-wax, Rosyn, Pitch, of each about the bigness of two Nuts,
Frankincense half as much: melt them again, and make them into a Salve, this is
good for all sorts of Wounds.

Or, take pounded and fifted Brimstone, put it into a glass with Oil of Olives,
till it stand four or five fingers thick above it; then let the glass stand ten
days in the Sun, stirring it often with a wooden-stick, keeping the glass
well-covered, that no dust fall into it: after ten days pour the clear O^,
(which by that time will draw the virtue of the Brimstone to it) into another
glass without spilling any of the brimstone* then stop it fast; and when you
use it* dip therein lint of a clean cloth, or cotton* or black-wooll, and lay
it on the Wound* Boil, or swelling, every day till it be healed: you may put
Oil upon the same Brimstone, out of which Oil has been once poured.

138. Of Wounds by a Bullet.
If the Bullet sticks in the Wound, and you would get it out, make a tent of a
Quince-Apple, or of Marmalade, anointed with Oil and Eggs, and put it into the
Wound.

139. Against strained Sinews.
Take ripe berries of Elder fill therewith a round flask half full with the oil
of Olives; stop the Glass well, and let it stand twenty four hours in a skillet
of boyling-water, then put it ten days in a dunghill.

Or, oil of Elder, thus: fill a glased pot half full with the juice of
Elder-leaves, and fill it with the oil of Olives; stop it close with dough, put
it into an Oven after the bread is drawn, and let it stand there until the
juice be wholly consumed.

But this is more expedient; lay upon the Sinew the dung of an Ox or Cow, fried
in a pan with strong vinegar, or oil of Acorns, or Gum of a wild Pear Tree,
mingled with Capons-grease, or oil of Siccamore-Tree, or Jasmin.

140. Against stung Sinews.
Take Snails with the shells, pound them small, and put thereto dust-meal,
which is on the walls of Mills; put this upon the Sinews: or, anoint them with
the oil of Earthworms.

141. For Sinews that are cut through.
Take unwashed Earthworms, pound them small, and lay them on the wounded
Sinews: or, lay Alder-flowers to soak or steep in the Sun, in oil of Nuts, or
in Balsom, or oil, and dress the Sinew with it.

142. For inward Wounds.
If they may not be tented, drink the decoction of Eringo-Thistle, and wash the
outward Wound therewith.

Also, take of Bramble-berries, stinging-Nettles, Marygoulds, Sanickle,
Mouse-ear, Pimpernel, green-Sene, Canker-flowers, Lambs-tongue, little tops of
Hemp, Female-Ferne, Ox-tongue, Gentiana, Vervine, Ash-keys, Pennyroyal,
Scordium, Nip, Ruperts-herb, five-finger-herb, Venus-hair of all kinds, Roots
of Madder, Sage, the whole Wallwort, St. Johns-herb, Daisies, Betony, Agrimony,
Brunella, of each an handful, flowers that strengthen the heart, four ounces of
St. Johns-herb, Carduus Benedictus seed, long Raisons stoned, Liquoris, of each
an ounce; all these being well washed, must be very well pounded and strained,
with one pint of white wind, to a Potion.

Let the wounded person drink hereof before dinner and supper: if this drink be
unpleasant to him, then instead of pounding, boil the abovementioned
Ingredients in common-water, and add thereto White Wind, honey of Roses, Syrrup
of dry-Roses, as much as shall be necessary.

Cleanse the Wound with lukewarm White Wind, and lay thereupon fresh, red, and
warmed leaves of Coleworts; forbear salt-meats, Spices, strong-Wine, great
labor, and women.

143. Against the biting of a Mad-Dog.
Eat sweet brier-wort, and wash the hurt with a young Child's Piss, or with a
decoction of Rhue, Figs, red-Coleworts, and Salt mingled with honey and butter.

144. To Cure the Biting of a Serpent.
Take immediately a draught of the juice of an Ash-tree, with White Wind, and
lay upon the bed (of the party bitten) the leaves out of which the juice was
pressed: or, the milky juice of the Fig Tree, or juice of Figs: or,
Mustard Seed bruised with vinegar.

Or, take the leaves of Wool-herb, Caryophilate, red-Currans, of each an
handful; boil them in vinegar and Mares-piss, of each a like quantity, until
the half be consumed to a Potion.

Drink of this at once a small drinking-glass; bath the Wound with the
remainder of the pecoction.

145. A Cure for Kibe-heels.
Take the burnt-ashes of old shoo-soles, mingle them with oil of Roses, and
anoint therewith the Kibes,: or, lay thereupon Granate-shells boiled in Wine.

146. A Cure for stinking Feet.
Put in your shoes the scales of Iron; if you will preserve your health, keep
your body clean, and purge out (seasonably) superfluous humors, therefore use
gentle Purges, viz. Clysters, Pills, or small Potions, to prevent thereby great
sicknesses.

As, take a Clyster every Month, to keep the body in good order, take purging
Pills by the Advice of your Physician: Pills of Aloe, Myrrha wet with Wine, or
the Syrrup of Venus-hair, which is good against fleam, and being taken once a
week, it is good for the stomach, sight, and hearing.

When your stomach is stopped, you may loosen it, by taking the eighth part of
an ounce of the Powder of the leaves of Damask-Roses, with broth made of flesh,
a little before dinner, or with Cassia alone.

In the Spring you may cleanse and ^urge humors, with the decoction of
pale-Roses: drink eight or nine mornings together, one spoonful in a morning;
or without respect to the season of the year, you may purge with these
Flesh-broths.

Take a young Hen, or a quarter thereof: or, boil Weather-Mutton that is not
very fat; add thereto good Herbs, as Bernagy, Sorrel, Lettice, tame and wild;
Cicory, of each a little quantity, viz. an handful; when it is boiled, strain
it through a cloth into a well-glazed-pot, and add thereto Sena-leaves,
Cinnamon, and Anniseed, of each a little; then stop the pot very close, that
the vapors may not fly out: put it on a fire, and let it boil up one boiling
only; then take it from the fire, and let it stand a whole night upon hot
ashes; the next morning strain it through a clean cloth, and add to it Syrrup
of Roses, one ounce and an half; boil it to a potion: take a little of this
(made warm) about five hours before dinner, in Spring and Harvest; they are the
best times, because then Herbs are best in their season, but better in the
Spring than in the Harvest. The Apozemata or herb-Potions, purge fundamentally,
yet gently, because of the diverse virtue of Herbs of which they are made. Add
to this Potion Rhabarbar, leaves of Seen, Agarins; also little Cakes of
Cinnamon, Sugar, and other things, according to the condition and complexion of
the Patients body.

Another Purging Remedy.
Take Virgin-honey one pound, Powder of Agarius, of Folia-Sene, of one of
three, or of all three four ounces; mingle this Powder with honey, let it stand
sixty days in a cool-place, in a pot well covered, stirring it every day, and
take off the Scum.

FINIS.

