Bristol Quakerism Exposed: SHOWING The Fallacy, Perversion, Ignorance, and
Error of Benjamin Cool, THE Quakers Chief Preacher At BRISTOL,

And of his Followers and Abettors There, Discovered in His, and Their Late
Book, falsely called, Sophistry Detected: Or, an Answer to GEORGE KEITH's
Synopsis: Wherein also both his Deisme, and Inconsistency with himself, and his
Brethren, with respect to the peculiar Principles of Christianity, are plainly
Demonstrated.

By GEORGE KEITH.

LONDON, Printed for John Gwillim, over against Crossby-Square, in
Bishopsgate-Street, 1700.

Bristol Quakerism Exposed, etc.
PASSING by Benjamin Cool's False and Unchristian Accusations against me, for
which he gives no Proof, of my Envy, Malice, Pride, etc. I shall first of all
briefly take notice of his Threefold Charge against me, in his Preface Page 3.
etc.

First, That the Design of my Synopsis, which he faith is the substance of all
my late Writings against them Contracted, is to render the Quakers such as
disown the Authority of the Holy Scriptures.

Secondly, That the promised Messiah there Testified of, who was Born of the
Virgin, was not the Son of God. [ He should have added, Properly.]

Thirdly, That the History of Christ's Incarnation, etc. is not necessary to our
Salvation. These, says he, are the three grand Pillars on which his whole
Fabric stands, etc. And these, he says, are so many palpable Untruths.

Answer, That these three are the Substance of all my late Writings against
them, is a false Assertion; for I have Proved many other things against them in
my late Writings, that are as Substantial as any of those Three; but that I may
not Digress, I shall wave that part at present, and shall allow my Adversary,
that these three mentioned by him, are very great and considerable, which I
Charge all the Quakers to be Guilty of, who own the Books of the Quakers
Teachers and Authors Quoted by me, to give a true account of their Faith and
Persuasions: And particularly I charge William Pen, as well as George
Whitehead, to be guilty of all the Three, and Benjamin Cool as much as any of
them.

Now let us see how Benjamin Cool defends William Pen from being guilty of my
Charge, with respect to these three things.

My First Charge against William Pen, and his Brethren, is, That he disowns the
Authority of the Holy Scriptures. The Reasons of this Charge I gave in my
Synopsis, particularly in Art. 1. where I bring in William Pen arguing against
the Scriptures being the General Rule of Faith, and Life, Because all Men have
not the Scripture, and because of their Uncertainty (unless upon the ground of
Inward Extraordinary Revelation) and for their Imperfection; and many other
Reasons given by him in the following Pages, [ viz. of his Discourse of the
General Rule of Faith, and Life] to the number of about Fourteen, all which 14
Reasons 1 Printed in my Late Book, called, The Deism of William Pen, and his
Brethren, Printed in the Year 1699. And gave Answers particularly to every one
of them, to which I refer my Reader. [Such as desire to have the said Book, may
Buy it at the Three Pigeons, against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, London.]
Where I do not blame William Pen for asserting, That the Scriptures are not the
General Rule to all Mankind of Faith and Practice, for I know none who ever
said they were; but I blame him for Asserting, That all Mankind have one
General Rule of Faith and Practice, to wit, of equal Extent and Latitude to
Heathens and Christians.

And in Page 28 of that Book, called, The Deism of William Pen, etc. I show,
That he ought to have distinguished between the General Law, or Rule of
Justice, given to all Mankind, and the super added Law, and Rule of Christian
Faith and Practice, given in general to Christians. Now, that I charge William
Pen with holding the Scriptures to be Uncertain (unless upon the ground of
Inward Extraordinary Revelation) What says B. Cool in his Defense? Because,
says he, Page 4. W. Pen says the Scriptures are Uncertain, as to Number,
since many Writings are lost, etc. He would render us denyers of the Certainty
of the Matter therein contained; than which nothing is more untrue.

Note, Reader, The falsehood and dull Sophistry of B. Cool, as if my Charge
against W. Pen were mainly grounded upon his saying The Scriptures were
Uncertain as to the Number, since many Writings are Lost, etc. whereas I do not
make use of that Argument against him, as my Only, or Chiefest, either in my
Synopsis, or my Book called Deisme; for having diligently searched both, cannot
find it in the Synopsis at all, and but very transiently in my Book of Deisme.
If B. Cool thinks to help himself, from being guilty of Falsehood, and false
Quotation, by Concealing the principal part of the Truth, by his addition of
etc. that will but the more discover his disingenuity. I shall therefore for
the Readers Satisfaction, to clear my Innocence, and detect both W. Pen's Guilt
in his most Unchristian way of Arguing against the Scriptures Authority, and
their being the Rule of Faith and Practice to Christians; and also B. Cool' s
sordid and decitful way of defending him, Quote some places out of W. Pen's
general Discourse of the Rule of Faith and Practice, and which I have very
fully Quoted in my Book of Deisme.

In his 13th Page of his Discourse aforesaid, W. Pen thus Argues against the
Scriptures being the Rule so much as to Christians: They are not in the
Original, because that is not extant; nor in the Copies, because there are
Thirty and above in number, and it is Vndetermin'd, and, for ought we see, says
he, Vndeterminable. And the variety of Readings amongst those Copies, amount to
several Thousands; and if the Copies cannot, how can the Translations be the
Rule? And then Argues against their being the Rule, from diverse of the Books
of Scripture, because Rejected by some, and Received by others.

Concerning which way of W. Pen' s Arguing against the Scriptures being the
Rule, I say, in my Book of Deisme, Page 70. All which Pleas, both of Deists, and
Papists, have been abundantly Answered by Protestant Writers. See Dr.
Tillotson's Book, called, The Rule of Faith; in Answer to J. S. a Papist, whose
Arguments against the Scriptures being the Rule of Faith, are so much of the
same sort with these here of W. Pen's, as if he had taken them from him.

Again, in his Page 26, he thus proceeds. The Scriptures are not the Rule of
Faith, and Life, because they cannot be the Rule in their Translations.
Supposing the Ancient Copies were Exact, it cannot be the Rule to far the
greatest part of Mankind: Indeed, says he, to none but Learned Men, which
neither answers the Promise relating to Gospel times, which is Universal, nor
the Necessity of all Mankind, for a Rule of Faith and Life.

I leave it to Impartial Readers, whether the Quotations above given, recited
faithfully by me, out of W. Pen's Discourse of the General Rule of Faith and
Practice; and also out of my Book of Deisme, against W. Pen, of which Book my
Synopsis was but a sort of Index, do not sufficiently prove W. Pen's
Undervaluing the Authority of the Scriptures, for their want of Certainty,
unless upon the ground of Inward Extraordinary Revelation, as I did
particularly express it, both in my Book of Deism and Synopsis: And it could be
nothing but a wilful omission in B. Cool not to take notice of those Passages
above cited; For suppose he had not known of my Book of Deisme against W. Pen,
yet he could not be Ignorant, that there was such a Book as W. Pen's Discourse
of the General Rule of Faith and Practice, out of which I had taken my
abovesaid Quotations.

But for a further Evidence, that W. Pen, in his said Discourse, did Argue
against the Certainty of the Matter contained in the Scriptures, with respect
to the chief peculiar Doctrines of Christianity, as the Orthodox Faith of the
Holy Trinity, against the Arians and Socinians, and the Orthodox Faith of all
sound Protestants, against the Papists, about Transubstantiation, I Quote him
at large in my Book of Deisme, Arguing in his Discourse of the General Rule of
Faith and Practice thus, page 41, 42. Is there any place [ in Scripture] tells
us (says W. Pen) without Interpretation, whether the Socinian, or Trinitarian
be in the right, in their differing apprehensions of the Three that bear
record, etc. Also the Homousian and Arian, about Christ's Divinity, or the
Papists and Protestants about Transubstantiation. If then things are left
Vndefin'd, and Vndetermin'd, I mean Literally, and Expressly in the Scripture;
and that the Question arises about the Sense of Words, does the Scripture
determine which of these Interpreters hit the mark? Thus far W. Pen. From all
which he concludes, That not the Scripture, but the Interpretation must decide
the matter in Controversy; and that Interpretation must be given, not by the
Scripture so much as Instrumentally, but from the Spirit of God [by
Extraordinary Revelation] to be a True and Infallible Interpretation; and yet
that extraordinary Revelation is not necessary to be given to any of the
Quakers (as W. Pen confesses) nor is given to them, as will after appear from
what follows to be Quoted out of him.

Judge, Reader, does not W. Pen here make the Matter of the Scripture
Uncertain, with respect to these great matters of Christianity, the Orthodox
Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and the denial of Transubstantiation, without
inward extraordinary Revelation; and yet B. Cool is so shameless, to blame me,
for saying, The Quakers deny the Certainty of the Matter contained in the
Scripture, than which (he says) nothing is more untrue.

Now if B. Cool thinks he, or his Brerhren, have any particular extraordinary
Revelation, to determine the Truth of the Matter concerning these great Articks
of the Trinity, and denial of Transubstantiation, let him Assert it, and next
let him Prove it, otherwise we have no reason to believe him, or them; but
their asserting it is sufficient argument to prove my Charge against them, and
particularly against W. Pen, That the Matter of Scripture, with respect to the
chief and principal Doctrines of Christianity, is uncertain to Men, without
extraordinary inward Revelation; whereby he means such as the Prophets and
Apostles had without Scripture.

But for a further Confirmation that B. Cool is a false Accuser of me, in this
very particular, and that I am unjustly charged by him, I have in my Book,
called, The Deisme of W. Pen, brought Fourteen of W. Pen's Arguments out of his
Discourse of the General Rule of Faith and Practice; to all, and every one of
which, I have particularly Answered. Whereby W. Pen Essayeth to prove, That the
Scripture is not the Rule of Faith and Practice to Christians. One of which is
from their Imperfection; another, from their Uncertainty; a third, from their
Obscurity. And in his 10th Page, he Argues against the Scriptures being the
Rule, That a Rule ought to be Plain, Proper, and Intelligible, which he pleads
the Scriptures are not.

Now, I say, W. Pen, and his Brethren, yea, and B. Cool with them, disown the
Authority of the Scriptures, because they deny them to be the Rule of Faith and
Practice, to wit, the primary Rule of Faith and Practice, with respect to all
things Commanded us to be Believed or Practiced. For as concerning the
Heathens, who have not the Scripture, I know none who Asserts that the
Scripture is a Rule to them.

But that not only W. Pen, but B. Cool, is guilty in asserting the Scriptures
not to be so much as the Rule in part to Christians who have the Scriptures, we
have his plain Confession, page 4 of his Preface, where he concludes, but by a
false Syllogism, That there is but one General Rule, both to them who have the
Scriptures, i. e. professed Christians, and to them who have them not, viz. the
Heathens. The word But in that place is Exclusive of the Scriptures being the
Rule any more to professed Christians than to Heathens, seeing, by his
Argument, both have but one Rule, which he would have to follow from some of my
words he quotes; but he inferrs his Conclusion by a false Syllogism, which is
this, If (says B. Cool) the Scripture cannot be savingly Believed and
Understood but by the Revelation and Inward Illumination of the Spirit, then
the Spirit is the primary Rule, even for Believing the Scriptures themselves;
but the first is true, therefore the last.

The Consequence of his first Proposition is false, the falsehood of which can
be Demonstrated by the like false and fallacious Argument following; If a
Bricklayer, Joyner, or Carpenter cannot see to work their Trades without Light,
therefore the Light is the Rule whereby they Work, either Primary, or
Secondary. But the falsity of this is apparent; for none ever thought that the
Light either of Sun, Moon, or Candle, is the Rule, either Primary, or
Secondary, whereby Tradesmen, as Bricklayers, Joyners, or Carpenters do Work;
for the Rule, or Rules whereby they Work, are one thing; and the Light which
lets them See how to use their Rule, is another thing: Or as if B. Cool should
Argue, the Grindstone makes the Knife or Razor sharp, therefore the Grindstone
is more sharp than both, or is Primarily sharp, and the Knife or Razor sharp
but Secondarily. This Example I only use to show the falsehood of that Maxim
applied in the Case, That for which a thing is such, that thing is the more
such. But to Argue, That the Spirit is the Rule, because the Spirit enlightens
and inables true Christians to understand the Scriptures, is as Weak and
Sophistical, as to argue, because a Bricklayer teaches a Man that is his
Apprentice, to lay the Bricks upon a Wall, that therefore the Bricklayer is the
Rule; whereas the Bricklayer is not the Rule to the Apprentice, but his Rule
and Master. And to Affirm, That the Spirit is the Rule, is to confound the
Agent with the Instrument by which he works; and is as great nonsense, as to
make the Bricklayer to be the wooden Rule, and Line, and Plummet by which he
works. And the like Fallacy have all his other Arguments, whereby he would
infer, from some of my words he quotes out of my former Books, That I held
there was but one General Rule, both to professed Christians and Heathens; and
Consequently, that if this proves William Pen guilty of Deisme, it equally (as
B. Cool infers) proves G. Keith guilty of the same. But I deny his Consequence,
for I do not remember that ever I so Asserted, or Argued, as W. Pen has done,
or as B. Cool now does, That professed Christians and Heathens have but one
General Rule.

But whereas, in some of my former Writings, I had dropped some Unwary and
Unsound Expressions, in calling the Spirit, with respect to the peculiar
Principle of Christianity, The Principal Rule, yet I deny that this proves me
guilty of Deisme; seeing to the best of my knowledge and remembrance, I never
made the Professed Christians and the Heathens, to have but one General Rule of
Faith and Practice; for I always distinguished betwixt the common Illumination
of the Spirit given to Heathens and all Mankind, and the special given to true
Christians, in the use of the Written Word; which being two differing things,
though both coming from one Author, sufficiently clears me, that I was never a
Deist, whatever lesser Errors, or Mistakes I had when amongst the Quakers.

But has B. Cool forgot the Proverb, That two Blacks makes not one White;
suppose G. K. dropped some unwary Expressions, that, contrary to his intentions,
did favor Deisme, will that excuse W. Pen of his Deisme, or B. Cool, and the
Quakers of their Deisme, which can be proved, not barely from a few
indeliberate Expressions dropped from their Pens, but from whole Books and
Volumes they have filled with mere Deist Notions, striking at all the
Foundations of Christianity, special and peculiar thereunto?

And I have this Advantage of W. Pen, and all others of his Brethren, That not
only in my Book of Retractations, I have Retracted and Corrected many things,
both in Particular, and in General, whatever I have Said, or Writ contrary to
the Holy Scripture, but none of Them have done any such thing in the least; but
also in Particular, in my Book, called, The Deisme of W. Pen, and his Brethren,
page 4. I have Corrected my Mistake and Error, in calling (in some of my former
Books) The Spirits Inward Evidence, sealing to the truth of the peculiar
Doctrines of Christianity contained in the Scripture, the Principal Rule of
Faith. Which I thus did correct, That the Spirits Inward Evidence was not the
Rule of Faith at all, to us Christians, but the principal objective Medium, or
Motive of Credibility.

And I having thus Retracted my Errors, and Corrected the same, before I either
Published, or Writ my Synopsis, and consequently long before B. Cool writ his
pretended Answer to it, he has dealt most Unfairly and Disingenuously with me,
to Charge me with what I have Ingenuously and Fairly Retracted: And the same
Answer may serve to all the other Quotations he brings out of my Books, to set
me as deep in the Mire of Deisme, as W. Pen, or himself; which had I been as
guilty as they, is no vindication to them. And but that it would be an improper
Digression, and too much divert the Reader, I could easily show, that none of
all his Quotations out of my former Books, prove me guilty of Deisme.

But seeing I have Retracted, both in Particular and General, what did seem,
though but remotely and indirectly, to favor any unsound Notions about the Rule
of the Christian Faith; and have in my Catechism, both Larger and Lesser,
Asserted The Holy Scriptures to be the only Rule of Faith and Practice, to all
Christians, with respect to all the peculiar Articles of the Christian Faith,
and to all the positive Precepts peculiarly belonging to the Christian
Religion: Therefore I appeal to all Impartial Readers, whether B. Cool, and his
Bristol Brethren, who approve of his Book, are not highly Injurious to me? Even
as much, as if some Romanist should charge all the Popish Errors upon Luther,
after he had Renounced them; or suppose upon some Quaker that had formerly been
a Papist, as I suppose B. Cool knows some of the Quakers to have been.

But the distinction of Primary and Secondary Rule, used by W. Pen and B. Cool,
will not do, to defend them from Deisme, as I have showed in my Book of Deisme,
page 56. W. Pen is so seemingly kind to the Scriptures, that he grants them to
be a Subordinate, Secondary, and Declaratory Rule, in his Discourse of the
General Rule, page 25. Such a Subordinate, Secondary, and Declaratory Rule
(says he) we never said several parts were not. Observe, Reader, he will not
allow all the parts of Scripture, but only some parts of it, to be so much as a
Subordinate, Secondary, and Declaratory Rule. Though even the Ceremonial
Precepts, he has as great reason to believe them to be the Word of God, and
consequently a Rule of Faith (though not of Practice) to us, as truly as any
other parts of Scripture.

That the Scriptures are not a Subordinate and Secondary Rule (as both W. Pen
and B. Cool have affirmed them to be) but the Primary and Only Rule, with
respect to all the peculiar Doctrines and Precepts of the Christian Religion, I
have clearly and fully proved, in my Book of Deisme, page 56, 57. The substance
of what I have there said, I shall here transcribe as follows.

Seeing every Subordinate and Secondary Rule presupposes a Primary Rule, which
has no dependency on the Secondary; though the Secondary is wholly from the
Primary, as the Transcript is wholly from the Original, but the Original is
entirely complete and perfect without the Copy, or Transcript. It is evident,
that according to him, (viz. W. Pen) he has all what he thinks to be a
Divine Knowledge and Faith, wholly from his Primary Rule, and nothing from the
Scriptures, which he calls the Secondary; for the excellency of the Primary
Rule is, that it teaches all that is to be Divinely Known, or Believed,
without the need or help of any Secondary Rule, otherwise it should not be
Primary, nor should the Scriptures, in that case, be a Subordinate Rule, but
Coordinate, and of equal Dignity, Necessity, and Use, with what he calls the
Primary: For whatever is a primary, full, adequate and perfect Rule, such as he
will have only the Light Within; or by whatever other Name he defines it, it
must propose to him, all the Credenda and Agenda, i.e. all things he ought to
Believe and Practice, without any other Rule whatsoever.

Surely as he who has the Original, has no need of the Copy, nor great use of
it for himself, so if W. Pen has such a perfect, complete, primary Rule, that
teaches him without Scripture, all that he ought to Know, Believe, or
Practice, I cannot understand of what great use the Scripture can be unto him;
or at least it is of no necessity to him, this primary Rule [The Light Within]
has taught him all before hand, otherwise it is not primary.

This Argument I have produced against W. Pen, is of equal force against B.
Cool, and his Bristol Brethren, and the Quakers in general, who affirm they
have this Primary Rule, and are come to be Taught by it whatever is to be known
of God; as W. Pen, in his Discourse of the General Rule of Faith and Practice,
p. 21. affirms; and gives for his proof, that place in Romans 1. 19. which he
grossly Perverteth, by wresting and corrupting the Text, making it say, what it
says not; for thus he Quotes it, WHATEVER might be known of God, was manifest
within; for God who is Light, has shown it unto them. But the word Whatever is
neither in the English Translation, nor is there any word in the Greek that can
be so Translated. St. Paul, in that above quoted place, is not treating of the
knowledge of God given to Christians, by special Illumination, in the use of
the Scriptures, discovering the great Love of God, by the Redemption of the
World, through Jesus Christ, as he gave himself to Dye for us, etc. but of the
knowledge of his Eternal Power and Godhead given to the Heathen, by the works
of Creation, and the common Illumination given to all Mankind.

What B. Cool Quotes out of W. Pen's Discourse of the General Rule of Faith and
Life, in his seeming praise of the Scriptures, in his 6th page, can be judged
no other, but like Judas's Kiss, when he betrayed his Master, and a palpable
Contradiction, and Inconsistency both to himself and Brethren, for which they
are accountable; but is no argument of my Insincerity, as B. Cool does most
falsely and unjustly accuse me. For while he argues against the Scriptures
being the great and only Rule of Faith and Practice, to Christians, with
respect to all the peculiar Doctrines and Precepts of Christianity, and gives
that Office to the Light Within, as common to all Mankind, Jews, Turks,
Heathens, Infidels; and yet, as it were with the same Breath, extols the
Scriptures, calling them The Blessed Scriptures of Truth, and that the Quakers
most heartily believe them to have been given forth from the same Holy Spirit,
and are a declaration of the mind and will of God; and as such, are obliging
upon all that have, and can have them, both in reference to Faith and Practice:
And we utterly disclaim and renounce all Doctrines and Practices repugnant to
them. He seems, like some Rebelious Subject, who being accused, that he denies
the Kings Laws, falls out in high Praises of them, but all this while does not
own them to be the Kings, but sets up other Laws in their place. But seeing B.
Cool thinks, that W. Pen has said enough in commendation of the Scriptures, to
prove G. Keith disingenuous, for blaming him for Disputing against their being
the Rule, from their Uncertainty, either as to their Original, or Copies, or
Translations; all which he has labored (as the Papists do to set up their
Tradition) to render uncertain, and that they do not determine (without
extraordinary Revelation) whether the Papists or Protestants are right about
Transubstantiation, or the Socinians and sound Protestants are right about the
Trinity. I freely leave it to the Impartial Reader, whether B. Cool has not
most unjustly blamed me for Disingenuity; and whether B. Cool himself be not
sordidly disingenuous and fallacious in this very matter, as well as in other
matters hereafter to be treated of.

But further to discover B. Cool' s gross Ignorance in his way of Arguing
against the Scriptures being the only Rule, exclusive of the Spirit [ to wit
from being the Rule] for that (he says) were to prefer the Effect before the
Cause, since the Light (Christ) was before the Scripture was, and by him were
they given forth, through Holy Men, for our Profit and Edification.

Answer, O rare Logician! As if to distinguish between the Workman and the
Rule, Square, or Instrument by which he works, were to prefer the Effect ( to
wit, the Rule) to the Cause, to wit, to him that uses it, and has made it for
his use. But though the Spirit gave forth the Scriptures, and did first reveal
the great Truths delivered in them, concerning the Redemption of the World by
Jesus Christ, unto certain Holy Men, peculiarly chosen for that work, yet the
Spirit was not the Rule even to them, but what the Spirit Revealed to them, was
the Rule of their Faith, before the Scripture was writ; and what the Spirit
thus inwardly Revealed to them, as to Abraham, Moses, etc. I grant was the Rule
to them, and their primary and only Rule; but that it follows, that that inward
Revelation, which they had, was, or is the primary and only Rule to us, is a
most false Consequence; unless on the supposition, that we, and all the
Christians, as well as Quakers, have the same inward Revelation, in kind, that
the Prophets had; and if B. Cool will say, they have it, the same in kind, then
they have it without Scripture, as Abraham and Moses so had it. But if they
have it not without Scripture, but that their Knowledge and Faith of these
great Truths, particularly that one great Truth, That the Son of God was
Incarnate, for the Salvation of Men, does necessarily depend upon the Written
Word, as the instrument by which the Spirit does Illuminate, or Inspire them to
Believe, and Understand the Written Word, or Truths declared in Scripture; this
is no proof that the Scriptures is not the Rule, to wit, The great and only
Rule; but is indeed a sufficient and clear proof, that the Scripture is the
Rule, and the Spirit is the Ruler, or he that by the Rule, as his Instrument,
Rules and Leads our Minds both to Believe the Scripture and Understand it; and
also rightly to Apply it for our Edification.

The Doctrine which W. Pen, and B. Cool, with their Brethren do set up, of
making the Spirits Internal Revelation, the Universal and Primary Rule of their
Faith and Practice, does necessarily oblige them to hold also, That all what
they Know, or Believe of God, and of Christ, is from the same Internal
Extraordinary Revelation and Discovery, in kind, that the Prophets and Apostles
had. For according to the Argument I have used above, and recited out of my
Book of Deisme, against W. Pen, if the Internal Revelation that the Quakers
have, be the Primary Rule of all the Faith and Knowledge they have of God and
Christ, it has no dependence on the Scriptures, or Written word, so much as an
Outward, or External Means; as the Original depends not on the Copy, but the
Copy depends on the Original; and this indeed is perfectly agreeing with the
Quakers great Apostle George Fox, whom W. Pen, and B. Cool also, so highly
Magnify; For, says G. Fox in his Great Mystery, Page 350. Ye tell People of
an outward ordinary Means, by which Christ communicates the benefits of
Redemption. [Note, By the outward and ordinary Means, they mean the written
Word and Sacraments.] The means of Salvation (says he) is not ordinary, nor
outward; but Christ is the Salvation, who is Eternal. Again, Great Mist. p.
133. His Opponent, T. Moor, having said, The Scriptures is the absolute Rule,
and Medium of Faith. In p. 134. G. Fox Answers, The Scriptures is not the
Author, nor the Means of it, nor the Rule, but Christ who gave it, and he
increases it. And in p. 243. Great Mist. he says, And the things of the
Gospel, and of the Spirit, are not attained by an External Means. [ Note, Here
he does Exclude the Scripture not only from being the External Means, but from
being an External Means of their Knowledge and Faith.] Again, p. 320. His
Opponents having said, God works Faith in us Inwardly, by the Spirit; and
Outwardly, by his Word, [meaning the written Word.] He Answers, Here thou go
about to make the Word and the Spirit not one. Is not the Word Spiritual, and
Christ called the Word? Again, p. 168. Them that never heard the Scripture
Outwardly, the Light that every Man has that comes into the World, being
turned to it, with that they will see Christ; with that they will know
Scripture; with that they will be led out of all Delusion, come into Covenant
with God; with which they will come to Worship God in the Spirit, and Serve
him. See all these, and many more such Quotations, in my 4th Narative.

Here we see the Scripture is Excluded from being so much as either the Means,
or a Means of the Spirits working Faith or Knowledge in them; and consequently,
what Knowledge, or Faith the Quakers have of God, or Christ, it must be by
inward, immediate, extraordinary Revelation and Discoveries, the same in kind
that the Prophets and Apostles had, as such which was without all outward
means. Thus we see the Harmony of W. Pen, and B. Cool and his Brethren, with
their great Apostle G. Fox. But let us again view their Disharmony and
Contradiction, both with themselves, and one with another.

Benjamin Cool, in his 9th page, says, That the Prophets and Apostles had an
extraordinary Sight and Sense of Adam' s Fall and Christ' s Birth, etc. I
readily own; but that such an extraordinary Discovery as they had, is
absolutely necessary to every Man's Salvation, I deny. But if he will adhere to
his former Assertion, That the Light Within is the Primary Rule of every Man's
Faith and Knowledge, and to G. Fox's Doctrine, above mentioned, every Man that
has the true Knowledge and Faith of Christ, must have such an extraordinary
Discovery as the Prophets and Apostles had, in kind, if not in degree: For
seeing the Quakers plead, That the true Knowledge and Faith of God and Christ
must be by the Spirit only, without the outward and ordinary Means, as G. Fox,
their great Apostle, has Taught them; then it must be the same, in kind at
least, if not in degree. And if all the Faithful are not come to the same
degree of the Spirit that the Prophets and Apostles had, Yet if B. Cool will
believe their great Apostle, some of the Quakers, at least, are come not only
to the same degree that the Prophets and Apostles had, who gave forth the
Scriptures, but above any degree: For thus he says expressly, Great Mist. p.
318. For who comes to the Spirit, and to Christ, comes to that which is
Perfect; who comes to the Kingdom of Heaven in them, comes to be Perfect, yea,
to a Perfect Man; and that is above any Degree.

But B. Cool, in his following Quotation, (as I can understand him, and let the
Reader see if he can understand him otherwise) disowns all Extraordinary
Discovery, such as the Prophets and Apostles had, in Kind as well as in Degree,
and wholly takes to the common and ordinary Discoveries of the Light Within,
Universally given to all Mankind; for thus he says expressly, But that the
common and ordinary Discoveries of the Light Within, Universally given to
Mankind, (as all Mankind Adheres thereto, and Obeys the same) is that
Universal, or General Rule of Faith and Life, we shall, I hope, never deny. Now
this Universal and General Rule, given to all Mankind, B. Cool, if he will
accord with his Brethren, and particularly with G. Whitehead and others, in
their Book, called, The Glory of Christ's Light Within, must hold it to be a
full and complete Rule, that needs no addition, yea, not only needs no
Addition, but admits of none; for if it admit of any Addition, then all Mankind
have not one and the same Rule of Faith and Practice, contrary to the very
scope and design of W. Pen's Book, called, A Discourse of the General Rule of
Faith and Practice. But again, If that Addition be but only a Secondary Rule,
it presupposes the Primary Rule, to wit, the Light Within them, as
Pre-existant, and from which all the Certainty of the Secondary Rule depends,
and their Primary Rule first giving them the said Discovery, makes the
Secondary wholly superfluous. If it be said, that by the Secondary Men may be
led to the Primary, as by the Copy to the Original, or as by the Stream to the
Fountain: But what service can the Secondary have to lead them to the Primary,
as from the more known, to the more unknown? Seeing the Secondary Rule, which
they call the Scripture, has no Certainty but what it receives from the Light
Within, as it is an Universal Principle common to all Mankind. But common
Experience teaches, That the Light Within, i.e. the common Discovery, or
Illumination given to all Mankind, that teaches them some things concerning
God as a Creator, and some general Moral Duties to him as such, yet does not
teach them the Knowledge or Faith of God, as he gave his Son to be Incarnate,
for the Redemption of the World; for that never was known but by special
Revelation, immediately given to the Prophets, and by their means conveyed to
others.

B. Cool proceeds to tell us, page 9. what special Veneration he and his
Brethren express for the Holy Scriptures, after he has set up the common and
ordinary Discoveries of the Light Within, Universally given to all Mankind, to
be the Primary Rule of all Faith and Knowledge: Yet at the same time, we (says
he) express our Veneration for the Verity and Authority of the Holy Scriptures,
since we know them to be (as they are) an Additional, and Unspeakable Benefit
for a Rule both of Faith and Life; and such a Rule too, that whatever is
Repugnant thereunto, ought not to be of any Authority with us. But judge,
Reader, whether this be not another Judas Kiss; or, as they that Mocked our
Lord with a Hail Master. They have a great veneration for the Scriptures, as a
Secondary and Additional Rule, but they have a far greater for the Common
Discovery given to all Mankind by the Light Within, being the primary Rule:
Though this primary universal Rule tells them nothing of Christ, as he was
outwardly Born of a Virgin, etc. Nor any one of the peculiar Doctrines and
Precepts of Christianity; yet, for all that, the common Discovery that
Heathens, Jews, Turks, and Infidels have, as well as the Quakers, is the more
Excellent and Venerable. The Secondary is but the Servant, or Lackey, to the
Primary: The great Truths of the Gospel discovered by the Holy Scriptures,
through the special operation and illumination of the Spirit, not given to
Heathens, but only to faithful Christians, must vail, and yield subjection to
the common Dictates of the Light Within, of Moral Justice and Temperance that
Heathens have.

Readers, what think you of this sort of Divinity, and deceitful way of showing
his, and their Veneration to the Holy Scripture? But possibly he will say, Must
not Christ, or the Spirit, or God himself, who is within all Men, be preferred
to the Scriptures? And it is Christ they hold to be the primary Rule. But this
Objection comes from great Ignorance; for neither God, nor Christ, nor the
Spirit, can be properly said to be a Rule, or the Rule in any Man, more than a
Workman can be said to be the Tool, or Instrument that he works by. God is
certainly Greater, and more Excellent than the Scripture, and so is Christ, and
the Holy Spirit, so much as the Creator is greater than the Creature: But the
Comparison is not stated betwixt God, or Christ, or the Spirit, and the
Scripture, but betwixt the common Illumination given to all Mankind, (which is
neither God, nor Christ, nor the Spirit, but their Effect and Operation) and
the Scripture, which certainly gives a discovery of all the peculiar Doctrines
of the Christian Religion, and Precepts thereof; and there is no need of any
other discovery, by way of material Object, but only that the Spirit of God
give a Spiritual sight and sense of the Truths of the Gospel already discovered
to us in the Scriptures.

But Lastly, How does this great pretended Veneration, that B. Cool seems to
have for the Scriptures, agree with the Vile and Contemptible Names that G.
Fox, the Quakers great Apostle, has given them? who, together with Richard
Hubberthorn, in the Book, called, Truths Defense, did call the Scriptures, page
14, 102. Earthly, and Carnal, Death, Ink and Paper, Dust and Serpents Meat. --
And their Gospel is Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, which is the Letter.
And in Truth's Def. p. 102. The Cursed Serpent is in the Letter. See abundance
more of the Quakers Contemptible and Vile Names given to the Scriptures, in my
4th Nar. And not only W. Pen, but Joseph Wyeth, their late Defender, in his
Switch, charge the Scripture with Uncertainty, p. 46.

But why ( says B. Cool to me in his p. 9.) George should we, by thee, be
rendered so Hetrodox, for Vindicating the Light Within, both with respect to
its Universality and Authority, when thou thy self have Writ and Printed the
same Truths over and over, and to this day are not to be found amongst thy
Retractations?

Answer, I never held the Gross and Absurd Notions of the Light Within,
asserted by G. Whitehead and W. Pen, and the generality of the Teachers of the
Quakers, viz. That the Light Within is sufficient to Salvation, without any
thing else, i. e. Not only without the Scriptures, but without the Man Christ,
and his Death, and Sufferings, and precious Blood, outwardly shed for us, and
his Mediation for us, without us, now in Heaven, all which are some thing else
than the Light Within. Now that this is the great Offense that the Quakers took
against me, That I held, That the Light Within is not sufficient to Salvation,
without something else, is fairly confessed by G. Whitehead, in his Antidote,
p. 28. And yet he confesses, that by that somewhat else, I meant the Man
Christ Jesus, as he outwardly Died for us. Far less did I ever hold that most
Absurd and Nonsensical Notion of G. Fox, That the Quakers have whole Christ in
them, God and Man, Flesh and Spirit, Blood and Bones: And that they have His
Flesh in them, because they Eat it, as I have proved out of his Great Mist. in
my 4th Narative. p. 107. Nor did I ever confound the Common Illumination given
to Heathens, with the Special Illumination given to Christians, as the Quakers
generally do, and as I find B. Cool, as well as W. Pen does: So that I can say,
with a good Conscience, I never was guilty of their Deisme and Paganism; For I
always held in my former Writings, when among the Quakers, That Faith in
Christ, God and Man, without us, yet one Christ, is a fundamental Doctrine of
Christianity, and so much plainly appears from that very Book that B. Cool
has quoted, called the Note, Reader, That Book, called, The Fundamental Truths
of Christianity, was not Published by me, nor was ever intended, by me, to be
published in that Imperfect manner; but being found in a Manuscript,
unfinished, was Published by another, as the Book it self shows, without my
consent or knowledge, I being then in America. See the Preface.
Fundamental Truths of Christianity, which though he quotes as making against me,
as my present persuasion is, and for him and his Brethren, yet it makes for me,
and against them; for he confesses, that I said in that Book, [ And I deliver
it as one of the Fundamental Truths of Christianity,] That Christ is come
outwardly, as Man, for all. Now seeing he grants that I delivered this, as one
of the Fundamental Truths of Christianity, it necessarily follows, That he who
believes not that Truth, wants a Fundamental of Christianity, and is no
Christian. But this is quite contrary to G. Whitehead, W. Pen, and B. Cool
also, who think Men may be true Christians without this Faith, if they be
Moral, Men Just, Meek, and Merciful, etc.

That there is a Principle of Light given to all Men, and is in them, I still
hold; and that it is given them for that end, that they may become the Children
of God, to wit, as by a preparatory operation, as Repentance is preparatory to
the Gospel Faith, and Dispensation; and also by way of Concomitancy and
Subordination, to a higher Ministration of Light that is given under the
Christian Dispensation, that is special only to Believers in Christ, who have
Faith in him, either express, or implicit; I mean in Christ, considered as God
Man, without us, which I have fully and sufficiently cleared to any Impartial
Reader, in my Book of Retractations, p. 13, 19. And therefore B. Cool is the
more Unjust to me in this, as in other things, as well as Fallacious, in
seeking to deceive his Readers, by making them believe I was of the same Mind
with them, in all their Notions and Doctrines of the Light Within.

In my Book of Retractations, what Unwary, or Unfound Passages I have found in
any of my former Books, I have very freely and willingly Retracted; and I thank
God, who has given me a Heart so to do; and I pray God, that he may be pleased
to work the like willingness in the Hearts of all my Adversaries, to Confess
and Retract their Errors, as I have done mine: But what of Truth I have writ in
any of my former Books, either concerning the Light Within, or any other
Subject, I Retain, and I hope shall continue so to do, to my dying moment.

And besides my particular Retractation of particular Passages, I have, in my
said Book, made a general Retractation of all that is not according to the
Doctrine of the Holy Scripture; to which I now add; And of all contrary to the
39 Articles of the Church of England, all which I do Believe to be perfectly
agreeable to the Holy Scriptures: Which I hope will satisfy the Moderate and
Impartial; but for others, it is in vain for me to endeavor to satisfy them,
who will not be satisfied. And notwithstanding the Clamor of my Adversaries
against me, of my Unconstancy, and Inconsistency in Principles, would they but
give me a fair meeting, before Impartial Witnesses, I could show much more
their Unconstancy and Inconsistency, ten fold, than what they can show of mine.

The Second thing that B. Cool blames me for, both in his Preface and Book, is,
for Quoting a Passage in my Synopsis, out of W. Pen's Serious Apology, p. 146.
But that He, [viz. That Outward Person that Suffered at Jerusalem] was properly
the Son of God, we utterly deny. This B. Cool calls a Juggle; See (says B.C.)
the Juggling of this Man! But upon due Examination, the Juggle will be found not
to be mine, but his; and that base and sordid. But thus it is, Their Credit of
Infallibility is so great a matter with them, like the great Diana of the
Ephesians, that they will commit the greatest and most sordid Equivocation,
though ever so obvious and apparent, rather than own their Error, as is evident
in the present Case. But where is the Juggle? Have I Quoted him wrong? He does
not pretend that I have; for he grants they are W. Pen's words. But let us see
whether his Gloss on W. Pen's words will excuse him; he says, By the outward
Person, he meant no more than Flesh, Blood, and Bones, abstract not only from
the Godhead that dwelt in him, but also from the very Soul of Christ, as he was
Man: But that this Gloss is a Juggle, will appear from what follows.

First, The Question betwixt W. Pen and his Opponent, who was a Presbyterian
Minister in Ireland, was not whether Flesh, Blood, and Bones, abstract from the
Godhead and the Soul of Christ, was that outward Person that suffered at
Jerusalem; for it was not a Dead and Lifeless Body that suffered, but a Living
Body, and such a Living Body, that was Animated with a Rational Soul, the
Noblest that ever was; and, together with the Soul, was Personally united to
the Godhead. And the like Juggle W. Pen himself is guilty of, as G. Whitehead
quotes him, in his Truths Defense, p. 72. Thus Defending his Assertion, That he
meant, the Body which suffered was not properly the entire Son of God; But none
of his Opponents ever so said, nor do I know that ever any Man did so Assert;
and that being no part of the Controversy, cannot be the true meaning of W.
Pen's assertion.

Secondly, The outward Person does as necessarily import, and signify both the
Soul and Godhead of Christ jointly with the Body, as B. Cool, who is an outward
Person, imports and signifies both Soul and Body of B. Cool. And if B. Cool
should borrow, or owe Money, can it be said, That it was only B. Cool's Flesh,
Blood, and Bones, abstractly from his Soul, that owes that Money, and should
pay the Debt? Our blessed Lord, who was that outward Person, that suffered for
us, and paid the debt of our Sins when he Died for us, was not Flesh, Blood,
and Bones, without his Soul, nor without his Godhead: Therefore to make such an
Abstraction, is a mere Juggle. And by the like Evasion, if I should say, That
outward Person B. Cool, is not a Man, but a Beast; does he think that it would
excuse me, to say, I meant B. Cool abstractly considered from his Rational
Soul, having only a Sensitive Soul in him, common to him with the Beasts? And
he may as well say, a piece of Wood, abstract from its Length, or Breadth, or
Depth, is not a Body: Whereas such an Abstraction is a Contradiction; for we
can conceive no Body without its true Dimensions, no more can we conceive a
Person without the Parts whereof that person consists. But let B. Cool tell us,
That outward Person that Suffered, whose Son was he properly? If he was not
properly the Son of God, Mary was not a Virgin. To say he was the Son of Mary,
as one of B. Cool's Brethren lately answered at Turners-Hall, was no proper
Answer to the Question, but an Evasion; the Question being, not who was his
Mother, but who was his Father: And as impertinent to the Question was it to
Answer, That he was the Son of David and Abraham; for they were but his remote
and mediate Fathers: But I ask B. Cool, Who was his Immediate Father as he was
Man? If God, then as Man, that very outward Person was the Son of God, as
really and properly, and more really and properly, as that Outward Person,
called B. Cool, was his Fathers Son: Yet not so, that either our Saviors Soul,
or Body was any part of the Godhead, but because his Soul and Body, was
Personally United to the Eternal Word, Eternally and before all Ages and
Creatures, begotten of the Father, and that as Man, he was miraculously
Conceived by the Power of the Holy Ghost, and Born of the Virgin Mary.

Thirdly, That W. Penn's Vile Error and Heresy, and B. Cools Juggle, may yet
more appear, it is Evident from W. Penn's Words in his other Books, that he
thinks that outward Person that Suffered at Jerusalem, was no part of the true
Christ, But that (as he has affirmed) he was called Christ, by a Metonymie of
the thing containing, getting the Name of the thing contained; as a Vessel that
holds Wine, is called Wine, yet this Vessel is no part of the Wine, and that
the Body of Christ, is called the Christ, (he says) that is Metonymically
spoken, the thing containing, for the thing contained; see W. Penns Rejoinder
to Jo. Faldo, p. 304. Had he said, it was a Synecdoche, of the part put for the
whole, he had spoke as a Christian, but a Metonimy makes the Body (nor yet the
Soul) not to be any part of the true Christ. And in his p. 300, he says,
Christ qualified that Body for his Service, but that Body did not Constitute
Christ, he is Invisible, and ever was so to the Ungodly World, (that was not
his Body). By all which it Evidently appears, W. Penn did not allow that
Visible Body to be any part of him, for a part though it constitutes not the
whole altogether, yet in part, it Constitutes the whole, as well as W. Penn's
Body Constitutes him in part. That the World did not See Christ, with their
Spiritual Eyes is granted, as neither do they see his faithful followers; but
that they did see him really, and as properly, as ever B. Cool saw W. Penn with
Bodily Eyes, is clear from John 6. 36 where Jesus said to the Unbelieving Jews,
Ye also have seen me, and believed not. But W. Penn, and B. Cool, will be
Wiser by that Spirit that is in them, then the holy Spirit that did dictate the
holy Scriptures, who calls him that was Born of the Virgin, the Son of God,
the Christ, both God and Man, by Personal Union, and the Holy Scriptures
teaches us no such distinction, as that the outward Person, was not properly
the Son of God, but he who dwells in that outward Person; for though Christ has
two Natures, yet he has but one Person; it is great Arrogance and Impudence in
this B. Cool, who is known to be an Ignorant Man, in the knowledge of the
strict, and proper Signification of Words, to pretend he knows better what
the Word Person signifies, than all the Learned Men, throughout Christendom,
and then all the Holy Ancients, who ever held that our Blessed Lord, even
considered as a Person without us, because of the Personal Union of the two
Natures, was properly the Son of God, and both God and Man, as the Scriptures
call him, which B. Cool, with his Arrogant Ignorance, would teach to Speak more
properly; and, as if he were both Wiser than the Holy Men that Penned the
Scriptures, that never used any such distinction of Christ within, that outward
Person being properly the Son of God, but that, that outward Person in whom the
Son Dwelt, was improperly the Son of God; and also, as if Wiser than all the
Holy Ancients, and all the Learned Men now in Christendom, very Magisterially,
tells us, in his p. 12. Nevertheless (says he) Since many People understand
not the terms of Proper and Improper, and are apt to Judge of things, according
to their Carnal Conceptions; for that reason, I should have been glad the
Expression had never been used. Thus we see how hard they still struggle for
their Infallibility; had W. Penn uttered that saying, from the Holy Ghost, as
G. Fox says, in his Truth Defended, p. 104. Our giving forth Papers, or
Printed Books, it is, from the Immediate Eternal Spirit of God; and in his
Great Mist. p. 98. And those, and you, all that Speak and Write, and not from
God Immediately and Infallibly, you are all under the Curse; why should B.
Cool, have been glad that Expression had never been used? Should he not be glad
of all the Words that come from the Holy Spirit? For doubtless, all such are
very profitable, and if B. Cool, did not think these Words came from the Holy
Spirit, by G. Fox's Verdict, both W. Penn, and B. Cool, for all his Lies, and
Fallacies uttered in this his Book, are under the Curse: But W. Penn, is not
alone in this Vile Heresy, that Christ's Body is no part of the true Christ,
for G. Whitehead is as deep in the Mire as W. Pen, who in his Christian Quaker,
p. 139. 140. tells us very deliberately, and as he seemed to himself, very
Scholastically; I distinguish (said he) between Consisting and Having; Christ
Had Flesh and Bones, but he did not Consist of them. This shows the very heart
of their Heresy; as a Man has a Garment, but he does not Consist of it, it is
no part of him.

Now to give my Readers an Instance, that B. Cool thinks himself and his
Brethren Wiser than the Holy Ancients, in his and their denying Christ, as he
was Man, or that outward Person, to be Properly the Son of God: I will briefly
give some Account, who were the Patrons of W. Penn, G. Whitehead, and B. Cool,
or at least their Forerunners in maintaining their Vile Heresy: In the time of
Justinian the Elder, certain Heretics called Bonosiani, from their Master
Bonosus, denied that Christ as Man, was the Proper Son of God, and affirmed
that he was his Adopted Son; but were refuted by Justinian a Bishop of the
Valensian Church; who lived about that time: After them about the year 783,
Elipandus, and Foelix, two Spanish Bishops, did openly affirm, and Preach, That
although Christ was the true proper and Natural Son of God, according to his
Divine Nature, yet according to his Humane Nature [ i. e. his Manhood Nature
consisting of Soul and Body] he was only the Son of God by Adoption, and by
Grace, but not truly and properly [Behold your Ancestors W. Pen, B. Cool, and
G. Whitehead] against whom, Charles the Great, called a Synod, at Franckford,
consisting of three Hundred Bishops, about the year 794, where that Heresy was
condemned; as J. Forbesius in his Instructions, Hist. Theol. Lib. 6. Chap. 1.
N. 1. etc. Gives a full and plain Account, and these Heretics, as the said
Author gives an Account, did make their great Argument against the Flesh of
Christ [to wit, his Body of visible Flesh, which the Quakers will not have to
be any part of him, but a certain invisible Body] for thus they did Argue, The
Flesh, or Humanity of Christ, was not Begotten of the Substance of God,
therefore the Man Christ is not, in his Nature, the true and proper Son of God;
the which Argument, Paulus the Aquilensian Bishop answers, and retorteth his
Argument against Foelix himself, That the Soul of Foelix was not begotten of
his Fathers Seed, and yet the whole Foelix was the true and proper Son of his
Father. And the like Retortion may be made against those Quakers, unless they
will say, that the Men whom the World called their Fathers, were not their
Fathers, because they did not beget their Souls, but only their Flesh; yet this
B. Cool thinks himself Wiser than these three Hundred famous Bishops, who
condemned this infamous Heresy above eight Hundred years ago.

The Third thing whereof B. Cool Accuses me, both in his Preface and Book, as
wronging W. Pen, and the Quakers, is, That I have charged him, and them, that
the History of Christ's incarnation was not necessary to our Salvation, or as he
explains it himself, p. 5. of his Preface, That Faith in Christ, as he Dyed for
us, was unnecessary viz. To our Salvation, which he says, is so very
Fallacious and Wicked, that it deserves no reply. But wherein does he discover
it to be so? I find not that he brings one single Instance, in all his Books,
effectually proving that W. Pen does hold, that Faith in Christ as he Died for
us, is necessary to our Salvation; and indeed it is contrary, to the general
Drift of all his Books, and especially his whole Disconrse of the General Rule
of Faith and Life, which he will have to be both one and the same, to all
Mankind, Heathens and Christians; and this as Perfect, full and Complete a Rule
to the Heathens, who never heard of Christ, as to the Christians, and
consequently of the same extent, and reveals nothing more to the Christians,
then to the Heathens, otherwise it would be less perfect, or more imperfect, to
the Heathens than to the Christians; but he will not allow of any imperfect
Rule to be the General Rule, because of their imperfection; he argues against
the Scriptures being the Rule, Discourse of the General Rule etc. p. 24 second
Edition.
because the Scriptures were given forth, not all at once, but one part after
another, therefore they are not to be the Rule; and he makes it absurd that one
Age or part of Mankind should have a more perfect Rule of Faith and Practice
than another.

I find only one Place which B. Cool does bring, wherein he deals very
Fallaciously to prove that W. Penn holds Faith in Christ, as he Dyed, to be
necessary to our Salvation; as in his p. 13. and 14. where he quotes W. Penn,
saying, The outward History of Christ's exceeding Love to Mankind, deserves all
Humble and Reverend Credit, as a Godly Tradition, and it should for ever Bind
Men to Remember, Fear, and Worship him.

Note, Reader, here is yet not one Word of necessity of Faith in Christ, as he
is Man, as well as God, as the Object of our Faith; but let us hear him
further: But a firm belief in him, viz. Christ that so Appeared, Lived, Dyed,
Rose and Ascended, both as Testified of in the Scriptures of Truth, and more
especially, as he breaks in upon the Soul, in his Divine Discoveries, as the
true Light Lightning every every one coming into the World. This I call true
Christianity, says W. Pen, though this has a seeming Show, as if W. Pen, meant
that Faith in Christ, as he was that outward Person that suffered at Jerusalem,
was necessary; yet it is a mere Fallacy, for first, that outward Person that
suffered, was not properly the Son of God, as W. Pen has affirmed, and
therefore no proper Savior, nor Object of Faith. 2dly W. Pen For about 16
Pages in his Rejoinder, argues against Jo. Faldo, that he who suffered was not
properly the Christ, but by a Metonimy he was so called; so that it was not the
Outward Person, but he that appeared in that outward Person, viz. The Light
Within that outward Person, that is the same Light in W. Pen and in all Men,
that is the Savior or object of Faith, properly; he, or that outward Person
that Dyed, was not properly, but by a Metonimy, called the Savior, or Christ,
and therefore not properly the object of Faith; which yet will more fully
appear, by the passages I have quoted out of his other Books; in his Quakers a
new Nickname, he grants that Quakerism was introduced not by Preaching the
Promised Messiah, and by pointing at his Humane Person; but by Preaching a
Light Within; and that seeing Christ is not to come again in the Flesh, the
Quakers need not Preach what is not to be again; and if not needful to be
Preached, it Evidently follows, not needful to be believed. His Excuse that
they deny not Christ's coming in the Flesh, will not relieve him, for that is
not the question here, but whether Faith in him be necessary to their
Salvation? which W. Penn opposes. And though in his rejoinder to John Faldo,
he grants that the Man W. Pen's rejoinder Christ Jesus, Dyed, in Familiar usage
of Speech, and page 305, 306. common Phrase, by the Metonymie of the thing
containing, getting the Name of the thing contained; yet he affirms, that, in a
more Mystical Sense, the Jews who put Christ's Body only to Death, may be also
said, in that very Action to have Murdered the Prince of Life and Glory. 1.
Cor. 2. Now what this Mystical Sense of their killing Christ is, does appear
out of his own and his Brethrens Books, to wit, their killing the Light within,
the Seed of the Promise, this he will have to be a Mystical Death, and this to
be the greater Mystery, Christ Formed within, the work of Regeneration, than
God manifest in the Flesh, as he says expressly in his Preface to To. Barclay's
Works; and this inward Death of Christ, he will have to be the more proper,
because the inward Principle, called by him and his Brethren, Christ. Quaker,
p. 97, 98.
The Seed of the Woman, that is slain in the Wicked, is properly the Christ,
and that Seed is God over all, as he says in his Christian Quaker; the
absurdity whereof, I have showed in my 4th Narative, p. 55, 56. and is so
obvious, that the very hearing of it, is enough to make Christian Ears to
Tingle; and this Mystical Sense of Christ's Death, to wit, the Crucifying
Christ within Men, affirmed by W. Penn, is a key to us to understand the juggle
both of W. Penn and B. Cool, when he quotes W. Penn, that a firm belief in
Christ, that so Appeared, Lived, Dyed, [to wit, in his Mystical Sense of Death,
that is the only proper Death of Christ, as if Christ as God, whom he calls,
The Seed of the Woman, and an Holy and Spiritual Principle of Light, Life, and
Power, could be more properly Killed than as he was Man: Oh Abominable! Rose
and Ascended,] is necessary to our Salvation.

And Note, Reader, that in the very same page of B. Cool's Book p. 14. where he
brings this juggling Testimony of W. Penn to Confirm the juggle, and make it
appear, he quotes him further, saying, And he that obeyes this Note, This W.
Penn and B. Cool, thinks Men may do, and yet have no Faith in Christ, come in
the Flesh without them, such as the Heathens among the Indians, and Brachmans,
whom they ownto be their Christian Brethren, so that Moral Heathen, and
Christian, are but two Names to one Thing.
Light, is a Child of Light, a Child of God, a true Christian. So this is that,
which changes Man, and Regenerates him, and of a Child of Wrath, makes a Child
of Grace, and an Heir of the Promise, says W. Penn, which, says B. Cool, is a
bare Historical Faith of Christ's Life, Death, etc. will never do.

But whoever said, of all W. Penn's or B. Cool's Opponents, that a bare
Historical Faith would do? not one; therefore this is another Juggle and
Fallacy of B. Cool, when he excuses W. Penn's saying, Faith in the History of
Christ's outward Manifestation, is a deadly Poison, these Latter Ages has been
Infected with, p. 12. as if W. Penn, meant it only, that a bare Historical
Faith, without the inward work of Sanctification, were such; which was never
the question, nor matter of Controversy between W. Penn and John Faldo,
against whom he there Disputes, or any other of his Opponents, who never said
that a bare Historical Faith would or could Save any; yet still their Phrase is
unsound and offensive, That Faith in the History of Christ's outward
Manifestation is a deadly Poison; for the bare Conviction, of the Truth of the
History, and assent to it, which is that Historical Faith he professes to
mean, where no real Sanctification is wrought, is so far from being a deadly
Poison, that it has a real Service, remotely at least, to prepare the Soul for
Sanctification; and if many so Convinced, are not Sanctified, as B. Cool
confesses in his 16 p. That Faith will be an Aggravation of their Guilt and
Misery, which is therefore no deadly Poison, but of great Use, even as
Unsanctified Men's having a Conviction of the Light within, and some Sense of
it, and that is more than a bare Historical Faith of it, will be an Aggravation
of their Guilt; but will B. Cool allow Men therefore to call it, a deadly
Poison, that infects Hundreds of the Quakers so called, who are no more
Sanctified than many others, who have but the Historical Faith of Christ
without; and if all England, and all Christendom beside, had but a bare
Historical Faith of the Light within, without the inward work of
Sanctification, that Faith would not Save them; yet it follows not, according
to B. C. that the Light within, or a Historical Faith in it, is a deadly
Poison. I cannot but think B. Cool would think it a great Blessing to all
Christendom, and a great Introduction to the Quakers Religion, if they all had
a real Conviction, or Historical Faith of the Quakers Notion of the Light
within, though all were not Sanctified by it; yet that that Conviction or
Faith, is a deadly Poison, I see not how he can Grant: The Quakers, commonly
distinguish betwixt Conviction and Conversion; they call that Conviction, or
Convincement, when a Man assents to their Great and Foundamental Principle, the
Light within, which they reckon a Step or Introduction to Conversion, and if
Conversion do not follow, yet the Conviction is good; as Paul said of the Law,
though many did not obey it, it was good. And what B. Cool, would say in the Case
of a general Convincement of the Light within, according to his and his
Brethrens Notion of it: I would say much more of a general Convincement all
over the World, and all Heathen Nations; that the History of Christ's Birth,
Life, Miracles, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, etc. is true, that it would
be so far from being a deadly Poison, that it would be a great good, and a
great Advantage and Introduction to spread the Christian Religion, over the
Heathen Nations. All Christendom, and in a sort all the World, has a real
Notion and Faith of the Light within, as it is an Assent of their Consciences,
to the work of the Law, Writ in their Hearts; and this Faith or Assent, is
certainly a good thing, and of great Concern to the good of Mankind, being the
Foundation of all the good Laws and Governments that are to be found in Heathen
Nations, though thousands who have it, yet are not Sanctified by it, nor can they
be Sanctified by it, without Faith in Christ Crucified, and without a special
superadded Illumination, and Operation of the Holy Spirit, that does usually
Accompany the Written Word, according to Gods Ordinary way of working, and the
methods of Divine Providence toward the Race of Mankind.

But the Quakers general Notion of the Light Within being sufficient to
Salvation without any else, and confirmed so to be by G. Whitehad in his late
Antidote p. 28. and by W. Penn in his Discourse of the General Rule of Faith
and Practice, justified all along by B. Cool, and his own saying, as above
noted, That there is but one General Rule of Faith and Practice, to all
Mankind, is such a plain Proof of his Deism, in opposition to the Christian
Faith, that greater cannot be given; notwithstanding of what he talks in
contradiction and Inconsistency to himself; and W. Penn and his other Brethren,
p. 27. That God in his Mercy and Goodness, has super-added the Holy Scriptures
for a Rule to us to walk by, and according to. Yet (says he) we are not
therefore to neglect the inward Law and Rule and Eternal Precepts in our
Hearts, because we have an outward one to walk by. Thus he still leaves the
true State of the Controversy, on purpose to divert and deceive his Weak
Reader, by his juggling. None says that we ought to neglect the inward Law or
Light in the Conscience, of all Mankind; because we have the outward Rule of
the holy Scriptures, for true Christians highly Esteeem of both, and Labor to
conform their Lives to both; but as to all the peculiar Doctrines and Precepts
of Christianity, as distinct from Deism or Gentile Religion, however refined
they hold the Rule of the Christian Faith and Religion, with respect to its
peculiar Doctrines and Precepts, to be such a Rule as the Heathens have not,
and it may be acknowledged to be a Superadded Rule, as much as Christian
Religion is a superadded Religion, to any thing that was or is True in Gentile
Religion. But for B. Cool, and his Brethren, who own but one general Rule and
Practice, to all Mankind: And say the Light within every Man is sufficient to
Salvation, without any thing else. [Let him deny this if he dares] to talk of a
superadded Rule, is a Contradiction and Inconsistence: for if they allow a Rule
superadded to the common Illumination, obliging Christians to believe and
practice any more things than what the Heathens are obliged to, they make two
Rules; one common to Christian and Heathens, viz. The Light Within; the other
peculiar to the Christian, which is of a far greater Perfection, and has a far
greater Number of things both to be believed and practiced, and of a higher
Nature, many or most of them, than what the common Illumination in the
Consciences of Mankind generally Teaches.

And as Concerning what B. Cool Grants of Gods Superadding the Holy Scriptures,
for a Rule to us to walk by. I ask him, Was that Superadded Rule, absolutely
necessary to be added to our Christianity, through our Faith and Obedience to
it? If he say it was and is, then he contradicts their Fundamental Notion of
the sufficiency of the Light Within all Mankind to Salvation, and all Men's
having but one general Rule, his own Words. If it be not absolutely necessary,
what need of it is being superadded, seeing the common illumination has a
sufficiency in it abundantly (according to the Quakers) not only to inform the
Understanding of all things necessary to Salvation, without any super-added
Rule, but of Grace to enable all Mankind perfectly to obey all Gods Commands;
and to attain to a Sinless Perfection, and that in a much nearer way, and with
fewer means, as having fewer and easier Precepts; for who can deny but the Laws
and dictates of the Common Illuminations given to all Mankind are much fewer,
and easier to be obeyed, than what the Christian Religion Superadds; for it
cannot be proved that the Common Illumination, without the superadded Law of
Christianity, forbids Poligamy; but the Law of Christianity forbids it: And
many other things the Christian Religion both Commands and Forbids, which the
common Illumination does neither command nor forbid, tho in the Substance of
the Ten Commandments, commonly called the Moral Law, both the Rules agree.
Again, this Super added Law of the Holy Scriptures, B. Cool will not allow it
to be any other than Secondary, compared with the common illumination, as the
Copy is to the Original which is the Primary, and as the Copy has nothing but
what the original has, and is better and more Authentic in the Original, than
in the Copy; and the Original has no dependence on the Copy, but the Copy has
on the Original; from all which it is very plain, whatever the Scriptures Teach
or Dictate, that the common Illumination in the Conscience does not first and
originally dictate, is of no further Obligation, upon any Men; for the
Secondary binds only by the force and Authority of the Primary, and has all
its certainly and Evidence therefrom, as W. Penn does argue in his Discourse of
the general Rule of Faith and Practice; where he preferrs the inward
Illumination common to all Mankind, to the Scriptures; affirming the first to
be the Rule for it is Perfection, certainty, Evidence, Plainness, Antiquity,
Universality, and many other Reasons, and for all which Reasons he Rejects the
Scriptures from being the Primary Rule; yet is so kind to allow them to be the
Secondary in diverse things, viz. So far as the common Illumination is
Commensurate to the Scriptures, which is only but in a small part; and for the
rest of them, the common illumination has nothing about them, as whether True
or False, further than the Ten Precepts of the Decalogue.

But that W. Pen, and B. Cool also confesses, that the Quakers have no
Extraordinary Revelation, ( i. e.) Special and Peculiar, Concerning Christ's
Incarnation, Birth, Death, Resurrection, etc. See B. Cool, his page 20. B. Cool
and W. Penn's Citation of Calvin, is a mere Juggle of both, and a notorious
perversion of Calvin's Words, as I have shown in my Book called, W. Pen's
Deism; for that Calvin asserteth the necessity of the inward Motion or
Influence of the holy Spirit, to persuade us that the Scriptures are true, is
no Argument that Calvin thought the Spirit, or Light Within, to be the Rule, as
I have showed in that Book of Deisme.

To the quotations of W. Pen's saying, in his Address to Protestants, What is
Christ but Meekness, Justice, and Mercy, Patience, Charity and Virtue, in
Perfection? He objects, p. 32. That I purposely left out the last Word, viz. In
Perfection, and for this uncharitable supposition, he charges me to be a
Sophister, and guilty of Envy and Malice, as if I did represent W. Pen, to have
dwindled away Christ to nothing but a Habit. But I answer, I did not omit
purposely the word in Perfection, as he does uncharitably charge me, for that
half Sheet of mine, called the Synopsis of W. Penn's Deisme, being but an Index
of my Book of Deisme, and some other quotations I had extracted out of W.
Penn's Printed Books; I had no need to put down his words at large, for I put
down all that was necessary to show his Deisme, and the words in Perfection, I
have put them in my 3d. Narrative, for which see page 8. of my 3d. Narrative,
which was printed a year before my Synopsis. Nor does the Word in Perfection,
when added, help W. Pen, or B. Cool, out of the Mire of Deisme, for who can
doubt but the Habits of Virtue in perfect Men, who are come to a sinless
Perfection, are perfect, as B. Cool and his Bretheren's Principle, obliges them
to believe? But supposing that by Meekness, Mercy, Justice, Patience, Charity,
in Perfection, W. Pen did mean not any Habits of Virtue, however perfect in
Men, but the Essential Perfections of Christ's Godhead, which may be said to be,
Justice, Goodness, Mercy, Charity, in Infinite Perfection, yet the Consequence
that W. Penn draws from this, as it is weak, and false, to prove that a Meek or
mere just Man is a Christian, so it is strong enough to prove W. Pen a mere
Deist; for though Christ's Godhead is Infinite Goodness, Justice, Charity, as
St. John describes God to be Love; yet Christ is not only God, but Man also;
and that Faith that denominates a Man to be a true Christian, must be a Faith
in Christ, not as God only, but as both God and Man. Which Faith must be a
living Faith, that has good Works; but against this Faith W. Penn argues, as
not necessary to make a Man a true Christian, and by a false Consequence, does
Infer, that he who believes in God, believes in Christ, because Christ is God;
as if Christ were God only, and not Man also.

Thus Reader I have made good my three Charges against W. Penn and B. Cool,
[and the Truth of my Synopsis] which he calls the three Pillars of my whole
Fabric; and supposing it were so, seeing they are firm, the Fabric must be
firm also.

I shall not further enlarge in Answer to his Book at present, judging it
needless, but refer to my other Books, especially my 4 Narratives, my book
called the Deisme of W. Penn; which B. Cool ought to Answer throughout, if he
thinks to clear W. Penn of Deisme; where his and his Brethrens Deisme and
Antichristian Principles are sufficiently discovered, and whereof the Synopsis
was but as an Index And that other called the Fallacies of W. Pen and his
Brethren, in their Answer to the Bishop of Cork.

As to the Airy Flouts and Scoffs, throughout his Book and Preface, more
Ishmael-like, than a Sober Heathen, and some base Insinuations against me, in
p. 11. and 12. of his Preface, being as False as Foolish, I think not worth
Noticing.

But I dare him to make good his charge against me in any of these particulars,
which if he offers to do, I doubt not but I shall thereby the more discover his
Falsehood and Folly.

As for the Bristol Quakers Reasons why they met me not, to Answer to my
Charges against their Antichristian Principles, then Read and Proved against
them, out of the Books of their most approved Authors, at the Baptists
Meeting House the 24th of July, 1699. They being in effect no other than what
the Quakers of London gave, why they refused to meet me at Turners-Hall the
11th of January 1699. I refer to the Postscript of my 4th Narrative, Printed
1700, where they are sufficiently answered. But the only effectual Reason, they
both have omitted, which was, that of a Guilty Conscience, knowing in
themselves that they are really chargeable with those things.

But whereas they say, I was not ashamed Hypocritically to profess my self a
Quaker, as I had done ever since I came to the City, is a Notorious Untruth;
When by Violence they kept me out at their Meeting-House-Door, some of them
asked me, If I was a Quaker? I said I was a Friend of Truth, but did not say I
was a Quaker. If to gain some of the Quakers from their Heathenism and
Antichristianity, (as God has been pleased to make me Instrumental to gain
some,) I was for some time in some outward Behavior like them, as St. Paul
said, to the Jews, he was as a Jew; and to the Gentiles, as a Gentile; this
will not prove me a Hypocrite; as it proves not that St. Paul was such.

FINIS.

