THE Universal free grace of the Gospel asserted OR THE LIGHT Of the Glorious
Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, Shining forth universally, and enlightening every Man
that coms into the World, and thereby giving unto every Man, a day of
visitation, wherein it is possible for him to be saved. Which is glad tidings
unto all People. BEING Witnessed and Testified unto, by us the People called in
derision Quakers. And in opposition to all Denyers of it, of one sort and
another proved by many infallible arguments, in the evidence and demonstration
of the Spirit of Truth, according to Scripture Testimonies and sound Reason.
With the objections of any seeming weight against it, answered BY GEORGE KEITH.

Printed in the Year, 1671.

THE PREFACE.
THERE be two maine and principal things held forth by us, which are as it were
the two hinges and fundamental principles, upon which all other things
relating either to Doctrins or Practices affirmed by us, do hang, and depend.
The first is, that there is no saving knowledge of God, or the things of his
Kingdom attainable, but by the Immediate revelation of Jesus Christ, who is
the Image, Word and Light of the invisible God, in which alone, he can be
manifest, unto the Salvation of men. The second is, that this Image, Word and
Light, which is Jesus Christ, the Son of the Fathers love, does shine forth in
some measure universally, and enlighten every man that coms into the World, and
thereby gives unto him, a day of visitation wherein it is possible for him to be
saved. Both which (...) they are indeed in the truth, are generally denied, but
affirmed by us, which two not withstanding, I may truly say, as they are indeed
known and witnessed in the truth, ar the chief and principal veins, and
arteries, which convey the very Blood, Life and Spirit of the Christian
Religion, into the true members of that body, whereof Jesus Christ is the head.
And the Lord has made me plainly to see, why the whole body of every Sect
professing the Christian Religion, up and down the world is so lean, barren,
dead and empty of that Life, and Spirit, which becoms the true Church to have,
and which the true Church had, in the Primitive times, even because of their
ignorance of, and opposition unto these two blessed testimonies of truth; and I
may boldly say it, never any society of people did flourish, or ever shall, or
can, with excellent induements of either piety, or knowledge, which denies
these two testimonies of truth, seeing they are the very principal means, and
Ordinances of God, which he has appointed, as through conduits, to convey
both Pi^y and knowledge, and all other hevenly gifts, and blessings unto men,
and seeing these are denied, the blessed effect, which would follow, upon the
using of them, cannot but be much wanting, as where there is an obstruction, or
stop in the principal veins, arteries, and nervs of the natural body, that
body cannot flourish, but must needs be a very sick Paralitick diseased body,
and near unto death. And for this cause it is, that the whole body of
Christendom so called, is in a most lam^table condition, and death reigns in
it, and a thick cloud of darkness fills it, and very few there be, who know by
sensible experience, the life, kernel, and substance of the Christian
Religion, among all the many professions in it, and that small remnant, who do
know any thing thereof, it is very weakly and faintly, and their sight of the
things of God, is but like the poor blind man's half sight, after Christ had a
little cured him, who saw men, walking as trees, the Reason of all this, has
been the ignorance of, and opposition unto these two testimonies aforsaid, for
the ignorance of the true manner of receiving either Piety or pious and Godly
wisdom, which is by way of immediate Revelation, from the Father by Jesus
Christ, through the holy Spirit, this has hindered and stopped the growth and
increase of holiness and piety, and the Wisdom and knowledge there unto
appertaining as to the Intension, i. e. measur or degree of it in the
particular, which otherwise by this time, might have been like the waters of
the Sanctuary, at a great height; and again, the ignorance of that other
blessed testimony of truth, (concerning the universality of the Light, word,
Grace, and spirit of God, toward, and upon all, in a day of visitation, for
the saving, and endueing them, with holiness and holy knowlegd and wisdom) has
been a most mischeivous hindrance and let, unto the Extension, or spreading of
true piety, and knowledge abroad among people in the world. The ignorance of the
One I say has hindered the Intension of it, and the ignorance of the other, its
Extension: as may be manifest to any, who will consider these things, were it,
but with half an eye. For what can tend so much to the universal gathering of
all the nations, Kingdoms, languages and kinreds of the earth, as to hold forth
this universal principle unto them all, the Light, which lights all and
every one of them; and to inform them, that thereby and therthrough salvation
is attainable by every one and peace and reconciliation with God, in their
belief of the light, and obedience thereunto? And what can more hinder this
universal gathering, then that particular, narrow, straitning, limiting,
principle, of men, of a pettish narrow heart, and spirit, who say, that
salvation never was, is, nor shall be possible unto the most part of men. That
God by an eternal decree has wholly passed them by, and left them in darkness,
without any light to shine in their darkness, that can possibly at any time,
lead them out of it. Does not this discourage people, and rather lay a block in
the way of their Faith, then to point, ordirect them, unto a pillar and ground
of it? Yea does not this Doctrine, that other being added to it, viz. that
immediate Revelation is ceased, lay a much more probable foundation, for any
man's unbeleif, and distrust in the Lords mercy and willingness to save him, then
for his faith thereupon? For when any man comes with a call unto them, to beleiv
that they may be saved, and therwithall tells them, that God has left most
men, without providing them any power, by which it is possible for them to
beleiv may not all begin to doubt, or question, with more ground, then to
believe, whether they be the persons, that are thus passed by, of the Lord,
yea, or nay? When the Lord said but to his disciples, one of you, shall betray
me, they were exceeding sorrowful, all of them, and began (...) Question,
Master is it, I. How much more then occasion have they to be sorrowful, and to
question the very mercy of God, for their salvation, if it be told them, that
this mercy is denied not only to a few, but most of men, and to many under the
visible profession, of the Christian Religion. And for as much as they say,
immediate Revelation is ceased, this shuts out all, from receiving any
knowledge from God himself, whether they belong to that number, that is
absolutely rejected, yea, or nay: Weigh, and consider these things: Oh all
people, and be awakened and roused up, out of your slumberings, in which, your
teachers, have lulled you, that you may once at last perceive these blind
guides, who deny the Light, that is universal, and whether they are leading
you, even into a very pit of darkness, and impiety, while they tell you, God
has not given, to every one of you, nay, nor to any one of you, who may be in
a natural state, any thing through which it is possible for you, to come out
of that darkness, and death, in which you lie: sure when you shall come to any
Nobility of understanding, you will find, that though your teachers say, the
Quakers teach pernicions principles unto the Nation, that indeed we bring glad
tidings unto it. Whose principles in the twofold testimony aforsaid, as they
come to be received and believed by the Nation, will make it a happy and
blessed Nation, which is now miserable, because of that ignorance and iniquity
that abounds in it. By the true faith and belief of these two principles, the
nation that is now as a barren wilderness, as to fruits of righteousness, would
become as the garden and Paradise of God. The glory of Lebanon, and excellency
of Carmell would be given unto it, and it would become a married land and
nation unto the Lord, and so would all other nations, through the true belief
and faith of this twofold testimony, which has long been suppressed, and
warred against, and the few witnesses there of, by the Dragon and his
followers, so that the two witnesses have been slain for three long days, and
a half, in as much as (beside other accounts) that this twofold testimony has
not lived and flourished in, and among them, but has been always knocked down,
and slain, through the deceit and violenc of earthly minded men, who have hated
the true life of Christ, and yet for their earthly and selfish ends, have made
use of the form and words of it, which without the life and spirit of Christ is
but a dead carcas, and as it were the dead bodies of the slain witnesses, which
have lain in the streets of Sodom and Egypt, spiritually so called, that is to
say, of the false and Antichristian Sinagogue, Babylon, the Mother of
fornications with her daughters, as all th^se are, howmuch soever pretending to
a Reformation, who are not yet come to witness the true Light, Power and spirit
of the Gospel to work in them, both the will, and the deed. Now these
Merchants of Babylon, and bloody Butchers, and Murderers of the two witnesses,
and testimonies of God, have traded and made their merchandise of these dead
bodies, viz. the words and forms of truth, after they had slain the life that
appeared therein (and murdered Gods faithful Saints, who held forth the living
testimony of truth) and sold them, in the streets, or market places, of the
false Church, as ever the Butchers, do their flesh in the shambles, in the
streets of market Towns, Cities and Villages. Well! the judgment of this great
whore is com, and is truly begun. The spirit of life from God is entered into
the two slain witnesses, and shall yet more abundantly enter, to the
affrighting and allaruming all that dwell upon the earth: and truly in nothing
more can we rickon, upon the raising of the witnesses, then in that the Lord
God almighty has raised this twofold testimony (that has been so much opposed
and resisted, even by them, who made a trade of the words, which witness there
unto.) and made it to appear, and shine forth in great Glory, Power and Beauty,
and raised up many to witness therefore, and thereunto, which no deceit, nor
violence of men, or principalities and powers of darkness shall ever any more be
able to prevail against. This twofold testimony, and the witnesses theirof,
shall prophocy, and that not in sackcloth and weakness, as formerly, but in
their beautiful garments, in power, glory, and dominion, to the staining the
glory of all flesh, and bringing down the pride thereof, that the Lord alone,
and his truth may be exalted.

Now unto the one of these two testimonies, Viz. that of immediate Revelation,
a large testimony from the Lord, has been given me to bear, and somewhat is
published on that Subject, for the general service of truth. And also as to
this other I find it with me to give testimony thereunto, and with others of my
Dear Friends in the truth, to leave a public standing Record and testimony,
unto the truth hereof, in opposion to all denyers of it.

And because that many of our adversaries, some through ignorance, and others
through malice and prejudice allege that this our principle concerning the
Light, etc. its being universally saving, as to its nature, is the very same,
which the Papists and Arminians hold who maintain universal grace, therefore I
find it fit to clear this matter for the undeceiving the simple, for indeed,
though the Arminians and Papists also, speak of universal grace as given and
offered unto all, yet the thing is self, which is the universal grace, as to
what it is indeed, and in truth, and in true manner and way of its operation,
they both deny and oppose it, for as much as they both deny, that the universal
light, which is given unto all, it the light evangelicall, or a light for the
faith of the Gospel to rest in, therefore they do not hold it forth, as the
immediate object of the Christian says. Secondly they deny the way and manner
of its operation to be by immediate Revelation. Thirdly they say, this light
coms from Christ, but Christ himself is not in man, in the true seed of
Regeneration, yea and the true and real indwelling of Christ in the divine
seed, and birth in the very, Saints, they generally deny as also, that this
divine seed and birth is a real substance, or that the divine life is
substantial, or subsisteth in any substantial principle of its own nature,
and so I say truly that both Arminians and Papists, deny the true universal
grace, as to what it is indeed, and as to the true way of its operation, and
therefore may be justly putt in the roll with others, as unskilful Physicians,
through their ignorance of, and opposition unto this universal medicine and
cure, which has truly the virtue to cure all men, and all diseases of men, and
is administered of the Lord unto all, whereby it is possible for them to be
cured. But not withstanding the great cloud of darkness and ignorance, which
has been generally over the understandings of people, it is to be acknowledged
that through the infinite mercy of God some, among one and another both Papists
and Protestants so called, have received some tastes thereof, and been partakers
of its virtue, whereby their souls have lived unto God, in some measur, but under
much weakness and leannes, yet so, as who have been truly single toward him,
have been accepted. For the times of this ignorance, God winked at, but now
commands all men every where to repent. The night is far spent, and the day
is at band, yea it is already dawned, and the true light shines out of the
darkness, which shall run, and spread, and cover the face of the whole earth,
with its glory, as an overflowing stream.

Amen.
A few words concerning the state of the controversy, and the explication of
the Terms.
1. WHEN we speak of the Light, as given unto all men that they may be saved,
and as being sufficient unto all for salvation: by Light we do not simply
understand a thing, that has but this one Property or Quality, of enlightening,
or manifesting, as only to give a true understanding of things, and to work out
ignorance and error from out of the minds of men, but this light has life in
it, and an universal virtue and power to reach unto the whole man, not only to
cure the blindness of his understanding, but the perverseness of his Will, and the
depravednes of his affections, it has not only an enlighting property, but it
has all these other properties as to quicken, to sanctify, to purify, to heal,
to mortify, etc. For it being the image of God, it has its perfections
answerable unto those which are in God: so that as in God, there is Light,
Life, Love, Goodness, Mercy, Righteousness, Wisdom, Power, etc. So in this
light, which comes from him, there are all these things, by way of
participation, or communication.

2. We do not understand this Light and Grace, or Gift of God, and Jesus
Christ, as separate from God, or Christ, for that it is as impossible as to
separate the beams from the Sun, for God and Christ are one with the light that
coms from them forever. Yea as the Father, and the Son are inseparable, so is
the light which comes from them, inseparable from both. And accordingly as we
say, there is a saving light from the Father of lights and from Jesus Christ
communicated unto all men, and which is in all men, so God and Christ are
together with this light in all men, present with it, and in it cooperating
therewith; for as Christ said, I can do nothing of my self, and my Father
works hitherto, and I work, so the light which comes from the Father and the
Son, cannot do the work alone, but the Father and the Son, do cooperate
therewith, and therein, hence in Scripture every good thing or Motion in any
man, is ascribed unto God himself, as immediately present, the immediate Author
and Worker of it. It is God that works in you, said Paul, and no man can come
unto me said Christ, unless the Father draw him, and said Christ concerning
himself, without me ye can do nothing, I am the way, the truth, and the
life, no man comes unto the Father, but by me, and also the whole work of man's
salvation is ascribed unto the Holy Ghost, the quickner and Comforter. So that
this heavenly seed of grace, needs the continual influence and presence of
God and Christ, together with the Holy Spirit to raise it and form it, and
concur with it, in the renewing and regenerating of man. But besides this
presence and inbeing of God and Christ, which is in all men, unto salvation, in
a day of the gracious visitation of God unto them. There is a more speeciall
way of the inbeing of God and Christ in men, which is proper only unto the
Saints and children of God, who both have God in them, and are again in God by
Union, and Christ is formed in them, and so they have Christ in them, and they
are in Christ, through a heavenly and spiritual birth in which they are one
with God and Christ. And of this sort, or manner of in-being, which is by
Union, and Christ formed within, the scripture speaks frequently. And does
hold it forth as only belonging unto the Saints, but as concerning this
particular, how God and Christ is in all men unto salvation, within a day of
the visitation of the love of God unto them, and also how God and Christ is not
in all, but only in the Saints and children of God according to a spiritual
birth and Union, the third part of this treatise following, in which the
objections are answered, does more fully and largely give an account.

3. And for the better understanding of the matter in hand, how that the saving
and Evangelicall light of Jesus Christ has been communicated unto all men, in
all ages and generations of the world, we are to consider the words of the
Apostle to this purpose, There are diversity of administrations said he, but
one spirit, and diversity of administrations, but one Lord, which diversity of
operations and administrations are reducoable unto these two, the law, and the
Gospel, or the first covenant, and the second. Which two as they were very
distinguishable among the Jews, so were they also among the Gentiles. As
concerning the Jews, they had first, the law, which came by Moses, and
secondly they had the grace and truth which came by Jesus Christ. The
Righteousness of the law, and the Righteousness of faith, and these two, though
they were distinguishable yet as they were administered of God, they were not
separated, nor divided, but the Gospel lay hid within the law, as within a
vail, which the outward Tabernacle did plainly figure, and hold forth. For what
did the Holy of Holyes signify, within the outward court, and holy place* but
the Gospel, and the administration thereof within the law, and its
administration? And thus Christ Jesus was in the law, and under it, but as
within and under the vail and here the light shined in darkness, but the darkness
did not comprehend it. The dispensation of the law was as darkness, in respect
of the clear dispensation of the Gospel, yet even in this darkness, did Christ
Jesus the true light shine. And also in, or among the Gentiles universally,
there was and is somewhat which by way of proportion, does answer unto the law,
and Gospel, first covenant and second, which was so distinctly held forth
among the Jews; and, as among the Jews, therwas Moses and the Prophets, in
the letter, so universally in all men, both Jews and Gentiles, there has
been Moses and the Prophets in the spirit, and also Christ: else what can be
understood by these words, Death reigned over all from Adam unto Moses? here is
an Adam, which related unto all men, both Jews and Gentiles, and here is also
a Moses that related unto all, which certainly cannot be that individual, or
particular man Moses, but a dispensation of God unto men, answerable unto
Moses, according to which, Christ said, as concerning men then alive upon
earth, long after Moses and the Prophets were dead, they have Moses and the
Prophets. And speaking of that universal law of righteousness; whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, do ye also the same unto them. For this,
said he, is the Law and the Prophets. So here is, first, Adam, Secondly Moses,
Thirdly the Prophets, unto John, who is a burning and shining light, and a
Voice crying in the wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord. And Moses the
Prophets and John, or Elias, are the forerunners of the Lord in Spirit, who
comes after them, and yet is before them all, and in them all, but as it were
vaild, even as Moses outwardly put a vail before his face, because the people
could not behold his Glory, so Christ Jesus, (both when he came outwardly into
the World, and now when he comes inwardly in men's hearts) in his first
appearance, puts on a vail, and his Flesh is called that vail, and as he
had his Flesh in the outward, which was a vail, so he has his Flesh in the
inward, which is a vail also; The Word became Flesh, and dwelt in us, said
John. And this inward appearance of Christ in Flesh, is his appearance in
Weakness, as Natural, and yet Spiritual, the Mystery hid within the vail of
Flesh, or natural Spirit. The Treasure hid in the field, the least of all
Seeds. And this Christ does because of men's weakness in the natural state, they
are natural, their eye is natural, their ear natural, their understanding
natural. And how can that which is natural apprehend or receive that which is
spiritual, but as it appears in, or clotheth it self with a natural
medium? For Unum quodque quod recipitur ad modum recipientis, i. e. Every thing
that is received, is received according to the manner of the Recipient. And
this is the body of Christ, that is indeed spiritual, but, for our cause,
descends into a natural form, or appearance, and changing us, by and with
it self, ascends again into its spiritual appearance of glory. Thus it is
sown natural, but is raised spiritual, and thus also we become changed
thereby, both in the soul and body, so as being sown natural, we come to be
raised spiritual. And indeed there was no other way, that we could be made
spiritual who were natural, but that Christ Jesus, who was and is spiritual,
should become (so to speak) natural. Hence he is called the (...) i. e. The
word in-naturalised, or become natural in us, which in it self is spiritual.
This is for our weakness, he must descend that we may ascend. And according to
this acceptance of the word [naturall] we should not contend with those who
call this inward divine light natural if they did not call and judge it so
natural, as if it were only a mere natural humane thing; as a property or
quality of man's corrupt nature, because of which their error, our controversy is
just with them. The consideration of this twofold appearance of Christ even
inwardly in men, should stir all up, not to rest in the first, but to press
forward into the second, so as to know, a dying through his first appearance
unto our natural, which is the first Birth, and a putting on the spiritual,
wherein the rising with Christ is witnessed, and a (...) down in him, in
heavenly plases.

This first appearance or ministration of Christ in men, is as a Lawgiver,
answerable unto Moses, which Law requires of men obedience unto it, without
letting them see, or propounding unto them, the Seed, wherein the ability is
received to fulfill the Righteousness of the Law. And indeed at first, Man has
no inclination to look after the Seed, which is the Elect and promised Seed.
But he aspireth to do what is required of him through the Seed and birth of
his natural being. But after all that he so does, or can do, the Law, which
is light discovers the emptynes and imperfection of it, it being not only a
shining, but a burning light, and here man is sore discouraged, afflicted and
grieved, under the sense and sight of his weakness, vanity, misery and
unrighteousnes. This divine and heavenly light in him does not only discover
his best Righteousness, to be imperfect and an unclean thing, but it burns as
fire against it, to consume and destroy it. Therefore is a man to give up the
first birth, and all the Righteousness, wisdom, and glory of it, unto death,
and burning, that this divine and heavenly fire may mortify and burn it, to
the end, that the second or new birth may be attained, by which also that which
dyed, that was natural and corrupt, comes to be quickened and raised up, pure
and spiritual. And this Christ himself taught expressly, that a man must deny
himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow him, if he would be his
Disciple. And this Self, that he is to deny, is his first birth whether of
unrighteousnes, or righteousness, the first birth, even with all its Glory,
Wisdom, Righteousness, he must give up to the cross, which cross is the very
light or life of Christ in him, even in its very first appearance, which
crosses the natural birth with its Righteousness, Will, and Wisdom, and is
not given to cherish, and strengthen it, but indeed to weaken, kill and
mortify it, and then to raise it up again, not any more bearing the image of
the natural and earthly but of the spiritual and heavenly. This denial, and
giving up of a man's self and the righteousness thereof unto death is attained
by Faith in the Light, Life, and Spirit of God and Christ: the Word and Spirit
of Faith.

4. And as concerning the sufficiency of this light unto salvation, we do not
understand it in opposition, to either the necessity or usefulnes of the
outward coming of Christ, and his sufferings and death for our sins, nor in
opposition unto the service and use of any teachings in the outward, that come
from the Spirit of God, or any outward things to be done or practiced, which
his spirit leads unto, all which is more largely showed in the third Section,
which answers the particular objections, where diverse others things
serviceable for clearing the state of the controversy are treated of.

5. Nor do we assert that by this light the will of all men, nor of any man, in
his natural state, at all times, is so posited, liberated or freed from the
Power and Captivity of the Devil, whose Servant and Vassal man is become, in
the fall and degenerate state, through a voluntary giving up of his members, as
servants to iniquity; as that he can, at all times, at his own will and
pleasure, avert himself from the service of the Devil, rescue himself from
under his Power, and convert himself to, and seek God, so as to find him: but
only then, and at such special and particular times and seasons, as it
pleases the Lord in the riches of mercy to touch, stir, and move him, by a
visitation from on high, upon, in, and through this light, both enlightening his
understanding and inclining his will, in the strength, power and virtue of
which divine touch, the soul and will is so far liberated and freed, that it
can follow that which draws it, without which drawings of the Father, Christ
says, No man can come unto him. The which the Lord is no ways bound to
continue for ever.

6. And therefore neither do we assert that men that have received this Light
and Spirit of God, and have given themselves up unto it, to obey it, and so are
become Servants of Righteousness, do receive at once, a full and sufficient
measure, for the whole course of their Lives, but only sufficient for the
present state, condition, opportunity, and case, to preserve, protect and
defend them from all evil, so that the Creature must be continually exercised
in a perpetual dependence and waiting upon the Lord, to receive the renewed
and fresh influences of this divine Light and Life, according as its present
State, Condition, and Necessity may require, there being no security of the
soul out of this dependant, waiting, receiving frame.

SECTION. I.
Holding forth the Arguments according to Scripture Testimonies, and a
vindication of them, from the corrupt Glosses of our Adversaries. Argument 2.
from Ioh. 1. cap. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.

IN this Chapter we have a full and clear Testimony both from John the
Evangelist and Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ, and also from John the Baptist
his forerunnor, concerning this matter.

John the Evangelist says, concerning him, that he was the Word which was in
the beginning, and was with God, and was God, that all things were made by him,
and without him was not any thing made, that was made, and that in him was
life, and the life was the light of Men. In which words he declares two
things, 1. That general Relation he has toward all the Creaturs, that he is
their Maker: All things were made by him. Secondly, that special Relation he
has toward Men, in as much as he is not only their Maker, as of other things,
but he is their light. In him was life, and the life was the light of Men:
Which words do import very plainly, that he is the Savior of Men, and given
unto them, for the light of Salvation, to renew and restore them, out of their
fallen condition, which is a State of death and of darkness; and so John here
does the work of a true Evangelist, in preaching glad tidings to lost Men,
they are dead, but in him is life, they are darkened through the fall, yea and
Darkness, as it is Ephesians. 5. 8. But the life is the light of Men, and the light
shines in darkness. Now Christ was the Life and Light of Men, before the fall,
in a more near Relation then of any other visible Creatures, so as that he
lived in them, and shined in them, to give them the knowledge of the glory of
God in his own face, which is his image in which man was made, so he was the
life and light of Men, before men became darkness, and also he is the Light and
Life of Men, which shines in them while they are darkness, to bring them out of
it, into his own life and light: But now this darkness, does not apprehend the
light, does not embrace it, nor enjoy it, has not fellowship with it so much
does the word [comprehend] import, nevertheless by the workings of the light
in the darkness, men may be changed, from being darkness, to become light in the
Lord. and many have witnessed this blessed charge, and so when men are become
light, through the workings of the original light in them, they can apprehend
the light, and enjoy it. Light can apprehend light, though dark^es cannot, by
all which it may plainly appear, that John, is in this place holding forth,
Christ to be the Light and Life unto Men, more then simply according to
natural Illumination, for that had not been to do the work of an Evangelist,
or to preach the Gospel unto Men, simply and barely to tell them, that Christ
does enlighten them naturally, as with natural Reason and understanding. The
Gospel, whereof John was a Minister, and of which this is a most comfortable
declaration, holds forth Christ, to be the Life, the Word, and the Light, in a
much more deep and comprehensive signification, not excluding the more
inferior kinds and degrees of life, communicated unto the Creatures, in their
capacities, but superadding a more excellent degree of Light and Life,
communicable unto Man from Christ, then that which is natural unto him, simply
as a natural Man, for indeed every degree of life which Man has, as 1. the
Life of Vegetation, 2. of Sensation, 3. of Reason, 4. of Grace, is from Christ,
the universal fountain and spring of Life, and he is justly called the Life,
in all these considerations. But now, to limit, this universal signification
of Light and Life, to the 3 inferior degrees of it, and exclude the fourth,
which is the Supreme, does plainly manifest a partial spirit, which is
prejudiced against the Truth. Let all the Scripturs be searched, and it will
never be found, that Christ is called the Light and the Life simply and barely
in Relation, to the natural quickening and Illumination of the Creaturs,
excluding the spiritual; but rather that the spiritual quickening and
enlightening is always mostly pointed at, not excluding the other, as Joh. 11.
25. I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me though he ^r
dead, yet shall he Live, and Joh. 14. 6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the
Life, no man comes unto the Father but by me: in which places Christ is held
forth principally in Relation, to his influence of spiritual Life, upon Men,
and Joh. 8. 12. I am the Light of the world, he that follows me, shall not
walk in darkness, but shall have the Light of Life. Which cannot be understood
thus, he that follows me, as I enlighten naturally shall have the Light of
Life, which is false, but thus, he that follows me, as I enlighten
spiritually, he shall have the Light of Life. Again in that he is called the
Light of Men, this is not to be understood particularly of some men, viz.
believers, but of all men, both believers and unbeleevers, within the day of
their visitation, 1. Because it is not said, the Life is the Light of some men,
but of men, indefinitly; now an indefinit term signifies mostly universally,
and is always so to be understood, where no sufficient reason, moves to the
contrary. 2. Because John the Evangelist, and John the Baptist much agree in
their testimony, now John Baptists testimony was, that he enlightneth every
man. 3. Because this is not only the Light of Believers, that they may more and
more believ, but he is the Light of, or unto Unbeleevers, in a day of
visitation, that they may become Believers, for, many Unbeleevers have become
Believers. And how? but by the Lighting, whereby the Light did lighten them, in
their unbeleef; for when the light first lights a man, it finds him in
unbeleef and darkness, and it lights him, that he may beleev and come out of
it, and so 4. If by men here, were only understood Believers, then John could
not have said, the Light shines in darkness, and the darkness apprehended it
not; for Believers are not darkness, but light, whereas Unbeleevers are darkened,
and unbelief is darkness, now the Light shines in this darkness, to change men,
who are darkness, to be Light in the Lord.

Now follows John Baptist his testimony of him, There was a man sent from God,
whose name was John, the same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light,
that ALL through him might beleiv, and this was his testimony that he was the
true Light, which lights every man that comes into the world; His words are
such a plain proof, that Christ enlightened every man, so as that he might
believ and so be saved, that no words could be desired, more plainly to
evidence it, and yet what miserable evasions have men made, who are prejudiced
against this precious Truth, to darken it by their corrupt Glosses. 1. Some
will have it only to be understood of the light of nature, or a natural light.
And if we reply, the words speak of Christ, and Christ is not natural but
spiritual, they answer, its true, but yet Christ who is spiritual has
diverse manners of enlightnings, he enlightneth some only naturally, say they,
and others spiritually, to which I reply, Granting that he does enlighten
after diverse manners, as natural^y and spiritually: but notwithstanding, all
men whom he does lighten naturally, he does also lighten spiritually, for
that, as is said, he is called light in no place of scripture simply and
Barely in Relation to a natural inlightning, excluding the spiritual, I
challenge the adversaries to produce one plain and evident proof for it. And
again, this were not to do the work of an Evangelist to preach him to every
man, as inlightning but naturally, whereas the Apostle received his Commission
from Christ, to preach the Gospel to every Creature, (i. e. every man) But
besides these reasons prosecuted above, John the Baptists plain words do
evince it, that he enlightens every man spiritually, and so as that he may
beleve; wherefore this is an inlightning of a saving, or salutiferous Nature: For
John came to bear witness of him, that all through him might believe. Hence I
thus argue, That enlightening, which has a special Relation to believing, is
of a spiritual and salutiferous or saving nature. But this enlightening here
mentioned has a special Relation to beleving. Therefore, etc. The first
Proposition is manifest, because the enlightening which is but natural, has its
special Relation, not to faith, but to natural Reason. The second Proposition
is proved from John's Testimony, who said, He came to bear witness of the Light,
that all might believe through him; Secondly I thus argue. That lightning by
which all men might b^leev, is of a spiritual and saving nature. But this
lightning is such. Therefore, etc. The first Proposition is clear, because by no
other inlightning, but that which is spiritual and saving CAN any beleev. The
second Proposition is proved from John's words, He came to bear witness of the
light, that all through him MIGHT believe; Therefore it was such an enlightening,
that all through him MIGHT believe, and so I desire the Reader to take notice
of the word MIGHT. Which Imports a Power or ability to believe, so, in so much
as John said, all might beleev, its evident, its possible for all to beleev.
Now to evade this; some reply, that its said, through him, to wit, John, and
not through Christ simply as he enlightens them. To which I answer. 1.
Supposing it were to be understood so, through John, yet this does not in the
lest, prove that this enlightening of all men is only natural, whereof I give
this most evident Reason. Because by the most powerful natural enlightening,
and John both, neither all nor any man, are putt into a condition, that they
might beleev; for, no Ministry of the best of men, with a bare natural
inlightning concurring, is sufficient to put men into a condition, that they
might beleev. But secondly, for them to say, that through him, is to be
understood, through John, is but a begging of the thing in Question, and it is
more agreeable to the words to be understood of Christ, through whom all might
believe without John, but to understand it of John would Imply, as if he were
an universal Instrument, so as none could beleev, but through him, whereas many
have believed, both without the Ministry of John, or any men on Earth.

Others again, finding the strength of these Arguments, which prove the
enlightening here mentioned to be spiritual, and of a saving nature, betake
themselves to another evasion, but as groundles, and weak as the former. By
every man, say they, is to be understood, not Singula generum, but Genera
singulorum, i. e. not all particular men, but some of all sorts of men, for the
words [every and all] do sometimes so signify in Scripture. To which I answer.
1. That the words [all and every] do sometimes signify so in Scripture, does
not prove, that they so signify here, unles they could prove that they do
always so signify, which is so far otherways, that where in one place they
signify some of all sorts, in one hundred of places they signify al
particulars. Now, would our Adversaries think it fair, to put this their
Gloss upon these words, In Adam all die, i. e. not all particulars; but some
of all sorts? But 2. according to that general Maxim of understanding
Scripture, which is, that Scripture words are to be understood in their whole
Latitude and Extent, where no cogent Reason movs to the contrary. The words
then [all, and every] are to be understood of every particular, because no
cogent Reason movs to the contrary. Its true, our Adversaries pretend to diverse
cogent Reasons, the weakness of which we may come afterward to show. And 3.
its evident they are to be understood of all particulars, because John and other
Ministers of the Gospel sent of God, preached to all particulars, as they had
occasion, whose day of visitation was remaining; and did not offer it unto
some, and refuse it to others, which they should have done, if Christ had
enlightened but some, and not others; for how could they preach to them, where
there was no enlightening from Christ, to answer them, or the end of their
Ministry? As now, it were a most ridiculous thing for any men, to offer the
things of humane Reason, to Beasts, because there is no Rational Capacity in
them; whereby they can receive them, so were it as ridiculous a thing for man to
offer the things of faith and salvation to any men, where there is no
illumination that is saving and spiritual, whereby they can receive them: And
as the Principle of Reason, answers in men, to the things of Reason, so the
principle of Faith, which is the Word of faith in men, answers to the things of
Faith, and therefore the true Ministers of the Gospel, offer Faith unto all men,
there being in all men, some measure of illumination, by which they are capable
to receiv it.

Now, John says further, he was in the World, and the World was made by him,
and the World knew him not; by the World it is manifest he understands Men,
for that he maks it, a culpable thing, that he being in the World, yet the
World did not know him, and so it cannot be understood of the outward frame of
Heaven and Earth, which are not in a capacity to know him: Therefore according
to John, he was in men, who knew him not, and so in them, who did not believe
in him, nor receive him; He came to his own, and his own received him not.
viz. Those who were his own, 1. by the Right of Creation, 2. by the Right of
Donation, all men, yea and all things were delivered unto him, of his Father,
and they, to wit all men, were given him, that he might enlighten them, as he
is given unto them, for the same, and so distributeth unto them their several
Talents, that they might putt them to usury, and at his coming to Judgment,
might give an account of them. Now here some reply, That by these words in the
10. 11. verse. is understood, his coming outwardly in the land of Judea, but I
answer, as he came there, and was a light in the outward, which shined
gloriously, and yet they did neither know him, nor receive him, so he did come
in the inward, in some measure, both then, unto them, and to all others, yea
and from the beginning forasmuch as he has ever been the light of the world,
enlightening every man that coms into it, therefore John bears testimony unto
him, not only in what he was at present, but in what he had been from the
beginning, both what he then was, and what he was to be afterward. So by his
being in the world, and coming unto his own, cannot be simply understood, his
coming in the outward, excluding his inward coming. And besides, his coming IN
THE OUTWARD, excluding his inward coming could not so enlighten them, that they
might beleev. But he came, enlightening them so, that they might beleve.
Therefore his coming outwardly is not simply, nor principally here understood;
For to his outward coming the following verses do rather relate. Morover John
bare testimony of him, saying, The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth
came by Jesus Christ, by which it is evident, that John is here preaching
Christ, as an universal Light unto all, not according to a natural
illumination, but according to that which is saving and spiritual. Grace and
Truth, says he comes by Jesus Christ. And of his fulness, said he, have we
all received, Grace for Grace. Now what ALL is this, only the Saints and
Believers? No; for if Saints and Believers only received Grace from Christ,
then no Unbeleevers could ever become Saints, and also no Saints ever were
Unbeleivers, which is false. For now, when Grace first comes unto men, from
Christ, out of his fulness, it finds them Unbeleevers, and it is given them,
while they are such, to the end, that they may be converted from their
unbeleef. So then Unbeleevers receive Grace, that they may believe, and
Believers receive it, that they may believe more and more; yet now some yea
many and most Unbeleevers suffer not this Grace, which they have received, to
have its operation in them, which would change them, and make them Believers,
but like the slothful Servant, hide their Masters money in the earth in a
napkin; therefore it does not increase, nor bring forth the fruits of Grace,
which it does in them, who yield and submitt unto its operation. But some may
say, if they had received Grace, they had received him, and so they should have
become the Sons of God, according to verse. 12. I answer, the Word [receive]
has diverse significations, 1. If a thing be put in such a place, it is said to
be received, as if Seed be sown in barren earth. So the slothful Servant,
which hid his Masters money in the earth, is said to have received it, Math 25.
24. But 2. a thing is said to be received, when it is suffered to have its due
operation, in that, where it is put, and if not, it is said to be rejected, so
the Earth may be said not to receive the Seed, which though sown in it* yet it
suffers it not to spring up; and the Body which receivs good Physic into it,
yet resisting the operation thereof, it may be said not to receive it, but
reject it; And thus many words in Scripture have diverse significations, which
in one is true, in another false; and so all men, of his fulness received Grace,
but some recei^e it, no otherwise, then the barren Earth or Womb receivs the
Seed, or as the slothful Servant his Talent, and so it proves their
condemnation, even as the body, which receiving good Physic, resisting it, and
working against it, is killed thereby; Others receive it, so as to yield to its
operation, and so they are as the good Ground which receiving the good Seed,
brings forth fruit, some 30, some 60, and some 100 fold.

Argument 2. From Ioh. 3. verse. 16. 17. etc. to 22. compared with Ioh. 8. 12.
IN these words. Joh. 3. from v. 16. to 22. Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
does from his own mouth, bear a large and plain Testimony unto this Truth.
God (said he) so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life;
Whereby he does show forth, the cause of man's perishing and misery, to be from
man's own self, and not from the Lord, for the Lord so loved men, that he
sent his Son to save them, but men did not believe in him, whom the Father had
sent. Now, that this love of God is universal toward all men, and that the
Son is come into all, to be a Savior unto them, is manifest, in that he
says, God so loved the World, that whosoever believed in him, should not
perish. But here also, they have sought out an evasion, to darken and corrupt
this clear Testimony; by [the World] say they, he means, not all men, but only
the Elect. In opposition to which I say. 1. Its but a mere allegation without
any ground, for they can show us no place in all the Scripture, where only the
Elect are called the World. Indeed, evil men and unbelievers are often called
the World, and sometyms all men are called the World, but no where the Elect
alone. But 2. supposing the World were sometyms understood to be only the Elect,
yet it cannot be so understood here, for that it would render these words of
our blessed Lord, void of sense, and nonsensicall, which were blasphemous to
think; For according to that acceptance, the words would run thus, God so
loved the Elect, that whosoever of them (Elect) believes, should not perish,
which is void of sense, forasmuch as none of the Elect, but must believe, and
yet the Particle whosoever distributeth those who are understood here, by [the
World] into Believers, and Unbeleevers, showing that God so loved all, that he
gave an opportunity unto them to be saved, by believing, and if they did not
believe, their perishing was not for want of the Love of God toward them, but
because they did not beleev in him, whom God had sent. 3. In that he says, God
sent not his Son, into the world, to condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved; And yet many are condemned, it is manifest that
even these who are condemned, had an opportunity once to be saved, and so the
Love of God reached once toward them, or elce, it might be said, God sent his
Son, even mainly and principally to them, for their condemnation. Again, in
that he says, This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and man loved darkness rather then the light; These two things are plainly held
forth, 1. that whoever are condemned, it is for loving the darkness, rather then
the light. 2. That the light is come, and has appeared unto them all who are
condemned, for how can any be condemned, for not loving that which never came
nor appeared unto them? Again it is plain, that every evil Door, has had
the light appearing unto him, because he is said to hate it. Now he could not
hate that, which never appeared nor was manifest, and that is the light which
reproves his evil deeds. Moreover it is also evident, that the light did come
unto them, in a way, wherein they could have been saved, because, their
condemnation, was, that they did not believe in his Name, but loved the darkness
rather. But they could not be condemned, for not believing in that which coms
not in a saving way. Again, If every one who believes not, is condemned, for
unbelief then they have had a Law commanding them to beleev, for where no Law,
is, there is no transgression; which Law, could be no other then the Law,
according to the Grace of spiritual and saving Illumination, and not according
to a mere Natural enlightening, for no light of a man's own nature, can ever
give him a Law to believe. And farther, This Illumination can show, if a man's
work be wrought in God, therefore it is spiritual and sufficient to salvation.
Again John. 8. 12. He hears a Testimony to the same Truth, I am, (said he)
the light of the World, he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life. Now, that he is the light of the world, lighting
it according to a spiritual and saving Illumination, is hence manifest, and
not according to that which is but natural only: for he alone that follows
him, as he does spiritually and savingly enlighten, has the Light of Life, or
is saved. And as to their evasion, that by the [World] is meant only the Elect,
that which is aforsaid, does refute it, and besides Christ said to the Jews,
many of whom did perish, and so were Reprobats, While ye have, the light,
beleev in it, that ye may be the children thereof. But that I may overturne
the foundation of this evasion, I say, none are the Elect of God, but in
relation, unto believing in the light and loving thereof, and none are
Reprobate, but in Relation unto their unbelief, hating and rejecting it, for
the Lord never reprobated, or rejected any, but who rejected the Gift of his
Love offered unto them, so that whoever are elected, they are elected according
to the foreknowledge of God, who did foreknow, or foresee, that they would
beleev, and embrace the offer of his love, which is Jesus Christ, and whoever
are Reprobated, are Reprobated according to the foreknowledge of God, who did
foreknow, or foresee, that they would reject the offer, and not believe; yet I
do not say, that either the Faith of the one, or the unbelief of the other,
was the cause of Gods Eternal decree, which has no cause without himself, but
this I say, men believing, are the Object of Election, and men disbeleiving and
rejecting Jesus Christ, are the Object of Reprobation, [not the moving, but the
terminating] so that their unbelief is not the cause of Gods Decree, but the
cause of their Condemnation and destruction, which is decreed. And so in
Scripture this gift of the Fathers love, the Lord Jesus Christ, is said to be
disallowed or rejected of men. Now, they could not have rejected him, if he
had not come a light unto them, and been truly offered, for none can reject,
that which is not offered. And if he was offered, he could be offered, under
no less Terms, then making salvation possible to them, for the offer of the
Lord does proceed from a true and real willingness, to give that which is
offered; and who-ever dare say the contrary, do charge the Lord with hypocrisy
and dissimulation, which is blasphemous; but if the Lord has a true and real
willingness to give his Son, unto all, who reject him; Then it was possible for
them, at sometime to have received him, for the Lord wills nothing, that is
Impossible, and it is below that infinite Goodness and Nobility of the Lord to
offer unto poor men, that which it is Impossible for them to receive, as now it
were below all Ingeunity and Humanity in us, to offer Alms unto a poor man, in
such a way, as he could not receive it; as, if he were bound in fetters, and
we should stand at a distance, and hold it forth unto him, but so as he could
not reach it.

Argument 3. From Romans 1. v. 18, 19, 20, 21, etc, compared with Col. 1. 23.
THe Apostle Paul whose Ministry was mostly unto the Gentiles and therefore is
called the Apostle of the Gentiles, does in this Epistle hold forth many things
concerning the Gentiles, both as touching the Privileges which they had
received from the Lord, and also the use that they made of them, some improved
them to advantage, but others, and that for the most part did misimprove them,
for which the Lord was provoked against them, to give them up to a Reprobate
mind. And this he does, according to the Wisdom given him of God, to make
way for the more abundant Reception and spreading of the Faith among the
Nations, which, because of the want of these outward Privileges, that the Jews
had, were looked upon by the Jews, as outcasts, and rejected of God to whom the
preaching of the Doctrine of Salvation, did not belong, which was even the
error of Peter, and his brethren generally till the Lord convinced him thereof,
by a vision from Heaven. Acts 10. Now, in this Epistle, among diverse other
things of importance, he declares these two things, 1. That though the Jews
had Privileges, in the outward, above the Gentiles, as the Law, and
Circumcision, yet the Lord had not wholly passed by, the Gentiles, and left them
destitute of the Truth, or of what might he known of him, 2. That those of the
Gentiles who improved what was given them inwardly from the Lord and kept the
Law, inwardly delivered unto them, were more acceptable unto God, then the
Jews, who had the outward privileges of the Law and Circumcision, and did not
rightly use them, so that the Uncircumcision, was counted Circumcision, and the
Circumcision, Uncircumcision, and hereby he takes occasion to beat down the
Pride and conceitednes of the Jews, as if they were the only people of God,
and God were only their God, whereas the Apostle says, is he the God of the
Jews only, is he not also the God of the Gentiles? yea of the Gentiles also.
3. Romans 29. And also by this means he encourages the Gentiles and preaches
Glad tidings among them, to take away all ground of despair, or unbelief from
them, as if the Lord had utterly rejected them, because of the want of these
outward Privileges bestowed upon the Jews. With which glad tidings he begins
this Epistle; showing First, that he had received Grace and Apostleship, to
his Brethren, for obedience to the Faith among all nations, i. e. that all
nations might give obedience to the Word of Faith, which he preached, which
imports a Call from God unto all nations to believe, Secondly he says that
he was a Debtor, both to the Greeks and Barbarians, which holds sorth the
obligation that was upon him, from the Lord, who had called him, to preach the
Gospel unto them; then he proceeds to declare, what the Gospel was, and what
was revealed therein, both to believers and unbeleevers, to the just and to the
unjust, whether Jews or Gentiles; as to them who believed it was the power of
God unto Salvation, and therein was the righteousness of God revealed unto the
just, from Faith to Faith, but to them who believed not, but were unrighteous,
and held the Truth in unrighteousnes, therein was the wrath of God revealed
against all their ungodlines and unrighteousnes. Now in the 19. verse he
answers secretly an Objection, which is to this purpose, How is it Paul, that
thou say, in the Gospel is revealed, the righteousness of God from Faith to
Faith, unto the just, and also that the wrath of God is from heaven revealed
therein against the unrighteous, seeing the Gentiles have not had the Gospel
preached unto them, all this time by past in which they have lived in their
ungodlines and unrighteousnes. To this Paul answers, That which might be known
of God was manifest in them, for God had showed it unto them, which is as much
as to say, though the Gospel came not unto them outwardly, by the ministry of
man, yet it came unto them inwardly by the ministry of God himself, because,
That which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it
unto them. So that it is manifest, that by this expression, That which may be
known of God, and as it is in the Greek (...), is understood the Gospel,
which is a very significant way of expressing it, the Gospel is that which may
be known of God, by men, being that which he has made manifest, and has
showed unto them, The Word that was in the beginning with God, in which was
life, and the life is the light of men, which is the true light which ligteth
every man that comes into the world, that all through him might believe. This
is that which may or can be known of God. and no more can be known of him,
but what the Gospel, which is the Word of God, does reveal; and this Word is
the Light of men, which lights every man that comes into the world, which is
not only the Power of God, unto Salvation unto every one that believes, but is
the Power of God unto every one, that they may believe, in the day of their
visitation. Agreeable, unto this is that the same Apostle writes unto the
Colossians 1. cap. 23. that the Gospel has been preached unto every creature,
which is under heaven, but according to the Greek it is, which is preached in
every creature under heaven, (...), in every creature i. e. in every man, as
when Christ said to his Disciples, preach the Gospel to every creature, i. e.
to every man, in which Gospel, has the righteousness of God, been revealed
unto men, in all ages and Generations, even among the very Gentiles, both the
just and the unjust: to the just, therein has been revealed from heaven, the
righteousness of God from Faith to Faith, to the unjust therein has been
revealed the wrath of God from heaven, against all their ungodlines and
unrighteousnes, who held the Truth in unrighteousnes, and this was a righteous
thing with God so to do, so that none of the Gentiles but have had the
righteousness of God revealed unto them, in rewarding the Just and Well-doers,
and in punishing with wrath from heaven, the unrighteous and evill-doers, as it
is Romans 2. 9. 10. Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does
evil, both Jew and Gentil, but glory, honor and peace to every man that
works good, both to Jew and gentile also.

But by this manifestation of God, in the Gentiles our Adversaries deny, that
the Gospel, or any manifestation, that is of a saving nature is understood,
and it has passed generally among them, that it is but some natural
illumination which they have called the light of nature, and the Law of nature
which flows, from a man's own mind and understanding, as a mere natural man,
which is woeful ignorance and darkness in them so to do, as may appear from
what is already said, If no more should be added to refute this their corrupt
Gloss. Yet I find it with me to ad somethings further, for the clearing of
this matter, and here I give notice to the Reader, that whatever this
manifestation of God be, there is no question, or debate betwixt our
adversaries and us, concerning the Universality of it, for they grant, that it
is given to every man, only they deny, that it is Evangelicall, and of a saving
and spiritual nature, which I prove it to be; for 1. if it were not
Evangelicall, and the very Gospel it self, in an inward ministration, it
would quite render the words of the Apostle, impertinent and contrary to the
purpose he treats of: for Paul is here showing, what the Gospel was, and what
was revealed in it, both to the just and the unjust, and because the unjust
among all the Gentiles and Nations, had not the Gospel outwardly administered
he shows, they had it inwardly; God having showed it unto them; and this he
gives as the cause of what he had affirmed of the Gospel. Now if Paul had
understood this inward manifestation, to have been only the natural
Illumination of man's own understanding he could not have given it as a cause
of what he affirmed, or desined the Gospel to be. For the natural
illumination is no part of the Gospel, nor does reveal any part of it, and so
cannot be given as a cause, of what he affirmed of the Gospel. Let the
Judicious Reader weigh and ponder this; in the true Balance, and he will find
it weighty. But 2. the natural Illumination cannot reveal from heaven, the
wrath of God, against all ungoodlines and unrighteousnes of men, But, the
manifestation here spoken of, does so, Therefore, this manifestation is not the
natural Illumination. The first Proposition is proved, from our Adversaries
own concession, who affirm that the natural illumination which is in all
men's does not discover all sins, but some only, and especially those against
the second Table as unrighteousnes betwixt men and men, for if it did discover
all sin, then it would discover all duty, because by the same, that I know such
a thing to be sin, I know the contrary to be a duty, and if it did discover al
duty, then it would things pertaining to the true Faith and Worship of God.
Which the mere natural Illumination cannot do therefore I say, our
Adversaries grant, that the natural Illumination cannot discover all sin, and
if it cannot discover all sin, then it cannot discover, the wrath of God,
against all sin, for that which discovers the one, discovers the other, yea in
so far is sin known to be sin, as the wrath of God is revealed against it. The
second Proposition is proved from the Apostles words, for (says he) the wrath
of God is revealed from heaven, against all ungodlines and unrighteousnes of
men, now these two, all ungodlines and unrighteousnes, comprehends all sin. 3.
This Manifestation is said to be a Revelation from heaven, Therefore it has a
higher rise, then man's own natural understanding. 4. This Manifestation is
said to be that which may be known of God, which he had showed unto them;
Therefore it is of an Evangelick and saving nature; for so is that, which may
be known of God, whereas the natural Illumination, is not that which may be
known of God nether deserves it such a high name, for that which may be known
of God, Imports all that can be known of him, for all that can be known of
him, is but (...) that which may be known of him; Now the natural
illumination, is but a very small discovery of him, and very darkly, so that in
these words is plainly held forth, that whatever may be known of God, of his
light, life, glory, goodness, mercy, and saving power, is manifest in men, in a
seed or principle, which as it is permitted to spring up, in them, gives them
the knowledge of all that is needful, or may be known of him, and so the
words may be translated that which is needful or ought to be known of God is
manifest in them, Quod est cog^osendum, (...), but the natural Illumination
discovers neither that which may be known of him, or ought or is needful, to
be known of him, etc. 5. By this Manifestation here mentioned, they did
clearly see the Invisible things of God, even his eternal Power, and Godhead,
as it is said, therefore it was not the natural manifestation or illumination,
which givs not clearly to see the invisible things of God, but very dimly and
darkly to apprehend them; all the knowledge of man's natural light or reason,
concerning the invisible things of God, being but an abstractive knowledge
gathered from things visible by Inferences and Deductions of the Reasoning Part
which is far from a clear seeing of them, which is the Intuitive knowledge
which the revelation of the Son only gives. 6. By this Manifestation they were
left without excuse, Therefore it was not a mere natural illumination, I prove
the Consequence, because a mere natural illumination is not sufficient to
render any man without excuse; which I thus evince, That is only sufficient to
render a man without excuse, which is sufficient, if it were duly Improved, to
render him excusable, and acceptable unto God. But the natural illumination is
not such, according to our Adversaries own confession. Therefore the first
Proposition is manifest, to any of sound Judgment, for if it were not he should
have an excuse, Viz. the insufficiency of the thing, As now, if a Master should
give to his servant a piece of Money, to improve, among Marchands and
Exchangers, if the Money were not sufficient enough, so that he Could not
improve it and be approved of his Master, when his Master called him to give an
account of his Money. He could not be without excuse, but would have an excuse
sufficient, Viz. the Insufficiency of the money. But of this more afterward.
This manifestation here mentioned is the Truth, which they are said to have held
in unrighteousnes verse 18. for which the wrath of God was revealed against
them. But The natural Illumination is no where in Scripture called the Truth;
nor indeed does it deserve such a Name; for that it is corruptible, and become
very Corrupt and Impure through sin; whereas the truth is eternally pure and
incorruptible. Now by [Truth] in Scripture, is sometimes understood Christ
himself, sometimes the Spirit of Christ as John said, the Spirit is truth; 1.
Joh. 5. 6. And sometimes that heavenly and Divine Seed of Regeneration is
called the truth in which the Son, and the Spirit is manifest; and so it is
understood Psalm. 85. 11. Truth shall spring out of the earth, Now, what earth
is this? but the hearts of the children of men, which is the field where this
Divine and heavenly Seed is sown, which through the preyalence of Error, and
unrighteousnes has long been choked, and suppressed, and lain barren, but
here is a Prophecy that it shall spring up, yea and else where it is promised
that it shall fill the Earth, and Righteousness shall look down from heaven,
i. e. the Spirit, Light and Life of righteousness shall influence it from
heaven, and cause it to grow up, and loose it out of its bonds, wherein it has
been so long detained; As it is here Romans 1. 18. they had the truth given
them, but they held it in unrighteousnes, were not obedient to it, as Romans 2.
8. received it not in love, As 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. but resisted it as 2. Tim. 3.
9. and in many other places of Scripture, the Truth is held forth to be the
very Saving Gift of God, which Sanctifies and begets unto God, and sets
free from sin, and it is joined, with things of a heavenly and saving nature as
Grace asid Truth, Mercy and Truth, Peace and Truth, Righteousness and Truth, and
they who fear God are called Men of truth, Exodus 18. 21. and said Christ, every
one that is of the truth hears me. Joh. 18. 37. And for this end (said he)
came I into the world, to witness unto the Truth, by all which cannot be meant
the natural Illumination, and indeed as concerning the natural Illumination,
the Gentiles could not be said to detain IT for they gave but too much way
unto IT. And Thereby, sought to find out Wisdom, but could not, for since the
fall, the natural light or illumination of man, is exceedingly corrupted, and
yet men have loved IT, and set IT up above the Gift of God, and fed upon IT, as
if IT had been the Tree of life. And IT has been permitted to grow, and
become a very large Tree but the fruit of IT, is corrupt and Impure, in all
natural men, and not good for food; so unrighteousnes cannot be said to
detain or hinder the growth of the natural Illumination, as it is corrupt,
for many men, who are very unrighteous and wicked have much of it, and many
times more then the Righteous; so that Christ said, The children of this world
are wiser in their generation, then the children of God. Now, the natural
Illumination, as it was pure, before transgression, so in them, who come to be
purified from transgression it does become pure; for the Truth purifieth it,
and it grows up under its shadow, and is good unto men, for diverse uses, and
so unrighteousnes hinders its growth as its pure, but not as it is impure. And
this has been the general Loss of men, in that they have still sought after
that satisfaction, in the natural Illumination, which they should have sought
after, in this heavenly and Divine Principle of truth, and so have missed IT,
and seeking Wisdom, have become fools, so as to exchange the truth of God,
for a lie, as it is here Imputed unto these Gentiles. Now, as in the Scripture
it is said, Poor men are vanity, and Rich men are alye, verse. 13. because they
were apprehended and judged to be what they were not; so it may be said, the
natural light, or illumination, as it is now corrupted, since the fall, is a
Lie, in such an Acceptance, because, it is judged by men, to be what it is not;
They love and esteem it more then the Precious Truth, and seek after wisdom
and knowledge in it, which is not the true knowledge and Wisdom of God, that
maks wise unto Salvation; And of this, the Gentiles were extremely guilty, for
thereby they lost any measure of the true knowledge they had received and
became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened, for
which cause, God gave them over to a Reprobate mind to do those things which
are not convenient, and this is the 8. Reason, why this manifestation is not
the natural illumination because through it, God kept them as by a chain, from
doing these abominations, which afterward he gave them up to committ; There
was a time, when God dwelt in their knowledge, whereby they knew him, through
what he had made manifest of his eternal power in them and he being thus
manifest in them, stood as in their way, and withheld them, from doing those
things till afterward, that he was provoked through their unthankfulnes, who
when they knew him, did not glorify him, even to give them up to a Reprobate
mind, not from the beginning, but after much provocation and long suffering of
God, and therefore they could not but be under a Possibility, of Salvation before
they were thus given up for a man is always under this Possibility, till he
be given up to a Reprobate mind or Spirit, so that the Spirit of the Lord
cease to strive with him any more.

But say our Adversaries, This is but the natural Illumination because it is
said; the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made; so that what they knew of
God, they gathered it but from the creatures, and things that were made, and
therefore it was but the Light of nature, or natural Illumination. To which I
answer, supposing that by these words, the things that are made, which are
according to the Greek (...) Should be understood the Works of the outward
creation, yet it does not follow in the least, that what they did know, or
understand of the invisible things of God, was either merely or principally
from or by them. I do willingly Indeed acknowledge that there is a Book of
Creation, in which many things of God, which require great consideration, are
writ: but I say this book is sealed, and can no more be truly and sufficiently
understood, then the Book of the Scriptures, unles that Divine and spiritual
Illumination of the Holy Spirit of God, do unseal it, do reveal and open and
make known the things that are therein recorded. Now, the Apostle does not say
that they understood the invisible things of God either only or principally, by
the things that are made, for before he maks any mention of the things that
are made, he speaks of that which may be known of God, which was manifest in
them, which God had showed unto them, and so this was a Light to reveal these
things of God, which were writ in the Creaturs, and as a key to open them up,
and as an Interpreter to Interpret those Characters of the Divine Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness of God, imprinted in the Creatures. But Secondly, the
Words may be no less truly, yea more properly and warrantably translated in
the Creatures, or things made, as thus, the invisible things of God are seen
clearly in the things that are made, so that they who look upon the Invisible
things of God, with the Light of Divine Illumination which proceeds from him,
Can and do, see God, and his invisible things, in all the Creaturs, or things
that are made, so that the Creaturs are not in themselves a Vail to hinder the
sight of God, from any man, if the Vail of iniquity were but rent off from the
Eye of his mind, and that Eye were filled with the Divine Light of God, he
could clearly see the Lord and his invisible things, even his Glory, Power, and
Majesty in all things that are made, as really as with our natural Eyes we
can see visible things in such and such places. Now, I may see a man, in such a
place, and yet the place contribute nothing, by way of a cause, to give me the
sight of him, so I may see the Lord clearly in Creaturs, and yet the Creaturs,
not be the cause of my sight, and indeed so it is. The Creaturs and things that
are made of this visible World, God is in them, and fills them with his
heavenly presence, and may be seen in them, by men, who behold, him, in the
Divine and Heavenly Light, which proceeds from him; but they cannot be called
the cause, so much as by way of either Object, or Instrument, why he is
clearly seen. I do not deny, but there is a certain abstractive knowledge of
God, to be gathered from the Creatures which are visible, and whereof they may
be called the cause, by way of Object and Instrument, but this is not the clear
sight of God, being not Intuitive, but abstractive, and so the Creaturs cannot
administer or afford unto us the clear sight of God, because they cannot exhibit
or emit unto us the image of God, but only some Prints and footsteps of him,
but the clear sight of God, which is the Intuitive knowledge of him, can only
be had in the Son, as he is manifest in the expressed Word and Image, which
is the Light that gives, with open face, only to behold him. Now, though the
Invisible things of God may be clearly seen i. e, intuitively in the
Creatures, yet if the Creaturs have no Causality hereof, this knowledge cannot
in the least be imputed unto the Creaturs, and so not unto any natural
illumination, which is either acquired or increased by them. And this is a
manifest Reason, why the Creaturs of this visible world, can not be said to be
the cause of this knowledge here mentioned, because no knowledge we can receive
by them, though, but as by Instruments, is a clear seeing of the Invisible
things of God, whereas this here mentioned is a clear seeing of them, which
might be in the Creaturs, but not by them: So that if all Creaturs were removed,
yea and turned to nothing save only that Creature, which has this clear sight,
yet the Invisible things o, God, could be seen. As now, if I should see
clearly some Excellent Object, in, or through Glass, which if the Glass were
removed, I could see as well without it, I could not impute any thing to the
Glass, as having influence upon my sight: So it is, as to this sight of God,
the Creaturs are as it were a Crystal Glass, in, and through which the
Beauty and Glory of the Lord does shine, which those who are of a pure mind can
see in them, and through them, so that they are no Vail, nor hinderance in
themselves, and yet they are no cause of this sight neither; for if they were
removed yet the Lord could be seen. Now, I shall not say, that all these
Gentiles had such a sight of the Invisible things of God, as to have these
Immediate manifestations of his Love, Joy, Peace, Goodness, and Excellency,
which the Saints have, but there is a Manifestation of God, which is in a
mixture of Wrath and Mercy, Judgment and Compassion, that the Lord administers
unto men, before their conversion, in order thereunto, through which he appears
in them as a Consuming fire, and yet not wholly to destroy, but to purify
them, and consume the iniquity; Which Manifestation cannot be imputed unto the
Creatures without, but is inwardly felt, and seen: And such a Manifestation
had these Gentiles, and in some measure every man that coms into the world,
otherwise he could not be left without excuse, if he had not clearly seen
somewhat of the Invisible things of God, even his Eternal Power and God head
revealing his wrath from Heaven against all ungodlines and unrighteousnes which
is called a clear sight, in respect of the Wrath and Judgment of God, made
manifest in them, because of sin. And thus far, every Eye shall see him, who
have pierced him, that is to say caused the Seed to suffer in their own
particulars. But 3. By [the things that are made] (if any man will so translate
the words) may be understood those things which are inwardly made, those
marvelous works of the Lord, which are wrought in men's hearts, both of
Judgment and Mercy; through the appearance of God, and the Revelation of his
almighty arm and power, in that Heavenly and Divine Principle of his own
Seed, by which indeed the Invisible things of him, are clearly seen; And until
a man come to see the Lord, in the things that are made of him, in himself,
he can never see him, in the things that are made without him, which gave
occasion to many of the Gentile Philosophers, to bid people, seek God within
themselves, as Seneca said, Intra te quere Deum, i. e. Seek God within thy self.
But now, if a man would seek God within himself, and desire to see him clearly
and enjoy him, he must seek him, in the Divine Seed, and in the things that
are made, therein, and thereof, he must seek him, in the righteousness, purity,
holiness, meeknes, and temperance, which spring up in the Divine Seed, and are
the works of God, and the things which are made, by which he is clearly seen,
and also enjoyed and possessed, for this Seed and the Birth thereof, by the
springing up of these Heavenly powers and virtues, which issue there from, Can
and does truly represent the Divine, Power, and God head, being the express
Image of God. This has been the Lamentable loss of many, who have sought
God, even within themselves, that they might see him, and enjoy him, but have
sought him, in the natural illumination, and in the perishing and corruptible
thoughts and imaginations, and willings, and runnings of their own hearts,
which are a Vail to darken and blind the Eye, instead of helping it to see him,
whereas they should have sought him in the Divine Seed, which generally they set
at naught, for it has been the stone, that the builders in all ages have
despised, and trod upon, and held it in unrighteousnes, but to us, who believe
it is precious, and therein, and thereby we have seen those things of God,
which are too wonderful for us to declare. Now, where these heavenly and
Divine works of Truth, and Righteousness, and Holiness, are made and brought
forth in the Divine Seed there the Lord has his Throne, which is as it were
built of these heavenly materials, these Saphirs, and Carbuncles, and Precious
stones, according to which it is said, Psalm. 89: 14. I^stice and Judgment, are
the habitation of his Throne, and Mercy and Truth shall go before his face.
For here, does the Glory of the Lord manifest it self* as the Heavens; here is
the Lord seen, and tasted, and enjoyed, as he is all sweetness, all love, all
meeknes and gentleness, his Anger, and Wrath, and severity being turned away,
which was manifested in the day, when Iniquity had power in the heart. But as
David said, If I go up to Heaven, thou art there also. Now, as the heart,
where Righteousness, and Holiness, Purity and humility have place, does represent
Heaven, wherein God dwells and reveals himself in most sweet and
comfortable manifestations, so the heart where unrighteousnes, unholines, pride
and impurity etc. have place, does fitly represent Hell, yet even in this Hell,
God is, and does make his Invisible power and Godhead clearly to be seen
therein, but not in the sweet and comfortable manifestations aforesaid, but in
such as are very dreadful and terrible, as a consuming fire, to devour the
Adversary. As an angry and Jealous God all anger, all wrath, all severity and
Justice, and no otherwise, to be Immediately seen till iniquity be turned from,
only unto whom the day of their visitation yet remains, the mercy and
Compassion of the Lord does let forth some remote Glimpses, and flashes, as it
were, but gives not it self to be enjoyed by the soul that is not turned
from iniquity, and the love thereof unto Righteousness, purity and holiness, for
without these, No man can see the Lord, in the sweet and comfortable
manifestations of himself. And Lastly these words (...) may be understood of
men themselves, which very word the Apostle uses to signify men, Ephesians. 2. 10.
And may be applied, both to the Saints, and to others who are but under
convincement, and judgment, and those preparatory works, which go before a
through-conversion, who are the workmanship of God, in whom, or by whom, or to
whom, the Invisible things of God are clearly seen, and understood. And thus,
however these words be translated, I have shown, that no proof can be gathered
from them, that the manifestation here mentioned, is only that of natural
Illumination. I have found my heart drawn forth the more largely upon this
place, for that it is much misunderstood and wrested, by the corrupt glosses of
men.

Argument 4. From Romans. 2. Chapter
THe same Apostle in this 2. Chapter proceeds yet more fully to hold forth, the
Privileges of the Gentiles, which they had of God, and that they were not so
left of him, but whoever among them, did that which was good, a Reward of
glory, honor and peace was provided for them of the Lord no less then for the
Jews, and who ever did that which was evil, a punishment also was ordained,
unto the one, no less then unto the other, Tribulation and anguish upon every
soul that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile, but Glory,
honor and peace to every man that works good, to the Jew first and also to
the Gentile, for there is no respect of persons with God. verse. 9. 10. 11. Then
he comes to answer a weighty objection, which might be propounded against what
he said, as thus, How can the Gentiles be either rewarded, or punished seeing
they have had no Law given them, for all reward is in relation unto obedience
of the Law of God, and all punishment is in relation unto the disobedience
thereof? To this the Apostle answers, that they had the Law inwardly, though
not as the Jews had it, in an outward administration, and according to this
Law, they should be judged, and accused, or excused, according to their evil
or well doing. verse. 12. 13. 14. 15. Now, let it be considered that the Apostle
in both these Chapters is speaking of the Gentiles, who were under no outward
administration either of Law, or Gospel, as appears by his answers that he
givs, unto the Objections aforsaid, wherein he grants, that they had not the
outward administration of the Laws and oracles of God, but affirms they had
that inwardly made manifest in them which God had showed unto them, whereby they
were condemned who did evil, and justified who did well.

Now say our Adversaries; the Law, here mentioned, which the Apostle grants,
that the Gentiles had, was but only the Law, and light of a man's own nature,
and not any principle of light, or life that was of a spiritual and saving
nature. To which I answer, The contrary is very demonstrable from the Apostles
words as may appear, from these following Reasons. 1. There was such a
Principle in them, whereby they did the things contained in the Law. Therefore
it was a principle of the very saving light and life of Jesus Christ, which is
that Divine nature mentioned 2. Pet. 1. 4. for by a man's own nature, he
cannot do the things contained in the Law, because it is corrupted in the fall
and is that evil tree, which cannot bring forth good fruit, till it be renewed
and healed by the virtue of this Divine nature and principle. 2. It is evident,
that this inward principle was the very principle of the Gospel in them, in
that Paul says that God will render to every man, according to his deeds, in
the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, by Jesus Christ, according to
my Gospel, i. e. the gospel which he preached. Now, if the Gentiles shall be
judged according to the Gospel, then the gospel behoved in some measure to be
manifest unto them, for no man shall be judged according to that, which is not
made manifest, it being a most certain Maxim, a law, not promulgate does not
oblige, and the Law, which does not oblige, does not condemn the transgressors
thereof, and the law that does not condemn the transgressors thereof, can not be
a Law, according to which they shall be judged.

But say they: By a man's own nature, and the light and power thereof, though
corrupt and degenerat, he may do somthings required in the Law, which are
good, materially, though he cannot do them well, nor so as to be justified in
the doing of them, or to receive the reward of eternal life. To which I
answer, But these Gentiles did the things contain^d in the Law, so that they
were excused yea and justified, and did receive the reward of Glory, Honor,
and Peace, in so doing, for, said the Apostle, even concerning these same
Gentiles, Glory, Honor, and Peace to every man that works good, to the Jew
first and also to the Gentile, which imports, that some of these Gentiles,
did work good, and also received Glory, etc. as the Reward thereof. Now, see how
abundantly the Apostle clears this matter not the hearers of the Law (said he)
but the doers of the Law are justified, verse. 13. and verse. 14. The Gentiles
were doers of the Law, forasmuch as they did the things contained in the Law,
and therefore it follows that they are justified. And again verse. 15. he
says, they were excused, in their minds, who did that which was good, as they
were accused, who did evil; yea he proceeds so far to ho^d forth the
Justification of some of these Gentiles, that he plainly affirms, though they
were not Jews outwardly, and outwardly circumcised, yet they keeping (or as it
is in the greek) fulfilling the Law their uncircumcision is counted for
circumcision, and they were Jews inwardly having the circumcision in the heart
and spirit, though not in the letter, and so had praise of God, though not of
men. By all which it is plain, that the nature here spoken of, cannot be, man's
own nature, which is corrupt, but that Divine nature aforsaid, whereof such of
the Gentiles, who were obedient to the Truth inwardly made manifest, were
partakers, and so, were justified through faith, though they were the
uncircumcision, as the circumcision was justified by faith also. And herein was
that great error of Pelagius that he affirmed the Gentiles were justified by
their own Nature, without the Grace of Christ; judging the Nature here
mentioned to be man's own Nature, whereas it was that Divine Nature, aforsaid,
that is, the very Grace or Gift of Christ.

But, that the Gentiles could not be justified, by their doing the things
contained in the Law, they thus argue. 1. Because the Apostle says, by the
works of the Law; shall no flesh be justified: To which I say. By Law there is
understood the Law of the first covenant, which came by Moses, and its true, no
Justification is by that Law, whether it be understood of Moses his outward
ministration, or of the same ministration of Moses in the spirit, where the Law
is writ but in tables of stone, till the Seed be raised, by which the Law is
fulfilled. But in diverse of these Gentiles, the Seed was raised, which is that
Divine Nature or Birth, by which they did the things contained in the Law, and
so were justified by him, who gave them power to fulfill it, which if it had
not been, there could have been no Justification. 2. They argue, that Paul
says, he has proved all, both Jews and Gentiles to be under sin, and therefore
they could not be justified. Answer. That is, all those both Jews and
Gentiles, who did not seek righteousness in Christ, the true light and life
inwardly manifested, but sought it in other things, as the Jews, in their
outward performances, and the Gentiles in their natural wisdom. Nor can our
adversaries deny, but that diverse Jews were justified, even then, and in all
ages before, there were among the Jews, who were the true Saints and Children
of God, and sought after righteousness, in the True Principle where it was to be
found, but, its true, they were but few, in respect of them who had confidence
in the flesh, and fleshly performances. Now, if these words of Paul aforesaid,
[that he had proved all to be under sin] hinder not but that some Jews were
justified, neither do they hinder, but that some Gentiles were justified also.
3. They argue, there can be no Justification, without faith in Christ. But
these Gentiles had not faith in Christ. Therefore, etc. Answ. I deny the second
proposition, for if they did cleave unto, and believe in the light, they
believed in Christ, for he is the light, nor is the outward name that which
saves, but the inward nature, virtue and power, signified theirby, which was
made manifest in them, and thus is Christ even that (...), that which may or
must be known of God, for Christ is only that which may or is to be known of
him, because no man knows the Father, but as the Son reveals him, and no man
can know more of the Father, then he makes known unto them. If any object,
that formerly I understood that (...) to be the Gospel, and now I understand
it of Christ, and say, how do these hang together? Is Christ the Gospel? I
answer. The Gospel is either taken objectively, or declaratively. i. e. either
as that Divine Principle, which is both the object of what is declared, and
also the spring from which it flows, or as the living declaration thereof,
issuing from that spring. And so Christ is the Gospel objectively, or that
which is declared of by the Gospel, and is its object and spring, and thus the
Apostle says, the Gospel is the power of God, unto salvation. Inasmuch then,
as the Divine Power, is manifest unto any, for Salvation, we do justly say,
there is the Gospel preached, for that Power does declare it self, both in
words and works, where it is kindly received, to be glad tidings, which
[Evangile] signifies: and to be the Word of God, which [Gospell] an old Saxone
word does signify in that language.

Argument 5. Erom Romans 5. verse. 18.
IN this Chapter the Apostle does hold forth a parallel in diverse particulars,
betwixt the first Adam, and Jesus Christ the second Adam, of whom the first
Adam was a figure, as it is said verse. 14. which parallel does not run, in
Relation, unto the things, which are come upon us, through both, for they are
contrary, but in Relation unto the Persons, upon which the things are come,
viz. That as universally as the first Adam has brought a disadvantage and
loss upon all the Children of men, so universally has Christ the second Adam
brought a free gift upon them, whereby it is possible for them to recover all
that they lost in, or by Adam, and be delivered from any, and all the evils
which accompanied that loss. But as the first Adam brought on the evil upon
men, by his disobedience, on the contrary Christ the second Adam has brought
on the good and free gift of God upon us, by his obedience. And this is clearly
proposed and affirmed in this 18. verse. Therefore as by the offense of one (said
he) Judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so, by the righteousness
of one, the free gift came upon all men unto Justification of life. Where note,
that the word [Iudgement] is not in the Greek, nor any word for it, but there
is something understood, as neither the [free gift] in this verse. But it is
manifest, the free gift is to be understood, as is clear from verse. 15. 16.
Now, what can be more evident, for this truth, then these words, which are as
plain and full a Testimony as any can be desired, for this which we plead
for? And yet our Adversaries betake themselves to their old corrupt gloss to
get an evasion, affirming that by [ALL] in the latter part of the verse, is
understood, not Singula Generum, but Genera Singulorum, i. e. not all
particulars, but some of all sorts. To which I answer. This shows their
prejudice against the truth, who pass from the sense, which the words plainly
import, and seek out another sense, to the words, not from any necessity, but
because it pleases not their corrupt judgment. Now, what is above said, upon
the words [all and every] in the first Argument might suffice here, but I shall
ad somewhat more, which the very place it self, here adduced, gives an
occasion for, affording us very good ground, to refuse this their corrupt
gloss; For beside that the word [ALL] being understood, by themselves, in the
first part of the verse Universally for all particulars, is a good Reason to
evince, that it should be so understood, in the latter part, there being no
Cogent Reason to the contrary. This following consideration does evidently
prove, that the second [All] must be understood, as Universally as the first,
because otherwise the Parallel, could not hold, and the Apostles words, would
be impertinent, as if he had said, as by the offense of one, somewhat is come
upon all men to condemnation, So, by the Righteousness of one, somewhat (viz. the
free gift) is come, not upon all men, nor upon the most of men, but upon the
fewest, unto Justification of life; who cannot but see, that this cannot be the
sense of the Apostles words? for that it quite destroys the Parallel, which
is made in Relation to the persons, who, as they suffered a loss Universally
by the first Adam, so by the second, the grace or gift of God is come upon
them, whereby they may recover it, as Universally, and so the Parallel runs
betwixt universal and universal, and not betwixt universal and particular,
and it is contrary to the nature of Parallells to be narrower one way then
another.

But say they. The Parallel holds thus; That as all in the first Adam, or who
are begot of him, do receive hurt, and Judgment is come upon them all to
condemnation, even so the free gift is come upon all, who are in the second
Adam, and are begot of him, unto Justification of life. And thus, as Adam is
the head of all sprang from him, so Christ the second Adam is the head of all
sprang from him; who conveyeth life and spirit, unto them all, As Adam has
conveyed death, unto all, who are come of him, by ordinary generation. To which
I answer. The free grace or gift, which comes by the obedience of Christ, does
not find any of the children of men, in Christ, or begot of him, according to
the new birth, for when it first comes upon them, it finds them without God,
and without Christ in the world, with Adam, in the fall, and therefore the
Parallel can not run, according to what is alleged above, as to say, even so
the free gift is come upon all, who are in the second Adam, and are begot of
him, for none are in him, nor begot of him, upon whom the free gift first
comes, but it comes upon Unbeleevers, that thereby they may become Believers,
and upon the Unbegotten, that thereby they may be Begotten, and upon them, who
are out of him, that thereby they may come to be planted in him. And as to what
is said, of Adams being the head of all, as they are come of him, and of Christ
his being the head of all come of him, it holds good. But this further is to be
considered, how Christ is the head of men, for sometimes he is called the head
of the body, which is the Church, and sometimes the head of every man, as it is
1. Cor. 11. 3. Now after what manner did Christ become the head of his Church,
who are the Saints? not by finding them Saints, when he first came unto them,
and so joining them unto him, as finding them, a suitable body for such a Head.
No, no, for he found them, not Saints, but ungodly and unrighteous, and he
was given of the Father, as a head, full of Grace and Truth, to begett them, to
be the Saints and children of God, that so they might be a suitable body for
him, as their head. And thus he is the Head of the Saints by union, and
comunion, they are joined to him, and receive life and spirit from him, as the
Members do from the Head, and they do serve and obey him, as their Head, and
thus, he is the Head of none but the Saints. But again de jure, i. e. of
right, he is the Head of every man, whom every man ought to receive, and
acknowledge for his Head, and give obedience thereunto, as the Members do unto
the Head, and therefore it is, that the whole world shall be judged by Jesus
Christ, and who have received him, as their Head, shall receive the reward of
eternal life, and who have not received him, but denied that obedience and
subjection to him, which the Members ow to the Head, shall be punished with
everlasting destruction, because of their rebellion and disobedience. Now there
is such a mutual Relation of duty, betwixt the Head and Members, that as the
Members are bound to serve and obey the Head, so the Head is bound to convey
that influence of life and spirit, unto the Members whereby it is possible for
them, to do all things, which the Head requires. And from hence I thus argue,
Seeing Jesus Christ is the Head of every man, de Iure. i. e. of right, and is
given of the Father, to be the head of all men, and has received that power
and authority from the Father, to be the head of all men, de Jure, Therefore he
is bound, from the Relation he has unto all men, even all particulars, as
their head, to convey that influence of life and spirit unto them, whereby it is
possible for them, to do all things he requires of them. And consequently the
free gift is conveyed unto them, whereby it is possible for them, that they may
be saved, and so he is justly called the second Adam, in that he is the Head
of all men, from whom a spiritual seed is conveyed unto all men, even as the
first Adam was the head of all men, from whom a natural seed was conveyed.

But say they, If the free gift had come upon all particulars, then all would
have been justified. 1. Because it is said, that the free gift is come upon all
unto Justification of life. 2. Because, by the disobedience of the first Adam,
condemnation is come upon all, and therefore, if the free gift is come upon all
particulars, then Justification is come upon all. Answer, to the 1. because it
is said, the free gift is come upon all, unto Justification of life, it will
not follow, that Justification it self is come upon all, for it is not said,
Justification is come upon all, but the free gift is come upon all unto
Justification, which imports that Justification is the effect which the free
gift would produce were it received by faith, but now all do not receive this
free gift by faith, and therefore it does not produce this effect in all. And to
the 2. I answer, denying that by the disobedience of the first Adam, simply,
condemnation is come upon all, for the Scripture does not say so, but thus,
there is somewhat by his disobedience come upon all unto condemnation, which
somewhat is the seed of sin, that is transmitted from Adam to all his natural
posterity, and does produce condemnation as its fruit and effect, where it is
obeyed, and yielded unto, and suffered to spring up, but in none else.

Morover the Apostle says, that where sin did abound, grace did much more
abound, but if grace has not come upon all, as universally as sin, Viz. the
seed of sin aforesaid, then grace should not have so much abounded. But now it
has much more abounded, or superabounded, which therefore it is justly said to
have done, inasmuch as it has given to every man that coms into the world, a
possibility to overcome sin, and the power thereof, for that which is able to
overcome in all, is more superaboundant then that which is overcome, or may be
overcome in all. And though this seed of Grace and of Righteousness suffer in
many for a time, yet in due time, the Lord will raise it up in all, and crown
it with dominion, over all, unto the Salvation of all, who have received it in
says, but for the everlasting destruction of them who did not believe, nor
were obedient thereunto.

Argument 6. From Romans 10.
THE Apostle Paul in this 10. Chapter, does again fall upon this Subject to
compare the Jews and the Gentiles together, showing that the Gentiles were not
so cast off, but that, as to what was the maine and principal thing, To wit
the word of faith, the Gentiles did share with the Jews, and that whoever
among the Gentiles did believe and call upon the name of the Lord were saved,
no less then the Jews, for (said he) there is no difference betwixt the Jew
and the Greek, for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him,
and whoever believes on him, shall not be ashamed. Now in the 3. and 4.
Chapter, he gives the Reason, why the Jews, who sought after Righteousness
did not attain it, even because they sought it not in Christ, but in the Law,
and the legal ministration, whereas God had not appointed that for Righteousness
but to point unto Christ who is the end of it, for Righteousness, unto every one
that believes, verse. 5. And this he proves, Viz. that Christ is the end of Law
for Righteousness, from Moses words, Deuter. 30. showing that by that word of
faith, which Moses said was nigh unto the Jews, and in their heart, (so that
they needed not say, who shall ascend into heaven for it, or descend into the
deep,) is understood Christ. Otherwise he could not have brought Moses words
as the Reason, or proof, why Christ was the end of the Law, as here he does.
Again, he affirms for a man to say in his heart, who shall ascend into
heaven, were to bring down Christ from above, or to say, who shall descend
into the deep, were to bring him up from the grave, which cannot be, whereby it
is manifest, that by the word he understands Christ, whom he calls the word of
faith, which he and his Brethren did preach. And so they preached him, nearer
unto men, then either Heaven, or the grave; The word is nigh unto thee, even in
thy heart and in thy mouth. Some may say, how is Christ to be understood, to be
in the mouth? I answer, It may be in Relation unto his being given unto men,
for the food of their souls, according to what Christ said, he that cateth
me, shall live by me. Now the food is put in the mouth, that it may be
nourishment unto the body, so here is an allusion unto that, as if Moses and
Paul had said, thou needs not perish for want of Christ, the food and the life
of thy soul, for he is as nigh unto thee, as thou can desire him, as the
very meat when it is in thy mouth, yea he is yet noarer, Even in thy heart for
now the meat may be put into the mouth and yet because of weakness, or some
Impediment in the body the virtue and strength of it may be hindered to go unto
the heart, for the strengthening and comforting or quickening of the same, and so
though it were in the mouth, yet a man might die, as being so weak, that he
could not draw the virtue of it into his heart, and indeed so it is, with us
men, in the unconverted state, we are in such an impotent condition, to do
any thing for our selves, that if life and virtue from God, were not brought so
near us, as to be put in our very hearts, we could not live, for we are not
only weak, and sick, but we are dead in sins, and trespasses, and this is the
wonderful mercy of the Lord, that he has brought this bread of life as near
us, as is possible for our quickening and salvation, he has put it not only in
our mouth, but in our heart, yet if the heart does not kindly receive it, nor
suffer it to have its operation therein, notwithstanding it is brought so near,
it will not give life unto the heart, but be a savor of death unto death
thereunto. But where the heart does receive it, so as to unite therewith, it not
only becomes life unto the heart, so as to fill it with pure Heavenly
refreshment and joy, and with most excellent and Heavenly breathings, thoughts,
desires, and meditations, concerning the Mercy, Goodness, Power, and Love of the
Lord, and of his Wisdom, Righteousness Purity and Holiness, or whatever else it
tastes of, and enjoys in him, but also becomes a most abundant wellspring
of life unto the mouth, whereby it is opened, after a marvelous manner, to utter
and express the thoughts and feellings, and joys of the heart, in living
words, which are spirit and life, having of the very virtue of the divine life
in them, which as they are a most sweet and acceptable favor unto God, so are
they of great use and service unto men, both for quickening the dead and for
refreshing and building up the living yet more abundantly, in the power of that
life which has quickened them. And thus the word springs up from the heart
into the mouth, but here it, as it were, descends from the mouth into the
heart, therefore it is first said to be in the mouth, the word is near thee, in
thy mouth, and in thy heart. Now that this was the privilege of the Gentiles,
no less then of the Jews, to have this word so near unto them, as to be in the
mouth and in the heart. The Apostle does plainly affirm, and so that the
Gentiles who believed, were saved, no less then the Jews for says he, There
is no difference betwixt Jew or Greek, but the same Lord is rich unto all that
call on him. And that these Gentiles, who did call upon the name of the Lord,
and were saved, were not under any outward administration of the Gospel, is
most evident from the Objection framed by the Apostle verse. 14. 15. and his
Answer thereunto. The Objection is occasioned by Paul's saying, that the
Gentiles, who called upon the name of the Lord, were saved. Now, it might be
objected, How shall the Gentiles call on him, in whom they have not believed.
And if it should be replied, that some of them did believe, The Objection is,
How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard. And if it be
replied, they have heard, the Objection remains, How shall they hear without a
Preacher? and if it be replied, they have had a Preacher, the Objection in the
last place is, who, or what Preacher has been sent to them? for how can they
preach unless they be sent? As it is written, How beautiful are the feet,
etc. Hereunto the Apostle does not reply that Preachers have been outwardly
sent unto them, for at this time, The Gospel, as to its outward administration
had not gone over all the world, but this he givs for the direct and positive
Answer, But they have not all obeyed the Gospel, etc. So then, faith come by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. So he grants that they could not
believe without hearing; and that they could not hear without a Preacher, which
Preacher he does not say was any man, sent unto them, by whom they did hear,
but thus. So then (says he) Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word,
even that word which was in their mouth, and in their heart, therefore he
adds, But I say, have they not all heard? Yes verily, the sound went into all
the earth, and their words into the ends of the world, which words he cites
out of the 19. Psalm, where they are understood of that Universal language,
which the Heavens and Firmament, Day and Night has unto all men, even all
particulars without exception, and are not cited by him, for that end to prove,
that the visible creation did preach the Gospel unto them in the living clear
and powerful Ministration thereof, for that it cannot do; but he makes use
of them, by way of allusion, to signify, that as Universal, as the language
of these creatures was unto men outwardly, even so universal was the language
of this Word of faith, which is Christ, the Messenger of the everlasting
Covenant sent to preach unto men, in the inward, even unto all without
exception of any, so that all among the Gentiles have heard this Word, both
Believers and Unbeleevers. Now as concerning the Believers, it is certain, for
how could they believe in him, of whom they had not heard, and concerning
Unbeleevers, it is as evident from the Apostles words, who says, They have not
all obeyed the Gospel, for Esaias says, who has believed our report? Now
Mark, the Apostle does not say, They have not all obeyed the Law of nature, or
the Light of nature, but they have not all obeyed the Gospel, so that the very
Gospel has been preached unto all, otherwise they should never have been
charged with not having obeyed it. Again he says, But have they not heard?
Even that which they disobeyed, to wit the Gospel? He answers, Yes verily,
their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world; alluding, as is said, unto that Universal language of the Heavens and
Firmament, Day and Night, which speaks not only unto some of all sorts of men,
but to all particulars, so that this Word has had its language not only unto
some of all sorts, but Universally unto all and every particular, otherwise the
allusion, unto the words of the 19. Psalm, had been impertinent.

Moreover the Apostle proceeds to show, how the Gentiles, who followed not
after Righteousness, had attained to Righteousness, even that of faith, and yet
the Jews missed of it, of which as he gave the reason, in the close of the
last Chapter, why the Jews missed of it, Viz. Beealls they sought it not by
faith, so in the close of this 10. Chapter he further adds, that
notwithstanding all the high thoughts, the Jews had of themselves, as if they
were the only elect people of God, and the Gentiles, cast of, that the Lord had
said long ago, I will provoke you to jealousy by a people that are no people,
and by a foolish nation I will anger you And that Esaias is so bold, as to
affirm, that the Lord was more readily found of the Gentiles, then of the
Jews, for of the Gentiles he says, I was found of them that sought me not,
but to Israel he says, All the day long I have stretched out my hands to a
rebellious and gainsaying people. So that though the Jews weremuch seeking,
and asking, and praying, yet they did not find the Lord, because it was but in
hypocrisy, they were in their hearts a gainsaying and rebellious people,
whereas the Gentiles many of them had not such a show of external devotion,
and Prayers, but were more righteous in heart before the Lord, and so did more
readily find him, and know him, yea and did more readily receive the testimony
of truth as it was outwardly published by the Apostles, then did the Jews
notwithstanding all their great Profession. Oh that the late Professors could
read their figure in this, at this day. Some may object, that its said, there is
no difference betwixt Jew and Gentile, but the same Lord is rich unto all that
call upon him, which would seem to import, that such a rich mercy, as the
grace of God, is only given to Believers, and them that call on his name, as it
is else where said, he gives grace to the humble, whereas we say, he gives
grace unto all. To which I answer, these Scripturs do not import, that he
gives not Grace to all, but only that he gives more Grace unto them, who
believe, and truly call upon him, and are humble even to enjoy his love, and
the comfort of his holy spirit, and to none else; yet he gives Grace even
unto the Unbeleevers, and Proud, and Forgetters of him, that they may become
Believers, and true and humble Seekers of him, as many have become such, who
were as bad as any, but who do resist the Lord, and the Grace offered, and
continue so doing, till the day of their visitation pass over them, the Lord
cease any more graciously to visit, and he causes the same word, by which
they might have been saved, had they believed, to become their condemnation,
because of their unbelief.

And here I desire the reader to observe, that the Grace held forth, both in
this place, and all others aforsaid is the very Grace that is evangelicall,
being the word of faith, and the Light which is to be believed in; and no other
Grace making salvation possible to all men, does the Scripture declare of. So
that, it may plainly appear, that the universal, non-evangelicall, grace,
which Papists and Arminians speak of, is but a figment, and not the truth
which is owned by us.

Argument 7. From Titus 2. 11. 12. compared with 1. Corinthians 12. 7.
FOR the Grace of God, that brings salvation, has appeared to all men, (or
as in the translation of Beza himself has shined in upon all men) teaching us
that denying ungodlines and wordly lusts, we should live soberly righteously
and Godly in this present world, etc. And this he gives as the Reason, why
Titus should exhort ALL those among whom he lived, unto Temporance,
Righteousness and Godliness, old men, old women, young men, young women, and
servants, etc. even because the grace of God had appeared not unto them, only,
but unto all men, which taught them the same things inwardly, as they who were
sent of God, did teach and exhort them unto outwardly, and did not only teach
men to deny and forsake the evils and lusts of the world, but did appear
bringing along with it, a power to save from these things, and indeed, this is
the very foundation, and fundamental ground, of all outward teaching, and
instruction and exhortation, in relation unto the things which pertain unto
Holiness and Godliness, that there is an inward principle, which is the free
grace or gift of God planted in every man, to answer and witness unto the truth
of the things which are outwardly taught and exhorted unto, even as face
answers unto face in a glass, by and through which inward principle, the
true Teachers and Ministers of Jesus Christ, and the things by them published
and taught, were believed, and received, among those, unto whom they were sent,
and if any believed not, as many did not believe, they were left without
excuse, for that there was that in their very hearts that did answer unto the
truth. And hereby their ignorance may appear, who object, that if there be an
inward principle, which does or can teach all things pertaining unto truth and
righteousness, then all outward teaching of men is in vain. Whereas the plain
contrary is the true consequence, For were there not an inward principle, to
teach them all things, and to enable to believe and perform the things which
are required; all teaching of men would be in vain, BECAUSE that there would be
nothing in people to answer, or witness unto the truth of what is taught, by
which they could be convinced or persuaded, nor would there be any thing in
them, by which they could do the things required of them, and this would
indeed make all teaching as vain, as for a man to go teach the things of
humane Reason, unto a Beast or to exhort it, to do such and such reasonable
things, because in a beast there is no principle of humane reason, by which it
can be reached, either to understand, or do those things. Now, it is a bad
consequence thus to argue, there is a principle of reason in every man,
therefore it is needles, that there should be any men, to teach unto others,
the things of reason, whereas this is the great and only encouragement, that
the greatest Masters in the things of natural Reason, (as in the sciences
Physical and Mathematical) have, to teach, in that there is a Principle of
Reason, in their Scholars, to answer unto the truth of the things taught by
them, who believe those things, not simply because of their Masters authority,
but because of that evidence, which the Principle of Reason in themselves, gives
unto them. And for as much as there is an universal Principle of Reason in
men, therefore it is, that men are so useful unto one another, in propagating
knowledge in the things thereof, and so it is, as touching the things of Faith
and Godliness, because there is an universal Principle of Faith and Godliness in
all men, which is the free gift of God, therefore it is, that men can be so
useful unto one another in the propagation thereof, and the knowledge
thereunto appertaining; so that, those in whom this Principle is raised, and
come to have its free course and operation, are only appointed to be useful
unto others, in a ministry, for the raising up of the same Principle in them,
and turning them toward it: most pertinently therefore does the Apostle,
according to the Wisdom given him of God, hold forth this universal
Principle, of the Grace of God, which has appeared unto all men bringing
salvation, as the cause why Titus should exhort all, unto those things, which
did pertain unto Godliness.

Now, this place of Scripture is such a plain proof, of this blessed truth,
that a plainer cannot be desired, and yet our adversaries go about, to cast a
mist of darkness over it, by their old corrupt gloss, that by [all] here is
again meant, not, Singulagenerum, but Genera singulorum, i. e. not all
particulars, but some of all sorts. Which is so frequently before refuted, that
I need say the less here. But do they think so to baffle the understanding of
people, that they must take their meaning all along, of such plain and full
scripture proofs only because they say it, and that it crosses their private and
narrow spirit. This acceptance of the word [all and every] given by them, is
but improper, and seldom used in Scripture, in respect of the many times, it is
used, in an universal fence, and shall we therefore pass from the proper, and
more usual sense of the word, because of their bare affirmation? Indeed they
have but too long Lorded it over the consciences and understandings of people,
to get them to believe any thing for truth, if they have but said it, but now
an Eye is opening among many, and will open yet more abundantly, to see their
nakedness, and not any more to take things upon trust from them, as they have
done. And truly, it is the singular providence of God, that in all these
places, which hold forth this universal gift of God, there is abundant matter,
in the very words, or before or after, to evince the truth, and overturne their
false and unsound gloss therabout; as there is also here, for now the Apostle
bids teach and exhort, not only some of all sorts, but all, not some aged Men
and Women, young Men, young Women, and Servants, but ALL, among whom he lived,
and to whom he had opportunity, and this is the Reason he gives, for the grace
of God has appeared unto all; Teach, instruct, exhort ALL, even all
particulars, because the grace of God has appeared unto ALL, and a little after,
in the next Chapter, verse. 4. 5. he gives the original cause and spring,
from whence this universal gift did slow upon all men, even the kindness and
love of God toward man, (...), which signifies the love of God toward
Mankind, in the general, which comprehends all particulars without exception
of any, as even the term [Man] does generally signify in scripture, and
therefore as the Lord had appeared in love and kindness toward all men, he
wishes them, herein to be like unto their Heavenly Father, to be gentle
showing all meeknes unto all men, that is not to some of all sorts, but to all
particulars, verse. 2.

Again, This does overturne their gloss, that in all, even all particulars,
there is such a principle to be found, which teaches to deny the lusts of the
world, and to live soberly and righteously, and the same which teaches to deny
the worldly lusts, says the Apostle teaches to deny ungodlines, and the same,
which teaches to live soberly and righteously, he says teaches to live
Godly, and he does not tell us of a natural light, which can teach to live
soberly and righteously, but of the grace of God, and which is such a Grace,
that it brings salvation with it, according then to the Apostle, it is the
very saving, or salutiferous Grace of God, which teaches to deny the lusts of
the world, and to live soberly and righteously, and such a principle I say is
to be found in all men, and our Adversaries themselves confess, that there is
an universal Principle in all men, teaching sobriety and righteousness betwixt
men and men, but they will not acknowledge that it teaches or can teach
Godliness, or to deny ungodlines, whereas the Apostle holds forth the same,
which teaches the one, to be that which teaches the other. Now, if it be
objected, Then why are not the things pertaining unto Godliness, as universally
known as the things pertaining unto temperance, and righteousness, among men. I
answer, because the principle it self is not so improved, as it should be, yet
there is no man, but it teaches them somewhat of God, and Godliness, and
reveals in them from heaven, the wrath of God, in some measure, not only
against all unrighteousnes, but all ungodlines also, as it is Romans 1. 18. So
that, they are without excuse, who have not the knowledge of God and Godliness,
for what might be known of God was manifest in them. And that most men are so
ignorant of the knowledge of God and Godliness does not infer that there is no
Principle in them, which can or would give it, were it improved, but this is the
matter, they hide their Talent in the earth, and do not improve it, and put
their Candle under a bushel; and so its no wonder that they do not see, or
know, what otherwise they might, if they did not imprison this light of truth
in themselves, and yet they cannot so imprison it, but it shines forth to give
them some discoveries of things, to render them inexcusable. Now, some things
lie more near and obvious, and are discerned with a less degree of light
others are more remote, and lie deeper, and so require a further degree of
light to reach unto them, and yet the light in the nature of it, is one and the
same, and thus the things pertaining immediately to the worship of God, as to
the true way and manner of it, are more remote and profound, then those which
pertain unto common equity and moderation among men.

Agreeable here unto, is that Scripture, 1. Cor. 12. 7. The manifestation of
the spirit is given unto every man to profit with all, which profit is to be
understood in an inward and spiritual sense, Viz. unto the salvation of his
soul, otherwise what can it profit him, to gain the whole world, and loose
his soul; And if it be said, that by every man, here is to be understood every
man, within the Church, but not every one both within and without also. I
answer, the Apostle does not so Limit it and where he does not limit we are
not to limit neither. And besides it is evident, that it is to be understood,
not only of every one, within the Church, for that the manifestation of the
Spirit must be given them, to lead into the Church, who were once out of it,
and are now brought into it, for who are now in the Church, were once out of
it, in the world. Now, they needed a Light or manifestation of the Spirit, when
they were in the world, to let them see the misery they were in, and to light
and direct them unto the true Church, to be as it were a light unto their feet,
and a lantern unto their path, in their travel betwixt the world and the
Church, the Kingdom of darkness, in which all men, are by Nature, and the
Kingdom of Gods dear Son; and to this the Light which appeared, unto the
Israelits in Egypt was a Type, before they came into the promised land, the
light was given them of God, which directed them the way, from Egypt to Canaan,
through the wilderness, and so the Lord has given a light to the people who sat
in darkness, and are in spiritual Egypt, to direct and lead them unto the
spiritual Canaan, and that not to Jews only, but to Gentiles also, a light to
lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of his people Israel. Therefore the Lord is
said to give light unto them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
Luke 1. 79. Now, who are these, who sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death?
Even they who are out of the Church, for they of the true Church are not in
darkness, as it is said, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 4. but are delivered from the power of it,
as Col. 1. 13.

Argument 8. From a Collation of diverse Scriptures, which hold forth the
In-being of the Heavenly Gift in Men, before they believed, as Ephesians. 3. 8. Col.
1. 27. and 23. and 28. 1. Tim. 3. 16. Gal. 3. 1. 1. Cor. 2. 1. 2. 2. Cor. 5.
19. Acts. 17. 27. 28. Luc. 17. 21. 1. Ioh. 5. 10. 11. Acts. 26. 18. 23. Ioh.
16. 7. 2. Cor. 13. 5.
THE great obstruction, that is in the way, unto many, that they do not
acknowledge this Heavenly Gift to be universal, is, because they do not
conceive, How it can be in Unbeleevers, and in them who are not converted; Now,
here are diverse Scriptures, which in a most excellent harmony, bear a testimony
hereunto, most of them also holding forth the thing universally. As Ephesians. 3. 8.
Unto me, said Paul, who am less then the least of all Saints is this grace
given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of
Christ; but according to the Greek it is thus, That I should preach, the
unsearchable riches of Christ in the Gentiles; Now, when Paul first preached
unto the Gentiles, they were not Believers, and yet he preached the
unsearchable riches of Christ in them, he told of the money that would make
them rich forever, that it was in themselves, to be found in their own house,
as the parable declares, of the lost piece of money. Coloss. 1. 27. To whom God
would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the
Gentiles, which is Christ, in you the hope of Glory, whom we preach, warning
every man, and teaching every man, etc. But according to the Greek, it is thus,
Which is the riches of the glory of this mystery in the Gentiles, which is
Christ, in you the hope of glory, so that Christ was in the Gentiles both
Believers and Unbeleevers, but in Believers, he was the hope of glory, i. e.
gave them hope, but in the Unbeleevers, he was the mystery hid, as the piece of
money, or treasure that is hid in the house or field, according to which Paul
says, verse. 23. That the Gospel was preached in every creature (for so it is
in the Greek) i. e. in every man. Now, this was it, that the Apostle preached,
Viz. Christ, warning every man, and teaching every man, and he preached him,
not afar off, but near, even so near, as in them, the riches of the Glory of
the mystery in them, which is Christ.

1. Tim. 3. 16. And without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness, God
was manifest in the flesh justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached in
the Gentiles, for so it is in the Greek, so when the Apostles preached Christ
first unto the Gentiles, they preached him, in them, yea and he preached
himself in them, so that al had heard, but all had not obeyed the Gospel, as
is above showed on Romans 10.

Gal. 3. 1. O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you, that ye should not
obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ bath been evidently set forth
crucified among you; But according to the Greek, it is crucified in you, this
was in the time of their unbelief, 1. Cor. 2. 1. 2. And I Brethren, when I came
to you, came not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, declaring unto you,
the testimony of God, for I determined, not to know any thing among you, save
Jesus Christ, and him crucified, but according to the Greek it is thus, not to
know any thing IN YOU, save Jesus Christ and him crucified, so Paul preached, a
crucified Christ both in Jews and Gentiles, when he came among them: which is
understood of the seed, which suffered in them, by their unbelief and
disobedience, which is the principle in which Christ does manifest his life and
his glory* as it comes to rise and spring up, and in so far as IT suffers, HE
is said to suffer, and in so far as it is crucified, he is said to be
crucified, even, as what that blessed seed and body in the outward suffered is
said to be his sufferings. Now that was it, that Paul labored and traveled
for, when he came among any people, not to tickle and please their carnal
ears with pleasant words, and excellency of speech, but in the evidence and
demonstration of the spirit and of power, to reach unto the suffering seed in
them, that it might come to be acquainted with it, and with the virtue and
power, that is therein, for the salvation of their souls. But some may say what
virtue or power, is there unto salvation, in that which is crucified? Unto this
Paul answers, 1. Cor. 1. 22. 23. 24. 25. For the Jews require a sign, and the
Greeks, or Gentiles, seek after wisdom, But we preach Christ crucified, unto
the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishnes, but unto them who
are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom of
God, because the foolishnes of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is
stronger then men. So that, Christ, even inwardly crucified, is both the
wisdom of God, and the power of God, unto them who believe, though in a weak
and foolish appearance, to that eye which is but natural, and therefore is
called the foolishnes of God, and the weakness of God, but which is wiser and
stronger then men, and thus it has pleased the Lord to send his Son into the
world, both in the outward, and inward, in a low and weak appearance, that he
might show forth the more abundant glory, in that which was so low and weak in
appearance, to prevail over the greatest power that stood in his way, for thus
does the seed of the woman bruise the serpents head.

2. Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the word of
reconciliation, but according to the Greek, it is, and has put in us the word
of reconciliation, which is understood not only in relation to the Saints, but
even the world, for it is said, God was in Christ reconciling, the world unto
himself, whereas the Saints are reconciled through this Word already, but the
world is not, yet the word is put in them, whereby they may be reconciled,
therefore its said God was in Christ reconciling the world, but of the Saints it
is said, verse. 18. all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself,
so then they are reconciled.

Now say our adversaries* these and such places, are to be translated among or
unto, for (...) does signify so at sometimes; Answer, though (...) does
sometimes signify [among, or unto,] yet the most proper and usual
signification of it, is [in,] Now we are always to take the most proper and
usual signification of the word, where no cogent reason movs to the contrary,
as none does here, whatever they pretend, yea the very intent and scope of the
places do prove, that it is to be translated [in,] and so to be understood,
for Christ was not crucified outwardly, either among the Galathians, or
Corinthians, and the Riches of Christ, that Paul told the Gentiles of, was not
any outward thing, which they were to find outwardly, nor did he bid them go
any where without to find these Riches, but preached God and Christ, and the
Kingdom, and the Word near, even in themselves.

Acts. 17. 26. 27. 28. God has made the world, and all things therein, etc.
has made of one blood all nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the
earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their
habitation, that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after
him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us, for in him, we
live, and move, and have our being, as certain also of your own Poets have
said, for we are also his off spring. Now by this speech he calls off the
Athenians from seeking to find the Lord or to worship him, in Temples made with
hands, or images of gold and silver, to seek and find the Lord, in themselves,
as being the off spring of God, in which, he insinuats that near relation,
which all men have unto God, which is nearer, then that of the visible
Creatures, who are the Creatures of God, but not his offspring; whereas men,
are not only the Creatures, but the offspring of God, forasmuch as man was made
after the image of God, which was put in him, in which he was to know and find
the Lord, and feel after, and worship him. But now, through the fall, it is
true, this Heavenly and Divine image of God in man, is stain, yet the Lord is
more to be felt, and found in this slain image of himself in man, because of
the breathings of his life therein, then in all images that men can grave, or
in any of the visible Creatures, yea this is the Tabernacle of David, that is
fallen down, which the Lord comes to raise up in every man, and will
certainly raise it up in every one, for a Temple for himself to manifest, his
eternal love and mercy in, unto them, who believe, but his eternal wrath and
displeasure in them, who remain in unbeleef: and so, in regard of this near
relation, which every man has unto God, that he is his offspring, through his
image, which is in him, though it does not live in every one, (even as a dead
Child, is the offspring of his Father, though he bear not his living image,)
thus the Apostle does preach God near unto the Athenians, even so near that
they might feel after him, and find him, to wit, in his own image in them,
which though crucified and slain in them, yet, as is said, there is more of
God to be known and felt, even therein, then in Temples made with man's bands,
gold and solver, graven by art and man's device, or in any visible creature, so
that it is great ignorance, in them who affirm, that the Apostle is here only
holding forth, that knowledge of God, which the Athenians might gather simply
from the creatures without them; for of these creatures, it cannot be said,
they are the offspring of God, but of men, it is said, they are his offspring.
Now God is more to be known in his offspring, that in these creatures, which
are not his offspring, in so much that men may feel after God, whose offspring
they are; But say they, God is a spirit, and cannot properly be felt. To which
I say, as be is in himself simply, he cannot be felt, but as he is, in his
expressed image or word, he may, to wit, in his own seed whereby the Saints
have a most precious feeling, and tasting of his love, goodness, and mercy, and
the Wicked, when he pleases to touch them, have a most sharp and peircing
feeling of his wrath and indignation against them, yet qualified with the mercy
of God, so long as the day of their visitation remains, through which, they may
seek him and find him, unto the salvation of their souls.

Luke. 17. 21. Neither shall they say lo here, or lo there, for behold, the
Kingdom of God is within you. This Christ spoke to the very Pharisees, who
were unbeleevers, and so is such a plain proof as a plainer could not be
desired, yet our adversaries go about to darken it with their corrupt gloss,
saying, By the Kingdom of God is means the reaching or declaration of the
Kingdom, and the words [within you] may be translated [among you,] Answer.
This gloss cannot hold, 1. Because no where in all the Scripture, can it be
demonstrated, that by [the Kingdom of God] is to be understood, the external
declaration or preaching of the Kingdom; They may allege some places, but to
the spiritual mind it will appear, that they are not so to be understood. 2,
Because the Pharisees did not question him, of the Kingdom of God, in relation
to this understanding of it, as if they had said to him, when shall the
preaching of the Kingdom of God come? for they knew, that was come already,
forasmuch as they did daily hear Christ, and the Disciples preach of the
Kingdom of God, for this was it, that they preached, as the maine thing, and
he gave his Disciples charge mostly concerning this, that they should preach
the Kingdom of God, as near at hand, and come, and yet more abundantly coming,
and this Kingdom, was also mostly the subject, or theme of Christ's own
preaching, which for most part he held forth under Parables and figures, in
great plenty, which gave occasion to the Pharisees, to have many thoughts of
the Kingdom of God; as also because the Prophets had spoke great things of this
Kingdom of God, the Jews and Pharisees were in great expectation of it, and
conceived it to be some very great and glorious earthly and outward Kingdom,
that they should enjoy under the Messiah, which should come with great
observation, and outward show, and even the Disciples themselves had some such
apprehensions of this Nature, till their understandings were further opened.
Now Christ here, does plainly declare, that the Kingdom of God, was not such a
thing, as they understood, nor to come in such away as they expected, who
looked for it to come without, in some great outward appearance, but he
pointed them inwards unto it in themselves. That it was to come from within, and
not from without. That it was to spring up from a seed which was sown in their
hearts, and according to the coming up, and raising, and appearing, and growth
of this seed in men's hearts, so should the Kingdom of God come, arise, appear,
and be made manifest, and so these who waited for it outwardly, were
disappointed, but who waited for it inwardly, and sought after it in the divine
seed of regeneration came to find it, and be partakers thereof, therefore Christ
taught plainly that the way for people to find the Kingdom, and to enter into
it, was by being borne again of that divine seed, and not by going abroad
after them, who cry lo here, or lo there, for the Kingdom of God, said he,
comes not with observation, or outward show, neither shall they say lo here,
or lo there, for behold the Kingdom of God is within you: And whereas they say,
the words may be translated among you; I say, the words most properly signify
within you, as they are rendered in our English translation, now we are to keep
to the most proper signification, where no cogent reason movs to the contrary,
as here none does; but leads indeed to understand them in you. For this
Kingdom being an inward and invisible thing, and not of this world, but of
heaven, it can no ways be understood to be among people, but in so far as it
is in them, the hearts and spirits of men, being the proper place of this
Kingdom, even as the Kingdom of darkness, and of Satan, is within, and has
its place inwardly in men, so the Kingdom of Gods dear Son, that is contrary
thereunto, is within also, and through the destruction of the one, comes the
other to be built up. But say they, we can not conceive how the Kingdom of
God it self, which is righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, can be
within Unbeleevers. Answer, It can not be within them, as sprung up, and
arisen, in the power and glory of it, but it can be with in them, in a seed,
and thus the seed of the Kingdom was in them, which seed, Christ calls the
Kingdom of God, very frequently, and held it forth much under the figure of a
seed, The Kingdom of Heaven said he (Math. 13. 31.) is like unto a grain of
mustard seed, which a man took and sowed in his field, which is indeed the
least of all seeds, etc. Now it is very fitly called the Kingdom of God,
because it has in it, what ever is in the universal Kingdom of God,
incorporated, and is a most rich and pure extraction thereof, containing
therein a measure of all the powers, virtues, spirits, qualities, and
properties, of the whole universal Kingdom, which as it springs up, and
attaineth unto its due stature in man, it does bring forth and manifest in most
wonderful and excellent variety, but of this seed, and the figures and
parables under which it is represented more afterward: Now when it is said,
The Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy, etc. this is to be
understood of the Kingdom, as it is sprung up, from a seed, bearing its
heavenly fruit, which is righteousness, peace, and joy, etc. which we
acknowledge cannot be in Unbeleevers, but the seed may be in them, yea, no man
who is an Unbeleever, can become a Believer, but through this seed, which is
sown in him, when he is an Unbeleever, and thereby he becoms a Believer, as
he does join to it, and cleave unto the appearance of God therein.

1. Joh. 5. 10. 11. He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in
himself, he that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he
believes not the record, that God gave of his Son, and this is the record,
that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. Now what
(US) is this, to whom God ha^h given eternal life? Surely both he who
believes, and he who believes not, for thus he who believes, bears a true
witness and testimony unto the record of God, holding forth that eternal life
which is given him, in a true belief thereof, and confession thereunto, in word
and deed: but the Unbeleever is a liar, and why so? because that God has given
him eternal life, but his unbeleeving heart says No, he has not given it
unto me. As now, if I should give a thing unto a man, to make use of, and he
burieth it in some place, and denies that he ever had such a thing from me,
he would be a liar, so the Unbeleever, by his unbeleef denying the gift of
God, which is given unto him, he lies. But now, if this gift which is
eternal life, had never been given unto him, he could not be called a liar,
for to lie is to deny that which is true, therefore it is true that God has
given him eternal life, viz. in the seed* which would have brought forth life
in him, had he believed, And thus the slothful servant who hid his masters
money in the earth, was a liar, in that he said, his Lord was a hard Master,
and that what he had given him, was not sufficient enough, and so did not
believe the record, viz. that God had given him eternal life. Acts. 26. 18.
23. Paul says he was sent of God to turn the Gentiles from darkness unto
light, even unto Christ, who lights every man that comes into the world.
whom Paul here preached, that he did suffer and rise from the dead, and did
show light unto the people, and to the Gentiles, and yet when Paul first came
unto them, they were in unbeleef and darkness; Now it is great ignorance and
darkness for man to say, that this light, which Paul turned them unto was not
within them, for they might as well say, that the darkness and power of Satan,
from which he was to turn them to God, was not in them, and seeing he turned
them to God, sure it was that they might find him, and his light and li^ in
them, for we cannot find God, to the salvation of our souls, but in our selves,
because the light which gives the knowledge of the glory of God shines in the
heart, 2. Cor. 4. 6. And we never find that Paul directed the Gentiles to seek
God, on his light, otherwise then a^ near, even in their hearts; Morover out
adversaries confess, that which is merely outward, is not sufficient unto
salvation; Hence I thus argue, The Apostle was to turn them to that which was
sufficient unto salvation; Therefore it was the light, which is of a saving
nature, that was in them, the consequence is plain from our adversaries
confession aforsaid, that nothing merely otward is sufficient unto salvation,
the Antecedent is proved, from this, that he turned them to that, whereby their
eves might be opened, and they niight receive forgivenes of sins, etc. Again
the Apostles were able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, but of
the spirit, and so they directed people unto that which was sufficient for
salvation, they both ministered from the spirit in themselves, and directed the
people, to whom they preached unto a measure of the same spirit, and to the
light and life thereof in themselves.

Joh. 16. 7. I will send the comforter unto you, and when he is come, he will
reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment, of sin because they
believed not in me, etc. This answers unto what is said immediately above, as
the Apostles did preach from the Spirit of God, and of Christ in themselves, so
they directed the world unto a measure of the same spirit in themselves, which
was given to the end their ministry might prevail in the world, for had not
the spirit been given to convince the world, and bear testimony unto the truth
published by the Apostles, they could have had no encouragement to preach, but
this was their encouragement, that the spirit was sent into the world, whereby
the whole world should be convinced, and so either saved, or left without
excuse. Now it is very observable that he says, he shall reprove the world
of sin, because they believed not in Christ, whereby it is manifest, that the
great sin of the world is unbeleef, for which it is reproved; But if the world
be reproved for that they did not believe in Christ, then certainly they ought
to have believed in him, and if they ought to have believed in him, he has
been given and held forth unto them, in such a way as was sufficient unto
salvation, for no man can be bound to believe in that which coms not in a
sufficient way, and under what smaller terms, could he be held forth unto
them, then as making salvation possible unto them, which yet is only possible
through an inward principle.

2. Cor. 13. 5. Know ye not your own selves, how that Christ is in you, unles
ye be reprobats. This Scripture holds forth that Christ is in all men, unto
salvation, who are not Reprobats, Now none are simply Reprobats, but whose day
of visitation is past, and their house left desolate, its true the state of
unbeleef, and impenitence is a state of of reprobation, and so those who are in
it, may be said, Secundum quid; or in so far to be reprobate, but none are,
or can be said to be simply Reprobats, but who remain in unbeleef, and
impenitency after their day of visitation is expired, for while their Day
remains, in which salvation is possible unto them, and wherein the Lord visits
them, and strives with them, for their recovery, they cannot be called simply
Reprobates, for reprobate, is as much as left or rejected of God, whom the Lord
has ceased to deal with in order unto their salvation, yea and even our
adversaries affirm that all Unbeleevers and unconverted are not reprobated;
Hence I thus argue, that therefore at least Christ is in some unbeleevers and
uncoverted, because he is in all, who are not Reprobats, and that unto
salvation, for otherwise he is in the very Reprobats, viz. unto condemnatiom,
and yet they deny that Christ is in any unto salvation, who are unbeleevers and
unconverted, which is proved against them. Now if people were convinced, that
Christ were in any unbeleevers and unconverted, unto salvation, this would be a
great step, unto their being convinced that he is in all, unto salvation,
within a day or time of visitation given them of God, for that the greatest
objection they commonly make, is that Christ is in none, in a saving way, but
who believe; which is here proved false, for he is in them, who believe not,
in a way to save them from unbeleef, as many can witness, who now believe, but
were once unbeleevers, and that he appeared in them, when unbeleevers, and
turned them therefrom to believe in himself, but many resist the operation of
Christ in them, and so remain in unbeleef.

Argument 8. From a Collation of diverse Scriptures in the OldTestament, so
called, answering to those above cited, out of the writings of the Evangelists
and Apostles, holding forth the self-same thing, as Deuteronomy 4. 29. 30. Amos
4. 13. Provs 1. 21. 22. 23. Genes. 6. 3. Deuteronomy. 30. 14. 32. 43. Job 24. 13. and
28. 12. Psalm. 2. 12. and 98. 2. 117. Prove. 8. 1. and 9. 1. and Isai. 49. 6.
Deuter. 4. 29. 30. But if from thence thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou
shall find him; if thou seek him in all thy heart, and in all thy soul, And if
thou turn to the Lord thy God, and hearken in his voice.
THE words being thus truly rendered, as they are, word for word, in the
Hebrew; do most plainly hold forth, that God is in the wicked and unbeleevers,
that have forgot him, days without number, as the Prophet says, concerning
Israel Apostate, of whom Moses spoke these words, who had forgotten God and his
Covenant; made graven images, and likenesses, worshipping the works of men's
hands, and serving other Gods, for which God was provoked to scatter them among
the Heathen. Yet, to this people, thus Apostatized from, and punished by God,
scattered from God in the heathenish imaginations of their hearts, does Moses
say; If they shall from hence, even from hence, seek the Lord aright, where he
is to be found, that is, in their whole heart, and in their whole soul, and
turn to him, (which presupposes his being there, to be turned to) and hearken
in his voice, (which necessarily argues his in-speaking to be hearkened to) they
shall surely find him.

Is it not hence evident, that the Reason why so many that have sought God,
affectionatly, and zealously, without, in their self-Righteous acts,
performances, Applications of promises, etc. have not found him, is, because
they have not sought him where he is, even within? as Augustine the great
Ancient Father of the Church, so called, lamenteth his misspent time and pains
in so seeking; saying, I sought thee, o God, and sound thee not, because I
sought thee without, and thou were within, I was abroad, from thee, and thou
were within me, yea more inwardly within me then my most inward parts. Thus may
many a one say now, and smite upon their heart, and turn to the Lord, and seek
him in their whole heart, and in their whole soul. Had the Translators been
but more inwardly minded, and known the manifestation of the spirit of God in
their inward parts, to have given them a sense of the mind of the spirit, in
the words of Scripture; how might they have been isntrumental to have directed
peoples minds where they were to wayt for, and seek and turn to God, as well as
to inform them that they must seek him? but they spoke, or translated according
to the misty understanding they had, and so have, by their defective
translations, cast a veil of thick darkness upon the Scriptures in many places,
as may in due time, God assisting, be shown at large, where of some instances
may be given at the end of this Treatise.

The day is now dawned, and the light broken forth, and the veil of thick
darkness that has been over the Tabernacle of God, is rent and rending, and he
has discovered his habitation, where he will be found, and his Temple where he
will be worshipped and honored, to be, even in the hearts and souls of men
and women; where he has been lost, and how? But by their minds being
extroverted, and averted from him, and converted to perishing objects, that
perish with the using, by which the Lord has been forgotten even days without
number, and is become a stranger in the earth, to men and Women, and they
estranged from the life of God, although they live move, and have their being
in it; Even in Christ the Word, and Power, and Wisdom of God, which

Proverb. 1. 20. 21. 22. 23. Lifts up her voice in the streets, and cries in
the chief places of concourse, in the openings of the gates of the City, (which
is the heart of man, where the throng and press of thoughts pass to and fro)
saying; How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? and scorners delight
in scorning and fools hate knowledge?

What more plain from hence, then that Christ, who is the eternal Word and
Wisdom of the Father, lifts up his voice unto all men? even to the simple
ones that love simplicity, to the Scorners that delight in scorning, to fools
that hate knowledge? and worse cannot be found, unbeleevers, unbeleevers, with
a witness; and wherefore does she this? to what purpose? what does she intend
by and in this her visitation and cry unto them? only to boast her self
against them? only in scorn to upbraid them? only tauntingly to triumph over
them? only to harden them, that she might destroy them? only to aggravate
their sins, that she might increase their damnation? Nay, Nay, surely Nay, for
wisdom, as a certain writer says, is a holy spirit living, clear,
undesiled, plain, not subject to hurt; loving the thing that is good' ready TO
DO GOOD, AND KIND TO MAN; preventing, them that desire her, in making her self
first known unto them; that so they may seek her, for unless she prevents all
mankind first, and calls unto them, and makes her self first known unto them;
they cannot desire nor seek her; but when she lifts up her voice, if they
hearken (and then they may) they shall have no great travel (says this
Author) for they shall find her sitting at their DOORS, to think upon her,
says he, is perfection of wisdom, for she goes about, seeking such as are
worthy of her, shows her self favorably unto them IN THE WAYS and meets
them IN EVERY THOUGHT: Lo here is a description of wisdom, of THE DOORS, of
THE GATES, of THE WAYS, the STREETS in which she lifts up her voice, and to
what end, with what good purpose, intent, and meaning toward man, and this is
consonant to the testimony which Solomon himself gives of her; in her calling
upon, and crying out to these simple, scornful fools, to wit, that they may
turn; turn to what? to her, at her reproofs; and to what purpose? that they may
grow wise through the out-powrings of the spirit of wisdom upon them. For lo,
this is her counsel to them, having reproved them for their folly and
expostulated with them about it; Turn you at my reproof, and this is her
promise, if they do, Behold I will power out my spirit (the spirit of wisdom)
upon you. And did she give them this Counsel, and not heartily and unfainedly
desire that they might receive it? and did she promise this, and not truly and
really intend, and resolve to perform it? what! did she only mock, only
dissemble, only pretend a great deal of good will, and intend a great deal
of, yea naught elce but, ill will and destruction? yet thus malicious do the
crooked conceits of some men render Wisdom: but I had rather believe the
Testimony which the Apocrypha givs of wisdom; That she is not subject to
hurt, ready to do good, and kind to man, sted fast and sure; the very breath of
the power of God, a pure stream flowing from the glory of the Almighty, into
which, therefore, no such defiled thing, as cruelty, or dissimulation can fall.
And this I am sure is most agreeing to the Testimony which the Evangelists and
Apostles give of Christ; that he came not to do hurt to any, but good to all;
not to condemn, primarily, but to save. So let every man mind that which
convinces him of his folly in secret; expostulats with him about it, saying,
how long will thou love this evil way of thy own heart? and lovingly advises
him, kindly woeth him to turn at the Reproofs of instruction, if he intends to
get in to the way of life, or witness the out-pourings of the spirit of wisdom
upon him. Consonant to this is

Amos. 4. 13. Lo he that forms the mountains, and creates the wind (or the
spirit) and declares unto Man what is this thought, etc. The Lord, the God of
Hosts is his Name.

He that created the spirit (for so the Hebrew word also signifies, and so the
Septuagint renders it) the spirit of man, the same upholdeth it to this day,
dwells within it, in his own divine seed, and principle; and in it, it is
that Man lives, and moves; and has his being; This is he who shows unto Man,
unto Man indefinitly, that is to Mankind, to every Man, his thought, what it
is, what his heart, soul, mind, and spirit runs out after, and the Lord God of
Hosts, says the Prophet is his Name.

Now the thoughts of man are within him, hid from every eye, save that which is
so inwardly present every where, that all things are naked and bare before him;
and the thoughts being thus within, can not be shown unto man, but by an
inward conviction; even there, where his thoughts are, and he that does thus
convince, man, within, of that which is within, must be within, and there
exercise and manifest his convincing power; and every man that comes into the
world, having that in him that thus shows him his thoughts (as there is no
man that lives that has it not) and the Prophet asserting that he which does
thus show unto Man, his thoughts is no other then God himself, the Lord God of
Hosts, who created Man, and his spirit, out of which his thoughts arise (and
consequently knows them all) It does most necessarily follow that this God,
who searches the heart, and tries the reins is in every man that comes into
the world;

This is so clear and consequentiall, that no reasonable Man, that considers
it, in an un-prejudicate mind can deny it. But this Doctrine is further
confirmed by God himself.

6. Genesis 3. My spirit shall not always strive (judge, plead or contend) in
man, for that he is flesh, etc.

Thus is it in the Hebrew, and thus it ought to be rendered rather then [with
Man]; and it being so, what is more plain from these words of God himself
concerning the wicked old world, Then first, that even to this unbeleiving
ungodly generation; who by their impenitency had provoked God to repent that
ever he had made man, and to resolve now to cut of mankind; He, God, had first
given them a day of visitation, in which, he did strive, plead and contend with
them, by his spirit in them, before he gave them up to destruction. And
secondly (which naturally flows from this) that that which strives, and judges
for God, in Man, and pleads Gods righteous cause with man, in the secret of his
heart and conscience, is not, a bare, mere natural light, as the dark,
dreaming Divines of our days do say, which can not save, but only condemn,
destroy, and leave without excuse; But is the very salutiferous spirit of God
himself which created man; and alone has power to save or destroy him, as he
answers the long-sufferance and goodness of God, which the Apostle says
leads to Repentance; or despises it, and sets it at naught.

But as plain as this Testimony of God himself is in the case; yet because it
thwarts the preconceived opinion of these men, and overturns the whole fabric
of their Divinity and Analogy of their faith so called; it must not be suffered
to pass under a double veil.

First of an ambiguous translation of the words, Secondly of a misty meaning
put upon the words so ambiguously translated, on purpose to make way for it.
viz. That God did not strive with this ungodly world by his spirit in
themselves, but only by the ministry and preaching of Noah. And for both these
they have their somewhat-to-say. First as to their translation, they say, The
Hebrew language is concise, and so by one word in it, many words in other
languages are often times expressed, and that particularly this word by me
precisely rendered [in] signifies also with, from, among, by, and sometimes into.

Answer. The Hebrew language is not so concise, but that it has proper words
for every one of those English words, and in the Greek and Latin languages, how
copious soever they be, the same Word has diverse significations; yet it
follows not but that both in those languages and in the Hebrew, these words
have their most natural and proper signification which must be kept to, unless
some weighty Reason requires an other word to be used; so that, as to the
traslation, this is First, plain from their own concession; that the word
does signify [in] as well as [with] in the Hebrew language, and so I have as
much ground from the Hebrew to render it [in] as they can have to render it
[with]; And Secondly I do assert (and any man that is but a little skild in the
Hebrew Grammar knows, that [in] is the very proper, and most natural
signification of the word, and consequently if the sense does not command
another word to be used, (as it does not here) in, is to be kept to: although
[with] be as good grammatical sense, and as proper a word (if it were not
ambiguous) to express the mind of the spirit of God by in this place, for when
the Lord striveth in any man by his spirit, he striveth with him; But because
[with] seems to leave some scope for their gloomy gloss, That God only strove
with them outwardly, therefore [in] which puts it out of all controversy, that
the spirit of God strove with them, in themselves, is to be kept to; [in] being
as much the proper signification of [(...)] in Hebrew: as it is of [(...)] in
Greek or of [in] in Latin when the sense does not necessarily require another
word; And thus the Septuagint, The Vulgar and Interlineary Versions (whose
opinions in Religion did not sway their judgments in Translating) have rendered
it, and thus much for the translation.

Now as to their gloss, that God only strove with them by the ministry of
Noah, who is called a Preacher of righteousness.

I answer; that granting them that their Ambiguous translation, which is
calculated to accommodate this their misty meaning; yet it dothnot follow, that
the words must be understood of any outward striving with man, by outward
preaching to them; but may be still understood of that inward striving of the
spirit of God, by which God did strive with them, to convert them, that they
might not be destroyed, but saved; much less does it speak of a bare outward
striving: for though we grant, and deny not, but that God did outwardly, as it
were, strive with them by Noah a Preacher of righteousness in his day; and has
in all ages, and at this day does so strive with the wicked, by the Preachers
of righteousness, of his sending forth, who preach in, and by, and from the
immediate Revelation, motion, and guidance of the spirit of God, whence it may
be said that the s^irit of God, in his Ministers, strives with them, because
they preach from, and in the demonstration of the spirit and power, yet this
secludes not this striving with them also, by his spirit in themselves. Without
which, all outward preaching, is unsufficient to conversion, according to the
Doctrine of these gloomy glossers themselves, in favor and honor of whose
soule-merchandizing trade this translation, and interpretation is framed; But
alas! what is the Chaff to the wheat? What the Ministers of unrighteousnes to
the Preachers of righteousness? how much so ever transformed to the deceiving of
many simple ones as the Ministers of righteousness? what are the quaint Orations
of these Academick Oratorian hirelings, to the immediate ministry of the spirit
of God, in, and through his Servants? these are they, and they alone by whom
God works his good pleasure, and no self-running hireling has any part or
portion in this ministry, or service.

If then we prove that this striving of the spirit of God with them, was in
order to their conversion, and seriously and uprightly so intended on Gods
part; then it will necessarily follow, from these men's own Doctrine, that God
must also have strove inwardly with them, by his spirit in them, as well as
outwardly, by his spirit in Noah; For all such outward striving, is, even
according to them, insufficient to effect or procure the salvation or
conversion of one man, and Reason shows that the Wisdom and Justice of God,
requires that he must needs use means, at least sufficient on his part, for
the effecting, of what he really intended, and not only feignedly pretended,

That God then really intended the Good, the Conversion, the Repentance, and
saving of these men, I prove from the Testimony of Peter 1. 3. 20. where he
says, the long suffering of God waited upon these disobedient men in the days
of Noah; and that Christ, then, by the spirit, preached unto them, which is no
more then what God himself here presupposes, when he says, his spirit shall
no longer strive in them, which I say, presupposes that it had strove with
them, and waited upon them, and if so, for what did it strive with them? was it
that they might be converted, and become righteous, or that they might grow
more wicked? Surely nay, the pure spirit of God, strives neither outwardly nor
inwardly with any to make them more wicked, but to bring them out of their
wicked ways; it is the wicked spirit of Satan, that strives to bring forth such
effects, and naturally does; where the spirit of God, being long resisted, does
but once cease to strive The long sufferance of God, says the Apostle, waited.
What waited it for? He that waits does earnestly expect, and hope for some
thing as the issue of his waiting? Now what was it God hoped to effect by his
long sufferance? their conversion from their evil to himself that they might
be saved, or their confirmation and obduration in sin that they might be
damned? This would not to be wayt, to bear with long-sufferance, to strive,
that he might spare them, and not finally cut them of, (which God was loath to
do;) but to watch for their haltings, to lie upon the catch with them, to
ensnare them, to pretend one thing, and intend another toward them, by sending
Noah amongst them to aggravate their condemnation; Oh! for shame away with
these blasphemous conceits of the merciful and true God; But I know, rather
then ye will yield to the truth, ye will assert those horrid, cruel
hypocritical conceits concerning the holy God, which if any man should but
suggest, concerning any of your selves, ye would with indignation, flee in his
face.

But if it be as ye will have it, right or wrong, that God, from the
beginning, only intended, their temporal and eternal perdition and
damnation. What needed he have waited for that? what need of striving and
laboring for occasion against them? had not one sin, by them committed, been
ground enough for him to have taken the forfeit? if that were it he only eyed?
yea according to your own desperate Doctrine, the one sin of Adam alone;
although they had never committed any in their own persons, had been enough:
What need then all this waiting, striving, sending of Noah to them, etc? When
will ye cease this senceles prattle? when will ye leave accusing God to Man?
and heightening the enmity between God and Man? when will you learn to think
well, and speak the thing that is right concerning the righteous God; to
unrighteous Men? that they may be persuaded to embrace the word of
Reconciliation, which God has put in them, that in and by it, they may be
reconciled to him? But who sees not that your interest (as hirelings) lies on
the other side the way? You and your work are seen, ye boast your selves to be
the Ministers of Christ, and of the Gospel; but of Antichrist ye are, and the
Anti-Gospell of evil tidings to poor mankind ye preach; and not good will to
men on earth. Your work is to dethrone Christ, and enthrone your selves in the
hearts and consciences of men and women, by keeping them under a necessity of
your ministry, and from the immediate ministration of the pure Judgments of
God, from his spirit and witness in their inward parts; therefore, is the Lord
discovering your nakedness, and laying open your shame, dethroning you, and
re-inthroning himself, recovering his Judgment seat, Authority, and Dominion;
and his slain witness, is he raising up again, and power has he given unto it,
more than in the days of old, to judge the inhabitants of the earth; Thousands
have already bowed to his Scepter, and ten thousands submitted to its Judgment,
and have there-through, in their measures, known Redemption, and witnessed
cleansing, and under his Banner are they traveling on, until Judgment be
brought forth into perfect Victory: and your Authority Esteem, and Dignity is
fallen and falling, and shall fall, before the Judgment of the spirit of God; in
every heart and conscience, in every Nation, Kindred, and Tongue, that
submiteth to the Judgment of God.

This is it of which David in the spirit prophesyed, Psalms. 9. 97. and 98.
saying, The Lord has prepared his Throne for Judgment, and shall judge the
world in Righteousness, and minister Judgment to the people in righteousness. He
comes, behold he comes to judge the earth: the world he shall judge with
righteousness, and the people with truth and equity. This is the everlasting
Gospel, which the Angel, whom John saw fly through the midst of heaven, had
to preach to them that dwell on the earth, even to every Nation, Kindred, and
Tongue, saying with aloud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him, for the
hour of his Judgment is come. Which is now fullfilled, and fullfilling, and
therefore is Babylon fallen and falling in Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues, even
so, oh Lord, let her and her Merchants fall never more to rise. Amen.

Deuteronomy 30. 14. But the Word is nigh unto thee in thy mouth, and in thy
heart that thou may do it.

These words are to be understood of the Word of Faith, which is Christ, as
Paul does expound and apply it, both to the Jew and Gentile, Romans 10. as is
above showed. Now these words [that thou may do it] are very observable, as
holding forth an ability or Power given them, in the Word, as it is received,
by faith, whereby they may do whatever it commands, and consequently, that it is
sufficient unto salvation, see Argum. 6. where this place is at large opened.

Deuteronomy. 32. verse. 43. compared with Romans 15. verse. 10. etc. Rejoice O ye
Nations (or Gentiles) with his People, etc. and why should the Nations rejoice
with his people? even because they had the same mercy of God, as to what was the
maine and substantial thing, bestowed upon them, Paul in his Epistle to the
Romans cap. 15. verse. 10. takes notice of these words of Moses, and makes use
of them to show, that the Gentiles were not so cast off of God, but that they
had the same mercy, as had the Jews, in relation unto the chief and
substantial thing, as he expressly says verse. 9. Let the Gentiles glorify God
for his mercy; and this he confirms out of the Psalms, Moses, and Isaiah,
out of the Psalms, he brings these Testimonies, first, Psalm. 18. 49. For
this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles (but in the Gentiles it
is in the Hebrew and Greek) and sing unto thy name, so that the Lord was among
and in the Gentiles, and had a Name in and among them, which was a Name of
mercy. The second Testimony is from Psalm. 117. O praise the Lord all ye
Nations, praise him al ye people, for his merciful kindness is great toward
us, and the truth of the Lord endures forever, praise ye the Lord. Now, what
[us] is this to whom his merciful kindness is great? even the Nations and
Gentiles, and that all of them, no less then to the Jews, who are also in
this Psalm called to praise the Lord, because of the mercy bestowed upon them,
and because of the truth which endures forever. And that the Mercy in these
places aformentioned, is Christ himself, without which nothing is a mercy, is
plain, both from the intent and scope of the Apostles words, who is speaking
of Christ, and also from the other citation out of Isaiah. 11. 10. There shall
be a root of Iesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people, and he
that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust,
which Scriptures as they hold forth the more abundant manifestation of Christ
unto the Gentiles, after his coming in the flesh, so do they point unto some
manifestation of him, in and among the Gentiles in all ages, sufficient unto
salvation, for that Moses in his day, and David in his, required the Nations,
even all of them, to glorify God with the Jews, for his mercy, the Riches of
the glory of this mystery in the Gentiles, which is Christ, as is above
declared.

Job. 24. 13. They are of those that rebel against the light, they know not
the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof. This, Job spoke of the
wicked and oppressors; Now, what light is this, that they rebelled against but
the light of Gods holy Spirit? Which witnessed against their evil deeds? For
that it was not the light of man's own corrupt nature is manifest, because its
said, they know not the ways thereof, whereas the ways of the natural light
or understanding they did know, for wicked men, can digg deep in that natural
light, and find out the paths thereof, but the paths of this Divine and
Supernatural light they cannot find out.

Job. 28. verse. 12. compared with verse. 28. But where shall wisdom be found,
and where is the place of understanding? This is answered, First Negatively, The
depth says, it is not in me, and the sea says, it is not with me, etc.
Secondly Positively; And unto Man he said, behold the fear of the Lord, that is
wisdom, and to depart from evil, is understanding. That is to say, that which
enclineth the heart to fear the Lord, and to depart from evil, is Wisdom and
Understanding. Now, what Man is this to whom God has so said? was it only unto
Job? surely none will say it. Or was it only unto the Jews? nor can this with
Truth be said. For Job neither lived among the Jews, nor was he of the Jewish
Nation; Was it then only unto some particulars of the Gentiles? Neither can
this be said; for, there is no place of Scripture that calls only a few
Gentiles, by that large indefinite Name [Man] By [Man] then we must understand
Mankind, as comprehending every Individual and particular man in the World, as
it is most usually taken in the Scripture. Parralel to this place is Micah. 6.
8. He has showed unto thee O man what is good, and what does the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, and love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God. This
is more then the Light of Nature can show.

Psalm 2. 12. Kiss the Son least he be angry, and ye perish, from the way; when
his wroth is kindled but a little, etc. This is a most sweet and joyful call
unto the Gentiles, no less then to the Jews; even to these who were combining
against the Lord and his anointed, or Christ. Now that they are bid to kiss the
Son, does plainly import that the Son was held forth, and given unto them of
the Father in true love, that they might kiss him, i. e. that they might enjoy
him, which does again infer that there was such a manifestation of the Son
let forth into them, which was sufficient unto salvation, elce, how could they
be required to kiss him, if he were not offered and made manifest unto them?
and how could he be offered unto the Gentiles, to kiss him, if it were
impossible for them so to do? this were contrary to that righteousness and
sincerity that is in God; so that in these Words, is plainly held forth a day
or time of visitation, wherein it was possible for them to be saved and escape
the wrath of God; Kiss the Son, least he be angry and ye perish from the way.

Psalm 50. 1. The mighty God, or the God of Gods even the Lord has spoken, and
called the Earth from the rising of the Sun unto the going down thereof.

This is an universal call unto all Nations.

Psalm 98. 2. The Lord has made known his salvation, his righteousness has he
openly showed, (or revealed) in the sight of the Heathens. Now, what was this
but the Gospel, in which (as said Paul) the Righteousness of God is revealed?
etc. And Christ in Scriptureis called the salvation of God, which was, in some
measure, made known, or manifest, in them; though not as to the outward Name,
yet, the power, light and life, thereby signified, was made manifest in them.

Proverb. 8. 1. Does not Wisdom cry, and understanding put forth her voice?
verse. 4. Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the Sons of men. verse 5.
O ye simple, understand Wisdom, and ye fools (for to these she also calls,
none excepted) be ye of an understanding heart. verse 6. Hear, give Ear, or
hearken (there, in the heart) for I will speak of excellent things. And verse
31. She tells us, she rejoiceth in the habitable part of Gods earth, yea, that
her delights are with the Sons of men. Who, of all the Creatures, alone, are
created capable of her inhabitation, cohabitation, fellowship and Communion in
the Spirit.

And therefore unto them alone she speaks on this wise. Verse 32. Hearken
unto me, O ye Children, for blessed are they that keep my ways. Verse. 34.
Blessed is the man, that hears me: watching daily at my gates, waiting at the
ports of my doors. Why so? what shall he reap thereby? does thy appearance,
Wisdom, in and unto the Sons of Men, even to fools and simple ones, tend to
their blessedness, to bring them to a blessed State? Yes. Verse 25. for who so
finds me, finds life (life indeed, life eternal) and shall obtain favor of
the Lord. But he that sins against me (that does not love and receive me,
but rejects my instruction) wrongeth his own Soul: all they that hate me
(which none can be said to do to whom she has never appeared, seeking their
love) love death. What can be spoken more plain to the holding forth a day of
visitation for good, not watching only for evil (as some Apostles of darkness
speak) to the Sons of men indefinitly! Tantamount to this is,

Proverb. 9. 1. 4. Wisdom has builded, her house: she has hewn out her seven
pillars. She cries, who so is simple, let him turn in hither; turn in!
whither? to whom? to what? let him turn in (says wisdom) hither, to me, who am
within, cry within, call within, lift up my voice within. Therefore to the
simple she says, let him turn in hither, and as for him that wants
understanding, she says to him, etc. What! does wisdom appear, speak to, visit
such? Yes, she does if we may believe her. Who is then, this man that wants
understanding? is he a Saint or a Sinner? a believer or unbeliever? a
Regenerate or unregenerate one? I think none will be so sottish as to say that
the Saints, the Believers, the Regenerate, are these fools, that are void of
understanding: It necessarily follows then that they are the unconverted, the
unbelievers, the unregenerate; and consequently that to such, while such,
Wisdom appears, and speaks, and what says she to them? why! Verse 5. Come eat
of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled. Verse 6. forsake the
foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding. For thee then though a
fool, though void of understanding, without the knowledge of God, and so
without God, and without Christ in the World, for thee, even for thee, I say,
Wisdom takes care, for thee, even for thee, she has prepared bread, and
mingled wine; and to thee she says, come eat of my bread (the bread of life)
and drink of the wine which I have mingled. Behold the Visitation, the loving,
the kind visitation, and tender of wisdom, to those that know her not, that
heed her, that regard her not, that believe not in her. But who, or what is
this Wisdom here spoken of? is it not some common gift, some natural thing
that is common to all, elect and Reprobates, only Common, restrayning, but not
saving grace, which convinces, and condemns, but converts not, nor has power
so to do?

No, no, this Wisdom of which the holy Scripture here treats, is the highest
wisdom, the wisdom of the most high, even Christ Jesus, the wisdom of God, the
Son and wisdom of the Father, whom he has given to be a light to the Gentiles,
and his Salvation to the ends of the Earth, who calls and cries unto all,
directing and pointing all men to turn in, to with in themselves, that they may
hear his voice and live. Whose Ministers, then are all those that would
persuade the greatest part of mankind that Christ appears not to them, intends
nothing for them, but does all that he does, with them, in them, toward them;
only to augment their Damnation? Surely these are not the maidens that wisdom;
nor Ministers that Christ has sent forth, though they pretend to come in his
Name, but are the right ministers of Antichrist. The same truth is again
confirmed.

Isaiah 42. 6. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine
hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a
Light to the Gentiles etc. The like place follows.

Isaiah. 49. 6. It is a Light thing that thou should be my servant, to raise
up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel; I will also
give thee for a light to the Gentiles that thou may be my salvation to the end
of the earth.

Many other places might be produced to show the same thing, but these are
testimony sufficient, that not only the Apostles but Moses and the Prophets
declared of this universal dispensation of Light given unto all men for
salvation.

Argument 10. From a Collation of diverse Parables given forth by Christ clearly
pointing at the same thing.
Matthew. 13. From Verse 3. To the 24. Here is the Parable of the sower expressed
at large and the interpretation of it given by Christ himself, holding forth
that it was one and the same seed, that was sown in all the four grounds,
though only One ground brought forth the fruit.

WHich four grounds do signify and represent all men, in whom the seed, which
is called the Word of God, has been sown, even that Word before mentioned, the
very seed of Regeneration: for in the good ground, which is the heart that
receivs and keeps it, it (the seed) sprung up, and brought forth fruit;
therefore it could be no other thing, but that true and real seed of
Regeneration which was sown in all the four grounds.

Objection. But say our adversaries, the seed which comes to a true birth and
fruit in the good ground is not One and the same, with that which is sown in
the other grounds; where the seed did either not spring up at all, or springing
up in some measure, did wither.

Answer. Who sees not (that will but seriously mind what he reads) that this
objection, is rather the fruit of their own prejudice against the truth; then
any natural consequence of the Parable it self, which gives not the least
ground, for any such groundles surmise as if the seed had not been One and the
same in all: The blame is laid wholly upon the grounds, by Christ, not at all
upon the seed. Whereas had the seed, in either of the grounds, been
insufficient, or not true, Real seed which could have sprung up unto maturity
and brought forth its fruit, the blame would have been laid upon the seed it
self, and not upon the grounds; but this was not, Therefore the seed was One
and the same in all. Another Parable we find

Matthew. 13. 31. 32. The Kingdom of heaven, said he, is like unto a grain of
mustard seed which a man took and sowed in his field which indeed is the least
of all seeds, but when it is grown is the greatest among herbs; and becomes a
tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.
Now, this can be no other then the true seed of Regeneration, which becomes a
Tree when it is grown, and is the preservation of men, in whom it springs up.
Therefore they are said to lodge in the branches of it under the figure of the
Birds of the air. And it is very observable, that its said to be the least of
all seeds, when it is fown; which does plainly imply, that it is sown, in the
hearts of men that are unbeleevers, and unconverted, for, only in such, can it
be said to be the least of all seeds; in whose hearts unbelief, lust, pride,
Covetousnes, and other sins are very powerful, but this seed very small, the
least of all, as having the least place and power in them; which cannot be so
said of the saints and converted, nay nor of them which are but in the
converting; and truly entered into any true beginnings of Conversion; for, even
in them the seed cannot be said to be the least of all seeds, yea there are
none in the least measure partakers of true faith, and truly turned toward God,
but the seed of truth, Righteousness, Purity and holiness has a place in their
hearts, somewhat more then other things, that are of a contrary Nature, and so
cannot be said, in them, to be the least of al seeds. But in unbeleevers it may
be, and is really so. Again. Matthew. 13. 33. The Kingdom of heaven is like unto
leaven, which a Wom an took and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole
was leavened.

What can any man understand by this Leaven, but the grace of God, which is of
a saving nature? even the Seed of Regeneration? for, thereby it is that men
become leavened, that is, purified and sanctified. Now, the leaven is put into
the meal, while it is yet unleavened; and this meal signifies mankind, men who
are unholy, and unsavory unto God, into whom while so, the leaven is put, which
leaveneth them, not in an instant, but by degrees, first one measure then
another, then the whole lump, if not impeded in it is operation; for if the
meal (the mind) be not duly applied unto the leaven of Gods grace, operating
to render it savory to God, but resists the operation thereof, it will remain
unleavened.

Again Matt. 13. 44. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a treasure hid in the
field, which when a man has found he hides, and for joy thereof, goes and
sells all that be has and buyeth that field.

All these Parables point at one and the same thing, which is, That Divine
Principle of God, given unto Men, in order to their Salvation; which is likened
unto so many useful things, in this World, because of its excellency and
usefulness unto men.

Now, here it is signified expressly, that this Treasure, is hid in the field,
before men find IT, and also, that a man may find IT, before he possesses IT,
yea he may find IT, before he goes and sells all for IT: by which going and
selling ALL, is understood Man's true Self-denial, and Resignation of himself
unto God, without which he cannot possess the field, nor the Pearl that therein
is.

Now, before this Self-Denial, or Resignation of himself, he may indeed find,
but cannot enjoy the Treasure. Yea, it is his finding the Treasure, or rather
being found of it, that is the cause and occasion of his going and selling all
for IT: therefore when he first found IT, he was not resigned, but stood in a
selfish Spirit, and was Self-Rich, calling every thing he had, his own, which
is plainly the state of an unbeliever and unconverted man, who may be convinced
of the truth and find the workings of it in him, and yet cannot possess the
Truth, in that State; till he come to a true Self-Denial and Resignation of
all, to be poor, and have his heart weaned from all those things in which he
took pleasure more than in God, and then he becomes blessed, as it is said,
Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

And, whereas it is said he goes and buyeth the field, where this Treasure is
hid. By the field, is understood, his own heart and mind, which no unbeliever
is possessor of, but is under the possession of another, even the Devil.

Now, till the field be redeemed, the Devil and sin cast out, and dispossessed
of his Heart and Soul, and his heart come to be purified, sanctified unto God,
a man cannot enjoy the Treasure; for, in the unsanctified heart, the Treasure
lies hid, and buried, and does not send forth that Uertu, Beauty and Glory,
which IT has in IT; because of the Impurity of the heart, which stops, and
hinders it, for IT cannot communicate it is pure glory, to that which is
impure, because of it is pure and incorruptible nature. Yet, it works even in
this field (which is full of impurity) as a fire to purge and purify it; that
so after it is being purified thereby, IT may shine forth and display IT IS pure
glory therein.

But the Heart sanctified and resigned unto God, is the field, where the
Treasure is no more hid, but manifest, in which IT does unseal and disclose
it is wonderful Virtue and Powers, in most admirable variety and glory.

Again Matt. 13. 45. 46. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant man
seeking goodly pearls, who when he had found one pearl of great price, he
went and sold all that he had and bought it. The explication of which is clear
from the above said; here it is again very observable, that he found the pearl
before he sold all for it, and bought it; which signifies that men may be
convinced of the truth, and find it in them, in the state of Non-Conversion and
Non-Resignation (which our adversaries deny) but in that state they cannot
enjoy it, but must first sell all.

Again, Luke 15. 8. 9. We have another Parable holding forth, the same thing
under the similitude of a piece of silver lost in the house. Which piece of
silver, betokens that Divine principle, which, by man's fall from God, came
to be lost, in man's heart, through the abounding of sin which covered this
noble Pearl, and made it to disappear, as if it had not been: But, though it be
lost, it still retains it is Existence, and is to be found in the house where it
was lost, that is, in man's heart. Now this piece of money is said to be lost, in
diverse respects; it is lost unto Man, and it is lost, (so to speak) unto God,
being so smothered and buried, under the filth and impurity of sin in man's
heart, that the Lord has not that use of IT, so as to appear and shine forth
therein, and convey the mani^estations, of his glory, there through, unto man's
soul. And thus it may be said, to be lost unto God. Who is here signified by
the woman that lights a Candle, and sweeps the house and seeks dil^gently till
she finds IT. And, if man would find this piece of money, he must seek IT, in
the Light of this Candle which God has lighted him with, and not in the Light
of his own kindling; and he must concur with the Lord to sweep the house, and
seek IT diligently in the virtue and Power of that true Light of God, which
has enlightened him, and so he will find it, in the house, where it was lost,
even in his own heart. Again, though this piece of money does remain, as it
were, in many men lost unto God, yet certainly the Lord will not give over the
seeking of it, till he find IT in ALL, and raise IT up in ALL, to have that use
in them, which he has appointed in which he will appear in everlasting joy,
peace and refreshment, unto the souls of them who have believed and been
obedient, but eternally be revealed, in flames of fire, taking Vengeance on all
them who have continued in unbelief and disobedience, till the day of their
merciful visitation be over.

Matthew. 25. From Verse 19. to 31. Compared with Luke 19. Verse 12. to 19. These
two Parables are much of a kind, most evidently and truly pointing at the same
thing with these already mentioned. For what elce do these Talents, which the
Lord gave unto ALL the servants of his house signify; but the divine Grace or
Gift which Christ has received of the Father, and given unto every man, to
profit with all to the salvation, of his soul? And is it ought elce but
partiality and prejudice against the Truth, in our Adversaries, to say that the
One Talent, which the one received, was not in kind and Nature, one and the
same, with the other Talents, and so not of a saving nature? For from the Words
of Scripture they have not the least occasion to think and judge so. As if the
one had not been sufficient enough for him to have traded with and increased
it, and consequently have been accepted of God, as well as the others. True it
is one of the Parables holds forth a difference in respect of the Quantity, but
not at all of the Quality, nature or kind. Now, least some might yet think the
slothful servant had not received what was sufficient; the singular providence
of God gives us another Parable: declaring that the slothful servant had his
Pound given him, as the other; Every one their Pound. Which imports that some
may have, not only the same grace given them as others, but even the same
measure, and yet prove slothful servants. Besides, that this Talent was not
any Natural gift, but indeed supernatural, spiritual, and sufficient to
salvation, is most evident from these ensuing Reasons. etc.

1. Because the Kingdom of heaven is held forth by this Parable, but no mere
natural gift has relation thereunto. Therefore this Talent, is no mere
Natural gift.

2. Because the slothful servant is said to have hid his Talent in the Earth,
and made no use thereof. But there is no mere Natural man, but does more or
less use the natural gift of Wisdom or knowledge that is given him. Yea the
worst of men have very much used the natural light, and abused it to serve
their lusts. Whereas this is hid in the earth, and not used at all.

3. Because otherwise the slothful servant might have had an excuse Viz. that
his Talent was not sufficient, with all his industry, to procure any increase,
that might be accepted of his Lord. But the slothful servant himself pleads
not this, only charges the Lord (though falsely too) with hardness and
austereness.

Thus I have the more briefly ran through these Parables, not insisting upon
the many circumstances, but only pointing at the main thing intended in them,
as knowing that the scope of a Parable is mostly to be heeded.

SECTION II.
Holding forth the same thing, in diverse Arguments from the intrinsic evidence
of the Truth it self, consonant to sound Reason.

1. Argument. From the Righteousness of God.
GOD, the righteous Judge of the whole earth has appointed a day in which he
will judge the world in Righteousness, and give unto every man according to his
deeds done in the body, whether good or evil. Now the sentence of his
righteous judgment against all workers of iniquity will be for their
disobedience to his righteous will and Pleasure. For, God having made all men
to dwell upon the earth, and been good unto them, it is a righteous thing in him
to require of them all service and obedience, even to love him above all, to
fear, and worship him, and do the things that are well pleasing in his sight.

But, as it is righteous with the Lord to require this of all men, so is it
also as righteous that he should give unto every man of whom he requires this
obedience, such a manifestation of his will as is sufficient to give them the
knowledge of all that he requires of them; and also administer to them that
power and ability, whereby it is, at least, possible for them so to do the
things required of them as to be accepted of him. Seeing then, that men can
neither sufficiently know, nor be able to do, the will of God, without an
inward principle of light and life from God, sufficient to that effect;
Therefore, it is manifest, that there is such a Principle given to them. Even
to every man that comes into the world.

Object. To this our Adversaries object, That ability has been given unto
every man both to know, and do the Will of God; but they, by their sin, have
lost it, and so it is righteous with the Lord, now to require obedience of
them, though they cannot perform it, because they once had it, and their
playing the prodigal with it diminishes not the Lords right of exacting it
from them still.

Answ. But of these men we ask, when or how was this Power and ability given to
all men? how and when, did they loose it? If they say in Adam. I reply, that
this is but a deceitful mist cast before men's eyes to blind them from seeing
the truth. But the day is dawned, and dawning, the glorious light of which will
go on to dispell all such mists of deceit. But, that I may make this the more
plainly appear, I shall first premise some things. First, I grant, Adam had,
when God made him, an ability or Power given him, in a divine principle of
light and life, both to know and do the will of God. Secondly: That Adam, by
his fall, came to loose this ability, by loosing the divine Principle in which
the ability stood. Which though he lost, yet it remained in his own house: but
the light and life thereof became though the prevalency of the fall
extinguished, it died in him, remained shut up in death, till the Lord raised
it up again by administering unto it somewhat of its own nature that was
living which HE was no way obliged to do, but might of Adam have required
obedience, even after this loss, because it was the fruit and consequent of
his own Personal disobedience. Thirdly its also true, this loss is descended
upon all Adams posterity, so that (as they come from him) they are impotent,
and unable, from any Principle conveyed from him, either to know or do the will
of God: and the Image of God lies slain and lost in them. But I deny, that this
loss is, by God, imputed unto Adams Posterity, before their own actual or
Personal transgression: for they brought not this loss upon themselves, they
having then no personal Being, but Adam brought it upon them.

Object. If they say, they brought it upon themselves, because, being in Adam,
they sinned (though not personally and actually) when he sinned, and so his sin
was their sin.

Answ. I reply, that all men were in Adam when he sinned, this imports no more,
then that Adam was the stock or root of all mankind, but not, that all men had
a personal existence in Adam; Therefore I deny that they can be said to have
sinned in Adam. That is to say, as the word [ADAM] signifies the first Man
that was made upon the earth: And there is no ground for it in Scripture. It is
therefore a mere deceitful figment invented, to blind the minds of people
from the truth. For the Scriptures Testimony is plain, that every man shall
give an account to God, for the things done by himself personally, and that the
iniquity of the fathers, shall not be imputed to the children, unless they
follow their example by actual transgression.

Object. But say they, as Levi, paid tithes to Melchisedech in Abraham, so did
Adams Sons and daughters sin in him.

Answ. I deny the consequence. And if this argument does any thing, it
overdoes; and proves against themselves, that children are guilty of all the
sins, not only of Adam, but of all their forefathers: Whereas, themselves say
they are not guilty of any but Adams first sin only. They must needs then say,

That Infants are not guilty of sin, merely and simply because descended from
Adam. But because of some special Covenant or transaction, which God made with
ADAM, and with all his posterity in him, by reason of which his sin, should be
their sin even before their own actual transgression.

But let them prove this if they can, for we deny it, as another figment of the
same Calibre with the former. Not that we deny that there was a Covenant and
Transaction made, and that when Adam sinned, his children thereby suffered a
great loss, so as to come Dead into the world as to spiritual life; and to
have a seed of all sin and evil transmitted unto them, from him; but this I
say, cannot be imputed unto them, as if THEY had lost it, or brought it upon
themselves, or were the punishment of their sin. No, that is false, its the
punishment and consequent of Adams sin, only. And as to these words Levi paid
Tithes in Abraham. The Apostle does not absolutely say so, but qualifies it
with an as I may-so-say, etc. which plainly implies that they are not to be
taken strictly.

Object. But say they, how could God punish infants with this loss, if they
had not been guilty with Adam.

Answ. It is not, to speak properly, their punishment, nor can it prove them
sinners, no more then that the curse that came upon the earth through Adams
sin, was a punishment to it, as well as to Adam, or that it was guilty. Adam
brought this loss upon his children, nor was it unrighteous in God to suffer
him so to do, though they were guiltless of it. Just as if Adam should have
laid violent hands upon any of his children, or any man now should do the like;
it is no unrighteousness in God to suffer such a thing, and yet this murder
cannot be imputed to the poor children, as if they were guilty of it. And
indeed just thus it was; Adam, as it may be said, did by his sin murder his
children, for had he not sinned his posterity should not have come into the
world with a Dead image, and brought the very seed of the serpents image along
with them, which, in the nature of it is sin, being contrary to the purity and
righteousness of Gods Nature, which is the first law. But still I say, its not
their sin, nor imputed unto them, before their actual transgression.

Now, let none through ignorance or prejudice say, that we herein, deny
original sin, for original sin, in the true sense, we deny not, that is to
say; that there is a seed of sin, transmitted from Adam unto all his posterity
in the natural birth, which becomes the origin, source and spring or root of
all actual transgressions, where ever it springs up, in which all sin is
committed, but, we say this is not men's sin, nor imputed unto them before
actual transgression.

Of the propagation of sin thus in a corrupt seed, the scriptures do indeed
declare, but no where, that this seed, is the sin of infants or that God
charge it upon them, before their actual transgression.

Yet this figment, they would fain hammer out from those words of the Apostle
Romans 5: 12, 14, 18. But I shall plainly show that these words do prove no such
thing, Verse 12. says. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
so death passed, upon all men, for that all have sinned.

Now, we grant, that sin entered into the world by Adam, and death by sin, but
it is the spiritual death that is here mainly intended, even that principle of
death which kills the soul; and, where it is suffered to spring up, hinders
its living unto God.

Object. But they urge, that the Apostle says, all have sinned. But all have
not sinned actually and personally, as infants, Ergo they have sinned Viz in
Adam.

Answ. By all, in the first proposition 't is clear that MEN are to be
understood: for its said, death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned,
or (as it may be rendered) in which all have sinned. But this place speaks not
at all of infants, who are not Men and Women, but children.

Object. But they would again infer their fiction from another translation of
the words [(...)] rendering them (not for that, but) in whom (that is, say they,
in Adam) all have sinned.

Answ. To this we say, that though the words be rendered in whom, or in which,
there is not only no necessity, but no ground to understand it of Adams
person. For there is another Antecedent unto which it more nearly relates, Viz
the sin that entered into the world by which came death. And indeed is death it
self, to wit, that cursed seed of sin, in which all have sinned, that ever did
sin. All sin being committed in it. And this seed and birth of sin is called
Adam, i. e. the old Adam or old Man: as the seed and birth of righteousness, is
called the New-Man or second Adam. And in this sense, the translation [in whom]
may be admitted and the explication, to wit, in Adam all have sinned. The word
Adam not being understood of that first person whose name was Adam, but of that
sinful and sinning nature which being derived from him bears his Name.

Obj. They Object further that because its said death reigned over them who
have not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, therefore infants
are sinners, for by that phrase, say they, are infants understood.

Answ. Suppose that infants are there understood, it is so far from proving
them sinners, that it does rather the contrary. Saying that death reigned over
them who had not sinned, etc.

Obj. But say they, Infants are sinners because liable to death, as many do
actually die in their infancy. Ergo they are sinners.

Answ. I deny the consequence, their death no more proves them sinners, then it
proves the Apostles and other holy men deceased, to be still sinners, because
they are dead, or do still continue in the state of the dead, and shall, till
the resurrection of the body. But this they themselves beleev not. Therefore
this argument overdoes again, if it does any thing.

Object. They argue again from the 18 Verse. That judgment is come upon all
men Ergo all have sinned.

Answ. This word judgment is not the Apostles, but Translators, not being
found in the Greek. Where somewhat is left to be understood (which the Apostle
expresses not) as being come upon all men unto condemnation. But what this
[somewhat] is the letter does not express. Only this is observable that it is
not jugdment. The Apostle not saying that judgment or condemnation is come upon
all men but some what [Viz the seed of sin] is come upon all unto condemnation.
i. e. some what which has condemnation as its effect where it is suffered to
bring forth.

Object. They endeavor once more to infer their assertion from these words,
Verse 19. where it is said, by one man's disobedience many were made sinners.

Answ. This proves not that his disobedience, was formally their disobedience,
but only a cause, and that remote thereof. Even as by the obedience of Christ
many are made righteous, not that his righteousness is imputed unto them who
are not actually righteous.

Object. They object again, that as a man's debt is chargeable upon his
children, so is Adams upon his posterity.

Answ. This is so, and is just, where a man leaves as much behind him, as will
pay his debts; or where the heir voluntarily accepts. But otherwise unjust; but
they grant, and that truly, that Adam has not left any such ability to his
children wherewith to satisfy God, or answer his requirings.

How plainly now does appear the groundless and unwarrantableness of their
doctrine? That God requires of men obedience, and punishes them for their
disobedience since the fall, to whom he gives neither light sufficient to
discern, nor ability enough to answer, his requirings, and that alone because
they, in Adam, on rather he for them, (for they could not, having then no
existence,) prodigally wasted and lost all spiritual light and life.

Look upon it, read it again, and tell me whether this looks, or sounds like
the Doctrine of Christ the truth it self, the Doctrine of the Gospel of
Salvation?

Hence then I argue, That Doctrine which serves to clear the righteousness of
God, in his punishing the wicked for their disobedience, is to be owned, and on
the contrary that which tends to the obscuring it, and casting an imputation of
cruelty and injustice upon God, to be denied.

But this Doctrine which asserts a principle of light and life sufficient, to
be from God imparted to all mankind, servs to clear his righteousness etc. and
the contrary Doctrine to obscure it, etc.

Therefore etc.

The first proposition is so clear that it needs no proof. The second does
again as clearly flow from that. For, if God has de novo, or of a new, given
unto all men a sufficient principle of light and life, to know and do his will,
then he may say, as in Isayah, and now oh men of Judah and inhabitants of
Jerusalem, what could have been done more unto my Vineyard that I have not done
in it? Viz. in point of righteousness, he has done all that was needful to
clear his Justice in giving the Vineyard that which was sufficient to enable
it to bring forth good fruit, and consequently in punishing it for remaining
unfruitful. Whereas, if he had not given that which was sufficient, his
righteousness could not have been cleared. For the law of righteousness
requires of no man more then it allows him ability to perform. And hence is
very manifest, the ridiculous unreasonableness of that assertion, that they
that perish, have that given them which is sufficient to make them inexcusable,
but not sufficient to salvation, howmuchsoever improved. For notoriously
evident it is, that that alone is sufficient to leave a man without excuse,
which, being duly improved, is absolutely sufficient to render him excused; and
this again, infers sufficiency unto salvation.

Besides, why do they put themselves to that trouble, of saying, that they have
that given them, that is sufficient to leave them without excuse; seeing they
may as easily lay the inexcusableness it self, upon Adams sin, as the
insufficiency to save; and tell us they are without all excuse, not for any
thing particularly or personally given to them, but for Adams sin. But let the
Scriptures be searched throughout, and it shall never be found, that any are
simply condemned, or made inexcusable for Adams sin; but for their own sins in
the first place, and for those of their Ancestors but consequentially. This is
the Condemnation of the World, says Christ, that Light is come into it, and
they love darkness, etc. But no where is it said, this is their condemnation
simply that Adam sinned.

Argument. 2. From the Mercy, Love, and Goodness of God, extended in a day unto
all men.
THat the Mercy, Love and Goodness of the Lord, is extended unto al men, in a
day of visitation, the Scriptures testimony is most ample. Some few of the more
significant of them I shall allege Viz.

Psalm. 14. 5. 8. 9. The Lord is gracious and full of compassion, slow to anger
and of great mercy, Good unto ALL, and his TENDER MERCIES are over ALL his
Works.

Psalm 107. 8. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his GOODNESS, and for his
wonderful works to the CHILDREN OF MEN. And this is four times repeated in
that Psalm.

Psalm 81. 1. 4. O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in ALL THE EARTH.
What is MAN that thou are mindful of him, and the SON OF MAN, that thou
visitest him.

Psalm 62. 12. Also unto thee O Lord, belongs MERCY, for thou rendrest unto
EVERY MAN according to his works.

Here observe the connection, which is very signal, importing that the evil
doers shall be condemned, from the very mercy of the Lord, which they have sinned
against, and out-sinned the visitation thereof.

Matthew. 5. 44. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do Good to them
that hate you etc. that you may be the children of your father, which is in
heaven, for he makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the Good, and sends
rain, on the just and unjust.

Here again the connection is very signal, they are bid to love their enemies,
which must certainly be taken universally, even all their enemies, of mankind;
and why? that therein they may be like their heavenly father, who loves them
ALL, and does Good unto ALL just, and unjust, etc.

Actor. 14: 17. Nevertheless he left not himself without a witness, doing GOOD
and giving us rain from heaven, and fruit full seasons, filling OUR HEARTS
WITH FOOD AND GLADNESS.

Romans 2. 4. Despisest thou the RICHES of his GOODNESS, forbearance and long
sufferance, not knowingthat the GOODNESS OF GOD, leads THEE to repentance.

Which Scriptures do all plainly declare the mercy, and Goodness of the Lord
toward ALL MEN, not only, no nor yet principally, in relation to outward
things, but to the salvation and welfare of their souls. For, in that God
loves all men, he loves their souls, which is the principal part of men,
Now, if he love their souls, then he has provided somewhat for the welfare
and happyness of them. And in that its said, the Goodness of God leads them
to repentance, it manifestly follows that repentance, was once possible unto
them. For the Goodness of God leads no man to that which is impossible.

Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death
of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live, etc.

1 Timothy 2. Verse 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. I exhort therefore, that first of all
supplications, prayers etc. be made for ALL MEN, for Kings, and for ALL that
are in Authority etc. For this is Good and acceptable in the Sight of God our
savior who will that ALL MEN Shall Be SAVED and come to the acknowledgment of the
truth, for, there is One God, and One Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus who gave HIMSELF a ransom for ALL to be testified in due time.

1 Timothy 4. 10. Because we trust in the living God who is the savior of ALL
MEN, especially of those that believe. etc.

Joh. 4. 42. Christ is called the SAVIOR of the WORLD. and Joh. 1. 2. 2. The
reconciliation not only for the sins of the Saints or believers, that were
chosen out of the World [not only for our sins, says the Apostle,] but also
for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD.

What more plain, and evident! can more emphaticall and significant expressions
be used by men? But besides these plain testimonies of Scripture, which need no
explication, nor application of mine, there is an universal testimony and
witness of this truth in the heart of every man that comes into the world. For
that very same thing, that in his heart bears witness to the existence or
being of God, is also a witness, that he is Good, loving, merciful,
long-suffering, gracious and favorable unto him, till he by his wickedness
has out-sinned the day of Gods merciful visitation. And then, the same which
before witnessed unto him of the love and mercy of God, does now bear witness
of his wrath unappeasable, and fiery indignation against him. This have diverse
felt sealed in their hearts, as Cain after the murder of his Brother, Judas
after his betraying Christ, and many Apostates.

But I say, before this time, in whichmens wickedness be come to the height,
and the cup of theiriniquity full; there that is in all men, that which
certainly witnesses unto them, that God is merciful, good, and favorable
unto them; even the same I say, that Witnesses that he is, so that there is no
man who can, or dares to say, the Lord is not, nor ever was merciful, and
loving to me. For in so saying, he should ly against the inward Testimony of
God in his conscience, yea the daily mercies of the Lord daily conferred upon
him, would also be as a thousand witnesses against him.

Object. If it be now Objected, it is true, there is such a witness in every
man, of the love and goodness of God to him, in relation to things temporal
and external, but not to things spiritual and eternal.

Answ. It is as easily answered that this distinction is frivolous, ridiculous
and absurd: For the same that witnesses that God is good to his body
witnesses also that he is good to his Soul much more, because the soul is
more worthy then the body, and the more Principal part of man; yea, is rather
the man then the body. Therefore if God be good unto ALL men; he is good urto
the souls of all men: and if he be good unto their souls, then he has
certainly provided, that which is sufficient for the health and welfare of the
soul, and consequently that which is sufficient unto salvation.

O Man! who ever thou art, whether Jew, or Gentile. Scythian or Barbarian, let
the witness of God in thy conscience answer, which tells thee there is a God,
who has made the heavens and the Earth, and created thee, with all mankind to
dwell upon the face thereof, given thee a body and provided abundantly for the
welfare and comfort of it, and of the life thereof, causing the sun to shine,
and rain to descend upon thee, the Earth to give thee bread, the water drink,
the Air breath, the fire warmth, the heavens light, and many other benign
influences: has, I say, this bountiful God, and Creator, who has given thee,
besides all this, a soul immortal, so carefully provided forthy body, and the
life and comfort thereof, etc. wholly neglected to provide for thy soul, and
the immortal life and good thereof? has he given nothing to feed it? no food
convenient for it? appointed no bread for the mouth thereof! no water for thy
inward, as well as outward man, to quench his thirst! no air to give it a
comfortable breath, no fire to warm it no light to lead it in its way, in which
it ought to walk! nothing to refresh it in its path! I say, has the same Lord
provided so many, so abundant remedies to cure the maladies and distempers of
thy mortal body which is but dust, and no remedy at all for the discrasy and
distempers of thy soul (of a more excellent and noble substance) by which they
may be removed, and thy soul cured! let the witness of God in every man
answer; and I am certain it will not fail to bear this Testimony unto the
goodness of God: That he has as abundantly provided for the good of thy soul;
as of thy body.

And if he has provided for the good of the soul of every man; that good must
bear Analogy or proportion, to the soul, so as to answer unto the nature
thereof which is immortal, or eternal and without and. Therefore it must be
an immortal and eternal good, and consequently sufficient unto salvation and
eternal bliss. For, its said of the Lord that he opens his hand and gives
unto everyliving thing its meat, that is, that which is good for it. So to the
Beasts of the field he has appointed food convenient for them, to the fowls
of the Air their meat, to the fishes of the sea theirs, which is not one and
the same to them all, but distributeth to every one according as their nature
requires, what is consonant thereunto. Now, is it in the least measure probable
that this bountiful Creator, who has so abundantly provided for the
Vegetable, and animal life in plants, and the beasts of the field, as also in
men, food convenient thereunto, should have provided no food for the rational
soul of man, which is an eternal and everlasting substance? no food I say,
convenient for it, by which it might live in comfort and joy as other creatures
do? Indeed, had the souls of all men sinned personally, as the Angels who
fell, God had as justly passed them by, and deprived them of that which was
good, as he did the fallen Angels. But, to conceive that the righteous God, has
thus passed by, and deprived most, orindeed all the souls of mankind, before
their own Personal or actual transgression, is most injurious, against both
that abundant righteousness, moderation and mercy, unto which, both the
Scriptures, in most ample manner, and the inward Testimony of God in every man,
do bear witness.

But again, if God were not a lover of the soul of every man, and provided not
for their good; but on the contrary hated the souls of some, yea of most men,
even before they had a being, denying or depriving them of that which is for
their eternal good; then surely, it could in no propriety of speech, or
Justice, be said, that God were good, loving and merciful to all men; though he
did confer upon them never so many outward things, good for the body or outward
man: For what advantageth it men to have all the good things of this life if
they loose their souls, they being past by and from all eternity irreversibly
appointed to eternal wrath and misery? yea, are they not hereby but rendered
the more miserable and unhappy! and what can such a conceit beget in them, but
blasphemous and injurious thoughts of their maker, so as to look upon his
dealings with them (which is horrid to be thought) as as cruel as those of the
inhumane Cannibals toward some, whom (poor miserable creatures) they feed
with good fare, to fatten them that they may feed upon them with the more
pleasure? How is it now possible for any to imagine these Cannibals, to bear
any love to those whom they thus fairly feed, that themselves may with the
greater pleasur feed upon them? And yet, does not the Doctrine of these men,
who teach that God has passed by the souls of most men without providing any
food at all for them, represent the merciful and just God as only seding
their bodies Canniball like, or worse (Oh dreadful and astonishing to be
thought!) with the abundance of the good things of this world, only in order
to the making them more miserable in the condition of their souls, devoted to
the insatiable wrath of God to feed upon to eternity; never giving them any
sufficient occasion whereby they might be in a possibility of salvation?

Whereas, the contrary doctrine which asserts that God has provided, that which
is good for the souls of all men, even sufficient for their salvation, in a
day, or time of visitation allotted them, wherein it was possible to have been,
though they never actually be, saved, but do perish eternally, does abundantly
clear both the righteousness and mercy of God; as not wanting on his part,
being willing to have saved them, but they would not embrace it: and so their
condemnation is just, and they can have no plea, neither from the
righteousness, nor mercy of God; which mercy it self, does most deservedly
condemn them, because they have finned against it, and despised the riches
thereof, which did lead unto repentance. Thus shall they be judged by, and left
without all excuse from the very mercy of God. Whereas, had not the Lord visited
them with what was good for their souls and sufficient to salvation. They might
have had this strong plea. Lord we desire to plead at the tribunal of thy
mercy, even at thy mercy seat; though we cannot stand, we acknowledge, to plead
at the throne of thy strict justice, yet let us plead at the throne of thy
mercy: Lord thou have indeed required us to serve thee with our souls, but in
all our life time thy mercy never visited our souls, with any measure of light
and life sufficient to enlighten, quicken or enable them, either to know the
service thou requiredst of them, or ability to perform it. Therefore Lord how
can they mercy condemn us; we never having sinned against thy mercy; thy
healing, thy saving, thy enlightening, thy quickening mercy to the salvation of
the soul. Therefore we put up our plea to thy mercy, that we may at least be
preserved from eternal wrath through thy abundant mercy.

Now, let the witness of God in every man judge in this matter, and it will
certainly determine that because the mercy of the Lord shall condemn all that
perish, the same mercy must needs have visited them, with some measure of light
and life sufficient unto salvation. Which saving mercy of the Lord visits every
man, till he has wholly filled up the cup of his iniquity against it, and then
he is left to himself.

A threefold instance of this thing the Scripture gives us, first of the
Amorites, Idolaters that possessed the Land of Canaan, in Abraham's time. The
iniquity of the Amorites (says the Lord to him) is not yet full. How, not yet
full! because the mercy of the Lord continued yet to visit them, and they had
not yet wholly outsinned the time of the merciful visitation of God, given
them. The second is that of the Jews over whom Luc. 13. 34. Christ lamented,
saying, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. O that thou had known in this THY* DAT,
the things that belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thy eyes. And
again, how feign would I have gatherd thee, as an hen gathers her chickens,
but thou would not, therefore thy house is left unto thee desolate. The third
instance, is that of the people of the old World, of whom the Lord said, my
Spirit shall not always strive in man, for that he is also flesh, etc. All which
do plainly imply a day of visitation, unto them that perish and consequently
that salvation was possible, unto them, through the appearance of God in that
day.

Argument. 3. From that universal duty that is upon every man, to believe and
call upon the Name of the Lord.
THat it is the duty of every man that comes into the World to believe in and
call upon the Name of the Lord is evident from Scripture. Power out thy wrath
upon the heathen, that have not known thee, and upon the kingdoms that have
not called upon thy Name. Jer. 10. 25. And why so? doubtless because they ought
to have known him and called upon his Name: For punishment implies, and is the
wages of, sin. Now, if not to know and call upon the name of the Lord were
their sin: then to know and call upon him was their duty. Again these words
[who have not known thee] import saving faith and knowledge; Viz. who have not
known thee in a believing way. Again, Prayer, true prayer and faith are
inseparable companions joined together by God. So that if the Lord has
required the heathen, and Kingdoms of the world, to call upon his name, then
he has required them to believe; as it is plain from these words, how shall
they call on him in whom they have not believed, Romans 10. 14. Psalm. 62. 7, 8.
65. 2. And if he has required of them to believe, then (Christ, the name of
God) the object of faith, the (...), has been, in some measure manifested and
held forth unto them as the Apostle again answers to that objection, Isayah 45.
22. have they not all heard? yes, No doubt, their sound went out through all
the Earth, and their words unto the end of the world. Romans 10. 18. Psalm. 19. 3.
In all which places faith and prayer are conjoined. And remarkable it is, that
God is said to be Psalm. 65. 2, 5. the hope and confidence of all the ends of
the earth, unto whom all flesh come because he hears prayer.

He is the ground of their hope and confidence, and in him they ought and may
confide as the God of their salvation.

This is further showed, by that inward Testimony in the heart of every man,
which shows him that there is a God or supreme Being, for the same that
shows man the existence of God, shows him that he is to confide and trust
in him, to worship and call upon his Name, to love, fear, and obey him etc. Of
which Paul spoke, saying to the Athenians, That God made all nations of one
blood that they should seek him etc. Act. 17. 27. And hereunto he gives them,
even all Nations, atwofold ground of encouragement. First because God is not
far from every one of them, that is to say, because he is nigh unto them, Very
nigh, yea so nigh, that in him they live, and move, and have their being.
Secondly, because they are his offspring and children, and he their father;
which holds forth most sweet and comfortable things unto the children of men,
Viz that the Lord does regard them in so near a relation, notwithstanding
their degeneration. And thus much is clearly held forth by our blessed Lord and
savior, in the Parable of the Prodigal son, whose father still reckoned him as
his son, saying, this my son, was dead and is now alive, was lost and is now
found.

So that all men in a natural condition, while the day of Gods merciful
visitation remains toward them, in some sense, are the children of God; that
is to say, his dead and lost children, whom he visits to quicken and find them.
And this is for the seeds sake, there is a seed of God in them, of which it is
possible for them to become the children of God, as it springs up in them, to
leaven and change them into the image of God. And so in the natural and
unconverted state they are his children, not actualy, but potentially, that is,
they are in a capacity to become his children, through that divine seed which
is in them: Therefore God is nigh unto them, and looks upon them in so near a
relation; And this is the foundation, or moving cause, why all men should trust
in the Lord, worship and call upon him: wherefore the nighness mentioned by the
Apostle must needs signify a nighness of the Lord unto all men, in mercy, as a
father unto his children; he sees them dead and lost, and the bowels of his
tender love, yearns toward them, so that he comes nigh unto them, in the
tender love and mercy of a father to quicken and find them. But to the fallen
Angels he stands in no such near relation.

It is I say, the nighness of the Lord, even in his saving mercy, and in a
saving way, to all men, that is the ground and foundation (by the Schoolmen
called [Objectum formale,] the formal object) why they should believe and call
upon him. For the act always praesupposes its formal object. So that, if the
Lord requires all men to believe in, and come unto him, as children unto a
father, and seek from him, that which is good for them in that relation, then
certainly he does hold forth himself unto them in such a way as its possible
for them to believe in, and find him. For, it is as unreasonable a thing to
require a man to beleev in that which is not held forth, as an object of faith,
as to bid a man hear and yet speak nothing, or look upon this or that thing,
when there is no such thing to be seen or presented to his sight, or to bid a
man smell, taste or feel when nothing is exhibited to be smelt, tasted, or felt.

And so, if the Lord ought to be believed in, by all, and that as a God of
mercy, as nigh, as a father etc. then certainly he does reveal himself in such
a way in some measure: For how can they beleev in him of whom they have not
heard? and how can they hear without a preacher? and who is this Preacher that
all nations must hear? but the word of God? seeing all never heard any outward
Preacher?

And seeing its the duty of all to call upon the Lord what should they call upon
him for, if not for saving-mercy, healing and quickening mercy, if not for
salvation and for that which is sufficient to save them? should the soul when
its to seek the Lord, only seek him for the things pertaining to the body? and
neglect to petition for its self that it may be saved from sin and wrath, from
death and evil? Now, if the soul may, yea ought to pray for these things,
must it not pray in faith, believing it is possible to attain them, and if the
soul, in its seeking, must so beleev then are they attainable at least. Elce
the Lord should require men to beleev a lie, and that which is false, even to
beleev that to be attainable, which is not so, if salvation be not, at least,
possible to every soul in a day of visitation; but to say that God requires
any man to beleev a lie is injurious unto the veracity and righteousness of
God, which his witness in every Conscience declares.

Some may say Arminius argued thus for universal grace, having just such an
Argument.

To which I answer, if it were so, I have not received it from him, but from
the Spirit of truth which has let me see the truth of the thing in my own
heart: and any that are acquainted with Arminius his writings can not but see,
that I prosecute it not in his way. But in another more convincing, and which
has a deeper reach to the inferring of grace universal Evangelicall, de
primo, given unto all, which Arminius never pleaded for nor affirmed.

But it may again be objected, that this seems to contradict another principle
which we hold, Uiz. that wicked men should not pray.

To which I answer. No such matter, for we only say that wicked men, abiding
in wickedness, impenitence and unbeleef, ought not to pray: but first to repent
and believe and then pray.

Argument. 4. From the very Nature and intent of the Gospel.
THe very Nature, sum and import of the Gospel is, glad tidings of salvation
unto all people; holding forth the Good will of God toward them, pointing at,
and directing them to a principle, by closing with which, peace and
reconciliation with God is obtained, and the forgiveness of sin received.

And thus did the Angel of the Lord publish the Gospel, unto the shepherds at
the nativity of Christ according to the flesh. Behold (said he) I bring you
Good tidings of great Joy, which shall be unto all people Luc. 2: 20, 19. And
suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God
and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, Good will toward
men. According to what the Lord said unto Abraham in his day, in thy seed,
which is Christ, shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed.

Object. But our Adversaries, according to their old corrupt gloss, say, that
by [all people] is to be understood, not all particulars, but some of all sorts.

Answ. This is manifestly contradicted, by another principle of their own,
Viz. that immediate Revelation is ceased. From which, and their concession that
the Gospel is really glad tidings, and holds forth the real love and good
will of God, unto some, I thus argue ad hominem, (as they speak.)

If the Gospel be no otherways glad tidings to any, but as it is to all, and
every, particular; then it is glad tidings to all and every particular.

But the first is true. Therefore the latter. The connection of the first
proposition, is so clear, that nothing needs to be said to it.

The second proposition, (Viz. that the Gospel is no otherwise glad tidings to
any then to all, and every one in particular) is thus proved.

The knowledge that any particular among you can have of the Gospels being glad
tidings unto them, and holding forth the love and good will of God toward
them, is, either because they know the Gospel to be so universally to all and
every one; or elce, because of some special immediate Revelation from God,
assuring them, that though the Gospel be not glad tidings unto all men, but
that many are, (yea the far greater part of mankind) excepted, yet it is so to
them in special, God having revealed it unto them, by name, that they are
included in that particular, small number, to whom the Gospel is glad tidings.

But this way you wave, as denying immediate Revelation. Therefore must run to
the former there being no third way conceivable.

And indeed upon that ground it is clearly deducible, for, if the Gospel be
glad tidings to all particulars, then any particular may without hesitation
conclude it so to him. For, from the universal to the particular or
particulars, is a most certain and infallible consequence.

As for example, I, or any man may conclude our selves as descended, from Adam
because all men universally are so.

And on the contrary, from never so many particulars, if there be any
exception, of but any one, it does not follow unto any particular whatsoever.
So, no man can conclude himself descended from Abraham, because 't is most
certain many are so. Just thus, if the Gospel be only glad tidings, unto
many, and not unto all, and every particular, it follows not that it is just so
to me or thee. For that, it is as probable that we may be among the secluded,
as included, if the Lord has not particularly revealed it to us.

Now, before any man can believe the Gospel, it must be held forth as a thing
certain, and as such must be made known unto him. For, what is a man's faith,
but the particular application of the Gospel, or thing therein held forth,
unto a man's self; or man's laying hold on the Grace offered, and believing that
it belongs to him? Which he can never do, until it be so made known to him,
and that certainly; not by faint or rash conjecture. For true divine faith
relys not, cannot lean, upon mere conjecture, but only upon certainty. And
herein faith differs from Opinion, which always relyes upon conjecture; and
therefore is but faint and fluctuating, weak and feeble, as is the foundation
upon which it relyes. Whereas, that certainty which is the right basis and
foundation of true faith, is strong and can never fail.

Again, the Gospel can not be glad tidings to any, further then it is
certainly known to belong to them, because uncertain tidings can never be glad
tidings: the uncertainty thereof so hindering the heart in closing there with,
that it cannot come to have joy therein, but is rather kept in an anxious
sadness, till it knows the certainty of it. Now how can they be glad tidings to
any (except through a special and immediate revelation) but from this ground,
that they are so to all.

If it be replied, it may to some be known, through their effectual calling,
the Lord secretly persuading them; by the secret operation and influence of his
Spirit, to apply the grace of the Gospel ontwardly held forth.

To this I answer. How shall they, in what manner can they, be assured of the
efficacy of their calling, and that their belief of it, is not a mere
presumption, and groundless imagination? for this again, must either be known,
by its having an objective evidence of its own; or, from the evidence of the
Scripture; If the first, that I affirm to be, as it indeed is, immediate
Revelation exparte objects. Which thing these men utterly deny in this age.
For, that secret operation, influence or impression of Gods Spirit, they will
allow to be only subjective and not objective. Which therefore, I may justly
call (as they understand it) a blind impulse, or impression; From whence
consequently, they cannot infer the certainty of the Gospels belonging to them.

If they say the evidence is from the Scripture. Then certainly it must be from
the Scriptures holding forth the Gospel universally to all, as glad tidings,
and so by consequence to them.

Because there is no Scripture that holds any such thing forth particularly as
to them, more then to others. For, as is already showed that it is held forth
as glad tidings to some, gives no man firm ground to conclude it so to him, as
one of those some.

But, waving now this principle of theirs [that immediate revelation is ceased]
(through most true it is, that there is at this day immediate revelation, and
that no man can truly apply the Gospel to himself but by immediate revelation)
yet this Argument is of great weight and force. As for example, First, it
cannot be denied that, the truth of the universal being known and believed,
is a great and comfortable, confirmation to the strengthening of men's faith in
the particular application. For, if the Gospel hold forth good will unto all
then certainly unto me. So Secondly. As I can savingly beleev the Gospel no
other way, but as held forth unto me by immediate revelation. So by this
immediate revelation, it is not any singular or particular principle that is
thus held forth unto me, but that which is the universal, the common
salvation, Viz, the Light, the word, the seed, which I sind revealed and made
manifest in me, reproving sin, in heart, word and deed, and secretly drawing me
from it, unto righteousness, which principle is revealed in me, to be the grace
of the Gospel; not, I say, as any particular principle given unto me, and not
unto others, but, as that which is universally given, and works, so to speak,
universally, answering every where; to me in others, and to others in me. And
so it is both outwardly preached, and inwardly manifested to be that universal
principle which is the grace of the Gospel. Through closing with which, peace
with the Lord is obtained. And because it is an universal principle and is so
inwardly revealed, therefore is my heart the more persuaded to close with it,
especially at first, or in my first entrance. For, coming to hear that that
which secretly reprovs for sin, and appears against it in every conscience is
the very grace of the Gospel, and finding the same thing revealed in my
particular, this is an occasion or ground for me to beleev it. Whereas, if the
principle were not universal, and that there were two principles, reproving
and convincing of sin, the one universal not saving, the other particular and
saving, I might have much reason to question, whether what I have, be the
saving and special principle or no. Thus I say. The principle being in the
first place declared, so to speak, as an universal thing, it is a great help
unto the poor soul, at its entrance, to facilitate its belief: Of which thing
I have had experience in my own particular who witnessed it revealed in me, as
universal, and so closed with it, not that I durst say that there was any
special principle revealed, or given to me; For, such was the darkness
confusion, and inclearness that was over my mind, that I could not have
distinguished it; but yet I manifestly felt in my heart that which reproved all
sin, and weighted me for it, working as fire against it. But this I knew to be
nothing but what was common to others; For the same that made me know it in my
self, made me know, and feel it in others. And now, this universal thing,
being by Gods faithful messengers preached unto me, as the very grace of the
Gospel, and the very saving Light of Jesus Christ. O! how glad tidings was it
to my soul! which closed with the truth thereof, by the secret operation of
Gods holy Spirit. And truly, in that day, I must needs say, that the greatest,
most manifest and clear prop, or ground of my faith (that was visible unto my
mind) that I had in my heart what was saving; was, even because I found in me
that little, universal, common, despised thing, the least, of all seeds, which
is at this day more precious unto my soul, and more excellent then all the
mountains of prey: seeing that was held forth to be the saving grace, which was
universal; which I found in me, answering to it in others: yea, when it was
the least of all seeds, in me, it did wonderfully answer to its self in others,
in whom it was grown up to be the greatest of all herbs, full of heavenly fruit
and virtue: and while it was yet burdened and oppressed and imprisoned in me,
it answered to the same (the same I say, for nature and kind) in others, where
it was in Dominion and perfect liberty, over all that oppressed it: whereby I
was exceedingly reached, strengthened and confirmed to believe that it was of a
saving nature, conceiving a blessed hope, that it would in due time be raised
in me, into the same Dominion, victory and liberty, that I felt it to be in, in
them; which now, in a measure, I do witness; all glory and praise be unto the
Lord for ever. So I say, feeling that universal Principle in me; and being
persuaded of the Lord that it was universally saving, I was thereby helped to
believe that it was saving in me.

And indeed, that immediate revelation by which faith at first, is usually or
commonly wrought in the heart; is not so much given in a distinct form of words
particularly saying this or that thing to the soul: as, in a manifestation of
the divine power and virtue of Gods Spirit in that little seed, which the heart
is made to feel secretly working in it, as sire, soap and water, as an hammer,
and two edged sword, as a magnet, or Load stone, drawing the heart to it self;
And thus is faith, at first, wrought by the word of God speaking forth it self
simply in power, virtue, Light and life, rather then in words; for that the
soul, being in confusion, darkness, and unacquaintedness with the way of God,
cannot so easily apprehend it, so as to discern it from an imagination, as it
can apprehend the virtue and life it self, and distinguish it from any other
thing, but afterward, when the ear is well opened and formed, words are given,
and that very distinctly heard and apprehended, which are very precious and
excellent, full of heavenly virtue and glory.

Argument. 5. From the exceeding great usefulness of this truth, in order to
the gathering of people, into the true faith of Christ: even to the universal
conversion of all Nations. As also, from the great prejudice of the contrary
Opinion, in order thereunto.
THE Scriptures Testimony is Very large and ample, that in the latter days
there shall be a very great (and so to speak) universal gathering of the
children of men; in all nations unto the faith of Jesus Christ; and that is it
which all true Christians find themselves much concerned in, to pray, travel,
and labor for, even the gathering and turning people unto the faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and that holiness, and virtue and righteousness, may spread
and abound in and among them. Now, what is more useful, and conducible to this
universal gathering; then this universal principle, and what more pernicious
and prejudicial thereunto then the contrary? hence I thus argue.

That Doctrine which is most conducive of that universal gathering and
conversion of all Nations to faith and holiness is to be embraced. And that
which is most prejudicial and impeditive of it, is to be rejected.

But this Doctrine which holds forth an universal, sufficient Evanlic principle
is most conducive etc. and the contrary most impeditive etc. Therefore,

The first proposition is so clear that nothing needs be added for proof of it.

And the second is thus proved. That Doctrine is most useful and conducive of
holiness etc. which informs unholy, and unbeleeving people universally, of a
principle given them of God through which they may come to believe, and be made
holy. And that Doctrine which not only informs people of no such thing, but
plainly denies any such principle, as to the greatest part of men; is most
prejudicial, and impeditive of holiness etc.

But so are, respectively the aforesaid Doctrines.

Therefore, etc.

And the thing is indeed, most plain, with little reasoning about it. For let
a man or company of men go forth to preach to a multitude, and bid them believe
in God and Christ, become holy righteous, and pure, and not point at, direct
them to, nor imform them of any principle, capacity or power given them,
whereby it is possible for them to come to beleev, to become holy and
righteous: yea, perpetually to be inculcating upon the minds of their hearers
in their preachments, that they, being the messengers of God, Ministers, and
Amdassadors of Christ, do certainly know, and assure them in the name of God,
that there is not only no such principle, power, or capacity given by God to
the greatest part of mankind, but that there never shall be any such given them,
from all eternity, God having of his own free will and pleasure, irrevocably
determined, never to give them any such thing, without which it is impossible
for them ever to become believers, holy, just and good men: And this because
they might remain unholy, unjust, unrighteous, and that remaining so, he might
magnify his justice in damning them for ever and ever, to endless torments
without intermission or ceasing.

Is it not apparent to the weakest understanding that this is no great, ready
or probable way, to become isntrumental to bring people to faith, holiness
etc. but really and indeed to hinder, discourage and turn them back? would not
this be as unreasonable and ridiculous, as for a Physician to come into an
hospital of sick men, and tell them, he was come to cure them, and mean while
never produce, nor direct them to any medicament that is able to cure them, but
on the contrary tell them the greatest part of them are incurable, and (to say
the right of it) though he believes several of them may be cured, yet he knows
not which of them, nor indeed certainly whether any of them, (to whom he
speaks) or no. And yet still cry upon them to be whole to be whole.

What think ye would not these poor people think this man rather a fool then
a Physician, out of his wits rather then a rational man, except they should
take him to be some scoffing varlet, that made himself merry at their misery?
and could they possibly take any delight to hear him talk, or in the least
believe that he were like to do them any good?

This is plainly the case of the national Ministers who are still crying to
their people, be holy, be holy, be righteous, be pure, who generally are in
their natural unconverted condition though they have lived all their days
under their ministry: For, these very men that thus cry to them to be holy etc.
often tell them at the same time, that there is no sufficient principle of
grace given to any one unconverted, or natural man (so far are they from
saying it is universal) whereby it is possible for him to be converted.

Pray then! what is their ministry good for! are they sufficient ministers (of
any thing but unbelief) that turn people who are in darkness to no sufficient
thing to lead them out of it? Physicians of no value they may well be called.

Surely, there is no Doctrine, more prejudicial to the setting up of Christ's
Kingdom among men, and none more advantageous for the upholding, and
propagating the devils, then this Doctrine of theirs. But they who bring the
contrary Doctrine, to the nations who ly in darkness and wickedness, as having
received it from the Lord Viz. That Christ, the Light of the world has
enlightened them, and given them a principle sufficient whereby they may be led
out of that state of darkness and wickedness, and be quickened and sanctified
unto God; These are indeed messengers of glad tidings to the nations, whose
feet are beautiful upon the Mountains: as not only bidding them be holy, but
pointing them to a principle in their own hearts whereby they may so become;
these bind no heavy burdens upon them as do those that deny this universal
principle; for what more grievous burden, then to put people upon
impossibilities!

They that bear testimony unto this universal principle, from the virtue of it
felt in their own hearts; are like unto those skillful Physicians, who coming
to a company of diseased people, should tell them of a substance hid,
underground even in their own house, that is able to cure them if found and
duly applied helping them to dig for it and informing them how they shall find,
and know it, telling them what it is, and how they are to use it; which
whosoever does, comes to be cured thereby.

By the preaching of which universal principle we can reach unto the most
Barbarous Nations, unto their convincement and conversion, this principle which
is in them, answering to the same in us, as face unto face in a glass; and so
servs for a ground and foundation unto us whereby we may be, and are encouraged
to declare unto them, the things pertaining to the faith of the Gospel: even
as the principle of Reason in men, becomes a ground and foundation for a Master
to instruct his Scholars in humane arts and sciences the proper object of
Reason, without which there would be no encouragement for Masters to take upon
them to teach any body any thing. For if there were no principle of humane
Reason in the hearers to answer to, and apprehend the things taught, they might
as well go teach the beasts of the field. Just thus it is in this matter; if
there were no divine principle of faith in the unconverted, and unbelieving, to
no purpose would it be to declare unto them the things of divine faith; there
being nothing in them that could answer to, or were susceptible of them. But
this being opened above, I shall proceed no further in it.

Yet though I say there is such a ground or foundation in all, I must not be
understood, as if I said that this foundation were laid in all: for the
foundation cannot properly be said to be laid in any, till it has obtained its
proper place, in them. Now this divine principle, which indeed is the only
ground and foundation of divine faith, and of all religion (that is truly so)
though it be in all, yet it has not got its due and proper place in all. But,
as I may say, is in many or most displaced, out of its place and order where it
ought to be, through the hearts being joined unto the contrary seed and
principle, which usurps the place and room of this divine seed and principle.
The work now of the true ministers of Christ, is, as his instruments, through
the influence of life and virtue, from this divine principle in themselves
raised, to reach unto the same in others that it may in them find and attain
its due and proper place: And this is as it were the laying of the foundation;
according to which Paul as a wise master builder, said, he had laid the
foundation in the Corinthians: which foundation, to wit, this universal
principle was in them before, but not laid in that proper, due place, that it
ought to have had in them, which he was, in his ministry, isntrumental to
bring it to. And indeed this is the great cause, why this Noble seed remains
as it were barren in so many people, to wit because it is not permitted to have
its due place in their hearts, which is as requisite to its fructifying, as it
is necessary to every other Seed to be cast into its proper place, as into its
matrix, out of which it cannot grow, and come forth to the birth. This divine
Seed therefore requires the most inwards of the heart, to cleave unto it, in
true love, and that the contrary seed be expelled, and then the seed of God
will spring up and prosper, bearing the most precious fruits of virtue and
knowledge, by and through which the hearts of people will come in due time to
receive every thing, one after another, that is of God, according to the growth
of this principle in them; so that the hearers will as readily, close, join
with, and assent unto the things declared, as the speakers can utter or express
them; life answering unto life, and light unto light in an excellent and
wonderful harmony; And indeed, this is the true and only method which should
be used by Preachers, for the bringing people in to the faith and
acknowledgment of the Christian Religion; First to inform them of this
universal principle, what it is, and turn them toward it, that they may
observe its operation in them, as it appears against the lusts of this world,
and for righteousness, and temperance: And so as wise builders, to lay this
true foundation in its proper place; and as wise husbandmen and planters to
place this divine Seed, where it ought to be in order to its growth, that it
may spring up in them, and the life, power and virtue of God in it may be felt;
And this will naturally bring people to own the Scriptures, and things therein
declared; to own Moses and the Prophets, to own the dispensation of God to the
Jews in that day; and to own Christ in the flesh, his miraculous birth, his
Doctrine, miracles, sufferings, death, resurrection, and ascension, together
with the wonderful end and design of God therein; to own the Evangelists and
Apostles, and the dispensation of life and glory through the spiritual and
inward appearance of Christ among them, in their day, which was very powerful
and excellent; and finally to own the same as it is now again revealed in this
day after the Apostasy: For this inward and universal principle bears a most
excellent concord and unity with all these, and does witness and answer unto
them, in most near and dear respects, with kissings and embracings, as it
rises or springs up in any Vessel, in the manifestation of its own life.
And thus men should be first turned toward this inward principle, light, word,
and seed of the Kingdom, which being in them, and they coming to feel it there,
they may the more readily be persuaded to own and believe it. And as they come
so to join to it, that it springs up in them in the light and glory thereof,
they will see and feel the Scriptures, and the things therein declared, to be
of God, and will taste, relish and savor them, in the life of this divine seed.
And this is good method and order in the preaching of the Gospel. So that
evident it is, though it be ordinarily objected, that the Quakers, so called,
have no method; that we have the best and only true method in our words and
writings, as has been declared, first to turn people to the light that they
may believe it, which finding in them, they can the more easily do: and then
to direct them to, and inform them of the Scriptures, and things therein
declared; which they cannot receive, beleev, or understand, but in the divine
light. But to come to the Nations, that have not, nor do own, the Scriptures
and but few of the things therein declared, and press them to beleev the
Scriptures, and own them as the words and oracles of God in the first place,
without first directing them to the great word and oracle of God in their own
hearts, in that to beleev and receiv them, in which alone they can be truly and
duly received, is most contrary unto the true method and order of the Gospel,
and against all true method and order held in the knowledge of things natural,
which always proceeds from the more known to the less: And begins at such a
principle or principles, as makes way for the receiving other things that are
more remote. And, to speak the truth, hence it is, even for want of this true
order in preaching of the Gospel that men have had so little success hitherto:
nor can they rationally expect better, till they come to this method and order,
which the Lord has taught and given us, and in the use of which we have found
the large blessing of the Lord, in the wonderful success that it has had
among people and the Lord will, we know it, continue to bless it, to the
gathering of all the nations of the earth to the knowledge of himself, which
shall cover the earth as the waters cover the sea.

Amen.
Argument. 6. From the discovery of the Nature of this universal principle of
light, which our Adversaries grant to be in every man, but deny to be saving.
HEre our Adversaries are not a little at odds among themselves, the greater
part of the National, and Congregationall teachers, whether Prelaticall,
Presbyteriall, Independent or Baptists do affirm this universal light, which
they all confess to be in all men, to be only a Natural light, or light of,
and proceeding from man's own nature. Others among them, grant it to be a light
Supernatural, but only given to most men to leave them without excuse, and
aggravate their condemnation, being but common grace and insufficient to their
salvation.

Others, that agree with the Arminians and Papists in this point* do acknowledge
it not only to be supernatural, but given of God to all men in order to
salvation; and consequently having a tendency, though remote, thereunto, in so
far that they say, that whosoever do improve this light or grace universal,
and are faithful thereunto, shall certainly obtain from God grace
Evangelicall, whereby they may besaved: so that they do not acknowledge this
universal Grace, to be the Very grace Evangelicall; or Gospel grace, but
only a certain supernatural grace, which, if improved, loadeth thereunto.

But we, in opposition to all these Opinionists do aver this universal grace,
to be that very Evangelicall, Gospel and saving grace and not another, through
which, it being closed with in faith and love, salvation is obtained.

Hence then it may appear, how unjustly and unreasonably most of the national
teachers and others, do charge us with agreeing with the Papists and Arminians
in this weighty point. For, how do we agree with them while they deny, and we
affirm it to be the very grace of the Gospel, and object of the faith thereof?

But say they: ye agree with them in the general, in that you, as well as
they, say, that this grace is both universal, and sufficient in order to
salvation.

To this I answer, that we may by the like inference charge them of agreeing in
general with the Pelagians against whom they do so much cry out, For Pelagius,
as well as they, and they as well as he, do affirm this universal principle to
be no other then man's own nature, and the light and power thereof; and so in
general they agree as much with the Pelagians, as we with Papists and
Arminians.

Now its (...) Pelagius said that men might attain unto Justification by it,
although he judged, it to be but the Light of a man's own nature; which these
men deny, and so do differ in special. As we also do from Papists and
Arminians. And thus as we do agree with them in some remote general on the one
hand, so do they in opposition to us on the other hand. For, they (with the
Papists and Arminians) do deny this to be grace Evangelicall, averring it to be
some other thing.

But that the nature of this universal principle may be discovered, we are to
observe that it is generally acknowledged that this universal principle, is a
witness in every man's conscience and heart (and that perpetually and
unchangeably) unto temperance and righteousness, as things pleasing unto God:
and against intemperance and unrighteousnes as contrary and displeasing to him.
Yea they further grant that disobedience unto this principle in every man,
which t^cheth sobriety and righteousness, is a sin against God, and to be
punished eternally, if not repented of and forgiven. From this concession then,
it is evident, that this universal principle is pure and incorrupt in the
nature of it: because it is a perpetual and unchangeable witness in man against
unrighteousness, and could never be biased, nor bribed so as to give way or
consent unto men's doing unrighteously, or speak peace to them therein; but still
reproves and witnesses against it: Which, were it impure or corrupt it might
and doubtless would do. Again, seeing disobedience against it, is sin against
God, it must certainly be the Law of God. And if it be the Law of God it must
be pure and divine. For it cannot be supposed that ever God did or shall
require men to obey any Law that is not of him or that is impure and corrupt.
More over all unrighteousness and intemperance is impure, therefore that which
witnesses against, and is contrary unto it, is pure.

Hence I thus argue. That Principle which is pure and incorrupt, is not man's own
nature, neither of, or proceeding from the same.

But this universal principle is pure and incorrupt as has been shown.

Therefore etc.

The first proposition is evident from this, That man's own nature, by the fall
was not only in part, but wholly corrupted and defiled by transgression, as our
adversaries grant, therefore, seeing this principle is pure and incorrupt, it
cannot be man's own nature nor proceeding therefrom. For that which is pure
cannot proceed from that which is impure, a corrupt fountain cannot send forth
pure water; nor an evil tree bring forth good fruit.

By the force now of this Argument are many convinced that this universal
principle is really supernatural, but then they deny it to have any infallible
tendency to salvation, how much so ever it be improved, for that it is not a
gift or grace given (say they) to man, de novo, or of a new, after the fall,
universally for his salvation; but some Remnant, or Relick of that
supernatural light, which God gave Adam before the sall: which still remains
in all men, since the fall; like a little spark of fire among the ashes, or in
the ruins of a house burnt down. And so, though man's nature be wholly
corrupted, yet, this being supernatural remains therein incorrupt, retaining
its own primitive purity, not being defiled with, but witnessing against, and
reproving the corruption of man's nature, and man's nature in it.

If we should now ask; seeing its pure in the nature of it, how comes, it to be
unable to purify man's nature? and save it from its impurity? was it not
purifying, and saving in its nature before the fall; and if so, is it not
saving and purifying after the fall?

If it be said, it nor does nor can save and purify man's corrupt nature,
because of its being so weak and small, being only a very small remnant or
Relict of what man had before the fall. To this I reply and say.

Answ. That this very Answer then, grants it to be still of a saving nature, in
so much that if it save not this or that man, in whom it is; it is not any
defect in the nature, but only in the degree or quantity of it. But others
that foresee the consequence of this concession, will not allow it. For if it
be saving in the nature of it, though it be the least of all seeds, yet it may
save, as Christ compared the true seed of Regeneration unto a Very little thing,
even the least of all seeds.

But that they say this universal pricciple is only some relict of that
supernatural Light which Adam had before the fall, and nothing de novo, or of
a new superadded, is not to be granted. For, if by supernatural Light they
understand the image of God in man, that image did wholly dye, and the light
thereof become wholly extinguished and so the image remained indeed in man, but
as a dead body without life, or as a candle whose light is blown out and
extinguished, for the Lamb was slain from the foundation of the world, and, by
the fall, Christ came to be crucified, in man, Viz. according to the life of
the expressed word, which being crucified, he is said to be crucified, though
according to the life of the word as it is immanent or dwelling in God, (and
not externally emanant or expressed in man) he could never suffer or be
crucified. And thus, as that supernatural principle became crucified in man
through the fall, the light thereof came to be wholly extinguished, for the
light proceeds from the life.

An example whereof we have in every natural thing which lives. Which, so
soon as they are slain, or mortified, send forth no more virtue, till quickened
again. And thus a live coal after it is killed, gives no more light, till it
be revived again by somewhat that is living administered and communicated de
novo to it.

That supernatural light then, which is in all men since the fall, is not any
relict, as aforesaid, but some what given of a new to quicken and enlighten the
dead body of the divine image, and (thereby and there through) the soul of
man, which only can live unto God and be a partaker of his life, through that
life which he breaths into this slain image, in which man only has fellowship
with God, according to which man was made in the beginning, and because of
which he excelled all the other visible creatures, for that this divine image
expressed, or breathed Concerning this image of God in man, or Breath of life
breathed into man, by which he became a living soul, see the Testimonies of the
Ancients, especially of Athanasius, Cyrillus Alexandrinus. Proc^pius Gazaus,
etc. some of which may possibly be given at the end of this book.
into him whereby he became a living soul, i. e. did partake of a life that in
the very nature and kind of it, excelled the life of all other Visible
creaturs, which did represent God, and give the knowledge of him, unto man, so
far as he was capable of it.

Now, in the last place we have to do with Arminians, and Papists who deny
this universal principle to be the grace Evangelicall, and consequently that
the true seed of Regeneration is sown in every man: which is sufficiently
refuted from what has been said.

For, if this Light or principle be given a new to quicken and raise up the
divine image which dyed, and was slain by man's fall, what can it be but the true
seed of Regeneration? For, any other principle would be altogether
Heterogeneous, and so could not serve to quicken or raise it up. Let also the
many excellent Scripture proofs adduced and opened in the 2 Section, and elce
where, be but well weighed and considered, and it will plainly appear, that the
grace they declare of, is truly Evangelicall, being called the word of faith,
and the Gospel Rom, 10: 8. v. 16. compared, and Colossians. 1. 23. 27. As also
John 1. 9. 7. etc. where its called the true light which lights every man that
comes into the world, that all through him might believe etc.

SECTION III. The objections of any seeming weight answered.
Object. 1. Natural and unconverted men are said Ephesians: 5. 8. to be darkness,
how then can saving light be in them?

Answ. It may be in them notwithstanding in a seed as well as darkness, by your
own principles, is said to be in the Saints so long as they are in this body,
who yet, are in that place said to be Light in the Lord. Why may not then as
well light be in them that are called darkness, as darkness, according to your
principles, be in them that are called Light in the Lord! yea, it must have
been in them while darkness, or they could never have been brought out of that
state, to be light in the Lord: for, it is by the shining of the true light, in
such, that those that resist not its operation, come to be so changed.

Object. 2. All men have not faith: therefore all men have not saving light.

Answ. I deny the consequence. For faith is the effect of this saving light
only in those that resist not its meek and gentle operation, not in those that
resist it, for in them it produces, not faith, but condemnation: so, we grant
all men have not faith, hope, love, nor any of those blessed effects and
Virtues of the spirit mentiond, Galat. 5. 22. 23. which the Saints alone, or
the converted only; have but this hinders not but that all might have them,
the seed (which would bring forth these fruits in them, did they not oppress
it) being in them.

Object. 3. Some are said Jude. 19. Not to have the spirit. Therefore such have
no saving light.

Answ. The word [have] has various significations, sometimes it signifyes
possession, enjoyment, union, and thus all have not the spirit. Yea, thus none
but the Saints have it. Other whiles it signifies the presence, or in-being of
the Spirit in men, according to that influence of light and life, which
prepares for union and enjoyment; and thus, all men have the spirit so long as
the day of their Visitation remains.

Object. 4. It Is said the World cannot receive the spirit of truth, because it
sees him not neither knows him. Therefore etc.

Answ. The same answer servs: For, the word[receive]as well as[have] is of
Various acceptations. Thus the World can neither receive nor know the spirit of
truth, as to union, possession and fruition of it. But the world, that is,
worldly, natural, carnal men may receive the spirit according to that
influence which prepares for union etc. for, many a wordly and natural man
has become a child of God; But how could any man witness such a change, but by
receiving the word and spirit of truth, while natural and carnal? as its
said, as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God;
By which receiving here, is understood believing, but there is a more general
receiving of the Spirit by which unbeleevers may come to believe, and so become
the Sons of God who were not.

Object. 5. Unconverted men are said to be without God and without Christ in
the World.

And Romans 18. 10. Its said If Christ be in you the body is dead etc. Therefore
Christ is not in all, nor any of the unconverted in a saving way.

Answ. The former answer suffices here again, Christ is not in the unconverted
by faith, by union, and enjoyment etc. this being the proper state, of the
Saints. But he is in them according to that in-being and presence which by his
influence upon them prepares for union etc. For how is elce any unconverted
man, ever converted, but by the in-being of Christ, and his coming to them
while unconverted? he visits men while in spiritual Egypt, and coms unto them
in that state, to lead them out of it, but many do not follow him: as the words
of Christ do most plainly import. I am the light of the world he that follows
me shall not abide in darkness but etc.

So, some follow, and some follow not, yea, he said to the very unbeleevers,
while ye have the light beleve in it. Jo. 12. 36. And the slothful servant is
said to have RECEIVED his Talent. Though he hid it in the Earth, according to
which Christ said, from him that has not shall be taken away that which he
has. How could he be said to have received it; and how could he again be said
not to have it, if the words [have, and receive] did not admit of Various
significations?

Object. 6. Its said, the natural man receivs not the things of the spirit of
God etc. neither can he know them. Therefore etc.

Answ. The things which the Apostle here speaks of, are relative to the things
mentiond 1 Cor. 2. 9. which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man which God has prepared for them that love him;
which things (Viz. the peace and joy of the holy Ghost, and sweet fellow ship
of the Saints with God, and things thereunto pertaining) the natural man, or
man in his natural state receives not, nor can he, so much as know them; And
what wonder! while he is in a state incapable of them. But; there are other
things, and those of God too, which they may receiv and know, Viz. the things
of his Judgment, qualified with mercy, which are preparatory to their
conversion and restoration, which are proper to their state and condition. But
the conditions of the Saints, and things thereunto appertaining none can know,
till they come to be Saints themselves. And then they will have an eye to see,
and heart to understand even those deep things of God.

Object. Its said unto the Saints Heb. 10. 32. after ye were enlighted, ye
endured a great fight of afflictions, which imports that once they were not,
and only the Saints are enlightened.

Answ. No such matter, it only denotes a two fold, enlightening, and that the
unconverted are not so, or in that sense, said to be enlightened as the Saints.
For there are diversity of illuminations, ministrations and operations, but one
spirit, one word, one power, one saving light and grace, common to, and working
in, all, according to their respective states and conditions. Thus the Saints
are enlightened to see and know the things proper to their state, and others to
see and know the things proper to theirs, but not the conditions, attain ments
and enjoyments, of which at presen they are utterly incapable, being only
capable of knowing their own conditions, and things that are preparatory, and
of tendency to their sanctification, or becoming Saints.

Object. Christ says, he prays not for the world, therefore he does not
savingly enlighten them.

Answ. The word [World] is either understood relatively, as a society and
fellowship of men whose Government, Dominion and course of life, is directly
contrary to the Government, Dominion, and way of Christ, and the course of life
and conversation of his Saints. And thus the world, and the Church, are
diametrically opposite to each other. So that in this sense Christ prays not
for the world; for that were to pray for the upholding and continuance of
wickedness, which is, as it were the band which knits the World together into a
body incorporate against Christ. But this, nor he nor his do pray for but
against.

Or the [world] is singly understood, of men living in the world in a natural
condition, and thus he prays for them that they may be converted and believe
as John 17. 21. and he prayed for his enemies, when he suffered upon the cross.

But they say. If he prayed for the world, then the whole world should be
converted, for the Father hears him always.

Answ. He prays for the world in a submission to the will of God, who wills
all men to be saved, not absolutely, but in relation to their believing, by
which will of God to save them, all men are visited, with such an hour and
power of the love, mercy and grace of God, that they may believe; And for this
Christ prayed, and all the Saints do pray; even for all men, that they may be
more and more so visited, for this is good and acceptable unto God. 1 Timothy 2:
1, 2, 3, 4.

Object. 9. Christ dyed not for all men therefore, etc.

Answ. I may well form the contrary Argument, Christ dyed for all men,
therefore he has savingly enlightened them. For, that Christ dyed for all, is
most expressly affirmed. 2 Cor. 5. 2. Hebr. 2: 9. compared with 1 Timothy 2: 6.

But say they, the word [all] is here to be taken not for singula generum, but
genera singulorum, i. e. not for every particular, but for some of all sorts.

Answ. For the refutation of this fond fancy I refer the reader to the above
Arguments, espetially to Argument 1. 5. 7. Page 12. 31. 32. 38. 39. Where it is
at large proved that by [all] is to be understood all particulars.

But they further Object, If Christ had dyed for all, then all should be
justified and saved, or elce his death would be in vain and of no effect unto
many. And Romans 8: 34. its said who is he that condemns; it is Christ that
dyed.

Answ. We say not, nor ever did, that all the benefits of Christ's death come
upon all, for the benefits of Christ's death are many, whereof some come only
upon some, others upon all. Viz. Justification and the things accompanying it
do come only upon them that believe, but the free gift or grace is come upon
all, not whereby all are actually justified, but whereby they might believe and
be justified. Nor does the unbeleef of some make the death of Christ of none
effect; For it has its effect to render them without excuse, as guilty of the
body and blood of Christ.

And thus is that other cavil answered, If God willed all men to besaved, then
his will should be ineffectuall, because many are not saved.

For God wills not all to be saved absolutely, but conditionally (ex part
Objecti) upon their believing. And whereas it is again by them objected.

Either God wills them to believe absolutely, or conditionally.

Answ. We say conditionally. Yet not so, as if God required any thing to be
done by them previous to their believing. But upon their non-resistence of his
operation when he works in them. For, when the Lord appears in that divine
seed, which he has sown in all men, to produce in them the very act of
believing and to draw the will of man along with him to concur therein, some do
resist even when their bands are so far released that they might yield. Thus we
say that God wills all men to believe, upon their non-resistence of him when
he works in them, to the producing faith; which is a being passive, and not
active. For, before faith they cannot be active to any thing that is good.
Hosea 11: 4.

Object. 10. This doctrine seems to hold forth that all men even the
unconverted have free will, whereas according to the Scriptures testimony, all
unconverted men are in bondage and captivity so that they cannot do the things
that are good.

Answ. Any freedom that men wholly unconverted may be said to have, must be
understood passively not actively. For indeed, in that state they cannot act
that which is good, but they can forbear to resist that which works in them
toward their conversion.

And yet even this passive freedom., is not of or from themselves, but of and
from the Grace of God.

But some will perhaps infer from hence that they have an active freedom
because believing is a being active, and according to your Doctrine (say they)
they may believe.

Answ. None can believe, but as faith is wrought in them, by the operation of
the Spirit of God, in his own seed, by which, they not resisting it, faith
would certainly be begot in them. And in this sense it may be truly said they
may or can beleev. And though the soul be truly active in its faith
afterward, yet, at its first believing, it may rather be said to be passive
then active. For, what is its first believing, but a suffering the seed of
faith to cleave unto, and unite with it? And thus the first step of believing
in Christ, is called a receiving him, which may be taken passively. Now, at the
souls first believing, it receivs power to be active, and to act, from a free
will, that which is good: which freedom it does not receive all at once, but
it grows in the soul, according as its faith grows, which begins in a
very small thing; nor can the soul believe, at all times, but only at such
times, as the Lord by his Spirit, in his own seed, breaths and movs upon the
heart.

Object. 11. By this Doctrine, it seems that the reason why one man is
converted, and another not, is to be imputed unto man himself and so he should
make himself to differ from another, contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostle,
1. Cor. 4. 7.

Answ. No such thing. The reason being always to be imputed to the principal
cause, which is God: and man, at best, but the instrument in his own
conversion, whatsoever he does so, as an instrument, it is all from God, and
not of himself: So that, as for him, the difference is to be imputed to God,
for man neither has nor does any good, but what he has received from him.

Object. None have saving Light and Grace, but the Elect, all others being, by
God, passed by and reprobated from all eternity.

Answ. That there is a decree of election and reprobation, and that from
everlasting, we grant, but in another sense then the National teachers do
assert it The understanding whereof the Lord by his spirit has given us; on
this wise.

There are two seeds one elect, and of God, the other Reprobate and of the
Devil, the divine seed, which is elect, is that seed of which we have said,
that God has sown it in every man that comes in to the world, who so now
cleave to this elect seed, in true faith, and persevere so to do, to the end of
the day of their trial and temptation, these are the elect of God, who are
chosen of him before the foundation of the world, as fore knowing, and fore
seeing them in unity with this seed, which is Christ, in whom they are
therefore said to be chosen Ephesians.

The reprobate seed, is that seed of darkness and unrighteousness in men, which
is of the Devil. They now which cleave thereunto, and continue in unity
therewith till the day of their visitation from the Lord expire, they are the
Reprobate, whom God from everlasting did fore know, would reject his elect, and
cleav unto this Reprobate seed, to the very end of their day, and so
accordingly did reprobate them.

Thus then, though the decree of Election and Reprobation be from everlasting,
yet it respects men, not simply as men, but as finally adhering and cleaving,
to the elect or reprobate seed.

So that, none are at first passed by, but all are once visited, with a day of
mercy and grace, wherein it is possible for them to be saved.

But this their odd Doctrine, that God has altogether passed by all those that
perish, without ever making salvation, so much as, possible to them, they
endeavor to prove from these Scriptures. Romans 8: 29. Romans 9. Act. 13: 48. Jud.
4. John. 6: 37. Which Scriptures they woefully wrest, and wring to that purpose,
as I shall show in the vindication of each of them.

And first, to the first; Romans 8: 29, 30. From whence they would infer, that
none are called, with a call sufficient to salvation but who are predestinat,
and justified, because the Apostle says, for whom he did predestinat, them he
called, and whom he called them ho did Justify, etc. Ergo none are called, Viz.
Sufficiently, etc. But who are Justified.

Answ. There is a more general call, whereby unconverted are called unto faith
and renovation; And there is a more special call and Vocation, proper only
unto the converted, whereby they are called unto the glorious liberty of the
children of God; being called the Sons and Daughters of the living God: and so,
called unto such things as do pertain to such a state: of which calling, many
Scriptures do speak, as Romans 9. 26. Ephesians. 4. 1. 4. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Hebr. 9. 15.
Jud. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 10. of which special calling this place by them adduced, is
to be understood; For, whom he predestined, them did he thus call his people,
the children of the living God, his Sons and Daughters, and all these he
justified.

Yet, according to that General call, many are called, who are not
predestinate; for its said many are called, but few are chosen. Yea I have
already proved that all are called by God, in their day^, and to say that God
calls any insufficiently, is to reflect both upon his goodness, power and
righteousness.

The next Scripture they lay violent hands on is Romans 9. Where, they say, its
said Jacob have I loved and Esau have I hated, before the children were born
etc.

Answ. 1. There Is no such thing said there, nor any where elce; but those words
[Jacob have I loved and Esau have I hated] are by the Apostle cited out of
Malachy 1. 2. 3. Which were spoken long after the children were borne, and
gone. And all that the Apostle says, that was said before the children were
borne, is only, the Elder shall serve the younger.

2. Though the decree of God concerning them was not only before their birth
but (as has been said) from everlasting. Yet it did not respect, as its
Object, Jacob and Esau simply, before they were born: but as born, and having a
day of visitation given them; the one Jacob, as seeking after and obtaining the
elect seed, signified by the birth right; the other Esau, as rejecting and
despising it, till the time, of finding it was elapsed, and then though he
sought it, and that withtears, he could not find it.

3. The Apostle does plainly signify this whole matter of Jacob and Esau, to be
a figure, signifying that the Election runs not in a carnal line, as the Jews
apprehended, as if they were elected because descended of Jacob, and others
reprobated; to give check now to this carnal conceit, the Apostle shows that it
does not run in any line of carnal generation, but in that of Spiritual
regeneration. Verse 7. 8. In Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is, says he
(opening the thing signified by the figure) they which are the children of the
flesh, are not the children of God; but the children of the promise (i. e. who
are born of that elect and divine seed) are counted for the seed. And thus
Jacob in the figure represents all believers, that are born of the elect seed:
And Esau all others.

Now, to Jacob and his posterity was given the promised Land, which signifies
the kingdom of heaven, which is given to the truly regenerate. But Esau and
his posterity are shut out unto the wast and desolate mountains; signifying the
outer darkness into which the children of unrighteousness are cast. Yet this
does not prove that either Esau himself or all his posterity were absolutely
rejected of God. Yea diverse Protestants as Luther, Oecolampadius and Mollerus,
do not concede that Esau himself did perish but was rather saved.

They urge again Verse 15. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy etc. as
being Paul's answer to that Objection, is there unrighteousness with God? From
whence they infer, that God has not mercy upon all, but upon some only.

Answ. These words relate not, to men's first coming into the world, but unto a
time after which the much long suffering of God, was extended unto them, which
they despising, and resisting, do provoke the Lord, to withdraw his mercy from
them, and yet perhaps visit others with his mercy, after as much or more
provocation, and never leave them till he has gained them to himself, which is
a wonderful discrimination of the free love of God. And thus, after a time of
gracious visitation, though never so small; he may have mercy upon some, to
give them yet a longer time, and yet not have mercy upon others, so as to give
them any longer time of forbearance or repentance; which is no unrighteousness
with God; but a very clear demonstration both of his righteousness and mercy.

They urge again Verse 17. For this cause have I raised thee up, meaning
Pharaoh, that I might show my power in thee, which was for his destruction.

Answ. It is not said, for this cause I raised thee up from the beginginning;
without giving thee any time of mercy, and long suffering, wherein thou might
have repented. Nay, its plain it relates to the time of Pharoahs great
provocation.

Lastly they urge from this Chapter Verse 21. etc. Has not the power potter
over the clay, etc.

Answ. The Apostle alleges this example to clear the righteousness of God, by
reasoning from the lesser to the greater thus: If the Potter may do so with the
clay, much more the Lord do so with men, i. e. have more abundant mercy upon
some, and appoint others unto destruction, after he has endured them with much
long suffering, and given them space and place for repentance, wherein salvation
was possible to them: Peter testifying, that the long suffering of God is
salvation, i. e. tends thereunto, as Paul also testifyeth saying the riches
of his for bearance leads to repentance, which yet some despised. It is also
said, that Iesebell had given unto her space to repent, etc. But repented not
and so have others neglected the space and day given them.

So that the Lord deals not altogether with men, as the Potter with the clay;
for the clay being a substance, void of sense and Reason, inanimate, and
incapable of all sense of honor or dishonor; the potter may use it as he
pleases any way. But men being capable of reason and understanding, and
consequently of righteousness and unrighteousness, the Lord deals with them
only in such ways, as may be answered by the very testimony in their own
consciences, that his ways toward them are ways both of mercy and
righteousness, as is already demonstrated, so that not only the righteousness
of God, but his very mercy shall condemn the reprobate, because they have
sinned against the mercy of the Lord and rejected it; and so become vessels of
dishonor. The Lord dishonouring them, because they have dishonourd him,
through unbeleef and impenitence.

Another Scripture which they press into their service, is, Act. 13: 48. And
as many as were ordained to eternal life believed.

Answ. The words may be translated thus; And who ever (or as many as) believed,
were ordained unto eternal life, or ordered or placed into eternal life. But,
although, the common translation should be admitted, it provs not what they
intend.

For we grant, that as whoever believe are ordained to eternal life so whoever
are ordained unto eternal life do believe: which hinders not but that others
may have had a day of visitation wherein it was possible for them to have
beleed, but God did fore know that they would not beleev and so de did not
predestinate them to life.

Another place they call to their assistance is, Jude 4. which speaks of some
which were before, of old, ordained unto condemnation.

Answ. We grant that some are ordained from old unto condemnation, but say, its
for their unbeleef turning the grace of God into Wantonness etc. as Jude there
speaks.

Another place they build upon, is Jo. 6. 37. which says, all that the father
gives me, shall come; whence they would infer, that none can come unto
Christ, but who are given him, that is who are elected, and they all shall.

Answ. There is a more General giving, and so all men, yea all things are
given unto Christ. Matthew. 11. 27. Jo. 3. 35. and there is a more special
giving, which is only applicable to the Saints. Who are his children, and
these cannot but come unto him, as Peter said Lord to whom shall go but unto
thee? etc.

There are other places urged by them, but these adduced are the most usual,
and the answers given unto them, will, being rightly applied, suffice to any
other; so that, who judge of this matter according to the witness of God in
their hearts, and do therein, ponder the Scriptures, will find the Doctrine of
the National Teachers, concerning Election and Reprobation, not to be
according to the truth nor Scripturall; but indeed a most pernicious Doctrine
to the hindering of the growth and spreading of piety in the world, as may
appear from what is already said;

I shall now descend to weigh the few small Reasons they have, and usually
give, for their adhering to so absurd an Opinion.

First then, they say, if election be according to faith foreseen, then it is
not free.

Answ. It follows not at all, for election is free, though it be not without
respect to faith, even as justification is free, which themselves say is not
without respect to faith. They must then either deny justification to be free,
or say that it has no respect to faith, or confess that election is, free not
withstanding its respect to faith.

Secondly they argue, if Election and reprobation be according to faith
foreseen, then something in the creature was the moving cause of Gods decree.

Answ. Nor does this follow. For, though men believing, be the object of the
decree of Election, yet they are not the moving cause thereof: in like manner
men unbeleeving are the object, but not moving cause of reprobation. Unbeleef
is indeed a cause of the Destruction of the wicked, which destruction is
decreed, so is also faith an isntrumental cause of the salvation of the
Saints, which is also decreed, but not of the decree of God, which has no
cause, without himselfs. And by these Answers any other reasons they bring may
be confuted.

Object. 13. If saving grace andilight were given unto all, then all should be
saved, otherwise grace were not effectual, as not having its efficacy.

Answ. It follows not; grace is effectual, and has its sufficient efficacy,
in that in its own nature it is able to save all, who do not resist it, even as
Physic may be very effectual, to cure such and such diseases, if duly
applied, and yet if it be not permitted to have its due operation, it may not
only not cure, but kill. But more over, grace has its efficacy in all, in
that it makes all inexcusable, who do resist it, and persist in their
gainstauding. And thus, it tends to the glory of God in their condemnation.

But say some, a moral suasion is sufficient to leave men without excuse.

Answ. I deny it. For, nothing can render men unexcusable, but that, which
being improved can excuse, which no moral suasion can do.

Object. 14. Saving light and grace is irresistible therefore it must have its
effect to salvation.

Answ. That the Lord may work irresistibly in some, we deny not, but that he
does so work, in all that are or may be saved, is the mere brainsick fancy of
these men, and contrary to the tenor of the whole Scriptures, which complain of
men's resisting the holy Ghost. withstanding the truth, holding it under in
unrighteousness, crucifying the Lord of glory in themselves, doing despite unto
the Spirit of Grace, oppressing and choking the good seed etc.

What is more effectual then the sun, and then fire, unto which Christ, the
word of grace and true light is compared? yet, what more easily resisted then
the light of the sun, without all pains, by the bare wink of the ey. And fire,
though suffered to break out to a flame can be quenched. To diverse other
natural and powerful causes which have efficacy enough in them to procur
their proper effects, if not impeded, is this word of grace compared.

Object. 15. Its said of some that they could not believe Jo. 12. 39. Ergo etc.

Answ. True; but no where is it said that from the begininng they could not
believe. Yea, the very reason why they could not at that time believe is
expressly rendered by Matthew. 13. 13. because they had closed their eyes and in
seeing did not see; for which cause the Lord, being provoked, gave them up (read
v. 14. 15.) to hardness of heart that they could not believe.

Object. 16. God so hardened Pharoahs heart that he could not obey the Lord, and
let the people go.

Answ. True again, but where is it said that Pharoahs heart was so hardened from
the beginning of the time that he was capable of understanding? no where.

Pharaoh had provoked the Lord by his cruel oppressing the Israelites, and
causing their male children to be killed a just provocation of the Lord thus to
give him up to obduracy of heart, so that he could not obey. Now, we never said
that all men may believe and obey the Lord, at all times, but only at such
times and seasons as the Lord breaths and moves upon them within the day of
their visitation.

Object: 17. Its said of the People of Israel Deuteronomy. 29. 4. The Lord has not
given you a heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear etc. Therefore
he had not given them all, saving light and grace.

Answ. It follows not; for the perceiving heart, seeing eyes, hearing ears, are
the effect of this saving light and grace, only in those, in whom it is not
resisted.

Now, God had given his good Spirit to instruct them. Nehem. 9: v. 20. but they
rebelled against and vexed his holy Spirit, Isayah. 63: verse. 10.

But some would fain limit these words only to those who prophesied, or at
least to the faithful, unto whom God gave his good Spirit to in struct the
people, which they rebelled against, not in themselves, but in the faithful who
did instruct them.

Answ. This cannot be, for it had been to no purpose to give his good Spirit
unto the teachers to instruct the people, if no measure of the same had been
given to the people to learn.

For, as none can sufficiently teach the things of God, without the Spirit, so
can none can truly learn them without it. Again, so far as any man resists the
Spirit of God in another, he first resists it in himself: yea, it is said
expressly they tempted God in their hearts Psa. 78. verse 18. And it is already
proved that the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal.

Object. 18. Some are said to have no light in them Isayah 8. 20.

Answ. According to the Hebrew, even as the margent intimates, it is thus,
because they have no morning in them. Now, its true all have not the morning
light in them which imports the day star to be arisen; but with many it is as
it were midnight for darkness, yet the light shines in this darkness, even as
the darkest night has some light, and that from the sun at least by the
reflection of its beams.

Object. 19. Its said Matthew. 6. 23. If thine ey be evil thy whole body shall be
full of darkness, if therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great
is that darkness?

That it is said the whole body is full of darkness where the eye is evil,
(that is, where the heart is false) hinders not, but that the true saving
light, in a seed, may be in that body: according to the very concession of our
adversaries; who (although it besaid if the Eye be single the wholly body is
full of Light) do earnestly contend that the most single hearted and best of
all the Saints that ever lived upon the earth, have still some darkness in
them, in a seed.

And more over, the word in, in this place, signifies, as in other places,
union, enjoyment, etc. Now, most certain it is, that all that which men of
corrupt minds do take for their light, rule and guide, so as there with to
unite and thereby to be lead, is but Light falsely so called, and real
darkness. For, there is a generation that call real darkness light and true
light darkness, to whom the day of the Lord is said to be darkness, Amos 5: 18.
against whom the Spirit and true light pronounces a Woe.

That Christ here speaks of the woeful state of such people is plain whose
light is darkness: For it is utterly impossible that the true light, even in
its least measure, should really be darkness. The light then which is darkness
(in whomsoever upon the face of the earth) is not the true light, but a false
thing by them taken on, and set up in them, instead of the true light, as the
most pleasant thing to the blinded eyes of their minds. But what does this
hinder but that the true light may be in them, a reprover and condemner of
them, and their false light? which because they join not to nor improve it,
is, as it were, not in them, but in order to their further condemnation, as it
is written Jo. 3. 19. Yea, that the true and saving light has been in them,
whose body was full of darkness, and ey evil, is most palpably evident from
this. That the Light indeed in them as they were turned toward it by the
Ministry of Gods faithful servants, has proved an eye salve, to make the eye
single, which was evil; by which in process of time the darkness has been
wrought out and dispelled, and the soul and its body filled with light, as the
bright shining of a candle gives light to the eyes, as it is written. Luke 11.
36.

Object. 20. Its said Jo. 5. 37. 38. Ye have neither heard his voice, nor seen
his shape at any time. And ye have not his word abiding in you.

Answ. That Is the voice by which he speaks unto his children, which is full
of heavenly sweetness, joy and refreshment, which is spoke from mount Sion;
which comes after the wind, the fire and the Earthquake etc. But there is also
a voice from mount Sinai, which is a voice of reproof, and correction, of
judgment and condemnation, which yet has some mercy, as it were, secretly in
it, whereby God speaks unto all men both Jews and Gentiles, as it is Ps. 50.
1. The mighty God even the Lord has spoke, and called the earth from the
rising of the sun to the going down thereof. And Romans 10. 18. have they not
heard? yes Verily etc.

And so, according to the various states and conditions of men, the Lord has
diverse voices whereby he speaks unto them, and they as men, have an ear to
hear. And this voice the Lord forms or frames suitable to the ear he speaks
to. Now the Saints and children of God, have an ear and ey formed in them, in
the divine birth, which others have not: yet God can speak unto them according
to the ear which they have. Deus loquitur lingua filiorum hominum. i. c. God
speaks in the language of the Sons of men. Yea, he has a voice whereby he
speaks unto the most unsensible creaturs, so as that they obey him. Thus has
the Lord also, a special, peculiar, and singular way of manifesting himself
unto the Saints, by them to be seen, in his image raised and formed in them;
which may be called his shape. And thus none but such can see him. Yet he
makes his invisible things, even his eternal power and Godhead clearly to be
seen, in some measure, even by them who believe not, so that they are without
excuse. And, whereas its said that they have not his word abiding in them. That
is, not springing up, and bringing forth fruit in them; as a seed which being
sown in the earth is not permitted to take root in it, by reason of some
impediment, and so, is not said to abide in it: for the word [abide] signifies
union as Jo. 15. 3. Abide in me, i. e. keep in union with me etc. otherwise the
word was nigh unto them, in their mouth and in their heart Romans 10.

Object. 21. This universal Light, can lead no further then heathenish
morality, i. e. moral righteousness of temperance, and justice between man and
man, and therefore is not a saving and Evangelicall Light. Other such
objections also there are, that may fitly be taken in here. As, that it cannot
discover all sin; nor the root of sin, called original sin; nor the remedy
Viz. the Lord Jesus Christ, nor the right way of worshipping God. Ergo not
saving. And all this they think they sufficiently demonstrate, when they say;
the Gentiles that had not the Gospel outwardly preached to them, know no more
but heathenish morality as being Idolaters and worshipping false Gods, or the
true God in a false way.

Answ. This is a miserable way of concluding, void of all reason; to argue from
the nonexistence of the effect to the non sufficiency or inability of the
cause. And servs equally to the accusing of the Scriptures insufficiency in
discovering the will of God; because many that own and profess the Scriptures
are found worshipping of Idols, and of the true God in a false manner, and
practicing many enormities against the Testimony of the Scriptures and witness
of God in their own consciences.

So that, though all the Gentiles had been universally ignorant of these things
that will not prove the light to be insufficient to salvation, because their
ignorance proceeded not from the insufficiency and inability of the light, but
from their not being faithful unto it; nor diligent improvers thereof. I am
(says Christ) the Light of the world, he that follows me shall not walk in
darkness; importing that those that do not follow him, though he lighten them,
shall remain in darkness.

But secondly, how do they prove that none of the Gentiles did know sin, nor
the root thereof? nor the Lord Jesus, nor the true worship of God? They instance
indeed, many that knew not all these things, quoting Scriptures that speak so
of many of them, but not of all. Now, to argue from the particular, or
particulars, to the universal, is but an unreasonable way of argumentation;
and no better then to conclude all men to be blind because some are so.

Thirdly. I have already showed, in Argument 3. 4. and 6. from Rom: 1. 2. and
10. Chapters, that some of the Gentiles who were under no outward
administration of the Gospel, did call upon the Name of the Lord, and were
saved: and so consequently knew both sin and the remedy thereof the Lord Jesus.

But, what though they knew not the outward Name, if they knew the Nature, the
Spirit, the life which slays sin and cures the soul? It is not the mere
outward name that saves, but the life, the power of Christ that quickens,
cleanses, purifies: and by this they might besaved; For it is the life that
saves Romans 5. 10.

I also showed from Romans 2. That some of these Gentiles did so fulfill the Law
of God, that they were accounted the Jews and circumcision in heart before the
Lord, had praise of him; and were justified.

And this was a great error among the Jews, that the Lord had not a people
among the Gentiles who were accepted of him; yea, it was even the mistake of
the Apostles themselves, till the Lord convinced Peter by a vision from heaven,
Acts. 10. But after he was convinced (both by the heavenly Vision, as also by
meeting with Cornelius, a Gentile and uncircumcised, and yet a just and devout
man, one that feared God and all his household) he broke forth with these words,
of a truth I now perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every
Nation he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted. Which plainly
imports that there were some in diverse Nations who both feared God, wrought
righteousness and were accepted.

And what do those words, Acts 10. 28, call thou no man unclean, import, but
that God has not absolutely passed by any man without giving him an
opportunity, by which he might be saved?

But say they, Paul said he had not known sin but by the Law. Romans 7. whereas
you say, the light by which he might have kown sin was with him from his child
hood: again he says, when the commandment came sin revived and he dyed; how
can this be understood of that Light, which was with him from his child hood?

Answ: Very well: yea, how can it be understood of any thing elce but that
Light, which now so wrought in him that he saw that which before he saw not?
For, though the Light was with him from his childhood, yet his mind was not
turned in toward it, and so he did neither see nor know sin so distinctly as
was needful for him, to be saved from it. And so, though the Law in the light,
and the commandment came unto him, from his childhood, yet it came not in
that power and force as afterward, when his mind came to be turned toward it.
For, the power of the Light is then only sufficiently felt in its discovery of
sin, and the remedy thereof as the mind is turned toward it.

Besides, this Argument lies much more forcibly against the Scriptures being
this Law and commandment, not only because he had the outward Law and
commandments in the Scripture, from his childhood, and was always directed to
it as his rule, and trained up at the foot of Gamaliel a Doctor of this Law.
But also, because the Law never said more at one time then at another to him or
any man; so that the change that was made in him, cannot be ascribed to the
Law, which he was always a very zealous Professor of; but to that light which
opened his mind to the understanding of the things of God, by which he might
understand the Scriptures.

But they urge further this Light cannot discover the Birth, Sufferings death,
Resurrection and Ascension of the Lord Jesus, in the outward, the knowledge of
which is essentially necessary to salvation, Therefore, etc.

Answ. Our own experience teaches us the contrary, for we never came to know
the mystery of his birth, death and sufferings (as to the true and comfortable
use thereof) till our minds were turned to the Light. And how did the wise men
from the East know him? Surely, the star which outwardly appeared unto them had
never been sufficient, had not his star. i. e. his Light shined in their
hearts.

Also, how did the Centurion and the Canaanitisch woman know and acknowledge
him in the outward; and had greater faith in him then the very Jews? And how
did the disciples themselves know him? For, his outward appearance simply was
not sufficient to convince them, yea he forbad them to judge according to the
outward appearance. Of this matter John gives a clear account, who first
declares him, as he is, as the light, that lights every man, before he
declare^h of him in the outward: Forasmuch as he could be known only by the
Light, even what he was outwardly. By this it was that they beheld his Glory;
as the Glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth. But the
unbeleevers who believed not in the Light, wherewith he had enlightened them,
and whose minds were turned from it, in to their own carnal reasonings, did
not know him though they had the Scriptures that testified of him, and saw and
heard of miracles that he did; for they neither knew him nor the Scriptures,
being gone from his inward appearance in his own Light in their hearts, which
would have discovered both him in the outward, and the Scriptures testimony
concerning him.

But, that the knowledge of him as in the outward is of necessity unto
salvation, we grant not, save only where it is revealed, and there it is very
useful and comfortable. Yea, our very adversaries do not affirm that all who
ever were saved, had (or absolutely behoved to have) an express and distinct
knowledge of his outward coming. For, they grant that children may besaved, who
by reason of their infancy cannot have that knowledge.

Now, if so, why may not also some men (who are as it were but children and
infants, even babes in Christ, as to Spiritual knowledge) be saved without that
clear distinct knowledge of his outward coming, being borne of his Spirit and
sucking in the sincere milk thereof? Surely such can never perish: Yea, the
very disciples themselves, were for a season ignorant of the mystery of his
death, sufferings, Resurrection, and Ascension.

Object. 22. The Devil or Satan has that in him which reprovs him of sin,
but yet works not at all in him, any possibility of being saved. Therefore that
which reproveh for sin is not universally saving.

Answ. This is a fallacy called, transitio de genere in aliud genus i. e. a
passing from one kind to another. As, to argue from the Devil or Devils to
men. That because that which reprovs the Devils for sin, works not in them
savingly, therefore that which reprovs men for sin, does not work savingly in
them, which follows not at all. For Devils and men are of different kinds,
and the way of the Lord toward them differing in kind. For though it be the
same Spirit of God and Christ, which reproves Devils and men, yet, in the way
or manner thereof is great difference; For the Devils he reproves only in
wrath, without any mixture of love and mercy; and therefore we never read that
he calls upon them to repent, and turn, as he does upon men, or mankind.

Nor do we affirm that which reproves men for sin to work for their salvation,
Viz. only because it reprovs them; but because it so reproves them, i. e. in a
way of gentleness, tenderness, mercy and not only reprovs, but calls, moves,
draws, allures, strives with o^ leads them to repentance, as Peter says,
waiting with long-sufferance, as in the days of Noah; as is already largely
proved.

Object. 23 But man's own nature, as corrupt as it is, teaches him some things,
as the Apostle says, does, not even nature it self teach you? Nature teaches a
man not to defile himself with abeast or with mankind, so that bestiality,
sodomy, etc. are sins against the very nature of man though corrupt.

Answ. True it is, the nature of man, though corrupt, teaches him some things,
yet so as but naturally, and there are some things so bad, that the very nature
of man abhors them, as bestiality, sodomy, etc. being against nature. But it
is most certain both from Scripture, and universal experience, there is a more
high and Noble principle in man, then that of his own Nature, even universally;
which reproves men; not only for those gross and abominable sins, but for
other things, which man's corrupt nature, not only reprovs him not for, but
prompts and inclines him to.

And besides, though man in his own thoughts and reasonings may prove himself
guilty in diverse things, and after a sort convince and reprove himself
therefore, in and by his own thoughts and reasonings; yet there is still a
principle in man, which over and beyond all his own thoughts and reasonings
does convince him of evil and reprove him for it; and this most manifestly of
all, in the deepest silence of a man's own thoughts and reasonings; neither is
there any man living but may observe a manifest difference betwixt those
convictions and reproofs, which proceed from the Light and Spirit of God and
Christ in his own seed; and those that proceed only from a man's own natural
Spirit in his own thoughts and reasonings. For, when the Spirit of God and
Christ reproves and convinces a man, he does it livingly and in such power,
that it pricketh the heart, and works in it as a fire, hammer or sword:
whereas, the natural Spirit of man, does it but in a dead and cold manner. And
though this be the way of many to work convictions upon themselves, merely by,
and through, their own natural Spirit, in their thoughts and reasonings, and
hammerings there with upon their hearts, calling in the aid and help of the
Letter of the Scriptures for that effect, yet they do not proffit themselves in
so doing, but indeed, do greatly hurt themselves; For, this is all but the
sparks of their own kindling, and their own works, which they should cease
from: which if they did, they would in that cessation and stilness find the
Light and Spirit of Christ, as their minds are turned toward it, to work
mightily in them the true and real convictions for sin, which tend to work true
contrition, and tenderness of heart toward God, and the true and godly
repentance never to be repented of.

And so, if the Spirit of the Lord make use of the Scripture testimonies in
bearing in convictions of guilt upon the soul, they are very useful, which
otherwise, (as used merely by man's own natural Spirit) are but a killing
letter.

Object. 24. Its said the Lord gave his Laws unto Jacob and his statuts unto
Israel, but that he had not dealt so with every nation, therefore every nation
has not that in them which would teach them his Laws and statuts. It is also
said, in Judah is God known, therefore not in other places.

Answ. I deny these wild consequences; For though the Lord dealt not so with
other nations, as with Jacob, Israel, and Judah, as to the outward Laws,
statutes, and outward occasions afforded them of knowledge, etc. Yet he left
not the other nations destitute of the main and principal thing, even the
manifestation of the light, and Spirit of his Son in their hearts, and
consciences, which would have given them the knowledge of God and of all his
Laws and statuts needful to be known by them, had they improved the same
aright. And those that did improve it did both know the Lord and his Laws, and
were justified through faith in him, who outwardly were neither of Jacob,
Israel nor Judah but Gentiles in other Nations as has been showed, and seeing
it has been so in times past, why may it not be so now?

Object. 25. If the Light wherewith Christ has enlightened every man be
sufficient unto salvation, then the coming of Christ in the outward with his
obedience, sufferings and death were in vain.

Answ. This is also a false and senceless consequence; grounded upon a mere
mistake, as if the sufficiency of the Light and Grace of Christ within did make
void the use and benefit of his outward coming, obedience, death and
sufferings, or were to be set in opposition thereunto, which is utterly false;
for they are not to be set in opposition to each other, as if the one did
hinder the sufficiency or usefullness of the other; both being sufficient and
useful, and necessary each in their own kind and way, consummating, and being
consummated in, one another.

Besides, this Objection lies as much against the Scriptures. For, either the
manifestation of God, to the children of men, before the Scriptures or any part
of them were written, was sufficient unto salvation or it was not; If it were
not, no man before the Scriptures living, could be saved. If it were, then was
the giving of the Scriptures, (by this Argument) in vain, a superfluous and
useless thing.

Object. 26. But if the Light within be sufficient to teach and give the
knowledge of God, unto salvation; then the Scriptures are in vain, and it is in
vain to make use of outward teachings by men, or books or any outward means
what soever.

Answ. The vanity and unreasonableness of this consequence I have already shown
above, and so need say the less to it here. Indeed the plain contrary is the
truest, and most ingenuous consequence. Viz, that because the Light within is
sufficient, therefore the teachings of men and books are proffitable; which can
only proffit as in the Light they are received, and made use of, and from the
Light do proceed: And therefore all men who teach not from the Light of God in
them, and all books writ and not from the light are unprofitable and vain. But
though the outward teachings which proceed from the light are truly profitable,
yet are they not of such absolute necessity as if God and Christ could not be
known where the outward occasions of hearing are wanting.

Besides either this consequence is grossly false and impertinent or John was
under a gross mistake when he wrote to the Christians, even to the little
children in Christ that they had received from the holy one an unction, which
was so sufficient that it so taught them, of all things, that they needed not
(as an absolute necessary thing) that any man should teach them. 1 Jo. 2. 27.
And yet himself did frequently teach them by word and writing, as particularly
in that Epistle, not only in general to abide in that unction, and learn of
it in all things, but many other particular things he exhorts them to, and
plainly tells them these things he writes not, because they had not light
sufficient, or were in the dark, as to them, but v. 8. because the true light
now shines in them, and because they know the truth. v. 21. So far is he from
imagining that this would render his writing or preaching vain, that he makes
use of the consideration thereof, as an encouragement why he should, and why he
did write unto them.

Object. 27. Men receive this Light but as a gift of nature, by their natural
birthright or descent from Adam and our natural parents. Therefore. etc.

Answ. That is false: For it is not any gift of nature, but of the free grace,
love and mercy of God; neither does it come unto us by natural birth right,
from Adam, or our natural, parents; but from Jesus Christ the second Adam by
whose obedience and righteousness it is come upon all. Romans 5.

Object. 28. But if that which is sufficient be communicated, then it is
needless or in vain to depend upon God, for the daily and hourly in comes,
communications and influences of his Spirit, Light and life.

Answ. What crooked consequence is this? who ever said that every measure of
life, or light communicated, is so sufficient for all times, states and
conditions, that there needs no ampliation for times to come? we only say, and
that truly, that there is a measure sufficient given to every man to begin
with, which does suffice for the present occasion, and the soul that improveth
the same well, may warrantably expect more and more, new and renewed
communications, and influences of Light and life from the fountain daily and
hourly, who is always to be depended upon for them, and will give them
sufficiently in their season.

Object. 29. This Doctrine that all men may be saved, say they, hinders Prayer.
Which they endeavor to evince thus. Because David (and diverse others) prayed
that God would incline his heart to his Testimonies, and unite his heart unto
him; which signifies that they prayed for such motions of the grace and Spirit
of God, as should irresistibly produce the very effect, and not for such as it
might be in their power to resist and render ineffectuall. Which is just as if
they should pray on this wise, Lord so move my heart as that I may be left to
my own liberty, to choose whether I will follow thy motion or not. Yea,
according to this Doctrine, say some, it is in vain to pray at all; For what
should a man pray for? for Grace? that is given him already, and that
sufficient. For what then? for irresistible motions of the Grace of God? Such
are utterly inconsistent with this Doctrine.

Answ. Many words, as inconsequentiall and to as little purpose as all the rest!

The Doctrine of truth is so far from being a hinderance to prayer that't is a
great encouragement to it, and the contrary Doctrine no small impediment: For
if God has passed by the far greater part of mankind, and absolutely decreed
to deny them the least measure of his Grace, does not this discourage people in
seeking his Grace? Seeing if they be of those that he has so passed by, and
decreed to deny his grace unto, prayers will be to no purpose, the decree of God
being unchangeable. And seeing they do not know but that they be of that great
number, it is sufficient to make them doubt (yea a man cannot but doubt of that
which he does not certainly know) and doubting hinders prayer.

But secondly, if all motions of the Spirit of God be irresistible, and come by
an absolute decree of God, why should a man pray for them? seeing they must and
will come whether he pray, yea whether he will, or not. Again though we say
grace, and that sufficient is given unto all, and the Spirit of God moves upon
the hearts of all men, in a day of visitation, yet there is still room left
for prayer, that more grace may be given, and the motions thereof daily more
and more increased.

But, as concerning praying for motions and drawings of the Spirit to incline
and unite the heart to God, we are to pray for them as his own Spirit teaches
and moves us, and in submission to his will, whether the motions and drawings,
he is pleased to put forth in us, be more or less strong according to his good
pleasure: Nor do I deny but the Lord can so move the hearts of men, as to leave
no place for resistance, but all his motions are not after that manner. As for
example, a man is assaulted with a temptation, he prays to the Lord either to
remove it, or preserve him from yielding to it: And the Lord answers him as
he did Paul, my grace is sufficient for thee, ought not this man to acquiesce
in this answer? And if he find grace sufficient given to withstand the
temptation, so that if he be on his part diligent to use it he shall certainly
be preserved, it is a good return of his prayer.

But again, we are to consider that't is one thing to pray that the Lord would
give us such motions of his Spirit and Grace as we cannot resist, and would so
preserve us from the temptations that we cannot yield unto them; And quite
another thing to pray for the motions of the grace and Spirit of God that I do
not resist them, nor yield to the temptations. For actually not to resist, and
not to be able to resist, are things very different from each other. And this
we may very warrantably pray, that the Lord would so assist us by his grace and
good Spirit, that we resist not the good, nor yield to the bad and so do not
sin against the Lord: in which prayer, th^re is an act of resignation in the
soul, freely resigning up that propriety of its will, by which it might will
any thing contrary to the will of God. And for as much as an unpeccable state
is attainable we may pray for it, as we do for other good things that are to
come, but we must not limit the Lord, so as to have this accomplished in our
time, but patiently wait the Lords season.

Object. 30. If that Light which was in the Gentiles had been of an
Evangelicall nature (as you say it is) then it would have taught them
Evangelicall precepts, Viz. to love enemies, bear injuries without revenge,
overcome evil with good etc. which are things which no humane light, reason,
or natural faculty of man can teach, much less bring any man to the practice
of.

Answ. It does appear, that many of the Gentiles who had not the Scriptures,
did not only teach these Doctrines, but also in a large measure practice them,
patiently suffering injuries, not only without revenge, but showing love,
meekness, and rendering good for evil. Seeing then, that this objection
ingenuously grants that no natural power of man could teach or lead to these
practices, evident it is that that in them which taught and enabled them to
obey the truth in these things, was supernatural and Evangelicall.

G. K.

POSTSCRIPT.
AND because some through ignorance in History have presumed to affirm that
none of the Heathens so (called) knew or practiced such things, for the
conviction of them, and a general service to the truth, we shall here allege
some remarkable examples to evince the truth of what is affirmed in those
particulars: which made Aristotle in his Ethics lib. 10. chap. 4. 7. say, they
that did these things did them, not as men, but as having some thing divine, or
of God in them.

Not then to quote at large the Noble Testimony given by Palladius, Ambrosius
and others, concerning Dindimus King of the Brachmans, as they are at large
published in Latin and Greek and printed in London by T. Raicroft 1668.
entitled Palladius de Gentibus Indiae and Bragmanibus. S. Ambrosius de moribus
Brachmanorum, and Anonymus de Brachmanibus. As also another in the high Dutch,
language inittuled History von them grossen Konig Alexander etc. Yerzo auffs
new aus der alten Ceutschen sprache in druck gebracht. Printed anno 1642.

All which do relate the excellent and Christian Evangelicall lessons given by
the said Dindimus to Alexander, who sent Ambassadors to him to require him to
come to him, promising him great rewards if he did, and loss of his head if he
did not, and this in the Name of Alexander the King of all men and Son of the
great God Jupiter. But Dindimus smiling at this Vapor, and not moving his head
from the leaves he lay upon, answered, God the great King never begot injury,
but light, peace, life, the water, body and souls, which he also receivs when
they have finished their course, nor was he ever the author of lust. This is my
Lord, and only God, who as he hates murder so he wageth not war etc. And a
little further he says. The things that I seek I easily attain to, those
things which I regard not I am not to be driven to. If therefore Alexander take
my head he shall not destroy my soul which will return to the Lord, while the
body which was taken out of the earth shall thereunto return. For I being made a
Spirit, shall ascend unto my God, who included us in the flesh, and placed us
upon this earth to try us whether we, being gone forth from him, would live
unto him, as he has commanded: who demands an account of those that depart;
for he is a judge of all injuries: and the sighs of those that are injuriously
treated, become the pains of those that injure them. Let Alexander then
threaten those that love silver and gold, and fear death; neither of which
has place among the Brachmans, who do neither fear the one nor love the
other. Go therefore, and tell Alexander, Dindimus wants him not and if he wants
Dindimus, let him come to him. Which being reported to Alexander, he was the
more desirous to see that single old man that could conquer him after he had
conquered so many Nations. And so coming to him said, I come to hear a word of
wisdom from thee whom I hear do converse with God. To whom Dindimus
replied, Very willingly would I administer to thee the words of the wisdom of
God, had thou but place in thy mind to receive the gift of god administered.
But thy mind being filled with various lusts, insatiable avarice, and a
devilish desire to rule, which fights against me, and my design of drawing
thee off from destroying Nations and shedding humane blood is in all things
contrary to the wisdom by which I and the Brachmans are led, who worshipp
God, love men, contemn gold, despise death, and slight pleasures: whereas
Alexander and his, fear death, love gold, covet pleasure, hate men, and
despise God. adding, how can I speak unto thee the words of the wisdom of
God, whose cogitations are so filled with pomp, ostentation and inordinate
lusts that a whole world is not able to satiate thee? however he refused not to
give him that council, which Alexander was (as he confessed) convinced in his
heart was good, but could not follow; Viz. to cease warring against men
without, and engage himself in another warfare, against the enemies within
himself, his lusts, his affections, his desires, if he desired to be rich
indeed and to be a true Victor: assuring him that all his power, all his hosts,
all his Riches, all his Pomp, would at last not avail him any thing; But
(says he) if thou will hearken to my words, thou shall possess of my goods,
who have God to my friend, and whose inspiration I enjoy within me. Thus thou
shall overcome lust the mother of penury, which never obtains what it seeks.
Thus thou shall, with us, honor thy self, by becoming such as God had created
thee. Adding though thou slay me for telling thee these proffitable things I
fear not. For (says he) I shall return to my God which created all things,
who knows my cause, and before whom nothing is hidden.

I know not (says he) whether thou shall be so happy as to find thy self
persuaded by my words, but I assure thee, if thou be not, when thou art
departed hence I shall see thee punished for thy actions and hear thee lament
with deep and sharp sighs, the misery thou have put many to etc. Viz. when thou
shall have no other companion then the memory of the evils thou have heaped up
upon thy self. For (says he) I know the pains justly inflicted by God upon
unjust men. Then thou shall say unto me, Dandamis, how good a counselor were
thou to me? etc.

These things Alexander heard (as, it is said of Herod concerning John the
Baptist) not only without wroth, but with a placid countenance and replied. O
Dandamis thou true teacher of the Brachmans! I have found thee the most
excellent amongst men, by reason of the Spirit that is in thee; I know all that
thou have spoken is true. God has brought thee forth and sent thee into this
place: in which thou art happy and rich, wanting nothing, all thy life long
quiet, enjoying much rest.

But what shall I do who cohabit with continual slaughters? etc. who if I
would live in the desert, my Lievtenants would not suffer me, and though they
would being in this state, it is not lawful for me to quit them, for how shall
I defend my self before God, who has assigned me this Lot?

But thou reverend old man and servant of God, for these words of wisdom where
with thou have helped, and rejoiced me, dehorting me from war, receiv thou my
presents and despise me not: I am affected with kindness, honoring wisdom,
and so commanded his servants to bring forth gold and several sorts of array,
bread and oil. Which Dandamis beholding laughed, saying to Alexander Persuade
(if thou can) the birds about the woods to receive thy gold, and sing the
better for it: but if thou can not persuade them, nor shall thou ever
persuade me, to be worse then they. I therefore receive no unprofitable
present, which I can neither eat nor drink, nor do I serve soule-hurtfull
riches etc. Here Is nothing in this desert to be bought with gold; For God gives
me all things freely etc. selling nothing for gold, but freely bestowing all
good things, and even the mind on those that freely accept it etc. But the oil
he took; and walking about the wood gathered some sticks, and kindling a fire,
he said. The Brachmanns have all things, being fed by providence, and into the
fire he powered the oil, till it was all consumed and sang a hymn unto God. Oh
God immortal I givethee, in all things thanks. For thou rulest in all things,
giving all things abundantly unto thy creatures for their food. Thou creating
this world do preserve it, expecting the souls which thou have sent into it,
that thou may, as God, justify those that have lead a pious life, and condemn
those that have not obeyed thy laws. For all righteous judgment is with thee
and life eternal prepared by thee. Who with eternal goodness show mercy
unto all.

He that can doubt from whence these streams, and from what Spirit these
Doctrines and exhortations slow. Whether from Nature or grace and that
Evangelicall, seems to me to have little skill in things that differ: he that
can ascribe it to Nature can surely not believe nature to be so vitiated and
degenerate as it is in mankind, he that shall say it proceeds from the devil
or enemy of mankind is certainly worse then blind. It were worth the while then
to know where the Calvinists (that acknowledge the cortuption of nature, and
deny the universality of grace) will place it.

He that shall read Hermes Trismegistus his Divine Pimander translated out of
Arabic by the famous Dr. Everard, printed in english 1657. and especially his
book, or secret sermon in the mount, of Regeneration, and the profession of
silence, if he understand what he reads, shall without all hesitation say, the
things there uttered transcend the reach of natural wisdom and proceed from
a more profound source. As also his Doctrine in his 12. Book called Crater or
Monas, where he does not darkly preach the Baptism of Christ, i. e. of the
Spirit which he (in his dialect) calls the mind.

Lieupang Emperor of China, taught that 'twas the part of a great mind, to
forgive injuries, and that the greatness of the mind never shines cleare^ then
where opportunityes of revenge are neglected. Demonax taught that we ought not
to be wroth with offenders, but endeavor to become their amenders: to sin,
says he, is humane, but to amend the faults of others is the part of God, or
of men most near unto him.

Claudianus taught that we ought to be ready to forgive offenders of our own
accord, and more ready to lay aside anger then to stir it up, and not refuse
reconciliation with any that seek it.

King the Emperor of China said, there is nothing that increases virtue, more
then the slighting of all sustained injuries.

Now, that these things they taught not out of vainglorious ostentation nor to
be seen and admired of men, or for any self-end, but purely out of conscience,
sincere love to God, and faith unfeigned may further appear by what follows.

A certain Indian monk or secluse, an ancient man living in a chapel in the
Island Calempluy which certain Portugals having robbed of no small treasure,
they were by this old man sharply reproved and advised, if they would escape
the just judgment of God, and find mercy and pardon of their sins, that their
souls might not perish eternally, to restore the spoil they had taken away, to
pray with tears for forgiveness, and as freely to give alms as they would
bestow any thing upon themselves. Which they promised to do, but fearing least
their prey might be taken from them; they asked him whether there were no arms
upon the Island: the old man replied no, adding that all that would go to
heaven, stood more in need of patience to bear injuries, then arms to revenge
themselves. See Ridderus his shamed Christian.

The same author gives further an account of the doctrine of one Bertri Herrou
an Indian Bramine whom he thus quotes, saying, when the wicked see a man live
well, they say he does it to be honored of men; when they see one that is pure
of heart they say it is nothing but deceit and hypocrisy, if a man be still and
silent, these blasphemers say, he is mute and dumb, if he be but a little
retired from the multitude, they say, he is a varlet or villain; if he sustain
injuries they call him coward; if he bear ill language, they say he is of a
base offspring, thus turning all good into evil: Thus far concerning bearing
injuries. Now, concerning riches, hear what he says, if thou pursue not
worldly things thou shall have much satisfaction, but if thou do hunt after
them thou shall have much trouble, why art thou, to no purpose, buried in the
world? Forsake thy love unto the things of this world and place thy love on
God; if thou could get all that thou can desire, what is it? it shall verily
have an end. And in his soliloquy to his own heart, he says, o my heart thou
sometimes wanderest through the whole universe because thy will is not fixed,
seeking every where, and what is the reason thou find not that God that is in
thy own heart, by which thou may attain to salvation? the world must have an
end, what will then be man's life? the rich are never satisfied but always
covet more, and in time they wax old; there is nothing therefore better then to
mind God. Though I should loose my honor, my money, my friends, my servants,
my youth, and should have nothing to give any man, 't is no matter, best then
it is for me to have my thoughts upon God alone.

Thus also taught Seneca, saying, a great mind never revengeth an injury,
because it is no more affected w^h it then a rock with an arrow shot against it:
Reason (i. e. the divine reason) forbids me all revenge, to which reason I have
surrendered my self; anger would do me more harm then the injury sustained.

But least ye should think that by a great mind, he means a haughty, exalted,
scornful mind pussed up with an imaginary greatness, void of goodness, which
is indeed the only true greatness of the mind; hear what he further taught, if
it be a bad man says he, that wrongs thee, why will thou hate a sinner, who by
going a stray is fallen into transgression? such we must seek to convert and not
be wroth with them, who would then be wroth with him that he ought to cure? he
will meet with his reward from another. And else where he says, 't is an ugly
thing and unseemly to reward one injury with another, because in such contests
the victor is the worst, if any man strike thee, go thy way.

Alexander the Grecian said, there is nothing more sweet, pleasant and comely
then to be able to bear with a man that reviles us, if any man speaks evil of
thee, make as if thou heeded him not, so shall the r^viler himself become
sensible that his ill tongue turns to his own disadvantage:

The comprehensive motto of Epictetus bear and forbear, is a brief and full
demonstration of their doctrine in this point. And 't was one of the stoic
laws. Bear all injuries with patience.

Object. But it may be some may say, they did so write indeed but they
practiced it not, the^for these sayings and doctrines were not the product of
the Spirit of God in their minds.

Answ. It follows not, for how frequent are the manifold examples of peoples
acting contrary to the convictions of the Spirit of God in their consciences,
seconded by the testimony of the Scriptures? who among you that bear the name
of Christians do walk faithful to the inward convictions of the light of
Christ in your own bosoms? Yea, do you not generally glory in it as a piece of
orthodoxy that ye believe it impossible to overcome the lusts of your minds,
and root sin out there? So 't is enough that we have showed that men that have
lived in ages and nations (not befriended with the glorious testimonies of the
Scriptures) have had the knowledge of these most singularly excellent things
therein contained, although we could not give one single instance of any man
that had so practiced. But ex abundanti we shall now give no mean examples of
such as practiced, upon occasion, these things, and that in such a degree, and
measure, as, we fear, if we should search your cities, yea and Churches too
with candles, we should scarce find such pregnant proofs of the power of God,
so far received, and suffered to rule in you and to bow your hearts to the
practices of that which his light injoines and effects in those that are
resigned thereto.

Of Socrates his patience we may suppose the world pretty well informed by
general fame, but for the sake of such as perhaps have not heard, we shall
give out of the book above mentioned this account that being once very much
reviled, and by some, that admired at his patience, stirred up to revenge said,
the man speaks not evil of me, for the evil he speaks against is not in me. I
am no such manner of man, and to another upon another occasion, he said assault
me, fall upon me, I shall by bearing overcome thee. Again being once told that
some spoke evil of him, said, 't is no wonder, they never learned to speak well.

So also said Seneca in the like case, they speak evil of me, because they
cannot speak well, they do not what I deserve, but what they are wont to do: 't
is an honor to displease wicked men, and he that by his own evil life is
condemned has no right to judge others:

Thus also said the King Agesilaus of a certain man that in spite and contempt
had poured water upon his head, who when his friends endeavored to move him to
revenge, replied, the man did not pour this water upon me, but upon the man he
took me to be.

In like manner said Lysander, to one that reviled him sore, speak my friend,
speak on, disburthen thy mind which is full of evil.

Remarkable is that passage of Augustus to Cynna who being taken prisoner by
Augustus was by him pardoned, which favor Cynna sleighting, sought the
Emperors life, for which being a second time apprehended and doomed, as his
sentence was framing, Livia the emperors wife, came to her husband, advising
him to do as the doctors sometimes do, who, when ordinary remedies will not do,
use the quite contrary: So says she, seeing hardness will not prevail, forgive
him. Whereupon Cynna being set upon a seat by the Emperor, the Emperor said unto
him in a friendly manner, I now the second time give thee thy life, first, when
thou were my open enemy, and now thou art become a s^c^et traiter against me;
let therefore our friendship begin again from this day, and made him Consul,
and thus by kindness and favors overcame his evil mind; according to the
advice of Seneca, saying, if any man be wroth with thee do him good, secret
hatred falls, when deserted^y ^ts adversary.

Not unlike to this is that passage of the Emperor Vespasian, who (contrary to
the saying of one, that he had rather be spoiled then spoil) once hearing of
two noble men, that aspired after his crown, and having thereof good proof, said
nothing to them, but that they should desist that enterprise, for dominion was
given of God, but if they would ask any thing else he would give it them.

As worthy our notice was that worthy passage of king Philip father to
Alexander the great, toward Nicanor and Arcadion speaking evil of him,
whereupon being prompted by his council to punish them, yea being urged
thereunto as his duty, was of another mind, replying that Nicanor was none of
the worst of men, adding, I must a noble saying and as noble a practice of a
great Prin^e.
see whether I have not been short of my duty toward him; and (upon
examination, finding that he was poor) sent him a present, and went in person
to Arcadion, carrying him presents: Whereupon hearing afterward that they
spoke well of him, he said to his courtiers, do you now see how it depends upon
our selves that people speak well or evil of us; I am a better doctor, then you.

Nothing inferior to this was that action of Lycurgus that famous Spartan
Legislator, who, for making wholesome laws to reduce his people to good manners
was hated and stoned, and, among many other insolences sustained, had one of
his eyes smot out, with a cudgel, by a certain young man called Alexander, for
which he being apprehended, and condemned to dye, Lycurgus redeemed him, took
him as a friend into his own house, and there taught him to live well so that
its said he became a good man. If this be not to overcome evil with good; what
is?

That famous Athenian General Pericles having been upon a time, all the day
long reviled by a certain man, who followed him even to his house at night
railing at him, was by this noble man so meekly borne that he not only reviled
him not again, but commanded his servant, with his lantern to light him home.

Phocion that noble Athenian being unjustly condemned to dye, by the drinking,
(after the manner of that country) a cup of poison, being asked what he would
leave in charge to his son answered; Nothing but this, that he should never so
remember this cup, as to avenge his death.

Aristides an Athenian noble and righteous man being banished out of Athens,
and in order thereunto, by the magistrates led out of town, a certain
ill-nurtured person, ran after him, and spit in his face. Whereupon the meek man
only desired the Magistrates to teach that man for the future to be more
mannerly. And after he was, through envy, thus unjustly banished, seeing his
country in peril, secretly helped it against King Xerxes, being the chief
occasion of that victory.

Solon being by one abused who spit in his face, nothing moved thereat, said, If
a fisher man, to catch a small fish, bear the seawater, why should not I to
catch a man, bear this.

Just so Aristippus, when having reproved Dionysius, who for it spat in his
face; said, If a fisher man be not afraid of being wet to catch a small fish,
why should I to catch a whole salmon fear a little sprinkleing?

The same Aristippus being railed at, held is tongue, and went his way; the
Reviler following him said, What! Do thou runn away? Aristippus replied, Thou
have power to speak evil, and I to forbear hearing (or ^eding) it.

Dion, going from a feast, was followed by one railing at him, to whom not
replying any thing, this ill-bred man, said to him, Do thou not answer me?
No, quoth Dion, not one word.

So Lentulus spitting in Cato's face, the patient man said nothing to him, but
o Lentulus, I must aver to all that deny it, that thou have a mouth.

Crates, having rebuked Nicrodomus the Comaediant, he took it so ill, that he
not only abused Crates, in word, but so smote him with his sist in the face,
that he bore the sign of it. But Crates did nothing to him, only hung this
inscription upon his fore head: Nicrodomus made this.

Euclides, being once got into contention with his brother, his brother said,
in truth, I shall dye, if I do thee not some mischief, or ill turn. And I,
quoth Euclides, shall dy^, if I be not recon^iled to thee.

Very noble, and savoury was that act of that noble commander Pisistrates
toward certain drunken fellows who once fell upon his wife, abusing her with
Lascivious words and actions, who (they coming next day to beg pardon of him
for their mistake) was so far from avenging this brutish incivility acted
toward his wife, that he pardoned and dismissed them only with this sober
piece of advice, that they should take heed they were no more so drunk.

All these examples we find alleged by a Calvinist preacher in Rotterdam, to
the shaming of his pretended Christians, by the virtuous examples of these
pretended heathens, and mere natural men, whereupon he intitles his book Den
beschaamde Christen, For which the man, we confess, had a great deal of
reason, for certainly these men shall rise up in judgment against the
Christians of this age, and fill their faces with shame and confusion enough.

But how to reconcile these things to their doctrine of natures being so
corrupted, so defiled, that all natural men are blind and darkened in their
understandings, dead in trespasses and sin^ and unvisited by any new visitation
of evangelicall grace, is past our skill. Surely, that doctrine is false, these
things not good, the relations not true, or they must say, Christ was out, when
he said, Men gather not grapes on thorns, nor figs on thistles, and that an
evil tree can not bring forth good fruit nor corrupt fountain send forth sweet
streams.

G. KEITH.
B. FURLY.

Reader,
IT was my intent to have given the at the end of this treatise the testimonies
of several, if not most of the Ancient Fathers of the church, so called,
concerning the universality of the divine, spiritual, saving illumination
imparted by Christ, as the eternal Word, wisdom and Image of the father to
all mankind; with not a few testimonies out of many Authors of note of later
ages, both before and since the Refortion; And more especially to have showed
what many of them thought concerning that (...) spiraculum vitarum, breath of
lives, said (2 Genes. 7.) to be breathed into man, by which he became a living
soul: viz, that it is not the soul, nor the natural life thereof, but the
divine life, something of God, even the Divine Spirit which finally constituted
man the image of God, and without partaking of which he could never properly,
not truly be said to be the image of God; of which breath of life many have
excellently writ, some stiling it the Spirit of God, others something of God in
man, some the Divine soul in contradistinction to the vegetative, animal, and
Rational souls, others the pars or portio superior animae, others fundus
animae; the supreme part or portion, the fund, bottom or center of the soul,
the guide and director thereof. I had also intended to have given here some
account of many vitiously translated places of Scripture darkening the Doctrine
of the inward light, grace Spirit and kingdom of God in the soul, so
plentifully attested to by the holy penmen of Scripture, as also to the
establishing the doctrine of the necessity of sin, every day, hour and moment
of this Natural life which never entered into the souls of these holy men to
think, or publish; but these being not at present so perfected as is requisite,
and this work having layn long on hand, I was unwilling to detain it longer. So
these may, upon some other occasion be communicated; mean while, if any shall
please to read A^hanafius in his book de Definitionibus; and in his 3 Dialogue
de Trinitate, and 4 Oration against the Arr^ns. And Cyrillus Alexandrinus in
his treatise upon John, lib. 2: cap. 3. and lib. 8. c. 47. And in his Thesaurus
lib. 4: c. 1. Together with Procopius Gazeus in his Comment. on Genesis, he
will see, that our Testimony in that point, of the breath of life, is no novell
doctrine, and unheard of, but many hundred years since, zealously defended by
as grave Authors among the Christians as any extant; which may serve as a
sufficient check to that impudent clamor of Novelty, so ordinarily objected by
every Ignoramus that never once looked into Antiquity.

B. F.

FINIS.
Errors to be mended.
Page 11. lin. 26. read Argument 1. p. 4. 4. l. 33. r. than. p. 45. l. 5. r.
preaching. p. 49. l. 1. r. Argument 9. p. 71. l. 30. r. or. p. 75. l. 15. put
out that. p. 77. l. 27. put out as. and l. 35. feeding. p. 78. l. 27 r. thy. p.
81. l. 28. r. beleev. p. 85. l. 30. r. though. p. 97. l. 2. r. principle. p.
108. l. 2. r. potter power. p. 109. l. 1. believed. p. 112. l. 3. till. p. 135.
l. 10. r. Reformation.


