THE POPES Pedigree, Usurpation, and abominable Pride; The Forerunner of His
(...) Downfall.

Briefly declaring the first rising, and the ripening of Popery; in a true and
short Collection of the names, wicked lives, and Decrees of most of the Popes
of Rome, their adding to, and altering the Ordinances of Christ.

Also fourteen Questions proposed, and a friendly advice given.

John 3. 19. And this is condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
men love darkness rather than light, etc. Rome, Rome, beware of sixty three and
three, Mark the number of the Beast.

Printed in the year, 1664. Of Romes great fear.

Light is sown.
OUR Heavenly Sower makes all men's hearts his field by inward teaching, to
beget in them an humble submission to his will, with all other spiritual fruit,
Mat. 13. 3, 4. Romans ^. 14. Col. 1. 6.

Secondly, Out of this field he Nationally culled the Jews for a Vineyard, by
miracles, to outward teachings, for the aforesaid end, in profession of the
Levitical Law, Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, 8. Isa. 5. 1. Romans 3. 1, 2, 3. Heb. 7. 10.

Thirdly, Out of Field and Vineyard, he personally culls Disciples into
Churches (as it were Gardens) by outward teaching, for the same end, under
profession of Christianity; in which profession

First, Christ only is High Priest, and chief Bishop: All Disciples, Preachers,
and Hearers, are Brethren, and fellow servants; none to be called Lord, Master,
or Doctor, Heb. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 5. 3, 4. Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 24. 49.

Secondly, Christ's Command is the only rule to walk by; what is imposed more,
is vain worship, John 15. 14. Mat. 15. 9.

Thirdly, Beside the Ten Commands, and standing Ordinances, Praver and Praise,
he ordered Disciples by preaching and baptizing to Disciplise others in all
Nations, and that they also observe the same things, which he had commanded
them to enjoy his spiritual presence to the worlds end, Mat. 28. 16, 17, 18,
19, 20. John 20. 23. (not meaning Spirit Baptism, as some say,) that is Christ's
gift, and our enjoyment; only water Baptism is his Command, and our duty, and
part of Disciplising, Mat. 3. John 3. 22, 23. and 4. 1. Also he bad them Break
and eat bread, bless the Cup and drink, to remember him, 1 Cor. 11. 24.

Men love darkness.
But contrary to expectation, his Field bore Weeds, his Vineyard wild Grapes,
Isa. 5. And his Gardens, the chief weed, selfship.

That, culled out of his Vineyard, bore disputings for greatness, but Christ
cut it down, and other Gardens bore the same weed, with buds; for Diotrephes,
loving pre-eminence, prates against the Apostles, rejects the Brethren, and
excludes them that received them; but John cuts it down, 3 John 9, 10.

In his Garden at Rome, it grew so numerous, and rooted so deep, before the
Apostles dyed, that Paul could not fell it; wherefore he bad the faithful to
mark and avoid such as caused divisions and offenses, contrary to received
truth; because pretending to serve Christ, they served their own bellies, and
by fair speech deceived the simple, Romans 16. 17, 18. And now, these being
avoided, the faithful become Separates of Separates.

But the outside Christians claim Churchship, and reckon the faithful
Schismatiques. Yea like the fallen Tribes of Israel, they take to themselves
Authority to make Bishops. For in Anno 68. they make Linus their first Bishop,
and he ordains. That women come covered into the Assemblies.

Now self-ship is knuckle high, and has two great arms, to wit, a worldly
Church, and a carnal Ministry. In Christianity each Assembly is a visible
Church: And a Church could come at one time, into one place, 1 Cor. 11. 20. But
Linus his Church contains several Assemblies 2. Christ requires all aged men in
his Churches, to watch over, and guide the younger, at least by example, if
they cannot by preaching; and many Elders or Watchmen were in one Assembly, 1
Pet. 5. 1, 2. 5. Phil. 1. 1. But this Church will have but one Bp. (not to
watch, but) to rule over many Assemblies.

And so Titus 1. 5. is turned aside like soft wax. Paul bad Titus stay in
Crete, to set things wanting in order, to order Watchmen to be blameless, as
Gods Stewards, not to be self-willed, or be scon angry, no wike-bibber,
striker, or covetous person; but they dare order who shall be their Bp. and who
not; and from these arms of self-ship sprout many worldly Ordinances; for,

70. Their second Bp. Anacletus ordains, That each City or Village, have a
Priest openly made to teach, and administer Sacraments, and excommunicates such
as hinder visiting Saints Sepulchers.

Christ makes all faithful Christians a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 5, 9.
But contrary wise, he divides his Saints into Clergy and Laity. 2. Christ
commissionated men, as Disciples, to preach, baptize, bind, or loose, John 20.
19, 21, 23. But he bounds these things to his new fashioned Priests. 3.
Jew-like, he hates Saints, but honors Sepulchers. And more buds yet; for Anno

92. The third Bp. Clement, divides Parishes in Rome, adds Oil and Cream to
Baptism; but Infant Baptism is not yet thought on.

118. Alexander will have Communion-Wine mixed with Water, brings up purging
water to sprinkle people after Mass, to make them holy, and to be reserved to
drive the Devil out of men's houses, and out of the hearts of the faithful; and
yet not holy enough to touch holy things; for Anno

130. Sextus ordains fine Linen for Mass, and that Laymen or women touch not
Church-Ordinances, or hallowed things.

139. Tillisphorus ordains three Masses for Christmas day, and Lent to be
fasted, and that Priests fast a week longer. And the next buds are wooden
Churches, and childish Baptism; for

150. Higinus hallowed Churches, brought up Godfathers in Baptism, but
childrens baptism was not yet in force, not tised by considerate people; for

Pancrates a Christians Son, 15 years old, was by Cornelius Catechized 20
days, and then baptized. And Pontus the son of Marchus a Christian, was by Bp.
Pontianus first instructed, and then baptized.

Anno 233. And Nazarius son to Perpetua a Christian, was first instructed, then
baptized. And Lionella a Christian had three Grand Children, Sosippus,
Cleosippus, and Melosippus, first Catechized, Anno 244. And thus they write:
The Primitive Church used to baptize at Penticost, and all the children of the
Church, which in the whole year were by the Word moved, gave in their names at
Easter, and till Penticost were instructed in the rules of Faith, and then
baptized.

Augustine thus preached, Juniors, Before we dipped your bodies in sacred water,
we asked you, Believe you in God the Father Allmighty? believe you in Jesus
Christ his Son, conceived of the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary? believe
you in the Holy Ghost? And to each question every one answered, I believe. This
we did according to our Saviors Command, Mat. 28. etc.

154. Pius brought up keeping of Easter, ordained, That if Sacramental Wine be
spilt, the Priest must lick it up; and brought the Font into the Church, but
not so small a Font as now is; for Ciriachus Marcellus his Deacon baptizing
Tobia the King of Persia's Daughter in a silver Font; asked her, Tobia,
believe thou in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? she answered, I believe;
Ciriachus asked, Believe thois the Resurrection of the body? she said, I
believe; then being dipped, and listed out of the water, she said, Jesus whom
Ciriach preaches, is God.

195. Victor commands that Baptism be not administered till Easter, except need
be; then at any time, and by Laymen, or women, and in hallowed, or unhallowed
water.

203. Zopherimus brought up glass Challices, because Christ's blood might soak
into wood; and ordered that all called Christians receive the Sacrament at 12
years of age. The wine is now turned bloody, but not yet confirmed for an
Article. But more buds still. For

218. Calextus brought up hallowing of Church yards; and Urban their 16 Bp.
appoints Silver and Gold Challices.

233. Pontian ordains, That Psalms be sung in Churches night and day; and that
none but Priests, may accuse a Priest.

258. Steven condemns Church-robbers, as man-slayers.

261. Sextus 2d ordains, That the Communion be celebrated on an Altar. And

273. Foelix will not have it on an unhallowed Altar, or any unhallowed place;
nor by any but a Priest, except need be.

275. Eutichianus blessed new fruits, as Grapes and Beans on the Altar. And more
buds still. For

283. Gaius decreed none to be made Priest, that has not been 1. A
Doorkeeper. 2. A Reader. 3. A Conjurer. 4. A Candle-Carrier. 5. A Subdeacon.
6. A Deacon; and then a Priest.

312. Melciade their 31 Bp. brought up Bishoping of children, as a greater
Sacrament than Baptism.

314. Silvester makes Wednesdayes and Frydayes fasting-dayes.

And now is self-ship grown knee-high into an Archbishop, but a Pope or
universal Bishop is not yet thought on.

336. Marchus their first Archbishop, brought up singing the Nician Creed, and
Julius brought in singing Athanasius Creed; and that the Bread and Wine be
received severally. And self-ship buds still. For

352. Liberius the third Archbishop, ordains Procession against plague,
famine, rain, or drought. And

367. Damasus appoints Gloria Patri to end every Psalm, and two Quires to sing;
one to sing one verse on one side, and one to sing another verse on the other
side; set Jerome to appoint every days Service, and how many Psalms for each
day, and that all do use that form. And more buds yet. For

385. Severius admits Monks into holy Order, un-Priests such as marry twice, or
a widow; decreed that Priests have not all their Orders at one time.

398. Their Archbishop Anastatius ordains standing when Gospel is read.

404. Innocent their eighth Archbishop, makes Infant Baptism a Law, and that
the people kiss the Paxe, and Priests to kiss each other; and that the sick be
not anointed with unconsecrated oil.

417. Zosimus brought up Tapers.

419. Boniface a Miraculist, brings in fasting on Saints Eves; and none to be
Priest before 30 years of age. And more buds yet. For

423. Celestinus the eleventh Archbishop will have none Christened, till the
Priest by breathing, drive the Devil out of them.

461. Iberius brought in the Letany.

467. Anacetus forbad Priests to have herds, or long side-hair, but shaven
crowns, Not four cornered like Simon Magus; but round like Simon Peter, (says
he) to mind them of the Crown of Glory.

492. Galatius ordains, That the Priests in Mass stretch out their arms, and
hold up their hands; and by Council Enacts Baptism to be administered, but at
Easter and Whitsuntide, except need be; and then on newborn Infants; and to be
done freely.

499. Simonachus their last Archbishop, ordered that Pascutia's soul be
chastised in Purgatory.

Now is self-ship grown middle-high, and turned Patriarch.

514. Hornesday their first Patriarch will have no Altar set up without a
Bishops consent.

526. Faelix 4. and third Patriarch, divided Church from Chancel.

531. John 2. wrote for equality of Father and Son.

534. Agepetus, will have people on Sunday follow the Cross in Procession.

537. Vigillius their eighth Patriarch, will have Mass said with faces
Eastward.

556. Pelagius ordains Deriges, and that days Mattins for the dead.

559. John 3. and tenth Patriarch, decrees that none have the title of chief,
or universal Bishop.

591. Gregory their 13. Patriarch, styled himself, Servus Servorum, opposed
John of Constantinople for claiming title of Universal, yet he hallowed
candles, ashes, and palms, ordained Candlemas day for people to carry lighted
candles in, and ash wednesday to be sprinkled with ashes, to mind them that
they are dust and ashes, and to carry palms on palm sunday; he put the Pater
Noster to the Mass, and a candle to burn on the Altar in Mass-time, held Images
to be Laymens books, but not to be worshipped, revoked his Decree against
Priests marriage, because 6000. infants skulls were found in a Fish Pond: many
buds at once, and yet more still; for,

604. Sabian the last Patriarch, decreed bells ringing to gather people to hear
Divine Service.

And self-ship is now grown head-high, and turned Pope.

606. Boniface 3. and first Pope obtained chiefship of the Emperor Phocas, and
that the Church of Rome he reckoed the Mother Church; now begins we will and
command you, and now Mahomet schismed from him, and joined with Sergius a Monk.
Little thought Phocas that Emperors would at last be subject to Popes: but
more buds yet; for Boniface 4. and second Pope, fatted Monks in a Monastery for
his lust.

614. Deus dedit wills Gossips not to marry, and

618. Boniface 5. ordains Sanctuary for Men-slayers, and that none below a
Deacon touch Saints relics: and Honorius ordains a feast for exalting the
Crosle.

642. Theodorus wills none to marry that Maid, to whom his father was
Godfather: and yet more buddings; for,

649. Martin the ninth Pope, decked Churches, appoints more holidays, and
Priests to keep single, and sing Mass aloud, and no man to lie with his wife,
till a Priest bless them, and hallow their bed.

654. Eugenius ordered Bps to imprison bold Priests.

665. Vitalian brought into the Church Organs, and Prick-song, and Latin
Service in England.

669. Deo, or Theodatus, has Mass sung in Latin, and debarrs Ravena Bps of
Christian burial, for not stooping to Romes Sea.

678. Pope Agatho subjected Ravena-Churches, and put out the Bps eyes that
withstood it.

683. Leo 2. and 15. Pope, opposed Western Priests marriages.

684. Pope Benedict got the style of Christ's Vicar.

688. Sergius, or Swines snout, settles Candlemass-day Customs, gets Shrines to
put relics in: and lofty budding yet, for,

708. Constantine permits Justinian to kiss his feet.

731. Gregory 3. decreed that people offer derige groats, and mass-pence, for
their dead friends souls, and that Priests do pray and sacrifice for the dead,
and that Images be worshipped.

752. Steven 2. was the first carried on men's shoulders.

757. Pope Paul made legends for Saints, and Service for Lent.

767. Steven 3. settled Image Worship.

772. Adrian the 30. Pope, wrote a Book for Images, and will have Western
Churches put off all fashions of massing, save that fashion that Gregory 1. had
ordained.

792. Pope Leo 3. brought up Censers.

817. Pascalis put Saints relics to sale. and Gregory 4. wills Priests to go
homely like Christ, without Rings or costliness.

844. Sergius 2. the first that changed his name for the Popedom, and selfship
is now full crown-high; for,

847. Leo 4. brought up Peter's penny, offers Princes his feet to kiss, lets
none come in the Chancel while Mass is saying.

855. Pope Joan, and 862. Benedict 3. gives security that he is a male, orders
the Clergy to be at the burial of Bps, and sing derige for their souls, and
Bps to do so for the Clergy.

864. Nicholas complains of neglect in registring Popes, and orders Baptism,
administered by pagan or infidel is not null, and that Popes decrees be equal
to Scripture.

891. Formasus, and 896. Steven 6. took Formasus up, cuts off his consecrating
finger, and casts him into Tyber.

910. Sergius 3. took him up again, cuts off his other right hand fingers, and
casts him again into Tyber, and new ordains whom he ordained.

939. Steven 8. cuts off men's hands, and pulls out their eyes for inclining to
Otho, made boys Bps for money, defiled his fathers Concubine, put out his
ghostly father Benedicts eyes, brake windows in the night, set houses on fire,
drank healths to Satan; but a resolute man found him naught with his wife, and
dispatched him; but,

965. Leo 8. Crowned Otho, and admitted him right to choose Popes.

965. John 14. began to name and baptize bells.

999. Silvester 2. and 73 Pope, defeats a Sarazen of a conjuring book, agreed
with Satan to be wholly his, if he bring him back and promote him: and did
return, and taught the black art to Theophilact, Lawrence, Braesutus, and John
Gratian, by whose help he came to be Bp of Reames, then Archbp of Ravena, and
next Pope of Rome; used the art secretly, till asking how long he should live,
was told, till he said Mass at Jerusalem; he thought to live long, but in Lent,
said Mass at St Crose (sometime called Jerusalem) where Satan seized on him.

1003. John 18. made a fast for all souls, took the people from choosing Popes,
saying, The people must be taught, and not followed: and now Purgatory sprouts
apace: for,

1003. John 19. called also Fastinus, is said to raise souls, and

1012. Benedict 8 is said to be seen a horsback after death, telling a Bp he
was tormented, wishing that Odels would pray for him, and bad that his brother
John take a treasure hid in such a place, and distribute it to the poor for his
soul.

Benedict 9. made Lawrence and Gratian (his fellow-conjurers) Cardinals,
invocates Satan in a Wood, makes women run after him, was selling his Popedom,
and in the interim steps in Silvester; then Gregory gets the keys; three Popes
at once, called the twenty schism; but Benedict fled, Gregory was banished, and
Silvester stood.

1047. Clement 2. makes the Romans forswear a right to choose Popes; but the
Emperor quelled him.

1049. Leo 9. appoints Priests to dwell nigh the Church.

1075. Gillibrand, or Gregory 7. and 89. Pope, by causing fire to come out of
his sleeve, the people cried, Peter has chosen Gillibrand; he had poisoned six
or seven; he decreed that people come not to Mass empty-handed; he threw the
Sacrament in the fire, not answering his demands, as the heathen Gods did
theirs; he made the Emperor and Emperess in cold weather come barefoot three
days for audience, yet, at last was banished, and died miserably.

1088. Urban 2. excommunicates two Emperors, and Clement the Emperors Pope,
and the people quarreld which Popes side to take; and more buds still; for*

1110. Petrus devised beads to say their Ladies Psalter on, and settled tithes
on the Priests; but

1119. Calextus excommunicates the Emperor, makes his Pope ride backward,
excommunicates all Priests that took money for baptizing or burying.

1124. While Honorius sent to forbid Priests marriage in England, himself was
found in bed with a slut.

And selfship has overgrown the Empire; for,

1154. Adrian 4. chid the Emperor for holding the wrong stirrup; also
excommunicated him for writing his own name before his; he seeking admission,
Adrian sets his foot on him, and said, On the Adder thou shall tread, etc. also
he made Consulls powerless.

1191. Silestin 3. sets on the Emperors Crown with his feet, saying, Per^me
regis regnum: and yet selfship buds apace, for,

1198. Innocent 3. settles Oricular confession, and takes the Cup from the
laity, burnt a hundred in one day, decreed that men believe that the words in
their Mass-Canon were used by Christ, and are equal to Scripture, and that the
Bread and Wine is after consecration the very flesh and blood of Christ, and
not Bread or Wine; that sins be confessed to a Priest once a year, and if he
publish their faults, to do penance in a Monastery till he die.

1216. Honorius 3. commands that when the Bread is lift up over the Priests
head, all people fall down and worship it, and that a woman declaring in three
years after marriage, that her husband cannot give her due benevolence, shall
be separate from him; and

1227. Gregory 9 orders a sacring bell to ring while the Priests lifts up bread
and challice, to stir up the people to worship it.

Silvester 4. was poisoned, and the place lay void 21. weeks.

1243. Innocent 4. brought in begging Friars, Dominicans, Carmalites, and
Austines.

1271. Gregory 10. held the Holy Ghost proceeding from Father and Son, twelve
times withstood before: And yet selfship buds; for,

1275. Clement 4. Granted three years pardon to all that could devoutly say
some Latin Horisms; and

1277. Nicholas 3. caused a massacre in France by the tole of a bell.

1281. Martin 4. kept Nicholases Concubine, and rid from his Palace all
pictures of Bears, least she beholding it, bring forth a Bear.

1294. Boniface 8. is said to enter as a Fox, rule as a Lion, and die as a Dog,
brought in the Jews Jubilee: went one day in Imperial another day in Popes
robes, and two Swords carried before him.

1316. John 22. Sainted Thomas Aquine, and in their register was now found
5555. Canonized Saints; he flaid a Bp, and then burnt him, decreed that bells
tole every Even, and that people straightway kneel, and say Avi Maria three
times.

1334. Benedict 12. gave a great sum for a woman to make use of.

1352. Clement 7. made a holy day for the Spear that pierced Christ.

1362. Urban 6. and 130. Pope, opposed France, and they chose Clement, which
schism lasted nigh forty years; Clement plundered Rome, and one Popes Bulls
roared against the other.

1389. Boniface 9. could not sing or say, nor understand what was discust
before him, but could admit dolts for money.

1406. Benedict succeeds Clement.

1417. In Martin the fifth's time, a Counsel was decreed above a Pope.

1447. Nicholas 5. Celebrates a Jubilee, in which Crowd were 136. slain: and
now the Turks took Constantinople.

1458. Pius 2. would have Priests to marry.

1464. Paul 2. had Jewels for his Diadem.

1470. Sextus 4 covered his concubines shoes with pearl, built Stews in Rome,
which brought him in yearly 2000. ducats, he granted St Lucy a Cardinal to use
unnatural lusts, each June, July, and August.

1492. Alexander 6. Plagued them that chose him, heapt up for his bastards,
betrayed his brother for money to a Turk, lay with his own daughter, gave
himself to Satan, etc.

1503. Julius 2. better at war than preaching, dispensed with our Henry, who
married his brothers wife, bugger'd two youths, Sainted mother Frances for
preserving her chastity with melted lard.

1512. Leo 10. told a Cardinal, that Christianity was a profitable fable: in
making thirty Cardinals, a tempest rose, and struck the keys out of his hand,
and Christ's Statue out of his mothers arms: for being styled the Lion of the
Tribe of Judas, Luther sell from him.

1524. Paul 3. used his own sister, also his own daughter, and poisoned her
husband, but pressing on his Niece, her husband taking him in the act, gave him
a mark that stuck to him till death.

1550. Julius 3. buggered a boy, and gave him a Cardinals Cap; his Cardinals
asking his reason for it, asked them, What reason they had to make him Pope?
(in his time John Cassa printed a Book to maintain Sodomy; and Francis Spira
revolted) he said, He had more cause of anger, for keeping back his cold
Peacock, than God had to cast Adam out of Paradise for eating of an Apple. He
gave the Mothers Blessing in Queen Marye's days.

1555. Marcellus 2. counts Luther worse than a Turk, discharged one Bp. for
holding Scripture above Traditions; and another, for saying the Council was
above the Pope.

1555. Paul 4. had stoutly opposed abuses, but the case is altered, he
patronized Jesuits, and the Inquisition.

1560. Paul 5. institutes that an Oath be not kept with Heretics.

1572. Greg. 13. had a massacre in France celibrated with triumph at Rome, the
Governor of Malti sang to him, For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

1580. Sextus 5. excommunicated Henry of France, praised a Monk that killed
him, comparing the act to the work of Creation, and Incarnation, and without
success, blessed Spains Banner against England.

More Popes have been, and more these Popes did, enough to tire the Reader; as
is shown in my chief Authors, Thomas Becons Collection, dedicated to Francis
Earl of Bedford, one of Queen Elizabeth's Privy Council.

And in an Introduction to the reading of Historyes, out of the writings of
Matthias Prideaux, sometime Fellow of Exeter College. But this is the poor
man's penny, and enough to teach us to avoid self-ship.

From what is written, I ask,

1. Why have Popes hundreds of Ordinances that Christ commanded not? Was it
from Christ's ignorance, or unfaithfulness, or from Popes arrogancies?

2. Is their pretended succession a vain notion? or have they had no Church or
Ministry, since the place lay 21 weeks void.

3. Is that Body a Monster, or no? that has sometime a Male, sometime a
Female? sometime one, sometime two, sometime three heads?

4. How are they infallible, since some Popes and Consuls too, oppose what
others maintain, and build what others pull down?

5. How are they Catholic? whose Daughter Mahomet has more children than she.

6. Where is their antiquity? since by their Register, Bishops were five hundred
years older than Popes? Protestants say they, began with Luther; but they know
that the way of Protestants was long before Popedom, though not called
Protestants, till they protested against Popes novelties.

7. How can they know what Religion they are of, since Popes alter and add what
they please; and who knows the next Popes fashion?

8. Why should their Deerees be equal to Scripture, since themselves heretofore
held otherwise?

9. Was that consecrated Wine, the very vein-blood of Christ, which poisoned
Pope Victor?

10. Did the Bell that tolled for a massacre, drive away the Devil?

11. If Bishops be not like Christ, except they go homely, who are Popes like
that wear Jewels? etc.

12. Have the worst of Heathens exceeded Popes in idolatry, murder, whoredom,
buggery, or witchcraft? etc.

13. Who can best judge of the sense of Scripture, whether ambitious Popes, or
humble laymen? Ps. 25.

14. How sit they in Peter's Chair? For 1. Their first Bp. Linus was mounted two
years before Peter dyed. 2. Peter had a wife, but they must have none. 3. Peter
beat down that Lordship which they have. 4. Peter had learnt of his Master to
sheath the Sword, but they are bloody. 5. Peter for Conscience Godward,
submitted to Powers, but they hastened to overtop Kings, and Emperors. In a
word, Peter was the Jews Apostle, and Paul to the Romans, Romans 11. 13.

A Loving Advice.
COurteous Reader, whether Papist, Protestant, Presbyterian, Independent,
Quaker, or Baptist, it is thy eternal good I aim at; and so does God also: for,
He desires not the death of him that dies, but rather that all would repent,
that they might be saved, Ezekiel. 18. 23, 30, 31, 32. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Therefore be
timely advised,

1. Not to take man's Traditions, for Christ's Commands; laying on of hands
cannot make a Youth an Elder, nor confirm in Christ, the baptized person. If
Paul (Jew-like) circumcised, and laid hands on Timothy, purified himself,
vowed, etc. it was beyond Christ's command, and before himself was perfected;
for afterward, he yielded not a jot to such Jewish Ceremonies, Gal. 2. 3, 4, 5.

Salted water, a Bell tolling, or a man's breath, cannot drive away Satan, a
Popes three years pardon avails not. Christ has hallowed no day, save that
which follows our six days labor; Popes hallowing of garments, persons,
places, or times, is not worth a straw.

Plot not against Powers, but obey them in all things lawful; submit to them
in every thing, revile them not, resist them not; for, if thou do, thou art
condemned of God, Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. and 2 Pet. 2. 10.

Christ's pure Ordinances, are but as Shells, and perfect purity is the Kernel?
for preaching, and Church-meeting, yea, the gift of Prophets, Apostles,
Gospelisers, or Teachers, is for this end given, to make men perfect, to bring
them to the same fullness that is in Christ, Col. 1. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
Therefore

Rule not over men's faith, 2 Cor. 1. 24. Imprison not, kill not, fight not for
shells, much less for men's inventions, which are but shaddows of shells; for
carnal fighting bereaves (not others, but) thy self of the kernel, which is
righteousness, for thy Just causes it, James 4. 1. And

Christ's thousand years Reign will not be set up by man's weapons; but the Lord
will shortly and totally end wars and Warriers in the valley of Jehoshaphat,
Joel 3. 10, 11, 12. He that kills with the Sword, shall surely perish (if
repentance prevent not.)

Secondly, Yet slight not Christ's pure Ordinances, for the Pearl is to be found
there; buy the Field for the Pearls sake; let Ordinances be as the one thing
needful, thereby to enjoy the Lords beauty, to wit, righteousness, Psalm. 27. 4.

Thirdly, Yet rest not (as many do) in the bare purchase of the field, but
therein dig for the Pearl; the form of Godliness without the power (that is,
the practice of Righteousness) avails not To conclude.

To make sure work for eternity, keep the Ten Commands, Matthew. 19. 17. Rev. 22.
14. Romans 13. 8, 9. And use Ordinances. Baptism is one part of righteousness,
Matthew. 3. And they that are one bread with Christ, are to eat of the Bread, and
drink of the Cup, which Disciples are (in Christ's name) to bless, etc. 1 Cor.
10. 16, 17.

Therefore trust not to bare believing, (though thou believe truth, (which
few do) but to thy belief, add all virtue, and therein abound, and thou will
not miscarry, Psalm. 15. and 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. Which is the desire of thy
Friend,

T. K.

Would thou live long, and see good days?
From evil speeches cease.
Shun all evil, do good always,
And follow after peace.
Gods eye is on the Just, his ear
Is open to their cry;
And who will harm you if your care
Be to walk uprightly.
And whosoever suffers for his sin,
Although he patient be,
Does not from God acceptance win,
No thank thereby gets he.
But he that smarts for shunning ill,
And patiently it bears,
Acceptance has from God, who will
Bottle up all his tears.
For Christ, who dyed for me and thee,
Did no sin, spoke no guile;
When sinners did revile him, he
Did not again revile.
His righteous cause he did commit,
Unto the righteous judge,
And herein was a pattern fit,
From which we should not budge.
How apt is man, if wronged he be,
With vengeance to repay?
I Will use him, as he used me,
Thus they do boldly say.
And by this means blood touches blood,
And murders do increase;
Yet each side says, My cause is good;
I follow after peace.
But man forgets that God alone
Will the avenger be;
Whose work it is for to repay,
For all hearts sees he.
FINIS.

