THE True Christ Owned, AS HE IS

TRUE AND PERFECT GOD MAN.

Containing An ANSWER to a late Pamphlet, having this Title, The Quakers Creed,
concerning the Man Christ Jesus, etc. Writ by a Nameless Author.

Which Pamphlet contains many gross Lies, and wilful Perversions: Beside some
other great Mistakes, occasioned by the Author his Ignorance and Blindness.

By George Keith.

Printed in the Year, 1679.

The True Christ Owned, AS He is True and Perfect GOD, AND True and Perfect Man.
Pamphlet.
TRanscribed verbatim out of a Treatise entitled, The way cast up.

Ans.
The false-hood of this shall plainly appear to any who reads my Book, how
that the Author has Omitted many particulars of great Moment, that are
necessary, for the Reader to understand the whole, beside the many Arguments,
made use of in my Book, to prove the truth of what I have affirmed; which he
has not so much as once named, only he has taken notice of some few, wherein
he thought he could find any advantage, but that he is therein also
disappointed, the following Answer, I hope shall make sufsiciently apparent.

Pamplet. Animadversion, 1.
The Quakers from hence believe, that Christ had a Manhood differing in nature,
srom the manhood of all other Men, contrary to Heb. 2. 11.

Ans.
He has given no answer to my argument from 1 Cor. 15. 45, 46, 47. that
proves that Christ as Man, excels all other Men, in Nature and Substance,
as the most high Heavens do excel the low Earth; but only to oppose this, he
brings that Scripture, Heb. 2. 11. which yet does nothing oppose what I have
affirmed; for granting, that Heb. 2. 11. proves, that Christ has the same
Nature of all other Men, in respect of all the essentials of Man's Nature, and
that he had all belonging to Man's Nature, which Adam had, before the Fall,
(although more is to be understood in Heb. 2. 11.) all this does not prove,
that he has not somewhat more belonging to his Nature, as he is the Heavenly
Man, than Adam had; but indeed, on the contrary, it proves very clearly, that
he had more, which is employed in these words, He that Sanctifies; for Christ
the Heavenly Man, the Second Adam, does Sanctify the Earthly Man, or First
Adam, as he believes in him, and gives him Life, both to Soul and Body, even
Life Immortal; and therefore he has a more excellent Nature, which is Heavenly
and Divine, than the First Adam had; for that which Sanctifyeth and Quickens,
is more excellent, than that which is Sanctified and Quickened thereby; but it
behoved him to partake of the true Nature of all other men, in all essentials,
which therefore, accordingly he has done, according unto Heb. 2. 14. forasmuch
then, as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself took
part of the same: and ver. 16. For he took not on him Angels, but the Seed of
Abraham. But, that more is to be understood also, by these words Of One, Heb.
2. 11. is manifest, because he that Sanctifyeth, and they who are not
Sanctified, but remain in their Unbelief and Ungodliness, are not said to be Of
One. Nor does Christ call the Unbelievers his Brethren, but only them that
believe, and are Sanctified by him: Christ therefore, and true Believers, are
Of One, because they are united together by a mutual participation of the
Nature of each other; so that as Christ the Heavenly Man, does partake of the
Flesh and Blood of the Children, they also partake of his Flesh and Blood, and
become one Flesh with him according to Ephesians. 5. 31, 32. And therefore, as he
does partake of the Nature of Men, so these men who do believe in him, are
partakers of his Divine Nature, who is the Heavenly man, and of God through
him, according to 2 Pet. 1. 4. compared with 2 Cor. 5. 19. and John 17. 23.
Moreover, that the Man Christ Jesus, has a Nature excelling all other men, as
much as the Heavens do excel the Earth; See also John 3. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.
and compare it with 1 Cor. 15. 45, 47.

Pamphlet. Animad. 2.
They believe from hence, that the Word was made Flesh, or Man, before the
Creation of this World, contrary to Gal. 4. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 20.

Ans.
These Scriptures prove nothing contrary to my assertion, for they are only to
be understood of his outward coming, when he took Flesh in the Virgins Womb,
and came in the likeness of Sinful Flesh; now I do not say, that he took that
outward Flesh from the beginning, but only at that time: but he, namely, the
Heavenly Adam himself, was from the beginning, and was the Word made Flesh, and
gave unto the Saints srom the beginning, his Flesh to Eat, and his Blood to
Drink, otherwise they could not have had Life in them, according to John 6.

Pamphlet, Animadversion 3.
The Quakers have found out another kind of Flesh, besides these four sorts, 1
Cor. 15. 39.

Ans.
Here thou seem rather to mock, than to argue in good earnest. But what I
have affirmed of the Heavenly Flesh and Blood of Christ, which he had from the
beginning, is no invention, nor fiction of ours, but grounded on the Scriptures
Testimony, and also on our own blessed experience: for that Flesh and Blood of
Christ, which he had from the beginning, is the Food and Nourishment of our
Souls unto Eternal Life, as it was also the Food and Nourishment of the Souls
of all that believed in him, from the beginning of the World; for all before,
and after his outward coming in that Body of Flesh, did Eat the same Spiritual
Meat, and Drink the same Spiritual Drink; for they Drank of the Rock, etc. and
that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. But when the Apostle is speaking of four kinds
of Flesh, he is only speaking of the Flesh of Terrestrial, or Earthly Bodies;
but not of the Flesh of Christ that came down from Heaven; which indeed, is
none of these four Sorts, but has a more excellent Nature: for all these four
Sorts are but Natural and Corruptible, but the Flesh of Christ is Spiritual and
Incorruptible: And as touching the words of Grotius, cited by thee, Flesh is
not understood by the Hebrews, but of the Mortal Body; it is easily answered,
by taking the word literally, without any Metaphor or Figurative Speech; but if
we take it Figuratively, it has other Significations. For how often is all
mankind comprehending both Soul and Body, called Flesh in Scripture, and yet
the Soul is not the Mortal Body? But how little have thou considered, how if
thou stand unto the words of Grotius, thou have given a stone to break thy own
Head? for if nothing is to be called Flesh, but the Mortal Body; then the Body
of the Resurrection, namely, both Christ, his Body, and also the Resurrection -
Body of the Saints, is not properly Flesh, because not a Mortal Body.

Pamphlet. Animad. 4.
The Apostles frequently speak of things to come, as present; as well might the
Author say, that Cyrus had a Soul and Body, and did exist in flesh and blood,
an Hundred Years before he was born; for he is called by Isaiah, Gods Anointed,
before his Birth, Isaiah 45. 1.

Ans.
If this be not gross Socinianisme, and Samosatenianisme, I leave unto all
understanding and sound Christians for to Judge: For both the Socinians now, and
Samosatenians of old, denied that Christ was before Mary; and so does this
Author, contrary to the express. Testimony of many Scriptures cited and opened
in my Book called, The Way cast up; to which again, I Refer the Reader: and
what a gross and unchristian, yea, Blasphemous comparison is this of the
Author, betwixt Cyrus and Christ, as if Christ were no more Gods Anointed
before his outward Birth in the Flesh, than Cyrus, was before his birth; and so
by this means, all the Saints from the beginning of the World unto the outward
birth of Christ, containing near about four Thousand Years, had no Christ, nor
no Savior, no Head, no Mediator; nor indeed, nothing of the Heavenly and
Spiritual Anointing or Unction; and so had nothing of the Holy Ghost, which is
that Anointing: for how could they have it without Christ, who is Gods
Anointed, originally and first of all, and from, and by, and through whom, it
comes down, and is conveyed unto the Saints, even as the Oil that was poured
on Aarons Head, ran down from the Beard unto the skirts of his Garment: Now
that David and all the Saints, before Christ came in the flesh, were in measure
anointed with the holy Unction, or Anointing; even the same wherewith the
Saints are now Anointed: see Psalm. 23. and Psalm. 133. 1, 2. And how did they
receive this Oil or Anointing, but from Christ, who is Gods Anointed first of
all, and by whom it descends unto them, of whom Aaron the high Priest, was
the Figure or Type; and therefore Christ was Gods Anointed from the beginning,
not only before Cyrus, but before all other men, according unto Prove, 8. 23. I
was anointed from the beginning, (so the Hebrew word Nissakti, does signify,
as I have already showed in my Book) or ever the Earth was.

Moreover, when Paul said, the Fathers of old, drank of the Rock, and that Rock
was Christ, was this only a Prophecy of Christ? who, but one so blind and
grossly ignorant, as the Author of this Pamphlet, can so affirm? Nor, do thief
Scriptures Cited by thee, Mat. 3. 16. Luke 4. 1. concerning Christ his being
anointed with the holy Ghost, after his outward birth, prove, that he was not
anointed before: For, in contradiction to thy self, thou grantest, he was
Anointed before he was born; as indeed he was both then, and also from the
beginning.

The Fifth Animad.
has nothing in it of Argument, against what I have affirmed; only he
perverteth some of my words, as the Reader may fee, by comparing his words and
mine together; and this he often ufeth, not willing to suffer my words to stand
as they are, but seeking to Vail and darken them, with his perverse minglings
and additions.

Pamphlet, Animad. 6.
They believe that the Man Christ, did suffer, was slain, and Crucified, when
our first Parents sinned; and does suffer, is slain, and Crucified, as often as
man sins, and Apostatise, contrary to Heb. 9. 26. and 1 Pet. 18. that testify
that the man Christ Jesus, was personally and really slain, Crucified and
offered for sin but once; the other is but either in Decree, Promise, Type, or
Metaphor.

Ans.
These Scriptures are only to be understood of Christ, his Sufferings in the
body of flesh; so that he did but once die and suffer for sin, in the outward
body, and in his outward person, which does not hinder, but that he suffered
and was slain, inwardly and spiritually, in men's hearts by sin, both before and
since he suffered in the body of flesh, which was Crucified at Jerusalem: for
the writer to the Hebrews, did tell of those that fell away, that they crucify
to themselves the Son of God afresh, Heb. 6. 6. And if thou say, this is but
in the Metaphor; I Answer, admitting it in a sense so to be, yet a real
suffering is employed under that Metaphor; as also, when the Spirit is said to
be quenched, somewhat real is understood under that Metaphor; and so in the
present Case, although the slaying and Crucifying of Christ, may be said to be
a Metaphor, or Figurative Speech, yet some real suffering analogous in some
true respect unto what he did suffer in the outward, is thereby understood; and
that I did acknowledge a Metaphor in that expression, is clear by my very words
cited by thee, where I say, the measure of the life of the Lamb, came to be
slain, as it were in them, by transgrefsion; here the words as it were signify
a Metaphor, which yet hinders not, that the suffering of this innocent Life
of Christ, was real, according unto its own kind and nature.

Pamphlet. Animad. 7.
In Answer to Amos 3. 13. he says, As well might they say, that God as God
has now, and had then, such Eyes, Ears, Feet, Hands, as we have; for the
Scripture speaks of him frequently, after that manner.

Ans.
I no where Read in all the Scripture, that God has such Eyes, Ears, Feet and
Hands, as we have; fo that in this, thou do grossly pervert the Scripture it
self: For, although the Scripture speaks at times, of Gods Eyes, Ears, Feet
and Hands, yet they are not said to be such, as ours; and though these words
are metaphorical, they have also somewhat that is real, understood by them by
way of Analogy; his Eyes, signifying his infinite Knowledge; and his Hands, his
Power, etc. and although I do also acknowledge, that the words Amos 3. 13. are
Metaphorical, yet a real suffering is employed under them, which is the
suffering of the Spirit of Christ, as he is the Heavenly man, and Lamb of God;
for, in that respect only, he does or can suffer, properly; nor is it any
contradiction, or inconsistency, as thou seem to make it, that the same
Life; or spirit of Christ, may be alive in it self, and yet Slain or Crucified,
as to the sinner, no more than it is any contradiction or inconsistency, that
the soul is, as it were, dead unto the dead body, in which it lived; and yet
remains alive in it self, even when it is in the body, as it was in the case
of Eutichus whom Paul raised from the Dead, Acts 20. 10.

In his Animad. 8.
he brings no new matter, but what my former Answer does give a sufficient
Reply unto; for the words, Romans 6. 9. are to be understood of Christ his being
raised from the Dead in that body wherein he suffered; so that he died no more,
as in the Head, no, nor yet in many of the Members; in whom that precious Life
of Christ, shall never any more, be slain or quenched: but it cannot be so said
of all, seeing some may fall away, and Crucify him afresh, unto themselves.

Pamphlet, Animad. 9.
In Answer to my Arguments from some places of Scripture in the old Testament,
thou say, By the same way of arguing, Christ did from the beginning, really
take upon him Angelical Nature, as well as man's Nature.

Ans.
That Nature which Christ did take from the beginning, did and does excel in
its very being, the Nature, both of all men, and also of all the most glorious
Angels; and yet, according unto the same Nature, he is sometimes called Angel,
and sometimes Man; Angel there, not signifying the common nature of Angels, but
only his High Office and Dignity thereof; for Angel is, as to say, Messenger,
or one that is sent: and therefore it does not follow from this, that Christ
took on him the common Nature of Angels, as he did the seed of Abraham, when he
was born the son of David according to the Flesh. And thy other instance
concerning the man riding upon a red Horse, is no less impertinent (Zech. 1.
18,) For although some places of Scripture, have only an allegorical sense, it
follows not, that none have a proper; and the proper sense is to be kept,
where nothing does persuade unto the contrary; as indeed nothing does persuade
to the contrary, in the present case; but many things concur together to
establish the true and proper sense.

Pamphlet, Animad. 10.
Here he brings forth no matter of argument, but only some queries, which I
might altogether wave; yet for the sake of others, I shall say that which may
suffice unto any sober enquirer: And to the First, I say, this Life and Spirit
of the manhood of Christ, is one with the Holy Ghost, by an oneness of union,
even as the man Christ, is one with God; but as the Holy Ghost does signify the
Spirit of God, simply considered, the Spirit of Christ, as man, is distinct
from the Holy Ghost, as really as the manhood of Christ, is distinct from the
Godhead, but not divided, or separated therefrom. To the Second I answer,
that the Spirit of Christ, as he is the Heavenly Man, is not properly a
creature, but only as it is taken improperly, and largely, for a Divine
Production and Emanation; but properly, it is rather an Emanation or
Generation, than a Creation. To the Third I say, a Spiritual Body, can well
enough penetrate another that is, either, not Spiritual; or if Spiritual, yet
not in that degree, as the other. Now, when I say, according unto the
Scripture, that Christ had Spiritual Flesh and Blood from the beginning,
wherewith he fed the Saints; by that Flesh and Blood, I mean a Spiritual Body,
in the highest degree: and how one Body more Spiritual, can penetrate another,
in a less degree, we have a Figure, or shaddowy resemblance, in the outward
light, that does easily penetrate, both crystal and air. To the Fourth, I say,
it is very easiy to conceive, how Christ is called the Second Adam, although,
as man, he was before Adam, who is called the first man: namely, in respect of
the outward birth in the flesh, and also, in some respect, in the inward birth,
of Christ in us, when we are regenerated and made new creatures, in him: for
commonly, the first birth, which is of the nature of the first Adam, as in the
Fall, has place in men, before Christ the second birth be formed in them; and
yet Christ himself and his Spirit, Life and Soul, as he is the Heavenly Man,
was and is before Adam and all Creatures, the first and the last; of whom John
said, there comes a man after me, which is preferred unto me, for he was
before me: And thus, according to Solomon's advice in the Proverbs, I have
answered the Fool in his folly, lest he should seem wise in his own Eyes.

Pamphlet. Animad. 11.
Here he brings no argument, but only querieth, and seeks to ensnare; but I
am aware of his serpentine cunning, and can easily escape it by the grace of
God, which is given unto me: and whereas he labors to bring G. F. younger,
and me, into a contradiction, his work is vain; for according to G. F. I say,
the true Eternal God, is Light, and that Light is in us: But God does shine in
us, in Christ the Heavenly Man, or Second Adam, who is in us; for God was, and
still is, in Christ, Reconciling the world unto himself. Again, whereas thou
say, by way of query, Was the man that appeared frequently to the
Patriarchs, without the spring of this Soul and life of Christ. I answer, Nay;
for that man was Christ, even the same that afterward came in the flesh of the
Virgin Mary: And whereas thou say, let them produce one Scripture, and they
shall carry it, where it is said, The man or Manhood became flesh, it says,
The Word was made Flesh; I answer, these words, The Word was made Flesh, cannot
be restricted, or limited to the outward birth of Christ in the Flesh; for the
Word was made Flesh from the beginning; which Flesh was the Saints food in all
Ages; and the Word made Flesh dwelt in them, according to Joh. 1. 14. The word
was made Flesh, and dwelt in us; for so the Greek does bear it, and so was it
Translated, by diverse of them called the Fathers. But that Christ the Heavenly
man, took part of Flesh and Blood with the Children, see Heb. 2. 14. And that
this he, who did so partake with men of Flesh and Blood, was not God;
separately, and abstractly considered; but God in Union with the Heavenly
Manhood, and Soul of Christ, is clear, from other Scriptures, as 1 Cor. 15.
47. Joh. 3. 31. Joh. 6. 38. Now these words, Joh. 6. 38. I came

down from Heaven, not to do mine own will; most clearly signify, that the
Soul of Christ came down from Heaven, to take Flesh; for God simply considered,
could not say, I came down from Heaven, not to do my own will, for God always
does his own will, which being most Holy, is a Law, both unto Christ the
Heavenly man, and also unto all others: this Scripture with many others, I did
bring, in my book, The way cast up, for proof of what I have affirmed, whereof
thou have taken no notice, so as to give any reply. But lastly, whereas thou
say, in this Twelve Animadversion, In the next quotation, Mark, he says, As
man he was the Son of God; at which thou art offended: it seems therefore,
that this is no part of thy Creed, viz. That Christ as man, was the Son of God,
even when born of the Virgin Mary; But if thou denyest this, I ask thee, who
was the Father of Christ, as he was man, but God? For if he had another Father,
then he was not born of the Virgin: which, if this be not rampant blasphemy,
for any called a Christian to affirm, I leave unto all true Christians for to
Judge: Or if thou denyest, that Christ was the Son of God before he was born in
the Flesh, thou art Guilty of Gross Socinianisme, and contradictest the
Scriptures Testimony in many places.

Pamplet, Animad. 12.
They believe that Christ did not become man, when the Virgin conceived by the
over-shaddowing of the Holy Ghost, but was man before.

Answ.
He was man before, but yet he was not man clothed with Flesh and Blood, in
the likeness of our Flesh, before the Virgin conceived by the over-shaddowing
of the Holy Ghost; and therefore we do saithfully believe, that the Man Christ
was born of the Virgin, and conceived by the over-shaddowing of the Holy Ghost,
who was the Son of God, both after he was so born, and also before, even from
Everlasting.

Pamplet, Animad. 12.
Thus Christ was never man, had never a Humane Nature; for as they have said
before, The Soul most properly is the man, and Christ never had a Humane Soul,
according unto Keith.

Answ.
That Christ was never man, I altogether deny, to follow by any true
Consequence; from what I have affirmed, and as to his reason, that Christ never
had a Humane Soul, according unto Keith, as touching the words, Humane Soul, I
do not remember that I have used that Term at all in my book, The way cast up;
for because it is not a Scripture-Term, and of a doubtful and Equivocous
signification, I purposely did pass it by; I say, it is of a doubtful, or
Equivocous signification: because first, it may signify such a Soul; as has
no substantial dignity, or perfection in it, above the Souls of other men; and
in this sense, the Soul or Spirit of Christ, as he is the Heavenly man, is not
a Humane Soul, but Divine, and Heavenly; for it is more excellent, even in the
nature of it, than the souls of other men: Or Secondly, it may signify the
true soul of man, having all the Essential Properties of man's soul, and it is
whole perfection; and if in this sense, any will say, that Christ has a Humane
Soul, and call the Manhood of Christ, his Humanity, there needs no
contention about it; for in the Latin Tongue, we have not a word so proper, as
Humanitas, to signify the Manhood; and if we may say Humanitas in Latin, we
may say in English Humanity; that is to say, Manhood: But then, by the
Humanity of Christ, we understand, not only the whole Essential perfection of
the souls of Ordinary men, but also some greater and more Excellent perfection,
as aforesaid; and therefore, it may be called his Heavenly and Divine Humanity,
or Manhood, which took part of Flesh like unto ours, in the womb of the
Virgin. And not only the soul of Christ, but also his body of Flesh, in the
outward, as it had all the Essential properties, and whole Essential
perfection, of our bodies; so it had somewhat more, as being. conceived of a
Heavenly and Divine seed, that came down from Heaven; and for this cause, the
Heavenly man Christ Jesus is truly Divine, both in soul and body, being
divinely qualified in both. And if this offend any, that Christ should be
called a Divine man, I desire them to consider; how often men are called Divines,
only for some profession of Divinity; and surely Christ Jesus, as man, has
incomparably more reason to be called Divine, than any of them; And what if I
should call all their Divines, Humanes? Is this too mean and low a Term,
whereby to call them? But why is it too mean and low unto them, and yet they
give it unto Christ, and call him Humane; his soul, a Humane soul, and his body
a Humane body: Is not this to exalt themselves above Christ himself, and to
take to themselves a Title, which they will scarce allow unto him, and to give
him a Title (as namely Humane) which they think too mean for themselves.

Pamplet, Animad. 12.
So that he is so far from being like to us in all things, that he is not like
unto us in any thing; for though he had a body like to ours, yet that body is
not informed as ours.

Answ.
He is sufficiently like unto us in all things (sin excepted) that both his
soul and his body had all the Essential properties, and whole Essential
perfection, that the soul or body of any other men has; but that he had, and
still has greater, and more excellent perfections, both of soul and body, than
all other men, does not hinder that he was made like unto us, in those which
both he and we also have: for was not Adam made in the Similitude or likeness
of God? So that by reason of that Similitude, man was like unto God and yet God
is infinitely more excellent in nature and being, than Man; but yet according
unto the reasoning of this Author, either man has no likeness unto God, is not
like unto him in any thing, or then God has no Substantial or Essential
perfection above man; both which are most absurd and contrary unto Scripture.
But again, is not man like unto the Beasts in some things, as also unto the
Herbs, Plants and Trees of the field? So that as the Herbs, Plants and Trees,
have a Vegitable soul or life, and as beasts have a sensitive soul or life;
has not man both the Vegitable and sensitive soul, and is he not like unto
them in those respects? And yet has he not a Substantial dignity and
excellency of nature above them; But yet again, according unto this man's
reasoning, either man is not like unto the Beasts and Trees, in any thing, or
else he has no Essential dignity or perfection; not so much as in his very
soul, above them; and therefore it shall follow, at last, that as God is no
more excellent in his nature than man; and as man is no more excellent in his
nature, than any beast, yea or Tree, that God is no more excellent than any
beast or Tree of the field, which is most gross and blasphemous, and yet the
Natural and necessary Consequence of this man's Doctrine. When I think upon
these and such like gross absurdities, that follow from this man's Doctrine,
together with his other absurd sayings, and Malicious perversions, I wonder
not, that he has been either ashamed or afraid to put his Name to his Pamplet.

Pamplet, Animad. 12.
A Son is not a Son, if he have not the same nature with the Father and Mother.

Answ.
I grant, for Christ has the same Nature both of Father and Mother: seeing as
I have declared in my book, he is True and perfect God, and True and perfect
Man: but that he has the same Nature with Mary, and all Mankind, as to all the
Essentials of soul and body, hinders not, that he has also, a more excellent
nature; otherwise, thou might as well say, that Christ could not be the Son of
Man, and also the Son of God, which is contrary to Scripture.

Pamplet, Animad. 12.
Jesus increased in Wisdom, his Soul was then subject to some kind of
ignorance, though not sinful: it did not know all present or past things.

Answ.
Ey Jesus increasing in Wisdom, may be very well understood, the manifestation
of the spirit of Wisdom, that did more and more show forth it self in him; and
that to increase, is not always taken strictly, is clear from the words of
John; He, namely Christ, shall increase, but I shall decrease Now, John was not
to decrease, as to any Perfection, Grace, or Virtue, wherewithal God had
endued him. But again, I do readily grant, that Christ, as in respect of the
Nephesh of his soul, might grow in Wisdom, as other men, as also he did grow
in stature: and Lastly, even the Nismah, although Omnipercipient of things
present, and Omniscient of things, both past and present, may and did grow in
Knowledge; for the Soul of Christ, has this Omnisciency of things past and
present, by the Perception of the objects, or things, as they daily appear: and
therefore his Soul may grow in experimental Wisdom and Knowledge, as properly
as the soul of any other man; although both his Wisdom and growth therein is
incomparably beyond that of all other Men or Angels: But whereas thou say,
Christ's soul was subject to some kind of ignorance, this is too grossly and
rudly, yea irreverently spoken: He was nescient of some things that was to
come; as namely, of the day and hour of the last Judgment, as he declared
himself; but to say he was ignorant of any thing, is gross and improper; for
ignorance signifies always some defect of that Knowledge which one should
have, as blindness, deafness, etc. Signify a defect of the Natural senses of
seeing, hearing, etc.

Pamplet, Animad. 12.
Christ (according to Keigh) when he appeared in Flesh, was more like to the
Angels that appeared in Humane shape, in the time of the Old Testament, than
like to men.

Answ.
This I altogether deny, for Angels have not real bodies of Flesh and Blood,
such as men have; Angels are not born of women as men are, Angels are not
crucified and buried, as men are, and as Christ was: and although Christ was
called an Angel, yet he had and still has, a nature more excellent than all
the Angels, and when he came in the likeness of our Flesh, he took not hold on
Angels, but he took hold on the seed of Abraham.

Pamplet, Animad. 12.
What spirit was that which Christ committed to his Father, when he gave up the
Ghost on the Cross?

Answ.
Why not the same excellent spirit or soul, that is above the Nature of all
souls of men, and that is Omnipresent; for still the Father is greater than he,
and he has his dependence on the Father, in whose hand or power, he is.

Pamplet, Animad. 12.
And if they are for the pre-existence of the Soul of Christ's Manhood, why
not for the pre-existence of the souls of all other men?

Answ.
I have no time, nor mind to answer all thy queries; many of which are
altogether unnecessary, others, vain and frivolous; but if thou think that
the pre-existence of the Soul of Christ, does necessarily infer the
pre-existence of the souls of all other men, thou should have proved it by a
clear Deduction, so to be; which because thou have not done, I am not concerned
to answer thy query in this particular: and I advise thee, with Augustine, to
be more earnest to know, what shall be the state of thy soul after thou go
out of this world, than what it was before thou came into it. And if thou
repent not from thy heart, for thy so long opposing the Truth, and maliciously
perverting the words of Truth, the state of thy soul will be miserable after
thy departure.

Pamplet, Animad. 13.
I ask, why is not this Man Christ, in all the fallen Angels, as well as fallen
men?

Answ.
He is in all the Creatures, for hefilleth all things, giving being unto every
Creature, and upholding the same therein; and Consequently he is in the fallen
Angels; as also to Judge and condemn them for their sin; but yet Christ Jesus
has a nearer Relation unto fallen men, than unto the fallen Angels, by reason
of the seed of Abraham, which he assumed: and therefore the Apostle Paul
Preached Christ in fallen men, not only after that general manner of presence,
but in way of Grace and Mercy, in order to restore and renew fallen man by
Repentance according to his Commission, which he received from Christ; which
was to turn fallen men from darkness to light: but we read not, that Paul had
any such Commission to preach unto the fallen Angels: and as for the fallen
Angels, they are reserved in Chains of darkness unto the Judgment of "the
great day, and expect not any other thing from Christ but Torment, as they said
unto him, when he came in the flesh, and did cast them out of men, What have we
to do with

thee, Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to Torment us before the time? So,
here, the Devils believe and tremble, for they fear the Judgment of Christ, to
whom all power is given; But how could they fear it, if he were not present;
and how could he cast them out of those they possessed, if his power (which is
one with himself) did not reach unto them?

Pamplet, Animad. 13.
As for the Greek proposition (...), it must necessarily be Translated among in
some places, else see what sense you will make.

Answ.
That it must be necessarily translated among, in some places, I do not deny;
but in many more places, it must necessarily by translated, not among, but in;
and in every place, it ought to be translated in, where the sense does permit
it, without any contradiction to truth, or other inconveniency; because it does
most properly and usually signify, in, and not among; but improperly, and less
usually, whereof many hundreds of examples may be given. Now there is no
contradiction unto truth, nor any inconveniency, to understand by the Greek
particle 'Ev, it is proper and common Signification, which is [in] in all these
places mentioned in my Book: And indeed, these very places constrain us to
translate the Particle

in, and not barely among: For how was Christ Crucified among the Galatians,
but in them? Gal. 3. 1. And how was the Riches of the Glory of the Mystery,
which is, Christ, among the Gentiles, but in them? and how could Paul Preach
the Unsearchable Riches of Christ among the Gentiles, if nothing of these
Riches of Christ was in them, but all without them? And how could so many have
been said to have pierced Christ, if he was not in them? For as touching the
outward piercing of the outward Body of Christ, we only read that some few did
that; and therefore, their piercing of Christ, must be meant of his tender Life
and Spirit, which both Jews and Gentiles have pierced in their own Hearts, by
their Sins, according to Rev. 1. 7.

Pamphlet, Animad. 14.
They believe this manhood of Christ perceives and knows all things, past and
present, of it self and by it self; considered, without any Relation to, or
union with the Deity, and that it needs not God, as to the knowledge of any
present or past things, but only as to the thing to come.

Answ.
This is a most gross and unreasonable perversion and wresting of my words;
which any man that, has the least Sobriety or Candor, must needs acknowledge,
by reading my words, even as cited by him:

But if he say, that his gloss does follow by way of consequence, from my
words; I altogether deny it, and in plain contradiction to what he has most
perversely and falsely alleged to be my assertion: I say, the Manhood or
Soul of Christ, neither knows, nor can know, any thing, past, or present,
without the need and necessary help of God; as neither indeed, can we, or any
Creature: And Secondly, I affirm, that Christ has this Omnipercipiency, or
Universal knowledge of things past and present, by Virtue of his Divine Union
with God; even as the body has its perception of some things, by Virtue of its
Union with the Soul, to which it is United. And because the Soul of Christ,
has the most excellent, most perfect and most high, and immediate Union with
God; so as that Christ himself is God: therefore he has this universal
perception or knowledge of things past and present: and therefore also, he has
the most abundant knowledge of things to come, by Divine Revelation from the
Father, above what the most perfect Angels or men can have; so that what they
know by Divine Revelation, they know it by Jesus Christ, who has it from the
Father, according unto Rev. 1. 1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God
gave unto him, to show unto his servants. Nor can it follow by any just
consequence imaginable, that because I say, that Christ has an Universal sense
or Perception of things as they are, that therefore he does know them without
all need of God, or without all Relation unto him, or Union with him; I say,
this does not follow, no more then it follows, that whereas the Author of
this Pamphlet has many Natural Perceptions of Natural Objects, Sees, Hears,
Smells, Tastes and Feels; many Objects immediately, and knows them
without immediate Revelation; that therefore he has no need of God, or of his
help, whereby to make them known: Whereas indeed, according to his manner of
reasoning, either he himself, Hears, Sees, Smells, Tastes, Feels all
Natural things by immediate Revelation; and all his Natural knowledge of things
immediately Revealed unto him by God; or then he knows them all without any
need of God, and without all Relation unto God, so much as unto a Creator: both
which, how absurd they are, and yet how the Natural Consequence of his own
reasoning, I leave unto every understanding man sor to Judge.

But I cannot but wonder at his blindness and inconsiderateness that does not
understand, how to make a difference betwixt that knowledge, which is by a real
sense or perception of the Objects in themselves, and that which is by a Divine
Revelation, when the Objects themselves are not immediately discerned; for that
which I know by a real Perception of the things, I need not a Revelation to
make them known: As for Example, when I hear a man speak, I need not a Divine
Revelation to tell me who speaks unto me, or what is spoken; and yet I need
the help of God, in many respects, both to convey the voice unto me, and also
to help me to hear; for it is God who makes the ear to hear, and the eye to
see: And thus, according to the aforesaid Example, if Christ Jesus, even he the
Man-Christ Jesus, who was Crucified for us, hear our Prayers, when we pray unto
him, and unto God through him, does he not know our Prayers without a Divine
Revelation? and if he know them only by a Divine Revelation, he cannot be faid
properly to hear them, as I have sufficiently proved in my book, and to which
this Trifler, and perverter, has made no reply: and if he denies, that the
Man Christ Jesus hears our prayers, let him declare so much; and then we
shall see, how this shall relish unto the ears of true Christians; and who are
most denyers or owners of the True Christ, and of his Divine perfections.

Pamplet, Animad. 14.
Whether this is not to constitute a new God in time: Is it not Jehova's
Prerogative, what is spoken, Psalm. 139. Of possessing the Reins, and being
Omniscient.

Answ.
To say that Christ Jesus the Heavenly man, and Lord from Heaven, is
Omniscient, and has an Omni-perception, and Universal knowledge of things; is
not to constitute a new God in time, for Christ Jesus is God, even the same
God, with the Father, by virtue of his most excellent, and most immediate Union
with him, which no men nor Angels have, or are capable to have, and Christ
Jesus is before all things, and consequently before all times also, the first
and the last: Nor does it follow, because the manhood of Christ has an
Universal knowledge and perception of things, that therefore his manhood is
either equal unto the Godhead, or the same; for seeing the manhood has his
being as well as his knowledge, from the Godhead, and is altogether dependent
from him, the Father is greater then he, as he has declared himself: and here
what thou talkest of the communication of properties, I may afterward
consider, in its proper place, where thou fliest unto it, as thy last refuge,
after thou have finished thy Animadversions.

Pamphlet Animad. 14.
As to the second it is spoke, Now I am no more in the World, and me you have
not always: I go away.

Answ.
It is very clear, that he spoke these words, only in respect of his outward
and bodily presence of his external person, or outward man; but not in respect
of his inward and spiritual presence, even as he is the Son of man, or second
Adam, for after the Ascenfion of Christ, John saw one like unto the Son of man,
walking in the midst of the Seven Golden Candlesticks, who could this be but
the Son of man himself? And how is Christ the second Adam, the quickening
spirit, if he be not present to quicken those whom he does quicken? for how can
that which is absent from us, altogether quicken us, or give us life?

Pamphlet Animad. 15.
As to thy query here, I answer, That Christ was an offering unto God for sin
(when he was Crucified upon the Cross) both in soul and body; and neither his
soul nor body, want any thing that is Essential unto the true and real Nature
of man; and all that which he had as man, he offered up unto God through the
eternal spirit.

Pamphlet Animad. 15.
They believe this second latter body is Ascended, glorified in Heaven, yet
remains the same in substance, contrary to their former faith, citing John

Crook, in his book called Counterfeit Convert, when the question is put J. C.
viz. whether do thou believe, that the same body of man, after the departure
of the soul from it, does rise to life again: he answers, this query is
contrary to Scripture, which says, a Natural body, etc.

Answ.
This is another manifest perversion, for it is plain by J. C. his words here
cited by thee, that J. C. does not speak of the body of Christ, but of the body
of an ordinary man, which goes to dust and corruption, whereas the body of
Christ did not corrupt; for it being conceived by the Holy Ghost, and having a
Heavenly Original, it was more excellent then the body of any other man; and
therefore seeing it did not corrupt, it was raised again, according to the
words of Christ, concerning it, Destroy this Temple, and after three days I
will raise it up: and the same, after forty days Ascended into Heaven.

Pamphlet Animad. 15.
Yet according unto Keith the Philosopher, though it be the same in substance,
it is no more a body of Flesh and Blood.

Answ.
How or in what respect, he calls me the Philosopher, as whether by way of
Derision or not, I am not careful to determine, or inquisitive to understand,
for I affect no such Title, unless it be understood according to the Etimology
of the word, to signify a lover of Wisdom; namely the true Wisdom, and not
that falsely so called; and in this sense, every true Christian is a
Philosopher; which is to say, a lover of Wisdom; but that Philosophy and vain
deceit, which the Apostle bids the Colossians beware of; that is, after the
Tradition of men, after the rudiments of this world, and not after Christ,
wherein I have been formerly educated and exercised, before I knew the truth as
it is in Jesus, I have renounced, and do here, openly declare my Renounciation
thereof, and count it all but loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus, in whom are hid, all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge;
and what I have declared, or given forth in any public Testimony concerning
the truth, I have not received from the Worlds Philosophy, or Wisdom, but from
the openings of the spirit of truth, as they livingly fprung up in my heart and
inward parts; and unto the same, and to nothing else, I can and do recommend my
Testimony, to be judged in all, who have the same living spring of truth; as it
is in the life and light of Jesus, opened in them; and unto the greater measure
of the spirit of truth, in any others, I freely can and do submit, any public
Testimony which I have given forth, for the spirit of the Prophets is subject
to the Prophets; and what the spirit of truth opens in one, can never be
condemned by the same spirit in another.

Pamphlet Animad. 15.
The first Heavenly body of the manhood of Christ which Keith says, he had
from the beginning, he allows to have Flesh and Blood, and calls it so, and it
has so now, in Heaven, surely according unto him, yet, the body born of the
Virgin, is changed so Etheriall, that you must call it no more Flesh and Blood.

Answ.
I have said nothing concerning the Flesh and Blood of Christ, either before,
or after his outward coming in the Flesh, but according unto plain Scripture;
nor have I meddled to give any other names unto the body of Christ, but what the
Scripture gives: for Christ said, the bread from heaven is his Flesh, and of
this Bread, or Flesh, all true believers did feed, and thereby had life in
them, even from the beginning of the world: and seeing Christ himself gave
these names of Flesh and Blood, to that inward, Heavenly, Spiritual, and
invisible substance, which refreshes the soul and inward man of every one that
believes, Who dare call these names into question, or find fault with them?
although, I do freely acknowledge, they are Metaphorical and figurative; as
when Christ called himself the vine, and those that believed in him, the
branches; and I ask, was not Christ the vine, even from the beginning, into
which all true believers were grafted? and did they not eat the Grapes of this
Heavenly Vine-Tree, and drink the Liquor or Juice, or Wine thereof? and what
was that but his Flesh and Blood, even as the Grapes of the Vine may be called
it is Flesh; and its Wine or Liquor, its Blood; and as it is so called in
Scripture, the Blood of the Grape?

But when I say, the body of Christ which was born of the Virgin, and was
crucified and rose, and ascended, did not remain a body of Flesh and Blood, I
am warranted by the Apostle, who said, Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God: and the body at the last resurrection is raised spiritual,
conform unto the glorious body of Christ; and therefore it is not Flesh and
Blood, in the Vulgar, or common sense; but if any call it so Metaphorically,
and spiritually, I shall not contend.

Pamphlet Animad. 15.
If the body of Christ be turned into air, and yet remain the same, in
substance, we ask, what it is that identifies and makes it the same in
substance, that it was, when Flesh and Blood.

Ans.
Here is another gross abuse and perversion of my words, that he affirms: I
say the body of Christ is turned into Air. This is a gross lie and perversion;
I call it not Air, but a body Etherial and Heavenly; and it is a more excellent
body than the purest Air, beyond all comparison; and as to his question, what
is that, which Identifies and makes it the same in substance; this is very
easily answered; the substance of the body it self remaining the same, under
these different modes, or manners of being; as when the Soul of a man, is the
same for substance, when converted from Earthly, Carnal, and Natural, to
Heavenly and Spiritual.

Pamphlet, Animad. 16.
As to the comparison that the Author uses, as nothing of the Body of the Sun
is here on Earth, but in Heaven; only its light and heat, which are qualities
in the Air: So now that light within, that these Quakers have made so much
stir about, is nothing else but an accident and quality from the manhood of
Christ, in Heaven, adhering in our Souls, as light and heat, adheres in the Air.

Ans.
Here he passes by the other examples given by me here, and elsewhere, and
only noticeth that of the Light, which having its center in the Sun, emanates
in most abundant Streams into all the World, which emanating light that flows
from the body of the Sun, he denies to be any part of the Suns body, affirming
it only to be an accident or quality: But what reason or prooff gives he, for
his assertion? Surely none at all: But if he thinks to defend himself by the
authority of some called Philosophers; who say the same with him: I can tell
him of other Philosophers, so called, more famous; and who speak indeed, more
according to the truth, that deny it; and affirm, that the Light of the Sun,
that emanates unto us, is a real substance, and has of the real body of the
Sun in it, which is the real Substance of Fire, as it can be proved, by the
said Light, when it is contracted or gathered together, by the help of a
burning Glass, that it burns, or kindles, any ordinary combustible matter,
as any other fire does: But seeing such a debate, is more proper for
naturalists, and belongs to that called natural Philosophy; I shall not
insist thereon: only, I inform the Reader, who is not acquainted, perhaps, with
such things, that the opinion which holds light and heat, to have no body, is
almost generally, now rejected, in the Schools, as false; and as a mere old
fiction of some old Popish School men, grounded upon some mistaken notions of
Aristotle, and upheld by the Jesuits to uphold their absurd Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, when they teach, That the color, and taste, and smell of
the bread and wine, being but mere accidents, do remain without all Substance
of the bread and wine, after the consecration; and as absurd and ridiculous,
is their doctrine who say, that light has no body, that is proper unto it, but
is a mere accident, or quality in the Air: For as well may the Jesuits say;
that the color, smell and taste of the Bread and Wine, having no body, or
substance of the Bread and Wine, are only accidents adhering in the Air. But
why do thou not answer to my other examples, brought from Scripture; as
namely, how the natural Life and Soul, do principally reside in the head and
heart, and yet emanate into all the members of the body; and how the Sap and
Moisture, residing principally in the root of the Tree, goes forth into all
the branches; even so the life and light of Christ, as he is the Heavenly Adam,
residing principally in himself; does emanate and stream forth, into all his
members, and in some respect, into all things? Is the Sap and Moisture, a mere
accident, having no substance? and is not the Soul of Man, substantially, in
all the bodily Members? although residing, more principally in the heart and
head.

Pamphlet, Animad. 17.
They believe this Heavenly manhood to be a creature, contrary to John Crooks
Counterfeit convert, p. 63. that true light which is called the Life of Christ,
John 1. 4, 9. and lights every man that comes into the World, is not a
creature; Keith says, it is a creature.

Ans.
To this I have answered sufficiently above, upon Animad. 8. that the Spirit or
Life of Christ, as he is the Heavenly man, is not so properly or strictly a
creature. But men have not only the Spirit of Christ in them, as he is Man; but
also as he is God, and the Light, Life, and Spirit of Christ, as he is God: or
the word simply considered in it self, in no sense, can be said to be Created:
But the word made Flesh, may in that sense be said to be Created, as it is said
to be made; for Made, Created, and Formed, are commonly of one Signification:
And that the word was made Flesh from the beginning, I have proved in my book,
because the Saints in all Ages, did feed upon the Word made Flesh, and the Word
made Flesh dwelt in them. Now in what sense I understand, that the Heavenly
manhood and Soul of Christ is Created: I explain in my book, in these words,
p. 135. Therefore to the end that the word may be ingrafted into us, and we
again ingrafted into it, the Word must be Incarnate, or made Flesh, as we are;
for all men are a sort of Flesh, and so called in Scripture, in comparison of
God, that is purely Spirit; and though the Souls of Men are Spirits, yet
comparatively, as unto God, they are, as it were, Flesh; and thus the Word is
become Flesh; that is to say, has advanced a Step or degree, nearer unto us,
than it was in God before any thing was made; and the Word was first of all
made Flesh, to be the root and soundation of all other Created beings, and for
which they are Created; for it is a more noble Creation, than all things else:
Here by my words quoted at large in my book, it may be seen, how and in what
sense, I understand the Heavenly manhood of Christ to be Created, namely, as
the word is made Flesh: also Christ himself designed by Wisdom, Pro. 8. 24.
does expressly say of himself; when there were no Depths, I was Formed; and
again, v. 25. before the Hills, I was Formed: for so does the Hebrew word
Cholalti, most properly signify, and is used elsewhere in Scripture to signify
the Creation of other things; so that, Made, Formed, Created, do commonly
signify one and the same. Nevertheless, I do acknowledge, that Christ the
Heavenly Man, is not so properly or strictly to be called a Creature; or
Created, Made, or Formed; but rather generated: and he is the Son of God,
rather than a Creature of God; even as a Man's Son, is not called his Creature,
but his Son; and yet he does truly and properly partake with the Creatures;
otherwise he could not be a perfect Middle, or Mediator, betwixt God and Men,
who are Creatures. But seeing this production or bringing forth of Christ from
God the Father, is so great a Mystery, it is by no means to be curiously
disputed about, but simply to be acknowledged, believed and admired; and not to
be expressed in words which man's wisdom teaches, but what the Holy Ghost
Teaches; such as the Scripture words are, which say, The Word was made Flesh;
and Christ, the Heavenly man, is the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace
and Truth, and the firstborn of every Creature: and concerning his wonderful
Generation, it is said, Who can declare it? and he is called, the New Man, who
is Created after God, etc. and so to these Scripture Names, I keep close; where
I am safe, and where the malicious accusations of the adversaries of truth
cannot reach unto me. And by what is said, the reader may easily understand,
that there is no real contradiction, betwixt John Crook and me; for whither J.
C. mean by the true Light, which is the Life of Christ, the Light of the Word
simply considered, or the Word made Flesh, I am at no contradiction with him;
for according to the first, That Light, can in no sense be called a Created
Light: and according to the second, namely, As the Word made Flesh, or as the
Spirit of Christ as man, it is not properly Created, nor in that strict and
narrow sense, is it to be so called, as the other Creatures are.

Pamphlet, Animad. 17.
That Scripture, in Heb. 9. 11. Not of this Building; is grossly corrupted by
the Author, etc. (...) here, is rightly translated building or structure: It is
not always taken, for the Act of God, in framing something out of nothing; nor
the effect of Gods so Acting; but it is taken in another sense, in some places,
as 1 Pet. 2. 13.

Ans.
That Scripture, Heb. 9. 11. Is not at all corrupted, but truly translated,
and the sense of it truly given; nor does thy weak and frivolous reasoning
prove the contrary: for as the Greek word does not always signify a strict
Creation; so no more does the word Creation, in English; and that the word is
sometimes applied to an Humane work, or constitution; proves not that it is so
to be understood here: For the Writer to the Hebrews is not comparing Heaven
with the Tabernacle made by men's hands, (as thou alleadgest) in that verse:
neither does he call Heaven, that greater and more perfect Tabernacle; for he
says not so; but thus: Christ being come, an high Priest of good things to
come; by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, etc. entered in once, into the
holy place: The greater and more perfect Tabernacle: Therefore, is Christ
himself, who has gone into Heaven: And this Tabernacle, is more excellent,
than that outward figurative Tabernacle was; because that Tabernacle, could not
remove it self from one place unto another; but as it was carried by the hands
of men: neither could it go into Heaven, because it was of a mere earthly
creation; but Christ Jesus by a greater, and more perfect Tabernacle, namely,
by himself, did go into Heaven; for he came down from Heaven, and is Heavenly;
and not of such a mean, and Earthly Creation, as that outward Tabernacle was:
and therefore, he does compare Christ with the Figurative Tabernacle; not so
much as to its structure or building with men's hands; for that were but a mean
and low comparison, seeing the beasts Skins that covered the Tabernacle, and
the blood that sprinkled it; as also, the substance of the wood, and other
materials, were not made with men's hands, but only the artificial structure, or
form of the Tabernable, was the work of men's hands. But Christ Jesus, this
greater and more perfect Tabernacle, does excel the Typical and figurative
Tabernacle, in regard of the very substance of which it is made; as being of an
Heavenly Nature, and not of this creation, with the outward Tabernacle, as to
the very substance; although for our sakes, he did partake with us of the
Earthly creation, yet he himself is wholly and altogether Heavenly; if this be
not the True and real sense of those words, Heb. 9. 11. I leave unto the
spiritual for to Judge.

Pamphlet Animad. 17.
Let the Quakers remember, that this creation, of which he says, this Manhood
is not, but of another; was not by hands.

Answ.
That it was not the work of men's hands, I confess; but this gives thee no
advantage; nor does it in the least, weaken my Argument; for this Earthly and
corruptible creation, although it is not the work of men's hands, yet by a
Metaphorical and figurative speech, it is said to be (...), made with hands; to
signify the weakness and corruptibility of it; and for a clear proof of this,
see, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2. Where the Apostle compares the earthly house of this
Tabernacle of our Mortal Flesh, with our house from Heaven: and calls this
last by way of Antithesis, an house not made with hands; as if the Mortal body,
which is our earthly house, were made with hands, although not with the hands
of men; which is a figurative expression, as holding forth the meanness and
weakness of all that which is earthly and Mortal, which the Learned among the
Hebrews, on that account, call in Hebrew, Asiah, as to say, in English,
manufaction, or a making with hands: but besides this visible and corruptible
world, of Heaven and earth, which they call Asiah, or faction; they understand
that there is another more excellent world, or creation, invisible unto our
outward eyes; and this they call Jezirah, as to say in English, formation; and
besides this, yet a more excellent, which they call Briah, in English,
creation; namely that which is strictly and properly so called, (the other two,
although commonly named, Creations, yet not so properly or strictly) for which
distinction of three Worlds, they Allege Isaiah, 43. 7. where all these three
Hebrew words are used; and besides all these, yet one most excellent of all,
and which does in the Nature thereof, approach nearest unto God himself, and
this highest and most Noble production, above all things Created, Visible, or
Invisible, they call Aziluth, which is to say, in English, Emanation. Nor are
these distinctions of Worlds and Creations, idle fictions of latter Jews, but
real things; the Truth whereof is warranted, by clear and express Testimonies
of Scripture, both of the old and new Testament: for does not the Scripture
speak of Heavens in the Plural number, and of Heavens of Heavens? Also, does it
not say, that God made all things both visible and invisible by Jesus Christ,
and certainly these invisible things are a more excellent Creation, as God
created them, than the visible; also it is said, That God by his Son made the
Worlds, or Ages; which cannot merely relate unto the times, but also, and more
especially unto the things themselves, made in those times.

Pamphlet, Animad. 17.
Some of them think fit to call this manhood an Emanation, rather than a
creation; you see they are at a loss, what name to give this child of their
own begetting, and breeding, in the imagination.

Answ.
This is another gross abuse, and perversion of my words; as if by these, some
who think fit, rather to call the Heavenly man, an Emanation, than a Creation;
I did understand some of my friends, called in scorn, Quakers, and as if we
were at variance among our selves, how to name it; which is a gross untruth
and false hood: for by that same, I did understand some Hebrew Doctors, or
Teachers, who call this Heavenly Man Aziluth, which is to say, in English,
Emanation; as also they do call him, the Heavenly Adam, the great Highpriest,
the Bridegroom and Husband of the Church: and they say plainly, if this man
were not, the world could not confist: and who is this but Christ Jesus,
although they do not express these names. And certainly, it might be a great
help whereby to convince the Jews, and to gain them to believe in Christ Jesus,
as he was born and suffered in the Flesh, and Rose and Ascended into Heaven, to
make use of those Testimonies, which are in their own books, unto Christ,
although under other names; some whereof are very proper, and according unto
Scripture, in our reasoning with them, in order to their conversion; which way,
if used in the Wisdom of God, and direction of his Holy Spirit, I doubt not,
but the Lord would bless; for even Paul, when he preached unto the Gentiles, at
times, made use of some Testimonies out of their writers, whereby to bring them
to acknowledge the Truth. But whereas thou art not afraid, nor ashamed, to
call this Heavenly Man, Christ Jesus, a Child of our own Begetting, and
Breeding in the Imagination; thou openly show thy gross Ignorance of the
Scriptures, and thy great Unbelief, and want of True Faith in Christ; and that
thou art a greater Infidel, in some Respect, than many of the Jews are: Some
whereof, in words, do Acknowledge him, as he is the Heavenly -Adam, as
Spiritually present with his Church in all Ages; although they do not believe
his outward Coming, and Birth in the Flesh, which is a great Sin unto them: But
thine, and their Sin is greater, who, although in words ye Confess unto his
outward Birth in the Flesh; yet Deny his real Spititual Presence in the Church,
either before, or since his outward Coming, and Birth in the Flesh. And surely,
thy Blasphemy is no less, to call the True Christ of God, as he was and is in
all Ages, even from the Beginning, a Child of our own Begetting, than the
Blasphemy of those Jews was; who, when he came in the Flesh, called him the
Carpenter's Son.

Pamphlet.
Can Flesh and Blood, and an Human Soul, be said to Ray and Beam from God, who
is a Free and Simple Spirit?

Answ.
Christ's Soul is Heavenly, Divine, and Spiritual; and so is that Flesh and
Blood of his, whereof I speak, which he had from the Beginning: And it may
properly and safely enough be called, an Emanation from God the Father,
according unto Christ's own Words, who said, He did proceed, and come forth
from the Father; and whose Goings - forth have been from of Old, or from the
Age. But then, Emanation (in this Sense) does not signify, That the Thing
which does so Emanate, is belonging to the very Essence of that from which it
does so Emanate: For these who call it an Emanation, do acknowledge, that it is
a Distinct Being, or Production of a Thing distinct from the Godhead; although
next unto it, and most nearly united with the same; as so indeed, the Heavenly
Manhood of Christ is.

Pamphlet.
Therefore, you shall hear, he has denied it again, in the next Quotation.

Answ.
This is another gross Abuse, and Perversion! For, I have not denied, that
Christ his Heavenly Manhood, may be said to Emanate from the Godhead; as one
Being, or Essence, may be said to Emanate from another Being or Essence,
distinct therefrom: Only, I say, That the Godhead it self has no such distinct
Parts, within its own Essence or Being, as Center, or Rays; but rather, is all
Center, according to that noted Saying of H. Trismegistus: Whereas the Soul of
Christ has its Center and Rays distinct, by way of Emanation; and yet, that
which Emanates, is of the real Being and Essence of the Soul, as truly as the
Center.

Pamphlet. Animad. 18.
This then, may as fitly be spoke of them, as of the Man Christ Jesus; that in
G. K. and J. C. dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2. 9. How
does the Christian savor this? Is it not Rampant Blasphemy? See Piscator, and
he Translates the Word (...), in Col. 2. 9. Essentialiter, Essentially: And
Calvin likewise upon the Scripture, says, That God has in Christ, Essentially
appeared unto us.

Answ.
I altogether deny the Consequence; That, because the Essence of God is in us,
that therefore, the Fullness of the Godhead can be said to dwell in us bodily:
for that is only proper unto Christ, who is the Mediator betwixt God and Us; in
whom that Fullness dwells immediately, and to which it is immediately united.
And forasmuch, as we cannot contain the Fullness of Christ, but only a Measure
of him; therefore, the Fullness of the Godhead cannot be said to dwell in us:
and yet we must partake of that Fullness which dwells in Christ, because we
partake of Christ, in whom the Fullness is. And this is no Blasphemy, but words
of Truth and Soberness, and cannot but savor well and comfortably unto every
true Christian; namely, that God dwells in us in Christ, according to Christ
his own Words, unto the Father, Joh. 17. 23. Thou in Me, and I in Them; and
according unto John, He that confesses the Son, has the Father also, 1 John
2. 23. And as for Piscator, his Translation of the word (...), Essentially, it
does nothing hinder, but rather helps to consirm the Truth of what I affirm:
For, if the Fullness of the Godhead dwell in Christ Essentially, or in its true
Essence; then it is clear, that if any Measure of Christ dwell in us, that a
Measure of that Fullness of God himself, dwells in us: for no Measure, or Part
of Christ, is empty of God. Which Fullness of the Godhead, as also, the Measures
of it, are not to be understood Simply, as in God himself; who properly has no
Parts, nor Measures, but in respect of his Appearance and Manifestation toward
us; which Appearance or Manifestation of God, has its Fullness in Christ, and
its Measures in us, according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ, received by
us. For concerning Christ, it is said; That God gave not the Spirit by Measure
unto him: But to every one of us, the Grace or Gift (namely, of the Holy
Spirit) is given, according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ. And thus we
see, that the Scripture holds forth Measures of the Spirit given unto us,
through what we receive of the Measure of Christ: But Christ has that Spirit
in Fullness, or without Measure: And the Spirit of God, both in Christ, and in
Us, s of the same Essence with God.

Again, As to the Words of Calvin, cited by thee; they do also confirm the same
Truth, and over-turn thy gross Assertion: For, if God has appeared unto us
Essentially, in Christ, and that we are Partakers of Christ himself, by a real
Participation of him as Calvin does elsewhere acknowledge; then, together with
Christ, we are also Partakers of God: for God reveals himself in Christ
Essentially, and Christ reveals himself in us.

Pamphlet.
Whosoever then has God Essentially in him, has the whole Deity in him; for
the Essence is the whole Deity.

Answ.
The Essence of the Deity (as I have said) has not Measures properly in it
self; but yet the Scripture allows us to speak of the Measures of the Spirit
of God, which is one Essence, or Being with God: Which Measures in Us, and
Fullness in Christ, are to be understood, in respect of Manifestation. And
according to this Distinction of fullness and measures, that is warranted by the
Scriptures, I deny thy Assertion; that who ever has any measure of the Essence
of God, has the Whole or Fullness; and the plain tendency of all thy work
against us, is not only to rob the Saints of Christ, the Heavenly Man, but also
of the Holy Ghost, and consequentially of God; and then finally, of all
Goodness, Virtue and Grace: And indeed, this is the real and naked tendency of
the Doctrine of all those, who contend so earnestly against the real and proper
in-being, or in-dwelling of Christ, in the Saints, as he is the Heavenly Man,
and second Adam; to bring us at last, if they could, to deny that we have
either God in us, or the Holy Ghost; for if the Essence of God, dwell only in
Christ, and that Christ dwell not in us, then indeed it should follow, that we
have nothing of God, and so nothing of the Holy Spirit, which is one Essence
with him: and the end of this is plain downright Atheism; for if God himself
be not present in men, nor the Holy Ghost, (which is one Essence with him) nor
Christ, how can any thing that is truly Good be in us, who can work it; or
being wrought, who can preserve it if God and Christ be absent? Surely nothing
appears unto me, more rampant Blasphemy, nor more gross Atheism, than to
deny, that God is really present in all Men, and in all Things: For, how is God
omni-present, if he be not really present, in and with all his Creatures? And
if God be present in all his Creatures, then Christ is also present, because
the fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ. But seeing thou will not allow
Christ, to have any further reach or extent, than the humane soul and body of
any ordinary Man; and that the Fullness of the Godhead is contained within that
bounds of the ordinary stature of a man's body, and that essentially? is not
this to limit the infinite God into a narrower place, or room, than the Souls
of many brute beasts, which have larger bodies, manifold times, than the
greatest body of any earthly man, and to confine him within the humane figure
and shape of a man? yea, nothing is more plain, which is gross
Anthropomorphitisme, and the blasphemous Doctrine of Lodowick Muggleton. But
further, I enquire, seeing thou affirmest, That the Essence of God is only in
Christ, and that whole Christ is contained within the ordinary dimensions of
man's Body; and that Christ had neither Soul nor Body before Mary; Where was the
Essence of God, from the beginning of the World until that time? For either it
was somewhere, or no where; to say it was no where, no not in the Highest
Heavens, is absurd; seeing God is said to dwell in the Heavens; and they are
called Gods Throne; and Christ Taught his Disciples to Pray, Our Father which
art in Heaven, etc. But again, on the other hand, if thou shall grant, That the
Essence of God was in Heaven, then that Heaven is as personally united unto
God, (by thy Doctrine) as ever Christ Jesus; and may as truly, and in the same
sense be called God, the Son of God, God-man; the Creator of the World, and is
the Object of Divine Worship. This, I say, is the necessary and infallible
consequence of thy Doctrine, because thou say expressly, who ever has the
Essence of God in him, is as personally united unto God, as Jesus Christ; and
may as truly, and in the same sense be called God, etc.

Pamphlet, Animad. 18.
Yet observe, the Author will not have the center of the Heavenly Man hood of
Christ dwell in us, but allows here, the Essence of the Deity to dwell in us:
Is not this a preferring the Manhood above the Deity?

Ans.
By no means: but it is an infallible indication, That the Deity is infinitely
a more excellent being than the Manhood of Christ simply considered; for it is
a greater perfection to be all center; and that the center be every where, then
only in some place. As for Example, if the Light of the outward Sun were all
center, and that the center of the Suns Light were every where in the whole
Firmament, that Light should be a much greater, and a more glorious and
excellent Light, than the Light of the Sun, as it is now at present, is: And
although I say, that the center of the Soul and Spirit of Christ, as Man, is
not in us; yet the true Essence of the Soul and Spirit of Christ, in measure,
is in us; for that emanation, or flowing forth, and ray of his Life and Light,
is truly efsential unto him, and is not any mere quality or accident, or
operation, as some have supposed.

Pamphlet, Animad. 19.
They believe, that there is a Nephesh, and a Nishamah, in this Heavenly Soul
of the manhood of Christ, one more gross, the other more refined.

Answ.
This is a gross abuse and perversion: for although I speak of a Nephesh, and
Nishamah, in the Soul of Christ, yet I did not call the one more gross, the
other more refined, although the one does excel the other; yet none of them are
either to be called, or understood to be gross, as having any mixture of
refuse, or superfluity, as the word gross does import.

Pamphlet.
But there is a secret not yet to be revealed by this Rabbi; whether these two
be one Soul, or two Souls of different kinds; or whither two faculties, or
parts of one and the same Soul?

Answ.
This is another abuse, for I do not state the question so; as whether one Soul
or two Souls; but thus: whither two principles really distinct, or two
faculties or powers of one only principle, which I found no necessity to
determine, as neither I yet do, whatever be my Judgment and Persuasion in the
case. Now, admitting or giving that they were two principles, yea although
three, or four; or more Principles, were acknowledged to be in the Soul of man,
as constituent thereof; it is still but one Soul, in the complete and entire
notion of the Soul; as the Body of man, is still but one body, although
consisting, ^ not only of many Members, but also of many Principles; as namely,
the Elements of Water, Earth, Air, Fire; and certainly, he that understands the
nature of any ordinary man, and what man is, inwardly and outwardly, in Soul
and Body, must needs acknowledge that every' man has many principles in him;
yea the principles of the whole Creation, reduced by a wonderful order, into a
certain Epitome or Compend; and for this cause, not only these called
Philosophers of old, but also these called the Fathers, have called Man, the
Microcosme, or little World, as having all the principles of it, in him;
namely, the principles of the outward and visible World, in his body and
outward man; and the principles of the inward and invisible Worlds, in his
inward man; and these words, Isaiah 43. 7. Every one that is called in my name,
and unto my Glory, I have Created him, I have Formed him, I have Made him. The
learned among the Hebrews understand them, in respect of the three Worlds
aforesaid; so that out of each of these three Worlds, Man is Made, or Created;
and yet he still but one man; his Soul, one Soul; and his Body, one Body;
although consisting of many principles; Even as a speech, or discourse, is but
one speech, or discourse, although that speech, consist of many sentences, and
every sentence of many words; every word commonly of diverse syllables, and
every syllable of diverse letters; and the letters which are the first
principles of speech, of diverse kinds and natures; and for this cause, and with
a respect unto this, some have called man, Logos, i. e. a Speech, as being the
Similitude of that more excellent and principal Logos, which is Christ, the
essential speech or Word of God. But because every being, the nearer that it is
in nature unto God, does the more resemble him; and that God himself, is a most
simple unmixed being, without all composition of parts or principles, and is
one in the highest and most perfect sense, (which yet his being three, only in
manner or property of being, does nothing hinder); and that Christ, the
Heavenly man, of all things, is nearest unto God, and his most perfect Image;
therefore it is manifest, that he has least of that which may, or can be
called a composition, or mixture of principles: But whatever perfection,
virtue, power, or operation, the creatures have in their various compositions,
he has them all virtually and eminently in himself, after a more perfect, and
simple manner: But seeing he took hold on the Seed of Abraham, and did partake
of Flesh and Blood like unto ours, to the end that he might be yet more like
unto us, that he might make us like unto him, yet more abundantly, whether it
behoved not that he was to partake with us, of all the principles, both inward
and outward, that belong to the essential constitution of any man, is a thing
worthy of consideration; as also, admitting that he did partake of all these
Principles, whether he did assume, or partake of them, at one and the same
Moment of time; And what I have here written, is enough I hope, to them who
have a Spiritual understanding, to discern, and perceive my Judgment in the
present case; as whether the Nephesh and Neshamah in Christ, be distinct
Principles, yea or Nay; or whether more, then these two: but as for others who
are Carnal, and cannot reach unto these things, if never so plainly told them,
I am not concerned to give them a further answer; and I had rather that I might
be instrumental in the hand of the Lord, to bring the Soul of any man or woman,
to the Feeling and Tasting of the precious Life of Christ in their hearts, than
to fill their understandings with the soundest Conceptions of words about
Christ: and I can and do say it, in the presence of the Lord, the life and
power of Christ Jesus, as I feel it in the least measure, to move and operate
in my Soul, to conform and Leaven me into the Image of Christ, in righteousness
and holiness, is more to me, then all the soundest Conceptions of words about
Christ; But yet, because, in the Light of the Lord, I see clearly, how false
and absurd, yea how Blasphemous, and Atheistical Notions and conceptions of
Christ, and also of God, many men have, I have been earnestly and fervently
moved, and am at this present time, in the Zeal and Love of God, and in true
compassion and good will toward Mankind, to declare what God has made
manifest unto me, of this and other things, and to open the Scriptures of Truth
concerning them, as God by his Holy Spirit has opened them plainly to my
understanding: Wherefore, let every one that is Spiritual, and has a Spiritual
discerning, read me, and feel my Testimony, and that from which it comes; for
it is not of man, but of the Lord: although, at times, to gain the reader, as
Paul did in his day, I find freedom to make use of Testimonies of other men;
and what ever True Testimony to the Truth, I find in any man, be he Jew, or
Gentile, Scythian or Barbarian, so called, it is precious and comfortable unto
me; And to declare it unto others, as the Lord gives me true freedom, may and
shall have its Service; for Truth is one in all, and its Testimony is one; And
something of Truth by Virtue of that Divine illumination of Jesus Christ, the
Light of the World, that does inlighten every man, that comes into the World,
is made manifest for a Testimony among all Nations and sorts of people; and in
every Nation, he that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted of
him: And what if some hold the Truth in Unrighteousness? What if wicked men at
times, confess unto Christ, as the Devils formerly did? We must not therefore
deny him, but rather make use of their own Testimony against them, unto their
further condemnation.

Pamphlet Animad. 20.
I query here, whether, besides this Nishma, Adam had a Rational Soul, which
was the Root of his animal Senses, and discursive parts; and whether this that
was breathed into Adam, was the Center of the Soul of Christ or some ray only;
it should be the Center, in that Nishma, is the excellency (the Author says)
of this Soul?

Answ.
The darkness and perverseness of Spirit that is in this Author of the Pamphlet,
causes him to ask many unnecessary questions, which a Child of an ordinary
clear understanding, might resolve, according to the Principles laid down in my
book: and although I have condescended in freedom, to answer many of his
questions, especially, such as have any weight in them, for further clearing
the Truth, yet diverse others, I purposely forbear to answer, seeing they
neither tend to edification, nor serve to clear the Truth: But to these at
present mentioned by me, as above, I answer briefly, Adam (beside that Divine
Nishma, or Soul of Christ) had also, a Rational Soul, as we also have, and all
men; but the Center of the Divine Nishma, or Soul of Christ, was not breathed
into Adam, nor into any man, besides Christ himself; nor does it follow, that
it should be the Center, which was breathed into him, because the Nishma is the
excellency of his Soul above ours: I say, this reason does not hold, for not
only the Center, but also that emanation or ray of the Divine Soul of Christ,
that is in us, is exceedingly more excellent, than our Souls.

Moreover, whereas he argues, that if Adam had a proper Nephefh, that then he
was a more complete man, then Jesus Christ of Nazareth; I deny the confequence,
for Christ has all the Essential perfection of man's whole Soul and Body,
elther Virtually or formally, even as man has Virtually or formally all the
Essentials, resembling the Sensitive Soul of a Beast, that belong to perfect
it, as an animal, or living Creature; but yet he has some what more: all which
proves not, that a beast is a more complete animal, or living Creature, than a
man.

Pamphlet.
Its True he says, the Soul or Spirit of Christ has an immediate and
wonderful manner of Union with the Deity, as no other Soul or Spirit of men
were partakers of. But what Union the body of Christ that was taken of the
Virgin, had with the Logos, which any of the Quakers have not, I cannot yet
learn.

Answ.
That is also plainly enough insinuated in my book, where I expressly say, that
Christ was a most wonderful Vessel, both as concerning his Soul and Body; and
that, in that very body, born of the Virgin, the Center of his Soul did reside;
which could not be without an Union of such a Nature as no other body could
have, seeing no other man, ever had the center in him, but he.

Pamphlet,
I query what difference, betwixt the Nishmah of his Soul, and the Center of it?

Answ.
As great as betwixt the Spring and the Stream, and the life and virtue that is
in the Root, and a measure of the same in the Branches; so great is the
difference, betwixt the Center of that Nishmah, and the ray or emanation of it
into us; which yet is one and the same Substance or Essence with it.

Pamphlet.
Look into Buxtorfs Lexicon, you that are Scholars, and there you will see,
that this curious distinction of Nephesh and Nishmah, is ground less -- and a
little after, for the same word is used of the beasts and fouls, and creeping
thing, that were destroyed by the Flood Genesis 7. 22.

Answ.
That the word, Nishmath, or Nishmah, at times, is used indifferently, or
commonly, to signify the breath or life of any living Creature; does not
hinder, but that at other times, and that more frequently, it has a peculiar
and singular signification, even as the word Ruach, signifies, at times,
indifferently, any ordinary Spirit, good or bad, as also the wind; and so does
(...) in Greek, Spiritus in Latin, and Spirit in English; and yet also, it
has a peculiar signification, at other times, to signify the Divine Spirit of
God, and Christ: and thus also many other words have both a common and peculiar
signification; as the words, El, Elohim, Bara; and others. And unto Buxtorfs
Authority, I oppose the Testimony of others better skilled, and namely the
Author of the Apparatus in Librum, Zohar, part, 1. p. 542, and p. 600. And that
which is of more Authority then all Humane Testimonies, I oppose unto him the
Scriptures Testimony, in diverse places, which I have Cited in my book; as
namely, Genesis 2. 7. Prove. 20. 27. To which I shall add, Job 32 8. The
Inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding; where the same Hebrew Word,
Nishmah or Nishmath, is used, that is in Genesis 2. 7. And surely, whoever shall
duly consider that Scripture, Gen, 2. 7. How that-the Lord God breathed in
Adam, the breath of Life, and he became a living Soul; and shall compare it
with 1 Cor. 15. 45. The first man Adam, was made a living Soul; the second, or
last Adam was made a quickening Spirit; If he have the least sense of that
quickening life of Christ Jesus, that made the first Adam a living Soul, cannot
but acknowledge, that that breath, or inspiration of life, which made Adam a
living Soul, was something more excellent and living, then his own Soul, which
he received from Christ Jesus the second Adam, who is the image of the
invisible God, after whom he was made; for it was this breathing in, or
inspiration of Life, that made him a living Soul; Namely living unto God:
Whereas he was a Soul afterward when he Transgressed, but not such a living
Soul; for in the day he did eat of the forbidden fruit, he dyed, and remained
no more a living Soul unto God, in Holiness and Righteousness, after the image
of him that created him. And indeed, that this breath or inspiration of Life,
was not Adams own Soul, but a Divine substance; diverse of those called
Fathers, of great Note, do earnestly contend. Hilarious, says, on Psalm. 118.
expounding these Words: And he breathed into him, the breath, or Spirit of
life, and man was made a living Soul, Inspirationi ergo huic Preparatus sive
formatus est, per quam Natura Animae and Corporis in vita perfectionem, quodam
inspirati Spiritus foedere contineretur. Scit in se beatus Paulus, duplicem
esse Naturam, cum Secundum interiorem Hominem delectatur in Lege, etc.

In English thus; Man therefore, being prepared, or formed, unto this
inspiration, by which the Nature of the Soul and body should be contained
within a crtain Covenant (or bond) of the inspired Spirit. Blessed Paul knows
that there is a Twofold Nature in him, when according to the inward man, he
delights in the Law of God. Again, Cyrillus Alexandrinus on 9. John says
expressly, that the breath of life, which God breathed into Adam, was not the
Soul of Adam, but a Divine substance. Non est igitur factum divinae Substantiae
Spiraculum, anima hominis, sed animato potius homini, and proprietati Naturae
utrisque (anima dico atquae corpore) Consumatae quasi Sigillum. Naturae suae
Creator Spiraculum vitae, id est, Spiritum Sanctum infixit, etc. Which is in
English thus: The breath of the Divine substance, was not made the Soul of man;
but rather man being already endued with a Soul, and the property of his Nature
being consummated both in Soul and Body, the Creator fixed in him, as it were
the Seal of his own Nature; That is, the Holy Spirit. The which Holy Spirit, he
also calls the Spirit of the Son, and the Divine Nature; and indeed, without
all doubt, God breathed into Adam, the Holy Spirit; but this Holy Spirit being
one Essence or being with God, dwells in the fullness of it, in Christ the
second Adam; and therefore Adam could not be a partaker of the Holy Spirit, but
as he was also a partaker of the second Adam, whose Nishmah, or Soul, has the
Holy Spirit in it, as being its most immediate Temple, or house; and therefore
the fullness of the Godhead is said to dwell bodily in Christ, because Christ is
as the body or house, that most immediately receives that fullness to
Communicate of the various measures of it unto others; for the Greek word
(...), which signifies Body, is said to be derived from a word, which
signifies a House, or Lodging, or Habitation, (...), quasi (...); so that the
fullness of the Godhead, dwelling in Christ, as in its most immediate, and
proper Habitation (as the Soul of a man dwells in its body) no man can
partake of God, but as he partakes of Christ, in whom that fullness dwells.

Pamphlet, Animad. 20.
I desire the Scholars to call to mind, how this Notion of the Soul of Christ
in all, suits with Platoe's of the anima mundi.

Answ.
Cyrillus Alexandrinus and others do Judge, that Plato, by his anima mundi, did
understand that which the Scripture calls the Holy Ghost; for as the
Scripture speaks of three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost: Plato likewise spoke of three, namely, the good, the mind,
and the Soul: and the Good he calls the one, and the Father; the Mind, he
calls the Son, as being generate of the Father: both which answer unto the
Father and the Son, which the Scriptures Testify of, and therefore they
conclude, that by that he called the Soul, he did understand, the Holy Ghost;
And that Plato had learned this mystery of the Three from the Egyptians, who
had learned it from Moses; But that he had wrongly understood it himself, for
he seems to call them Three Gods, as being distinct, in a threefold being, or
substance: And the first greatest of all, the second less than the first, but
greater than the Third; so that Plato his Doctrine of this Mystery was unsound,
and imperfect, although it seems that he aimed at the Truth. Now, whereas we
believe that the Holy Ghost, is one and the same Essence with God; and that the
Heavenly Manhood or Nishmah of the Soul of Christ, is distinct in essence or
substance from the Godhead, although by a most excellent and wonderful union
united with the same for ever, and yet is not any third essence, as Plato
calls his Anima Mundi. It is very manifest, that Plato his Anima Mundi,
cannot at all be acknowledged to be the Soul of Christ. Again, Plato calls it
the Soul of the World, as Judging the World it self to be an Animal or living
creature composed of Soul and Body: But this does by no means agree unto the
Soul of Christ, for if it did, then the world should be Christ, and the body of
every beast, fish, foul, tree, or stone, and also the earth it self, should be
the real body of Christ; all which is false and absurd, and therefore Plato's
Anima Mundi cannot be the Soul of Christ.

Pamphlet. Animad. 21.
I Query whether this Soul of Christ can be the Holy Ghost?

Answ.
This query is altogether needless, seeing in my book called, The Way cast up,
I have expressly declared, that the Soul of Christ, and the Holy Ghost, simply
considered, are distinct beings; but because the Holy Ghost dwells in Christ,
the Heavenly Man, and by him only is conveyed unto us, and that they are
wonderfully united one unto another, we cannot understand them as separate; and
therefore, as Christ, the Second Adam, in Scripture is called the quickening
Spirit, and the Lord is the Spirit; so he may also be called, the Paracletus,
or Advocate, as he is expressly called, 1 John 2. 1. And if any man Sin, we have
an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous: and this same
advocate or paracletus, is but one; it is clear, that sometimes Christ himself,
is called the Holy Ghost, in Scripture; for the words Holy Ghost, as well as
the word Spirit, have different significations in Scripture; for God is said to
be a Spirit, also Christ is called the Lord that Spirit, and the Second Adam,
the quickening Spirit. And thus the words, Holy Ghost, and Spirit, do sometimes
signify more generally, and sometimes they have a more particular, and peculiar
signification.

Pamphlet. Animad. 21.
Why then the Christian has a great advantage of a Quaker, in that his
Sanctification is of another, and better nature, than that of the Quakers, in
that it is the Holy Ghost, who is God, who mystically dwells in them.

Answ.
Here thou do commit Three great abuses. 1. To distinguish betwixt the
Christian and the Quaker; whereas every true Christian is a Quaker, namely, one
that trembles at the Word of God; and every true Quaker, is a Christian, and we
desire to be called by no other name, than that of true Christians: 2. That
thou do insinuate, as if we did not believe, that the Holy Ghost, who is God,
did dwell in us, but only Christ; which is a gross perversion, and false
calumny; yea so false, that thou give thy sels manifestly and openly the lie;
in the next citation. 3. Thou do grossly again contradict thy self, that thou
say the Holy Ghost dwells mystically in every true Christian, and yet thou
deniest that the essence of God dwells in any Christian, although the Holy
Ghost be one essence with God: Nor will thy term, mystically, save thee; for if
by mystically, thou understandest not a real indwelling of the Holy Ghost, as
he is one essence with God, then the Quaker is in a better condition, and has
a great advantage of thy supposed Christian; that according unto us, every true
Christian and Quaker, has the Holy Ghost, who is one essence with God, really,
or essentially dwelling in him, through Christ, who is also in him; and this
according unto 1 Cor. 14 25. God is in you, (...); which being rightly
translated, is essentially, from the word (...). which signifies being, or
essence.

Pamphlet. Animad. 21.
But they understand the Holy Ghost, who is God, is not separated from this
Body and Soul of Christ: but why then did they not express themselves so?

Answ.
Thou see Reader, how openly he gives the lie unto himself, in this
citation; by acknowledging that we understand the Holy Ghost is not separated
from this Body and Soul of Christ; and yet a few lines before, he did allege,
that according to our principle, the Holy Ghost did not dwell in us: and
whereas he says, why then did they not express themselves so? I answer, first,
how could thou know our understanding, or mind, if the thing had not been
expressed? But Secondly, I say, that I have sufficiently expressed the same in
my book, called The way cast up, in several places, particularly in p. 114.
where I say expressly: For, because the Fullness dwelt in him; and that he was
immediately, and most intimately united with the Godhead, so as no Man nor
Angels are, but only the Man Jesus, he is only the true Christ. And because he
it is alone, who in an immediate way, and originally, is Gods Anointed, who
has Anointed him with his Holy Spirit; and all other men, even the most Holy,
but mediately united with God through him, receiving the Anointing, or Holy
Spirit: Therefore all other men are not Christ, but Christians; not being
immediately Anointed of the Father, but by the means of Jesus Christ. Nor are
they otherwise partakers of the Anointing or Holy Ghost, but as they are
partakers of Christ. Thus Reader, thou feast how clearly I have expressed this
very thing; and how faulty the Author of this Pamphlet is, and how far he has
fallen short of his promise, to give the World a true account of our Faith,
concerning the Man Christ Jesus; who is guilty of so many false insinuations,
gross perversions, self - belyings and contradiction, as I have sufficiently
demonstrated.

Pamphlet. Animad. 22.
They believe this humane nature is divine: farewell that distinction then, yet
it is inferior to the Godhead. But this Author thinks that omnipresency, and
omnisciency, may be attributed to the Manhood; yet the man hood not being
consounded with, or equalized to the Godhead, contrary to the Doctrine Taught
by our Christian Divines.

Answ.
Mark Reader, the great ignorance and partiality of this Author, who is so much
offended, because I call the Nature of the Manhood of Christ, Heavenly and
Divine; as if because the name Divine is given to the Manhood of Christ, that
therefore I consound the Man Hood with the Godhead, and equalize it thereunto;
and yet within three or four lines, he calls these of his brethren, who
profess to teach of Divine things, Christian Divines; he will therefore have
men that Teach, or profess to teach Divine things, to be called Divine; but he
will not allow Christ, the Heavenly-man to be called Divine: This is a plain
exalting themselves above Christ. But again, if to be called Divine, is to be
equal unto God; then by his Doctrine, he and his brethren whom he calls
Christian Divines, are equal unto God: see what Blasphemies his ignorance and
rashness, does precipitate and hurry him into.

Pamphlet Animad. 22.
That there are Attributes of God not communicable to the Creature; and among
them are these two, Omnisciency and Omnipresency; these cannot be Communicated
to any Creature, but it immediately becomes God.

Answ.
That Christ Jesus is not to be called a Creature in that strict and narrow
sense, as the other Creatures are, I have above declared; and yet he does
partake with the Creatures, having taken part of Flesh and Blood with us. And
be it so, that Omnipresency and Omnipercipiency, being communicated unto
Christ, that he is God; In what is this contrary to Christian Doctrine? Is not
Christ God? Do not all true Christians believe that he is both God and Man, and
yet but one Christ? But according unto thy Doctrine, because Christ is neither
Omniscient nor Omnipresent, he is not God, but a mere Creature. This is gross
Socinianisme, and Arianisme both, that Christ is not God, but a mere creature.
Now, although I say and believe, with other true Christians, that Christ is
God; yet I do not say, the Manhood of Christ is his Godhead, nor yet equal
thereunto; for the Godhead is still greater then the Manhood, and has its
Attributes, or Divine properties, that are incommunicable unto the Manhood,
simply considered; for the Godhead is absolute and independent, and has not
its being from the Manhood: But the Manhood is dependent, and has its being
from the Godhead. Again, these Attributes of Omnipresence and Omniscience, as
they are in the Godhead, and belong unto the same, are indeed, incommunicable
unto the Manhood; for the Omnipresence and Omniscience of the Manhood of
Christ, are of a far inferior Nature and condition, in respect of the
Omnipresence and Omniscience of the Godhead: And first, as to the Omnipresence
of the Godhead, it is centrally every where, and is no where circumscribed, as
I have already cited out of Hermes Trismegistus, in my book; But the Manhood
or Nishmah of Christ's Soul, is not so Omnipresent, for its center is not every
where; so that, here is a manifest difference, betwixt the manner of Gods
Omnipresence, and the Omnipresence of Christ, as man; Again, as to the
Omnisciency of Christ as man, it is not of the same Nature with the Omnisciency
of God, but inferior unto the same; for the Omnisciency of Christ as man, or
of his Manhood, is by a certain influence, or impression, or touch, which the
Objects, known, make upon him; and therefore, the Objects themselves are in
some sort the instrumental cause, or occasion to excite his knowledge, in
respect of the Creatures which he does know, past, or present; and as for his
knowledge of things to come, by Divine Revelation, that also differs from the
manner of Gods Knowledge, who knows all things, past, present, and to come,
immediately in himself, without dependence on any other, or without receiving
any influence or impression, from the Creatures, which he does know; nor are
the Objects any cause, so much as instrumental in the least, of the knowledge
which Christ has as God, or of his God head: and thus I have very plainly and
clearly demonstrated, that the manner and sort of the Omnipresence and
Omniscience of Christ as God, is very differing from his Omnipresence and
Omniscience, as man; These two Attributes, or properties, as they belong to his
Manhood, being of a very inferior Nature and kind; and yet true Omnipresence,
and Omniscience, in their kind and sort, and such as are altogether necessary
for him that is to be a Mediator betwixt God and Man, and our High Priest with
God; namely, that he can be touched with the Feeling of our Infirmities; and
that he be present both to hear us, and also, to help and succor us, in all
Straits and Wants. And here again, thou fallest into a gross Contradiction, to
assert, That God only is Omni-present, and not Christ, as Man; and yet to
affirm, That the Essence of God is only present in the Manhood of Christ, which
is a manifest and palpable Contradiction. Again; I ask thee, Is Omni-presence
Essential unto God, or only an Accident? If an Essential Attribute, then it
follows, That God's Essence is everywhere: If it be only an Accident, then
thou asserts contrary to Scripture, and to thy own Divines, as thou call
them, That there are Accidents in God, and that He is Changeable, which is
gross Cajetanisme, and Vorstianisme; namely, the Heresy of Cajetanus and
Vorstius, that is greatly Condemned, and that generally by all Christians.

Pamphlet. Animad. 22.
Let it be considered likewise, there is thought by Judicious Divines, that
there is an Infinite Space beyond this Globe of the Heaven and Earth: I query,
Whether this Manhood, if Omni-present, must not be there? And a little after,
he says; And if present there throughout, this is Immensity; and then, the
Universe is but as a Drop of the Bucket, to the Manhood of Christ: Is it not
then equal to God, and confounded with God? And after, in p. 15: l. 1. he
calls this Infinite Space, Infinite Imaginary Space!

Answ.
They who affirm, That there are such Infinite Imaginary Spaces, may rather be
truly called Unjudicious Humanes, than Judicious Divines; seeing, by thy own
Confession, they are merely Imaginary, and are not any Part of the Universe,
and are neither God nor Christ; and yet are Infinite, and have Immensity: Then
which, there can be supposed nothing that is a greater Contradiction; namely,
to say, There is an Infinite Imaginary Space, having Immensity that is not any
real Thing or Being: That is, neither God nor Christ, nor Angel, nor any
Spirit, nor Body, nor any Created Thing, but mere Imaginary; and yet it is
greater than Christ, the Heavenly Man: for it is Infinite, and has Immensity.
But, to discover yet more abundantly thy Confusion and Contradiction, I ask
thee; Why may not Christ, as Man, have the same Infinitness and Immensity, that
this Imaginary Space has? Why then, according to thy own Words, the Manhood of
Christ should be equal unto God, and confounded with God. By this then, it
clearly follows from thy own Doctrine, That this Infinite Imaginary Space,
having Immensity, is Equal unto God, and Confounded with God; and so, is
greater and better than Christ, and that Infinitely; and yet, it is neither God
nor Christ, nor any Creature, or Part of the Universe of Created Beings. Is not
this a strange new Deity of thy own devising, and a most abominable Idol? But,
seeing this Space is only Imaginary, and is nothing but a Child of thine, and
thy Bretheren's Imagination; and yet, because it has Immensity, and is
Infinite by thy Doctrine, it must be Equal unto God: It follows from thy
Doctrine, that the Brat of thine own Imagination, is Equal unto God: Which, if
it be not the grossest Idolatry, that ever any Man was Guilty of, I leave unto
all Men of a true Understanding for to judge; yea, if it be not the Height of
Atheism. But again, supposing, (but not at all granting) that there were such
Infinite wast Places, having no Creatures in them, I ask thee; If God should
fill them all with Creatures, (as he could well do, because he is Omnipotent)
should these Creatures, taken in the whole Complex, be Equal unto God, and have
the same Immensity, or Infinitness, with him? Surely, thou must needs say, Not:
And therefore, Christ, the Heavenly Man, although he should also be in all
these Places, is still inferior to the Godhead: For whatever any Man, or
Creature, can conceive of Places, or Spaces of the greatest Extent Imaginable,
God is still infinitely Greater; and all the Creatures, Visible and Invisible,
are unto Him but as the Drop of the Bucket, and Dust of the Balance. And here,
if any should ask me, because I deny all such Imaginary Spaces, as idle
Fictions of foolish and Ignorant Men, What is beyond this Visible World of
Heaven and Earth? I do easily and readily answer; That not only God and Christ,
but also real Parts of the Creation, which are true real beings, Created of
God, are beyond this Visible World of Heaven and Earth; whose Greatness and
Number, no Humane, nor (indeed) any Created Understanding can fathom, or
comprehend; but God alone, the most High; and Christ Jesus, by whom all Things
are created and made, Visible and Invisible: For Solomon said truly; We cannot
find out the Works of God, from the Beginning unto the End. And thus we have no
need to run into these Fictions of Imaginary Spaces, to find a Place beyond
this Visible World; seeing the Things which God has made, are Greater, and
more Numerous, than we can conceive, or imagine: And therefore, are really
Infinite and Immense, or Immeasurable, unto our Understanding; although they
are well known unto God, in Number, Weight, and Measure; and are, in comparison
as Nothing, and as the Prophet speaks, Even less than Nothing.

Pamphlet. Animad. 23.
And thus he lays the Ground and Foundation of the Angels Worship, upon the
Excellency of the Nature of the Manhood, barely considered in it self: I query
solemnly, If it be not great Idolatry, for Men or Angels to worship any
Creature; and that Creature, though never so Excellent, be not in Personal
Union with God, and the Worship terminated upon the Godhead? Christ is God and
Man; Christians worshipping him, terminate the Worship upon the Godhead. See,
if Keith has not made the Angels Idolaters?

Answ.
That he says, I lay the Foundation of the Angels Worship upon the Excellency
of the Nature of the Manhood, barely considered in it self, is a gross Abuse
and Perversion, and a most palpable Lie and Contradiction to my Words: As also,
that he insinuates, that Men or Angels are to worfhip the Man Christ, without a
Respect unto that Union he has with God; So that, by Virtue of the said Union,
he is God: This also is another gross Lie and Perversion. And 3 dly. That he
alleges, that in our worshipping the Man Christ Jesus, we do not terminate
our Worship upon the Godhead, but only upon the Manhood, and that also barely
considered in it self: All which Three Assertions of the Author, are gross
Lies, and most groundless Calumnies: For I no where, in all my Book, use any
such Words as he alleges. And that I have no such Meaning as his Words
import; my Words that stand upon Record in my Book, do sufficiently clear me:
As namely, where I say expressly, p. 82. That the Man Christ, is God, by reason
of that most wonderful Union betwixt the Two Natures: And a little after, I
say; The Godhead and Manhood of Christ, are but one Christ. -- And the Godhead
of Christ is no Inferior Divinity, or Deity; but the very same Godhead of the
Father. Again, as concerning this most wonderful and singular Union, (whereby
the Godhead and Manhood of Christ, are one Christ) I say, p. 83. Christ as Man,
has a true and real Soul, distinct from the Godhead; yet for ever united with
the same, in a most immediate and wonderful manner: Of which Union, no other
Soul or Spirit of Men or Angels, ever were, or shall be Partakers.

And thus Reader, thou may clearly see, that I lay not the Foundation of Men
and Angels, their worshipping Christ, upon the Excellency of the Nature of the
Manhood barely considered; as if he were not God, by reason of his most rare
and singular Union with God: But, on the contrary, I do very plainly affirm the
said Union, and that because thereof, Christ is God. And therefore also, I do
further say, That the Worship which Men and Angels give unto the Man Christ,
does not terminate, (which is as much as to say, in more plain English) does
not rest nor end upon the Manhood; but ascends through the Manhood of Christ,
unto the Godhead, where it does terminate, or rest: And therefore, the Saints
in Scripture, are said to praise God through Jesus Christ; and by Him, to offer
up unto God continual Sacrifices of Thanksgiving: And so much does the word
Mediator import; which signifies a Middle Man betwixt God and Us: So that,
although our Prayers, our Thanksgivings, and whole Worship, be directed unto
Christ; yet not unto Him alone, but also unto God htrough Him. Nor do my Words
cited by thee, give thee the least Ground to say, That I lay the Foundation of
the Angels Worship upon the Nature of the Manhood barely considered in it self;
because I say, That the Man Christ Jesus, is a Great and Mighty, and most
Excellent Being, far above All, and excelling all Men and Angels: For does not
the Man Christ Jesus, excel all Men and Angels, by reason of his Union with
the Godhead, such as none else are Partakers of? Is not this Union of his with
the Godhead, most Excellent? And does it not cause him to Excel all other
Beings, that have no such Union? By thy Doctrine, indeed, it adds no
Excellency unto him; and consequently, by the same Doctrine of thine, (although
in Contradiction to thy self) the Man Christ, is to be worshipped, as barely
considered in himself, without any respect of his Union with the Godhead: For,
according unto thy Doctrine, that Union adds no Excellency unto him, and
makes him not one whit more Excellent. And thus, now, I desire all Men of
Understanding, to see and consider, whether the Author of this Pamphlet, (and
not I) has not made the Angels Idolaters. And here, Reader, I desire thee also
to consider, how this Author of this Pamphlet, seeks to lurk in the Dark: and
gives us no express Account, whether he believes, that the Man Christ Jesus,
is to be worshipped; only tells, that all true Christians do terminate the
Worship upon the Godhead; which we also do: But this hinders not, that the Man
Christ, as Mediator, is also to be worshipped, and God through him; which can
be no Idolatry, because he is God, by Virtue of his most wonderful Union with
him, which no Men nor Angels, are Partakers of, or ever shall be. And, if the
Man Christ, is to be worshipped, my Argument holds still good; that therefore
he is really Present, as Man: To which Argument, although most convincing and
demonstrating, he has made no Shadow of Answer; and therefore, I return it
upon him, or them who take any part with him. As also, I return all the other
Arguments in my Book, which are many, that he has not so much as once named,
far less, answered: And particularly, where I argue from what he and they do
generally acknowledge, of the Devil; his being every where present, in all Evil
Men, at least, which are more numerous than the Good; and yet they will not
acknowledge, that Christ, the Heavenly Man, is every where Present in all Good
Men. And thus they make the Devil greater than He: And which is more, seeing he
holds, That the whole Essence of the Godhead is contained within the Body of
Christ; which, as he says, is of no greater Extent, than the ordinary Body of
one Man; and will not acknowledge, that God himself is any where, but in that
one only, Human Body: and yet the Devil possesses really, the Souls and Bodies
of many Men and Women. He does make the Devil not only greater, and more
largely or universally present in the World, than Christ; but also, (with Fear
and Reverence be it spoken) than the very Godhead it self; which is indeed, the
greatest Blasphemy and Impiety of Words, that ever I heard formerly, in all my
Life; and yet the plain, downright Language of his Doctrine, and vain Impious
Scribbling against us.

And thus Reader, having answered sufficiently unto every one of his
Animadversions; which I have done somewhat more fully and largely, than was
either needful unto him, or then (indeed) he was worthy of: yet for the sake of
others, who might be desirous to have some Things further opened and cleared, I
have found Freedom so to do. And now I shall take some Notice of what he adds
by way of Conclusion; and reply also, there-unto, so far as is needful.

Pamphlet. p. 14.
He proposes three general Considerations, which he thinks will Answer my
whole Book. 1. That the Prophets spoke of many Things to come, as if they were
present.

Answ.
To this I have sufficiently answered above; and I have proved, how absurd and
contrary to Truth, the Opinion of the Author is, that Christ was no more
Christ, before his birth in the Flesh, than Cyrus was God's Anointed, of whom
Isaiah prophesied many Years before he was Born.

Where-as, although the Prophets prophesied of Christ's Coming, and Birth in
the Flesh, as a thing to come; yet they did still understand, that Christ
himself was present, in and with the Church, in all Ages; as I have already
proved in my Book, at large. And this was also the Testimony of the Apostle;
and particularly, of Paul, who said expressly, That by Jesus Christ, all Things
were Created; and, He is the same Yester-day, Today, and for Ever. Also, Paul
said, The Fathers did Eat the same Spiritual Meat, and Drink the same Spiritual
Drink: For they drank of the Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.
And if they did eat the same Spiritual Meat, and drink the same Spiritual
Drink, then they did eat the Flesh of Christ, and drink his Blood; otherwise,
as Christ taught him self, They could not have Life.

Pamphlet. p. 14.
His Second Consideration is, That Christ acted, in his Mediatorship, in all
Things before his Incarnation, in reference still to his Incarnation, which was
to be in the Fullness of Time.

Answ.
That Christ acted in his Mediatorship, in all Things before he was Born in the
Flesh of the Virgin Mary, in reference still to his Birth in the Flesh, which
was to be in the Fullness of Time; and also, in reference to his Sufferings,
Death, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. I do readily grant. But what says this
against any thing that I have affirmed in my Book? Or, What does it infer
against the Real Being and Existence of Christ, in all Ages, from the
Beginning? Surely, nothing at all, but on the contrary, if thou stand to thy
own words, they do prove manifestly, that Christ, as he is the Heavenly man,
was from the beginning; for how could he Act in his mediatorship, if he was not
mediator from the beginning? How can Mediatorship be without a Mediator?
Surely, not at all, more than Kingship can be without a King, or Lordship
without a Lord; or any other Office, without him that does bear it. And if
Christ was Mediator from the Beginning, it follows most clearly, that he was
Man from the Beginning: For it is the Man Christ Jesus, who is the Mediator
betwixt God and Man, as Paul has expressly declared, 1 Timothy 2. 5. For Christ
as God, simply considered without his Manhood, cannot be Mediator; even as Man,
simply considered without the Godhead, he cannot either: for the Nature of a
Mediator is such, that he must have the Nature both of God and man, united
together, after the most excellent and singular manner, so as, by reason of
that Union, he is true and perfect God, and true and perfect Man; and therefore
seeing he was Mediator from the beginning, and acted in his Mediatorship, or
mediatory Office, as King, Priest and Prophet, and as Head of his Body the
Church, he was Man from the beginning, although not Man clothed with flesh and
blood, in the likeness of our Flesh, until the fullness of time was come, that
He was Born of the Virgin Mary.

Pamphlet.
Page 14. His third consideration is, that many things in Scripture, are spoken
of Christ, by that figurative speech, of the communication of properties, when
that which is proper to one nature only, is attributed to the other, or to the
whole person, etc.

Answ.
Although thou do betake thy self to this, as thy last refuge; namely, that,
called by some, the communication of properties, yet does it nothing help thy
Evil cause, more than the former.

For albeit I grant, that there is such a figurative speech of the
communication of names and properties, whereby the Man Christ is called God,
and also God is called Man, and God is said to have Shed his Blood, although
Christ, as God, has not Blood to Shed, but only as Man; yet by reason of that
most rare and wonderful union betwixt the Godhead and Manhood; the Blood of the
Man Christ, is called, the Blood of God, Acts 20. 28. But this communication of
names and properties, is not a bare Titular, or Verbal communication, but is
grounded upon a real communication, of real Divine Attributes and Properties,
which the Godhead of Christ, does communicate unto the manhood; so that the
manhood of Christ, by reason of this most rare and excellent, and truly Divine
union, it has with the Godhead, does by virtue of the same, receive such
Divine attributes and perfections, as are communicable unto none else beside
him; and the nature of the Manhood of Christ, must be so excellent, so great,
and so perfect, and so substantially excelling all Men and Angels, that is
capable of such an Union, or of such Divine attributes, properties, and
perfections, that are both proper and necessary for such an one as is to be
Mediator betwixt God and Man, and our High Priest with God; of which Divine
attributes, omnipresence, and omnipercipience aforesaid, are some, which I call
Divine, because of their great excellency; and in respect of which, the manhood
of Christ is nearest unto the Godhead of all other distinct beings, although,
as I have already showed the omnipresence and omni-percipience, or omniscience
of Christ, as man, is not the same, nor equal unto these attributes of
omniscience, and omni-presence, that belong to Christ, as God, or unto the
Godhead: but of a far inferior sort. Moreover, seeing the foresaid
communication of names; is grounded upon that so rare and singular union,
betwixt the Godhead, and manhood of Christ, it is very manifest from hence,
that the said communication of names, could not be from the beginning of the
world, unless also the union betwixt the Godhead and Manhood of Christ (which
is the ground of the said communication) had been from the beginning; and
consequently, also the Manhood of Christ was from the beginning; for two
natures cannot be united, before the one of them have any being: again, as the
said communication of names and properties, require the Manhood of Christ to
exist, or have a being from the beginning of the World, otherwise it could not
be said that the Man Christ Jesus, was from the beginning, not so much as by
that figurative speech of communication of properties; so in like manner, that
communication of properties cannot be allowed; but where, as well as when, the
Godhead and Manhood are together united, and existent, and that, for the same
reason already given, namely, that the communication of the names is grounded
upon the union of both existing together, in the same things, places, or
persons, as well as in the same times: and therefore, if the Manhood of Christ,
were not omnipresent, in all places, as well as all times: The Man Christ,
could not be said to be omni-present, not so much as by that figurative speech
of communication of properties, which is not barely Verbal, or Titular, and
Nominal, but Real and Substantial, according to the manner above expressed.
Again, there are many Scriptures which speak of Christ, that must needs be
understood of Christ as Man, and not as God, so much as by that figurative
Speech of communication of prorerties; as when Christ said, John 6. I came down
from Heaven, not to do my own Will: this must needs be understood of Christ as
Man, as I have already proved, seeing Christ as God always does his own Will.

What he adds page 14, 15. concerning the sum of the Quakers Doctrine,
concerning Christ, it being in great part, a heap of Nonsense and Confusion,
and not my words nor meaning, and so far as any part of it is true, being
sufficiently answered already, I need not make any new Reply unto it; only,
whereas he talks of two Souls and Bodies of Christ, I would have the Reader
to Remember, that I have no where in all my Book spoke of two Souls of Christ:
and as concerning the two Bodies of Christ, they are also but one body, in the
full and entire Notion of a body, consisting of various parts and members,
united into one, so that the manhood of Christ is still but one, in its full
and entire Nature. And again, whereas he finds fault with us, for saying, that
Christ's heavenly body, whereof the Saints are partakers, confisteth of flesh,
blood and bones, he may find the same fault with Christ, who spoke os his flesh
and blood that came down from Heaven, which is the Saints Food: also, he may
blame Paul, who said, the Saints were of his flesh and of his bones; But flesh,
blood, and bones, here understood, are not to be meant literally, and after a
vulgar manner, but spiritually, and figuratively; for his flesh and blood from
Heaven, are Spirit and Life: And although the Wisdom of God has expressed them
under these distinct Names, yet originally, they may be but one substance, even
as flesh and blood, and bones, of an earthly body, are originaly but one
substance, which is dust and earth.

And I can and do freely appeal unto all Christians, whom God has spiritually
Enlightened, and given a Spiritual Understanding unto, of the Mystery of God and
Christ, whether this be not the True Christ of God, of whom I have declared?
And, Whether that described by the Author of this Pamphlet, here Answered by
me, is not indeed a False Christ? And also, his God, whom he limiteth
Essentially within the Dimensions of an ordinary Human Body, be not also False?
And so, Whether He, and not I, be not guilty of Gross Idolatry, and bringing -
in another Gospel, and so is acted by another Spirit; and has therefore a
Curse from the Apostle upon him? Gal. 1. 8, 9.

And lastly, Whereas he labors to fix upon me the Heresies of no less than
Seven several sorts of Heretical Sects; he but shows forth the same Lying
Spirit, that has acted him all along: And therefore, to undeceive the Reader,
whom he seeks so grossly to abuse, I shall very clearly and briefly pass
through these Seven Heads; and sufficiently purge my self of every one of them,
to any that are Judicious and Impartial. 1. He charge me with the Heresy of
the Macedonians and Valentinians, who said, Christ brought an Heavenly Body
from Heaven with him. To this I answer, That was no part of their Heresy; but
only that they said, Christ's Body in the whole Substance of it, came down from
Heaven, and did not in any part, share or partake of the Substance of the
Virgin Mary; but altogether passed through the Virgin, as Light passes through
the Air, or purest Crystal: But this I do not maintain; for I have
sufficiently declared, That Christ did really partake of the Virgins Flesh and
Substance; although the Body of Christ was not Conceived after the manner of
Human Conception: And therefore, it was Heavenly in respect of its Original,
and more Excellent than the Body of any other Man. And that this was reputed no
Heresy among the Ancients, I prove; because Hilarious, one of the Fathers of
great Antiquity, and in high Esteem among these called the Orthodox, was of the
same Judgment; namely, That both the Body and Soul of Christ, had a Nature more
Excellent, than that of all other Men; although they had also, what belonged to
the true Nature of Man, in all Essentials. 2. He charge me with the Heresy
of Apellis, that said, Christ had an Airy Body, and Starry Flesh, that passed
through the Virgin. To this I answer; That I have no where affirmed any such
thing, nor such Words have I any where used: For the Flesh and Blood, whereof I
speak, according to Scripture, that came down from Heaven, is neither of the
Air nor Stars; but of a more excellent Substance, and that beyond all Compare:
And also, that the Body which he did take of the Virgin, was a real Body of
Flesh and Blood; as I have above declared. 3. He charge me with the Heresy
of the Manichees, that said, Christ had an Imaginary Body. To this I answer;
That I am altogether free of this Charge: For I affirm, That Christ has no
Imaginary Body; for his Body is Real and Substantial. Nor does it prove, that
Christ his Heavenly Body, is Imagiary, because it cannot be seen, or felt, or
heard, by the outward Senses, as he reasons: For by the same reason, God
himself should be no Real Being, but only Imaginary; seeing God, who is a
Spirit, cannot be seen, or felt, by the outward Senses. And thus we see, what
Spirit of Madness acts this false Accuser; who seeking to fix upon me (but
falsely) the Error of Manicheisme, salleth headlong himself into the Ditch of
Gross Atheism: For what grosser Atheism than this, to say, That God is no real
Being, but only Imaginary; which is the Necessary Consequence of his Doctrine.
4. He charge me with the Heresy of Apollinarius, who is said to have
affirmed, That Christ had no Soul distinct from the Godhead: The contrary of
which, I have manifestly affirmed, and do still affirm. And when I say, The
Nismah is the Word Incarnate, or Word made Flesh, I do not exclude the Soul of
Christ: For if these Words (namely, the Word made Flesh) exclude the Soul of
Christ, then by the perverse Reasoning of this Author, he makes the Apostle
John equally Guilty with me, of the Heresy of Apollinarius. And thus we may
see, how commonly this Author falls into the same Ditch, which he has
prepared for another; and sometimes into a worse. 5. He charge me with the
Heresy of the Nestorians, who said, There were two Persons, as well as two
Natures, in Christ. To this I answer; But I have no where said, That there are
two Persons in Christ; nor do I say, That there are two Christ's, or two Sons of
God, as the Nestorians affirmed. Moreover, whereas he says, The Quakers hold,
that there are Three Natures in Christ, if not Four: I answer, 1. But this was
no Part of the Nestorian Heresy, if I had so affirmed: and therefore, instead
of proving me a Nestorian, he but proves himself a gross Liar, Perverter, and
Calumniator. But, 2. I answer, That I hold only, that there are but two Natures
in Christ, Nature being taken (as it ought to be) in its full and entire
Concept or Notion: For the Nature of Christ his Manhood, is still but one
entire Nature of Man, although consisting of various Principles. And this the
Author himself, must needs acknowledge, or then be guilty of his own
Accusation: For, is not the Soul and Body of Man of distinct Natures, and yet
they make up but one entire Nature of Man? And if he say, they are two distinct
Natures, then Christ having these two Natures of Soul and Body; and also, being
God, he has, according to this Author, three Natures; which was the Accusation
wherewith he charge me, and yet is guilty of the same. 6. He charge me
with the Heresy of the Eutychians, who gave the Divine Attributes to the Human
Nature. To this I answer; That I have abundantly cleared my self of this,
above; where I have showed, that these Divine Attributes, of Omni-presence, and
Omni-science, which belong to the Manhood of Christ, are neither the same, nor
yet equal to these of the Godhead; and so, I confound not the Manhood and
Godhead of Christ, but acknowledge them distinct Natures and Beings, forever
inseparably united together, after the most Perfect manner: whereas the
Eutychians are said to have confounded the Manhood and Godhead into one Nature.
-- 7. He charge me with the Heresy of the Ubiquitarians, but whom he
means, he does not express: But for answer, by the Ubiquitarians, either he
means the Eutichians, or them called Lutherans; if the former, concerning
them, I have answered already, upon the 6 th. If the latter, namely the
Lutherans, I have at large, in my Book discovered, how I do not hold the
Ubiquity or Omnipresence of Christ, after that absurd and gross manner, as they
do, but after another way; that is, both according unto Scripture Testimonies,
in many places, and is no wise repugnant unto right reason, but very agreeable
thereunto: Although in the general, I do acknowledge, that I do agree with the
Judgment of Luther, and those that wrote the Liber Concordiae, as touching that
particular; and whereas I made use of some excellent testimonies, both out of
Luther and Liber Concordiae, for the Ubiquity, and Omnipresence of Christ, this
Author has not so much as once named them, far less answered them.

And thus Reader, I have particularly replied unto all his false accusations,
and his beast with the Seven Heads, that he has conjured out of the Sea of his
troubled Imagination, I have easily slain, with a few easy and simple strokes:
and here it were but very Just, instead of his Counterfeit Creed of his own
making, concerning what the Quakers believe of the Man Christ Jesus, to draw up
an account of his Atheistical and Blasphemous Creed, concerning both God and
Christ, which is truly his, and which he must needs own; either as his express
words, or as the genuine, and most necessary consequences of his Words and
Doctrine; and when I have so done, I should be more Just unto him, than he has
been unto me, who has alleged upon me many false things, which are neither
my express words, nor the true consequences of my words; no, not after the
remotest manner: But at present, I shall spare this pains, and refer the Reader
to the places in my answer to his Pamphlet, where I have proved him manifestly
guilty of Socinianisme, Arianisme, Anthropomorphitisme, Muggletonisme,
Judaisme, Anti - Christianisme; and lastly of gross Atheism and Impiety; to
which also, I could add Manicheisme, Ebionitisme, and Cerinthianisme, withal
whom the author of the Pamphlet, falsely called, the Quakers Creed, has taken
part, and for which he is justly reproveable.

Some Testimonies out of Hilarious, concerning the Manhood of Christ, both as
touching the Soul and Body: Who although he does expressly affirm, that Christ
has the true and whole nature, both of God and Man, yet he no less expressly
says as follows in his own words lib. 10. de Trinitate.

SUum, rursum panem esse dixit, ut per hoc quod descendens de caelis, panis
est, non ex humana conceptione origo esse corporis existimaretur, dum caeleste
esse corpus ostenditur -- Et arguere nos solent Heretici quod Christum dicamus
natum non nostri corporis atquae animae hominem. -- Sed ut per se sibi sumpsit
ex Virgin corpus, ita ex se sibi animam sumpsit, qua utique nunquam ab homine
gignentium, originibus prebetur. Si enim conceptum carnis nisi ex Deo Virgo non
habuit, long magis necesse est, anima corporis nisi ex Deo aliunde non fuerit
-- at vero si Dominici corporis sola ista natura sit, ut sua virtute sua anima
feratur in humidis and insistat in liquidis, et extructa transcurrat, quid per
naturam humani corporis concepta ex Spiritu S. caro Iudicatur? And concerning
the Soul of Christ, he further says. Naturae hujus potestatem, Iam non dico
metus, sed nec infernae sedis regio est concludens, quae descendens ad inferos,
a paradiso non desit, sic ut and hominis filius loquens in terris, maneat and
in Caelo. -- Non habet hunc metus corporalis penetrantem quidem inferos, sed
ubique Naturae suae virtute distentum and naturam hanc mundi Dominam, ac
liberate Spiritualis virtutis immensam, non sibi terrore mortis, Gehennae
chaos vindicat, qua Paradisi deliciae carere non possunt.

In English thus. Again, he said, that he was bread; that by this, that he is
bread, coming down from Heaven, the Original of his Body may not be esteemed to
be of Humane Conception, while it is shown to be a Heavenly Body -- And the
Heretics use to accuse us, because we say, that Christ was born a man, having
a Soul and Body not of our kind: but as by himself, he took to himself a Body
of the Virgin; so of himself, he took to himself, a Soul which is never to be
acknowledged to have the same Originals of them begotten of Man: for if the
Virgin had the Conception of the flesh, not of any other but God, it is much
more needful, that the Soul was not of any but of God. -- But indeed, if that
be the only Nature of the Lords body, that by its own virtue, by its Soul it
is carried upon the waters, and stands upon the Floods, and being struck at,
can pass through; why is the Flesh conceived of the Holy Ghost, judged by the
Nature of an Humane Body? And concerning the Soul of Christ, he further says.
The power of this Nature, now I say, not only fear, but the region of the
infernal seat does not contain; which descending into the Hells, is not absent
from Paradise; so that being the Son of Man speaking in the earth, he does
remain in the Heavens. Bodily fear does not take hold of him; that does indeed
penetrate the hells, but is everywhere extended, in the virtue of his own
Nature; and the pit of Hell cannot claim to it self by the Terror of death,
this Nature; that is, the Lady of the world, and immense, or unmeasurable in
the liberty of Spiritual virtue; Which the delights of Paradise cannot want,

Postscript.
SInce I wrote the Answer, aforesaid, to the Pamphlet, set out by a Nameless
Author, called the Quakers Creed, etc. I have seen a sheet in print subscribed
by William Haworth, a sort of Independent Teacher at Hartford, which he calls a
Winding Sheet for the five Hartford Quakers; and in the said sheet, he refers
the Reader to the aforesaid Pamphlet, called the Quakers Creed, for an answer
to my Book, The way cast up. This gives me just ground to hold the said William
Haworth, either to be the Author of the said Pamphlet, or at least an approver
of it; and therefore all the Lies and Calumnies, and whatever other gross
abuses, weaknesses, and impertinencies, and all the absurd, and blasphemous
Assertions, which I have discovered in the said Pamphlet, are Chargeable upon
him, and lie at his door. And whereas William Haworth says, at the end of that
fheet aforesaid, that G. Keith says, Christ never was a man; this I charge
upon him, as a most gross, and Notorious lie, and slander: I never spoke,
wrote, nor thought, any such thing. It is strange, that the man has so far lost
all sense of shame, to publish such a manifest lie in the sight of the world.
Now, how truly, and uprightly I own

and believe, that Christ is both God and Man, my book called, The way cast up,
is a sufficient witness; and this other Treatise, writ by me in answer to the
lying Pamphlet, owned by him, is another. But it seems, he does suppose, that
such a Conclusion will follow by way of Consequence from my words, because I
have affirmed in my book, that Christ the Heavenly Man, was from the beginning,
even before Adam, the first Man, which was of the Earth, earthly. But this
consequence I altogether deny, as false and unreasonable; for his being before
he came in that body, does no more infer, that he was not man in that body,
than it does infer, that a man cease to be a man, or that the Soul of any Man
cease to have a being, when it is not in a Fleshly body: and if the having of
a Fleshly Body be so Essential to the being of the Soul, (which is most
principally the Man) so as the Soul cannot be, or subsist before the Fleshly
Body; the same reason holds as much, that the Soul cannot subsist, or have a
being, after the Fleshly Body is put off: and so by W. Haworth his Argument,
the Soul of every man dies with the body, and has no immortal Subsistence.
Let him see, how he can clear himself of this, and many other absurdities,
which he runs himself into, by his foolish and inconsiderate way of
reasoning.

And as for other things in that he calls his Winding Sheet, which he
charge upon the Quakers, as their Doctrines, and then upon some called

Quakers; as that one should say, that the Soul of man was the Devil, and that
the Devil was made an offering for sin; and another should say, that Christ was
a bastard: These false, and abominable Calumnies, have been so fully and
sufficiently answered above, by the said five Hartford Friends; and especially
in their last, called the Malice of the Independent Agent again rebuked, that
it is to no purpose to give any further reply. Nor is the evidence he gives by
proof of some witnesses, of any more Authority than his own, who has openly in
the face of the world, discovered himself to be a liar, and false accuser; and
can it be questioned, but he can find others like to himself, who because of
their deep malice, and prejudice against the Truth, make no more conscience
than himself, to bear false witness against the innocent?

Moreover, whereas these five Friends of Hartford did justly blame W. H. for
Charging the whole people called Quakers, with any error, that some one or
other called a Quaker, may be supposed to have writ or asserted, set case any
one had so writ, or asserted: And they Query further, Is it just, the
Independent party should be charged with the private Opinions of every one of
them, because they pretend all to one rule, the Scripture? -- The said W. H.
gives only this bare and naked evaston, in that he calls his Winding Sheet:
Should the Independants (says he) hold Infallibiliy as you do, then might that
party be Charged with

all the Religious Opinions, that any of them at any time vented. Unto which
bare evasion, these Friends of Hartford, have given a sufficient reply, in page
13. of their last book: where among other things, they say; Such an absurdity
was never the assertion of the people called Quakers, viz. That either every
one pretending to be guided by the light within, or distinguished by the name
Quaker, is therefore guided by the same light, in all discourses, or so to be
owned by the said people. This which they have already said, is sufficient to
overturn his evasion; as because the Quakers do all pretend an infallible
Spirit, that therefore all must be acknowledged to have that infallible Spirit,
and to be guided thereby; which does no more follow, than that because all the
Independants so called, pretend to one Rule, the Scripture; that therefore, all
that they or any of them speak, write, or do, is according unto the Scripture;
which instance of parity, they did bring in their foresaid answer, page 13.
(Yet do not thereby grant, that any of the people called Quakers, are guilty of
any such Blasphemous Doctrines as before cited.) To which W. H. has made no
reply; and therefore, it is returned upon him, as wholly unanswered: as also
the whole substance of their last book, which W. H. has not answered, nor
indeed has not so much as pretended, to give a particular answer, unto the
greatest and most Principal part thereof. And therefore, these Friends see it
not needful

to give any further answer, to what he calls his Winding Sheet, until he
give a particular answer to the several parts of their book; and they look upon
his sheet, to be no Winding Sheet for them; but that it is an evidence, he has
spent all his strength, and is as it were a dying man, that is no longer able
to hold out in this controversy: and that therefore, it may be more fitly
called a Winding Sheet for VV. Haworth himself* than for them.



FINIS.

