The Righteous taken away from the Evil to come. Applied to The DEATH OF THE
Late Excellent QUEEN, IN A SERMON PREACHED At St. MARTIN'S CHURCH, On Sunday
January the Twentieth, 1694/5. Before the MAYOR, Bailiffs, and Commonalty of
the City of OXFORD. By WHITE KENNETT, B. D. One of the Lecturers to that
Corporation.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, for George West, Bookseller, 1695.

A Sermon, etc.
ISAIAH. Chap. LVII. Ver. 1. The Righteous perishes, and no Man lays it to
Heart; and merciful Men are taken away, None considering that the Righteous is
taken away from the Evil to come.
THE preceding Chapter does conclude with a grievous Complaint, which the
Prophet makes, of a loose and careless World: when all Persons were either
intent upon their Profit, or addicted to their Pleasure: and seemed to have
little or no Concern for any public Calamity that fell upon them.

Hence in the Ninth Verse, All ye Beasts of the Field come to devour: Yea, all
ye Beasts in the Forest. That is, the Land of Israel which GOD once Cared for,
the Vineyard which he once Planted with his own Right Hand, it is now so
Degenerate, and Barren of all that is Good, that it is only Ripe for
Desolation. Therefore, All ye Beasts of the Field and the Forest come and
devour it. i. e. Let this Vineyard be Entered and Trampled by some Foreign
Nation: Let it be Profaned by some strange Religion: Let Heathens come, and
take away the Place and Nation.

For alas! All the Inhabitants are Secure and Stupid: They scarce apprehend the
common Danger: They take no thought of appeasing the Anger of GOD, or of
averting those Judgments that hover over their guilty Heads: No! Even they
whose Character and Office makes it their especial Duty to attend the public
Good, They are all wrapped up in Vice and Ease. ver. 10. His Watchmen are blind,
they are all ignorant, and so on. Some have their Soul filled up with Thoughts
and Cares how to force Trade, and improve their sordid Store. ver. 11. They all
look to their own way, every one for his Gain from his Quarter. And while these
are drudging to increase their Wealth, there be Others equally unconcerned for
National Interest, who drown the sense of common Safety in Riot and Excess.
ver. 12. Come ye, say they, I will fetch Wine; and we will fill our selves with
strong Drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.

And thus, between the base Avarice of some, and the rude Debauchery of others:
The Nation sleeps on in fatal Security, and wants the feeling of her own
Wounds. If GOD should now threaten Invasions from abroad, and Distractions at
home; yet few would apprehend the Storm, more few provide against it. If GOD
should take away a righteous Prince, and give the deepest cause for a universal
Grief and Lamentation; yet a covetous and dissolute People would scarce be
affected with the infinite Loss: For so it follows in the Text.

The Righteous perishes, and no Man lays it to Heart; and merciful Men are
taken away; None considering that the Righteous is taken away from the Evil to
come.

Let me ask leave first to explain the Words, and then to reflect on the Sense
and Subject of them.

First, Here is the Character of those who are said to perish, and to be taken
away. They are the Righteous and the Merciful: The Righteous perishes, and
merciful Men are taken away.

To be Righteous does I think imply a universal Goodness, Piety, Justice,
Integrity, and most other Graces and Virtues, that make the perfect and upright
Soul: Therefore our Blessed SAVIOR who had no Sin nor Guile, Mal. 4.2
is called the Sun of Righteousness; and scarce a higher Eulogy could be given
of him, than what the Centurion delivered at his Passion, Luke 23. ver. 47.
Certainly this was a Righteous Man.

And though this Title cannot be strictly conferred on any of us Sinners: For in
truth, among us there is no One fully Righteous, no not One. Yet in a qualified
sense, and with that allowance which Religion and Language make, those Persons
who are Exemplary for Goodness and Virtue, they are justly called Righteous:
Partly for their own love, and their own practice of all Equity, and Honesty;
but chiefly for the Merits of the Holy JESUS, by which they are justified, or
accepted as Righteous, in the sight of GOD: For he is said to cover us with a
Robe of Righteousness, Isa. 61.10. and by St. Paul to be made Sin (or a
Sufferer for Sin) for us, ^ Cor. 5. ver. 21.
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in Him.

Nor are they only called Righteous, but Merciful: The Merciful men are taken
away. Because Mercy, Pity and Compassion, they ought to be always the Temper and
Practice of Righteous persons: Therefore the the Wise Man joins these Two
Virtues to make up the Characters of Goodness, Pro. 21. ver. 21.
He that follows after Righteousness and Mercy. Mercy without Righteousness
makes a soft and a weak Soul, and Righteousness without Mercy has nothing
Divine or Humane in it: At least, if Righteousness alone would create some
Veneration; yet it is Mercy can alone command the love of Mankind: For scarcely
for a Righteous man will one Dye, yet peradventure for a Good man some would
even dare to Dye.

This in general is the Righteous and Merciful that perishes, and is taken
away. But Interpreters believe the Prophet meant some one particular Person of
eminent Virtue and of high Degree: Perhaps the Messiah himself: or perhaps some
Crowned Head in Israel, who reigned a public Blessing, whose Righteousness and
Mercy, so long as he lived, did serve to establish his Throne, and to exalt his
Nation. Grot. in Loc.
And Grotius understands it of the great Example of Royal Virtues Josiah, who
did always that which was right in the sight of the Lord; and keeping the noble
Mean between Superstition and Profaneness, turned not aside neither to the
right Hand nor to the left. 2 King. 22. v. 2.


Alas! That righteous Prince, and merciful Governor perishes, and is taken
away. The second Phrase to be explained.

To perish cannot be here meant a total Destruction, or a return to sleep in
Nothing; in which sense the Beasts are said to perish. Psalm. 12. v. 20.
No one of Mankind can so perish: For when our mortal Bodies drop, our Souls
must put on Immortality; and while our Flesh falls back to Dust and Ashes,
Eccl. 12. ver. 7.
our Spirit does return to God who gave it.

Nor can perishing here mean that eternal Perdition, which remains the plague
and portion of the Wicked, who without doubt shall perish everlastingly: For
the Righteous shall be saved from that dreadful Doom, and shall enter into a
rest, and peace, and joy for ever and ever.

But by perishing is here plainly meant a temporal Death, from which no more
the Righteous than the Wicked can be exempted. It being appointed for all
(however great and good) for all Men once to Dye. Heb. 9. v. 27.
So is the sense of the same phrase, Mic. 7.2. The Good man is perished out of
the Earth: i. e. is dead and gone; and so is taken away, or removed from one
World to another: As the Messiah by his Passion is said to have been taken away
and cut off out of the land of the Living. Is. 53.8.


So as the Prophet might design these words should signify to this effect. Some
one righteous and merciful Soul, whose Authority and Example countenanced
Virtue, and kept up Religion: That Great Soul, of whom the World was not
worthy, has left this ungrateful World, and is gone to seek a better Country,
and to sit upon a higher Throne, where it has received a Crown of Righteousness
laid up for it, where it reigns in greater Glory, and enjoys a Kingdom which
shall have no end.

But though the Righteous thus perishes, and the Merciful be thus taken away:
yet No man lays it to Heart, none considers.

To lay to Heart is a Hebrew Phrase to be deeply affected with Concern and
Sorrow: to mourn and express the Affliction and Bitterness of our Soul: and to
be humbled under the severe Blow that is struck by the mighty Hand of GOD. Then
to consider of it: that is, to remember what Provocations we have given to the
ALMIGHTY, that he should thus Chastise us in his Anger: to reflect that we have
indeed deserved these and worse things to come upon us: but then to weigh and
advise, what Course will be most proper to appease an Offended GOD, and to
avert those farther Judgments, which this one Calamity seems to threaten and
presage.

And One would think all this Scene of Sorrow musts needs open, when the
Righteous perishes, and when the Merciful are taken away. It is the
Instruction of Solomon, that after the day of Death, there will be a house of
Mourning: Eccl. 7. ver. 2.
and at the End of any Man, the Living will lay it to his Heart.

To Die is the debt of Nature, paid by Departing Souls: and to mourn for the
Dead is as much the debt of Nature in those Friends that survive. Especially if
the Soul taken away were Righteous and Merciful, the Loss is greater, and the
greater Sorrow due. More precious is their Death in the sight of the LORD: and
more dear should be their Memory among the Sons of Men.

But especially, when it is probable the Prophet meant, not a righteous Soul
that inspired a common and ordinary Mortal: but One advanced to Grandeur, One
in Royal Dignity and Power; whose Greatness did dilate and recommend his
Goodness; who shined in an higher Orb, even as a Sun of Righteousness, and shed
a gracious Influence on all Below: For such a One to perish, and be took away,
must needs spread a Darkness and a Horror over the Faces and over the Hearts
of all, that were so lately blessed with that Auspicious heat and light.

The Prophet might well expect, that on this sad Occasion, every Breast should
have swelled and broke in Sighs, and from every Eye should arise a Fountain of
Tears, when the Breath of their Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, was taken
from them: But he found himself disappointed; the People had no sense of Loss,
no impression of Grief; as careless and unconcerned, as if common Humanity had
been buried with the Dead.

This provokes the Prophet to upbraid their hardness of Heart, their stupidity
of Soul; that they should have no common Justice to lament the perishing of the
Righteous; no Bowels left to condole the Merciful being taken away.

Alas! That the Righteous One should perish, and no Man should lay it to Heart!
and that Merciful men should be taken away, none considering that

The Righteous is taken away from the Evil to come. This Phrase does admit of a
double sense: Either first, For the Righteous to be taken away from all
personal Evil, that by a longer Life should come upon themselves: Or secondly,
The Righteous being taken away from some public Evil, that after their
Departure shall fall upon the People and Nation, which they leave behind. It is
undoubtedly true in the First, and I am afraid more true in the Second sense.

First, The Righteous and Merciful are taken away from all personal and private
Evils etc. For as the Psalmist declares, Many are the Afflictions of the
Righteous, Ps. 34. ver. 19
and it is only Death can deliver them out of all: And sure one great Evil,
from which they are taken, is to see the Wickedness of the Age they live in:
For Righteous persons to observe so much of Fraud and Oppression, of Injury and
Violence; for merciful Souls to live on, and behold so much spiteful Revenge,
and so many cruel Mercies of the Wicked: This must needs move their Patience,
and tempt their Indignation; as was the sore Experience of Lot in the midst of
Sodom, when to be an Eyewitness of their scandalous and abominable way of
living, He dwelling among them, 2 Pet. 2. ver. 8.
in seeing and hearing, did vex his righteous Soul from day to day.

Especially good and pious Princes, they are more nearly concerned for the
Glory of GOD, and the Good of Mankind; and therefore are more deeply affected
with the heinous and crying Sins of their People. To see that neither their
Authority can restrain, nor their Example reform, the Age they live in: In
spite of their Laws and their own Obedience to them, to see Vice and Villainy
insult, and reign above their Sovereign power; This must needs be a Grief and
Vexation to their Royal Spirit: For so holy David was often mourning for the
Sins of his dissolute Subjects: Ps. 119. v. 136.158.
Rivers of Waters run down mine Eyes, because they keep not thy Law: I beheld
the Transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not thy Word. From this
ungrateful Evil wise and virtuous Princes are taken away by Death, entering then
into a Kingdom, where without Punishment or Reproof all Obey: Where, though
there be different Orders and Degrees, there is no different Interest or
Inclination, nor other Passions but those of Love and Joy.

To be thus taken away from personal and private Evils may be one Sense
implied: But I doubt the Sense chiefly intended is, their being taken away from
some public Evil, or some common Calamity, that after their Departure shall
fall upon the People and Nation, which they leave behind.

Pro. 14. ver. 34.
As the just GOD does provide that Righteousness should exalt a Nation: So does
he resolve that Sin shall prove to the Destruction of every People. Therefore
when a whole Country declines into Profaneness and Atheism, into delighting in
their Vanity, and glorying in their Shame; then does that God to whom Vengeance
belongs, begin to show himself, to vindicate his Justice, and exert his Power:
Then does his Resentment break forth in those words of the Prophet: Shall I not
Visit for these things, Jer. 5.9.
says the LORD, and shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?

But when the day of Visitation is appointed, GOD often calls away the innocent
and righteous Souls, and hides them from the Judgment dropping down: As of Old,
he prepared a Zoar for righteous Lot, before the Descent of his fiery
Indignation upon Sodom: And an Ark was built for Noah, before the Deluge flowed
in upon the guilty World. So has it been since observed, that the good St.
Augustine departed this Life, just before his City Hippo was taken and laid
wast: And Zealous Luther is congratulated for being took out of the World a
little before the Civil Wars in Germany, and the Miseries of that divided
Country.

Thus frequently are the Righteous taken away from the Evil to come.
Especially, if the Text referrs to righteous and merciful Princes, They by the
singular Care of Providence seem caught away from some public Calamity, which
Themselves deserve to escape, and their People deserve to suffer. It was so in
the Reign of Hezekiah, That excellent Prince had a perverse People, for whom
GOD had prepared a Vial of Wrath, but would not pour it down, till his Anointed
Head was laid safe in his Sepulcher. Wrath was upon Judah and Jerusalem, 2
Cron. 32.25, 26.
but Hezekiah humbled himself, so that the wrath of the Lord came not upon them
in the days of Hezekiah: But when He slept with his Fathers, then came
Invasion, and Blood, and Captivity. Then the Lord brought upon them the
Captains of the Host of the King of Assyria, which took Manasseh among the
Thorns, and bound him with Fetters, and carried him to Babylon.

This dispensation of Providence was more remarkable in the Reign of religious
Josiah: When the People despised the Example of the Best of Princes; and made
the City and Country a Stage of Profaneness, while the Court was all Devotion:
Then by the mouth of Huldah the Prophetess, thus said the LORD, 2 Cron. 34.24.
Behold I will bring Evil upon this place, and upon the Inhabitants thereof,
even all the Curses that are written in the Book: My wrath shall be poured out
upon this place, and shall not be quenched. But the pious Prince, He was
snatched as a Firebrand out of the Fire. As for the King of Judah, thus says
the LORD, Because thine Heart was tender, and thou did humble thy self, and
rend thy clothes, and weep before me: lb. 27, 28.
Behold I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and Thou shall be gathered to thy
Grave in peace; neither shall thine Eyes see all the Evil that I will bring
upon this place, and upon the Inhabitants of the same. And so the Reprieve was
granted, till his Sanctuary was the Grave. But then, the first Successor was
deposed, and carried into Egypt; and under the next, GOD brought upon them the
King of the Chaldees, 2 Cron. 36.17.
who slew the young men with the Sword, and had no compassion upon Young man or
maiden, Old man, or him that stooped for Age.

The Records of our own Church and Nation present us with such an Instance of
Divine Mercy in the most Pious of our English Princes, Sim. Dunel. sub an. 957.
King Edward the Confessor; Allredus de vit. and Mirac. Ed. confess.
whom our Oldest Historians report to have had this Vision on his dying Bed.
Two Men of Religious Order and Habit appeared in his Chamber, Cron. Joh.
Brompton. sub Anno. M LX VI.
and declared themselves the Messengers of GOD, and delivered this Express to
him: Your Nobility, Clergy, and People of England have filled up the measure of
their Iniquities: Henr. de Knighton de Event. Ang. Cap. 14.
So that God has bent his Bow, and made his Arrows ready for them. Die you in
Peace, but within One Year, and One Day after your Decease, Strangers shall
possess this Land, and condemn it to Fire and Sword. To this Message they say
the Prince returned: My Soul is sore troubled to foresee the Affliction of my
People; but sure if they turn from their Wickedness, then will God repent, and
leave a Blessing for them. A like Sentence was denounced upon the Ninevites,
and yet suspended on their Repentance: Nay, the Humiliation of wicked Ahab
diverted the Evil from his own days: Therefore (says he) I will persuade my
People to repent, that God may have Mercy, and withhold the impending Judgment.
No, said the Two Holy Men, The Heart of this People is hardened, and their Eyes
are blinded; they cannot see with their Eyes, and understand with their Heart,
and God cannot heal them. Depart you in Peace, and escape the Evil to come. The
History proceeds, That the decaying Prince recovered strength to tell This to
his attending Courtiers; and that Stigand among Others ridiculed the Story, and
said it was all the Dotage and Delirium of a dying Man: But it proved a
Prophecy, and had a fatal Completion; for within the appointed time, the
Normans invaded, and conquered, and divided the Land.

Thus have I opened the Text, and familiarly explained the several parts of it;
so that it is easy for you to apprehend this to have been the sense of the
Prophet. In the midst of a wicked and careless Generation, some public
Calamity, some universal Loss may happen, and yet None be much affected with
it: Even the sharpest Affliction may befall a Nation, their righteous Prince may
perish, and their merciful Governor be taken away; and yet the Wound reaches
to no Heart, None betray the Concern and Sorrow which so sad an Accident calls
for; but drive on their little Humors and Designs with no regard of public
Loss, or public Good. When alas! They ought to consider, that by such a
providential Chance, they may suffer more than they imagine: For that Castle of
Defense being now removed, Enemies and Destruction may come upon them; and sad
Experience may too soon convince, that the Righteous was taken away from a
fatal Evil to come, which had been longer suspended, had the Righteous longer
lived.

And now All this I will not apply so near, as every Conscience may apply. When
righteous Princes perish, their Ashes are too Sacred to be disturbed by every
Tongue: And when they seem taken away from an Evil to come, yet it is not fit
every bold Person should portend that Evil, or describe the Tokens of it: It is
more modest to direct you how to bestow one serious Thought or two on these
Branches of the Text.

First, On the Righteous perishing, and the Merciful being taken away.

Secondly, On no Man laying it to Heart, nor considering what may be the
Consequence of it.

Thirdly, On the fatal Reason of GOD'S Providence in it: The Righteous may be
taken away from some Evil to come.

First, Let us reflect on the Righteous perishing, and the Merciful being taken
away.

Let us reflect, I say, that Piety and Virtue will save our Souls, but not our
Lives: All Graces are subject to Mortality in this World, and only purchase
Eternity in that other World. It is true, the prolonging of days in the Land
wherein they live, is promised a Reward to the Obedient Keepers of Divine Laws;
and so it really proves, by the course of Nature, and by the care of
Providence: By the course of Nature, as Sobriety, Temperance, and all Virtue
preserve our Health, and protract our Life: And again, By the care of
Providence, as GOD more especially protects his own Servants from common
Dangers, keeps them as the Apple of his Eye, and hides them under the Shadow of
his Wings, and carries them safe to Gray Hairs, and a good Old Age.

But this is not so meant, as if all Men's Piety were to be a Charm against
Sickness and Death: No! Not only the Bloodthirsty and Deceitful do not live
out half their days; but even the Good and Virtuous fall often in the prime of
their Age: And yet by their untimely Death they justify the Wisdom and Mercy of
GOD, in that they more quickly retire to Rest, when they are sooner weary of a
wicked World; and particularly are taken away from some ensuing Judgment, which
they kept off by their exemplary Lives, and make room for by their sudden Death.

This is a just Reflection on the Death of all Righteous and Merciful Men: But
if the Prophet understood, as we cannot but understand, the Words of some one
Righteous and Merciful Prince: Then we should farther reflect, That Royal Blood
will run no longer, than that in the Veins of the meanest Subject: That a Court
stands as open to Diseases as a Cottage: That Crowns, and Swords, and Scepters
cannot awe, nor bribe the King of Terrors Death. I have said ye are Gods, but
ye shall die like Men: For so the haughty Heathen Monarchs, who affected to be
Divine, soon proved their Humanity by being Mortal.

Nay, it has so happened, that the Best Princes have generally had the more early
Translation to Heaven. Whither because they most despise the vain Glories of an
Earthly Crown, and labor to be the more quickly delivered from the Burden of
it: Or, whither by their great and good Deeds they sooner work out their
Salvation, and deserve the more speedy Admission into the Courts of Heaven: Or,
whither their Subjects by such a Loss may be taught more to value such a
Blessing: Or whither, as the Text implies, they stand in the Gap, and fence off
the Destruction of a profligate People, and must be taken out of the way, that
GOD may be avenged on those his Enemies. Whither for One, or All of these
Reasons, Holy and Religious Princes are the shortest Loan from Heaven, soonest
called in from an ungrateful World. Thus the Jews lost their good Josiah,
before he was Forty Years of Age; and He, whom we English called our Josiah, K.
Edw. VI.
was a Minor in all but Piety and Parts: As if Rare Princes were to be showed
only to the Earth, and then snatched from it; to leave their Memory more
esteemed, and turn Envy into Admiration.

But let us secondly reflect on no Man laying this to Heart, nor considering
the Greatness of such a Loss.

Sorrow for the Dead was always an Instinct of Nature, and always a Precept of
Religion; and therefore always a Custom in civilized Countries, that, as Solomon
expresses it, when Man goes to his long Home, Ecl. 12. ver. 5.
the Mourners went about the Streets. This Ceremony is paid to common Friends,
and to ordinary Relations: But when a Prince and Governor, when a righteous
and merciful Prince and Governor resigns a well-manag'd Scepter, and retires
into the inner Chambers of Death; then is it a National Calamity, and calls for
a National Grief and Lamentation.

When meek and righteous Moses was taken away from the Judging of Israel, the
People Wept in the Plains of Moah, Deu. 34. ver. 8.
and full Thirty Days were employed in the unintermitted Penance of Weeping and
Mourning. When good Samuel Died, 1 Samuel 25.1.
all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented him. When devout
Josiah fell, they bemoaned him, Jer. 22.10.
and wept sore for him that was gone away, because he should return no more,
nor see his Native Country. So strict and solemn a Grief, that it became a
Proverbial Example of Mourning: Zech. 12 ver. 11.
A great Mourning as the Mourning of Hadradrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo.

Nay, the want of such Condolement GOD threatens as the most Reprobate hardness
of Heart, which he can possibly inflict on an obstinate People: It is denounced
as the Portion of the Wicked, Job. 27. ver. 15.
Those that remain of him shall be buried in Death, and his Widows shall not
weep: Or as the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 74. ver. 66.
There shall be no Widows to make lamentation. And when the Prophet Jeremy was
to represent the desperate and lost Condition of the Jews, he proposes this as
the heaviest Judgment: Thus says the LORD, Enter not into the house of
Mourning, Jer. 16. ver. 5.
neither go to lament nor bemoan them; For I have taken away my Peace from this
People, says the Lord, even Loving Kindness and Mercies.

And sure Men's Hearts, like Pharoah's, must be doubly-harden'd, by their own
Perverseness, and by the Judgment of GOD; before they can resist the Torrent of
Grief, drove down by the Death of an excellent Prince. Sure Christian Religion
must be renounced, and common Humanity put off, before the decent Respects of
Silence and Sorrow can be omitted on such a sad Occasion.

Sure All, that have the Bowels of a Man, cannot but in mere Nature have some
Pity and Regret at the Instability of Humane Greatness; and to see how little
Distance there is between a Throne and a Grave. Sure All, that have any Love
for their Sion, any Value for their Religion, cannot but complain in Bitterness
of Soul, when they lose a KING that has been a Nursing Father, or A QUEEN that
has been a Nursing Mother. And even All that are concerned only for the
Interest of the State, must needs commiserate the Suffering of it, when the
Head is laid low that did so wisely Guide it: When There Is an end of the
Sagacity, and Courtesy, and Clemency, and all the other Excellence of Spirit,
that was fit to fill a Throne, and save a Nation.

Sure Examples are not wanting how much Grief, and grateful Respect, has been
paid to the Ashes of Wise and Virtuous Princes. I might offer One from the
known Annals of our own Nation: Maud, the Wife of King Henry the First, a
Princess, who by her Charity, and Affability, and Piety, all tempered with
Prudence, did so win upon the Hearts of all the English People, that when She
came to Die, the Nation was in a perfect Tumult of Grief and Sorrow: They all
lamented Her, as the most dutiful Daughter of the Church, and the most
affectionate Mother of her Country: They labored to touch her Coffin, (...)
H^st. W^nt. A^g. (...) p 2^^.
and to salute her Grave: And in all Discourse and Writing, they scarce ever
mentioned Her, but with this Character, Mold the Good Queen.

Certainly our Reformed Religion must have now improved the sense of Tenderness
and Love, above the Temper of those who lived in a Communion of a narrow and
persecuting Spirit. Certainly that Disposition, for which we have since
invented the Name of Goodnature, and boast it the Propriety of our Modern
English Tongue, must incline us to more soft and compassionate Thoughts, than
could arise to those our rough and hardy Ancestors: And certainly, that very
Breeding, to which our Times so much pretend, must direct us to all those just
Civilities of Duty and Respect, which were less paid, and less due, in that
Ruder Age. One would (I mean) imagine, that the Blessing of a Good QUEEN should
make a deeper Impress upon English Hearts; and the being deprived of that
Blessing should raise warmer Resentments of Grief, than the like Providence did
in the remote Reign of Hen. I. when the Normans were transported with Conquest,
and the Saxons were dis-spirited with Oppression; when the Insolence of one
Party, and the Indignation of the other, were enough to take away all the
better Affections of Humane Nature.

It is impossible that Nature, Education, and Religion, when they are All
reformed, should be All less effectual to strike and wound the Hearts of a
Nation, when they have lost a QUEEN equal to the greatest Example of past Ages.

When, without suspicion of Flattery, Her Character shall be drawn for the Use
of Posterity. Posterity will not believe, That a great part of Her People were
Indifferent, and Unaffected with Her Death; and only put on their Mourning, as
the Pharisees did their Sackcloth, to appear unto Men. At least, Posterity will
not believe, That some were so Insolent, as to Ridicule the Divine Judgment,
and make a Mock at GOD'S Anger, and their own Sin. A barbarous Indignity, that
could have been only tolerable in that Emperor, Sueton. in Vit. Ner. Cap. ^8.
who, amidst the Conflagration of his City, was setting Music to the Flames:
Idem in Vit. Calig. Cap. 31.
Or in that Other, who wished a signal Calamity might happen in his Reign, to
distinguish it from ordinary and unobservable Times.

The Thoughts of such inhumane Practice will naturally lead us to the more
melancholy Reflection.

For we are lastly to reflect on the fatal Reason of GOD'S Providence, in so
severe a Dispensation. The Righteous is taken away from the Evil to come.

History tells us, The First Christians were retreated to Pella, before the
Siege and Destruction of Jerusalem: Or else, perhaps their Prayers might have
turned back the Armies of the Aliens, and stopped the Blood that was imprecated
on the Jews, and on their Children. Indeed GOD cannot execute a dreadful
Judgment, while the Righteous remain to intercede, and turn aside his stretched
out Arm. Had but Ten Righteous Persons been found upon their Knees in Sodom,
Genesis 18. ver. 32.
they had quenched the Fire and Brimstone, before it fell on the polluted City.
Yes! Righteous and Merciful Men, 2 Kin. 2. ver. 12.
they are the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel: They are the Guardian Angels,
and defend the Province over which they do preside.

The Messenger of GOD told Lot, that Nothing could be done against the City,
while he was within the Walls of it: Genesis 19. ver. 22.
Have thee, escape thither; for I cannot do any thing till Thou be come
thither. When the LORD was wroth with his Inheritance of Israel, and resolved
their Iniquity should be upon their own Heads; yet the Intercession of Moses
stopped his drawn Sword; nor could he strike till Moses should let him alone. Ex.
32. ver. 9.
I have seen this People, said the LORD, and behold it is a stiff-necked
People: Now therefore let me alone, that my Wrath may wax hot against them, and
that I may consume them. So much Violence does GOD himself seem to suffer from
the Prayers of Holy Men: And in the most Sinful Land, it is rather a Threat
than a Decree, Eze. 14. ver. 14.
That Noah, Daniel, and Job, shall deliver Nothing but their own Souls.

Oh! That a People were Wise, and would Consider this! Who cannot but Consider?
That when the Walls of a City are broken down, how easy is it for the Enemies
to enter and destroy? When the Pillars of a Temple are took away, how soon must
the unsupported Fabric fall? When the Banks are laid low, how naturally will
the Waters overwhelm the defenseless Ground? Even so, when the Righteous are
taken away, how without Resistance must descend the Evil to come?

It is true: While we reflect on former Mercies, and contemplate our present
Affairs, we grow Sanguine, and presume that All will be Safe and Happy: But
while we take the other Prospect of Divine Justice, and our own Provocations of
it; Then the Light Side of the Pillar is turned round to Cloud and Darkness,
and fearful Expectations may remain.

What Judgment may we expect? What may we not expect? Shall we choose any One
of the Three Evils, which Gad offered to David? 2 Samuel 24.
Shall Seven Years of Famine come upon us in our Land? Our Bodies Hungry and
Thirsty, and our Souls fainting in them? No! Bless, O LORD, our Victuals with
Increase, and satisfy our Poor with Bread; and suffer us not to know the want
of that Plenty we abuse! Shall we flee Three Months before our Enemies, while
they pursue us? Shall Invasion, and Conquest, and Slavery, drown us in Sweat
and Blood? No! Defend us, Good LORD, from barbarous and insulting Foes: Give us
the undeserved Favor of Victory Abroad, and Peace at Home! Well, but Shall
there be Three Days Pestilence in the Land? Shall Carcasses fall in Heaps, and
the Living be buried among the Dead? Yea, rather Let us fall into the Hand of
the Lord, for his Mercies are great, and let us not fall into the Hand of Man:
But rather, O LORD, turn away this Plague from us: Give us Strength and Health:
Give us leave to wait our appointed Time, till a natural and gentle Change
shall come.

Though the Handwriting seems upon the Wall; and the Sentence of Death be
already executed against that just Person, who could alone have stopped the
determined Woe: Yet, Let us turn unto the Lord with all our heart, with
Fasting, Joel. 2. ver. 15.
and with Weeping, and with Mourning: Let us rend our Heart, and not our
Garment; and looking upon the Evil to come, let us try whither the Merciful and
Gracious LORD will Repent him of that Evil: Who knows, if he will return, and
repent, and leave a Blessing behind him?

Merciful GOD! Let it be Judgment Enough! That we have lost a Princess, whom
past Ages never did Exceed, and future Generations shall scarce ever Equal!
Judgment Enough! That we have lost the Benefit of so many Prayers of that
Devout QUEEN, who loved no Apartment of Her Palace, so well as Her Chapel; and
behaved Her-self in it with that Zeal and Affection, as if She believed it the
House of God, Genesis 28. ver. 17.
and the Gate of Heaven, which is now Opened to Her: Who made Her Closet a
continued Oratory of private Devotions: Who prosecuted all Business, as if She
had no leisure to Pray; and yet Prayed so Continually, as if She had attended
no other Business. Judgment enough! That we have lost Her who believed
Religion, and adorned it; who understood the Constitution of our Church, and
therefore loved it: Who Honored Divines for the Sake of their Profession, and
made Her Preferments the Reward of good Preaching, and good Living. And (what
is not improper to mention within these Walls) Lost Her, who was a Friend to
Learning, who knew how to choose Books, and to digest them; and amidst all
urgent Affairs, could descend to the Cares of a Library. Judgment Enough! That
we have lost Her, who paid all the obedient Duties of a Wife, so rare in Royal
Consorts, who, in a less Coparcenry than Hers, are tempted to bear no Equal, at
least to acknowledge no Superior. Lost Her, who was a Mistress Affable and
Humble; and who, if She had wanted Power, could have been Persuasive; whom
supreme Authority could not make Imperious to Her Servants: Who set Her Maidens
an Example of Domestic Industry; and Governed Her Family, as if that had been
her Only Kingdom. Lost Her! Who could Rule a Nation, and make Her Lord seem
Absent to None, but to Her-self: Who could do Justice without Revenge, and show
Mercy without Weakness, and Reign in the Hearts of Her People. In a word,
Judgment Enough! To lose Her, wherein Her Quality has lost an Ornament, Her Sex
a Glory, Her Nation a Blessing, and the World an Example.

Good GOD! Permit no other Judgment to fall upon us: Let Us the Priests, and
You the People, Weep between the Porch and the Altar; and let us say, Spare thy
People O Lord, and give not thy Heritage to Reproach: Be jealous for thy Land,
and pity thy People, Thy Distressed People.

To Thee, O Father of Mercies, with the Son of thy Love, and the Spirit of
Consolation, be ascribed the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, for Ever and Ever.

Amen.

