Flosculum Poeticum.

POEMS DIVINE and HUMANE, Panegyrical, Satirical, Ironical.


By P. K.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Billingsley at the Printing-Press, near the Royal
Exchange, 1684.

READER.
This Poem is an extemporanian by-blow of the Muses; brought forth into the
World before its full time. It is in puris, or rather nudis naturalibus; and
beggeth a smile of acceptance, for a Swadling-Clout to cover it is Nakedness:
Nothing can murder it, but the Eye of a carping Critic: Neither do I fear but
an Ingenuous Reader will find a dish that can both relish his Taste, and suffice
his Appetite, without any danger of a Surfeit: There are some Typographical
Errors, a thing very absurd in Poesy, but they are so obvious that none will
impute them to the Author's Ignorance. Therefore Pray Page 25. read the last
two lines thus. What need I care what Mortal Men can say,
Whilst Great JEHOVAH does a Scepter sway*


Soli Deo omnis Gloria.
ALmighty, Good, Great, Merciful, and Just,
The Angel's Joy; of Men the Hope and Trust:
Heaven is thy Throne, thou spans it with thine hand,
Non-entities obey at thy Command.
Earth's thy Footstool, thou view's it with thine eye,
Yet both are narrow, for thy Majesty.
All that we have, we owe it unto thee;
Both Life, and Breath, and our Existencie.
Thou (when we were o'r-guilt with Adam's stain)
Turned (...), to restore's again,
And by thy Power and Spirit did us call,
To guide our Feet, from such another fall.
You Are only good; and he that loves not thee
Is Satan's Slave, and not as yet set free
From strength of Sin, which thou alone most high,
Did overcome, gave us the Victory.
Let Angels praise, and Men adore thy Name,
And let all beings bow, and pay the same.
Omniscience and Omnipotence are thine;
And thy Ubiquity admits no line.
Then let thy Kingdom turn to Monarchy,
And it is Duration be Eternity.
That Sin and Death, may us no more destroy,
Then when Stars sung, and thy Sons shouted joy.
To the Memory of KING CHARLES the First.
Blessed Saint, Great King, and constant Martyr, I
Pay my small Mite here, to thy Memory.
Yet these three Nations cannot all pay home,
The Sum that is due* Engraven on thy Tomb.
Yet hope thy Blood, ah Blood! (was guiltless shed)
No Vengeance cries, but our Sin pardoned.
Impute it not for boldness then, that I
Could wish thy Life to live, thy Death to die.
INDEX.
ON Eternity. page 1. The World's Unworthiness. page 5. The Worlds Ingratitude.
page 7. The Steadfast Christian. page 10. A Royal Meditation of K. Charles the
First, on his Arraignment. page 11. A reflexfive Meditation on the same. page
13. His Anagram composed by himself the day before he was etc. page 14. An
Elegy on his Murder and Martyrdom. page 15. On the same. page 16. On the same.
page 17. King CHARLES the 2d. in the Oak page 19. On his Return and
Restoration. page 21. On the Death of MARY, Q. to CHARLES 1st. page 22.
CAROLISMVS, or the Sovereign touch. page 23. An Anagram on JAMES STEWART. page
25. Meditatio regalis de Curiae conju^a^ i^ nibus. page 28. A Conference 'twixt
the sleepy Soul, and the watchful Shepherd. page 29. Promotion page 35. The
great Oppressor. page ibid. On the O. M. page 36. On the D. Y. page 37. On a
Beautiful Young Lady. page 38. On Mrs. M. F. page 39. On Mrs. S. G. page 41. On
the same. ibid. An A^^estick on Mrs. J. (...). page 42. On M^^. (...). F. page
43. A Complement to Mrs. R. G. page 44. The Lukewarm Lover. page 46. Love's
Valedictory. page 47. (...) page 48. On the Turk's defeat at Vienna. page 50. A
Plaudite on the same. page 52. The Green-with Green coats Song. page 55. A
Prologue to a Play. page 58. Another. page 61. An Epilogue. page 60. On the
slow building of St. Paul's Church. page 62. An Elogium on D. T. C. ibid. The
noble commendation of S. G. G. page 63. The London-Monument. page 64. My Lady's
Train. page 65. A Poem to one whose Loyalty was suspected. page 66. A Reply to
a Pasquil. page 67. A Blow to the Hangman. page 68. On the Memory of the Earl
of OSSORY, page 69. On the Memory of Mr. J. F. page 70. On the Memory of Mr. J.
K. page 71. On Memory of a Married Maid. page 72. On the Death of a Hopeful
young Child. page 73. An Epitaph on the Brother of Heliogabolus, ibid.
Regicida, or an Epitaph on Old Nol. page 74. On Death. page 76. The Statue
Royal, page 77. The description of a Lie, and Character of a Liar. page 78. The
Character of a Fortune Tellers. page 80. The Description of Drunkenness. page
83. The Character of a Drunkard. page 84. The Character of a Cuckold. page 68.
Isa. 57.15. Thus says the High and Losty One, who inhabiteth Eternity.

Isa. 66.1. Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my Footstool: But to this Man
will I look, even to him that is Poor, etc.

E^cl. 1.14. Thou s^^^ all the works that are und^^ the Sun, etc.

Prove. 8.31. I took my solace in the Compass of the Earth, and my delight was
with the Sons of Men.

The Night's far spent, the Day draws nigh;
The Morning Star aloud does cry.
Remember Long ETERNITY.
Joh. 5.7. There are three that bare Record in Heaven, etc.

Joh. 1.18. No Man has seen God at any time etc.

Joh. 14.6. No Man, etc.

ETERNITI

Fathr^. is not the Son is not the Holy. g^ is not the

is God (...)

is

is

a threefold Cord

is not ea^^^ broken

Faith hope Love,



1 Cor. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, etc.

Joh. 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing.

Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is impossible etc.

Romans 8.24. We are saved by Hope.

1 Cor. 13.1^. The greatest of th^se three is Love.

God is Love.

Heb. 3.12. T^ke b^ed, Brethren, lest there be in any of you etc.

1 John 5.8. And there are three that b^re Witness in Earth, etc.

Often h^^e I striven, and labor given,
Etera^l. to s^an:
But still I find, I b^at the Wind:
And end where I began.


POEMS On several Occasions.
Eternity.
WHat is Eternity? A thing
That Is round in fashion, like a Ring,
It is a NOW, that ends never.
It is a LINE, that lasts ever.
It Is semper Idem still the same.
An Abstract, only known by name.
A Point that cannot be decided;
Subtracted, Added, nor Divided.
It is a round, long, endless Sphere,
And sister-twins with Everywhere.
It Is Non ens, clad in something's dress,
It laughs the Arts, and Sciences,
None can this clew of thread untwine,
Or it In terminis define.
It Is absent still, yet In Praesentia.
No Genus, but all Differentia.
I traced it (by a Demonstration)
'Twixt Va^tium, and Penitration,
And though I did exactly mind it,
I lost my self, but could not find it.
I did conclude it once to call
A Form, though not substantial:
But when I laid it to mine Eye,
It was a mere Absurdity.
I clad it with supposed Fictions,
And run my self in Contradictions:
For when my Phancie made a stand,
Thinking to catch it in my Hand;
I cast mine Eye, but could not see
Such Fruit, upon Porphyreu's Tree.
I can perceive some twilight sky,
Of all our new Philosophy:
But this the Object of Objection,
Know not by first, nor last conception:
Only I think I hear it cry,
I Am Endless, Long, Eternity.
Some Philosophs it sue, and chase,
To know it is height, and see it is face.
But it no Parley, but Desie
Sounds unto such (...).
It Is still at Hand, and yet it flies
Beyond the Horizon of Eyes.
I bent my Soul, and shot my Wit,
Thinking this Center-Mark to hit;
But it (like Arrows, shot in vain)
As Immanent turned back again.
I seriously did once design,
It to describe, but not define;
Yet got no further but to IT,
Which of no limits does admit;
Of no Non ultra, or Non plus,
No Prius, nor Posterius.
It Time survives, and yet I Am told,
It self was never a Minute old.
It is a VERB, that does commence
No further, then the present Tense,
A NOUN abounding, yet does fall
Objected, to no sense at all.
A PRONOUN sure, it needs must be,
For it includes Him, Thee, and Me,
A PARTICIPLE, that gives and takes,
Yet Less, or More it never makes.
And for an ADVERB it may pass,
Because it is an endless Cras.
A PREPOSITION, out of doubt,
For Circacircum's round about.
It Is a Conjunction that does draw
Forth endless long et caetera.
It needs must be an INTERJECTION,
Branched forth in Passion, and Perfection,
Because it has, still to throw in
Evax, and Heu, and ever begin.
The moment of our short time is,
ETERNITY'S Parenthisis.
Yet the Duration that is called time,
In it is own proper sense and clime,
Is all one with Eternity:
But 'cause all Mortals here must dye,
We change the Name, but not the Nature;
Terming our measure like the Creature.
It, none that lives but one does know,
And can make it our Friend, or Foe.
Whom we alone can fully call
Heter, and Homogeniall.
A Part ante, and a Post,
Whom chance, or change does not accost,
Who did us save, when we were lost.
By whom, let Reader Thee, and Me,
And all true hearted Christians be
Blessed, unto all ETERNITY.
THE WORLD'S Unworthiness.
John 1.17. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ.


MOSES a Shephard, and the Man of God,
Feeding his Flocks, in Horeb Mount abode:
And as he sought some wandering Sheep to spy,
A Non-such Object did surprise his eye.
A Bush, (which is Hyperbole to say)
Did burn a-pace, but not consume a way.
Therefore amazed, he thither made his flight,
To see that strange, and unexpected sight.
But 'ere he knew, he forced was to retire;
For him whose Name is A Consuming Fire,
The King of Kings from Heaven to Earth was come,
To give the Law, Per post liminium.
The Great Jehovah Lord, descended had,
To do the work, the Almighty promised.
But neither Plagues, nor Wrath, nor any Act,
Or Miracle of Mercy, could bring back
The chosen Israel, to pay the score
In works, his great Grandfather run before.
The heavenly Herald both in smoke, and fire,
To pay their debt, all Mortals did require.
God's Majesty, made Earth's Foundations shake:
Mount Sinai tremble, and the people quake.
A fiery Law went out, made Jacob mourn,
It gave a light; but every spark did burn,
No deb't was paid, for Moses could no more
But quake, and tremble, further on the score.
And all the World could only but confess,
God's holiness, and their Unrighteousness.
Therefore the Lord (to keep us free from harm)
Laid up the Bond, and gave a longer term.
God only good (as our case did require)
Turned flame of love, from a consuming fire.
And likewise veiled (his great love to express)
The burning Bush, within a Human dress.
Which Mortals boldly might approach unto,
Which not the meekest man before durst do.
THE WORLD'S Ingratitude.
John 1.10. He was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the world
knew him not.


O Thankless Globe! of thrice adulterate clay,
Whose Sin, and Ignorance eclipsed that day,
Wherein thy Maker (Masked with Mortal dress,)
Veiled his bright light, in human lowliness.
To reconcile, and ransom thee again,
From endless Death, from Sorrow, Grief, and Pain.
He left his Fathers Court, to visit thee,
And Flesh became, to set thee Prison-free.
The King of Kings, the Lord of all things, he
Came in a Servants form, to suit for thee.
Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Beauty, Life and Love
With light, did all descend from heaven above, bane.
To reunite, espouse, and bring again
The wretched world, from the old Serpents
When Adam's race was dead, and sunk in sin,
Whom none could bring to life, nor once begin
A Remedy, sufficient to heal
Poor Apostates, nor could find any bail
In Heaven, or Earth, who worthy was and just,
To whom the God of truth could give in trust
His Power, and Sp'rit, to fight, and put to chase
The Host of Hell, and world of Wickedness.
When neither Man nor Angel this durst dare,
The God of peace became a Man of War.
He made the world: but when he came therein,
To purify, and make it clean from sin,
They turned him out of doors, and did deny
Him Bed, or Pillow, whereupon to lie:
They would not give him lodging, one poor Night;
Though unto him belonged the whole World's right.
Both Beasts, and Fowls, had whereupon to rest;
The Fox had holes, the Sparrow had a nest:
And yet the Son here was so humble made,
He had not whereupon to lay his Head.
O Great Ingratitude! he did lay by
His Royal Robes, and Glorious Majesty;
And took our Nature, that he might restore
Us to the Righteousness, we lost before:
But when he came unto his dearest own;
He (like a stranger) was to them unknown.
They took his Life, and they by him did live,
He (by his Death) Life unto them did give.
They Murdered him: But he Revived again;
And his delight is with the Sons of Men.
Here Is a Misterious Love, and no Man knows it;
But he, to whom the Father of Spirits shows it.
The Stedfast-Christian
Eccles. 4.12. A threefold Cord is not easily broken.

Luke 24.32. Did not our Heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the
way, etc.


FAith, Hope, and Love,
Are from above,
And he that keeps them sure,
Can never Fall,
For Good and all,
Whilst Lifetime does endure
Though Tempests blow,
Through Storms of Snow,
Be of a steadfast mind,
There Is none needs care
For Prince of Air,
Whilst God rides on the Wind.
He can no more,
But only roar,
And sue us, for his prey:
But ten days space
Will turn the chase,
And he will shrink away.
Suspirium Regale: OR A Royal Sigh of King CHARLES the First, On His
Arreignment.
Eccle. 8.4. Where the World of a King is there is Power, and who may say unto
him what do thou?

Chap. 10. Verse. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy Thought, etc.

Job. 34.18. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art Wicked? and to Princes, ye
are Ungodly?


Betrayed by Tumults, to a Bloody War!
And now Arreign'd at black Rebellion's Bar!
Where Lawless Law-pretending Traitors plead,
Religiously, both for my Crown, and Head.
Yet they to me the Privilege deny,
To speak one Word, my self to justify.
Is England's King become a home-born Slave?
Both Life, and Liberty, to Beg, and Crave
From those Blood-sucking Rebels, who proceeds
From open Traitors, unto Regicides.
Is this the fate of Kings? what then must be
The just revenge of those who murder me?
If Reason, Law, Religion, this allow
To me their King, what dare injustice do
To these few Loyal Subjects, who have stood
With me in Tumults, to the Knees in Blood.
Unhappy Nation thrice! that do not know
This Visitation day, and dismal blow.
Yet in my rigid Fate, I Will Kiss the Rod;
Submitting all ( in Patience) to my God,
Without who is Providence, there is not found
A Lark, or Sparrow, falling to the ground.
Then ( since all beings bow at thy Command)
Take Head, and Heart, and Crown, into thine Hand.
Since thou my Friends removed have from me,
My Counselor, Lord, and my Safeguard be.
If thou thy Power, and Presence me bequeath;
I shall be more than Conqueror in death.
Though Faith be flown, and Truth has taken wings;
Let me prove Faithful, to the KING of KINGS.
A Reflection, on the Arreigument OF King Charles the First.
HEre lies Treason in a Trap,
Rebellion did commit a rape
On Loyalty, and Traitors bring
The Brat of Treason, to the King:
To Father the Hop-gobling Elf,
Of Treachery, against Himself.
Then Sophister you plainly lie,
Quae malum cannot appeti;
But it is true (as it is said)
A Crown is of a Cob-web made.
In memoriam Caroli primi docollati,
Regis Magnae Brittanniae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, etc.
CAROLUS REX: anagramma: Cras cro Lux.
Ut CeCIDIt CaroLUs, CasU praeCIsUs atroCI,
Cras LUX In CoeLois, ClarIor InqUIt ero.
Englished thus,

When Charles did fall,
And brake us all,
Struck through with fatal Sorrow;
He said, I see,
That I shall be,
A Star, in Heaven to morrow.
An Elegy, On the Murder and Martyrdom of CHARLES the First: King of Great
Britain, etc.
It Is said late times, and Ages could but bring
Two names of good Kings graven in a Ring-three,
But CHARLES the Great, and Good, augments them
And leaves the World, a new TRIUMVIRI.
A Black Swan sure: a KING! that did excel
All Learned Subjects: under him did dwell
In his Dominions; what could be the cause?
Against Wisdom, Knowledge, Reason, Natur's Laws;
Great Britain slew it self, and Murdered
It Is greatest Honor, and cut off it is Head.
Religion killed the CHURCH; and LAW did fall;
And LOYALTY did tax the Crown for all.
Great Brittain's Blush, rigidity of Fate!
Revenge, without the meanest cause of hate!
A Pious King, and Master of such Reason!
And Murdered Martyr, guilty of High Treason!
Against whom? I cannot tell; in Love, or Hate,
Nor no Man else, but say it was his Fate.
What Contradictions, and Enigmaes lie
Within the Riddle of this Cruelty!
But by past Ages, tell me if ye saw
KINGS cleared by Justice, and condemned by Law.
What Law? Rebellion only, that dare bring
Objections in, against a Lawful KING.
But there is no need (in such Self-murdering Treason)
To knock down Comradictions, by sound Reason.
On the same.
HEre lies Ashes pure, and just,
More precious than the Guiny-dust:
Our CHARLES, that was both Good, and Great,
Whom Envy murdered in despite;
Cause his Perfections did appeal
The World, to show his Parallel.
The cruel Draco, never did bring
A Law, to Murder any KING,
But here s a Madness, made of Must,
Which Rebels only own as Just.
In Britain Great he once did Reign
Both King, and Statesman, and Divine.
But here his great Crime only stood;
He was o'rballenc'd, with too good.
But dying Martyr, now we see
Non ultra in Humanity.
Then Traitor tell me if you can,
( Though two parts Pruit, and third part Man:)
Was ever such a passage seen?
Since Pilate pestered Palesteen.
On the same.
COuld Ashes speak, or Dust prove Eloquent.
Dead Bones would cry, and Martyrs would lament
This dismal Darkness, which did blind our Eyes;
Which Law conceals, and History denies.
This doleful Tragedy may let us see,
That God's Perntissive (sometimes) in decree.
That Men may know, that he can bring to pass
Wisely his work, from Satan's Wickedness:
Even so, he from this Super-Treason brings,
True Loyalty, to all succeeding Kings.
This Bloody, Brutish blow may well detect,
What Treason is, and break Rebellion's Neck.
For (though it is masked up, in a smiling dress)
This turns it up, and shows it is Nakedness.
A Babel's Brat, Engraven with disgrace,
A Regicide, with a Religious face.
Here Is REPUGNANTIA real, or at least
Hirco-Cervus, or such another beast.
A show of Law, which such sine tricks contains,
Can cut off Kings, and break the hearts of Queens.
Great Brittain's MONARCH speechless here does lie;
But cries aloud the Nation's Treachery.
His very Name foretold his future state,
By Anagram, Cras ero Lux; by Fare.
Which Divine Providence to him foretold,
The day before he Suffered, to uphold
Him in his Death; though some ambitious Men
Usurp the Glory, to their pedling Pen.
His Kingdom was his Cross which now does burn,
And melts all Loyal hearts, to Sigh, and Mourn.
He famous was in Life, and Death: yet I
Could wish his Life to live, his Death to die.
CHARLES STUART.
Anagram.
THUS A CLEAR STAR, did only set, not die:
Parenthisiz'd, not ended Monarchy.
King CHARLES the Second, in the Oak.
PRetending Salus Populi,
To be Suprema LEX;
Here CAROLUS was forced to fly,
When Murdered was REX.
Arbor honoretur, Cujus nos Umbra tuetur:



Heb. 5.8. Although he was the Son, yet did he learn Patience by Suffering.


BEhold and See,
Upon this Tree,
The tastless Fruit, of Treason.
Whereby we know,
That here below,
Is little Truth, or Reason.
There Is nothing sure,
That does endure,
By Fate, or Chance, (choose either)
Here sits upon
This Wooden Throne,
Both KING, and PRINCE, yet neither.
Lo every Bough,
That here does grow,
Make have, they know not whether;
And envelop,
Upon his Top,
To Crown him altogether.
Each Leaf I Will name
A Diadem;
O Cruel English Nation!
These trifles be
More true than thee,
Lo here is a Demonstration.
Then Britain Great,
This Emblem write,
And grave it on thy Nature.
That henceforth thou
May still prove true,
And never play the Traitor.
On the Return of CHARLES the Second King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, etc.
Psalm. 126.1. When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Zion: we were like
them that Dream.


WHen I cast up our by past Miscries,
And set our Floods of Blood, before mine eyes:
And then behold our now-returning King;
I Am ready both (at once) to Weep and Sing.
But Melancholy, hold; for why should I
My smile of gladness, from this joy deny?
Since Providence dispenses us, a-pace
Such Miracles of Mercy, Acts of Grace.
As lately would have forced a Statesman say,
Such things may be, but per possibile.
Our Lawful King, whom we had lost before,
No Host of Men; but Angels does restore.
Who Is Royal Peace-portending Scepter shows,
What Love he to his Loyal Subjects owes:
His flaming Sword of Justice does discry,
All Traitors ought, but Regicides must die.
Justice and Mercy, sets us up on high:
Not as an Object of a new envy;
But that (with Interest) they may us restore
All that we lost, in Civil-War before.
Thus it is most true, what (commonly) is said,
A Morning clear, succeeds an Evening red.
A Mournful Elegy, ON The Deplorable Death, of the Thrice Virtuous, Religious,
and Renowned MARY, Queen to CHARLES the First, King of Great Britain, etc.
HEre lies she that up did rear,
By stooping to a higher Spher^
Of Virtue; where her Memory
Shall ever live, and never die.
She was our Queen, but we ingrate,
Threw fuel to her frowning Fate:
Who both by Birth, Worth, and Renown,
Deserved a Kingdom, both, and Crown:
Yet she by Fate (or Fortune rather)
Had both, and yet possessed neither.
She was a Mary by her Grace,
An Angel by her comely Face,
Who Is Parts, and Person, I may call
(In most respects) Reciprocal,
She with her King, our CHARLES the good,
Was almost sunk in Seas of Blood.
But both endured the Tempests rage,
And swam a patient Pilgrimage.
Then MARY (since you overcame)
Take ARMY for your Anagram.
CAROLISMUS. Or, The Loyal Patient, on the Sovereign touch.
MOunt Divine Muse, with Loyal Wings, and fly
Above the Sphere of common Poetry.
Touch the Celestial Orbs, and sweetly sing,
And celebrate the praises of a King:
A King who is Race (unless experience lie)
Does bear the Tincture, of a Diety:
Who from his Cradle upward, bore his Cross
Through Seas of Blood; who is Billows did him toss
From Kingdom, (both, and Crown,) but (all in vain)
The King of Kings restored them both again.
Yet (though the Crown be purified from dross)
The Kingdom (sometimes) makes him bear his Cross.
But Providence, Iscariot Plots detects;
And turns them round upon the Traytour's necks.
Then Babel's brood, smell ( Pope-adoreing band).
A Sweaty Toe: I Will Kiss a Sacred Hand,
Who Is Health-restoring Faculty is such,
It cures Diseases, by a Sovereign Touch.
Not by your Ripmish, ^hocus, hearsay tricks:
Nor Babilonian, Holy Water bricks.
Nor is it a vain sophisticate Relation,
Of Pro, or Con, but real Demonstration.
Hence then hood-winked Impostors; get ye gone,
Church- Mountebanks, stain of Religion;
Who Controversy end, but in Contention:
And work your Miracles, by Apprehension.
To His Royal Highness JAMES Duke of York. JAMES STEWART: anagram: I: MASTER AT
SEA.
ONe's Name, and Fate, do often agree:
So may it with your Highness be,
Succesful, both at Lund, and Sea.
On leaving the W^^out of the preceding Anagram.
THe Royal Name will not admit
A W, to dwell in it;
Then to the Royal Race, and True,
Be Real, Loyal, Single U.
JAMES Duke of York. Anagram: Fa. Jes. do my Work.
I shall not care at all what Men can say,
So long as great Jehovah beats the sway.
Meditatio Reg alis De Curiae Conjuration ibus.
Ejaculatio Spiritu alis In Curiae Conjuration es.
Eccles. 1.14. I have seen all the Works that are done under the Sun, and
behold all is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

Psalm. 58.6. Break their teeth O God in their Mouth:

Meditatio Regalis.
THe Life of Man
Is but a Span,
That ends like a Taper.
A Royal Crown
May tumble down:
Promotion's but a Vapor.
Ejaculatio Spiritualis.
Since thine's the Right,
(Withal my might)
Good God, I unto thee,
Both me, and mine;
Do all resign;
But only stand for me.
Meditatio.
The Church does moan,
The State does groan,
And no man knows the Reason.
The Court does cry
Conspiracy;
The Country eccho's Treason.
Ejaculatio.
Iscariots,
And and all their Plots,
Lord frustrate: and deliver
Both me, and all
Who on thee call;
That thou may reign for ever.
Meditatio.
Strength, Wit, and Wealth,
Beauty, and Health,
Are all but Shadows flying:
There Is none that is sure
To live one Hour;
Our whole Lif's but a dying.
Ejaculatio.
In Earth, and Heaven,
All Power is given,
Lord Jesus unto thee;
Then (bythy might)
Own thou my right;
My Sword, and Safeguard be.
Meditatio.
Our Life does run,
Below the Sun,
There Is nothing that abides;
It Is here to day;
But flies away;
And in a Moment fades.
Ejaculatio.
Let Justice reign,
The Gospel shine,
Faith, Truth, and Mercy be
Our aim; that all
(What ever befall)
May Centered be in thee.
Bellum Intestinum: A Battle 'twixt, Nature, and Grace: Or, A Conference
between the Watchful Shephard, and the Sleepy Soul.
Genesis 25.23. The Elder shall Serve the Younger.

Cant. 5.4. My Beloved put in his Hand by the hole of the Door, and my Bowels
were moved for him.

Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the Door, and knock,


Shepherd. Awake, poor Soul, and come away
From sleep of Sin, it is break of day;
Make have; there is no time to delay.

Soul. Thy Invitation I deny:
In Worldly Pleasures I do lie;
Too sweet (so soon) to be laid by,
Let those who are decripit Old,
Delight to hear such tidings told;
When spring of Youth turns winter cold.

Shepherd. Me, Angels praise, and Men adore;
The Devils tremble, Seas does roar,
Yet flows no further than her shore.
I with my Hand the Heavens do span,
The Wind bind in my fist I can,
Yet my delight still is with Man.
I di'd, that I Death's Death might be.
I gave my Life, for life to thee:
And must I thus requited be?
Poor Soul, thy Life is but a flower,
That springs, and withers in an hour:
And Satan stands before the Door.
If Death step in, and but make bold
Thy short life's Riddle to unfold.
Where Is spring of Youth, or winter cold?

Soul. I can not leave my Glass of Wine,
My dainty fare, Apparel fine,
For things, they tell me are Divine.
I must carouze a while, and rant:
My Revelling's I will not want;
And yet (for all) I Will die a Saint.

Shepherd. Can Dark, and Light together dwell?
The one, the other, does expel.
Such Saints are turned into Hell.
Take but a sound advice of me;
Leave off the World's base Slave to be*
An Hundred fold I Will pay to thee.
Thy Life is but a Sorrows scheme,
Thy Pleasures are but flying fame,
And dross to what should be thy aim.

Soul. Then tell but what thou wilt give to me?
And what I must pay back to thee?
Or if I shall receive all free?
And I will leave this World behind,
And follow thee; because I sind
My joys do but molest my mind.

Shepherd. My Name is Wisdom; and I stand
Far off; and yet I Am nigh at hand:
He Is Wise, that answers my Command.
Thou shall have me (without a sting)
Can make the Dead, Rivive, and Sing;
Content (in heart) like any King.
And what I give, I give it free;
All beings do belong to me:
Non entities I call to be.
When thou was it Sin, and Satan's slave;
I suffered Death, thy Life to save;
And ransomed poor thee, from the Grave.
I have the Host of Hell withstood.
I Purified thee with my Blood.
And this I did, all for thy good.
And now (lest Sorrow on the sease)
I Am come to give thee (if thou please)
Sweet rest, instead of sensual ease.
Thou shall have earnest in this Life;
I Will be thy Husband, thou my Wife:
I Will keep thee, in the day of strife.

Soul. Put I Am afraid my Faith decay.
And if I faint, and fall away;
Then there is no after- time to Pray.

Shepherd. I Will love thee freely, and I Will cure
All thy ^ack- slidings; keep thee sure,
As long as lifetime does endure.
I Will tie, and draw the up above,
With three-sold Cord, Faith, Hope, and Love;
And keep thee spotless, like a DOVE.
I have a way the Lyon's paw
Never traced in strength of common Law,
Nor Valtur's eye yet ever saw.
Then follow me, and do not budge;
The stroke of Justice never grudge:
I Will be thy Advocate, and Judge.
I (by my Spirit) will repel
The Devils, who are the gates of Hell:
And thou with me shall ever dwell.
I Will Pilot thee unto that shore,
Where neither Sea, nor Billows roar:
Nor Satan gives a broad side more.
To Heaven of Heavens I will thee bring;
Thou shall be Subject, I Will be KING:
Where thou shall never sigh but sing.
My Face (for Beauty) thou shall see:
For Riches, Pearl I Will give to thee;
And for my Cross, thy Crown I Will be.
There Is ever Light, and wholesome Air:
For Food, and Raiment, take no care:
It Is always Spring, no Winter there.
Then have thou Wife, or have thou none;
Bring Company, or come abone,
Unto thy Host, it is all one.
There Is Rooms enough, none needs to pry,
They Are neatly hung, the fabrick's high:
But none comes in that makes a lie.

Soul. I rise, I come, I run, I fly^
My dearest Idol, I deny.
I Will follow thee, until I die.
If to the exit of my Breath,
Thy Power, Spirit, thou bequeath,
I shall endure the sharpest Death.

PROMOTION.
Esther 7.9. And the King said, hang him thereon.


PROMOTION is the Pinnacle, from whence
Pride breaks the neck of a good Conscience.
A tot'ring Piramid of gilded Sorrow,
That Is built to day, and thrown quite down to morrow:
For it is the ambitious Man's Eye-soar to see
One great; and himself unadvanc'd to be,
Then leave the Court, and learn at home to dwell;
Lest that you end like wise Achitophel.
To a great Oppressor.
Prove. 22.16. He that Oppresses the Poor to increase his Riches, and he that
gives to the Rich, shall surely come to want.


IF I should a (...) hold,
(As did Pithagor a^) I likewise would
(By Consequence) affirm, and prove it too:
That Nero's Ghost inhabited in you.
Except (in this) you differ much from him;
That he was good in his Quinquennium.
But you are Ill, and ever ^ave been so,
A Basuisk when in your Embrio.
Poor Men, and Beggars, you may freely kill;
Because you make as many as you will.
On the Q. M.
REligion in a twilight-skie,
Of wandering dark Apostasy,
The Universe surveyed; to find
Devotion in a sincere mind.
And with a serious look did spy,
Our Queen's unspotted Majesty:
Whose Orb of Virtue up did rear,
Above a Vicious Hymisphere.
And coming near unto her Face,
To add a gale unto her Grace;
She from the World (secure in Sin)
Rose up, and took Religion in.
Where (like a Lamp, in flaming Zeal)
It burns without a parallel.
For if a blemish Faith admit,
A Pious Life can cover it.
Could Bodies but: as Souls be prized,
And matter be spiratualiz'd,
I should determine her to be
Angelical, in Pedigree.
She is so pure, that sure she must
Be Transubstantiate, out of Dust.
She Is freed from, Passion, Hate, and Spite:
For Innocence, an Adamite:
Then learned Reader, tell (I pray)
If Angels can be made of Clay.
On the D. Y.
YOu half completed Ladies all,
Whose Parts, and Virtues are but small:
Would you Perfection's pattern see?
For Wisdom, and for Gravitie.
This Lady's Idaea take, and place
As't were a Glass; before your Face:
That when you cast your Eye upon her,
You mind your Virtue, both and Honor.
And (tracing her) your Fame may rear,
And fly up, to a higher Sphere.
Her Name, her Fame, and real Grace
Make up a Consort, in her Face.
Which ( Music like) without disguise,
Does charm, not cheat beholders eyes.
Her praises no Man can rehearse
Enough; in prose, nor yet in verse.
Believe, or not, then choose you whether,
But England show me such another.
On a Beautiful Young Lady.
ONce Beauty, Virtue, Wisdom, Grace,
Conveined in a certain place.
And altogether did combine,
To make a Feminine Divine:
And flying swiftly on a-pace,
Did light upon this Lady's face:
And having all they stood in need,
They to the Work did thus proceed.
BEAUTY (to make her all delight)
Did bring a Rose, was red, and white:
And in a smiling Blush did skip,
From Cherry Cheek, to Scarlet Lip.
Then VIRTUE laughed at Beauty's weed,
As needful but Secundum quid.
And (with a gentle flame) refined
Her eye, the Index of her mind.
Then WISDOM Virtue gave a check,
And did her oversight detect;
In over-sparkling of her Eye,
To tempt to Vite, or breed enny.
Then having (with a pierceing flash)
Made Virtue proof, of Beauty's dash.
The one she ballenc'd with the other;
That both might live, and die together.
Then GRACE came in a gentle gale,
And set her Soul all under sail.
And (nimbly) flew a modest race,
With all the three, and gained her face:
And from her Mouth, and sparkling Eye;
O'r spread her whole Physiognomy.
Yet she no Critic did commence,
To Reason slight, or banish Sense,
Or set at naught the other three;
Because of her precedencie.
But granted them a dwelling place,
Within the Suburbs of her Face:
Subjecting only them to pay
Devotion's Tribute, every day.
A Divine Poem, on the Unparalled and Religious Mrs. M. F.
GOD said to Jeremy seek out, and find,
A Righteous Man^ that is of an^ (...)
Who seeks Truth, and Judgment, and for him
I Will freely pardon all Jerusalem.
These are the latter days, wherein abound
All Heresies, and Faith can scarce be found:
Yet in this Woman, Mortals all may see
A Demonstration, of Divinity.
In Infancy, all her Acquaintance knew,
She promised Fruit, before her Blossom blew,
But when the Vintage of her age drew nigh,
She yielded Grapes, was ripe in Piety.
Her thoughts are all Seraphick Meditations,
Her words are pure, Divine Ejaculations.
Her works are such, that in the darkest night,
To wandering Souls they give a joyful light.
She knows to quote the Scriptures in each part,
As if she had the Bible, all by heart.
Her Heart and Soul, in prayer and praises pants,
For Faith, that once was given to the Saints.
She in the Truth, resolves to live and die,
And fight the whole World of Apostasy.
Then spare us Lord (according to thy Word)
And view this Woman, ever thou draw thy Sword.
Yet though the World (to us) may seem to lie
Blind in a Mist, of dark Apostasy:
Yet thy all-seeing eye, can see and keep;
More than seven thousand, marked for thy Sheep.
On Mrs. S. G.
I love a comely Maid, whose face
Does promise Virtue, Wisdom, Grace.
And in her smilin^ blush, and eye,
The Sum of all P^^fections lie.
She Is none of those spends half the day,
In pinning fine, and goes to play.
But in a plain, (yet comely) dress;
Looks smartly after business.
This is the Pearl which I do prize;
The spotless Object, of mine eyes.
To Mrs. S. G.
THy comely face, and steadfast eye,
Thy Wisdom, Virtue, Chastity,
Did (with a blushing flash divine)
Subdue this little World of mine.
Subjecting humbly me, to pay
My sighs for Tribute, every day,
It Is quite against the Law of War,
To murder any Prisoner:
And chiefly me, who did surrender
To thee, a Feminine Commander,
Then let me dwell (though live or die)
Under the Sunshine of your eye.
For if your frown of Life dep^ive,
Your smiling ^^ok can make alive.
Then Phillis dear it is my will
That I remain in Prison still:
For if thy Heart my Prison be,
My T^raldome shall be more than free.
An Acrostick on Mrs. J. H.
Invincible cruel, yet love's All-delight.
Admirable comely, that Suitors do slight.
Never think a Complexion composed of Clay,
Endures for ever, and never will decay.
Hark here in thine ear, and I Will tell thee the truth:
Once when a Maid passes the flowr of her youth,
Regraiting she often does exclaim (though in vain)
To think that she Love, did requite with disdain.
O then be not cruel, but take to a Mate.
Nothing than Old Maids, is more out of date.
On Mrs. E. F.
GRave Beauty, Wisdom, Chastity,
Flew up into Perfection's sky:
T'espy a Virgin, did excel,
With which they could both live and dwell.
And as they s^riously did view
The Latitude of fifty two:
On London's Change, they there did see
A Lady FRANK, but nothing free.
And as they viewed her ore and ore,
They liked her still the more and more.
Yea when they had severely proved her,
In all respects, the more they loved her.
And did determine her to be
Of Maids, the sole Monopoly.
Erected in a public place,
To serve them for a Looking-Glass.
Therefore they flew into her Face,
Possessing each their proper place;
Concluding all to keep her sure,
As long as Lifetime should endure.
Then Lovesick Lovers, all in fire,
That^s almost ready to expire,
Draw the Effiges of her face;
So comely, and so full of Grace.
She Will cure you of your vain disease,
And set your Languish't Soul at ease:
Unless you with a wanton eye,
Commit a Rape o^ Chasti^y:
And force her frown, (instead of smile)
To cause you P^nnance do a while;
Amongst those who strive (although in vain)
To gain Affection, by a stain.
For though at first she seem to be
United, to Complaisancie:
To shun Extremes, she well does know,
That V^rtue in a midst does go.
Her Face says Come; Heart, Get ye gone:
The Torrid, and the Frozen-Zone,
Are so well placed within her Sphere,
That one can with another bear.
Yet he that would his bold Arms make,
This little World's, proud Zodiac
Of all the Signs. must admit none,
But purest Virgo all alone.
A Passionate Love-Complement TO Mrs. R. G.
O thou my Heart, and Soul's deligh^!
And Idol of mine eye!
That Is Red, and Alablaster-white,
In thy Physiognomy:
O that thou would but yield to me,
That little World of thine:
I more then Conquerout should be,
And (like a Monarch) reign.
Was ever one of Adam's Race
Complete, in every part,
So amiable in the Face,
And loveless in the Heart.
Can not my Floods drown thy disdain,
Thy frowning Tempest swage;
Nor fainting flaming Heart, once gain
No ground, nor Weather-gage.
Rebecca fair did greatly fear,
When Nature strove with Grace:
And thou her Namesake now do bear
A Cruel, smiling-face.
Then let old Hate to Love succumb,
The Triumph shall be mine;
And when our Marriage day shall come,
Thou will it be all Divine.
The Luke-warn Lover: OR A Poem sent by J. F. to his Slighting Mrs.
POor simple Girl, think thou that I
Am so Lovesick for thee to die.
Or that my Reason cannot rear,
Above a Female Hemisphere.
Or that my Intellects came so rash on.
T'ensave my Soul, to Lov's sweet passion.
No no to think be not so vaini
That I Am all Liver, and no Spleen:
And that my Phancy's bound in Duty,
On'y to dote upon your Beauty.
The supersices of a face,
If destitute of inward Grace,
Is but a Hedge-Hogg, in disguise,
To cheat, and charm Beholder's eyes.
Then speak your Mind, and be not Mute:
I Am downright, be you obsolute.
As Love that is Lazy toward Marriage,
Break's off, and ends in Miscarriage.
And (for the most part) it is seen,
That Maids (in age) about sixteen,
Have more Sweet-hearts, to suit and woo them;
Then ever after do come to them.
Then stand not out, but take advice:
A maid strait-lac'd yields little price.
For she that is of a slighting mind,
And laughs at Suitors, often does find
The Rose and Lally of her May,
To fade and wither quite away.
When Nature cries, Thou Fool give place
To Hoary Hairs, and wrinkly face,
She Will Sigh and Sing, that dismal Song;
I have remained a Maid too long:
And wish to have (although in vain)
A slighted Suitor back again
In fine fair Maid, forbear to scoff:
I do draw near, stand you not off:
If you slight me as heretofore,
I Will never henceforth love you more.
Love's Valedictory: OR J. G. His Farewell to his Mrs.
SHall I to one,
Whose Heart's like Stone,
Imprisoned be in Love.
And yet's but said,
To be a Maid,
And does Inconstant prove.
No sure I Will live a Caeleb life;
A Monarch in my mind:
Freed from the Furies of a Wife,
That Is constant like the Wind.
(...) OR A Word-fight betwixt an English Man, a Dane, and a Dutch.
A Dutch, a Dane, and English Man,
Carousing with a merry Can.
Did (when their Brains were set on high)
Strive for Superiority.
And (in a rant) began to bring
Their Glory, from the great King.
The English said (as in a huff)
Mine Is Brittain's King; and that is enough,
Whom I in no respect will stage
With any King, that is in this age.
Then said the Denmarker; it is true,
(...) Dutch and Dane succumb to you:
Your King unparellel'd most be,
As sole Commander, of the Sea.
The great Mogul thus gives doom;
On him: "He slights the Pope of Rome,
"Nor would he give a Scot's Bo-bee,
"For Brother O^toman, and me.
And yet our royal race renoun'd,
Has been with Glory's greatness crowned:
And in this one thing equals yours:
In being chosen Emperors.
And what is more our ANN: (by name)
Did wear your Royal Diadem.
Yea all the Glory, and Renown
That hangs upon Great Brittain's Crown.
(In some respect) belongs now
To De^mark, and to Holland too,
Since, etc.
When York and Lanchaster did bring
Their Hoody War, within a Ring.
To see it was a great delight,
The red Rose hugg, and kiss the white.
The flaming Sword before that burned
Unto a Setpter, straight was turned.
Even so since Denmark, and the States
Of Holland, be unite by Mates,
To England's Royal Race, and sky
Of unecclipsed Majesty.
Let no old rancour, hence remain
Twixt Britain, Saxon, Scot, or Dane.
Nor let no Controversy be,
Nor Bloody War, by Land, or Sea.
But saves your lives, etc.
The Dutch Man hearing this grew bold,
And Swearing Sacrament, he told,
Ons heerlijk Hendrick Broeder Deen,
Brave grave van Nassow, ook van Spain,
Prins van Oranje, needs must be
The tweede Ruler of the Sea.
He Is Hogan Mogan, na Dane blester.
Daer he Getrouwt, etc.
A Sturdy Scot, then started up;
And Preached thus ore a rowzing Cup,
God bless them all by Land, and Sea,
And here is a Health, to all the three.
Apage Satan: OR A Poem on the Turk's defeat at Vienna.
HOld Passenger and gently jog;
I Will tell thee news of Hamon-gog:
A Beast-like Man, half Horse and Hogg:
Was ape to Alexander.
Who (confidently) did presume,
That he could conquer Christendom,
And overthrow the Pope of Rome;
And be the World's Commander.
Therefore he did together call,
His Janissaries great and small:
And he on Germany did fall:
And camp'd against Vienna.
But as his Mufty up did rear,
This new Seraglio, in the Air,
The Christians panted forth a prayer,
Did fright him like Gehenna.
There came an Army from the East,
Resolved the Riddle of the Beast,
Made Magog march, and fly in have,
And leave his Tools behind him.
But now (as mad in great despair)
He threatens Pope, and Prince of Air:
Therefore let Christians all take care,
For chains of Balls to bind him.
His Holiness, and Majesty
Called Christian; can not well deny,
To aid the German with supply,
That never will surrender.
Then Hogan Mogan, Sweed and Dane,
Unite your Forces all with Spain:
Let Brittain's Menarch rule the main;
And prove true Faith's D^fender.
He Is a Pedantick, Pedlame- Tom,
That fights a Neighbor King at home,
To pimp the Turk, to Christendom:
To cause the fire run further.
He to Grand Seignior quotes an ace,
That Ottoman may turn the chase,
And root out every Royal race,
And Loyal Subjects Murder.
The wandering World see with their eyes,
Who it is himself that deifies,
The Father and the Son denies,
And since the Beast is wounded:
Pray live in peace and love, at home,
And fight the Foe of Christendom,
That he whose right it is may come,
And Babel be confounded.
Rejoice in Triumph: OR A Plaudite on the Ottoman's defeat at Vienna.
I Am glad to hear the Cannon roa^,
Resounding from the German shore,
Better news, than heretofore:
That Babel's Beast is wounded.
Then Christians brave, both all, and some,
Charge with Horse and Kettle-Drum,
The Enemy of Christendom;
Till Turks be quite confounded.
The King of Poland in a phraze,
The great Grand Seignior did amaze;
And with a noise his siege did raise,
Courageous Solymanus
If thou resolv'st to come again,
Thou must recruit both might, and main:
Or else it will be all in vain,
To think that thou wilt trapan us?
Fis Christian Majesty of France,
Does Booty play, the German dance,
And he does laugh at our mischance,
Himself he dare not venture.
But pimp the Beast, to Babels Whore,
And he Bo-peep stand, at the door,
Until the wanton Cannon roar:
Then Hector like he will enter.
But shite on Turk, and great Mogul,
A Pox upon the Scarlet Trull:
And we the Poppie too dare pull,
If CHARLES but be Commander.
For (though the neutral seem to be)
He can command both Land and Sea,
And overthrew the big-look'd three;
And trace brave Alexander.
Then let no rancour joined with hate,
Make Ruptures in the Church or State:
But all submit to divine fate,
And keep within our border.
Let none old England then forsake;
Since Crowns and Kingdoms ly at stake,
A Foreign War to undertake,
Till CHARLES give further order.
The German tell that heretofore
They Captive took one Bull and Boar;
The Minotaurus of a Whore,
That roared like any thunder.
Then P. P. could this be,
The Bugg-bear ramphant of the Sea,
Whose army was to fight with thee,
And force the World to wunder.
But Ottoman pray get thee gone:
The Christians do but draw you on,
They Will greater booty have or none,
And if you will not prevent it
If e're you turn your Face this way,
We Will make the Cannon Music play,
And you must dance the Yorkshire hay,
Till all your Bauds lament it.
Then fill the Piss-pot to the Swine,
Heap me a rouzing Glass with Wine,
The dancing Thames shall pledge the Rhyne,
And Tyber shall be Preses.
Then here is to CHARLES that rules the main,
To Poland, Holland, Sw^ed, and Dane:
To Germany, and brave Lorrain,
But pray you Potus ne sis.
A Song, Sung by the Greenwich-Green-coats, to show their thankfulness, to
their adopted Father, and Entertainer; The Right Honorable, Sr. William
Boreman, Knight.
SOme do conclude
Ingratitude,
To be the chief of Evils:
And every Brat,
That is Ungrate,
Not like to Men, but Devils.
Then why should I
My Mite deny;
I Will pay it every hour Man;
My voice I Will raise,
My God to praise,
And bless Sir William Boreman.
He does me feed,
And likewise breed,
In Fruitful education.
Whereb^ I know,
To undergo
A Christian vocation.
If speechless I
Were like to dye,
And but to live an hour Man:
My leaping Heart
Should play it is part,
And sigh Sir William Boreman.
A thing that is bought
Is good for naught
And filthy Lucre merely:
But he did bring
An Offering,
Was good, and gave it freely.
My God above
I Will fear and love,
Though I should dye a poor Man.
I Will Honor bring,
Unto my King,
And bless Sir William Boreman.
All gifts decay,
And fade away;
But Divine love does never.
It Is always seen
To Flourish Green,
And does endure for ever.
My comely dress,
That Is Green like Grass,
Shows that it will endure then,
TO immortalize,
And cannonize,
The brave Sir William Boreman.
Then Green-coats all,
Both great and small,
I do you all adjure then;
Both Night and Day,
You ever pray,
God Bless Sir William Boreman
His obsequies
Shall be our cries;
His funeral our Mourning:
Until he Fly
Above the sky;
From whence is no returning.
A PROLOGUE To a play entitled, The Indian Empress.
A TRAGEDY acted by some young Ladies at Green-wich.
THis is that famous place, where once did dwell
Our V^^gin Queen, who did her sex excel.
Then we her t^ain may enter, (not intrude,
With in her Sphere;) yet in her Latitude:
To cheer our minds, beyond the sink of sorrow,
As lesser Stars: Therefore we dare to borrow,
A Beam of boldness, from her Midday sky;
And pay't in blushes, to her Memory.
Then Noble Sirs, and virtuous Ladies all,
And you beholding hearers, great, and small.
We Are not come here, sond Fopp'rys to defray;
D^^k riddles, and Enigmas to display:
Nor Exorcisms, and spells of Eloquence,
To captivate sound Reason, unto sense.
Nor great exploits of valor to rehearse,
Which never was beard before; in Prose, or Verse:
No no you are mistaken, pray forbear;
Such Antic tricks are far below our Sphere.
Of this our present Meeting, the intent
Is but to have some grave divertisement:
To elevate our modest minds on high,
To chase black Melancholy, from the sky
Of our chaste thoughts; which dare not once commence
Beyond the blush, of modest confidence:
Nor are we so much captivate with fears,
To fawn our Words, in favor with your Ears:
Nor lop the Logicks, for fine Sylogisms;
To dispossess your Minds of Criticisms.
We no Apology to Critics make;
Since what we please to give, they needs must take,
Or let alone: because the very same
May relish us, that favors not with them.
And it is a Maxim, that he is never at ease
Who strives the humors of all men to please
Yet hope the Dishes of this Tragick-feast
Shall neither be so Tastless, nor ill dressed;
To cause the Taster, afterward repent,
Nor think when he is gone, the time ill spent.
The subject's not so sour, but that one may
Suck sweet from it, and carry wit away.
None can expect a tender Bud that Springs,
To equalize the Fruit, that Autumn brings
The year is more than common kind to him,
Who pulls ripe Grapes, before the vintage come.
Even so the first Fruits of our sixteen years,
Comes short to that which thirty and odd bears.
Then (in good part) to take, pray be content,
What humbly to your Patience, we present.
And all we beg your clemency is this,
You pick the good, and cover what is amiss.
EPILOGVE.
WE bring no after claps to sour your sweet,
As when good fellows at a Taven meet:
Who having sung, and drunk their sorrows down;
The Landlord sings the dismal Reckoning Tune,
We cure not Melancholy by disease;
We crave no coin, nor thanks, unless you please,
The tender buds of our young smiling spring
We did present, a free will offering.
Thus if your Dishes have been badly d^est;
Your Pockets are not with rewards oppressed.
And yet this play no Prentise is in sport;
It served it is time (in Confidence) at Court.
And what is more, (without a trembling fear)
Found welcome access, to his Sacred E^r.
I hope it may then with your credit stand,
To taste his Dishes, though at second hand.
For (though they be set in another frame.)
The substance of the play is still the same.
Yet all at first we proffered was this,
You Are welcome (if ye please) to share with us
But if ye have not found a recreation,
Agreeing to your Amorous expectation.
We Are not to blame, nor was it ever known,
A Tree to bear; the Blossom yet unblown.
Then pray accept (for all that is your due)
This earnest of respects, we owe to you:
And we shall pay (when wit accutely bears,)
Your sum of Service, in our riper years.
Another PROLOGUE To Critics Auditors and Spectators.
WEe'r not come here, to please your Pallats;
By singing Tuns, and Ryming Ballads:
As if w' had nothing else to do,
But cut out curious knacks for you:
And as our actions did depend
Upon a not concerned hand;
No sure; we Act this Tragic play,
No Masterpiece, but an Essay
Of our fresh wits; and not of sense:
To learn a Modest confidence.
All wanton words we do defy,
Our Tongues are tip'd with Modesty;
And all vain objects we despize;
Behold us then with pure, chaste Eyes.
And if your expectation find
A Passage, pleasing to your mind,
Thrice Noble Sirs, and Ladies grave,
We humbly your acceptance crave.
And this is all that we require,
We shall fulfill our whole desire.
But if it be your hardened will
To Carp, and play the Critic still:
The Garter Gamball we will dance,
Called, Honi soit qui Maby pe^se.
The A-B. C. On the slow building of St. Paul's Church.
2 Samuel 7: 2. The King said unto Nathan the Prophet, see now, I dwell in an
House of Cedar, but the Ark of God dwells within Courtains.


I Blush for shame, and sigh as I pass by;
To see God's house, thus like a Dunghill ly.
When City, and the Suburbs both are done,
And built in querpo-cut, with B^ick, and Stone.
This Demonstration is enough, to prove
Us froze in Zeal, and but luck-warm in Love.
Our Savior went, us Mansiones to prepair,
And shall not we this one Hou's ruins rear,
I Will say no more, but sigh, and pray, that we,
May our King CHARLES the Zerobabel see.
AN ELOGIUM, On D. C. Minister of Marget, in the Isle of Thannet.
THis is the Pearl-like-Porch, through which first came
The Gospel Light, to our Jerusalem:
Which with a gracious Gale, or splendent ray,
Did blow, and banish Ath^ism away.
The Divine Porter of this Sacred gate
Is one, whom Church, and State Homologate.
No Wolf, nor Hireling, nor the World's Slave.
But left the Fleece, that he the Flock might save.
No private malice, nor Hypocricy.
Does choke his word, 'ere it can Fructify.
No legal War, compulsion, nor constraint,
Does force his Flock (in frowns) to pay him rent.
He cares to seed the old, with divine truth;
And in good learning, educate their youth.
His fervent prayers prevail at Sea and Land;
With him who made the Sand, a swaddling band.
He prays his People safe, and they do bring
A gratis gift, or free will offering.
T^rice happy Preacher, yea and hearers all;
Where both embrace, in Love reciprocal.
O Divine Saint! in all respects complete;
Who in the fall of Years sends forth such fruit.
The Island I In terminis appeal,
To show another, that is his Parellel.
His R. H. D. Y. to S. G. G. H. When he was made Chancellor of S.
DEserving Subject, of a Loyal Name;
Which to our Race, has ever proved the same
The Chanc'lor's place we do confer on you,
As earnest, of your sum of merits due.
Till Death, not fault; that cannot be supposed
In you, we have such confidence reposed.
It were a the's well worthy of the Press,
If Loyalty such can take more or less.
Then grudge not envy; though I dearly prize
His Son; who died Rebellion's Sacrifice,
For him -- But hold my Passion I Will refrain,
Lest I discover Brittain's blot again.
Thrice Loyal then, mind (and I Will add no more)
What Phoebus said to Phaeton before.
The London-Folly.
Act. 18.23. For as I passed by and beheld your Devotions, etc.


IN London, as I walked up Fish-street Hill,
I saw a Tower or Alter (which ye will)
Whose lofty top was clevate so high,
It touched the Clouds I thought, and pierced the Sky.
I had concluded (but I saw it Stone)
That it had been the Tower of Babylon.
I could not read the Inscription, which it had;
But meeting with a Passenger, I said;
Pray Sir, what means this Phancie, and what need
Is there of such a stately Pyramid.
My Friend (said he) our City has been burned
Of late, and unto dust and ashes turned.
Therefore we built this Tower of hewn Stone:
A Monument thereof, to watch upon,
And this our case at present does require,
Lest that we perish from the Earth, by Fire.
I answered, it had been more Christian,
TO have built a Church, where first the Fire began;
A place convenient both for Prayer and Praising,
And not an Object only fit for gazing.
Though Night and Day, you keep by Might and Main,
Unless God watch the City; all is in vain.
But I admire the Phancie, and can tell,
I saw a Statue-Steeple without a Bell;
And it is Devotions Paradox, to see
A Chimney set up, where a Church should be.
The French Tropick-bird Or Madam Travalzie's Train.
HA ha a Woman with a Tail!
That Is full six yards long, and a nail:
Of all vain fashions this is one,
Was never seen by Solomon.
Shall I believe mine own Eyes,
That gravity suits such disguise.
An object such I never saw,
But Sheep once in Arabia.
O pardon Madam my mistake,
I took you for a Rattle-snake;
Or else the bird that is called Cuckoo,
That keeps a subsequent like you.
But Lady Long-tail if you please,
I will you of your burden ease:
Tie to your britch a bag to bear it,
Your Jac^-page Rapier will not tear it.
And you Tail-bearing Gentleman;
Lest contrar-windes make Hurrican,
When ^ou perceive, a No^th-East gale
Stand clear, and hale the Mizen-sail.
A POEM presented to one whose Loyal^y was Suspected.
THese Wind-work vapors which do fly,
Like Snow-Balls squirted at your sky,
To batter down your Loyalty.
Are but the emblems of disdain,
Or Cob-web squibs, that is thrown in vain:
which without blot, fall off again.
Then let Beelzebub tear and shout
Among the mad distracted rout,
Till he come who can cast him out.
A Reply to a Pasquil: OR A sound Advice to the Unknown Author of the Ironical
Rhyme, or Satyr written on his Grace, the D. of M Entitled Jemmy Returned.
PEace Poctasber, parasite of time;
Thou slattering Sycophant, disgrace of ryme:
Who with Ironic jeers, do strive to sport,
And fawn thy self, in favor with the Court.
Think thou His Royal Highness, or the KING,
Desires 'timist protaeus, to bring
A Coward's quill, that is diped in disgrace:
TO offiont his Son, and stain the Royal Race.
The great Apostate Julian, taught thee this,
To Murder Monmouth, with a Judas-Kiss.
Pedantick Rymer, thy Muse is a Mine:
Thy quil's the Arrow of a Porcupine.
Which will at last turn Immanent, and dart
The sqiut-ey'd Archer, deeply to the Heart.
Turn ore the leaf, but of this present age,
Bring Bo-peep's Pasquils back upon the stage.
Thou Wilt find such Lybels (more than any thing)
Bred Civil War; which murdered our King.
Mind him who said: Insipid Wretch of Nature,
I love the Treason, but I hate the Traitor.
Perillu's Bull: OR A Blow to the Hangman.
THou Homo-brutus (out of doubt)
That Is Beast within, and Man without;
Whose Name's enough to over ve^
Thee Hangman, or thee C^rnifex.
Presum'st thou that thou wilt never die,
But live to all Eternity:
To shun the wages, of thy trade:
Which Justice surely will have paid.
Thou Wicked Wretch do thou not fear,
That thou'^t the Scapegoat, that do bear
The guilt of guiltless Blood that is shed,
By False Accusers; and art made
The Rod, of God's great Indignation:
To Plague, and Punish every Nation.
Know then thou Beast with Humane Face,
As God to Man, gives Grace for Grace.
So he from him that has not, takes
That little which he has; and makes
Him Execute his Just Decrees,
Of Vengeance: a^ to this agrees
Proud Pharaoh, whom he did obdure,
To show his Justice and his Power;
And set him up, that he might be
A Caveat, to Posterity.
Then (to conclude) O Poor Man know,
Offenses sure must come; but woe
To him, by whom: O thrice forlorn!
It had been good he would never been born.
On the Memory Of the Right Honorable, the Earl of OSSORY.
REbels hold off, and Traitors come not nigh
These Sacred ashes, of pure Loyalty.
It Is Ossory lies here, Good, Just, and Wise,
Who stopped the Flood-gate of your Villainies;
Of noble Race, and of a Loyal Line;
Politic Statesman, and a grave Divine,
Courage in Heart, and victory in Hand:
A brave Commander, both at Sea and Land.
Had he but lived like others of his Race;
And to his In^^ard joined his outward Grace.
He from base Plots had cleared the Kingdom's sky;
And freed the State from Clouds of Treachery;
He Would turned the Chase; and forced (within a while)
Grim-look'd Rebellion blush into a smile.
Great Britain sighs, and Ireland loud does cry;
The States of Holland wipe a wat^ry Eye.
The love of all he had, of none the Hate;
The Church Companion, and a Friend to State.
I think I hear his mourning echo cry,
Religion, Wisdom, Valor, Loyalty.
An ELEGY, ON Mr. John Forbes, late Sheriff of Aberdeen in Scotland.
HEre lies his dust, who did himself behave
In all respects, both Loving, Wise, and Grave.
A Man of Learning, Knowledge, and such Grace;
As did become his Pedigree, and place.
In Righteous Causes, he did never grudge,
To play the part of Advocate and Judge.
He all his life time, kept before his Eye,
The Principle, of real Piety.
He starved the mouth of Envy, and did gain
The love of those once had him in disdain.
A man of Courage, yet base broils abhorred;
And brought all discords unto Bon-accord.
Now Oratrie, and all the Muses nine,
Are not enou^h his person to define.
For when the King of Terro^rs took him hence.
Be stopped the Mouth of purest Eloquence.
Bad he not lived within a Northen mist,
Tossed 'twixt the Waves of Pope and Calvenist.
He might have to his Nation been a fame,
And eternized Admirable by name.
Then rest in hope (Dear Saint) and quiet lie,
Till he return who 'scended up on high.
A Mournful ELEGY.
ON Mr. I. K. who Died in KENT in ENGLAND.
THe Wor'd's a triste, and the life of Man
A hand in breadth, in Longitude a span.
Our Pleas^res are but Pain; our Joys relent,
Before the Morning of our days be spent.
I ve seen a Dunce, preferred before a Wit,
Base Beggars ride, when Princes walked a foot.
To swift or strong, by chance, no prize at all:
But God does send, what ever does befall.
Then why should I repine, my Heart replied,
The finest Gold is often purified.
This Object of our present Grief and Woe,
What I affirm without debate may show;
Whose Parts and Person, readiness of Wit,
Did of no Blot, or Blemish base admit.
Religion's root never withered nor decayed
In him: till he Lif's utmost minute paid.
Often Satan snatched; but he could only roar;
The God of Truth had muzzl'd him before.
Then (charitable Reader) write me down,
A Christian cros'd does wear an endless Crown.
On the Memory of a Married Maid.
WIthin this Coffin here does lie,
A Pattern of pure Chastity.
A Non such-sight (as it is said)
A Wife, a Widow, and a Maid.
Whose Modesty did her restrain,
A Marrie'd-Virgin to remain.
Who willingly, not by constraint,
Was pleased to live by Complement*
Her Youth and Beauty still did plead
Divorcement, from her Maidenhead.
Yet Chastity did gain the cause:
The civil beat down Natur's Laws.
I could speak more here to her praise,
And force beholders all, to gaze.
But that I think her Ashes cry*
Hold Gentle Muse for Modesty.
On the death of a hopeful young Boy.
WIthin this little Box does ly
Ripe wisdom, yet in Infancy,
Like Homer's Iliads in a Nut,
Full four score and ten here are shut
In single five, a Child, whose years
Are written down in Characters.
Then Reader gaze not, but behold
This young old Child, as Esaias told.
AN EPITAPH On the Brother of Heliogabolus.
WIthin this Tomb lies one, I can
Scarce nominate a Brute, or Man
But yet the veritatem loqui,
He borrowed partem, ab atroque.
His Definition was a Stipes,
Or animal implume bipes.
He spent his time here in a mist,
A Papist, yet no Atheist.
He lived by robries, and oppression;
Whereof (at Death) he made Confession.
His fame still cried he lives ill:
And now he is dead, against his will.
REGICIDA Or AN EPITAPH; On the first Death, and second Burial, of the great
Traitor, and Usurper; OLIVER CROMWELL, ANAGRAM.
O Vile, Cruel Worm.
COme Tribe of Judas, and condole,
The rotten Ruins, of old Nol.
That Is frighted up, without a Soul.
Great Britan's Butcher here does ly,
Who did up from a Dunghill fly,
In Treason, to pro notion's sky*
Whence, (for Eclipsing Sun, and Moon,
And aiming at a Royal Crown)
The King of Kings did hurl him down.
He was insatiate in desire;
And all his life time did aspire;
And now (when dead) he is jump't up higher.
He cut the Church quite off at knees;
And set on Fire, both Land and Seas;
And Fathered all, on Gods decrees.
He was sworn Enemy to good;
A Canibal of Babels brood;
Did eat Men's Flesh, and suck their blood.
In life, he plagued us with Protection:
And now (when dead) makes Insurrection;
And Threatens the World, with Infection.
The curse of Kings, of Queens the bane,
Who did the Universe so stain;
That Earth has spu'd him up again.
Then pray Historians mention not
The kiss of this Iscariot:
But let his Memory quite rot.
Then Traitors tremble and give o'r
To Plot your projects, any more:
Lest that you split, on treason's shore.
Although your Stubborn Hearts be stout
In villainies, yet out of doubt,
The King of Kings will find you out.
ON DEATH, Mors ultima linia rerum.
DEath is lif's exit, and the Porch whereby
All men do enter long Aeternity:
Upon the left the half-gat's open wide;
On right the Wicket's only laid aside.
Then stoop down low, when young; and boldly wenter,
For truckling thou may fall, before thou enter.
By all espoused it is still confessed,
That the first proffer's (commonly) the best;
There are no Suitors for thy Soul but one,
And thou may dye a Fool, when he is once gone.
There Is no contentment in our Worldly joys;
They puff to pride, which but the Soul destroys;
Then wast not time, for thy time is not long;
Lest Death prevent thy lovely Marriage-Song.
He Is blessed who Sings back from Mount-Zion high,
Death, where is thy Sting? Grave, where is thy Victory?
A POEM On The STATUE ROYAL, Erected in the Center of the EXCHANGE of LONDON.
TEll me no more how Memnon's Statue stood,
Which (but by hearsay) sounded forth aloud.
Nor of that Golden, Artificial Head,
Which prattl'd Nonsense, by Albertus made.
Nor of that fluttering Dove that flew amain,
To welcome Julius; and rerurn'd again.
These are but Fopp'ries, here is a Demonstration
Which to a greater Caesar has Relation.
A stately Statue, elivate on high,
TO immortalize our CHARLES his Memory.
This, is a Merchant's Mite, which does but show
What Faithful Sum this City does him owe.
Then Loyal London, keep before thine eye,
This as the Center, of thy Gravity.
That frowning Tempests from the Royal Sky,
May neither beat, nor break thy Loyalty
From him, this represents: but still endure
Like Marble, and like Alablaster pure
Unspotted: that all Foreigners may see
This Chirogliphick of Fidelity.
FINIS.
THE Description of a LIE AND The Character of a LIAR.
A LIE is of an ancient Extract, and deduceth its Pedigree from the Old
Serpent. It was the first seed of Apostasy, which out of Malice and Envy, the
Wicked One did sow in the Garden of Eden, to choke the lovely Flower of
Innocence, and blast the Blossoms of the Tree of Life. It is the Root of all
Evil, and the Father of Unbelief, the Corruption of Nature, the Overthrow of
Grace, the Ruin of the World, and breeder of Enmity 'twixt God and Man. There
is no Sin more opposite to the Nature of God, for ( Truth being his Essential,
Prerogative Royal) he can no more endure a Lie, than Ice can endure heat.

In the whole Scriptures I read not of one gracious Promise to a Resolute Liar;
Yea, it is said, Isa. 63.8. Surely they are my People, Childring that will not
Lie. So he was their Savior. And when in Rev. 21.8. a Climax or Series of
Wicked Sinners are reckoned up; Liars are placed in the highest rank and
degree, and have a more absolute Sentence then all their followers: For it is
said, And ALL LIARS shall have their part in the Lake which burns, etc. And
(as it was the first of Sins) so it is the last that is spoke against: For it
is said in the same Chap. Verse. 27. That in no wise any thing that defiles,
nor works Abomination, or makes a LIE, shall enter the New Jerusalem.

The Devil was a Liar from the Beginning, the first of all Sinners, that had
his being from God, but his being such of himself. For after his Lying, and
saying that which was void of Truth, and casting the aspersion of untrue on God
himself, Genesis 3.4. The Lord took from him his Mercy, Glory, and Goodness, and
then (as by taking away Light, Darkness comes) from an Angel of Light, he
became a Devil of Darkness.

Thus being but a Privation, neither Created, Made, nor brought forth, he is
termed a God: God of the World of Apostates, and Lord over all the Children of
Pride. The Sorceries of the Son of Perdition are termed lying wonders, and the
greatest stumbling block which is cast in the way of Self-conceited,
Stiff-necked Unbelievers, is Delusion, to seduce them to believe a Lie, These.
2.11.

An Antidote may be provided against all Sins, but this none can oppose. If the
Tongue (as the Apostle James says) be set on the fire of Hell, sure Lies must
be the sparks which fly from thence Mentioned Isa. 50.11. Wherewith the Wicked
compass themselves about, and walk in the light of their own kindling.

A Lie is the Foundation of the Kingdom of Confusion, and the first Brick of
the Spiritual Babylon: It Is a Cockatrice hatched in a Silogism, and Christian'd
with the Name of Reason, it is dandled by the Alma matter, and trades under the
Vizard of Philosophia. It is the breeder of Strife and the raiser of Sedition,
which has turned Kingdoms up-side-down. It is a cloak to Conspiracies, a vail
to Villainies, and a cover to all Vicious Designs.

The Venom of the Viper's-Gall,
The Sugared Serpent's Breath;
The first of Sins made Adam fall,
And slav'd us all to Death.
THE Character of a FORTUNE TELLERS.
A Fortune Tellers is the most Impudent of all Cheats, his Head is a Lottary,
and every touch of his Tongue a throw of the Dice, his Predictions are but
Possibilities, and bear no more certainty then the rule of future Contingency
is able to afford. All Impostors may pretend to some cloak or vizard of
Learning, to cover their Knavery; but he (against Knowledge) puts on a
Brazen-Face, to batter and beat down all Bulwarks of Reason, and Principles of
Learning, Art and Science: And sets up the foolish fancy of his own
ridiculous invention.

I have observed that (for the most part) the Pro^essors of this Art are great
Dunces, pretending themselves Magi, and Students in Astrology: though they
never knew the difference 'twixt Vrsa, and Cy^osura: Nor could distinguish
twixt the Pole Artick, and the Z^nith. Yet all their proceedings, and
resolutions are cut out according to the Rules of this Art; Which indeed (as
they say) is so profo^nd, that none but themselves can sound. Yea and to give a
rational account, how o^ by what means they attain the knowledge of such
Prophetical Mysteries, or rather fallacious Foppr^ys, exceeds the eloquence
of their expression.

If a Past onate, and impatient Lover come to one of them, desi^ing to be
resolved of his amorous success; he will (for a Crown) pimpe the Idol to an
adoration, and (by a strong apprehension) tickle his phancie to an imaginary
Marriage: or else tell him he will miss her, and obtain the favor of a more
deserving, beautiful, rich, and better qualified Lady, but be in danger to be
oppressed with the sign of Capr^corn.

I have observed that (in all times) since the Old Serpent, under co^our of
good Counsel, cheated our great Grandmother, he has still gilded his
pernicious projects, and destructive designs, with the pretense of Piety. He
did quote Scripture to the Son of God himself; (and to stain the Gospel, and
bring forth Unbelief) cry out that Paul and Barnabas were the Servants of the
most High God. He covers all his Sorceries, Spells, Breefs, Charms,
Inchamments, and Di^bo^ical drifts, with some holy Word, or outside form and
Superficies. But Religio velum est quod regit omne seelus. Saul became a
Proverb, when he turned Prophet. The Devil is most dangerous when he
metamorphose^h himself into an Angel of Light. These Hypocritical A^gurs,
Cunning Men, or Fortune Tellers, who sophisticate Knowledge, and cheat the
World with their Sorceries (for all they pretend to a special gift of
Divination, and therefore will not hide their Talen in a Napkin) are but
Deceivers of the Tribe of Simon M^^us, sprung from the seed of the Old Serpent,
whose Light, and Learning are but Egyptian Darkness, and Ignorance, which will
vanish in the day of Visitation, and perish in the gainsaying of Core.

GOD has told us that the Touchstone of a true Prophet is the Truth of his
Prophecy, and the observation whether his words come infallibly to pass. Now
whether or not these Men tell any think of Truth in finding out Theives;
recovering stolen. or lost Goods; in soretelling good, or bad success in any
Voyage, Journey, or Undertaking, let their cheated Clients declare, and whether
their surest Divination be but a mere Conjecture, hit, or miss; right or wrong.
There is a sad Woe denounced against those who make the arm of flesh their
trust, and run down to Egypt for help, who consult the Wr^^ch of Endor, and
take advice of the God of Eckron, as if there were no God in Israel.

DRUNKENNESS.
DRunkenness is the Primum Mobile of all Vice, and the V^stibulum of all Sins,
the Mother of Mischief, the Revealer of S^ercis, the Seducer of Sense, and the
Betrayer of Reason. It Is the Gate of Hell, and the way that leads to
Everlasting Destruction, it is the Doo^ of Confusion, the Porch of Impiety, and
the Turn-key of the Prison of Death. It was reputed (among the Romans) the most
brutish of all Vices, as being a Sin against Nature, Reason and Delight, the
Ruin of the Bo^y, the Destruction of the Soul, and the overthrow of the whole
Man, when the second World was without a Curse, it brought on Ham's Posterity,
the Cloud of Apostasy, and began a new Tribe to the Old Serpent. The Sca^let
Whore of Babylon (to ma^e her the more abomniable) is represented to the World
with a Cup in her hand; and it is said, She was drunk with the Blood of the
Saints. the Devil never gains more ground upon the Childring of God, than when
he takes them at the disadvantage of being overtaken with this Evil; and bound
with the setters of Swinish Pleasures. It rendereth^s Man incapable to handle
the Spiritual Armor; and it is so hateful in it self, that God has not so
evidently prohibited it in the D^calogue, as he has other sins, it being so
intrinsically Evil, and obvious to the Eye of mere nature, that he that runs
may read it is shame, loss, rum and disgrace, etc.

The Character of Tipsie Tome, The Metropolitan of Drinkers.
THis Drunkard is the Statue of a Man, surreverene'd over with Clay and Kennel
dirt; he is a Deast-like Man, or a M^dium 'twixt Man and Beast: all the terms of
Logic are not enough to prove him a Rational Creature, ta^e him in the
Complex, he is but Rationabile, or a Man in Actu signato, made capable of
Reason, by a Week's sleeping; had he lived in the days of C^ligula Caesar, he
had been a Court-favourite, and chosen president of the Ba^chanalians: had he
been Herds-man to the Gadarens, the Devil might have claimed him for a Hogg,
and choked him in the Sea among the rest of the Swine: put a white rod in his
hand, and set him up London-streets, and he would pass for the Monopoly of T.
T^. Madam Luxuria in her Cell of Darkness, never hatched a Frat of greater
B^stiality. Comeing home lately from the Tavern, and misbehaving himself (at
the House of Office) by the way, he was in danger of being eaten up by his
related Hoggs, who claimed right to his bespattered Garments. He Is a
Demonstration of Penetration, for there goes more in at his Mouth, then his
whole Belly is in bigness. At Twelve a Clock at Night, he would serve for a
Water-work, sending more Wine from the Spiggot of his Mouth. then Breath from
the Bellows of his Nose. He Is a Hogg in folio, but a Man in decimo sexto. were
it not for the flood-gate of his Mouth, his Pulmones and Wind-pipes might be
put to a Nonplus, and the whole Microcosme be in danger of Drowning, had he
Belly to his thirst, and appetite, he could dry the great Tunn of H^dlebirdoe
at a draught. At Night he wears the painted Vizard of the Scarles Whore, but
next morning he is a Man Metamorphos'd, who last night screwed his Nose out of
joint. View him at a distance, and per conceptum primum, you would take him for
a Man, but draw a little nigher, and survey him per conceptum secundum, you will
sind him a Monster of Beasts, or a Man Brutist'd, whose reason is turned to
sense, and sense to sensuality: he is a King allcompleat at night, and can dance
without Music, but next Morning he can hardly stand. Make him Celestial he
would pass for Vrsa oppressed with the Dogg-slar, Terrestial for a Hedge-Hogg:
Place him in the Sea, and he would pass for a Torpedo. whose Breath is enough
to infect the Anglet, he is an excellent Orator, sending forth sentences of
strong sense, for all the words of his Mouth are made of Onk,

Of all the senses he is most subject to that of smelling, Quid rides? mu^nto
nomine de te subul^^ narratur.
for you may nose him in the dark, when you can neither hear nor see him.

In fine he is an equivocal Creature, whose understanding is ecclipsed by his
sense, or rather Lux^ry; from whom and such, let all^sober and moderate Persons
Pray,

Good Lord deliver us.
The Character of a CUCKOLD, By D: N: B.
A Cuckold is an abortive brat of Wontonness, hatched betwixt a Man and a
Woman; he is an instantanions Creature, or an Animal immediate i^dividuotum a
part r^i: No sooner begotten than brought so th, and in a moment can both
walk, speak, and stare like a Buck; he is never produced but in an Edlipse, by
the interposition of some gross Body.

A Cock's-Combe and a Cuckold, are (for the most part Concomitants, and termina
convertibiles; and it is very rare to see one under sixteen years of age, but
he who is sixty, and married to a young Wife, and no Cuckold, may pass for a
Snow. A Cuckold can be no Bastard, for he is never begotten without the bond of
Ma^rimony, he is of an ant ent extract, and may pass for a Gentleman, because
of Antiquity. The chief Meconas, P^tron, and Metrapolitan of this Tribe, is
entitled, Cuckold-Major; and the in^eriour Brethren but Man cornutifi'd.
Seldom (or never) is a Cuckold made of a Maiden head. for the time and
accasion are short and ^are, Some natural Philesophers who pry in the secrets
of their Science, affirm that this A^imal wea^eth Horns; but like Lives
C^l^stial they are only Ima^inor^, used to express the real Cre^ture himself;
and like an Ear-mark difference him hom others of the Heard of Wise-Oppr^ssed
H^b^nd.

It is very remarkable here that some curious Inquisitors affirm, that this
production may be more properly termed a M^^amerph^sis; by Addition, as by
Substraction, a Bull is turned to an Ox, or a transmutation of a poor man to a
rich. And many are of opinion, that some virtuous and grave Ladies, subtily use
their best Wits and endeavors about this Generatior, rather to shun Pove^ty,
than licentiate Leachery, and for this cause are the more excusable. I am not
so rigid and void of Charity, as to affirm a Cuckold to be no Christian; for
then I should be put to a p^^^^ to find ten Marrried Righteous in this City,
whom I could give up upon Oath.

Then Gentlemen, contented Cuckolds all,
Since your Disease is Epidemical;
Conceal and wear your Horns, but in your pocket,
If they appear once on your heads, you are mocked:
Your Sen's a Eastard, and your Wife's a Whore,
But best of all, a Cuckolds seldom poor.
FINIS.
1. The Complete Compting-House, the Second Edition, it small Octavo, By John
Vernen.

2. Poems on several Occasions: being a Paraphrase upon the Psalms of David,
set to new Tunes for private De^otions, By George Sandys: and a Thorough-base
for Voice, or Instrument, by Henry Laws, Gentleman of His Majesty's Chapel
Royal: As also a Paraphrase upon the Divine Poems of the Old and New
Testaments, viz. the whole Books of Jobe, Ecclisiastes, Solomon's Song, and the
Lamentations, etc. Likewise a Paraphrase upon the Songs of the Old and New
Pe^^aments, by the abovesaid George Sandys, being a Bound Book, in large Octa^o.

3. Ovids Metamorwhes^s, put into smooth English Verse, being a Bound Book, in
large ^welves.

4. Debtor and Creditor made easy, or Instructions for the attaining the right
use of Accounts, after the best Methods used by Me^chants, by St^ben Mountage.
With the addition of two small Books. Bound in Quarto.

All four to be sold by Benjamin Dilling sly, at the Printing-Press in
Co^nhill, under the South-West-P^azza of the Royal E^xbinge.


