A LETTER From a Gentleman to his Friend, ON THE TREATY For DIVIDING the
Spanish Monarchy, IF THE KING of SPAIN Should DIE without a SON.
SIR,
I wonder that the Treaty and Design of Divinding the Spanish Monarchy should
make a Noise, and raise such violent Discourses as I have heard, and such
Threatenings of the Ministers that advised the King to make such a Treaty; as if
by that Treaty France was already Crowned Universal Monarch of Europe: But I
say, this was certainly the Wisest and most Politic thing His Majesty could do
for England, next having Redeemed us from Popery and Slavery.

And if the King was thereunto advised by any of his Council, those Counselors
deserve to have their Statues set up, and have the Public Thanks and Prayers
of the Nation; and our false Politicians, who exclaim against the said Treaty,
will be found either Fools or Knaves, or Malicious Villains, that would disturb
the Government; Some discontented Men that have either been turned out of their
Places for Jacobitism, or that hope to have their Mouths stopped with Places or
Money; and I expect to see them in Print, Spitting their Venom, and showing
their Malice, to this our Happy Government.

But all Wise, Honest, and true Lovers of England, will sagaciously think and
consider well, before they exclaim against the Actions and Counsels of a King,
to whose Courage and Wisdom We, and all Europe, owe our Liberty, and the Peace
we now Enjoy.

I pretend neither to Wit nor Eloquence, much less to be a Politician, or to be
a Privy-Councellor, but I am an Englishman, and hate the Ingratitude of many
of my Countrymen to this Great Prince whom Heaven has given us.

Every Cobbler in England is a Politician, Reads the Gazette and Post-boy, then
Preaches and explains some Text from Ditto, which the Rabble take for Gospel,
truly such are the Railers at this Treaty, but know nothing of the main Design.

Now Sir, I will not Condemn them without giving my Reasons for it, as these
ill People do, without knowing why this Treaty was made; for I dare say, they
were not asked to give their Opinions no more than my self, who do not think it
Necessary to write a Volume of what is said on this Subject, nor is it fit for
me to pretend to Penetrate into a Kings Thoughts, but I plainly give you mine,
and Thoughts ought to be free.

First, I do believe the Distemper of the King of Spain may be the Cause that
the French King was so desirous for a Peace, that he might be at Liberty to
assert the Dauphius Pretensions to the Crown of Spain, if the King of Spain
Dyed; and for ought I know, France may have made an offer to the King, or his
Ministers at the Treaty at Reyswick; if France did make that offer, pray tell
me was it not Wisely and Politickly done, if his Majesty or his Ministers
should answer, that it would not be proper at that time and place, lest the
Emperor and Spain should break off the Treaty.

If the French did obtain a Promise for this Treaty, when the Peace was made,
and all the Towns and Countries delivered up, I say if they did; Pray tell me,
was it not reasonable and fit England and Holland should make good their
Promise, by which the so much desired Peace was obtained, and a Petty Kingdom
given back, which France cannot retake in Twenty years, though England stood
Neuter; These Towns have enlarged and Strengthened the Barrier of Holland and
Flanders, which is the Interest of England to the highest Degree; for were
Holland and Flanders overrun, pray what would become of England? This was
thought of in King Charles his Reign, who put a stop to the French Conquests,
when France was at the very Gates of Amsterdam.

Next, I consider this Agreement or Treaty is of no consequence to the French
King: For the King of Spain is not Dead, he may have a Son; and the French King
is not Immmortal. But suppose the King of Spain were Dead, and has no Son; I
believe the Spaniards will choose themselves a King; the Emperor has Peace
with the Turk, and will not easily give up his Interest, or Abandon the House
of Austria; Italy will hardly choose the French King for Pope: For Rome would
soon be his, if Naples, Sicily, and Spain were in his Power; Venice will not
like such a Neighbor; nor will Savoy, or the Suiss be easy.

If now a French Man should ask me, What will the English and Dutch do, in case
all these Nations oppose this Division of the Spanish Monarchy? I would answer
the French man with this Question, Whether he would have me take it ill of him,
if he did not punctually meet me at the Royal Exchange at 12 a Clock, if he had
broke his Leg at Temple Bar at 11.

Can France expect the King of England should go a Voluntier in his Army, to
force the Emperor, Spain, Italy, Venice, Savoy, and the Suiss, to make him
Monarch of Europe? Or can it be imagined (considering the value and Jealousy
the English and Dutch have for their Trade and Liberty) that they will run
Headlong to raise a Power to devour themselves,

Why then all this Noise, but Maliciously to endeavor to make a Discord,
between our Great King, and his Good Subjects? Is it not better to think as I
do, for I only write my Thoughts, I am no Privy-Counsellor; but I believe it is
more Honest, and more my Duty, to think the best of my Superiors, than
Ungratefully to Exclaim against them who are set over us, and from whence we
reap such great Blessings as Peace affords, after our Preservation from Popery
and Slavery.

Thus Sir, I have given you my Reasons for what I have said on the Subject for
Dividing the Spanish Monarchy, in Case the King of Spain should Dye, and leave
no Heir; I am very short on every Paragraph, and not fond of Scribbling: And
Hudibras tells us, Brevity is always good,
Whether we are or are not understood.
Besides I would not be bid to meddle with my own Business.

This from, Sir, Your Humble Servant W.K.

LONDON, Printed for J. Nutt near Stationers' Hall, 1700.


