A LETTER Sent by the Emperor of Morocco And KING of FEZ, To his MAJESTY of
Great BRITAIN, And delivered by his Ambassador in January, 1681.
In the name of the most Gracious God, the Lord over all Lords. FRom the
Servant of the most High God, Governor over all the People, ISMAEL KERIFF,
overflowing with Good Deeds: He the high Commands of God and of the Angels
regarding, but of none other: He that has Millions of Horses at his Command,
sends Peace to them that follow Truth.
We have understood by way of TANGIER, that we are in perfect Friendship, and
that the Peace is concluded over all our Countries; and therefore the Letter
that we have sent, is to confirm the Peace and the Treaty that we have made
with you; for we desire to have a Trade with you: but let us not make the same
Terms as we had in the beginning of the War, wherein so many dyed by the Sword
when we were Enemies, but let our Enemies dye. We have slain such as have run
away from us to you, but you have not done the same. For the Second Article is,
That if any Renegado shall run away from us to TANGIER, you shall be obliged to
send him back again. And for your security in this Treaty, we have sent unto
you our Servant HERDV for the management of it; and our joy at it shall be like
the thing that begins to grow: and I who am the Tree, send you one of my
Branches, which I recommend to you, as if it were the Tree itself; and we have
strictly charged him what he shall say to you. Look upon him as yo would do
upon my self; that which he shall do, shall be well done, and you shall value
it as a thing that comes from Heaven. We heartily desire you to write to us.
Neither our Customs or Habits are like yours. If you will build any thing on
our Ground, we will pull it down, and we shall do our selves right. We have
amongst us some Christians that understand themselves, and are more esteemed
than our own Servants; they have Eagles Eyes, but hate us and our belief, and
therefore are a Scandal to us. He that values our Honor, honors God. And
because it is our desire that you should receive something from us, we have
sent you Thirty Ostriches out of the Desert; and we expect that you should
furnish us with Six Thousand pieces of Eight yearly. As for TANGIER, we stand
in no manner of fear of it: and after the Ratification of the Peace, all
Hostility betwixt us shall cease.

ISMAEL Son of the beloved KERIFF, Descended from God.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHereas immediately after the arrival of his Excellency the Ambassador from
FEZ and MOROCCO, there was published a LETTER from the Emperor of Morocco to
the King of England; this is to undeceive the Reader, that that was only a Copy
of an old LETTER Reprinted, sent from one of their former Emperors to King
CHARLES the First of ever-blessed Memory; and that this is the Letter brought
by the present Ambassador to His Majesty, whom God long preserve.

LONDON: Printed for H. Jones. 1682.


