Vera Effigies Conradi Reinking Anno Aetatis Suoe. 43.
portrait of Conradus Reinking

Printed for Thomas Howkins, in George Yard In Lombard street.

F. H. van. Hove. Sculp.
POLITIKO'S E'GAS: THE Grand Politician, OR THE SECRET ART OF State Policy
DISCOVERED.

IN Evident Demonstrations of unparelleled Prudence, and confirmed with
Wonderful and Successful Adventures, Stratagems, and Exploits of Wisdom and
Subtilty; both in Peace and War, by the most remarkable Wits of former Ages.

BEING A Treatise both useful and necessary for all Nobles, Statesmen, Judges,
Lawyers, Justices of Peace, Officers of War, and all such as now are, or may
happen to stand at the Helm of Public Affairs, whether in Kingdom or
Commonwealth.

Written Originally in Latin, by Conradus Reinking Chancellor to his Electoral
Highness, the Duke of Brandenburg, and now done into English, by a careful Hand.

Golz. Prudentia gubernantur Regiones, quarum limits tyrannide nunquam
extenduntur. Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed for Tho. Howkins in George Yard in Lombard street, MDCXCI,

TO THE Right Honorable, THE E. of Nottingham, Principal Secretary of State,
TO Their Present Majesty's
Right Honorable,
AS there are no Sea-Officers, to whom Gratitude is more due, than Knowing and
Careful Pilots; so is there no Minister, either in Kingdom or Commonwealth, to
whom the People owe greater Obligations. Duty, and Respect, than to a Wise, and
Well-deserving Secretary of State; as being one who constantly stands at the
Helm of Public Affairs, to Weather the Common Interest, against all the
Storms, and Tempests, of Seditious, Vainglorious, and Aspiring Opposers. For
this Cause, I have thrown in the Mite of my Humble Respects, in the Treasury of
your public Deservings, as a Token, and Acknowledgment, of the vast Sum of
Service and Respects, the Kingdom is indebted to your Lordship's Prudence,
Care, and Candor; that if, like the Unthankful Lepers, most should prove
forgetful of your Lordship's Favors, some, at least, may Acknowledge the Debt,
though all be not able to pay the Interest. I Humbly present your Lordship with
this small Treatise; Written Originally in Latin, and am sorry it is of no
greater Extract than a Translation: However, Non defero Noctuam Athenas, nor
profer it as a Supplement to the full Orb of your Lordship's Qualifications;
for the Sun never borrowed a Ray from any Inferior Planet, tho, on Rational
Grounds, this small Treatise, or little wandering Meteor, beggeth a Beam of your
Lordship's Favor, that, with Confidence, it may appear in the open World.
Thus, may it be said, in this Case, as Ovid, in such another.

Atque Ajax Armis, non Ajaci Arma petuntur. So this small Treatise, and Foreign
Politician, humbly beggeth the Honor of your Lordship's Patronage and
Protection: which, if granted, will effectually Legittimate all the Mistakes,
and Oversights, which might have been committed by a German Statesman. Thus,
humbly begging your Lordship's Acceptance, I make bold to Subscribe my Self,

Your Lordship's most Humble, and Devoted Servant, PAT. KER.
August 27. 1690.
THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present you with, this little Treatise of German Policy: And tho
perhaps you may repute your self as Wise as the Author, you may reap here some
Ears of Wisdom, Prudence, and Policy, as may relish the Appetite of your
Expectation, and keep you from grudging the perusal of so small a Book. It is
come of a German Pedigree, written Originally in Latin (tho never heretofore
in Print) by the famous and well known Minister of State, Conradus Reinking,
Chancellor to his Electoral Highness, the Duke of Brandenburgh, and at the
Request of some his Country Men, here at London, now Translated into English,
and published to the Worlds view. I wish the Book may be reputed as famous
within the Isle of Great Britain, as the Author was in his own Country. And it
is reason that we should be kind to this Stranger, which presents to us the
first Fruits of a German Wit, before it is own Countrymen. The Subject is
great, and much to be desired; for as Phocilides says, (...).
Agros, Navem, urbes sapientia sola gubernat.


Et Pythagoras. (...).
Et vis, et telum, et Murus, prudentia vitae est.


And as it is great and much desirable, so is it but by few attainable, tho
every one, for the most part, reputeth himself a Politician, and able to manage
Affairs of greatest weight and consequence. Thus Reader, leaving the Censure of
this German Politician, to your own gentle Nature, and courteous candor, I rest

Your Friend and Servant, P. K.

THE Contents.
THE Art of persuading to a Belief of Things unknown. Intrigue 1. Page 3. The
Art of persuading one that you know another's Secrets. Int. 2 p. 5 The Art of
obtaining what you desire from your Enemy. Int. 3 p. 6 The Art of obtaining
what one desires, without asking, but by giving occasion. Int. 4 p. 8 The Art
of obtaining hard and difficult Things, Intr. 5 p. 9 How to disarm and weaken
an Enemy. Int. 6 p. 12 How to Dissemble. Int. 7 p. 15 How to persuade, and
dissuade, Int. 8 p. 17 How to obtain what you desire, without danger of losing
the Favor of him whom you desire it of. Int. 9 p. 30 How to obtain what you
desire, when the Person whom you desire it of is altogether averse. Int. 10 p.
3 How to force a Confession from one who is obstinate. Int. 11 p. 33 How to
force a thing from one by that which he most hates. Int. 12 p. 34 How to
search out another's Secrets. Int. 13 p. 40 How to find out ones Secrets, by
Insinuating with another who is privy to them. Int. 14 p. 41 How to induce one
to confess all his secret faults. Int. 15 p. 44 How to find out the Secrets of
Drunken Men. Int. 16 p. 45 How to find out the Secrets of Sober Men. Int. 17 p.
46 How one may know what Reputation he is of, and what is his Character in the
Eyes of others. Int. 18 p. 47 How one may find out the Judgment of others, in a
Case that concerns himself. Int. 19 p. 48 How to know whether a suspected
Person be Guilty or not. Int. 20 p. 51 How to know Secrets from Nature and
Custom. Int. 21 p. 53 How to prevent and escape sudden Snares. Int. 22 p. 54
How to answer difficult and dubious Questions, without danger. Int. 23 p. 55
How to shun an Offensive Answer or Sentence. Int. 24 p. 57 How to shun a
difficult Sentence. Int. 25 p. 58 How to speak ones Mind freely without danger.
Int. 26 p. 62 How to speak what one pleases, without any danger. Int. 27 p. 63
How to shun the Reproach of an unhappy Adventure. Int. 28 p. 64 How to speak
that which in it self, is dangerous without hurt. Int. 29 p. 66 How to shun
that which is hateful to one, by a Jest. Int. 30 p. 67 How to reveal a Secret,
without giving Offense to him who did inform you of it. Int. 31 p. 68 How to
reprove one without giving Offense. Int. 32 p. 69 How to shun the
Inconveniences of Jeers and Satyrs. Int. 33 p. 70 How to induce a Prince to
hear one patiently. Int. 34 p. 73 How one ought to behave himself, and what
course he should take when he is environed with danger and difficulties on all
sides. Int. 35 p. 74 How Princes may conceal their hatred and private
displeasure. Int. 36 p. 75 How to assuage the Insolences of a seditions City.
Int. 37 p. 76 How to abrogate Privileges. Int. 38. ibid. How a Prince may
frustrate an Enemy, with whom he intends to wage War. Int. 39 p. 77 How a
weak Kingdom or Commonwealth may be delivered from the power of a potent
Enemy. Int. 40 p. 78 How to molest Neighboring Nations. Int. 41 p. 80 How to
suppress those who are proud of their honorable Titles and Dignities. Int. 42
p. 81 How to keep under Men of ambitious and aspiring Spirits. Int. 43 p. 82
How to suppress seditious Soldiers. Int. 44 p. 84 How to suppress civil
Seditions and Vproars. Int. 45 p. 85 How to know whether an Informer speaks
Truth or not. Int. 46 p. 87 How one ought to behave himself when he receives
an injury from a person of Quality, far above him. Int. 47 p. 88 How to shun
the Envy of Courtiers. Int. 48 p. 89 How one ought to behave himself with
offended Princes and Peers. Int. 49 p. 91 How to suppress the Vices and wrong
Sentences of partial Judges. Int. 50 p. 92 How to suppress Luxury. Int. 51 p.
93 How to render populous Cities unfit for Seditions and Insurrections, without
loss or detriment. Int. 52 p. 94 How to appease an incensed People. Int. 53 p.
95 How to keep the Favor of New Subjects. Int. 54 p. 96 Why Merchandising is
forbidden to the Nobility. Int. 55 p. 98 Concerning the Instruments of Power.
Int. 56 p. 99 How Statesmen ought to behave themselves, in assuming the Honor
of Memorable Acts. Int. 57 p. 100 How to appease offended Princes. Int. 58 p.
101 How to impose Taxes without the offense of the Subjects. Int. 59 p. 102 How
to Collect Taxes without offending the Subjects. Int. 60 p. 103 How Seditions
are raised. Int. 61 p. 104 How Rebels and Conspirators are kept close together
in one Body. Int. 62 p. 106 The Arts and Tricks of Tyrants. Int. 63 p. 107 How
to punish Seditions Peers. Int. 64 p. 108 How to prevent Scarcity of Corn. Int.
65 p. 109 How to behave in time of Dearth. Int. 66. p. 110 How to preserve
Corn. Int. 67 p. 113 How a Prince may best confer Honors and Places. Int. 68
p. 114 How to keep what is conquered by Force of Arms. Int. 69 p. 115 How to
March an Army through a Foreign Country. Int. 70 p. 116 How a Prince should
behave himself with a Contentious Neighbor, more powerful than himself. Int.
71 p. 117 How weaker Persons may prolong time in difficult Matters. Int. 72 p.
118 How to deny a thing without offense. Int. 73. p. 11 How to compose
Seditions by Intercessors, Int. 74 p. 121 How to Suppress Sedition by Force.
Int. 75 p. 122 How to Suppress Sedition by Force of Arms. Int. 76 p. 123 How to
enter in Covenant. Int. 77. p. 125 How to keep up Favor and Authority at
Court. Int. 78. p. 126 How a Prince, that is at Peace, should behave when his
Neighbors are in War. Int. 79 p. 127 How to Disband Soldiers. Int. 80 p. 128
How Ministers of State may avoid great Dangers. Int. 84 p. 129 How to Aspire to
Promotion. Int. 85 p. 130 How to delay an Inevitable War. Int. 86 p. 131 How to
Govern New Provinces. Int. 87 p. 132 How to establish and settle New Conquests.
Int. 88 p. 134 How to compose the Differences of the Nobility. Int. 89 p. 136
How one must behave that fears a Repulse. Int. 90 p. 136 What Policy must be
used by a General. Int. 91 p. 137 How to crush Reproachful Speeches. Int. 92.
p. 138 How to obtain leave to depart from Court. Int. 93 Ibid. How to avoid
Envy. Int. 94 p. 140 How to share Dominions among Brothers. Int. 95 p. 141 How
to observe the due time of making a Truce. Int. 96 p. 143 How to change
Commanders of an Army Int. 97 p. 144 How to draw up an Army. Int. 98 p. 145 How
Ambassadors and Mediators may procure Peace. Int. 99 p. Ibid. How to dissemble
the desire of Peace. Int. 100 p. 147 The Causes of Animosities and
Insurrections. Int. 101 p. 148 What Cautions are to be used in proposing
difficult Matters. Int. 102 p. 149
THE Grand Politician: OR, THE SECRET ART OF State Policy DISCOVERED.
PROEME.
POLICY, in Word or Deed, whether in persuading Things Incredible, obtaining
Things Desirable, forcing a belief of Things Impossible, of diving into
Secrets, of shunning Inconveniences, etc. is as useful means, for Prudent and
Pious Men, for obtaining a good and lawful end; as dangerous and abuseful to
the Impious and Crafty, to prosecute a Mischievous Design: And, although
State-Sophisters pervert it, to accomplish their pernicious Projects; the abuse
thereof ought not to take away the right use of a Science, so Noble and
Necessary in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths. As also, we daily see that that
Prudence which is attained without Learning, by mere Experience, in Civil
Affairs, is better and surer than that of those, who, from the Wit of Plato,
and others, pretend to build Cities for the Benefit of a Commonwealth; in
which it is questionable, whether Arrogance or Ignorance has the upper hand.

What I here Write, I have had Trial of, and proved by Experienee, and long
Continuance of Time; that thou, who read them, may, sooner and after a
happier and easter way, be made capable of standing at the Helm of Pubiick
Affairs, and may contribute to thy own, as well as the common Interest. Use
then, and intend these Maxims, and Stratagems of Policy to a good and honest
end; if thou would do thy Country Service, ^ain thy self Credit, and dye in
Favor with thy Prince and People.

INTRIGUE 1. The Art of persuading things unknown.
THAT your Hearer may believe that which he knows not, you must, from the
Belief of things known, gain ground upon his Belief: First, by telling him
things that he knows, as if you thought him Ignorant thereof, and that
without any Confirmation. Then afterward you must tell him Things which he
does not know, which you design he should believe; affirming them so
confidently as if you had been a Witness thereto; proceeding from the aforesaid
Things known, to persuade him unknown: After this Method.

First of all (without committing Hyperbolys) faithfully tell him the clearest
and likeliest Things, and what stand to Reason, which he cannot suspect or
question; but very demurely and shamefastly, with a small Stopping or
Hesitation; lest he repute you a precipitant Blab, that speaks whatever
falls in your Head. But if you suspect that he thinks that you understand
not these things so well as he, avouch them with Confidence, lest you should be
thought to dissemble. But if you perceive that he thinks that you understand
them as well as himself, then (as I have said) offer them with a kind of
Hesitation, by telling him that you are not come to a full certainty of them,
and that you have them but by report, and hearsay, which one ought not,
easily, without questioning to believe.

Then at last, to persuade him to believe that which he knows not, tell him,
what you say, with as much Confidence, as if you had seen it. For by telling
him at first injenuously these things whereof he is persuaded (after you have
declared that you are not a Babbler, nor Credulous, nor Dissembler; but very
cautious, and one that regards the true meaning of what is told you, little
minding common Reports) you shall likewise lead him to the Belief of those
Things which he knows not.

Thus T. Labienus, after his defeat at the Battle of Pharsalia, making his
escape to Pyrrachium, with Pompey's Forces, told Truth and Lies in a breath;
Frontin. Lib. 2.
and without concealing the event of the Battle, (in which he told downright
of Pompey's defeat) but, underhand, told how Fortune was equal on both sides;
forasmuch, as Caesar was most grieviously wounded; with as great Confidence as
if he had seen the Wounds Bleeding. By which Story, he did put new Life and
Courage in his defeated Soldiers. Truly if Labienus (who commanded in chief)
had spoke with any sort of doubt, or striven to smuther the event of the Battle
(which was so well known to them all) he had not been credited, as to the rest
of his Story, concerning Caesar's Wounds.

INTRIGUE II. The Art of persuading that you know another's Secrets.
YOU shall persuade others that you have come to the knowledge of Secrets, by
one who pretends to have the Art of finding out Mysteries, and understanding
Secret Matters, if in their presence, you give him some reward or gratuity, for
the discovery thereof; for none will suspect that one should bestow his Gifts
for nothing.

Thus as Dionysius was very Anxious and Thoughtful, how he might escape all
Snares; there came a Stranger to Syracuse, bragging, Potienus 5 Plutarch. Apoph.
how he alone could tell the way how all Plotters might be known beforehand.
As he was called to the Castle to Dionysius, and every Body else withdrawn.
This (says he) is the way to render you secure from Plots and Snares; make as
if you had Learned of me the Art of knowing Conspirators, beforehand; which
you shall render more credible, if in the presence of your Life-Gards, you
bestow on me a Talent, as the reward of my Teaching. Dionysius being well
satisfied with the Fancy, gave him a Talent accordingly; telling his Gards how
he was taught an admirable Art of knowing Conspirators; beforehand: And they,
believing it to be so, never durst afterward be so bold as to hear of any
Conspiracy against him.

INTRIGUE. III. The Art of obtaining what you desire from your Enemy.
YOU shall obtain what you desire of your Enemy, if you counterfeit that you
fear he shall do these things which you mainly wish he would do. Likewise, if
you counterfeit that you wish those things were done, which you would not at
all have to be done.

Thus Ventilius, in the Parthian War against King Pacorus, knowing that a
certain Slave (a Tyrian by Nation, Frontin. Lib. I. Cap. 1.
and one of these who seemed to be of their Allies) did acqu^int, the Parthians
with all things that were done among them, did manage the Barbarous Villain's
Treachery so, as to serve his own Conveniences; for being grieviously afraid
that the Parthians would, without delay, pass over the Euphrates, before the
Legions which were in Cappadocia, beyond Mount Taurus, could join him; he so
behaved himself, that the Traitor persuaded them, with his wonted Treachery, to
a long and troublesome March, before they passed the River: For, said he, if
the Parthians come over the Mountains, I shall escape all danger of the
Archers, by the Advantage of the Hills. But if they meet me on Champaign Ground
(my Forces being so few, and theirs so many) I shall be certainly beat. The
barbarous People being thus seduced, by his telling them so, they marched their
Army along the Valleys, and then finding the Banks of the River become wide,
must of Necessity be at more trouble to make Bridges over them, and to get
Tools and Materials for their Business. Thus they spent above Forty Days to no
purpose, which space of time, Ventilius made use of, to gather his Forces
together; and then having got them in a Body, three Days before the Parthians
could come, marched, met them, gave them Battle, and gained the Victory.

INTRIGUE IV. The Art of obtaining what you desire without asking, but by
giving occasion that it may be profer'd.
IF you would obtain, without asking what you desire of another; you must first
insinuate your self in his Favor, by some familiar Discourse, relating to your
purpose; which concerns both you and him; and then propose what you intend to
obtain, as a thing which (if it were granted) would tend much to his Interest.
And if this Occasion be Acceptable, and Take, you may ask downright. But if
not, you must smooth your Design, and smuther it, with all the Policy you can.
But must give some other plausible Reason, why of Necessity it ought to be
done; for which, Reasons sake, he may of his own Accord proffer what you desire.

Thus upon an honest account, Sertorius used to take and keep Hostages, so as
not to be minded by those who gave them. For they who give willingly do hardly
mind that they give. For indeed Sertorius (to keep the Spaniards Loyal, and
that he might, the more securely, live among them) keept a School in Orca, a
very Large City where he lived, and whether the Spanish Grandees sent their
Children for education: so that in effect he both received and kept Hostages,
and yet did instruct them withal. Thus it may be often times Lawful to obtain
and possess, under a more specious title, what of it self may look more hateful
and contemptible.

The truth is, if Sertorius had used the Name of Hostages, and required them,
he should never have had one.

INTRIGUE. V. The Art of obtaining hard and Difficult things.
A Good Prince can (without any grudge) obtain difficult matters, by imposing
moderate Taxes, when the necessity of the Government requires them, and
afterward, by remitting a great part of them, when his Subjects ask for no
Relief or Immunity from them, nor make any Complaint against them: Because the
Prince, by so doing, does sufficiently manifest to them his Good Will and
Clemency.

Thus King Darius, the third from Cyrus, being to impose Taxes upon his
Subjects, enquired of the Governors of his Provinces (together with other
Questions) whether the Taxes were grievous and burdensome? when they answered,
That they were but moderate, he charged them that they should exact but the
half thereof. The Kings equity was such, that he thought the half of that,
which seemed moderate to his Princes, to be enough; yea, over and above. For he
had rather win his People by Clemency, and Acts of grace, than by a rigid
Superiorty to disarm, weaken, and enslave them.

Thus a Tyrant (who is but the Ape of a King) when he intends to demand
intolerable Things, and suck the very Blood of his Subjects (because they
should never be in capacity to shake off the yoke of their Slavery) first of
all imposes great Burdens, to the end he might afterward seem to remitt and
pass off his own Right and Interest, and by that means act with the Clemency of
a good King.

You shall obtain what you desire from one, by asking not directely, and at
first dash (if it be a hard thing, and that your request may be denied;) but by
this course you shall obtain it from one who is altogether averse from your
purpose.

First of all, ask very eagerly, something that is harder to be obtained than
what you designed to ask; till, at Length, you get him to promise that he could
rather grant any thing in the World. Then ask what you designed, and you shall
obtain it, unless he has a mind to be worse then his promise.

Thus Scipio, when he would translate the War into Africa, (to the end he might
well accoutre his unarmed men) gave charge to the Nobles of Sicily, to accoutre
themselves most gallantly, as if they had been to go along with him. When they
met together, the Nobles as earnestly begged of him not to go, as if they had
been unarmed Men. Give then (said he) your Arms to my Soldiers; which they
very readily did, as Scipio would have had it.

But if he, whom you Petition, shall swear he will not grant your Request; Then
you shall ask the quite Contrary to that which you resolved to Petition for, at
First. Then when he shall turn his Vows and Protestations to the Contrary, you
shall either obtain what you would have, else he shall be forsworn.

Thus Anaximenes (when he had heard that Alexander the Great had sworn to do
the quite Contrary to whatsoever he reqested of him) obtained Liberty to his
Lampsacenians, Nicolans Thomae lib. 2. cap. 65. de var, Hist.
First, desiring that their City might be plundered, then overthrown, and then
that the Citizens themselves might be killed or sold Slaves. By which wicked
and cunning Counsel, the Victorious Alexander, was Vanquished, so that fearing
the swelling Fury and irreconcilable Revenge, on both sides, and dangerous
Consequences of what Anaximenes advised him to, he made up the supposed Breach,
Reconcileing them (which was no hard matter to do) and protested, by an Oath,
that he would never after, do any thing to the Prejudice of the Lampsacenians.

INTRIGUE. VI. How to disarm and weaken an Enemy.
THE way to disarm and weaken an Enemy, but especially, to deprive him of his
Friends, may be contrived several ways, whereof this is one,

First, deal very friendly with your Enemy's Friend, and in your Enemy's
presence, and also before those who inform your Enemy; and ever now and then,
with squinting Eyes (like those who dread that all Things are not safe) gaze
upon those timorous Informers, as if you and they did on both sides privately
communicate these Secrets, which you would not have your Enemy to know of, so
as thereby he may become less cautious; for nothing will move an observing
Person, more than a caution counterfeited with great artifice and cunning.

Thus Scipio, and the other Roman Ambassadors, dealt with Hannibal, at
Antiochus his Court; for, as often as King Antiochus fortuned to come suddenly
upon them, Frontin. C. 4.
they brought about, with their frequent and familiar Discourses with Hannibal,
what they mainly labored for, viz. that he, who formerly was designed to be
General of the Army, against the Romans, might be suspected of Treachery by the
King, as favoring the Romans. The Roman Ambassadors made a Show as if they
had come into Asia to treat with Antiochus, concerning a Peace whilst the chief
intent of their Embassy (which they palliated all along) was no other then to
render Hannibal a suspected Person to Antiochus; so that he might not be
Trusted with an Army where with totally to overthrow the Romans.

Secondly, you shall render your Enemy's Friend a suspected Person, if with
Gifts and Presents you send him Letters, written with the greatest Friendship
imaginable: advising him, in General Terms, to make good his Promise, which
Letters must be intercepted, so as they may come to your Enemy's Hands. Thus
when Quintus Metellus's Letters written (with the greatest Familiarity and
Affection) to Jugurtha's Friends; Frontin. C. 8.
for betraying the King to Metellus, were intercepted: King Jugurtha inflicted
a grievous punishment on them all; but afterward, being (by this means)
deprived both of Friends and good Council, he was himself easily destroyed by
the Romans.

Thirdly, The Suspicion will still move, and more be increased, if the Writing,
on the outside, resemble a Hand different from the inside.

Thus, when the Syracusians endeavored, by the Conduct and Assistance of Dion,
to disthrone Dionysius, who kept the Wives of a great many in Prison in the
Castle, Potienus 4.
and amongst the rest, Hyppanio, Dion's youngest Son. It was granted,
privately, to some Women ( Dionysius conniving) to carry sorrowful Letters, to
their bemoaning Husbands. But when he knew that (as suspected Letters) they
would be read in the public Council of the Citizens, he privately conveyed in
to the Number, his own Letter; the outward Inscription of which did resemble
the Hand, and bear the Name of Hippanio, to his Father Dion. But in the
inside, Dionysius had written very friendly to Dion, as if they had been
Confederate, to betray the Citizens at an appointed time. These, with other
things, being publicly read, Dion was looked upon as a perfidious Traitor and
Villain by all the Grandees of Syracuse; which was Dionysius's only Design, and
that they might not have so brave a General, to work his overthrow.

Fourthly, A Person may be rendered hateful to a People, if, by an exact
Imitation, you contrive and counterfeit some pernicious project or evil Work
(which will be ill taken by all) and then publish it in his Name.

Thus Anaxemenes (who could counterfeit Theopompus's Style, published in his
Name, Lies, Fables, and Stories; Pausan. l. 6.
which disgraced, and made him so infamous, all Greece over, that where ever he
went he was still in danger of his Life.

INTRIGUE VII. How to dissemble.
HE that would speak one thing and think another, must be cautious that his
Voice, Countenance, and Behavior agree to the Sense and Humor of his
Discourse, lest his dissembling be discovered, and he betray himself, and be
suspected. For, as the Nature of his Discourse changes, so also ought the
Voice and Gesture of the Speaker to be altered too; as he that speaks merrily
ought to have one way of speaking, and he that speaks gravely another, etc.
what is known to the vulgar has also the vulgar report; but if you speak of a
modest Person, you may say he blushed, and therefore, the matter is sure; if
you speak of a fearful Man, then with Virgil

Obstupuit; steieruntque comae, vox faucibus haesit. Astonished, his Hair up
stood,
And could not utter bad or good.
So must one humor all Circumstances of his Discourse.

Thus Hannibal, when a great many of his Soldiers left his Army, and went in
to the Romans; perceiving that the rest, by that means, Frontin. 3.18.
might be disencouraged, and that still more Spies did lurk in his Camps, to
inform the Romans; and privately betray him, as far as their cowardly power
went; that he might encourage his dejected Soldiers, and be revenged on the
Deserters or Run-a-ways; in a Public Council, and in the hearing of a great
many of his Soldiers, with a Counterfeit, Cheerful, Brazen-Face, he told, That
they had not run away, but by the Persuasion of their Officers (as becomes
Courageous Soldiers) gone to be Spies, and Discover the Strength and Designs of
the Enemy; and that, in Battle, they might Surprise, and Seize them, behind
their Backs. By this Fabulous Commendation, he encouraged his own Soldiers, but
inflamed the Romans against the Deserters; so that they did cut off their Right
Hands, and sent them back to Hannibal.

INTRIGUE. VIII. How to Persuade and Dissuade
YOU shall persuade one of little Spirit to undertake great and hard Matters;
to prosecute that which he takes to be good and pleasing, and dissuade him
from that Evil which he looks on as less Dangerous; if, by some moving
Object, you raise in him a violent Passion, as Wrath, Fear, Hatred, etc. For
then the vehement Passion augmenteth the Strength and Vitals of the Mind, to
prosecute and perform a Memorable Act; the attempt whereof, might otherways
prove but in vain, for want of Vigor, Courage, and Magnanimity.

Thus Horat. 2. Sat. 3.
Opimius the Miser, could not, by any Remedy, be cured of his Lethargy, till
the Physician (to keep him awake by some Anxious Care, and passionate
Apprehension) told him, That his Heirs did contrive how to take away, and rob
him of his Money; and therefore, desired him to Cause all his Treasure to be
brought to his Chamber, in his Sight, that with a Careful Eye, he might secure
it from the Hands of his Covetous Heirs. By which means the Physician obtained
his End: For the Miser Opimius, having so Covetous a Desire after his Money,
that he could not Sleep, (still keeping his Eye upon his Treasure,) was by his
Watchfulness cured of his Lethargy.

By this means also the brute Beasts may be induced to obey their Masters
Desires. Comp. l. 7. c. 4.
For Brachius, the Perusian General, when, neither by Whip nor Spur, he could
cause his weary Horses to take the Mountains, in pursuit of his Enemy; out of
the Spoil and Herd which he had taken, chose young lusty Mares, and set them in
the Front of his Cavalry, which so animated and stirred up his wearied Horses,
that there was more difficulty to keep them back, than drive them forwards.

Yet all are not stirred up by the same Excitements, by reason of the variety
of Natures, Manners, and Education: Therefore it is carefully to be considered,
how, and by what means, such and such Persons ought to be dealt with; and
(conform to the Dispositions of those with whom you are to deal;) to change and
use Excitements, Arguments and Strategems of Wit, Policy, and Discretion.

Thus Curt. l. 3.
Alexander the Great, when he went out to Battle, against Darius, he stirred up
his Soldiers by Excitements of diverse Natures: First, The Macedonians, (whom
he knew to be Ambitious of Honor,) to give an evident Demonstration of their
Valor, for obtaining the prize of an Universal Empire. The Graecians,
(desirous of Liberty,) that they would be revenged on the Persians, and make
them bear the Yoke of their Slavery, as long as they had done theirs. The
Illyrians and Thracians, (who lived by Theft and Rapine) he persuaded to
Magnanimity, by setting before them a great Spoil, and Rich Booty.

An Honest Mind can be dissuaded from a wicked Design, by setting open the
Shame and Infamy of the Action intended. * Thus the Milesian Virgins, who (as
Authors write) were taken with such a strange and unheard of Madness, that
almost in every House of the City some hanged themselves, without any known
Cause; and could not be cured of their Malady, nor be dissuaded from
Self-murder, by the Persuasions and Arguments of the Wise, nor the Tears of
their Parents; but were rather made worse, and set more on edge; till the
Magistrates ordained, That the First who should hang her self, should be
dragged naked (by the Heels) through the Streets of the City, and hung up in
the Market Place, as a monument of Shame, Infamy, and Disgrace: Which struck
such a Terror in the Minds of the young Virgins, that never one of them
afterward did attempt any violence against her self.

Thus also Selenicus, the Lawgiver, made the Women and Ladies of Locris to
forbear their gorgeous and gaudy Apparel, and their great Convoys, by these
Laws: He ordained, That no Lady or Matron should have above one Attendent, or
Page, to attend her, unless she would acknowledge her self first, in face of
the Council, a great Drunkard; and that none should wear Ribbons, Top-knots,
Chains, or Bracelets, etc. but when she went a Whoring, that with her fine
Apparel and wanton Dress, she might allure her Gallants to her Bed of Pleasure.
Another such Law was in Syracuse, viz. That no Woman should wear any gorgeous
and gaudy Apparel, till first she should acknowledge her self a Whore.

If you would dissuade an obstinate Person from an Error, you must show it to
him in a Parallel, to make him sensible, and convince him of it; for, if he can
be brought to a sense thereof, you have done the work: since none will Err
willingly, nor persist in an Error, when he knows it to be an Error. Moreover,
show him his mistake, with a cheerful counterfeit consent, by bringing him to
the first original and rise of his Error; or, more sharply moving him with the
bad Consequences and Evils that will follow, if he persist in so pernicious an
Opinion and Enterprise.

But to dissuade one from a pernicious Design, whom clear Arguments, and
evident Demonstrations cannot convince, but make more obstinate, these Measures
must be taken. After a wheedling manner, condescend to his Designs, as if they
were very pleasing and rational, and as you were altogether of his Mind. Then
take a full Information of all the draught and drift of his Intentions, as if
you were in Love with his Phancies, and intended them for a Rule to practice
by, or use them as Arguments to satisfy and convince another, who strove to
dissuade you from such a Project. Then explain to him all his plausible
Arguments, as you highly approved of them; but in such a plain manner, and such
terms, as may make the weakness of them appear, and he may begin to suspect his
Substantial Fabric to be but a perverted Maggot of imaginary Phancies. Then
start some Arguments, which may be objected against his Conclusions, and make
for a contrary Opinion, confuting them at such a slight rate, as he may easily
perceive them to be stronger than any he can bring for the Confirmation of the
contrary Opinion, which he so much dandleth and approves of.

Thus Bacovius the Calabrian, hunting after greater Preferment, and aspiring to
higher Dignity, (though he was the chief Magistrate in Capua,) took these
Measures, to ingratiate himself in the Favor of the Senators, Hermog. Lib. 4.
de invent. 13. Plin. Lib. 23.
and save them alive, when the common People had concluded to cut them off, and
commit the Rule of the Government wholly to him: First, having given the
Senators a Secret Oath of Fidelity, he imprisoried them in the Senate House.
Then called up the Commons to a Common Council, where he made a show of giving
up the Senators to them, in these Words. That which you have so often desired
and wished for, ye Men of Capua, that it might be in your Power to be avenged
of this wicked Senate, now you have; and them all (and that without tumult or
danger) shut up in Prison, by my means, in the Senate House. Take them unarmed,
severally by themselves, and dispose of them according to your Pleasure. Yet
lest we should do any thing rashly, through spite or malice, be persuaded that,
by all means, it is necessary, before ye cut off this mischievous Senate, to
choose a new one, that is far better for your purpose, unless you have a mind to
enslave your selves to the Arbitrary Government of one single Person: Go on
therefore, and let us not delay, but put this Course in Execution, with speed:
Let every Senator be severally brought before you, and pass Sentence on every
one of them; and then nominate, and bring in a better, in the room of each one
that is to dye: For it is in your Power to execute Justice, and condemn those
you find Guilty; and to choose better in their room. Therefore go on
deliberately, and with all speed, reward these wicked Senators according to
their Deservings.

This Design pleased them well; but when they proceeded to the Examination of
the Senators apart, and had compared them with those they had newly elected,
(which were to be put in their rooms,) they perceived the meanness and ignoble
Circumstances of those ill-bred startups: Forasmuch as they were, for the most
part, poor, beggarly, and unskilful in the management of public Affairs.
Whereupon they judged it more advised to continue the Old Senate. Then (says
Bacovius) seeing you cannot be without a Senate, nor can find a better than
what at present you have, you had better restore the imprisoned Senators to
their former Dignities, and be reconciled to them; to the end they may be more
serviceable to you for the future, than bring the City to Confusion and Ruin,
by depriving it of all Government. And so forthwith they agreed thereto, and by
this did Bacovius gain to himself great Favor, and Pre-eminence without stroke
of Sword.

If Bacovius had, at first, imperiously contended, that the People must have
bore with the Senate, because a new one would have been more mean and ignoble
than what they had; without all peradventure, he would have begotten in the
People a greater rancour and dislike to the Senators; they being so much
already incensed against them. Thus, according to Bacovius's Method, the
incensed Vulgar, or Rabble of Common People, (when they are in an Error of
Judging all others, and cannot be convinced by rational Arguments, without
danger of making the matter worse,) ought to be humoured and wrought upon, by
what is more pleasing and acceptable, to rectify their mistake.

Thus Machiavel argues, If the wicked Old Senate must be cut off, and a better
New One Chose from among the People; Lib. 6: Disp. Cap. 43.
let the People, first, argue thus with themselves: Either this or that, or
some Third Fellow of the Rabble, is better and fitter for Government than he
who is to be cast off: But neither this, nor that, nor the third, nor another
of the Rabble, can be chosen better and fitter for Government, (the People
themselves being Judges,) therefore it is not convenient, upon any Account, to
alter the Senate, or to change it for a New One.

Moreover, there is a twofold Persuasion; one in direct and plain terms, which
tells plainly as it means; and there is another which comes by Insinuations,
Far-fetches, and some subtle Contrivance of a Man's own Fancy.

Thus a certain poor Man had for his sworn Enemy a great and rich Man, who
proferred, in a time of great Famine, to keep the City where the poor Man
lived, if the Citizens would give him up (the poor Man) to be put to Death. The
poor Man suspecting, and fearing the inconstancy of the unstable Multitude, and
questioning the Honesty of the Hungerstarv'd Rabble, durst not hazard directly
to dissuade them from consenting to the unjust demand of the Rich Man, nor
argue that an Innocent Person should not be put to Death, lest he should the
more provoke their Inclinations, to give him up. Therefore, by Insinuations,
and a far-fetched sober Contrivance, to mollify their Hearts, he made his
humble Address to them thus:

Verily, for my own part, I refuse not to dye for the Good and Preservation of
my Country; although nothing worthy or deserving Death be found in me. However,
dear and honest Citizens, consider first, whether he has Corn enough to answer
the price of my Blood; and then (if he have) whether or not an honest kind
Citizen, who is able, be not bound to assist his Fellow Citizens, without the
Effusion of Innocent Blood. And Thirdly, whether or not the Commonwealth can
justly, in time of necessity, take all the useless Corn, for the maintenance of
starved poor People, paying the just worth, from one who will not part with it,
under the satisfying of his undeserved Revenge, and the price of Innocent
Blood. Now consider, whether you can more freely seize his Corn, than consent
to so horrid a Murder.

Thus also, when the Lacedaemonians demanded of the Athenians, (who desired an
established Peace,) that Pericles should first be given up to them. Pericles,
considering with himself that he would be safer, and more beloved among the
People, and could prevail more by counterfeiting and declaring a willing and
forward Resolution to dye for the safety of the Commonwealth, than by openly
contradicting the Senate, advised the Senators to give himself up to the
Lacedaemonians, and to hearken to a Lawless Necessity, since the State of
Affairs so required; but with such Arguments as did very plainly manifest how
Slavish and Reproachful a thing it was, for any Commonwealth to obey such
unreasonable and imperious an Enemy.

In like manner King Philip, the Father of Alexander the Great, after he had,
with a pretense of asserting Liberty, invaded a great part of Greece, at length
besieged Athens; but, withal, did cunningly excuse himself, that he did not at
first think of waging War against the Senate, and People of Athens, and that
they should soon be rescued from war, from the Siege, and from Famine; if they
would only deliver him up Ten of the greatest of their Orators; who indeed were
his greatest Enemies, and never gave over their barking and bawling against him
in their Senate. The People judging it best, that a few of their Orators, for
the safety of many, should be given up; Demosthenes persuaded them to the
contrary Opinion, by discovering to them King Philip's craft, and double-hand
Dealings, by this Fable. Of old (says he) the Wolf offered Peace to the Sheep,
on Condition, the Dogs should be destroyed, whom he did accuse, as the Authors
and Promotors of all their Contentions and Discord. But the Dogs (those
watchful and careful Creatures, who still gave notice to the Sheep of the
Wolfes approaching) being took out of the way, the Treacherous Wolf, as often
as he listed, without fear of Punishment, or respect to his former
Protestations, made havoc of the poor harmless deluded Sheep: Even so Philip
requires us to be delivered up, who discover his ensnaring Policy, and
Treacherous Plots; and withstand his Force, by animating you all to quit your
selves, in your Vindications, as becomes valiant Men; that by this means he
may deprive the City of it is Keepers and Watchmen, and destroy it unawares
without difficulty. Now the whole drift of his Discourse was good and honest,
viz. that the Orators should no more be given up to King Philip, than the
Dogs to the Wolf.

But when you drive at one thing, and design another, contrary measures must be
taken; as if you intended indirectly, and at a distance, to persuade one to a
sober Life; go on thus,

Grant me only these few rational Requests; be not mad drunk after Twelve a
Clock at Night, lest you disquiet People in their rest; and because you cannot
forbear your Old Habits of Drinking, running about, emptying your Belly at both
ends, and committing other such base Acts of Indecency, as are not fit to be
mentioned; begin your walks about Seven a Clock in the Morning, that you may
finish them about Twelve at Night; for by that time you may be wearied, and
leave off to molest, and be troublesome to others.

But if a Person obstinately still persist in his Opinion, after his Error has
been clearly (and in a friendly way) shown to him, do him some injury, which
may more clearly demonstrate his mistake; which injury, according to his own
Opinion (that he so confidently affirms and maintains) can, by clear
Consequence, be proved to be no injury at all, tho he should bring it to a
Trial of Law. Thus the obstinate Opiniator will be forced either to condemn his
own false Opinion, or acknowledge that he has received no injury. After this
manner, one, that maintained that all things came by Contingency, overthrew the
Opinion of him, who believed that all things came by Fate. He gave him a Blow
under the Ear, and when the Cause came to a Trial at Law, he cleared himself
thus. Either I struck you this Blow, driven to it by some fatal necessity, or
by chance, and of my own Free Will. If casually and by chance, then by this I
prove there is given Free Will and Contingency: Neither in this Case, have I
done him any wrong, but have convinced him of his Error, and brought him to an
acknowledgment of the Truth, which (perhaps) was my Design, and for which he
ought not to accuse, but reward me, and give me thanks. But if I be driven, by
some fatal necessity, to do you this injury, and give you so violent a Blow
under the Ear, than I am still clear; for who can withstand Fate, when, of
necessity, he must submit?

INTRIGUE IX. How to obtain what you Desire, without danger of losing the
Favor of him whom you desire it of.
IF you would ask for any thing of one, whose Favor you fear to lose, and
whose Wrath you fear thereby to incur (if your Petition should be ill taken) go
on after this Method. First, consider whether you have reason to fear, that you
will come off with reproof and repulse, from him whom you petition; and
therefore dares not hazard to be so bold, though, otherways, he be both
familiar and kind. Then, when you have weighed these things seriously in your
Mind, counterfeit that another asks that of you, or of some other Person,
which you really design to ask of him. Then take his Advice, whether it be not
unworthy and base, to ask such a thing of a Friend; and if he judge it neither
base nor irrational, then, without any farther delay, you may downright ask
what you design, and you shall obtain it. But if he repute the demand base and
irrational, desist from your Intention, if you would continue in his Favor;
for what a Man thinks not unworthy to be asked of another, he will not take
ill if asked of himself.

This was Eurastritus's Practice, when he designed to know whether Seleucus
would countenance the inordinate Love of his Son Antiochus, Plutarch. in
Demetrio, Suidas, Plin. Lib. 29. Cap. 1.
which he had for his Mother-in-Law, Stratonice, for whom he was fallen Sick,
and ready to Dye: Which the Physician found out, whilst he could find him
troubled with no common Distemper; for, as he felt his Pulse ( Stratonice
passing by) he observed the motion of his Veins alter, and turn more violent in
their Course; and a sudden change, and cold sweat surprise the Face of
Antiochus. Whereupon, Eurastritus spoke to his Father thus, Your Son is a dead
Man; for, he has passionately fallen in Love with my Wife, and will never
recover, unless he obtain his Desire, which I am resolved never to agree to.
Whereupon King Seleucus, with inordinate and compassionate Tears, (as a Favor
never to be forgotten,) requested Eurastritus to comply and save his Son's
Life, by granting his Desire. Do not you (answered Eurastritus) demand that of
me, which no Man in reason can demand? To which the King made answer: I
heartily wish he had fallen in love with my Stratonice. Do you say so
seriously? (replied Eurastritus.) Yes, truly, (says the King,) as I wish the
Fates to favor me. Then (answered Eurastritus) you neither stand in need of
me, nor my Wife; for you can cure him your self: And if you will let him enjoy
the company of your Stratonice, he will soon recover. His Father, King
Seleucus, gave him his own Wife, and after a while, the young Man recovered.
And lest this should have been known, and given offense to the People, Seleucus
still spoke to the Young Man's Commendation, which was very profitable to the
Commonwealth, though the Thing, in it self, was far contrary both to Custom and
Honesty.

INTRIGUE. X. How to obtain what you Desire, when the Person whom you desire it
of is altogether averse.
IF you would obtain what you desire, when the Person of whom you ask it is
absolutely averse from granting it, you must make that which you request
hateful, or appear hurtful or dangerous in his Eyes, and then afterward you
may cautiously ask and obtain. Thus, a Merchant in Amsterdam, desirons to buy a
House of his next Neighbor, which his Neighbor was not willing to sell,
caused such a formidable noise to be heard, every Night, in the House, that all
the Neighborhood thought it had been frequented with Evil Spirits, which he
brought about after this manner. The House being nearest to his own, he pulled
a Stone out of that place of the Wall which was concealed by a Desk, and
through it, every Night, he conveyed an Iron Bullet, tied to a string, by which
he drew it too and fro, over the Inhabitants; whereat they were so frightened
that the Landlord was glad to part with the House, at any rate.

INTRIGUE. XI. How to force a Confession from one who is obstinate.
HE that would, by Circumvention, induce one to confess that which (downright
and directly) he will not, must be accused as guilty of some greater Crime,
relating so near to that which you would have him confess, that the
acknowledging of the lesser will clear him of the greater. Thus a certain
Priest, desirous to bring one to confess his long absence from Church, and
receiving the Eucharist, did subornate those that did accuse him, that (in the
time of the Priests absence) when others were at Prayers, he profaned the
consecrated Things, and threw Stones at the holy Images. Thus the poor Man,
being afraid of a greater Punishment, was fore'd to acknowledge his long absence
from Church.

INTRIGUE XII. How to force any thing from One, by that which he most hates.
YOU shall force a thing from One, that is unwilling to grant it, by over
persuading him that it is your Right, or by driving him to that which he most
abhors. Thus a poor, but ingenious young Man, whilst he was put to the
utmost point of necessity, and knew not how to live, heard of a certain rich
Godly Merchant, that could not endure an Oath, to whom he went, and pretended
that he owed him a large Sum of Money; but the Merchant denying, was brought to
a Trial of Law, by the young Man, who desired him to clear himself by his Oath.
But the Merchant chose rather to pay the Money, which he owed not than swear.
The young Man, having gotten the Money, fell a trading, and grew rich; and after
a few years, returned to the Merchant, from whom he had forced the Money, and
paid him both Stock and Interest; beging his Pat^on, humbly acknowledging his
Offense, and that then he was driven to the utmost point of necessity, and knew
not how to live. The Merchant, weighing the young Man's Honesty and Ingenuity,
did not only forgive him, but also gave him his only Daughter, with a large
Portion.

This happened well on both sides; but oft-times, in such Cases, the Effect and
Proof makes the Contrivance good or bad, wise or foolish: For had this young
Man lost by his Trading, and not improved the Money, (which, very unjustly, he
cheated the Merchant of,) he had not been able to restore it again; and
consequently, by the result, had been (deservedly) reputed a Rogue to his
Grave. Therefore, I say, it is dangerous to take such dubious Courses, unless
in Cases of great Necessity: For the worst sometimes may answer Expectation,
when at other times, the best will not.

I heard a Story, much like this, of an Englishman; which was thus: A broken
Goldsmiths, in London, observed a rich Grasier receive Two Hundred Pounds,
whereof he robbed him, as he was on his way homeward. About Seven Years after,
he met the Grasier, by chance, in the Street; whom he, very kindly, invited
home to his House; where he profer'd to pay him the Two Hundred Pounds, with
Interest. But the Grasier, not minding the time when the Money was lent, took
the proser for a jeer or some designed trap; till the Gold Smith told him of
the time and place, concealing the Person who had committed the Robbery. The
Grasier was, at last, persuaded to receive his Money, but was so civil as to
take no Interest; but was very curious to know the Person to whom he had so
long lent it, protesting that he would do him no diskindness, but rather any
Favor that lay in his Power. The Goldsmiths, told him, Sir, I have a Child to
be Christened to morrow, and if you please to stay and be God Father, the
Person that did you this injury will be present, and make his Apology, for
detaining your Money so long. The Grasier was well satisfied; and (when all was
over) the Goldsmiths told him that he was the Person himself, to whom he had so
long lent his Money; and that mere necessity, contrary to his Inclination,
forced him to it; and that he had kept him out of Prison, and given him
whereupon to live honestly in the World. Whereupon, the rich Grasier was so
well pleased, and so much taken with the Goldsmith's Wit, Honesty, and
Ingenuity, that he gave the 200 pounds to his Godson, as a Confirmation of his
durable Respects. The Result was good, though many on such Measures, have
gotten a Halter for their Reward.

There is no surer way, to obtain what you Desire, than by giving the Person,
whom you design to ask, some ground to think that you can do him some great
Favor, for many have been so forward, on such an Occasion, as to study how to
ingratiate themselves in the favor of the Person, of whom they reckoned to
receive a Kindness. Thus a brisk Spark (who had more confidence than Money, and
wanted to be treated) came to a rich Goldsmiths, and asked him what a Wedge of
Gold, of such a length, might be worth, making a Demonstration on his Arm. The
Goldsmiths suspecting that he himself had such an one to sell, was desirous to
see it, telling that he never saw one so large. The young Man, as if he had
come by it some unlawful way, to confirm the Goldsmiths in his Opinion, and set
him more on edge, began to smother the Discourse, as afraid to speak of so rich
a Booty, lest it should be inquired, how he came by it. The Goldsmiths,
desirous to pump him, took him to the Tavern, where, after several Bottles of
Wine, the Goldsmiths, very seriously, asked if he could let him see the Wedge
of Gold. Truly, Sir, (replied the young Spark) I never, hitherto, was Master of
a Wedge of Gold, nor ever heard of one so large, as what I spoke to you of, at
your Shop. But, I assure you, Sir, if any such come to my Hand, you shall have
the first profer of it, whether you buy it or not. The Goldsmiths, who formerly
had been transported in Expectation, began to find out where he was; and after
he was Master of his right Senses, paid the Reckoning, wished his Chapman a
good Market, and so took leave. Another of his Trade, who had some Information
of his Neighbor's Prentice, that the Goldsmiths had met with a rich accidental
Booty, asked him, as he was a coming in to his Shop, if he should go halfs. You
shall have it all (said he) if you will; what is the Matter? (replied the
other?) The young Spark, that is at the Tavern (said he) has the largest Wedge
of Gold, to sell, that ever you saw, but we cannot agree. Whereupon, the other
Goldsmiths hastened to the Tavern, (where the young Gentleman was examining the
remainder of the Wine, which his Merchant had left him) and with a Covetuous
Grace, in a moment, became very familiar and complaisant, with the young Man;
telling him what his Neighbor had told him, concerning the Wedge of Gold. The
Spark (to Humor the Fancy) made as if he had been afraid to speak of it, in a
Tavern: Whereupon, the Goldsmiths took him home to his House; and, after
Dinner, brought about his Discourse, concerning the Wedge of Gold; but finding
the young Blade averse from his purpose, set his Daughter a pumping of him,
with her gilded Discourse, and pleasing Complements. But he, being too cunning
for her Sex, told her Father, that he had disposed of his Gold to his
Neighbor, before he came, but could save him 1000 pound in his Pocket. The Old
Man began to lend an attentive Ear, and called for another Bottle, which they
drank out very Cordially; the smiling young Lady, now and then relishing the
Glass with the perfume of her Lips; till the impatient Old Man could bear no
longer, but would know how to save 1000 pounds. The young Spark told him; Sir,
I hear that you have profer'd this young handsome Lady, your Daughter, to Wife
to Mr. Frontinick, with 3000 pound, and I will take her with Two; and by this
means, you may save 1000 pound in your Pocket. Both the Father and Daughter
seemed to be well pleased with the Jest; but the Old Man was in a Passion, and
went to scold his Neighbor, for helping him to such a Merchant, leaving the
young couple in his Chamber; where they made so good use of their time, and
became so intimate and loving with one another, that, contrary to the Father's
Knowledge, the Lady was forced to go to Church, and Marry the young Spark. But
the old Gentleman saved nothing by it.

INTRIGUE XIII. How to search out another's Secrets.
IF you would find out the Secrets of another, you must feign to him that one
has informed you of such Things; or rather suborn one to whisper you,
seriously, in the Ear, in his presence, as Informers use to do. Then (after you
have given him a reward for his Information) say, that you have found out a few
things concerning such and such a Matter; and that you are yet Ignorant of some
particular Circumstances, which (in time) you may come to know. Then the other
being persuaded that the greatest part of his Secrets are found out, (and,
therefore, that it is but in vain to conceal the rest) will, of his own accord,
discover the whole Intrigue, to keep or gain Favor, and to come the better off.

Thus Dionysius served Andron. For, having trusted him with his Affairs, his
Kinsman Hermocrates persuaded Andron to deliver him up the Castle and Treasury,
Aelianns, Lib. 5.
thinking Dionysius's Absence a fit opportunity to throw off the yoke of his
Slavery But the Design not taking, Dionysius returned in a short space, knowing
nothing of Hermocrates his Project, by Andron, or any other Informer.
Notwithstanding, being Jealous, that (in his Absence) the Citizens might have
designed some Plot, for the recovery of their former Liberty, he feigned, as if
he had been informed of all the Factions, and Conspiracies, which they had been
contriving against him, in his absence, and who was the chief Man that laid
hold on the opportunity, and carried on the Design. Andron being (by this
Fictitious Policy) deceived, (to save his own Bacon,) betrayed Hermocrates, by
revealing all the Transactions that had past betwixt them.

INTRIGUE XIV. How to find out One's Secrets, by insinuating with another, who
is privy to them.
IF you would know a Secret which another will not reveal, you must wheedle
him, by himself, to be serious in Discourse; and then learn some other Secret,
which he fears not to make known: Then, without delay, go to his Crony, and
intimate Friend (if he have any) who knows both the Secrets, and pretend that
he has told you the Secret which you are a fishing for; and, that you may
persuade him to believe you, tell him the other Secret which he told you. Then
he (hearing this Secret revealed) will be convinced that the other is
discovered too; therefore will not think it worth while to conceal that which
is already known; but talk to you of it, as if you knew of it as well as
himself. Thus (amongst the Turks) a very dark Case in Law, was cleared and
discussed by a very just Sentence.

A certain Man, named Consio, left a bag of Money in his Friend's Custody; and,
when he demanded it again, his Friend denied it, Arod. Decret. lib. 1. Tit. 30.
telling him that he had nothing of his, and that he owed him not one Farthing,
threatening him, that (if he scandalized, and troubled him with such idle and
disgraceful Discourse) he would complain to the Emperor, thinking, thereby, to
frighten the poor Man from asking after his Money; but all would not do; and
the Action was at last brought before the Grand Seignior, who examined both the
Parties, and checked him, in whose Hands the Money was left. But he (as he had
been honest and clear from so base and wicked a Crime) denied the other's
Accusation, with a great deal of counterfeit Grief, and Trouble. But the other
stood stiffly to his point, confirming his Assertion, with unfeigned Tears, and
Demonstrations of unspeakable Sorrow. The Emperor, desirous to find out the
truth of the Matter, delayed his Sentence till another day; and then,
underhand, sent one privately, to him who had the Money, and, after a friendly
and familiar way, advised him to restore it, and put an end to the
Controversy, to save his Credit and Reputation; and said that the Emperor
might have bad thoughts of him, and that be might come off at a loss. But he
still stood obstinate, and would submit to no Counsel or Arbitration. Wherefore
the Emperor was concerned, and commanded the Debate to be discussed by none
but himself, and, without delay, unawares, called them both before him. Then
taking him who had the Money aside, he asked if he lay with his Wife last
Night, and whether he had done something else, and at what Hour of the Night he
did it. Then after he had come to a knowledge of these Secrets, he immediately
sent one to his Wife, to say, that her Husband desired her to send him the bag
of Money, which he gave her to keep; and if she would not believe, to tell her
(as Tokens) what her Husband had, secretly, told him. His Wife being convinced
by these Secrets, (which none knew but her Husband and she,) sent the Money,
and so the Roguery was found out: And the Emperor did not only make him pay
double, what he had defrauded Consio of, but also took off his Head, to save
himself from trouble, and make him Honest for the future.

INTRIGUE. XV. How to induce One to confess all his Secret Faults.
IF you would allure one to confess all his Crimes and Secret Faults, you must
catch him with an inevitable necessity of confessing; and you your self must
first begin, and confess your own Crimes, whether true or false no matter, for
either will serve to show him Example.

Thus Nelius, the Son of Codrus, the last King of the Athenians, when beat from
his Kingdoms, he was (by Storms and Tempests at Sea) driven to Naxos, Aelian.
Lib. 8. Cap. 5.
whence he could not loose, till he purged his Army from all profligate
Villains, and vile Persons, as the Soothsayers told him. But he, not knowing
the good from the bad, appointed a general Confession; and he (to allure the
rest, and induce them to a free and resolute confessing of all their Crimes)
confessed first a great many Fictitious, Villainous Deeds, whereof he was not
guilty, as that he had murdered a Boy, forced so many Women, etc. By which
Fiction he did induce all his Men to confess their secret Villainies, taking
Example from their Master's Sins. Then, leaving all the great and Bloody
Sinners in Naxos, he sailed, with the lesser, to Ionia, where they settled; and
first of all, in Miletus. Now from those afterward, the other Eleven Cities of
Ionia (which by that means came to be Athenian Colonies) had their rise.

INTRIGUE XVI. How to find out the Secrets of Drunken Men.
YOU may know whether the Speeches of a Drunken Man be resolutely spoken, or
rashly, without any resolvedness, if you pry into the Constitution, Nature, and
Inclinations of the Drunkard; and observe whether he speaks warily, or talks
idly whatever falls in his Head: If he speaks warily, then he speaks
advisedly, and in earnest, and his Discourse ought to be minded: But if his
Tongue talk Nonsense, and run beyond Rational Conception, and speak nothing to
purpose, his Discourse is rash, and only the effect of his Drunkenness, and not
worth taking notice of.

Thus Dionysius, when Two young Men were brought before him, (who, in their
Cups, had spoke many Treasonable Words against him, Apothegm. Fol. 364.
as being a Tyrant, and an unjust Oppressor,) he invited them both to Supper,
and observing one of them to be a natural Drunkard, and idle Talker, him he
dismissed, and sent him about his Business, as one not worth minding, being
only made foul mouthed by Drunkning: But the other, whom he observed very
cautious both in drinking and speaking, he put to Death, reputing him his
Enemy, because he spoke deliberately.

INTRIGUE XVII. How to find out the Secrets of Sober Men.
YOU may find out the Inclinations and Secrets of a Sober Person, by moving his
Affections, and setting his Mind on edge, and by obstinate and reproachful
Controversies, by which being once moved (in Passion, and of his own accord) he
will pass a true Sentence, and discover his Inclination. Or you may try what
is, or has been the Inclination of one, when at School, whether Sober,
Patient, Wrathful, Contentious, or given to Lying and Swearing, etc.

INTRIGUE XVIII. How One may know what Reputation he is of, and what is his
Character in the Eyes of others.
HE that would know his own Character, and the Opinion which others have of
him, must praise or dispraise, before ingenious Men, another like himself, both
in Life and Manners; or praise or dispraise him, who is (for the most part)
given to Qualities quite contrary to his own. And, by this, he may know that
they who praise one of his Life and Manners, and dispraise one different in
Life and Manners, do certainly commend and approve of him; and that they who
dispraise one like him, and praise one who is not like him, cannot have any
good esteem, or think well of him.

Thus Nero sometimes praised Caligula, (whom he made the pattern of his Life,)
and sometimes greatly discommended him, thereby to know what repute he himself
had with others, Seneca.
and in whom he should put trust. And, at last, finding what he sought for, he
put to Death all those, who spoke reproachfully of him. But in such as spoke to
his Commendation, he put great Confidence, and made them his nearest, dearest,
and most intimate Friends.

INTRIGUE XIX. How one may find out the Judgment of others, in a Case that
concerns himself.
YOU shall know another's Judgment of your own Actions, or of your Friends, or
of your Enemies, after this manner, propose to one, an Act of the same Nature,
with your own, without mentioning the Actor, and then ask what the Person who
has done such things deserves, whether praise or dispraise, reward or
punishment. Then, after you have heard his Sentence, show the Cases to be of
one Nature and Likeness; and the Author of the one to deserve as much as the
other. This is the surest way; for on what a Man is Ignorant, and knows of no
Relation to, he impartially passes Sentence, freely and without fear. But, in
things known, love or hatred blinds the Eye of Reason, and often times turns
the Scales of Justice to a partial Sentence: Tho it be just that every Person
judge so of themselves and Friends, as they judge of others in the same Cases,
and under the same Circumstances.

Thus Charles King of France, denounced War against Robert Duke of Aquitain,
whom he overthrew, the Duke himself dying in the Battle, Annot. Gal.
which slaughter and overthrow, Robert Earl of Vermandy, Nephew to the Duke of
Aquitain, took so ill, that he laid Snares, and still waited for an opportunity
to be revenged on the King of France; therefore invited him, under pretense of
Friendship, to Perona, to a yearly Feast: Whether the King, with a few of the
French Nobility, without any Suspicion, willingly came. But, after Dinner, Earl
Robert was pleased to seize them all, and keep them Prisoners in the Castle:
But, after a whiles Imprisonment, he took an Oath of the Nobility, that they
should never rise in Arms, or act any thing against him, and so dismissed them.
But still detained the King, who after Two Years, died in Prison. Lewis III.
the Son of Charles, durst not at first, when he came to the Crown, bring Robert
in Question, or reward him for serving his Father so; he having so many
Favorites, Friends, and Relations in the Kingdom. But having invited a great
many of the Princes, and Nobility of France, to a sumptuous Banquet; and with
the rest, Earl Robert, a counterfeit Messenger, whilst they were merry, made as
if be had came from England, and delivered several Letter to King Lewis, which
he gave the Chancellor to Read. After the Reading of the Letters, he smiled,
and with a shrill Voice, said; This Letter makes the common report good, viz.
That Englishmen are no Politicians: For my Cousin Writes to me from England,
That a Vassal there, an ill bred Country Fellow, invited his Lord to Supper,
and after he had compelled him to stay all Night, strangled him in his Bed.
Then desired to know the Judgment of the Princes and Noblemen, there present,
and what punishment that Rascal deserved; earnestly requesting, that they might
freely pass a true Sentence, and speak (as really) as they thought. When; with
all the rest, the Earl of Vermandy, said, He deserved to be put to Death. The
King took up the Discourse, and said; Earl from your own Mouth I condemn you,
as guilty of a Death-deserving Crime; and immediately, commanded him to be
strangled. Thus, Earl Robert passed Sentence on himself, and received, for
reward, the Parellel-Effect of his own Treachery.

INTRIGUE XX. How to know whether a suspected Person be Guilty or not.
YOU shall know if a suspected Person be Guilty or not, if a first you accuse
him with false and fictitious Crimes; then with that which you suspect him
guilty of; and in the contest, in defending and proving, from his careless or
careful behavior, it may be known whether he be clear or guilty. For he
sligheth those things whereof he is not guilty, and denies them after a
careless undervaluing manner. But of those things whereof he is guilty, he
striveth to clear himself seriously, and with great care. For a good Conscience
scorneth a false Accusation, knowing it is own Innocence. But a true Accusation
moves the Passions, and Clogs the Conscience with it is own guilt. Hence may be
observed that an Accusation is like the objects of our Senses; for as a real
present Object moves that Faculty, which naturally lays hold on it, and
whose proper Object it is: As Color moves the Sight, found the Hearing, etc.
So likewise, a real Crime and Accusation moves the accused to a serious
Vindication, whilst he is not concerned at a false and fictitious Forgery.
Moreover, sound Sleep, a composed Mind, and a careless behavior are great
presumptions of Innocence.

Thus Titus Clodius, when he went to Bed in the same Chamber with his two Sons,
was found next Morning Strangled: Whilst no Person, Cic. pro Sext. Rosc Amer.
et val. Max 8, 1.
that could be suspected, could be found. His Sons (who were of Age) declaring
that they knew nothing of it; nor could Conjecture who had committed the
Murder. Yet the two young Men were both brought in Question, for their Fathers
Death. The thing being so strange, unlikely, and incredible, that any should
enter the Chamber, whilst the two Sons were present, to disern the least
Motion* and defend their Father. But when it was made known to the Judges, that
they were found Sleeping in the Chamber with the Doo^ open; they were acquitted,
and cleared from all Suspicion; which was the only ground o^ their being
brought to Trial. For it was never known, that one after he had poluted
himself, by the Violation of all the Laws of God, Men, and Nature, could
presently Sleep, and take his quiet Rest.

INTRIGUE XXI. How to know Secrets from Nature and Custom.
THE Presumption is Great and Rational, which is taken from Custom and Nature.
From Nature, Soloman found out the right Mother of a Child; when two Harlots
strove for it, as we may read, 2 Kings 3. Joseph. lib. 3. Chap. 2.

From Custom Galba (as Suetonius relates) found out who was the right owner of
a Horse, when, in Trial of Law, it could not be decided. For the foresaid Galba
caused the Horse to be led blindfold to the Well, where he used to drink; and
then, being set at Liberty, commanded the Horse to be delivered to him, whose
Stable he went to.

INTRIGUE XXII. How to prevent and escape hidden Snares.
IF you be informed that private Mischiefs, and secret Snares, are laid out for
you, (which, openly, and by out ward force, you cannot repel;) you must, by all
means, carry your self, as if you knew nothing of them; for, in so doing, you
will have the better opportunity, and may, with the greater ease, prevent and
frustrate them. But if your Adversaries suspect, or find out an Informer, they
will hasten their Enterprises, and run all hazards, to the utmost. Thus Hanno,
a Carthaginian King, had designed, at his Daughter's Marriage, to poison or
kill all the Senate, that without Opposition, he might reign absolutely.
Whereof the Senate being, privately informed, they concealed their Knowledge of
so pernicious a Design. But, before the Marriage came, they made a Law,
prohibiting all sumptuous Feasts, and that many should not be invited to a
Banquet, as if they had only struck at Vice and Riot; whilst, in the mean time,
they saved the Commonwealth by their Law.

INTRIGUE XXIII. How to Answer difficult and dubious Questions, without Danger.
HE that would shun dangerous Answers, and decline a Necessity of answering a
difficult Question, which (however warily it be answered) puts the Answerer
to a loss, must be cautious not to answer directly, but prove it difficult and
slippery, by some Parellel; whereby you may come off, with credit, and without
loss.

Thus a certain Jew, was asked by the Emperor of the Turks, what Religion was
best, whether that of the Jews, the Christians, or the Mahumetans. The Jew
suspecting that he had proposed the Question to ensnare him, to speak Treason,
in condemning the Emperor 's Religion; to find an Occasion to forfeit and take
away his Estate; and, on the other part, thinking that the Emperor would
repute him a dissembling Hypocrite, and Sycophant, if he should condemn his own
Religion, answered thus,

A Man, on his Death Bead, gave a Ring to his only Son, whom he entirely loved;
on that Condition, that his Son would leave it to his Son, whom he most loved;
who should likewise leave it to his Son; that, for many Generations, it might
so pass (if possible) to the end of the World, or as long as his Race
continued. Now, it fell out that one of the Line had Three Sons, whom he
equally loved, and the same Three Brothers did mutually love one another,
without difference. Therefore, thought, that to give the Ring to One, was a
slighting to the Rest, and might prove a means to raise hatred among the
Brethren. But, on second Thoughts, gave the Ring to a Goldsmiths, to make Two
Rings exactly like it, so that one might not be known from the other. And then,
on his Deathbed, called for his Sons, severally, and gave every one of them a
Ring, as the Hereditary Memorial he had got from his Father, which the Father's
dearest Son was to inherit; desiring every one to be silent, and conceal from
his Brothers the receiving of the Ring. Every one promised Secrecy, and all,
mutually, loved one another, as before: till, after the Father's Death, there
fell out a Contest, who was the Father's Dearest Son. Then (that every one
might prove himself to be him) they brought out the Rings, which they had long
concealed, every one thinking that he and none other had had the Ring. But,
when the Rings were brought, they were so like one another that the Hereditary
could not be known, and the Contest is not decided till this Day; And what are
the Three Religions but these three Rings?

By which Simile, the Jew shunned the dangerous Answer to the Emperor 's
Question, and came off without loss.

INTRIGUE XXIV. How to shun an offensive Answer or Sentence.
WHEN a direct and downright Answer would give Offense, (for veritas odium
parit,) Answer by some similitude that is witty and pleasing; or that the
Question is hard, and far exceeds your mean Apprehension; and that it would
take the Decision of a greater Wit, as never well yet decided; and that
therefore you are not bound to do that which lies not in your Power. But if
there be some eminent danger at hand, and the case cannot be brought to Trial
without both danger and offense, then some other more memorable Surprise, of
greater Importance, must be cast in, to stop the Course and Current of the
other.

Thus L. Scylla, when the Legions, or Trained Bands, of Rome, were up in Arms,
and set on edge, by their own Phancies, and could not be brought to Trial, for
their Sedition, without great Offense to the Citizens, and loss to the
Commonwealth; made up the Matter with his witty Advice: For, by the sound of
Trumpet, and beat of Drum, he surpised them, with the Alarm of the Enemy's
Approach; and so the Sedition was at an end, all joining together to oppose the
common Enemy.

INTRIGUE XXV. How to shun a difficult Sentence.
A Hard Question, which has not been formerly decided, should be given over;
and a doubtful Cause delayed to a longer time; rather, than that a Sentence
should be past, which would repeal and destroy it self.

Thus, Corax, the First, after the Death of Hieron, taught the Syracusians, the
Art of persuading, and Rhetoric, for reward: with whom Tysius made the
Agreement, That he should not give him his reward, till he had taught him his
Art; and then, when he had learned it, he might demand his Money. Corax, after
a competent time, thinking he had taught Tysius sufficiently, demanded his
Money. But, his Scholar denying, to Law they went. And, when the Cause came to
Trial, Tysius defended himself by this Dilemma.

If I can persuade the Judges that I owe you nothing, they will absolve me, and
so am bound to pay you nothing, according to the Sentence of the Judges. And if
I can not persuade them, then am I less bound to pay you any thing, because you
have not taught me the Art of persuading. Thus, whether I persuade the Judges
or not, I will pay you nothing.

But Corax, retorting his Arguments back on himself, says, If you persuade the
Judges, you are bound to pay me, because I have perfectly taught you the Art of
persuading. But if you cannot persuade them that you owe me nothing, then I
shall be paid, according to the Sentence of the Judges. But the Judges,
fearing to involve themselves in so intricate a Case, and Cause, very wisely,
declined their passing Sentence; and dismissed them with this Check, Mali
Corvi, Malum Ovum, such Master, such Scholar; Rogues both, get you gone.

There are, likewise, many Causes brought to a Trial of Law, whom the Statute
cannot reach, without granting some wicked Design; because of some particular
Circumstances, which a General Act, Statute, or Decree cannot reach, be it
never so Just and Rational. Therefore the Judge, out of his own Wit, Judgment,
and Discretion, ought to find out some way to pass Sentence, according to the
Statute of the Law, which, if it were put in Execution, would bring the
Executer under great Danger. As for Example.

There were at Venus two rich Men, one Antonio a Christian and Merchant; and
another Ben-Ezra a Jew and great Userer, whom Antonio, in all Companies, did
defame as a base, bad, and Covetous Man: But it fell out that Antonio (being
put to a strait) was forced to go to Ben-Ezra, to borrow a certain Sum of Money.
The Jew admired that he would have come to him, (upon such an account,) whom he
had so much defamed, and abused. However, he agreed to lend him the Money, on
Condition, that if he brought it again to him, on, or before the Day appointed,
Ben-Ezra was to give it to him freely; but if not, he was to pay him with a
pound of his Flesh. Antonio being put to it for Money, and not questioning the
Payment, before the Day appointed, took it on these Terms; but things falling
out contrary to his Expectation; and having lost several Ships at Sea, could
not return the Money, till two Days after the time; and then Ben-Ezra would not
take it; but a pound of his Flesh, according to the Agreement. Therefore, to
Law they went, and, at Trial, according to the Statute, Antonio was cast; the
Case being a clear Contract, Sealed, and with Witness; which the Law of Venus
could neither shun nor slight. Ben-Ezra, willing to be revenged on Antonio was
glad of the Judges Determination, so much, that (when the Judge said, Ben-Ezra
may choose out of what place soever of his Body he pleases, to take his pound
of Flesh, since no place was determined) he cried out, a Daniel, a Daniel,
meaning a just Judge. Antonio (knowing the irreconcilable Revenge, and
insatiable Thirst, which Ben-Ezra had against his Person, and sucking his
Blood) reputed himself a dead Man; and after several Sighs, and sad dejected
Looks on the Judge, which he presented as Petitions, for a favorable Sentence,
(which indeed, the Judge could not pass, contrary to the Statute of the Law,)
was taken from the Bar, to pay the Jew a pound of his Flesh. But, as they were
a going, the Judge called to the Jew; Ben-Ezra, you term me a just Judge, and I
should be sorry if you had Reason to think me otherways; but I perceive that
your Action against Antonio is but to be revenged on his Person, and that you
are absolutely destitute of all Mercy. Therefore, assure your self, that if in
taking your pound of Flesh, you shed one drop of his Blood, you shall satisfy
for it, according to the Law of Venus; for I cannot be less just to Antonio,
than to Ben-Ezra. This so stupefied the Blood-thirsty Jew, that he was glad to
dismiss Antonio, without paying of his Money.

INTRIGUE XXVI. How to speak One's Mind freely, without danger.
YOU may, without fear, speak what in it self is dangerous, if you assume, and
act under the Person of another, whose Privilege it is to speak freely,
without Danger of Punishment.

Thus, Labenius, an Old Knight, and Senator of Rome, (when, against the Dignity
of his Place and Person, he was compelled by Julius Caesar, to dance on the
Theater, Apoth. Fol. 517.
and Act with common Jesters, those witty Plays, which formerly he had Written)
revenged himself on Caesar. He took upon him to Act the part of Syrus, the
Slave; and as he had been beat, by his Master, fled grumbling, and cried out,
we Romans have lost our Liberty, whereby he plainly taxed Caesar for his
Tyranny; and then, a little after, added, He must needs fear many, whom many
fear. On the hearing of which, the whole People began to stare upon Caesar, and
whisper concerning him; knowing that Labenius had spoke these Words to check
his Tyranny.

INTRIGUE XXVII. How to speak what you please, without any danger.
ONE may be driven to speak that which, conveniently, he cannot; because they
would be ill taken, as coming from his Mouth. For which Cause, the Figure, in
Rhetoric, Prosoposoeia (by which an Orator may speak what he pleases, by
ascribing it to another Person) was invented. So likewise, he that cannot,
without danger, give a wholesome Council, concerning Public Affairs, as being
prohibited to be spoke of, must feign himself to be out of his Wits; and then
without fear or danger, may proclaim his Council; notwithstanding, of the
contrary Decree. Quin. lib. 9.2.


This was Solon's Course, when there had been so long a Continuation of War,
and such an Universal Slaughter, betwixt the Athenians, and the Magareans,
Just. Lib. 2. Laert. lib. 1. in vita Solon.
upon the account of his Native Country Salamis, that, on both sides, they
were almost quite destroyed; and the Athenians had decreed, that the mentioning
a Vindication of the Isle Salamis, should, ever after, be taken as a Capital
Crime. Solon, knowing that his Silence could do no Kindness to the
Commonwealth, and his giving Council might prove dangerous, he, suddenly,
feigned himself mad; under which Veil, he could not only speak, but act what he
pleased, for the benefit of the Commonwealth; notwithstanding, of the Athenian
Decree. Then, having disguised himself, in the habit of a Fool, ran out to the
Marketplace; and when the People had gathered about him, (the better to cover
his counterfeit Madness,) in a unusual style of Rhyme, he began to persuade the
People, without delay, to denounce War against the Magareans, and the Isle of
Salamis, in a short time would be theirs.

INTRIGUE XXVIII. How to shun the Reproach of an unhappy Adventure.
LEST any blame you, for a rash undertaking, which proves bad in the event;
you must carry it, as if the result were uncertain, and as it were not known,
what might be the event; and take his Advice, whose Business it is, what is
best to be done; then, when you both agree in one Judgment, and his Council
prove the same with yours, show him the unhappy event; and, by this means, you
shall shun his Reproach, and Reproof: For, agreeing to the same Measures, he
cannot, in Reason, condemn the event of his own Advice.

Thus, when Hannibal, the Elder, the Son of Guiscon, was beat in the First Sea
Fight, of the Punick War, he sent, with all speed, a Messenger to Carthage; to
know whether or not he should Fight the Romans, on the first opportunity. Val.
Max. 7.3.
To whom all the People, with one Universal Voice and Consent, answered; Fight
them without delay, and let nothing hinder. Then the Messenger added, We have
engaged, and are beat. Then they were all silent, who had, otherways (if it had
not been for their own Council) damned Hannibal, and his Fight too; and might,
perhaps, crucified himself; which was then the Custom of the Carthaginians.

INTRIGUE XXIX. How to speak that, which, in it self, is dangerous, without
hurt.
WOrds which one will speak, and are apt to bring both hatred and danger to the
Speaker, ought not to be spoke openly; but signified, obscurely, by some witty
knack; and this in Rhetoric, is termed Innuitio; by which Figure, one may,
covertly, make that known, which he can not conveniently speak openly; by
bringing in an Antecedent, from whence, of necessity, and readily, the Hearer
may know his hateful and passionate meaning.

Demoniades Lacon, used this Figure in his Vindictive Passion. For when he had
lost his Slippers, he earnestly wished, that they might fit the Feet of him
that stole them. Now he seemed to pray a very sober and lawful Prayer, whilst,
indeed, his Prayer was a wicked Imprecation; for he wished a Mischief upon the
Thief, viz. That his Feet might turn a wry, and that he might have crooked Club
Feet, such as Demoniades himself had. For he that wishes that the Slippers
might fit the Thief's Feet, concealeth the bad Consequence, viz. That the
Thief's Feet might be set a wry, to fit the crooked Club Pattons.

INTRIGUE XXX. How to shun that which is hateful to One, by a Jest.
IF Necessity force you to speak, that which, otherways, you would not; speak
it by way of Jest, as if you did it not Seriously, and with Deliberation.

Thus, a certain married Woman, which had made her Husband a Cuckold, went to
confess her Sins to a Priest. But, before he would give her a full Pardon, he
bound her to acknowledge her oversight to her Husband; and that her Young Son
was none of his. The Adulteress was hardly put to it, not knowing how to keep
her Credit, her Husband's Fovour, and discharge her Conscience toward the
Priest. But, taking advice of a Neighbor, she put on a Begger's Habit, and (as
another Person) told her young Son; (as it had been to frighten him;) whilst he
was crying, and making a noise, Get you gone squaling Rogue, and then turning
her Face to her Husband, (as it had been to make the Boy hold his Peace,) said;
You're not the Father of this bawling Boy. And, by this means, she thought she
had confessed her self an Adulteress to her Husband, which she had promised to
do to her Father Confessor. But this Jest was an impious and wicked cheat, and
a Hocus Pocus prank of Popery.

INTRIGUE XXXI. How to Reveal a Secret, without giving Offense to him that did
reveal it.
IF One tell you a Secret, which you willingly would reveal; you must seriously
tell him that you knew it before, and that you came to the Knowledge thereof,
by such and such Persons, as he cannot conveniently enquire at; and so it would
be reputed a piece of impertinent Nonsense, to urge you with an Oath or Promise
of Secrecy; or to bind you to conceal that, wherewith your present Informer
has nothing to do; nor are you any ways obliged to him, for telling you no
more, than what you knew before.

Thus, When Constantinople was taken by the Venetians and French, Anno 1204.
The Patriarch there, was forced to condescend that there should never
afterward be chosen any Patriarch, Archbishop, or Clergyman whatsoever of
St. Sophia's Church, but a Venetian born; yet privately wrote to the Bishop of
Rome Innocent III. Codr. Exact. Innocent 3.
that the Venetians did encroach on the Liberties and Privileges of the Roman
See. Innocent (because he could not obey the Patriarch's Request, in concealing
what he was informed of) presently wrote back to Constantinople, that he had
been, before he wrote to him, informed of the Venetians Insolence, Thus,
Moreover, Tho you have informed us, by your Letters, of several things, whereof
you thought us ignorant, be assured that, before yours came to our hands, we
had a clear and certain Information of the most part of what we have received
of you.

INTRIGUE XXXII. How to reprove one without giving Offense.
IF you would reprove another Vice, or would rather advise or admonish him not
to fall into such an Error; do it not directly, for, in so doing, you would
seem to accuse him, as guilty of some act of Baseness, and to entertain evil
thoughts of him, whereby you may give Offense, and, instead of mending one
Error make two. Therefore behave your self as ignorant of his Faults, and as
if you had not the least suspicion of any such thing; but, after an indirect
manner, seign to reprove another before him, who has committed, or is like to
commit the same Error; then open to him how base and shameful a thing it is;
and, if you can conveniently, persuade your Friend (whom you would reprove but
dare not) to check him upon that account, with some reproachful Name, agreeing
to the nature of his Error: And so, by this means, he himself may come to
know, loath and leave of his Error, and be glad that he was not found guilty
of so horrible a Crime, nor was directly reproved for his Fault.

INTRIGUE XXXIII. How to shun the Inconveniences of Jeers and Satyrs.
YOU shall shun the venom of Scoffing and reproachful Satyrs, if you behave
your self as you did not mind them; and this is a sure and Heroic rule, which
no wise Man will discommend.

This was the advice of Diogenes the Cynick, to a young Man who greatly
complained that he was much troubled, Laert Lib. 6. in Decl.
at the Scoffing and Satirical Reflections of Zanys, Mimicks, and
Stall-Jesters, who could never forbear him in public. You (says he) Show your
self too much troubled at their Impertinencies: Meaning that there is no better
way to stop the Mouths of such Pedantick Idle Fops, than to slight their
foolish Discourse, as not worth the taking Notice of. For by this means, you
show your self unconcerned at their Scoffs, as if you neither valued them nor
their foul Mouthed Language either, which will appear by your not retorting
such Jeers at them, as they throw at you: Or, in taking no care to free your
self from the vain tattle of so impertinent Persons. And this will gall and
perplex the Satyrists and Idle Persons, more than if you should make Orations,
and Write Volums, in spite, against them.

Thus, when two Learned Men did passionately and sharply Write one against
another, the First and Wiser, to stop the Mouth of his Adversary, did upbraid
himself and his Tribe with all the Vices which are incident to Men, and all the
Crimes that attend a debauched Life; gathering a cluster of bitter Grapes, and
bad Language from Plautus and other such Authors, which none but Scolds and
Scoffers use: Whereby his Adversary (having nothing to say against him, but
what he himself had said already) was vexed and galled in his Mind, and with
shame, put to silence as one slighted, and not worthy to be minded, or his
Discourse to be taken Notice of. Neither did any Person think the worse of the
other; For all his opprobrious Accusations (whether true or false) coming from
his own Mouth, they were believed by None, but he himself was reputed the Wiser
and Better Man.

N^ro bore nothing with greater Patience than base Language and Calumnies:
Neither did he pass any affront with less Punishment than spiteful Satyrs,
Sueton. in Neron. 39.
whether in Word, or Write; Verse, or Prose. For when any came to his hand, he
neither searched after the Authors, nor Punished those who were brought before
him and found Guilty, with any great Punishment.

Thus, if a vindictive cruel Tyrant (who fished in all opportunities, to Bathe
himself in humane Blood, on the least offense,) could pass and slight Jeering,
Scoffing, and spiteful Language, as not worth minding; how much more ought a
Sober Patient Man, of a sounder Principle, (who has not half the Power of the
Emperor Nero) slight the babbling of idle Jesters, and Satirical Fools: Who are
neither fit for any Business, nor worthy to be kept Company with.

INTRIGUE XXXIV. How to induce a Prince to hear one Patiently.
THE first and principal Means, whereby a Prince is induced to lend an
attentive and patient Ear, and is made fit for your Intention, is sweet
pleasing Words, and Flattery. For most Princes being incident to this
infirmity, that they are of Opinion, They are the only Men which are reputed
Wise, and capable to Manage great Affairs, and give sound Advice: Say what one
will in their Commendation, they think it no more than what they Deserve. Hence
it follows, that though one procure that good Events be esteemed the Fruit of his
good Council, or should accomplish by his Wit and Prudence, some worthy and
memorable Act (which might do his Prince a great Favor) all the Applause,
which by right is his, and which he should in Justice reap, will be attributed,
not so much to his Wisdom and Diligence, as to good Fortune: Yet, by this
means one may creep a little further in his Prince's Favor, but no other ways
than an Actor in a Play. For, he who ascribes the Victory to Fortune, carries
away the Triumph without the hatred of him who is overcome: but he that
attributes it to his own strength and skill, carrys away the Victory with
Envy, Hatred, and Revenge.

INTRIGUE XXXV. How one ought to behave himself, and what course he should
take, when he is environed with Danger and Difficulties on all sides.
WHen one is driven to that Condition, that, whether he strive or sit still,
his loss, danger, and current of affairs, are still the same, he must move and
bestir himself in those Courses, which are most likely to make for his
Business. For, when one concealeth the event of his Affairs, which he committed
to bare Wishes, and a fretting Mind, his Condition is nothing made better, but
rather worse; the Causes and Accidents of the Danger still remaining; whilst,
otherways, he who boldly withstandeth difficulties, either finds out a way
how to escape Dangers, or (if he bend his Wits, and spend his Labor in vain)
shows himself to be one of a daring Spirit, and Courageous Mind; for it is
often times found true, that Audentes Fortuna juvat, timidosque repellit.

INTRIGUE XXXVI. How Princes may conceal their Hatred, and private Displeasure.
A Prince, that would conceal his private grudge and hatred, against another
Prince, till the Provocations break out in open War, must (to render him
secure, and void of all Suspicion) Accoast and Congratulate him, with Gifts,
Legates, and Ambassadors, etc. as on his coming to his Dignity, his Kingdom,
Crown, Superiority, and Dominion; his Marriage, or Birth of an Heir. And, to
Grace all, every thing must be done, and presented with the most plausible
Signs of entire Favor, Friendship and Familiarity. Which will prove very
profitable, in prosecuting the intended Design.

INTRIGUE XXXVII. How to Assuage the Insolences of a Seditious City.
SWelling Cities, whose Inhabitants are Subject to the Insolences of
Insurrection and Sedition, when they are under a Kingly Government, are kept in
order, no better way, than by setting a Senate over them; or committing the
Management of Affairs to one Man, chosen and appointed by the King. For the
Government of a People, in respect of their Liberty, is better and more
agreeable to the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure of a King, when it is committed to
the Care and Fidelity of a few, than of many, whose Unconstant and Ambitious
Drifts, clash often times against another.

INTRIGUE XXXVIII. How to Abrogate Privileges.
IT is a singular piece of Secret Policy, in a King, to connive, at first, with
the Insurrections and Seditions of a People, which can neither bear with
absolute Liberty, nor absolute Servitude; and (when he can stop the Course of
their Sedition, and bring them to Trial,) to give way to the Current of their
Crimes, Villainies and Outrages; That, afterward, he may have a sufficient
ground whereby to deprive them of their Privileges and Immunities, which may
be termed Briars in the side of the Government, and Thorns in the Eyes of the
Prince. And, whereas, such Seditious Subjects, (in using such dangerous and
hurtful means, to lose their Liberties and Privileges) have forfeit all that is
theirs; they ought to be handled like those, who, being Conscious to their own
Crimes, deliver themselves up Prisoners, to be Judged by a Council of War.

INTRIGUE XXXIX. How a Prince may frustrate an Enemy, with whom he intends to
Wage War.
A Prince that intends to invade another's Territories, and denounce War
against any King, Prince, People, or Commonwealth; must keep his Design close,
to prevent the violence, and whispering of the Courtiers, (whereof some may be
private Informers,) and seem to prize and glory in peace, as the greatest
blessing in the World. And, to frustrate his Adversaries Information,
Prevention, or Preparation, he must send Subtle and well Accomplished
Ambassadorus, in whom he can put Trust, who may slily pump his Enemy's
Projects, without discovering his own. And if there be sent any Ambassadors
from his Enemy (who, perhaps, may be Jealous of his Design, and would Antidote
the poison of War,) they must be detained beyond the appointed time; and, at
last, sent away without any positive Answer; by telling them, that he will send
their Master an Answer, very speedily; which may be delayed till all things be
composed and put in Order, for prosecuting the intended Design.

INTRIGUE XL. How a weak Kingdom, or Commonwealth, may be delivered from the
Power of a potent Enemy.
IT is convenient for a Prince and People, who are not able to engage an Enemy,
in open War, to ingratiate themselves in their Adversary's Favor, by
confirming a durable Peace; or, to take for their Protection, some King,
Prince, or People, more powerful than themselves; or by buying their Peace, tho
at a dear Rate. But it should be observed, that Kings and potent Princes do
not, always, openly, enter in Leagues, offensive and defensive, with inferior
Dukes and Commonwealths, but in a private Compact or Agreement; lest the
inferior States should seem to aim at great things, and think themselves as
good as their Patrons. And it is likewise a sure way, to save Ones Territories
from Invasion, subtly and cautiously, to raise Seditious Jealousies, and
Insurrections, in the Bowels of that Kingdom or Commonwealth, which most you
fear; for by that means there may be some thing to do at home. Or, if that
cannot be done, it is needful to raise some quarrel, or stir up a Foreign
Enemy, to engage with so troublesome a Neighbor; with Assurance of Assistance,
both in Men and Money.

INTRIGUE XLI. How to molest Neighboring Nations.
THE fittest way to raise Broils, intestine Wars, Seditions and Insurrections,
in the Bowels of your Enemies Country; is to allure and stir up some of the
Offspring of the Prince, to undergo some hard, dangerous, and Seditious
Undertaking, in pursuit of some Royal Right and Interest, which he may have, or
seem to have to the Crown, Government, or any other Regal Prerogative; only
lost by the Power, Wrong and Injustice of Ambitious Usurpers: For there is no
fitter way to delude the minds of the unstable People than this. Hence it is,
that those who have been desirous of change of Government, have still been
objecting against the present; pointing at some Branch of the Royal Family,
whose Right, the Crown and Government might be, as they Fancy. There is no
necessity, here, to bring Examples, for there is neither King nor Subject,
Prince nor People, but have heard of, or seen such Transactions and
Undertakings, in their own Time.

INTRIGUE XLII. How to Suppress those who are proud of their Honorable Titles
and Dignities.
THE surest way to Suppress those ambitious Spirits, who are proud of their
honorable Titles and Dignities, is to make these great Titles (which they so
esteem and brag of) common; by conferring them on new Start-up rich Sparks, who
can look as big as they; and so these Titles, which once were courted, as most
Honorable, and whereof the great ones were so proud, will be slighted as an
ordinary thing. As for Example, if there be any who looks big, for the Title
of Duke, Marquess, Earl, etc. Let the King take one of his Domestic Servants,
and confer on him one of these high, vainglorious, airy Titles (which adds
nothing to the Man's Accomplishments) as the just Reward of his Deservings and
good Service. And, by making him, with several others, of the same order of
Chivalry; the high Titles will not make so geat a luster, and the swelling Peer
will lay by his big Looks.

INTRIGUE XLIII. How to keep under Men of Ambitious and Aspiring Spirits.
ONE whose Wealth does increase, and elevates his proud Mind above the Sphere
of an ordinary Subject, should be sent in Embassies; and put upon expensive
Employments, of Ambition, Honor, and Greatness. And those who have the
Applause, and look big in the Eyes of the People, should be drawn over by fair
Speeches, and a prospect of greater Honor; to be their Princes's Favourit:
that thereby the Subjects may owe the greater Allegiance and Loyalty to their
Prince, for countenancing such Men. Those who have a great Name, and make a
great Figure in the Government, ought to be put upon hard and difficult
Exploits and Expeditions: that, when the result of their Undertakings does not
answer the Expectation of their Admirers, their Grandeur and great Estimation
may be lessened; and that the People may not dote on the Parts and
Accomplishments of any Subject, above the Enduments of their Prince. They who,
at Court, aspire in Greatness, Pre-eminence, and Superiority, above the Sphere
of an humble Subject and Servant, should be sent to some Foreign Country, where
they cannot have opportunity to prosecute their ambitious Designs. He who has
the Applause of an excellent Soldier, and is suspected as dangerous in so
eminent an Employ, should be sent from the Army, under some pretense, to some
other honorable Function at Court: but such as is destitute of all opportunity
of molesting the State of Affairs, or doing his Prince any Diskindness. But, in
one Word, Men of unsatisfied Minds, who are still fishing after greater
Preferment, should be sent to Foreign Nations; about some public Affair,
whereby they may gain Honor, but become no more powerful, to work their
private and dangerous Designs, of Promotion and Dignity. If of necessity, great
Trust in public Affairs, must be committed to a vicious Person of Quality,
join with him a Sober, Loyal, and witty Conjunct, and his Vices may be
restrained, and he himself prove a good Statesman. But the best course that a
Prince can take, in the Administration of State Affairs, is to make all Places
and Offices of Government Temporal; and Durante Regis Beneplacito: lest by
continuing too long in one Office, any should begin to repute his Office his
Hereditary Right, and look upon himself as a petty Prince.

INTRIGUE XLIV. How to Suppress Seditious Soldiers.
THERE is no better Antidote to prevent the Sedition of mutinous Soldiers, or a
factious Army, than to disperse them to several Places; for it was never known
that a great Army could lie idle, without mischievous Plots, Insolences, and
Out-breakings. And, if an Army be suspected to contrive private Conspiracies,
and villainous Acts of Mischief, not yet Discovered, all means must be used to
come to the Knowledge thereof. And when the Intrigue is found out, something
must be cast in, to stop the current of their Conventions, Councils, and
Contrivances, till there be a full Discovery of the whole Matter; and things be
put in a posture of Defense and Safety, to repel the Force of their mischievous
Designs. Then, when this is done, a seeming opportunity should be given, that
they may hasten to accomplish their Projects: whilst indeed, the opportunity is
but a trap, all possibility of their performing their wicked Designs being
prevented. But it is a good way to keep an Army from plotting Mischief, to mix
together Soldiers of several Nations and different Manners and Languages; for
hardly can such agree in one Faction, or live in concord among themselves; much
less join with one consent in a Body, against their Prince or Commanders.

INTRIGUE XLV. How to Suppress Civil Seditions and Vproars.
A Seditious People may be induced to go to Colonies and Foreign Plantations,
in expectation of great Estates, and Land for nothing. Where they can have no
opportunity of Plotting and Contriving Mischief and Conspiracies, which were
occasioned by their Idleness and and want of Employment; but be driven to Till
the Ground, and use their diligence for a Livelihood. (2.) If their Insolency
be come to an open Out-breaking, the interposing of plausible Men, who have the
Favor of the People; and whom they take to be Friends, to whom they will lend
a patient and attentive Ear, is a very effectual Remedy to tame the Fury of a
distracted Rabble. (3.) It is likewise a sure way for a good and wise Man, of
great Power and Repute, to pretend to espouse the Quarrel of the swelling
Multitude, till the tide of their Madness be over; and, under color, to become
their Captain or Ringleader, thereby to save the Government from Rapine,
Burning, Slaughter, etc. Who, though perhaps, he cannot stop the current of
their malicious Endeavors; yet may he mitigate their Fury, till a surer.
Remedy be taken. (4.) For Suppressing public Insolences, a Foreign Force of
Soldiers must be used: for, being Strangers of an unknown Tongue, they cannot
so easily side with the Seditious, as those of their own Nation, who may be
induced to join with their own Countrey-People, upon the account of Friendship
and Self-interest; or at least connive at their Insolences, Outrages, and
Insurrections, as being their Friends and Contrymen. (5.) If these Remedies
do not effectuate, and the Insurrection must be Suppressed by Force of Arms,
the Magistrates must go and severely punish the Ringleaders and Promoters of
the Insolences, according to the extremity of the Law. Yet the Vulgar are
still to be excused; because indeliberately, and by the persuasion of their
Superiors, they undertook so villainous an Enterprise. (6.) Seditions and
Insurrections, raised by the Cruelty and Covetousness of Courtiers, and
Statesmen, may be appeased, by giving up to Justice those first Offenders, who
did set the People on edge. (7.) Then let the Prince pass an Act of Grace,
proclaiming his free Pardon, of all past Crimes, to all such as will come in to
their Prince, and acknowledge their Error; so full, that no Court nor Law can
lay hold on them; by which Clemency, all (some for fear of Punishment, some for
Shame and Contempt, being destitute of their Leaders and Commanders) will come
in, and make an humble Submission.


INTRIGUE XLVI. How to know whether an Informer speaks Truth, or not.
WHen the State of Affairs is so dubious and suspected, that private subtle
Informers must be used (thereby to know the secret Designs and Intrigues of
plodding and discontented Brains) it will be necessary to have several
Informers, who have no acquaintance one with another; and when they all agree
in one thing, without contradicting one another, then it is credible that they
speak Truth. But if they gainsay and contradict one another, there is no credit
to be given to what they speak; but diligent search must be made by others,
that, without delay, the certain Knowledge may be found out.

INTRIGUE XLVII. How one ought to behave himself, when he receives an Injury
from a Person of Quality, that is far above him.
TO serve a Prince, is a very hard and bad Employment, unless the Servant can
so bear with Injuries, as if he knew nothing of them. For it is a very foolish
thing for a Man to let his Passion be seen, when there is no way to revenge or
right himself. Therefore, I say, there is no other Remedy for Injuries, given
by great Persons, than to behave so, as if one had not received them. For, if
once a Person of Quality understand that their private Arts and Pranks are
found out, and that the Person, to whom they owe a Spite, knows that they
hate him, they will, with open Violence, prosecute their Revenge so furiously,
that they would be ashamed so to do, did they not perceive that their private
Intentions and Secrets were found out. Therefore, when either bad Words, a
Mistake, or Fault, depriveth one of his Prince's Favor, he must conceal his
Misfortune, that he may not seem guilty. And then, tho his offended Master
tyrannize over him, by open Reproofs Checks, secret Jeers, and Scoffs, he ought
to overcome his Masters Anger (which will in time wear out) by his diligence
and constant Obedience.

INTRIGUE XLVIII. How to shun the Envy of Courtiers.
Nothing hasteneth the overthrow of one ready to fall, whether by his own or
another Error, than Envy or Emulation, the constant Concomitants of Virtue
and good Enduments; and the Tormenters and Murderers of Greatness and
Promotion: To which commonly are joined, the Complaints and Murmurings of the
People, which spiteful Men use, as Witnesses and Evidences, to work their
Revenge, and prosecute their pernicious Designs, against those whom they have
set up, as the marks of their. Fury and undeserved Malice, which altogeth^^
(...) the Resolution, and stir u^ the Mind of a Prince (though otherways n^^er so
effable and indulgent) no otherways than the stormy Wind tosseth the foaming
Billows of the raging Sea. Neither is there any way to escape this Evil, but by
Innocence and Modesty. I say Innocence, that he may do his Masters Business
carefully and with great honesty, to his Masters best advantage. I say Modesty;
for, as Envy is kindled by Pride and Arrogance, so by a gentle Behavior,
Effability, and keeping a House neither too Prodigal, nor any ways Base and
Miserable, it is lessened, and at last quite extinguished. Therefore let every
Courtier and Statesman, quietly and carefully, look after his Business,
without a great Retinue. Yea, if he be Wise, let him not in any ways be
subject to those vain Glories, which do not deminish, but augment the Envy of
Ambitious Spirits; whose chief Eyesore is another Greatness.

INTRIGUE XLIX. How One ought to behave himself with offended Princes and Peers.
IT is an excellent way to deal with offended Princes, not to provoke them by a
slighting and froward Indifferency, and unseasonable Contradictions; but to
strive, by an humble Submission, to pacify their violent Wrath, thereby to
obtain a patient Hearing. Neither must this be done at first dash, but at a
convenient time and opportunity. For when an absolute Power overswayeth a weak
and inferior Person's Justice and Right, an obstinate Resistance marreth, but
mendeth not the Matter. And when the Person (in whose Hand the Power lies) is
pacified, and pardons him who was misrepresented an Offender, he can easily,
afterward, be brought to a right Understanding, and be convinced of his former
Mistake, and have greater Respect for him, who did humbly submit himself to his
Clemency, though falsely accused. Thus a certain, sober, and wise Person of
Quality, being falsely accused by some envious Courtiers, finding them resolute
(at any rate) to confirm their false Accusations, notwithstanding of his
Innocence, when his incensed Prince inquired, What d^ you deserve for so
Villainous an Enterprise? Answered, Death; humbly submitting himself to his
Prince's Mercy; by which sober Answer, he obtained both his Prince's Pardon,
and, in a while, greater Favor; when the Intrigue of the matter was found out,
to the perpetual shame and contempt of his Accusers. Though, otherways, had he
stood obstinate in his own Defense, he might have undergone the greatest
severity of the Law.

INTRIGUE L. How to Suppress the Vices, and wrong Sentences of Partial Judges.
FIrst of all, great Care must be taken that Courts and Judicatories be not
prostitute to a filthy Crew of perverted Judges, who pass Sentence partially
for Reward, or at the request of some great Person, or for the Favor they bear
to any Party; but that all such Places be freely conferred on such as are
knowing, well-deserving, good and honest Men. For whatever a Man buyeth, he
looks upon as hi^ Money, whereof he is free to make his best. And thus a
Magistrate, who has bought his Place, with freedom takes a Bribe, which is
the Original, out-most Extent, and non ultra of all Filthiness and Knavery.
Hence arise Murders, Slaughters, Robberies, contempt of the Laws, etc. Every
one confiding that all Crimes howsoever heinous, can be bought off for Money.
Therefore, it is needful that all Judges have their Sallaries appointed them
from the public; and that they themselves be bound, under a severe penalty, to
take no Money, directly or indirectly, upon the Account of their Offices.
Moreover, none ought to be appointed a Judge in his own Native Country; neither
will a wise Man desire it: For, whether he be an Honest Man, or a Knave, it
will still be presumed, that he will pass many partial Sentences; upon the
Account of his Friends, Kindred, and Relations.

INTRIGUE LI. How to suppress Luxury.
THough the violence of inveterate Luxury be such, that it cannot be restrained
by moderate Measures; yet the good Example of a sober Prince may avail more
than the fear of punishment, appointed by Law. And it is a good Remedy against
this Evil, to impose, not only great penalties on the Offenders, but also
Custom and Taxes on those Commodities which promote the Vice; far greater than
on Corn, and other such Commodities, which no Person can live without. Thus,
some will not buy their mad Frolicks at so dear a rate; and though others still
continue in their Luxury, yet will it turn to the public good, the King
reaping the profit of their prodigality.

INTRIGUE LII. How to render populous Cities unfit for Seditions and
Insurrections, without loss or detriment.
WHereas Merchandising makes gain the only Object of its Labor, it turns
Men to be of mean Spirits, and absolutely averse from the expense of War, and
any thing of Trouble; and begets a natural and dull Inclination to Peace.
Whence, Cities become plenty in Handicrafts, and Men, in the exercise of
Trading, can be easily kept in good Order, without insolences and
out-breakings. And, for the encouragement of such, a well-settled Peace is very
expedient: by which, the People's love and respect, and their own unity and
profit are more gained and preserved, than by all the charming Allurements and
fair Speeches, that either Prince or Magistrate can invent. For, there is
nothing that gains more ground on the Peoples Affection, than a peaceable
Government, and giving them means and occasion of gathering Wealth. And thus
People being busied about their Lawful Employments, they never mind the
Revolutions of State Affairs, so that they be not deprived of the sweetness of
their Gain, which they reap by their Trading and Merchandising.

INTRIGUE LIII. How to appease an incensed People.
TUmults and Seditions, raised by the Insolences and Miscarriages of
Statesmen and perverted Magistrates, can be composed no better way, than by
giving up those who were the first Offenders, and the Original Cause of those
Insurrections, to Justice; as a Sacrifice, to suffer for the peace of the
public, and pacify, by their Death, those whom they had abused and provoked
in their Life; and by setting up others in their stead, who are well qualified,
of a good Repute and Estimation, among the People. But seldom, or never, is the
Prince blamed for any Error in Government, but his Counselors and Ministers
of State, and provoked Subjects, especially Citizens (like the Dog who biteth
the Stone, not minding the Hand from whence it came) never consider the
Original of their Grievances; but blame those who execute what they are bound
to perform, by the command of their Superiors. And, in such Cases, this is the
Course and Remedy which both good and bad Princes take. For, the good expiate,
the imputed guilt of those Offenders, (who have misbehaved themselves, by
committing Crimes ignorantly) by putting them to Death. And the bad impute their
own Crimes to others, and charge them with that envy and bad Consequences,
which by right is their own.

INTRIGUE LIVE. How to keep the Favor of new Subjects.
THere is one good way to govern a People, who have a hand in choosing Masters
of Government, when the People enter Articles with a new Prince, lately come to
the Crown, which is this; Let not the Prince alter any thing of the ancient
Laws, Manners, and Statutes, that did formerly belong to the People; nor
diminish the Goods of his Subjects, by excessive Taxes, Customs, or Fines. But
let all, or most things, continue in their former State. And, that the new
Kingdom may still keep it is old Face of Affairs; Let all Magistrates, Officers,
and others, in public Employment, continue in their places, without
incroaching upon the People's Liberties, Immunities, and Privileges. Yet let
him know, by the by, that Ambitious, Headstrong Masters of Policy, who
commonly eye their own Interest, Greatness, and Pre-eminence, will be but
little profitable to the state of Affairs. For such, are commonly blown up with
a self Opinion and Confidence, and do both by Nature, Custom, and Education,
take a greater freedom in the Government than is fit, for a Subject to do.

INTRIGUE LV. Why Merchandising is forbidden to the Nobility.
OUR Ancestors did debar Noble Men from Merchandising, because they thought it
would wrong the common Interest of Towns and Cities; and that it would, by an
illimited Liberty, hinder a more noble Commerce. Now it is believed, by all,
that Merchandising is below the Sphere and Grandeur of a Nobleman. And this
Opinion was, at first, by the Policy of Princes, infused in the Ears of the
Nobility, and is now become a Maxim of undoubted Truth. For when Princes came
to understand, that their greatness and security did lie in the Exercise of
Arms, nor were ignorant that if the Nobility should once, take to Trading, and
taste of the Sweetness, which from thence redoundeth, they would lay by the
Exercise of War, and follow the Exercise of Merchandising. And, therefore, it
was necessary to infuse in them this Opinion, as a Paradox in Greatness and
Honor, viz. that to buy and sell, for the Desire of Lucre, in a Nobleman, was
a base and scandalous thing; tho to other Persons the Highway might be reputed
Honorable.

INTRIGUE LVI. Cancerning the Instruments of Power.
CAligula Caesar used to say that there were two things whereby Power was
acquired, preserved, and augmented; which were Money, and strength of Arms. For
it is impossible that a Kingdom can continue safe, without sometimes War,
neither can Soldiers be kept without Money: when there is neither Peace
without War, nor War without Money; nor can Money be had without Taxes; How
then can Taxes be exacted, securely, without hatred, heart-burning, and envy?
But this we shall show you hereafter.

INTRIGUE LVII. How Statesmen ought to behave themselves, in assuming the
Honor of Memorable Acts.
THere is one great Evil among Princes, viz. that they cannot endure any to be
reputed braver Men than themselves. Therefore they carry on Affairs, which are
accomplished with little labor and difficulty, according to their own Measure
and Contrivance. But the Management of all hard and more difficult Affairs they
commit to the Conduct of others; who (tho by their own only Wit and Industry
they accomplish the Business) must lay down the Name and Honor, which is
properly their own, at the Prince's Feet; who will think himself robbed, if he
carry not away the Garland, though he never knew how it was gained. Therefore,
every one, who would be careful of his own security, ought to shun all hard and
difficult Businesses of great weight, as far as possibly he can: But if he
cannot, let him be sure to attribute the Name, Honor, and Conduct of all good
success, and well-managed Affairs, to the Wisdom and Prudence of the Prince;
and by this means he will shun his Princes Envy, and be in no danger of losing
his Favor.

INTRIGUE LVIII. How to appease offended Princes.
WHen a Nobleman finds his Prince stirred up against him, by the Reports and
Rumors of Envious Persons, and that his fury is is like to tend to his Ruin
and Disgrace; first of all, his Wrath must be, timously, mitigated by the sober
advice of some great Favorite, in few Words; before he hazard to vindicate
himself in his Prince's Presence: lest, unawares, the Prince, by tossing and
tormenting, be provoked to greater fury. Neither does a show of stubborness and
obstinacy gain any great credit of Innocence; especially, when one, with a
brazen Face, carries himself too confidently in his Princes Presence. For,
being Eclipsed by the envy of his Enemies, he is not able, though Innocent, to
deal with his Princes Fury; nor represent the Case, as it really is; nor remove
the Cloud of bad Consequences which his Enemies Hatred has produced. Therefore
it is fit to give place both to the King's Wrath, and the false Reports, that
both, in time, may wear out; and then when the Prince beholds the true face
of Affairs, through the right end of the Glass, the matter without difficulty
can be soon made up.

INTRIGUE LIX. How to impose Taxes, without the offense, and grumbling of the
Subject.
IF a Prince raise that, as a Tax, which is, in every place, cheap, and may be
spared; and impose great Customs on such Commodities as promote the Luxury of
great and rich Persons, and great Fines on all Riotous Livers, and such as
slight and despise his Acts and Statutes of this Nature, he will gain ground
upon the People's Affections, and raise Taxes without offense or grumbling.
Moreover, it will be very acceptable, if he use any fiugal industry, upon his
own account, and then openly lay out the gained Money for the benefit of the
public; with a show of great Care and good Husbandry. For nothing pleases
Subjects more, than when they see the King carefully look after the management
of public Affairs, and the Treasury not wasted in Luxury.

INTRIGUE LX. How to collect Taxes without offending the Subject.
THE Ancients did not so much burden, with Taxes, the Borders and Limits of
their Kingdoms, as those places in the middle of their Territories, and nearer
to their Courts and Persons. And, to shun the offense and grumbling of
Subjects, this advice must be taken: No public Collectors must be chosen, who
go in Person to private Houses, who can be partial, or favorable upon the
Account of Bribes, and self Interest; but let, rather, inferior Collectors be
appointed, who can neither add to, or diminish from their limited Power; to vex
or oppress City or Country, under the veil of a pretended Power or Privilege.
But it is absolutely the surest way, to choose for a Collector, one who is a
free Citizen; or, if in the Country, one well acquainted in the place, honest
and of good report, who may choose, out of his own Corporation, such as can more
kindly gain respect of the People, and without giving offense, may bring in the
Taxes to the public Treasury. But if any Person refuse payment, it is fitter,
and will be better taken, that the Magistrate force them to a submissive
Obedience; than that a rude Collector should use the illimited Rule of his own
insolency, who commonly uses no Discretion, and gives no delay to the rigid
Execution of his Power; but rather makes his serving the Public a Terror and
Bugbear, to frighten the Subjects, and gather spoil to himself, from poor
People, who are scarce able to pay the Taxes themselves. But, last of all, the
Charge of the Treasury must be committed to very honest Men, whose Lives and
Conversations, are evidently known to be just and good; otherways, let the
Taxes be never so great, the public Treasury will allways be empty.

INTRIGUE LXI. How Seditions are raised.
INcendiaries use, by sly, insinuating Councels, to sow the Seeds of Sedition,
in going to the chief Towns and Cities, and under the veil of fair and lawful
Pretenses, advising the Magistrates, either privately, or at some public
Entertainment, when their Hearts are merry, not to betray the public
Liberties, nor suffer their Country to be undone, with mischievous Designs; and
that they should remember, they live in a free Kingdom, and not under Slavery
and Tyranny.

Neither must they speak any thing against the Prince, but so intricately,
dubiously, and at so great a distance, that they may easily excuse it; and that
none can lay hold upon it but rather, seemingly, cover his Imperfections,
Whilst, in the mean time, they discover and. whip his Nakedness. And if they
find their Discourse minded, and taken more than ordinary notice of by some,
they must make as if they would deal more familiarly and plainly with them,
knowing their good, just and honest Principle; and that they are good
Commonwealth's-Men. And then, with some sighs openly, or whispering the chief
Men in the Ear, they tell them of some Flaw or Imperfection in the Government,
that they may seem, with a passionate and deeply concerned Gesture and
Behavior, to dread more than they dare discover.

Afterward, you shall find a great many to look on those as very honest Men,
brave States Men, and the The Caterpillars.
Pillars of their Country. And thus, at length with a concern somewhat
sorrowful, they speak with greater freedom of their Prince; and Subjects begin
to be weary of him, especially when it is industriously spread about, among the
Rabble, that the Natives are quite slighted, and that Foreigners and Strangers
sit, at the Helm of Affairs; who (tho they boast of their noble Race, and
ancient Families) once got their poor and miserable Livings, by sweeping of
Ovens, or some such sordid Employment; yet now live high, sucking the very
Blood of the Commonwealth.

INTRIGUE LXII. How Rebels and Conspirators are kept close together, in one
Body.
AFter these Incendiaries have, by their Mischievous Speeches, sown the Seeds
of Treason and Sedition, the Weeds of Conspiracy and Rebellion begin to appear
in open view, and they still proceed further, laying hold on all Occasions,
using all means, and fishing for all opportunities, to enlarge the breach
betwixt the King and his Subjects; and that all hope of Reconciliation may be
cast off, or as Tacitus says, Quo minore spe Veniae crescat sceleris Vinculum,
4 History.
etc. whereby the Bond of their iniquity may increase, with less hope of
Pardon, they use to oblige the furious Rabble with some notable outrage; that
if any hope of Pardon should appear, they may take it for a Trap, wheedling
Snare, or State Sugar-Plumb, which would but set their Teeth on edge; and so
may not accept of it, though the Prince should freely proffer it; the horrid
guilt of their impardonable Crimes, being always before their Eyes.

And it is to be observed, that Seditious Persons, for accomplishing their
mischievous Designs, take the opportunity of Marriages, Fairs, and public
Festivals; very fit times for their purpose, and pernicious Projects.

INTRIGUE LXIII. The Arts and Tricks of Tirants,
IT is one of the sweetest Secrets in Tyranny, to bring over to Luxury, them
whose fierceness may be suspected to resist the Arbitrary Proceedings of
Rulers. 2. To forbid all Duels, without Exception. 3. To build Theaters in the
chiefest Cities, in which Dancing, Playing, and fine Shows, which delude the
Fancy, may be used; with the bewitching sweetness whereof, the People being
once taken, it will hinder them from returning to their former stoutness of
resisting Tyranny.
And by Consequence, they will be less able to do hurt either to Prince or
Government, being they are become effeminate.

INTRIGUE LXIV. How to punish Seditious Peers.
PUnishment on great Persons ought not to be inflicted publicly, but in
private, according to the Old Rule of Policy; Magnos sed pravos, vulgo tamen
gratos, Ductores, in eodem carcere, Custodiri, puniri, ac Sepeliri debere,
Great, but Evil Men, Ringleaders of Sedition, who have the Applause of the
Rabble, ought to be kept, punished, and buried, in one and the same Prison. For
the punishing of the Vulgar terrifies the Peers, and daunteth their Boldness:
But, by the Death of great Men, their Fury is set on edge, and their Hearts
enraged.

INTRIGUE LXV. How to prevent Scarcety of Corn.
TIlling of the Ground is the most useful and necessary of all Employments: for
thereby are both Men and Beasts sustained; and without which, both, of
necessity, must Perish. Therefore, Surveyors and Overseers, ought to be
appointed, to see that every one, carefully look after the managing of his own
Ground: Neither is it enough to stir Husbandmen up with fair Words and sweet
Persuasions; but, likewise, to assist them both with good Council, and supply
them with what else they stand in need of; especially, those whose experience
has not made them perfect in the Art of Agriculture.

Next, must all impediments be removed, which may prove stumbling Blocks in the
way of good Husbandry; lest Men giving themselves to Hunting, Hawking,
Drinking, Gameing, etc. They neglect their more earnest Affairs, and make both
themselves and others Miserable: Therefore Farmers and Husbandmen must be
prevented from trifling away their time, in going idle Journeys to Cities, from
Suits of Laws, and be as great strangers to the Bench and Lawyers, as to the
Taverns and Musick-houses. Moreover, great Encouragement and Privileges ought
to be given to such as dig up barren Ground, which has not been formerly
Tilled: as that the Farmer should pay little or nothing the first two years.
But, what ever course be taken, unless the Civil Magistrate appoint public
Granaries and Treasuries of Sustentation (as Officers or War, do Magazines of
Ammunition) it will be impossible to prevent Scarcity, in Kingdom of
Commonwealth: The unprovident Vulgar looking no further than the present time.

INTRIGUE LXVI. How to behave in time of Dearth.
WHEN Dearth approaches, or is at hand, great care must be taken to restrain a
sort of Fore-stallers, who taking the advantage of the times, make Corn dear,
and Starve those poor People who are destitute of Money, by their wicked
Extortion and Covetous Cheats: Whose Wickedness, if it cannot be quite
suppressed, it may be at least so far restrained that in the Corn Market, for a
certain time, the poorer Citizens may have the privilege to buy first. (2.)
Searchers ought to be appointed, who in every corner, shall carefully observe
those Fore-stallers, to apprehend and carry them before the Magistrate, to be
punished; for it is a Religious kind of Severity, which, by punishing a few
wicked covetous Wretches, preserves the Lives of a great many. (3.) In such
cases, it is a point of Wisdom, to raise high the Customs of such Corn as is
carried beyond Sea to Strangers; for when the great Customs deminish the Gain,
the Merchant will certainly lay by his Trafique.
But if those Courses cannot be taken, because of the prevailing iniquity of
the times; or, if taken, they answer not the intended end, in time of Famine,
stronger Remedies must be taken. (1.) Overseers must be appointed, to look
after every thing belonging to the Buying and Selling of Corn. (2.) It will be
expedient to compute the number of Citizens, so that one may exactly know how
much will suffice to sustain the People; then a competent Measure must be
allowed to every Person, as necessity requires. (3.) It will be expedient to
encourage Merchants and Seamen, with Rewards; as to allow the first Ship that
goes off, so much out off the Public Stock; the next Ship somewhat less, and
the third, as is convenient, with immunity of Customs, as long as the Famine
lasts; either for Importation of Corn, or carrying, for a Season, those who can
pay for their Passage; to some plentiful Colony; or, at least, keep themselves
in some other Country, till the Famine be over. (4.) The chief point of Wisdom
consists in a frugal Distribution of the Corn; neither is the People only to be
regarded, but the Ground is also to be looked after; and Corn for Seed (lest
the Ground lie barren) should be given to Husbandmen, who will return it with
Usury. (5.) It is a great point of Frugality, to send sturdy Beggars a packing,
and not to suffer them in time of Famine, to live upon the Labors of
industrious sober Men. (6.) It is proper, in time of Famine, to allow every
Person the benefit of Fowling, and Fishing; which was in old times, by the Law
of Nations, allowed to all without exception; tho great Men now limit both, by
an usurped Power and Prerogative. (7.) Let Taverns, Public Houses, and Stews
be shut up, and all high Feasting and sumptuous Marriages prohibited.


INTRIGUE LXVII. How to preserve Corn.
CORN is better preserved in the Ear, than when it is thresh'd out, and made
clean from the Chaff and Straw; for, being deprived of its own natural Cover,
it cannot be kept so sound by any thing of Art. (2.) It is advantageous for the
Husbandman; for the remembrance of the former Years plenty being still before
him, it stirs him up to follow his Business cheerfully, and without floth.
(3.) That Husbandmen may not be able to cast up, and make an estimate of what
Corn they have, which might disencourage them sometimes, whilst the Trouble and
Expense exceeds the Gain. (4.) By this means Straw is preserved for the
Cattle, and other uses.


INTRIGUE LXVIII. How a Prince may best confer Honors and Places.
THE importunity of those, who court and seek Honors and Preferment, is one of
the greatest Inconveniences that molesteth a Prince: For aspiring Spirits think
it an high injury, that any thing of that nature, should be denied them.
Therefore, with repetition of Merits, they make their humble Addresses, with
importunate Petitions, which cannot well be contradicted. Thus, when the Prince
obliges one, by granting a Favor, he disobligeth many by repulses; neither is
there any remedy for this Evil; the Prince not being able to oblige all, by
granting their Requests. Whereupon, Cardinal Cajetan did, deservedly say, that
it was one of the principal Qualifications of a prudent Prince, To know how to
deny a thing handsomely: maintaining, that he was not fit to govern, who knew
not how and what to deny. But, in this case, it is the main and best caution,
to prefer the ancientest of Competitors: for ballancing the Virtue and Merits
of many, breeds Envy and Discord, but the privilege of Age is without
controversy. (2.) They who have come of a good Pedigree, and have deserved
well of the Commonwealth, have the next place: for up-start Men, tho they
should excel those, cannot take it ill, if such be preferred to places of Trust,
if they be endued with any tolerable Qualifications. (3.) It is usual with
some, to join a Colleague and Partner to Officers of State; under some
pretense, as Age, Weakness, and other Infirmities: Who, thereupon, being
destinated to succeed the place, may exclude the hope and expectation of
others. (4.) Others, upon the same account, do advance to Preferment, whom they
think most fit for the Employment, in the room of his Predecessor; before too
many Competitors have time to put in for it. (5.) It is no small point of
prudence, before the Election, to send the more powerful Competitor some where
else.


INTRIGUE LXIX. How to keep what is Conquered by force of Arms.
KIngdoms that are Conquered, by Force of Arms, are best kept by Justice in the
King, and Moderation in the Magistrates, by imposing and collecting Taxes
deliberately and moderately, by paying of Wages duly, and by using all means
conducing to a well settled Peace. For whilst Affairs are embroiled at home, it
is a Natural consequence, that there is little Respect or Estimation abroad.
Therefore, those Kingdoms and Commonwealths, which maintain Peace and good
Order at Home, are hardly conquered or overcome. And, on the contrary, those
easily tottered, which are disturbed with intestine Humors and Commotions.

INTRIGUE LXX. How to march an Army through a Foreign Country.
THat the Treachery of Soldiers may be prevented, in a Foreign Country, care
must be taken, that they march in several Bodies, unarmed, and that the Kingdom
or Commonwealth, who suffers them to pass, may have due Information, before
they enter his Territories; that Quarters may be provided, and what every one
must pay be prescribed. 2. That the second Body march the same way that the
first marched; and that, if they be in great Bodies, they march not every Day.
(3.) That any Damage, done by the Soldiers, be made good. 4. That the Army do
not approach any prohibited place, within a Mile. 5. That they do not quarter
in Towns, or Cities, that are Walled or entrenched. 6. That Commissaries and
Proveditors go along with the Army, and set a rational price on all Provisions,
and curb the Insolences of the Soldiers.


INTRIGUE LXXI. How a Prince should behave himself with a Contentions Neighbor
more powerful than himself.
IT is very safe for a Prince, who is in danger of War with a Prince more
potent than himself, to yield up what formerly he has conquered, to him whose
former Right it was, unless he be able to maintain all Quarrels, by force.
Neither will it be inconvenient, in time of great danger, to buy a Peace with
Money, or the loss of some Cities; for, besides that all the rest are secured,
the shunning of a Bloody War, and the Enjoyment of a Happy Peace, make up all
the loss. But it is more Honorable for a Prince, if he be able, to beat off an
emulous Neighbor, turned to an open Enemy, in open Battle, by force of his own
Arms, and the Assistance of his Allies; rather than that an Ambitious,
Unsatisfied, Perfidious Prince, become Master of his Dominions. And, that the
Enemy may do as little Mischief as possible, it is necessary to hoard up the
Provisions in Stores and Granaries. But, if the Event answer not Expectation,
it is necessary, that giving over the Care of Villages, and small Towns; the
whole power and strength of the Country be brought to some Two or Three strong
fortified Places, till the Controversy be composed. For, under such
Circumstances, there will not be so much need of an Army, as of Garrisons, to
preserve what remains of Provisions and Revenues from the Hand of a Powerful
and Covetous Enemy.

INTRIGUE LXXI. How weaker Persons may prolong Time in difficult Matters.
THE prolonging of Time is, commonly, reputed a peculiar knack of the weaker
sort, for the more powerful use their craft, in wicked ambitious Designs, born
out with a bold Confidence; and so it is folly for the meaner sort to resist
them. And in such desperate Cases, length of time brings some means of help
along with it, especially when the Enemy drives headlong and too furiously,
with imprudence. Then, it is a point of Wisdom, in one that is still and quiet,
to discover another's Folly and Weakness; and from thence, find some
opportunity to help himself. Thus, oft-times, great Intentions and Preparations
of War, which at first were furious, through some Delayings, have come to
nothing. But withal, this distinction is to be observed, That we must gain
time, in those things only, which can be better managed by Procrastination. But
in other things, where the dangers will still recur, tho one delay and avoid
them never so often, it is better to go through stitch and hazard at first,
rather than at last.

INTRIGUE LXXII. How to deny a thing without Offense.
IT is a hard matter for one to deny an earnest Suit without Offense; but there
are several courses to be taken in this case: As first, To refer the granting
or denying of such and such a thing, to the Arbitration of others. Thus
Agamemnon served Ajax and Ulysses, when they strove for Achilles's Armor.
Ovids Metamor. lib. 3.
(2.) Others have delayed their Answer to some importunate Request, that could
not positively be denied, which may be cunningly put off by saying, I will
consider on it, and send you an answer that shall satisfy you, upon all
Accounts. (3.) Others have denied what they had no mind to grant, by slighting
and delaying the giving access, to such persons as were to ask for great and
difficult Matters. (4.) Others have dissuaded their Petitioners from their
Suit, and have proffered them somewhat else, more convenient for both. (5.)
Others have, to crush the aspiring Spirits of importunate Petitioners, raised
up Competitors, who exceed their Deservings, and to whom they must needs give
the pre-eminence. (6.) When a Petition is presented, which positively cannot be
denied, one may feign himself willing to grant it, but in the mean time,
propose such hard and difficult Conditions, with such intricat and troublesome
terms of Toil and Labor, that the Petitioner will think his Suit better denied
than granted.


INTRIGUE LXXIII. How to compose Seditions by Intercessors.
IT is the drift of Factions, to stir up one part of the Government to clash
against another, affording cause for it, on both sides: and when the Design is
brought forth, in process of time, both parties, or one begins to commit
Hostilities. Machiavel has reduced the Remedies of Factions to three Heads,
namely, The Reconciliation, the Death, or the Banishment of the Heads of the
Factions. But he has not, with Subtility enough, distinguished the matter,
which must therefore, be thus explained: First, When the divided Parties, on
both sides, are reconciled to the Homage of their Prince, promising that they
will stand to his Determination; the Prince must not side with one Party more
than the other, but impartially weigh and crush their Feuds and Quarrels with
equal Respect; and show himself a common Father to them both; and according to
Equity and Justice, compose their Controsies. Then, after all is in Peace and
Quiet, the Prince ought to confirm their Unity by Marriages, or some other such
obliging Ties, which naturally prompt to Affection and Love. But if the
Controversies cannot be composed (the Factions being so inveterate one against
another, that they cannot acquiesce to the former Determination) the Prince, by
his absolute Authority, should lay his Commands, to make no mention of their
old Quarrels, or else send from Court, the Head of the Factions, upon some
Embassy, or some such pretense. But in this case, there is one caution to be
observed, viz. That the Prince (as I have said) be not more biased to one side
than the other, otherways a great many inconveniences will incur.

INTRIGUE LXXIV. How to Suppress Sedition by force.
IF, of two Factious Parties, one shall dare, with downright Sauciness, or
secret Treachery, to control the King's Authority, let the Prince join himself
to the other side, and become their Head; and by that means, when it cannot
otherwise be, let him be avenged by force of their Treachery and Factions.

INTRIGUE LXXV. How to Suppress Sedition by Force of Arms.
WHEN two Factions bear not only ill will to one another, but to the Prince
likewise, then the Prince cannot suppress them both at once, neither ought he
to side with one Party more than the other; nor to meddle or concern himself
with them, in fomenting their Divisions: nor to make himself a promoter of the
ambition of others; nor become an instrument to procure his own and the
Kingdom's Misery. For in such a case, Money (which is the strength and sinews
of public Affairs) cannot be had but with great difficulty. And, when it
fails, the Subjects Allegiance fails with it: Namely, The Allegiance of such
Subjects as are biased with favor or fear of a Faction, to which they are
related, either by Blood or Affinity, or obnoxious to their Favors on several
Accounts. In this case the Prince himself must not take Arms, but, if he can by
any means, pull Arms out of the hands of mad Men; so behaving himself, that
whilst one Faction is overcome, the other grow not too powerful and insolent,
without a Competitor. For the tumults of Faction gain most advantage in time of
War, and are weakened in time of Peace. For in time of War, such Subjects, as
the guilt and consciousness of their Crimes, or deepness in Debt, stirs up to
desire and wish for change and alterations in the Government, do continually
run to the Factious, never considering the justness of the Cause and Quarrel,
so they can save themselves from Prisons and Gibets, on the contrary in time of
Peace, the Flames of animosity are extinguished, the violence of Warlick Force
stopped; the Storms cease; the Waves become calm, and time will wear out the
remembrance of all Rancor, Feuds, and Factions. For when they who are the
Maintainers of and maintained by those intestine Broils and Discords, are taken
out of the way; a new Stock of People arises, who are Strangers to the former
Tumults. Moreover, another reason prefers Peace to War, which is, that in time
of War the Treasury is exhausted, by laying out vast Sums of Money, which can
never be filled again, till there be a well flourishing Peace. The Prince,
therefore, must labor, by all means, to reconcile the disagreeing Parties; but
if the obstinacy of the Rebels shall reject Peace; what the Prince cannot
openly do, he must attempt by some undermining and cunning ways, lest when one
Faction is suppressed, the other, that kept balance with it, may too insolently
domineer.

INTRIGUE LXXVIII. How to enter in Covenant.
COvenants do discover a weak, unstable and dubious State of Humane Affairs,
And those that are made with a People very remote, never procure help in due
time. But the Friendship of two potent Neighbors is often treacherous and
dangerous, to their weaker Neighbors; and to stand neuter has often proved
beneficial, and as often injurious. For as the Friendship of the weaker
Neighbors affords little profit, so may one be weakened by being united to a
more powerful Neighbor than himself. When both stand on equal ground, in time
of danger, they may be reputed equals; but in time of Peace, the weaker makes
the least Figure. The stronger must reap all the profit of the Victory; but
both must equally partake of the danger and loss; because no new Line,
according to the manner of the Lions League, with weaker Beasts (in the Fable)
the Booty is always yielded to the strongest; it being the highest wish that
that the weaker side can or dare to desire, is to escape utter ruin. Moreover,
the stronger often provokes the Enemy, and afterward by a Peace, suddenly
patched up, to set themselves free of all danger, leave the weaker in the
lurch. Politicians, furthermore, advise to keep and continue in Peace with
those, who have formerly been Enemies. But it is not an easy matter to enter
in a League with them, or to put any confidence in those who delight in
Controversies, and love to entertain Quarrels.

How to keep up Favor and Authority at Court.
THERE are two ways, very opposite one to another, to keep Authority at Kings
Courts; the first is to court Favor and Assistance of the Prince, and those
who are nearest to him in Blood, and have the chief sway next him, to accompany
them often; and to owe to their Good Will, the foundation of all ones Power and
Preferment. The next is to rely on ones own Strength, and not on another; and
being conscious of no ill Design, to defeat the Artifice of envious Competitors.

INTRIGUE LXXVIII. How a Prince that is at Peace, should behave, when his
Neighbors are in War.
PRINCES, who profess least of Ill Will (either through fear, or because whilst
others are disputing for Interest by Arms, think it safer to wait for the event
of the War) do privately help some daring Party with Money or their Advice.
However, when the event falls out according to their wish, they can be
confident enough to declare openly for the Conqueror.

INTRIGUE LXXIX. How to confine great Statesmen.
THESE are necessary Cautions, in confining Seditious Statesmen. First, To
choose for them Prisons, which are not frequented by many Visiters, with
Apartments every way strong and fenced with Iron-Bars. (2.) It is very
necessary to give them but little Liberty, and whilst they are Prisoners, to
suffer them to take the Air but seldom, and never to allow them to ride out or
go a Hunting. (3.) To remove from them those who have formerly been their
Servants, and put Strangers in their room. (4.) To search all things that are
carried into the Prison; nay, their very Provisions, Jest, together with other
Things, Tools for Breaking the Prison, Ropes, Crows, Pick axes, etc. be
conveyed to them. (5.) To change their Keepers often, lest long acquaintance
and Familiarity give occasion of corrupting them by Bribes.


INTRIGUE LXXX. How to Disband Soldiers.
IT is no ways safe to Disband a whole Army, in time of suspected Peace, or in
time of a short Truce; and therefore prudent Princes, judging it better to
loose their Money than their Army, do not Disband all: But still keep a
sufficient Force in Arms, to secure the public Peace. But some who Disband
their Army's, discharge only such as conn^^ Live without their Pay; and so can
be easily brought to take Arms again, upon occasion: Whilst they keep those who
might seem to be more unwilling to be Listed again.

INTRIGUE LXXXIV. How Minesters of State may avoid great Dangers.
THey are a Wicked sort of People, who, without any necessity of their Duty,
but through mere Malice, do stir up or cherish animosities betwixt Princes.
However, they stand on slippery Ground, and are ready to Totter, who serve an
Ancient Prince, or him who is the next Heir: For the Old Prince will take it
Ill, that the Rising Son should only be regarded by his Subjects; and the Young
Heir commonly takes it as a contempt of himself, to be looked upon as a
Subject, and to be courted with no Homage or Respect. But, if such be the
danger and offense of neglected Duty, it is an evident consequence, that those
Ministers do far more undergo Danger, who discharge Offices, and pay their Duty
both to Father and Son; but it is the safest course of steering amidst such
Rocks, for one to get the name of an honest Man, and apply himself to all
designs, tending to Peace and Reconciliation; to go about the service of his
Master carefully, and to Court with obliging Duty and Humor, the apparent
Heir; to Write no Letters but such as are seen of the Prince. Furthermore, to
behave so, as to approve Allegience to his Prince, Respect to the Successor,
and to both, a peaceable Affection.

INTRIGUE LXXXV. How to Aspire to Promotion.
IT is no hard matter for them whose Noble Pedigree, their good Character, and
great Employment do elevate, to come to be known by their Prince; and to lay
out ways for a higher Preferment. But they who have nothing to commend them but
their own parts and qualifications, and can show no Coat of Arms of their
Ancestors, cannot obtain the favor of their Prince, but by chance, or the
Recommendation of some Noble Peer: And yet it commonly falls out, that the
Promotion of the latter is more stable than that of the former, which appears,
either because the former thinking that all is due upon the score of their
Ancient Nobility, never court the favor of any Patron; whilst the latter do,
with all industry, strive to obtain the favor of some great Person, which is
like to continue their preferment: Or because Princes, in imitation of Nature,
love generare and corrumpere, to promote the Inferior, and cast down the
Lofty. Therefore, to ward often pinching necessity and poverty of one's Family,
and to catch some high preferment, one must needs screw his Interest among some
strong Faction, and procure for himself the favor of some great Patron, with
all the duty, humble respects, and artificial shows imaginable: And the getting
into the favor of the Female Sex has often been very profitable in affairs of
this Nature.

INTRIGUE LXXXVI. How to delay an Inevitable War.
IF a Prince meet with such intolerable provocations, that he must of
necessity undergo the hazard of a dangerous War, and would delay it, till
affairs be put in a Posture; it is necessary that he seem condescending to all
the Articles and Overtures which his Enemy proposes; rather than to undergo
the danger of to send counterfeit Plenipotentiary Ministers of State, who on
the first Address may seem very complying, but referring some unexpected
proposals of great weight to his Masters Determination. Likewise, if by his
advice, and at his earnest request, there be sent an Ambassador to his Master,
it will be Policy to entangle him in such a Labyrinth of Affairs, out of which
he cannot extricat himself, without the help and advice of both Princes.

INTRIGUE LXXXVII. How to Govern New Provinces.
THE Governor of a New Province, must not caress himself in Pleasures, but
ought to understand the nature of Affairs, and learn a true account thereof,
from those who can inform him: And what time others do spend in Ostentation, he
is to accomodate to his Business. (2.) He must take care that vigorous
Beginnings end not in a supine Negligence. (3.) That he be not given to change,
by obtruding new Customs on the Province. (4.) He must not find fault with, nor
rescind what has been done by his Ancestors; nay he must behold as in a
Looking-glass, all their Virtues and Vices. (5.) Above all things, he must
govern his own Family well. (6.) He must give easy Access, and lay out his
Business for every occasion, and perform Affairs in due time. (7.) He must
shake off Sullenness and Pride. (8.) He must behave himself so, that his easy
temper do not diminish his Authority, nor his Severity the Love and Respect of
the Subjects. (9.) Let him not resolve upon any thing in Passion. (10.) Let him
be familiar but with few. (11.) Let every Office of Justice be administered with
all care. (12.) Let him have greater Respect for the public Peace, than to
rigid Justice. (13.) Let him not be biased by Favor or Hatred, in giving
Judgment. (14.) He must, if possible, avoid all Controversies, with the People
of the Province: or, if he has to do with private Quarrels, he had better
yield the Cause, and pass from his own Interest. (15.) He must avoid
Controversies with the Governors of Neighboring Provinces. (16.) Let him be
very cautious that the breach of Peace, with a neighboring Prince, be not
imputed to him. (17.) He must make smaller Affairs, to represent the Draught
and Design of his greater. (18.) He must vindicate the Rights of all Officers
and Soldiers, that serve under him. (19.) In Dangerous Affairs, he ought so to
behave himself, that all may acknowledge that it is not by his, but the Princes
Authority, that all Affairs are managed. (20.) He ought not to disturb the
Prince with triffling matters, nor do any thing of greater weight without his
Advice. (21.) He must keep up his Friendship at Court, by Gifts and Presents.
(22.) He should show himself fit for his Business, but not as he were above it.
For as Princes in choosing of their Ministers, hate Vice, so do they not much
like of ambitious and aspiring Virtues. (23.) He must never brag too much of
his own Feats, but attribute them to his Prince as Author, or to his good
Fortune.
Thus, by Valor in his Obedience, and by Modesty in telling of his Actions, he
shall be beyond Envy, and shall not miss of Honor.

INTRIGUE LXXXVIII. How to establish and settle new Conquests.
IN settling new Conquests, the chief point of Prudence, consists in
persuading the Subjects, that they are in a better case under their new Prince,
than under the former; according to Tacitus; Clementiam nova
imperiainchoantibus, utilem esse, ut prioribus tributis quaedam diminuantur;
quo mitius Imperium videatur. Clemency is of great use to them that adventure
upon new Conquests, and that some of the former Taxes be remitted, to the end
that the Government may seem more easy. (2) People are taken with no bait so
much as plenty of Provision, care for the public Peace, administration of
impartial Justice. (3) New Conquerors may, very effectually, gain the good will
of their Subjects, by Liberality and Munificence, according to Merit,
Moderation and Prudence; and then, after, they may promote to Honors and
Dignities, such as stick closest to their Interest. (4.) Good use may likewise
be made of Schools, and the Education of Youth, for People learn Obedience and
Allegiance to their Prince, from none so much as from Schoolmasters and
Clergymen. (5.) It is very convenient, to join in Marriage the Ancient and
upstart Citizens; for it is an excellent Bond of Friendship and Society, so as
those, who formerly were at distance, may make up one People, and agree in the
same Manners. (6.) It is Tyrannical to Debauch, with loose Discipline,
dissolute Manners, or Luxury, the Valor of the People, which yet is dreaded
and suspected by a faint-hearted Prince. (7.) The presence of the Prince, which
procures Veneration from the Subjects, prevents, or overthrows Plots and
Conspiracies, and conduces very much to establish the Government. (8.) Great
Expenses of the Court, upon their sumptuous Buildings, Fair, and great Pomp
does maintain and enrich a great many of the poorer sort of People, and
consequently gains the Affection of the Subjects.


INTRIGUE LXXXIX. How to Compose the Differences of the Nobility.
THE Differences of the Nobility at Court, of Magistrates, or Officers, which
threaten no harm or inconveniency to the public good, must not be decided, so
as that the Prince should condemn one side, and be for the other; but rather
provide for the Honor of both Parties.

INTRIGUE XC. How one must behave that fears a Repulse.
THey who fear a Repulse, use to deal by Emissaries and Messengers, who pretend
to have no Charge or Commission; but act as they did all freely of their own
Head.

INTRIGUE XCI. What Policy must be used by a General.
IT is a point of great Policy in a General, to make good use of the sudden
fear of his Enemy, and increase it by their own Courage and Severity; and
afterward, by being favorable, to gain the Reputation of Clemency. 2. To
March against an Enemy, with an Army that seems not serious or vindictive,
lest they lose all hope of Pardon and Peace. 3. It is convenient to use diverse
Arts, in showing Clemency to those that submit themselves, to his Mercy. 4. To
pursue them that are in flight, with all Expedition, but to be gentle to all
but the stubborn.


INTRIGUE XCII. How to crush Reproachful Speeches.
IT is a Secret belonging to Arbitrary Government, to give full Liberty to the
Malice and Envy of the baser sort, and to vent themselves in Calumnies and
false Reports; so, that when they have spoke very Ill of Brave and Worthy Men,
at length, finding their own Reputation and Fortune to lie at Stake; they by
their Foolish Revenge, may be brought to forbear.

INTRIGUE XCIII. How to obtain leave to depart from Court.
HE that is with a Master, from whom he has a mind to depart, and yet to ask
leave of departing is dangerous, (as commonly it is with Tyrannical Masters)
must make heavy Complaints; and then beg leave, not as if you were to go away
at present, but a great while after; and so he will not take it so very ill;
and yet, in the mean time, others gaping for his Place, will take Care that he
may have Liberty to go at Pleasure, and will use all endeavors to gain ground
upon his Master, to grant him his Desire. During which time, he must act all
things rashly, disorderly, and in a Tumult; until, that for asking his leave,
and the mismanagement of his Affairs, he shall utterly hate him. Then, when he
is assured of this, he may be of him that he would keep him still, and with
dejected Sighs, and Groans, and shows of Repentance, make use of Persons, for
whom the Prince has no great liking, to intercede for him; and thus the Prince
will think he has sufficiently punished him, by granting him leave to depart
with so much Reluctance and Unwillingness: Whilst he, in the mean time, shall
enjoy his Desire, without any loss or danger: But he must beware that he do not
presently brag, or boast of his Wit or Contrivance; otherways he may thereby,
incur great danger: Therefore should continue seeming sorrowful, as if he were
grieved for his Misfortune.

INTRIGUE XCIV. How to avoid Envy.
IT is a very safe Course, for all who would live peaceably, with constancy in
good Actions, to resist and trample under Foot all Calumnies (which are the
chief Weapons that Envy uses) and by Prudent Councels, Fidelity and Diligence,
not only to enjoy, but like-ways to deserve the Favor both of Prince and
People. And, last of all, to oblige Competitors with all Civilities,
Courtesies, and kind Offices; and, as far as possible, to avoid all appearance
of vain Glory, Pride, and Ostentation; and to refrain, or at least not to brag
of, any great Retinue, or Train of Attendants; or to Head, as it were, an Army
of Servants; to have a neat Dwelling House and Furniture, rather than that
which is costly. Moreover it will lessen Envy, when it appears that one does
not Court Dignities so much as they Court him.

INTRIGUE XCV. How to share Dominions among Brothers.
MOST Nations do condescend that, for avoiding those Inconveniences which
arise from sharing Estates; the chief Power, Dignity, and Government be given
only to the Eldest Child; all the rest of the Children being deprived of all
Inheritance, but what serves for their Subsistence: which Custom, (tho it
crosses the Law of Nature, by which, the Condition and Right of Brothers
stands in equal terms, and balance) is defended by the public Benefit,
whereof all Care must be taken: although, in that Case also the rigor thereof is
so far diminished, that the same Custom does provide that the other Children of
both Sexes, be not abdicated like Bastards, but be supplied by the Elder
Brother, with Dignities, Wealth, and other Necessaries, becoming the Royal
Progeny. But in sharing of Dominions, these Cautions are to be observed. 1.
That whatever Manors are allotted to the Children of Princes, they return to
the Prince without any Encumbrance, if the Brothers shall die without
Male-Issue (unless the Law of the Country provide otherways.) But the Daughters
of Princes should only have such Portions, as that the Prerogatives of the
Crown be not impaired, but the Dominions kept entire, and in the same Case as
they used to be lineally transferred. (2.) It is necessary that what ever
lands, or Revenues, are allotted to bring up the young Brothers, be received
immediately at the Hands of the Prince: So that, for fear of losing them, the
Brothers may be obliged to owe true Allegiance, who otherways, through the
default of depraved Nature, or wicked Guardians, may be easily persuaded to
turn aside. (3.) Care must be taken that the Charge of the Army be never
committed to the Royal Brothers, for nothing is more dangerous than to give the
command of the Sword, at home and abroad, to one of the Royal Family; seeing,
many times, such as are come of a low Pedigree, and baser sort, when they
arrive at high preferment, have aimed at great Things, and been much dreaded.
(4.) Wise Men do advise, that if necessity force the Sword to be given to one
of the Royal Family, a Conjunct or Partner should be added to him, who may
observe and curb his Ambitious and Aspiring Hopes. (5.) It is convenient to
recommend to the Royal Brothers, such Servants as are Prudent and Faithful to
the Prince, and to change them now and then, and to place new ones in their
stead, so as to break their Measures, which may be dangerous to the
Commonwealth, through a long continued Course of good Liking and Familiarity.


INTRIGUE XCVI. How to observe the due Time of making Truce.
IT is thought prudent, upon three Accounts, to make a Truce. (1.) When the
Truce lays open a way for Peace. (2.) When a Prince finds himself destitute
of Provisions necessary to continue the War. For a Treasury exhausted, and an
Army wearied with Fatigues and Accidents of War, cannot be recruited but by a
Truce, which makes way for Peace. And as it is the Interest of the strongest
Party to pursue strongly their first Designs, and to prosecute the Course of
Victory; so it concerns the weaker side, by obtaining time, to gain ground upon
the Enemy and to get opportunity to renew their Courage; and, commonly, in this
Case, a Truce is profitable to one, and hurtful to the other. (3.) Care must be
taken that when Hostilities cease for a while, and the Care, Vigilance, and
Industry of the Enemy is much bent for War, to distract them with intestine
Discords, Broils, and Commotions.


INTRIGUE XCVII. How to change Commanders of an Army.
IT has been observed by all Politicians, even those of the best Rank, that
hardly any business was ever well managed, by the Commanders of an Army,
bearing equal Sway and Power: Yet Cardinal Richelieu, according to his
Prudence, found out a Remedy for this Evil: When he had set three Commanders
over the Army in Italy (as mistrusting the Valor of one single Person to be
sufficient for an Office of so great importance) on those Terms; according to
the Course of Weeks; he appointed one to lead the Van, another the Main Body,
and the third the Rear, and that he who led the Main-Body should for that Week
have the highest Command.

INTRIGUE XCVIII. How to draw up an Army.
AN Army must be drawn up so, as that it cannot be surrounded, either whole, or
part, by the Enemy. 2. Room must be left for the Horse, to encounter the Enemy,
when they are in Battle. 3. The main Strength of the Army must oppose the main
Strength of the Enemy; but especially those Soldiers who have been accustomed
to Fight with such an Enemy. 4. The hindermost or Rear Ranks must not march
forwards until the foremost, in the same Company or Troop, march before them.


INTRIGUE XCIX. How Ambassadors and Mediators may procure Peace.
AMongst a great many Precepts which Cardinal Franciscus Barbariny, in his
Secret Commands brought along with him from Rome, these are the chief. 1. A
Minister of State should not be biased with Affection to either side, but
impartial to both; otherways, he shall lose all the Confidence and Authority
they may repose in him. 2. That he shall not give leave to his Domestic
Servants or Acquaintance to Argue, far less, send Letters about public
Affairs, either amongst one another, or the Servants of other Ambassadors. 3.
He must not propose any Terms or Conditions of Reconciliation, but what
Arguments are offered of one side, he should faithfully Communicate to the
other; adding only so many of his own Arguments, as may persuade one side to
embrace the other's Proposals, omitting all those which might embroil fortunate
beginnings, or the good procedure of Affairs. 4. He must judge it proper to his
Quality and Dignity, to propose Peace or Conditions to no side more than the
other; and so it will be the part of an Arbitrator, to invite them both, that
he may, at the same time, give their Proposals; or that both may send their
Demands in Writing to the Arbitrator. 5. He must not become Arbitrator to their
Controversies, when the Case cannot consist with the Duty, or be decided by an
Arbitrator. 6. He must not take a Pledge or Depositum of a Letigious Matter. 7.
He must not send his Expresses or Cou^riers to Kings or Princes, who may extort
an Assent or Dissent from them with Reluctance; but with those Expresses which
are sent by Ambassadors, he may send his own Letter. 8. If he must needs write
to them apart, let him use the Interest of Merchants, who have Dealings in
several Foreign Places.


INTRIGUE C. How to Dissemble the Desire of Peace.
PEace and Concord are often boasted of, under Specious, and yet vain and empty
pretenses; and that for several Reasons. (1.) That the Enemy being deceived
with the hope of Peace, and the care of providing necessary Provisions of War
slighted, may at length be surprised and caught unawares. (2.) That, when we
our selves are unprovided, we may gain time to raise an Army. (3.) We pretend
to negotiate a Peace with an Enemy, and to have matters of great Concern with
him, to the intent we may obtain of our Allies, what we desire through fear,
lest we should break off from them. (4.) Sometimes we negotiate a Peace with
one of our Enemies Allies, not for any hope of succeeding, but only to raise
Suspicion and Animosities among themselves.


INTRIGUE CI. The Causes of Animosities and Insurrections.
THE main and most endearing Cause of Associations amongst the People, is a
pretense of Respect to the Commonwealth, represented with great Zeal, and
pressed home to be much regarded. 2. An Indignation arising from Calumnies, or
supposed so to be, and a desire of Revenge thereupon, is a Means Incendiaries
much use. 3. They contribute very much to an Insurrection against the Prince
and Magistrates, who have but small Fortunes, and are in sorry Circumstances,
in time of Peace; and therefore they strive to raise Tumults, because they may
go more scot-free, when things are in Confusion, and be safer in Troublesome
Times. 4. Fear and Danger are not the least Cause of Associations; for
obnoxious Men dread the Laws, and the Punishments due to their Crimes; as also,
good Men fear Injuries and the Violence of Tyranny, and so both Desire to
prevent and ward off their impending danger, by their Associations. 5.
Sometimes a vain glorious Name or Renown, may stir up some to an Association.
6. Above all, ^he Princes Ingratitude, in not rewarding those who have deserved
well of him, raises Heart-burnings and Animosities among all sorts of Subjects.


INTRIGUE CII. What Cautions are to be used in proposing difficult Matters.
THE Deceitful Proposals of Incredible things, are to be avoided; and the
Artifices of Impostors, wherewith they commonly cheat Princes of their Wealth,
ought to be examined before they be believed; for great Pretenders, the more
easily to attain their ends, persuade Princes to be at some small cost, to
acquire great gains; as to level Mountains, turn the Courses of Rivers, to look
out for Treasures, and Mines of Gold, to invent new Engines, to
Transubstantiate Metals, to find out the Philosopher's Stone, etc. whereby,
with their Deceitful Confidence, they seem to provoke and force Nature her
self: Yet, as we must not altogether believe them, so must we not absolutely
slight and reject them; but the Author's Sincerity must be observed, and
Visitors sent, to find out whether he offers any feasible Proposal, which
must be consulted upon, and tried by competent Judges; so that nothing may be
undertaken rashly; for here the Italian Proverb, and Rule takes place, D^gran
parti parti-ti; that is to say, Beware of them who promise too much gain.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by, Thomas Howkins, in George-Yard, in
Lombard Street.
DR. Wedenfield's Chemistry, concerning the Secrets of the Adepts, or the Use
of Lully's Spirit of Wine, in Quarto. Dr. Everard's Works, in large Octavo.
Mandy's Marrow of Measuring, illustrated with Copper Plates, in Octavo. Angliae
Motropolis: or, the present State of London, by Tho. Delaune, Genesis Print. An.
1690. The Banished Duke, or the Tragedy of Infortunatus. Midnight Thoughts; the
Third Edition, enlarged, in Octavo. Holwel's Trigonometry, fitted to the
meanest capacity, in Octavo. Mythologia Ethica: Or, Three Centuries of Esopian
Fables, by Philip Airs, Esquire in large Octavo. The Narrow Path of Divine Truth
described, from Living, Practice and Experience, of its Three great Steps, viz.
Purgation, Illumination, and Union, By F. M. Vun Helmont. The Treasury of
Druggs Unlocked, or a f^^ and true Description of all sorts of Druggs, a^^
Chemical Preparations, sold by Druggis^^ whereby one may know the place of the
Growth, and how to distinguish the good fr^^ the bad. Culpepper's Physical
Receipts, in Octa^^ Price 6 d. The Art of short and swift Writing, wi^^ out any
Characters, or trouble to the Memo^^ in Octavo. The Experienced Instructor; a
Copy-bo^^ Printed in Red, for the ease of the Lear^ Price 6 d. Gloria
Britannica: or the Boast of the Br^^ Seas, containing a true and full Account
of (...) Royal Navy of England; showing where (...) Ship was Built, by whom,
and when; its leng^^* breadth, depth, draught of Water; Tuns, (...) number of
Men and Guns, both in Peace (...) War, at home and abroad; together, with ^^^ry
Man's Pay, from a Captain to a Cabin-(...) truly cast up, for a Day, a Week, a
Month, (...) a Calendar Year, or 13 Months and a Day; (...) fully Collected and
Digested, by a true Love Seamen, and one of long Experience in the P^^ctices of
the Navy and Admiralty. Price 1 ^^ With Paper and Paper Books, Blank-Bo^^ and
Releases of all sorts, with the best Ink (...) Records.

