A Pastoral Letter FROM THE BISHOP OF BATH and WELLS TO HIS CLERGY, Concerning
their BEHAVIOR DURING LENT.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom at the Gun at the West end of St. Paul's,
and W. Clark in Winchester. 1688.

All Glory be to God.
Reverend Brother,
THE time of Lent now approaching, which has been anciently and very
Christianly set apart, for penitential humiliation of Soul and Body, for
Fasting and Weeping and Praying, all which you know are very frequently
inculcated in Holy Scripture, as the most effectual means we can use, to avert
those Judgments our sins have deserved; I thought it most agreeable to that
Character which, unworthy as I am, I sustain, to call you and all my Brethren
of the Clergy to mourning; to mourning for your own sins, and to mourning for
the sins of the Nation.

In making such an address to you as this, I follow the example of St. Cyprian,
that blessed Bishop and Martyr, who from his retirement wrote an excellent
Epistle Ep. 11. Edit. Oxon.
to his Clergy, most worthy of your serious perusal, exhorting them, by public
Prayers and Tears to appease the Anger of God, which they then actually felt,
and which we may justly fear.

Remember that to keep such a Fast as God has chosen, it is not enough for you
to afflict your own soul, but you must also according to your ability, deal
your bread to Isa. 58. 5, 7.
the Hungry: and the rather, because we have not only Usual objects of Charity
to relieve, but many poor Protestant Strangers are now fled hither for
Sanctuary, whom as Brethren, as members of Christ, we should take in and
Cherish.

That you may perform the office of a public Intercessour the more
assiduously, I beg of you to say daily in your Closet, or in your Family, or
rather in both, all this time of Abstinence, the 51 st. Psalm, and the other
Prayers which follow it in the Commination. I could wish also that you would
frequently read and meditate on the Lamentations of Jeremy, which Holy Gregory
Nazianzen was wont to do, and the reading of which melted Orat. 12.
him into the like Lamentations, as affected the Prophet himself when he Penned
them.

But your greatest Zeal must be spent for the Public Prayers, in the constant
devout use of which, the Public Safety both of Church and State is highly
concerned: be sure then to offer up to God every day the Morning and Evening
Prayer; offer it up in your Family at least, or rather as far as your
circumstances may possibly permit, offer it up in the Church, especially if you
live in a great Town, and say over the Litany every Morning during the whole
Lent. This I might enjoin you to do, on your Canonical Obedience, but for
Love's sake I rather beseech you, and I cannot recommend to you a more devout
and comprehensive Form, of penitent and public Intercesson than that, or more
proper for the Season.

Be not discouraged if but few come to the Solemn Assemblies, but go to the
House of Prayer, where God is well known for a sure Refuge: Go, though you go
alone, or but with one besides your self; and there as you are God's
Remembrancer, keep not silence, and give Him no Isa. 62. 6.
rest, till He establish, till He make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

The first sacred Council of Nice, for which the Christian world has always had
a great and just veneration, ordains a Provincial Synod to be held before Lent,
that all Can. 5.
Dissensions being taken away a pure oblation might be offered up to God,
namely of Prayers and Fasting and Alms, and Tears, which might produce a
comfortable Communion at the following Easter: and that in this Diocese, we may
in some degree imitate so Primitive a practice, I exhort you to endeavor all
you can, to reconcile differences, to reduce those that go astray, to promote
universal Charity toward all that dissent from you, and to put on as the Elect
of God, holy and beloved, bowels Col. 3. 12.
of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering, forbearing
one another and forgiving one another, even as Christ forgave you.

I passionately beseech you to read over daily your Ordination Vows, to
examine your self how you observe them; and in the Prayers that are in that
Office, fervently to importune God for the assistance of His good Spirit, that
you may conscientiously perform them. Teach publicly, and from house to house,
and warn every one night and day with Tears; warn them to repent, to fast and
to pray, and to give Alms, and to bring forth fruits meet for repentance; warn
them to continue steadfast in that faith once delivered to the Saints, in which
they were baptized, to keep the word of God's Patience, that God may keep them
in the hour of Temptation; warn them against the sins and the errors of the
age; warn them to deprecate public judgments, and to mourn for public
provocations.

No one can read God's holy Word but he will see, that the greatest Saints
have been the greatest Mourners: David wept whole Rivers; Jeremy wept sore, and
his Eyes Psalm. 119. 136. Ier. 9. 1. -- 13. 17. Dan. 9. 3. -- 10. 2. --
ran down in secret places day and night like a Fountain; Daniel mourned three
full weeks, and did eat no pleasant bread, and sought God by prayer and
supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth and ashes; St. Paul was humbled and
2 Cor. 12. 21. -- 3 Phil. 18. --
bewailed and wept for the sins of others; and our Lord himself when He beheld
the City wept over it. Learn then Luke 19. 41 --
of these great Saints, learn of our most compassionate Savior, to weep for
the public, and weeping to pray, that we may know in this our day, the things
that belong to our peace, lest they be hid from our eyes.

To mourn for National Guilt, in which all share, is a duty incumbent on all,
but especially on Priests, who are particularly commanded to weep and to say,
Spare Thy people, O Lord, and give not Thine Heritage to reproach, Joel 2. 17.
that God may repent of the evil, and become jealous for His Land, and pity His
people.

Be assured that none are more tenderly regarded by God than such Mourners as
these; there is a mark set by Ezekiel. 9. 4.
Him on all that sigh and cry for the abominations of the Land, the destroying
Angel is forbid to hurt any of them, they are all God's peculiar care, and
shall all have either present deliverance, or such supports and consolations,
as shall abundantly endear their Calamity.

Now the God of all Grace, who has called you unto His eternal Glory by Christ
Jesus, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you in the true Catholic
and Apostolic Faith professed in the Church of England, and enable you to
adorn that Apostolic Faith with an Apostolic Example and Zeal, and give all
our whole Church that timely repentance, those broken and contrite hearts, that
both Priests and People may all plentifully sow in Tears, and in God's good
time may all plentifully reap in Joy.

From the Palace in Wells, Febr. 17. 1687. Your affectionate Friend and
Brother, Tho. Bath and Wells.


