To the Honorable, the House of Commons assembled in Parliament.
Proposals humbly offered for a Provision for the POOR, and setting them to
WORK.
Imprimis
THAT this Honorable House do nominate and appoint such a number of Men, of
known Estates, Integrity and Judgment in Merchandise, etc. either within or
without the House, as shall be thought fit to be Trustees, as we^l to receive
the Moneys collected for the Maintenance of the Poor, as likewise of a full
Power to set to Work and Employ all Able, to correct Offenders, and in all
Points to employ such Money and Produce of the Labor, for the Good not only of
those able to work, but also for the Maintenance of the Aged, Cripples and
Infants.

That the Parties, thus named, to be Trustees, be Incorporated by the Name of
Governor and Company of Trustees for the Poor; Or, (...) and to meet at (...)
and choose a Governor and Deputy, and (...) Committees, and so Annually, for
ever, after the manner of the Bank of England. The Committees thus chosen, and
sworn to be true to the Government and faithful in their Trust, to prepare
Bylaws to be presented at a general Court of Trustees within (...) days, by
the Majority to be Confirmed, Altered or Set-aside, as shall appear most
conducing to the Good of the Poor; and that such Bylaws, thus made, all
Justices of the Peace, Overseers of the Poor, Churchwardens, Constables and
all Others, do obey so far as they do relate to the Poor, under the Penalty of
(...) for every Offense.

That all the Money due, owing and remaining in Stock, and likewise all Lands,
Rents, Revenues and Money yearly arising, and payable to the Poor out of the
several Parishes of this Kingdom, etc. become payable to the said Committee of
Trustees; and, that the Overseers of the Poor and Churchwardens of every
Parish, do, at or before the (...) day of (...) 1694. give a true Account to
the said Committee, under the Hands and upon Oath, of such Overseers,
Churchwardens and Minister of every Parish, before some neighboring Justice
of Peace, of such Money, Stock, Lands and Rents payable to the Use of the Poor,
and of all Persons as are chargeable to such Parish: And shall likewise, at or
before the said (...) day of (...) 1694. respectively pay to the said Commit,
or to such as they shall appoint, all such Money due and owing to the Use of the
Poor: And that the said Overseers, etc. do in like manner, and on or before the
said day, give a true Account to the said Committee, of all such Sums of Money
as was assessed or payable out of their respective Parishes to the Poor this
present Year; which said Assessment to be Annually chargeable upon every such
respective Parish, to be collected as formerly, and paid Quarterly to the said
Committee, or those appointd by them.

Except all Colleges, Hospitals and Foundations, that are (or hereafter may
be) Erected and Endowed.

That it may be lawful for the said Committee, or those appointed by them, To
provide and erect Workhouses and Hospitals, for setting at Work and
maintaining the Poor in the most convenient Places within this Kingdom, on the
Linen or some other Foreign Manufactures; or such Manufactures of our own,
that may not be to the Ruin of the present Industrious People of this Kingdom.

That it may be lawful for the said Committee, or those by them appointed,
where they find either Houses or Lands most proper to build such Workhouses
and Hospitals upon, or to Endow them with, to purchase the same, and the Owners
thereof be obliged to sell and deliver the said Lands or Houses within (...)
days after notice, at (...) Years purchase, according to the present or last
Rents, allowing for Damage by being Uninhabited or let run to Ruin.

That after (...) days notice given of any such Lands or Tenements, so
purchased, by publication in the Gazette or (...) no former Sale, Mortgage,
etc. shall have any Claim or Title, either in Law or Equity, to any part, or
the whole of the Purchase-mony; but where, within the time limited, there does
any Dispute arise, the Purchase-mony to remain in the Hands of the said
Committee, Interest free, until the Matter shall be decided between the
Clamants by Law or otherwise

That for the better establishing the Linen Manufactures to the best Advantage
to these Kingdoms, all sorts of Flax and Hemp, etc. of the Growth of Ireland,
be Imported, Custom free, and from other Countries at a low and easy Custom;
and that such additional Duties be laid on all Foreign Linnens, Silks and
Papers, as may encourage those Manufactures in this Kingdom.

That a Sum not exceeding (...) per Annum, be allotted toward the defraying
the Expenses of the Persons chosen to be of the said Committee, to be paid them
in proportion to their attendance at the Committee; and that it may be lawful
for the said Committee, to allow such Salleries to their Officers, as shall
from time to time appear reasonable and necessary.

That whereas the beginning so great a Work will require an extraordinary
Expense, the said Committee have power to borrow Money at (...) per Cent.
Interest, on the Security of the Poor's Rates.

That every Committee of Trustees, before the Expiration of the Year they were
chosen for, do cause a fair State of the Poor's Stock, by way of Debtor and
Creditor to be prepared; and that each Person of the said Committee do examine
the same by their Books or such other Accounts as the same may refer to, and
put their Hands and Seals to their said Books and Accounts: And like wise under
their Hands and Seals certify the said State to be true, and a just Abstract
of their Books and Accounts; and do deliver the same to the new elected
Governor and Committees upon their Admission to their Trust; for Neglect
whereof each Person neglecting to be punishable by (...) And the Committee for
the time being be accountable to every Session of Parliament.

That so much of the Statutes made in the 39th Year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, the 1st Year of King James I. And the 14th Year of King Charles II.
as concern the Apprehending Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars, be duly put
in execution, and the Persons apprehended be sent to such Workhouses as the
said Committee shall appoint. And that it may be lawful for the said Committee,
or any (...) or more of them to correct the Idle, Sloathful and Offenders by
(...)

Reasons humbly offered to the Honorable the House of Commons for passing the
Proposals for setting the POOR at Work into an Act.
Imprimis
ABove all others, it is most reasonable to suppose, That the Members in
Parliament are the most competent Judges of Persons proper for such a Trust.
II. That the Power cannot be less than proposed, because of the many
Difficulties which unavoidably will attend so great a Work. III. That the Money
ought to be paid in presently, and a Borrowing Clause allowed for as much as
the first Years Expense will abundantly exceed any succeeding Years, Materials
being to be bought, the Expense in fixing their Abode, and the small Earnings
they will make of any Work at the beginning. IV. That the Poor ought not to be
employed on any of our own Staple Manufactures that are now in a flourishing
Condition, because that will only change the Hands and not increase the Trade,
and thereby advance the Beggars, to beggar the present industrious Workmen. V.
That the Poor ought not to be employed in their respective Parishes, but at
some convenient Places near the Sea, and in the most plentiful Parts of the
Country, that thereby they may be furnished with Provisions at the easier
Rates. VI. That all the Encouragement in the World ought to be given to the
Irish to raise Flax, because thereby it may in some measure divert their
Breeding and Fatting of Cattle, the same Land being proper for both. VII. That
the Trustees for the Poor ought to be accountable to Parliament, that thereby
the present Rates may be lessened or augmented as shall appear necessary.
The Benefits hereby accruing will be,
THE Poor will be relieved from the many Pressures they now groan under, and
the Nation freed from the Scandal.

And it will undoubtedly establish the Manufactures of Linen, Lace, Tape,
Thread, etc. forasmuch as the Money raised for the Maintenance of the Poor will
enable them to work cheaper than any of our Neighbors; By which means great
part of the Commodities from Spain and their West^^^^s, and likewise from our
Plantations, as Barbados, Virginia, Jamaica, New England, New Foundland,
Maryland, Carolina, Mevis, Antego, and several other Parts beyond the Seas, to
which such great Quantities of Linen, etc. are yearly exported, will be the
Proceed of the Labor of the present Idle Vagrants and Beggars, besides the
Consumption within our selves, for all which such vast sums of Money (in time of
Peace are sent to France, and) at present to our other Neighbors, toward the
Employing their Poor and starving our own.

All which is humbly submitted to the Consideration of this August Assembly, by
Dixey Kent.


