THE DEVILS LAST LEGACY: OR, A Round-headed Ironmonger, made Executor to Pluto.

Wherein is showed, The Descent of the Roundheads.

AS ALSO, The Roundheads great desire of a Crown, and to sway a Scepter,
although it be but Pluto his Crown and Scepter.

Composed by W. K. first a Turk, and now turned Roundhead.

London, Printed Anno Domini, 1642.

The Devils last Legacy:
Pluto, ALL hail my dear Adopted Son, thou alone art be that is my only
joy and hope, at whose sight my soul is filled with fatness, and the pleasure
I take in thee runs like to a Julop in my veins* come on brave soul, be
courageous, for this I know, thy impudence it is so great, that the whole World
is not able to outface; lea^e close to me, and I will be as willing to entice,
as thou to follow; leave me not, for then I shall not know to whom to leave my
Kingdom and immortal Scepter. Thou art the Heir and only he, be faithful to
my Kingdom, bend neither one way nor other, end as thou have begun, and none
shall more reward than I: my youngest Son Amimius has quite left me, his too
much yielding made him fall off; go on as thou have begun, and I will reward
thee. Both my Scepter and my Diodem,
I leave to the Rounheads, and to none but them.



Roundhead. Great King and Prince of darkness, whatsoever thou shall command,
no sooner spoke but done, I am as ready for to do, as you to speak, and you
not suller of enticements, but I twice as full of actions, yet fuller of Words,
perhaps it may seem difficult to your understanding, but thus to do good, I
say much, but do little, for I never in all my life knew how to do good; I am
the Heir, and delight to overtop men in wickedness, I am presently desperate
if I see any more wicked then I, yet cunning to the World, bear a fair show,
and have the Devil Printed in my Heart, and strive to be the Prince of
darkness Son: it is the height of my ambition to get his Crown, and though
all the world should bid farewell to Pluto and his Palace, and sound a retreat
from his damnable designs, I would stand as fast as Mountains. My seats to
show, who can be at all fearful,
To whom Grand Pluto says, my Son be cheerful.



Pluto. Brave resolution Son, but in the way take some of my damnable devices,
and what ever thou do here on Earth, shall presently in my black palace be
innacted for a Statute: thou have performed the duty of a Son in executing my
decrees that I left with you at the last Conventicles, where I wish I had not
been with you, for I think I have got my last, from a Cobbler, who in villainy
exceeded even his Father great Pluto. I having nor long life, enact thee
overseer and chiefest Executor of my last Will and Testament, do what in it is
commanded, and I will in one hour bring thee to my Acaronticall Palace, where
nothing shall be too much for him that acknowledges me, hot scalding Lead,
dear Son, shall be thy Nactar, thou shall quaffe off whole boules of tear, to
thy secconders, each sense with a greedy appe^ite shall have its fill, and the
whole Man shall taste my best pleasures, Music thou shall delight in much and
hear a quire of Cerberuses and the Sirens of Hell; In this performance have
but Argus eyes,
For Music, black zantes, and the Stigian cries.



Roundhead. Ever honored Prince, if a Son may have the permission and
boldness to speak to a Farther, let what design from you be spoken, my power
in your service extends it self so far that I will effect.

And think it done, what ever you command,
I Will perpetrate the thing I take in hand.

Pluto. Upon my deathbed Son, I enjoyne thee that thou see my will
completely performed, let not a Bishop in the Land have power, neither let the
Churches stand, pull down all and abolish the light, that we may live in
darkness, a tub is sufficient for any one to Preach in: I would have my
kingdom flourish that it may be said, it is Pluto's Kingdom, that is the
chiefest Throne. Thou art an Ironmonger, and though thou have broke here, I
have Chains and old Iron for to set thee up again; thou have almost quit thy
self, witness thy last Sermon of Toby an^ his Dog, and the Tale in a Tub: To
ch^nge a trade it is no ^me, from an Ironmonger to a Coop^r, ^^d the b^st^d,
for if t^y ze^le should strike the bottom out, then mi^^^ thou exercise a
faculty and turn C^oper, Cob^er, and Tinker, I reach thee a way to thrive;
some of thy Brethren are horned heads as well as Roundheads, turn, Grafier and
make one Branch two, that our Sect may the better be noted; With Fa^alists, all
things are lawful Son,
(...) Round-^ead what thou have begun.


Rou^^^^^^ I will ^^^^avour to the utmost, dread Sovereign, (...) thing by you
commanded, and though I be cract in trade, I will not neglect your affairs,
and be discouraged in your occasions; I will also crack my brain before I will
leave unperfected, what you command me.

Some call me little-Wit, but it is no evil,
For I have spent it all, to please the Devil.

Pluto. This is my Will, dear Son, the first thing specified is this: I leave
one hundred pound per Annum, for our Conventicles. 2. I leave my Brains, Head,
and Horns to all the rest of our Brethren, for wickedness and that which is
naught they want not I am sure. 3 And thirdly, I leave my Scepter and Kingdom
to thee, and only thee, dear Son: I cannot live, the Doctor specified so much
to me the other day, but do these things and I will help thee at all times,
do any thing, nothing shall hinder thy course to my black Palace, therefore
disturb me not, but go about it, and I will betake me to my more serious
consideratious.


I am a dying thus to him I say,
But for to punish, Roundheads live always,
And this alone shall be my Roundhead than
Which is a Brownist and a Knave,
But seems an honest Man.

An Oration of the Roundhead, a cracked Ironmonger, new made Executor to the
Devil.
Roundhead, BRethren, it is the fortune of Knaves and Fools to have the best
luck: I make no question but it is well known to you all, that our Father
Pluto has given over trading, and has made me supervisor of his last Will and
Testament; it is a fortune beyond the Moon, and though I be both Knave and
Fool, yst I thought the Proverb would have crossed it self in me; and seeing I
am so chosen and predestined, I will have an eye to all his entreaties, and
execute the part of an adopted Son; he has given me charge over your cum cura
animarum, therefore dear Sisters and Brethren, I must perform the part of the
Devils Viccar and Curate of Hell, therefore lets follow him, and our
Service-Clarke set the Song.


Clarke, Lets sing this Song to the tune of Old Sir Simon the King; it is a New
Dittie, ellevate you voices.


GRand Pluto he is dead,
Lets sing in this very Day,
That he has left his Throne
Unto the Roundheads sway.
And Old Sir Simon the King,
And Old Sir Simon the King,
We'll have a threadbare Coat, and a mamsey Nose,
Sing hey ding ding a ding ding.
The Ironmonger Rules,
The Cobbler also Preaches,
The Tinker he Cornutes,
The Weaver sometimes teaches.
And Old Sir Simon the King.
The Sisters protles much,
Canarie-Birds imitating,
The Baker gets a Tubs,
And never holds his prating.
And Old Sir Simon the King.
We stuff our guts with Capons,
Devotions but very small,
The World we thus can flatter,
And say Devotions all.
With Old Sir Simon the King.
To Westminster we trudge,
Each Man with a Bilbo blade,
At Night to Conventicles,
And ride like Hackney-Jade.
And Old Sir Simon the King.
The Miters from the Prelates
We will pull away,
No Man dare contradict,
Or once against it say.
Then Old Sir Simon the King.
The Devil has left us his,
What is it we want at all,
Be steadfast sister dear,
Although that Roundheads fall.
Then Old Sir Simon the King,
Then Old Sir Simon the King,
We Will have a thread bare Coat, and a Mamsie Nose,
Sing hey ding ding a ding ding.
Clarke, Peace and put out the Candles, you have gone a Note too high, lie all
the Sisters down, and strain lower, procreandi causa.


FINIS.

