Prayers FOR THE USE of all PERSONS Who come to the BATHS For CURE.

By the Author of the Manual of Prayers, for the Use of the Scholars of
Winchester College.

London, Printed for C. Brom, 1692.

BATHE
map of the city of Bath

Prayers FOR THE USE of all PERSONS Who come to the BATHS For CURE.
All Glory be to God.
Good Christian Brother or Sister,
WHatsoever the Calamity be, whether sickness, or lameness, or want of
Children, which brings you to this place, I am sensible how tender a regard I
ought to have for you; since you are come within my Fold, in imitation of our
most merciful Redeemer, who in respect even of our bodily distempers,
Sympathised with our miseries, bore our griefs, and carried our sorrows Isa.
liii. 4. Mat. viii. 17.

For this reason I could not satisfy my self, in only praying for you, as I
daily do, unless I did also send you these Directions and Prayers, which are
few, and short, and familiar, to comply with the Infirmites of your Condition,
and which I hope by Gods blessing, may be words spoken in season; nor can I
doubt, but that All of you who want such helps, will seriously pursue them, and
observe the advices of your spiritual Physicians, as you are wont to do those
of your Corporal.

Do not think the Baths can do you any good, without Gods immediate blessing on
them; for it is God that must first heal the waters, before they can have any
virtue to heal you.

The River Jordan could never have cleansed Naaman of his Leprosy, 2 King v.
10. had he washed himself in it, seventy times seven times, had not God blessed
it to his clensing. The Pool of Siloam, Joh. ix. 7^ could never have restored
sight to one born blind, had not our Lord sent him to it. And the Pool of
Bethesda could never have made sick persons whole, but that an Angel was sent
by God to trouble the waters Joh. v. 14.

I cannot then do better, than to send you to that Angel, who according to St.
John, Flies in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach to
them that dwell on the earth, saying with a loud voice, fear God, and give
glory to him, and worship him, that made heaven, and earth, and the Sea, and
the fountains of waters, Rev. xiv.6, 7.

This was the Angel's Sermon; and I beseech you to become his Auditors, and to
observe how after the Heaven, and the Earth, and the Sea, he particularly
mentions the Springs or Fountains of waters, as a very wonderful part of the
Creation: for out of the dark places of the Earth, through Passages, and from
Causes, unknown to the search of the wisest of men, God makes sweet, and fresh
Springs to rise, to water the Earth, to give drink to every Beast of the Field,
and to supply all the necessities of human Life, and Springs of different
kinds, some to allay our thirst, some to Cure our Diseases.

Look therefore on the Bath, as a very admir^^^^ and propitious Work of Divine
Providence, designed for the good of a great number of infirm persons, as well
as for your self. Praise and Adore God, who has signally manifested his Power,
and his Mercy, in Creating so Universal a Good; and the first thing you do when
you are come to this place, worship God who made the Fountain.

To this end you may use the following form at your first coming, and all the
time of your stay: and be pleased to observe that this, and all the other forms
which you find here, are penned in distinct parts, on purpose that you may
choose those which are most suitable to your condition, or recite one at a
time, if your Weakness will not bear any longer intention of your mind.

A Thanksgiving for the Waters, and a Prayer for Gods Blessing on them.
WIth all Humility of soul and of body, I praise, and adore, and worship thee,
O Lord God, Allmighty, and All-gracious, who have mad^ the Fountains of Waters;
thou sendest the Springs into the Valleys which run among the Hills: some for
our Refreshment, some for Medicine, and in particular, thou have sent us this
Spring, as a general good to infirm persons. And therefore all Glory be to thee.

Thee only, O Lord, do I acknowledge the Author of the Sp^ing, thou only can
make it eff^ctual to my Cure in thee only I trust, on th^^ only I depend, to
thee only, I commit my self, all my hope is only in thee.

Behold, O merciful Lord, I am come to the Bath, as Naaman to Jordan, O may I
feel the like happy effect, O may I wash and be healed!

I come Lord, like the blind man to the Pool of Siloam; I come, for thou thy
self have sent me, as thou did send him. Thy Providence by laying on me this
Distemper, has bid me come hither. O may the Bath be as powerful to restore my
Health, as the Pool was to give the blind man his sight.

I come Lord to the Bath, like the Infirm man to the Pool of Bethesda; O send
thy Angel to move the Waters as I step into them, to move them, not only for
me, but for all other Infirm persons also, whom thou have sent hither, that we
may be made Whole, of whatsoever Diseases we have, if it seem good in thy sight.

Lord be thou pleased to guide and counsel my Physician, that he may thoroughly
discover the cause of my Distemper, and prescribe proper means for my Recovery,
and do thou so bless those means, that in thy good time, they may become
successful.

O my God, hear me, and help me, for the merits of Jesus thy beloved. Amen.

You have great reason to begin with God, not only because he is the Author of
the Bath, and can only bless it to your Health; but also because he is the
Author of that very Distemper that brings you hither. For affliction comes not
forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the g^ound, Job. v. 6. It
is not a thing that happens to us by chance: it does not proceed only from
Natural Causes, which are secundary, and instrumental; we must look beyond all
these, to the permission, and apointment of Divine Providence, from which it
first took its rise, and by which it is wholly conducted.

Since then it is certain, that your Affliction comes from God, and it is as
certain that God does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men,
Lam. iii.33. but that he has always a most Righteous motive, to incline him to
afflict them. It very h^ghly concerns you to examine your self with all the
care you can, that you may discover what there is in you, what you have done,
to move the God of Mercy to grieve you.

There is no Calamity, whether it be Sickness, or Pain, or Lameness, or the
like, that can befall us, but it is the natural consequence of our depraved,
frail, mortal condition, and is incident to good Men, as well as to bad; to the
former, it is a punishment, to the latter it is a trial.

Holy Scripture teaches us, that God has threatened very many, and very sore
bodily Diseases to Disobedience, Deu. xviii.58, 59, 60. and that they who are
sick, are stricken by God, 2 Samuel xii.15. The Corinthians, who profaned the
blessed Sacrament, were for that cause, many of them weak, and sickly, 2 Chronicles.
xxi.18. 1 Cor. xi.30. And our Savior, in his advice he gives to the Man whom
he cured of an Infirmity of thirty eight years continuance, intimates that sin
was the cause of that inveterate Disease, Jo. v.14.

But when God is pleased to afflict righteous persons with Sickness, as he did
King David and Hezekiah, then Sickness is not an effect of God's Anger, but of
his Paternal discipline toward them, Ps. xxxviii.7. Isa. xxxviii.1.

The like may be said of Lameness, which happens by the Divine Direction, to
good Men, as well as to the wicked: King Asa who did that which was good, and
right in the eyes of the Lord his God, in the time of his old, age, was
diseased in his feet 1 King. xv.23. Mephibosheth was lame from five years old,
2 Samuel iv.4. And the poor Man whom St. Peter and St. John miraculously healed,
was lame from his mothers womb, Acts iii.2.

Since then both Sickness and Lameness are strokes given us by God, to him we
must chiefly, and in the first place, betake our selves for Cure; and the Holy
Ghost has set a mark of spiritual disgrace on Asa, who was otherwise a good
King, That in his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians, 2
Chr. xvi.12.

Not that the Scripture does in the least condemn, or discourage our going to
the Physicians when we are sick, or our use of all due means for our Recovery.
Our Savior himself, when he says, They that are whole need not a Physician,
but they that are sick, Mat. ix.12. sufficiently intimates, that they that are
sick did need one.

The Son of Sira^h gives excellent advice to both the sick and the Physician:
Honor a Physician with the honor due unto him, for the uses which you may
have of him, the Lord has created him, the Lord has created Medicines out of
the earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them, and with such does he heal
men, and takes away their pains, Ecclus. xxxviii.1. etc. But then he adds, My
son, in thy sickness be not negligent, but pray unto the Lord, and he will make
thee whole; leave off from sin, and order thy hands aright, and cleanse thy
heart from all wickedness; give a sweet savor, and a memorial of fine flower;
then give place to the Physician. There is a time when in their hands there is
good success; for they also shall pray unto the Lord, that he would prosper
that which they give for ease and remedy, to prolong life.

I earnestly recommend to you this Counsel of the Son of Sirach; and therefore
to you that are sick, or infirm, or lame, I recommend Repentance, and Prayer,
and Sacrifice; the Sacrifice of Alms, by which you will offer to God a sweet
savor. To your Physician I also recommend devout Prayer to the Author of
Health, and Sickness, that his Physic may prosper; and then is Physic like to
procure a Blessing, when both the Patient, and the Physician join in their
Prayers for it.

I exhort you to begin with Repentance, and to read Devotional Books on that
Subject, of which, blessed be God, there are good store; for it is Repentance
that must dispose you for Prayer.

The Prophet complains of the obdurateness of those, who, when God had stricken
them, did not grieve, Jer. v.3. God forbid you should be thus obdurate. God
forbid! but since he has stricken you, you should grieve, and grieve with that
godly sorrow which works Repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of.

I ^^seech you then to examine your selves very seriously, whether you have
ever repented of your sins, so as to bring forth fruits meet for repentance;
for if you are guilty either of total Impenitence, or of an universal relapse
into your old sins, or if you lie under the dominion of any one wilful sin,
look no further for the original cause of your Distemper: God has in Justice
sent it you for your punishment.

But the most merciful God, who delights not in the death of a sinner, in his
very Punishments designs rather to awaken, than to destroy us; and if this
punishment, by which God calls you to repentance, does awaken you out of your
former security, it turns to a Blessing, to a happy occasion of your eternal
Bliss; be of good cheer then, and repent.

Your very bodily Distemper will present you with a lively Idea of your sins,
and Holy Scripture makes use of the former, to picture out to us the latter.
Think then of the weakness, and the pain, and the indisposedness, and the
restlessness, and the danger that afflict the sick Man, and compare them with
that impotence to good, that anguish of a wounded Spirit, that universal
indisposedness to Duty, that restlessness of Conscience, those horrors of
eternal torment, which attend the sinner, and which without Repentance are for
ever incurable; and make this reflection with your self, that if we are so very
sollicitous for the cure of our Bodies, much more ought we to be sollicitous
for the cure of our Souls.

But if your heart does not condemn you, if you are conscious to your self, you
have truly repented, and have never returned to your vomit again, and indulge
no one wilful sin, and have nothing to accuse your self of, but your daily
failings; which are the unavoidable infelicities of lapsed nature, and for
which you daily beg pardon, then is your Distemper a fatherly Chastisement
only, and you ought to rejoice in it rather than in the least to regret it.
However it is your best way to renew your repentance on this occasion, and to
be sure to bear Gods Rod, and to learn that Lesson from it, in which you are
sensible you were deficient before, and which God has sent this ^ffliction on
purpose to ^each you.

True Repentance will rightly dispose you for Prayer, and you will come with
boldness, with an humble, but firm confidence to the throne of Grace, when you
can look on God as reconciled to you in Jesus, and shall be sure to obtain help
in time of need. To obtain either the Cure of your Distemper, or if God sees
the continuance of it to be more for your spiritual advantage such Grace which
is sufficien^ for you, such Consolation i^ your own Soul, and satisfaction in
God's good pleasure, as shall abundantl^ over-balance your Calamity^

Prayer is a Duty alway^ obliging, and to be practiced by all, because all
stand alike in need of the Divine Mercy, and Benediction; but it is more
especially the Duty proper for the time of affliction, because our needs are
then most pressing, and therefore says St. James, Is any afflicted, let him
pray, Jam. v. 14.

Nor is it enough for you to pray for your selves, but according to the same
Apostle's advice, and as soon as you come to this place, whether you are poor,
or rich, send for, or if you are able, go your self to the Elders of the
Church, to pray over you as God's Ministers, and to give you Ghostly Counsel,
as they are Guides of Souls; desire them that you may have the daily Prayers of
the whole Congregation for you, that the Waters may be blessed to you, and be
sure you daily frequent the public Prayers your self, or as often as your
Infirmity permits.

In all your Prayers, for deliverance from your present affliction, you must
always remember to pray with resignation of your own will, to the Divine Will,
as our Lord has taught us, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from
me, nevertheless not my will bu^ thine be done, Luke xxii.42. This short
affectual Heavenly Prayer I beseech you to have always in your Heart, and in
your Mouth; and the oftener you repeat it, endeavor to repeat it with more and
more fervency, committing your condition, all your sorrows, and the answer of
all your Prayers wholly to God, Committing your soul entirely to him in
well-doing, as into the hands of a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. iv.19.

Of the two Prayers which follow, you may use daily one, or both, in whole, or
in part, as they best suit with the temper of your Soul, and with your
particular condition.

A Prayer for Repentance when God is provoked to punish us.
O Holy Lord God, I wretched Sinner, humbly acknowledge, that thou in thy
Justice have laid this Calamity on me for my sins. Glory be to thee, O Lord,
that thou have not given me over as incorrigible, that thou have sent this
Punishment to awaken, and to humble me. O may it have that blessed effect on
me, that from my very misery, I may date my salvation!

Thou Lord have stricken me (with Sickness) (with Lameness) and it is just I
should bear thy Indignation, because I have sinned against thee.

Blessed be thy infinite Goodness, that my Punishment is not greater, that Thou
have not suffered thy whole displeasure to arise.

O Lord God, in the midst of Judgment remember Mercy, that Mercy which is over
all thy Works, that Mercy in which thou thy self delightest; Behold, a great, a
miserable sinner, a fit Object of that Mercy here prostrate before thee: Lord
have mercy on me.

Ah Lord, my spiritual Distemper, is infinitely more mortal than my corporal; O
that it might be thy good pleasure to forgive the one, and to remove the other.

O thou that art rich in Mercy, give the Grace of true Repentance to all that
come to the Waters; and give it to me, the greatest sinner of them all.

Lord, give me Grace to examine all my misspent life, in the bitterness of my
Soul to confess my sins, with a broken and contrite Heart, to bewail them with
utmost abhorrence to forsake them, and do thou so order my steps in thy Word,
that for the time to come, no wickedness may have Dominion over me, that I may
bring forth fruits meet for repentance.

I confess, Lord, that I have abused my members, and made them Instruments of
unrighteousness to sin, Romans vi.13. and thou have most justly punished them for
it; O restore them to me again, and I will endeavor all my life, to make them
Instruments of Righteousness to thy Glory.

Ah Lord, it is the Cure of my Soul, for which I pray more earnestly, than for
the Cure of my Body. I go to the Bath for my bodily Health, and bless it, if it
be thy will to my perfect Recovery, and to the Recovery of all those that come
thither with me: But for the Health of my Soul, I fly to the blood of Jesus, to
the Fountain set open for sin and for uncleanness: I consult my bodily
Physician for my Distemper, but with much greater concern, I fly to thee, O
Lord, who art the Sovereign Physician of Souls.

Heal my soul, O God, for I have sinned, grievously sinned against thee, and by
my sins have provoked thee, who art the God of Mercy, to anger. O Heal my
backsliding, and love me freely, and take away mine iniquity, and receive me
graciously, and turn thine anger from me.

I humbly pray to thee, O Lord, for my Bodily Cure; but because I know I may be
eternally happy hereafter without Health of Body here, I pray for it with a
resolution, to acquiess in thy good pleasure, should thou think fit to deny
it. But, O my God, when I pray for the Cure of my Soul, I resolve I will not be
denied, I will never give over importuning thee, till thou give me that Godly
sorrow, which works repentance to salvation, not to be repented of, till thou
have begun to kindle thy love in my Heart.

Turn thou me, O Lord, and I shall be turned. I will give thee no rest, till
thou have turned me to thy self. Turn me then, O my God, O Turn me, O Pardon
me, O Succor me, O Heal me, O Save me, for thy own infinite mercies sake, and
for the merits of Jesus thy beloved, in whom thou have made sinners accepted.
Amen. Amen.

A Prayer for Amendment when God is pleased to Try us.
I Know, Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and that thou of very faithfulness
have caused me to be troubled, for before I was afflicted I went astray, but
now have I learned to keep thy Word, blessed be thy goodness for afflicting me.

True it is, O my God, that thou have most seasonably sent me this affliction,
(this Sickness, Lameness,) because thou in thy propitious Wisdom did see that
I wanted it. O may it have its most gracious, and full influence on my soul,
that I may be bettered by it.

I humbly beg of thee, O merciful Father, that this affliction may strengthen
my Faith, which thou saw was growing weak: fix my Hope which was staggering,
quicken my Devotion which was languishing, unite me to my first Love which I
was forsaking, rekindle my Charity which was cooling, revive my Zeal which was
dying, confirm my Obedience which was wavering, recover my Patience which was
fainting, mortify my Pride which was presuming, and perfect my Repentance
which was daily decaying: for all these and the like Infirmites, to which my
Soul is exposed, O make thy Affliction my Cure.

Grant, O my God, that this Affliction, thou have in mercy laid on me, may wean
all my affections from the World, which I was apt to grow too fond of; rescue
me from those occasions of evil, of which I was in danger; secure me from those
temptations which were ready to assault me; restrain me from those sins, to
which my nature most strongly inclined; preserve me from all those abuses of
Health, I am apt to incur; and purify my Soul, from all that dross, and from
all those vicious propensions, which either my Repentance had left behind, or
which I have since contracted.

O my God, let thy Affliction produce my Amendment, and all the happy effects
in me, which it is wont to do in thy Children, and which thou in mercy do
design it should; and then continue thy Affliction, if it seem good in thy
sight: behold, Lord, Happy is the man whom thou thus correctest, Job. v.17.

What is best for me, O my God, I know not, my Flesh desires a deliverance from
this Distemper, and if it be thy pleasure, O Lord deliver me: my Spirit desires
that thou only would choose for me: do thou then O Heavenly Father choose for
me; choose for me because thou art my Father, and out of thy Fatherly
tenderness, wilt be sure to choose what is the best for me: I resign up my own
will entirely to thine. Father if, thou be willing, remove this cup from me,
nevertheless not my will but thine be done.

O my Father, if it be thy blessed will the Waters should not be effectual to
me, make them effectual to all other Infirm Persons besides: I will rejoice in
thy goodness for removing their Affliction, I will acquiesce in thy goodness
for continuing mine.

Hear, Lord, and have Compassion on me, for the Merits and Sufferings of Jesus,
whose perfect Resignation may I always imitate. Amen. Amen.

Next to the great Duties of Repentance, and Prayer, I am to exhort you to
Sacrifice of Almsgiving, which is a Duty appropriate to the Rich, or to those
who have a Competence of the things of this World, so that as hitherto I have
united the Rich and Poor together, because both are alike obliged to Repent and
to Pray, I must now separate them, and give distinct Exhortations to them both.

An Exhortation to the Rich.
IF you are Rich, or have wherewithal to relieve others, then be sure to be
rich in good works, and according to your ability give alms, Luke xi.41. and
give them in this place to those poor Christians, who come to the Bath for the
Cure of the like Distempers as the Rich do, but have nothing to sustain them,
or to defray the Charges of their Cure.

From what you feel your self, learn to compassionate the like Miseries in
others; that Relief you would desire others should show to you, were you in
want, do you show to the Poor; Those Blessings, that Ease, that Health, and
that Patience, you beg of God for your self, beg of God for all others, which
you see are in the like distress, and beg it as you would for your self, and
with a like concern.

Such Charity as this will be an unspeakable Comfort to you, whatever your
Distemper is; there is a present Temporal Blessing promised to it, and promised
to Charitable persons in that very time, when they most of all want it, namely
in the time of their trouble, and on their sick Beds: For Blessed is he that
considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of
trouble, the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, thou will
make all his bed in his sickness, Psalm. xli.1, 3.

Learn then of our most Compassionate Savior to show Mercy to the Sick, and
the Lame, and to contribute all you can to their Healing; lay aside money for
that very Use, and pray to God to direct your Charity to those who most want
it, and who are most worthy to be relieved: by this means you will be able
Conscientiously to say with Job, I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the
lame, Job xxix.15.

A Prayer for the Rich.
ALL Glory be to thee, O Lord God, for that portion of the good things of this
Life, thou have been pleased to vouchsafe me; Thou Lord have made me thy
Steward of them, and at the great day, I must give an account to thee of my
stewardship. O make me a faithful Steward of them, that I may give an account
to thee with joy, and not with grief.

Thou Lord have made it an argument of my love to thee, to open my bowels to my
Brother in need. Behold, Lord, I see many of my Brethren and Sisters here in
need, and destitute of those Conveniences for using the Waters, which thou in
great goodness have vouchsafed me, and out of a grateful sense of thy infinite
Love to me, I desire to show Love to them, and to my power to contribute to
their Comfort, Support, and Cure: Glory be to thee who have enabled me to do it.

O Blessed Savior, I see thee, in every one of thy poor Members, here lying at
the Pool, and thou have none to help thee in. O give me grace to undertake that
merciful Office; to open my Bowels, and my Purse wide to help thee; and do thou
vouchsafe help to me, in my time of need.

O my God, do thou direct me, in the distribution of my Alms to those who most
want, and who best deserve relief; that I may dispose of them most agreeable to
thy will, and to those who shall most glorify thee for them.

O make me ever merciful, as thou, O Father in Heaven art merciful; indulge me
a share in that mercy, with which thou have promsed to bless the merciful, and
send me deliverance in the time of trouble.

Hear Lord, forgive, and save me, for thy own infinite mercies sake, for thy
truth, and promise sake, and for the merits of Jesus thy beloved. Amen. Amen.

Ejaculations at the giving of Alms.
BLessed be thou, O Lord God, for ever and ever; for all things come of thee,
and of thy own do I now give thee, 1 Chr. xxix.

Lord, let these Alms be an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable,
well peasing to thee, through Jesus the son of thy love, Phil. iv.18.

If your own Charitable disposition incline you, and your Spiritual Guide do
also advise you, to devote a particular Sum to Pious Uses, you may express your
Vow, in this or the like manner:

O my God, if thou will be with me in this place, and keep me in thy way, and
deliver me from my (Sickness, Lameness) and bless the Waters to me, then shall
thou, O Lord, be my God, and of that thou have given me, I will surely give
(here name the Sum) to thee, and to the Poor, that they may be relieved by it,
and Glorify thee for it.

An Exhortation to the Poor.
YOU that are Poor, though you cannot exercise your Charity in giving to
others, yet you may, and ought to do it, in praying for them, especially for
your Benefactours.

The greater your Temporal Wants are, the more they should teach you to depend
on God; and the fewer are your Temptations; and your very Poverty, if you make
a sanctified use of it, will teach you Poverty of Spirit, Humility,
Heavenly-mindedness, of lively Faith, and a firm confidence in God, who is your
only Refuge, and Help in your greatest need.

A Prayer for the Poor.
O Lord God, the Refuge of all mankind, but especially of the miserable look
down with thine Eye^ of tenderest pity, on my low and destitute condition.

Thou Lord, have been pleased to deny me the good things, the Conveniences of
this Life, blessed be thy Name for it; thou saw I should abuse them, and
therefore have in mercy withheld from me those occasions of sin. But since
thou art pleased, beyond my poverty to lay this further Calamity, (this
Sickness, Lameness) on me, which has brought me hither, O be thou also pleased
to succor, and to support me under it.

Ah, Lord, I come to my Remedy, but have not wherewithal to apply it: I come to
the Waters, but have none to assist me, none to help me into the Bath; O let
thy infinite Love, kindle a compassionate Charity in the Hearts of the Rich,
and incline some merciful persons, to relieve me.

Send seasonable relief, O my God, to all other poor and needy persons, who
come hither calamitous like my self! O bless the Waters to our Cure, that being
restored to our health, and strength, we may return to our Labor, and
according to thy Divine Appointment, In the sweat of our brows may eat our
bread; Bless the Waters, O Lord, to all other infirm persons, but especially
bless them to my Benefactors.

Lord, sanctify my poverty to me, that I may be humble and constant under it,
and submissive to the Disposals of thy most wise and gracious Providence.

O my God, though I am poor in this World, make me rich in faith; I will gladly
want Riches here, so I may have Treasure in Heaven hereafter, and be an Heir of
the Kingdom, which thou have promised to those that love thee. Lord pity me,
Lord hear me, Lord help me, Lord save me, according to the multitude of thy
Mercies, and the Merits of my Savior. Amen. Amen.

The Poor Man's Prayer for those that relieve him.
GLory be to thee, O Lord, for my Benefactors; Glory be to thee who have given
them ability, and enlarged their Hearts, to relieve the poor and needy; Glory
be to thee for directing them in particular to relieve me.

O my God, I earnestly beg of thee, to show mercy to them, who have showed
mercy to me: I have had the comfort of their Alms, Blessed be thy Name: O give
them a plentiful recompense for it, reward them sevenfold into their Bosom,
through Jesus thy Beloved. Amen. Amen.

Ejaculations for the Poor.
AS for me I am poor and needy, but thou Lord, carest for me, and on thee,
Lord, I cast all my cares.

Glory be to thee, O Lord, who deliverest the poor in his affliction: O let it
be thy pleasure to deliver me.

O Lord, the poor commits himself to thee, for thou art the helper of the
friendless; and to thee, poor as I am, I wholly commit my self. O be thou my
Helper, O be thou my Friend.

Thou, O God, have of thy goodness prepared for the poor, and the poor and
needy shall give thanks unto thy Name.

O my Soul, put thy trust in the Lord, and by doing good dwell in the Land, and
verily thou shall be fed.

Having thus allotted to you that are Rich, and to you that are Poor, your
distinct Duties, I must now again join you together; and I most passionately
beseech you, if you have a concern for the eternal welfare of your Souls, any
Honor for that most Holy Religion you profess, any Reverence for the Pure
All-seeing Eyes of God, to take all imaginable care, that you do not abuse the
Bath, by any Lasciviousness, or Impurity, which may defile your selves, or
others: for this is the way to turn the means of your cure, into an occasion of
the more outrageous sin; and to provoke God to send you away with a dreadful
Curse, instead of a Blessing.

If after a due use of the Baths, you find any benefit by them, and that your
Distemper is either removed, or abated, as you desired the Prayers of the
Congregation at your first coming, for God's Blessing on the Waters; So it is
most just you should desire the Congregation to give thanks for you, and to
render to God a public acknowledgment for the Mercy he has vouchsafed you.

Be very careful, that when you are well, you do not forget you were sick: but
let that advice which our Lord gives to the impotent Man, be deeply impressed
on your mind, say it often to your own Soul, Sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee.

Renew all those good Resolutions you made in the day of your distress; be very
watchful and jealous over your self for fear of Backslidings; avoid all
occasions of sin for the future; and dedicate that Health, to which God has in
tender mercy restored you, to his Glory.

A Thanksgiving
ALL Praise, all Glory be to thee, my Lord and my God, for hearing my Prayers
in the time of my trouble, for blessing the Waters to my Good, (to my Ease) (to
my Cure;) O, may I never forget this Blessing, O may I ever give thee thanks
for it.

Lord, I am jealous over my own treacherous Heart, that now thou have (abated)
(freed me from) my Calamity, I shall grow cold in my Devotion, and that the
sense of my Duty will be apt to wear off with my affliction: but my sure and
only Trust is in the assistances of thy Grace. O, hold up my goings in thy
paths, that my footsteps slip not, O, keep me as the Apple of the Eye.

O, may I sin no more, left a worse thing come unto me.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, while I live will I praise the Lord, as long as I
have my Being, I will sing Praises unto my God.

I called upon the Lord in my trouble, and the Lord heard me at large,
therefore will I praise him.

Thou art my God, and I will thank thee; thou art the Lord, and I will praise
thee.

Praised be the Lord, who has not cast out my Prayer, nor turned his mercy
from me.

O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is Gracious, and his mercy endures for
ever.

I will not only praise thee, O Lord, in private, but I will tell abroad what
thou have done for my Soul.

I will give thanks unto thee in the great Congregation, I will praise thee
amongst much people.

Accept, O my God, this my Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving; and since the
longer I live, the more I experience thy most adorable, and boundless Goodness,
the more devoutly may I daily praise thee, the more intensely may I daily love
thee, through Jesus thy Beloved. Amen Amen.

To this you may properly add the hundred and third Psalm.

IF after you have used the Waters, you find no relief by them, be not
discouraged: it may be God designs to effect your Cure some other ways; it may
be he sees it best for your spiritual good, that your Distemper should
continue, and it is your Duty patiently to submit to his good pleasure.

If you are conscious to your self, that you have truly repented of all your
sins past, and that the desire of your Soul is toward God, you may be then
assured, that God chastened you because he loves you, that he deals with you
as with a Child, and that his paternal Bowels are ever yearning on you.

It Is most true in common experience, what the Appostle affirms, That no
Chastning for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous, and so will your
Chastning seem to you; nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceble fruit of
righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby, Heb. xii.11. and such
fruit it will in the end infallibly yield to you.

Believe me then, that you will at last to your unutterable joy, experimentally
find that all things, even the sharpest and the most continued afflictions,
work together for good, to those that love God, Romans viii.28.

Ejaculations for the Afflicted.
DEal thou with me, O Lord, according to thy Name, for sweet is thy Mercy.

Thou have been my Succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
Salvation.

I should utterly have faintted, but that I verily believe to see the Goodness
of the Lord, in the Land of the Living.

I will wait on the Lord, from whom comes my Salvation.

Though I am sometime afraid, yet put I my trust in thee.

Thou shall keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is staid on thee, because he
trusts in thee.

O what great Troubles and Adversities have thou showed me, and yet did thou
turn, and refresh me.

As for me, I patiently abide always, and will praise thee more and more.

In the multitude of the sorrows I had in my heart, thy comforts have refreshed
my Soul.

Unto thy entire disposal I resign my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O
Lord, thou God of Truth.

O, may I always Do and Suffer thy will.

My God, though thou slayest me, yet will I put my trust in thee.

It is the Lord, it is my God, it is my Father, it is my Friend, it is infinite
Love that afflicts me: let him do what seems him good, he can will nothing
but good to me; his Will be ever done, and not my own.

To these Ejaculations may be added that Prayer for Amendment when God is
pleased to try us, which went before.

IF want of Children good Christian, and hopes of Benefit from the Water, bring
you hither, then I beseech you, as I did those who were sick or lame, to begin
with God: Repentance and Prayer, and Resignation and Charity, are all as proper
for your condition, as for them.

Be assured, that Children are the Gift of God, and let your first and chief
recourse be to him, and from him, only expect a Bessing.

It Is true, the Blessing of the Womb are temporal only, yet they are such which
all married persons regularly ought to desire, and for which they ought with
humility, and submission to Pray.

Though the blessing of Children is very often indulged to wicked persons as
well as to good, yet we see many times that God denies them to both, though
they never so passionately desire them.

When God denies Children to wicked persons, it is in his anger, and for
punishment. Thus Nadab and Abihu for offering strange fire, died before the
Lord, Number. iii.4. and as an aggravation of their punishment it is remarked,
that they had no children. And the doom that God pronounced against wicked
Coniah was, Thus says the Lord, write this man childless, Jer. xxii.30. God
threatens incestuous persons, That they shall die childless, Lev. xx.20, 32.
And sometimes when hopes of Issue appear, he gives the Wife a miscarrying womb,
and dry breasts, Hos. ix.14. It is therefore most needful, that you should
ground your hopes of Children, on a previous Repentance.

Children are no certain marks of Gods Favor, and therefore the good often
want them. Never were ^here two better married Couples, than Abraham the friend
of God, and Sarah, ^han Zechary and Elizabeth; ^ho were both righteous before
God, walking in all the Commandments of the Lord ^lameless, and yet Sarah, and
Elizabeth were both barren, and never had been mothers ^ut by Miracle.

Rebeckah, and Rachel, and Hannah, had all for a long time their wombs shut up,
and by Prayer they were all at last opened.

However, when God foresees Children like to prove either Temptations, or
Calamities, or Curses to their good Parents, it is a great blessing then to
deny them which our Lord imitates t^ the Daughters of Jerusalem when he told
them, The days were coming in which they should say, blessed are the barren,
and the wombs th^^ never bare, and the paps th^^ never gave suck. Luk xxiii.29^

But when God denie^ Children to Holy Persons he makes up the blessing some
other way, and gives them a name better than of sons, and of daughters, an
everlasting name, that shall not be cut off, Isa. lvi.5. so that, which way
soever God thinks fit to deal with you, you have all the reason imaginable, to
assure your self that what is Gods Will is best for you, and cheerfully to
acquiesce in his good pleasure.

A Prayer for a Wife.
O Lord God Almighty, who formest us from the womb, who coverest us there, and
see our substance when imperfect, and all our Members, and how they are
curiously formed, Ps. cxxxix.16. All Glory be to thee.

I know Lord that Children, and the Fruit of the womb, are an heritage and gift
that comes of thee, and therefore of thee only I beg it; O vouchsafe me that
gift in thy good time. Glory be to thee O Lord, who make the barren Woman to
keep House, and to be a joyful Mother of Children. O that it might please thee,
to make me a joyful Mother.

Deliver me, O my God, from either a barren, or from a miscarrying womb, and
from dry Breasts; and if it be thy will, bless the Waters, that they may
dispose me to to be Fruitful, and to Conceive; and do thou, O Lord, most
tenderly preserve the Fruit of my womb, that I may at last happily bring forth,
and may forget my pangs, and may praise thy Name, for joy that a Child is born
into the World.

To thee, O Lord God, do I Vow this Vow, that if thou will indeed look on the
affliction of thy handmaid, and remember me, and wilt give unto thy handmaid
Children, then I will give them unto thee, 1 Samuel i.11. I will early devote
them to thee in Holy Baptism: I will do my utmost to bring them up in thy
nurture and admonition; in thy filial Fear, and reverential Love, that they may
become instruments of thy Glory on Earth, and may at last become Saints in
Heaven, to sing eternal praises to thee there.

Bless me, and my Husband, O Lord God Almighty, bless us with the blessings of
Heaven above, and with the blessings of the deep that lies under, bless us
with the blessings of the Breasts, and of the Womb, if it be thy will.

O Lord, if thou art pleased, for most wise and gracious purposes, to deny us
the blessings of Children; thy most Holy Will be done: O give us an entire
contentedness without them; and though it is not thy pleasure to make us
Fruitful in our Bodies, yet make us Fruitful in our Souls, Fruitful in all
saving Graces, which will in the end, prove a much greater joy, and comfort,
and blessing to us both, than Children. Hear me, O Lord, and help me, and grant
my Petition if it be thy Will, for thy infinite Goodness sake, and the sake of
Jesus the Son of thy Love. Amen. Amen.

If it please God to bless the Waters to your Fruitfulness, then use the
forgoing Form of Thanksgiving. And if you, or any one besides, who have made
use of this Paper, have received the least good from it, to God be all the
Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

