THE LATE HISTORY OF EUROPE BEING A Narration of all remarkable Actions' and
other various Affairs (both Civil and Military) that have happened in the
several Kingdoms and Republics; From the Treaty at Nimiguen in Anno 1676. To
the Conclusion of the Late Peace at Res-Wick, in September 1697. Which makes up
a History of One and Twenty Years. Accuratly and Succinctly Abridg'd

BY Captain DAVID KENNEDY.

Frustra sit per plura, quod, aeque commode, sieri potest per pauciora.
EDINBVRGH, Printed, by GEORGE MOSMAN, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Parliament-Closs, Anno School.

TO THE KING
Great SIR,
IT has been my Unhappiness to be Discharged of late (though too soon) from
Your Majesty's Service in a Military Capacity, In which Sphere, I have
unerringly moved in the Service of the Royal Family, even from my Childhood to
this time; Only, after the Happy Revolution, I served for some time, in another
Capacity, for being turned out of the Late Kings Army in Ireland, by Tirconnel,
(as generally all Protestants were) I retiered with my Family into Scotland,
And, from thence, I was remitted, and ordered by the then Privy Council, to
reside at the head Quarter of the English Army with the Duke of Schomberg, and
to give account to the Council, from time to time, how all Affairs went in
Ireland; Which I did, till Your Majesty 's Arrival in that Kingdom, in June
1690. And by the same Authority, I had the great Honor and Satisfaction of
attending Your Majesty, in the same Post, through all that Campaign, till Your
Return to England.

And in my Reteirment, this last Summer, I happily met with The Late History of
Europe, Being, A full Narration of all Memorable Transactions, Both Civil and
Military, that have happened for Twenty one Years, preceding September 1697.

The perusal of it pleased me so well, As I thought it worth my time to
Compendize it; Which having accomplished, I began to consisider, to whom I
should Dedicate my Puny Labors, when reflecting on the whole Series of the
History; And finding WILLIAM HENRY (by the Title of Prince of Orange, for the
first Twelve Years; And the same WILLIAM, by the more Splendid Title, of KING
of GREAT BRITAIN etc. for the last Nine of the One and Twenty Years) to be a
person, who had always made an Eminent Figure, amongst the greatest
Neighboring Princes and Potentats; And been deeply interested in most of the
Grand Affairs Treated of in the History: Without any Hesitation, I concluded
the Dedication most properly, and absolutely due to this most Illustrious
WILLIAM.

SIR, I must acknowledge it, far above the rate of an ordinary Confidence, my
presuming to Address Your Majesty, with so mean a Present; But, I am Animated
thereto, by what I have Read in Commendation of Alexander the Great, who being
presented with a small Basket of Fruit by a Poor Woman, Generously accepted of
it, as a Testimony of her Real Kindness, Supposing, If she had any thing of
greater value, she would as freely have given it.

Now, SIR, As Your Majesty has always Emulated, (if not Excelled) this great
HERO, in all Princely and Glorious Atcheivments; So I hope, with him, You will
Vouchafe to accept of this small Mite, tendered by him, who (with the deepest
Humilty, and sincerest Affection) Prostrats Himself, and His all, at Your Royal
Footstool; And who cannot affirm a greater Truth, than that He is.

Great SIR. Your Majesty's Most Humble, Faithful, And Devoted Subject, And
Servant DAVID KENNEDY

THE PREFACE
WHEN I had perused and considered the late History of Europe, I was so
extremely pleased with it, as I thought it worth my Labor to Extract all the
most Important Transactions therein contained, and have Sum'd them up briefly
in the following Treatise; And who ever will be at the pains to read it, will
therein find a Relation of so many various Occurrences, as may afford him a
pleasing Diversion, and a great deal of Satisfaction.

But before He enter upon the Book, I would have him take notice of a few
things which I thought fit to Premise, for his Satisfaction, and my own
Vindication.

1st. I have Varied quite from my Authors Style, which was impossible for me
exactly to follow, else my work had not been properly an Abridgement, but a
Transcription of the History; so as I was necessitate to pick out of each Page
or Paragraph, what I found most Material, and dress it up in such a homely
Method and Plain Language as my own Genius could Suggest,

2ly. Tho I have thus failed in the Form, I have not in the Main, for I have
(with all possible care) kept so closs to matter of Fact, as (in my
Collections) I have omitted nothing needful for the Readers Information, in all
notable Emergents, whereof, if any doubt, I appeal to the Original.

It Is true, there are in the History, some Prolix Declarations, and Intricate
Debares and Altercations, at the Treaties at Nimeguen and Reswick, with several
other Excursions from the chief design of the History, which I have deliberatly
omitted; for tho I knew, the perusal of them might be agreeable enough to the
Curious and leasurely Reader; yet the gratifying of such, was not my chief Aim,
but to give the Serious and Judicious a Comprehensive view of all Occurrences,
worthy of Observation, or of a Room in Memory; too large a share whereof, such
Circumstances would have Usurped, had they been admitted.

Yet even in these, I have not left the Reader altogether in the Dark, for tho
I have Contracted them, I have not Totally exploded them, but have given Him
the Contents, and such a Cursorie view of many of them, as may lead Him, to a
Competent Apprehension of the whole.

3ly. I Observe the Author goes on, in a continued Discourse, only
distinguishing by Paragraphs, and those pretty large too, not allowing the
Intent Reader any time to Breath; to ease him of this Fatigue, I have divided
the Treatise into Chapters, one for each year; Again, I have Subdivided the
Chapters into Sections, and have placed on the Margent the Names of the
Kingdoms and Countries, in order, as their several Affairs are therein
handled, together with some other useful Marginal Notes: And at the end of the
Book, I have placed an Index, or Table of all the most Remarkable Passages,
which will readily direct to the Page where the same is Treated of.

And I presume this small Piece may pretend to some Advantages over the
Original, not only on the preceding account, but on some other Considerations
also; As first, It Is of a smaller price, which perhaps may bear somewhat with
the Meaner sort, or less Inquisitive, 2ly. It Is of a lesser bulk, and so more
portable and useful either at Home or Abroad; and any Gentleman may have it
ready at hand to decide any Dispute that my happen (in ordinary Conversation)
about matters contained in it, and so end the Controversy.

4ly. Through the whole Series of the History, I observe, the Author does
manifest a Passionate Zeal for the Prince of Orange, Our Renowned and Beloved
King, Assigning to him, (in all Politic and State Affairs,) a Superlative
Ripeness and Soundness of Judgment, and in all Warlike Exploits, the like
degree of Conduct and Magnanimity.

The same, or a greater Character (if greater needed or could be) being given
Him by the Eminent Sir William Temple, in his Memoirs of his Embassy and
Negotiation, at the Treaty of Nimeguen and elsewhere, confirms me in the
belief of this, that the highest Eulogies, in his praise, can never reach an
Hyperbole.

And considering it my duty, not to omit any thing that may contribute to the
Aggrandizing of Our Great and Famous King, or Blazoning the Grandieur and the
Eminent Excellencies of his Ancient Family, and most Noble Ancestors; I have
here Transcribed (Verbatim) what my Author says in his preface, to that
purpose.

Wherefore (says He) to Conclude, as our History ends with the General Peace
we now enjoy, let our value and esteem of Him who (under GOD) has been the
Particular Instrument of it, our Dread Sovereign King WILLIAM, be Enhansed more
and more, who has so many Personal Excellencies, both in Peace and War, as have
no manner of need to borrow from the virtue of His Ancestors; whereof yet,
there has been such an Unparalleled Chain as is not to be met with in History;
And the Antiquity of whose Name, for ought I can see, may be as old as Julius
Caesar, who in the first Book of His Commentaries, says, a Body of Germans,
out of Suabia, came, under, the Command of two Brothers, Nasua and Cimberius by
Name, and settled upon the bank of the River of Rhine, near Treves. Now this is
the more worthy of observation, that besides the similitude of the Names of
Nasua and Nasau, which only differ but in the Transposition of one Letter,
there is an Estate upon that spot of ground, which belongs to the Family, to
this day. But be as it will, I was the more desirous to take notice of it upon
this occasion, because, I believe it is the first time it has been done by any
other, in this kind; And because it may stir up the Curiosity of those Gentlmen
who are skilled in Genealogies, to make a farther Inquiry into it. So far He.

I find also, the Learned and Famous Mr. Rushworth, in His Collections, says,
the Family of Nasau, have been of a Princely Quality, for many ages: And again,
speaking of the Emperors Defeating the Forces of the Prince Palatine of the
Rhine, near Prague, he gives this reason; besides the greater number of Men,
the Emperors Army (says he) was Commanded by the Greatest and Expertest
Captains, then known in Europe, except the Prince of Orange; To be second to
whom, was accounted the Highest Commendation.

Yea, we have yet on step higher to make, when several Eminent and Emulous
Princes were contending for the Western Empire, amongst all the Candidats,
Adolph Earl of Nassau, was Elected and Advanced, to the Imperial Diadem., in
Anno 1291.

Now, all their Remarks laid together, and duly weighed, claim from Us, to Our
Unparalleled Prince, the greatest Loyalty, the most Ardent Affection, and the
highest Adoration, that Subjects can possibly pay, or that may be warrantably
allowed to mere Humanity.

5ly. I suppose, I may be Censured by some for making such an Abrupte entry on
the Work, mentioning, off hand, a Congress of Plenipotentiaries and Mediators
at Nimeguen, not giving first the Reader an account of the great Antagonists by
whom those Plenipotentiaries were Employed.

The true reason of this omission is, when I entered on this Work, I had no
other design then my own private satisfaction, but having finished it, and
Communicating it to some Ingenuous Gentlmen of my Acquaintance, they seemed to
put a greater value on it, then indeed I did, and advised and urged the
Publishing of it, which (tho with some Diffidence, and Reluctancie) I
condescended to. And now seeing it is going Abroad, for the satisfaction of
these who are yet strangers to the Parties Contending, and who Occasioned the
Congress at Nimeguen. I have here Inserted a List of their Names.

On the one part The Principal Confederates were
The Emperor of Germany. The King of Spain The King of Denmark, The Elector of
Brandenburgh. The States of Holland.
And Collaterally
The Prince of Orange. The Duke of Lorrain. The Princes of Lunenburgh, And
Nieuburgh. And the Bishop of Munster.
On the other part,
The King of France Principal. The King of Sweden, His Allie. The Duke of
Holstein Gottorp. And the Bishop of Strasburg. Confederates. Charles King of
Great Britain, Sole Meditator. Sir William Temple, and Sir Lionel Jenkins,
Plenipotentiaries, In that Negotiation.
6ly. Supposing these Preliminaries may give a Competent Satisfaction to any
who are not too Critical; I shall Conclude, with one Request to the Ingenuous
Reader; That where he finds any thing Defective or Redundant (either in this,
or in the Treatise) or any way Disrelishing or unagreeable, He will be pleased
to allow those Grains of a favorable construction as may reasonably be
granted to a Soldiers pen, the Style and Dialect of which profession, being
generaly different from that which, I own, might be more requisite and proper,
for a Subject of this nature; And the rather, because this is the first
Manuscript of mine, that ever Aspired to the Press, as I verily believe it
shall be the last.

ERRATA.
Page 22, line 31. dele the p. 25. l 7, read Le-Strange p. 38. l. 13. r.
Attacks and l. 29. p. 40. l. 30.1. Doge p. 47. on the margent, for England r.
Ireland p. 49. l. 28.1 Attacked and l 30. r. Spah^'s p. 51. l. 22. (...) Cashaw
p. 79. l. 32. for le^ving r. Leavying and l. 20 r. Mackay p. 88. l, 31. for
King 1. Queen and on the margen^r, Londonderry p. 104. l. 15. for four r forty
and l. 19.1. out of the Da^pi^^ate p. 149, for and r. to p. 153. l. 4.1. Duke
of Savoy p. 154. l. 5. dele oune.

AN ABRIDGEMENT OF THE HISTORY OF EUROPE
CHAP. I. Anno 1676
Congress at Nimeguen.
THE Treaty at Nimeguen, between the Confederats, and the French King (wherein
the King of Great Brutain was sole Mediator) may be said to begin in July 1676.
Tho there was only present then the French and Dutch Plenipotentiaries, and the
two English Mediators, Sir Wil^iam Temple. and Sir Lionel Jenkins; The rest of
the Confederats, protracting and bearing off designedly, till they saw what
thelss^e of that Campaign would be, intending to take their measures
accordingly. The French Ambassadors endeavor to carry on a separate Peace with
the Dutch, who at that time positively refused it, tho the French King
threatened to recall his Ambassadors, unless they presently condescended thereto.

In the mean time, About the end of July. the Prince of Orange lays Seidge to
Mastricht, An. 1677.
which the French bad fortifved to great advantadge, P. of Orange Beseidges
Mastric^^.
the Garrison b^ing furnish^d with Eight thousand Choice Men, Mo^sieur Calvo
being Gov^rnour. The Seidge was carried on briskly for three Weeks and many
sharp Assaults made, where the English Forces behaved gallantly. But a cruel
Sickness falling into the Army, and the Rhinegrave (who Commanded next to the
Prince of Orange) dying of his Wounds, but especially the Marishal S^^mb^gs
being on his March throw Flanders with a considerable force, obleidged the
Prince (with the full consent of a Council of War, to raise his ^eidge.

Philipsburg surrendered to the Imperialists.
But to make some amends for this disappointment, about the latter end of
September, Philipsburg (after a Blockade of three Months) is surrendered to
the Imperial Army.

All this last Compaign and succeeding Winter, Denmark and Brandenburg
prevailed much against the King of Sweden; who only, was Confederate with
France,

But the Imperial Forces on the Rhine had not so good success, which enclived
the Dutch to listen now to the French Overtures for a separate Peace.

CHAP. II. Anno 1677.
SECT. 1.
February 1677. The Assembly was completely formed, The Assembly fully formed.
and the Preliminaries b^ing dispatched, the Respective Ambassadors (by
agreement) put all their Propositions and Pretensions into the hands of the
Mediators. The particulars whereof being too large to be inserted fully now
(considering my intended Brevity) I have pretermi^ted, intending to mention the
most material heads* of them hereafter, as the several Parties come to
agreement with France.

Now the Dutch discover a strong propension to a Peace, to which the Prince of
Orange was much averse, and endeavored what he could to obstruct it.

The French finding the Confederates very slow and backward in the negotiation
for Peace, thought fit to quicken them, by Blocking up of Cambray and
Valenciennes, and early in the Year, broak in upon Flanders, and these parts of
Germany on the other side of the Rhine, and that with more cruel Devastations
then at any time before, since the War began. Of which the Allies complained
heavily to King Charles the Mediator, but in vain.

The French King in Person comes to the Seidge of Valenciennes and the 9th. of
March, the Trenches are opened, and on the 17th. it is taken From thence he
Marched to Cambray, which, Valenciennes and Cambray taken by the French King.
on the 5th. Day after the Trenches were opened, surrendered to him upon
Articles, except the Citadel, which held out a few Days longer. At the same
time his Brother the Duke of Orleans invested St. Omers; The relief whereof,
the Prince of Orange, intended and and endeavored, with the States Forces
only, the Spainiards giving him no Aid. Approaching to St. Omers the Duke of
Orleans drew off from the Town and met him at Mountcassel, Orleans Forces being
much Superior to his; The Battle of Mountcassel.
where after a bri^k Engagement and hot Dispute on both sides, the Princes
Batallions fell in disorder, and in short, betook them to downright flight, tho
he strove to stop them with his Sword in his hand, and cut the first he met,
over the Face, crying aloud, Rascal, I Will set a mark on thee, that I may hang
thee at last.

But withal he made so Noble and safe a Retreat, as wanted little of the Honor
of a Victory.

St. Omers, Cambray, Citadel, surrendered to the French
The consequence of this was, The Surrender of St. Omers, and Cambray Citadel,
the twentieth of Aprile.

The French King being at Dunkirk, sends the Duke of C^equi, with a Complement
and a Letter to King Charles, professing himself willing to agree to a Tru^e
with the Confederates for some years, it his Ally the King of Sweden would
condescend, Praying King Charles to sound his inclination in that point.

Beverning adjusts the Peace with France.
Mo^sieur Beverning the Dutch ^^enipotentiari^ who was earnest for concluding a
Peace, understanding this, looked on it as a mere shamm, and e^^^umned openly
against it. And contrary to the Advice of Mo^^^^u^ V^n Benningham, and other
Ministers of the Allies, he streatched farther then his Commission would bear,
as some thought, and managed the matter so, as by the beginning of July, all
material p^ints between the French and Dutch were ad^^sted, The rest of the
Summer being triffled away in unsuccessful Disputs and Junglings, about the
Duke of Lorrains, and the Bishop of Straseburgs concerns in the Treaty.

Nor was there any considerable Action on either side, all this Campaigne, for
if the French boasted of taking the City of Freeburg in October; S^^tings
falling into the Elector of Brandenburgs hands, the same Month, counterpoi^ed
that, and so lest the Scales even.

SECT. 2.
October, The Prince of Orange went to England. Prince of Orange goes for
England.
And on the first view of the Princess Mary, eldest Daughter of the Duke of
York he was extremely Enam^ured of her, and ^mmediatly made Suit to the King
and her Father to that effect, which was assented to, provided the Terms of
Peace abroad were ^i^st agreed on before the Marriage: Which the ^^m^e on no
Terms would ass^nt to, saying the World would believe ^e h^d made that Match
for himself; at their Cost, adding, that he would never Sacrifice his Honor to
his Love: And at last becam so Sullen on the matter, as he desired a friend to
tell the King that he would leave England within two days, if things Continued
so; An. 1678.
that it repented him of his co^ing, that the King, must choose how they should
^ive after, for he was sure it must either be as the greatest friends, or
greatest Enemies.

This sharpnes and freedom so wrought on the King, as he presently consented to
the Marriage, is Married
which was Consummated without delay: After which they began to discourse and
Concerte the Te^rms of I ea^e that was in agitation abroad; And so on the
Tw^nty first of November, and re^ turns to Holland.
the ^rince (with his P^^^^ess) arryve in Holland.

Tho King Charles had Engaged to the Prince to join in the War with all the
Allies, if France refused to Conclud^^ Peace on reasonable Terms, yet soon
after he receded from this, and sends over with Mr. Thynne a draught of an
Alliance with the Dutch only, which was Concluded on, and Signed at the H^gue,
the sixtenth of January 16^8.

CHAP. III. Anno 1678
SECT. I.
Ghent and Ypre taken by the French.
Toward the end of Febreuary, the French King Marches on the head of his Army
to Metz, and having drawn the Spainsh Forces that way, of a sudden Crosses the
Country, and by the fourth of March, sits down before Ghent, and in few days
took it, as he did Ypre, before the end of that Month, tho the Garrison made a
ga^lant resistance: of which Grivances the Allies acquainted King Charles but
all they could do could not excite him to any speedy or open Declaration.

the French Kings project of Peace.
The French King elated with his Success of late, frames a project of Peace, and
Signs it a^ St Germans, the nynth of April 1678. But so exo^itant and
unreasonable, as the Allies un^n mo^^sly abhorred it (except the Dutch whom he
seemed to cajole in that Article concerning them) and they resolved rather to
r^n all hazards, rejected by the Allies.
then accept of any such Conditions.

Articles to ^eace being Conf^rted, and in effect Concluded tho privately as
yet) between the French King and the Dutch, money offered to King Charles by
the French King
yet he fearing the late Alliance betwixt the King of Great-Brittain and them,
might obstruct his agreement with them, he orders Monsiur L^^vots to tamper
with Mr. Mountague, the ^^^^gush Ambassador thon at Parts, and offers by him, a
great Sum of Money to King Charles to give his assent to the Articles, Sir
William Temple applauded.
he and the Dutch had agreed on; the motion is accepted of, and Sir William
Temple ordered to Preat with the French Ambassador about it; but that Gentleman
had so much Honor and Honesty, as to declyne the employment, for which he was
under clo^d for some time.

A while after this the Heir Bev^^ning and the Count D'avaux had a private
meeting, wherein all matters between the French King and the Dutch were fully
Concluded, the French King writs to the Dutch
and D'avaux procures from the King (...) then Encamped before D^^se) a very
smooth insin^ating Letter to the Scates, Containing more favorable so
des^^ntions then any proposed formerly: their answer.
To which they presently return their Letter, full of Compliment, and acquaint
him that they ^ill presently send their Extraordinary Embass^dor Van Beverning
to wait on his Majesty, A cessation till the 15. of August.
to whom they desired him to give Credit; and accordingly ^^ve^^ing goes to the
King and Conserts matters so well, as he obtained a Cessation of Arms till the
fifthteenth of August following.

Emperor Denmark. and Brandenburg, ^ded.
The French and Dutch having now as good as Concluded a Peace, Spain began to
Comply also, and to listen to proposals: But the Emperor, Denmark, and
Brandenburg, fell into the highest Exclamations and Reproaches immaginable
against the States, declearing themselves utterly dissatisfied with such
proceedings.

The Dutch order the Signing of the Peace.
But notwithstanding all these Storms on the twenty second of Jun^, The States
orders their Ambassadors to Sign the Peace with France, before the end of the
same Month.

Spain concurred with the Dutch, accepting of the offers made to them by the
French King of Restoring to them Charleroy, Limburg, Binch, Aeth, Oudenard, and
Courtray.

SECT. 2.
But here happened an unexpected demurr that was like to overturn all.

The Peace obstructed and the Reason
On the Agreement made amongst those great Statesmen, they quite forgot to
Limite the F^ench to a certain time for delivering th^se Six Towns to Spain:
And it was never thought on till the very Day before the Signing of the Peace,
when the Marquess de les Balbasses thought on it, and minded the Dutch and
Spanish Ambassadors of it, they immediately propose it to the French
Ambassadors, whose Answer was, that their Master the French King intended not
the Surrender of those Six Towns, till the King of Sweden, his Ally, was
reposessed of all the Towns taken from him in the late War. Who, Answer.
The Dutch Ambassadors acquaints the States with this, who forbade them on any
Terms to Sign the Peace, till that was assertain'd: And accordingly they denied
Concluding or Signing of the Peace.

King Charles joins with the Dutch.
The Estates immediately inform King Charles with this, by their Ambassador at
London, who recented it extremely, and sends presently Sir William Temple to
Holland, with orders to Sign a Treaty with the States, obligeing them to carry
on the War, and engageing himself to join with them in it, if France consented
not (within a certain time limited) to Evacuate the Six Towns: Which Treaty Sir
William carried on with that Diligence, as within six days it was perfected.

The Sum of this was, a mutual Engagement of, joining their Forces and all
their Powers to oblidge the French King to the performance of thos^ Conditions
agreed on betwixt him, and the Spanish and Dutch Ambassadors, and that neither
Party should m^ke any agreement with the French King without the Consent of the
other. France endeavour^ to Elude the Treaty
The Treaty being Signed, The F^ench use their utmost ende^vours to elude it,
by drawing the matter into a new Treaty, and pro^os^ several plac^s in Fl^^ders
for meeting to that end but the Dutch stiffly oppose the mo^i^^n^ and refuse on
any Terms, to recede from th^i^ l^te Tr^^^y. Th^se Heats and Altercations
cont^n^ed till the very Day pref^xed came, either for Signing the ^^a^^, or
Renewing of the War.

On the Morning of that Day, came Monsieur Bor^el from the S^^tes to their
Emb^ssadors, All Parties a^^^e once again.
who went presently to the Fre^c^ Ambassadors, when, after a Conference of five
Hours, they agreed on all points, both as to Peace and Commerce, the French
cons^nting to the Evacuation of the six Spanish Towns* and the Peace to be
Sign^d that very Day.

The Ambassadors of Denma^k, Brande^burg, and Munster, being acquainted
herewith, Expostul^te the matter sharply with the St^tes Embass^dors and that
very Day, give in (in their Masters Names) a solemn Protestation against all
these proceedings.

All which notwithstanding, The Peace sig^^d August ^oth. 1678,
the Peace is signed that day, b^^ween Eleven and Twelve at Night; The Eng^ish
Mediators refused to sign the same, Alledgei^g their Orders were to Mediate a
general P^eace but not to sign to a particular one.

SECT. 3.
cease; a firm and perpetu^l ^eace, to continue betwixt both parties and all
their Subjects. The Material Articles between France and Holland.


That the Heirs of all ^ersons who were dispos^ss^d of their Estates during the
late War, should be immediately restored, and reposest of all that belonged to
their Parents.

That each ^arty shall continue seiz^d of all Countries, Towns, Place* etc
within and without Europe, as they now hold and possess them. That the Town of
Mast^^cht shall be presen^ly delivered to the States, with all Villages and
a^purtinencies thereunto belonging; provided the F^e^ch King shall have liberty
to carry away all Artillery, Powder, and other Warlike Provisions, as shall be
sound there at the time of its Restitution.

That all Prisoners of War on both sides shall be presently rel^ased without
any ransom.

That the States shall be guarantees for the Span^sh King, in all Engagements
^e shall enter into by a Treaty to be speedily perfited betwixt him and France.
That it War shall happen hereafter betwixt the French King and the States, the
Subjects on both sides reciding in the Domin^ons of either Party, shall have
six Months time to carry off their Effects.

That all the Prince of Oranges pretenses and Interests, contained in a
separate Treaty shall be as effec^u^lly confirmed and made good, as if they had
been particularly inserted in this present Treaty. That the King of Great
Britain, and his Subjects, shall be comprehended in this present Treaty,
according to the best form that may be.

That the French Kings Allies, as the King of Sweden, The Duke of Holstein,
Bishop of Stra^burg, etc. shall be comprehended: And on the States side, the
King of Spain. the Protestant Sweetzers, etc. And Lastly, the Treaty to be
ratified by both parties, within six Weeks, after the 10th. of Au^ust 1678.

Ratifyed by the French King.
The French King Rratified and Signed the Treaty at St. Germans, the 18th. day
of August 1678. The French Ambassadors, grants and promises to the Prince of
Orange, the Restitution of the Principality of Orange; with all other his Lands
and Seigniories in France or Flanders, in such manner as he Enjoyed the same,
before he was disposest by the War; and Signed the same the tenth of August,
1678. and the French King approved and Sign^d the said separate Articles at St
Germans the eighteenth of August 1678. Many of the Dutch were unsatisfied with
Mous^^^ B^ver^ings precipitation in Signing the Peace. But Amsterdam approving
of it, the rest of the Provinces came soon to acquiesce in the same. At this
time Mons was blocked up by the French Army Gommanded by Luxemburg.

SECT. 4.
August the Prince of Orange Decamped from Soign^s with his own and the
Confederat Forces, Mons blocked up by the French.
and marched to St Dennis where the Right wing of the Enemy was posted; which
about Twelve a clock, he began to Cannon^de, at which very hour the Duke of
Monm^uth arrived in the Camp. About three afternoon: Battale of Mons, or St
Dennis.
Count Waldeck began the Attact, the Prince being present; the other side of
the Enemy was Attact by the Spanish Forces, Commanded by the Duke De Villa
Harmosa, assisted by the Princes Guards, and the English and Scot^ Commanded by
the Noble Earl of Ossery, who behaved with much bravery in that Action, which
Continued from three till nine at night, Luxemburgh, defeated, and the Seige
raised, by the Prince of Orange.
with a great slaughter of the French. In so much as the Duke of Luxemburgh was
forced to reteire in the night, leaving his dead and wounded men, his Tents,
Baggadge and all behind him. Next morning the Prince intended to prosecute the
Victory, but was stopped by the advice of Signing the Peace, brought to him then.

A Brave French Officer declared, that be esteemed this, the only
Heroick-action that had been done, in the whole progress of the War, this added
much to the Princes Honor. An in^erview between them.
The Prince present^y gave notice to Luxem borg that the Peace was Signed, who
desi^ed an interview with the ^^rmo^, which he granted, and all things past
betwixt them with great Civil^ies on both sides, the French ^rouding about the
young Prince, admireing him for his Courage and Conduct in the late Action,
which made a great noise in the World.

After this, the Dutch Embass^dors apply themselves with great zeal to
^^nishing of the Treaty between France and Spain wherein the English Mediators
refused to join o^ be Concerned; The northern Confedera's were mightily ^hafed
at the Dutch proceedings, and tho the Peace they had Concluded with France
could not be repealed, yet, they endeavored what in them lay to prevent the
agreement between France and Spain.

King Chares sends Mr Hide, wit orders to the Ambassadors.
No sooner King Charles hears of the Signing of the Peace, then he ^ends over
Mr. Hide about the middle of August, with orders to the English Ambassador, to
go and acquaint the States with his dissatisfaction at their rash proceedings
in that matter, with several reasons for his being so; especially that they had
not secured the Evacuation of the Towns to be restored to Spain, which he found
the French seemed to recede from, by some now propositions to the Spainaird.
And ordered him to solicit the States not to ratify the agreement their
Ambassador had made, promising, The ^rince of Orange his speech to Sir. William
Temple on that Embassy.
that on three days after notice thereof, he would declare Actual War against
France. The Prince of Orange being acquainted with this by Mr. Hide, he was
astonished, and lifting up his hands two or three times, he says to Sir
William Tempel. was ever any thing so H^^, and so Cold as this Court of yours
will the King who is so often at sea ever learn a word, that I shall never
forget, since my last passage. when in agreat storm, the Captain was crying
out to the Man at he Helm, all night, STEADY, STEADY, STEADY. If this dispatch
had come twenty days ago it would have chaing^d the face of all things in
Christendom, and the War might have been carried ^n till France had yielded to
the Treaty of the Pyrenees, and left the World in quiet the rest of our lives,
but its my opinion as it comes now, it will have no effect. And the event
proved answerable to his Judgment, However, that motion of King Char^es did so
Influence several of the Dut^b States, Beverning sensured, by the States.
as they began to censure severely Mr. Bevernings Conduct, and to charge him
with Exceeding his Commission, in several points; to salve which, the French
King orders his Ambassador at Nim^guen, to Satisfy the ^ace^, in these several
clauses, wherein they seemed to except against Bevernings Conduct, Excused by
the French King.
and farther, to remit all obstructions in the ^reaty betwixt him and Spain, to
the sole determination of the States themselves; (...) is so softened them as
they proceed presently to the Ratification, ordering it to lie in their
Ambassadors hands, till the Treaty between France and Spain was Concluded,
which was done, and the Peace Signed at the Dutch Ambassadors house, Peace
between France and Sp^in Signed Soptem-17. 1678.
the seventeenth of September 1678. Wherein the English Mediators would not
Concur; And so the disigns of the English Court were once more cluded, and
Mr. Hi^e returned discontented to England, ^e Infecta:

The Material Articles of this agreement were first, The Articles.
such as are ordinary in all such cases, an universal Cessation of all Acts of
Hostility, on both sides. A lasting Peace to continue between the two Kings,
their Heirs, and Suc^essors, and all their Subjects. All prison^rs on both
sides to be reloassed without any ransom. An Act of oblivion to pass for all
Damnages, losses or Injuries of any sort, that have happened in the War, to
this present day.

The French King to ^ender up to Spain, the Towns of Charle ro^, ^inche, A^th,
Oudenard, Articles of Peace between France and Spain.
and C^^tray, with all their appurtenances, as Spain posessed them before the
War in Anno 1667. Excepting the Verge of Menam, and the Town of Conac, which
are to remain to the French King.

As also, The French King promises to deliver and surrender to the King of
Spain, the City and Duchy of Lamburg, the Country of On^^em^use, the City of
Gh^nt, the Fort of Roddenhus, the County of Waes. the Town of Leuve in B^abaut,
the place of St. Ghil^n (the Fortifications whereof are to be rased) the Town
of Pucurda in Cataloma, with all the Countries, Villages. Castles, Forts,
Lands, and all other Appurtenances belonging to any of the foresaid places,
without demolishing or weakening any of the Garrisons, Castles, or Forts
forementioned. etc.

The King of Spain is to Surrender to the French King, The County of Burgundy,
the Towns of Bezancon, Valenciennes, Bouchain, Conde, Cambray, A^re, St Omers,
Ip^e^, Warwick, Warneton, Pop^^ng^en, Batleul, Cassal, Bavay, and Maubeuge,
with all their Territories and Appurtenances

Both Kings are allowed to carry away all Artiliry, and other Warlike
Provisions, out of the forementioned Ga^isons and Fortresses, now in their
possession before they Surrender them.

Both Kings mutually promise to restore to each other, all Towns, laces Forts,
and Castles, which have been taken from one anot^er in their Foreign
Plantations, and throughout the whole World. The rest of the Articles relating
most to commerce, and for the mutual good of the Subjects, An. 1679.
and adjusting all matters concerning the Cler^y and Ecclesiastic State, being
very pr^lix, and not so material. I have passed t^em over.

SECT. 5.
France tw^erein the Dutch Ambassadors were very Active the King of Spain
having an Eye still on the Emperors Concer^s, and being very desirous to have
them adjusted and settled, delayed the ratifying of the Peace till the middle of
December, expecting the Event of that Negotiati^n between the Emperor and
France, Flanders ravaged by the French
This so enraged the French, as they ma^c^a greater Ravage and Have^k in
Flanders, than they had done in any so long time dur^ing the War, King of Spain
ratifyes the Peace. December 15. 1678.
and on this consideration the King of Spain was for^ed to Sign and ratify the
Peace the fifteenth of D^cember: De^mark, and Brandenburg finding the Emperors
Ambassadors taking the same measures with Spain and Holland, in carrying on a
separate Peace, are extremly vexed, However the Elector in person Ships over
his Forces to the Isle of Rugen, Duke Lorrain a grees with France 1679.
of which he makes himself Master in a days time, and two days after takes
Stralsond. The Duke of Lorrain, seeing all go to wrak, accepts of what
Conditions the French King was pleased to give him, and agrees, quitting Nancy
to France

CHAP. IV. Anno 1679
SECT. 1.
February 1679.The Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenburg make a sharp
remonstrance to the Im^erial Ambassadors, of the manifest Evil and great
Injuries offered to their Masters, by those their proceeding with France and
conjured them, by the Majesty of the Empire; that they would d^sist, and do
nothing to the prejudice and dishonor of their Masters;

Not withstanding this remonstrance, The Treaty was so effectually carried on,
by the vigorous endeavous of Sir L^onel Jenkins, as the Peace was on all sides
conclued.

The next day, being the 4th. of February, P^ace between the Emperor and
France February 5th. 1679. and Peace ^^h ^weden the 7th
the Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenburg enter a Solemn Protestation against
that separate Peace. Notwithstanding of this, all the Emb^ssadors signed it the
day after, being the 5th of February 1679 And within two days after the Peace
between the Emperor and the King of Sweden was agreed and concluded on. I find
no particular mention of the Articles between the Emperor and France.

On the 24th. of February, The French Ambassador declared to Sir Lionel
Jenkins, that if Denmark and Brandenburg did not give full satisfaction to the
King of Sweden, before the last of March, the French King, would be free to
demand new Conditions of them, which perhaps would not please them.

Cessation of Armies ^ill the 1st. of May, and after to the 19th
Some days are spent in Consultations and Debates about this Affair, but to no
purpose, but at last, the English Mediator, and the Confederate Ambassadors
procured a Cessation of Arms, till the 1st, of Mars which time expireing and no
agreement made, the French Troops were ready to pass the Rhine, and prosecute
the War. But the Ambassador of Brandenburg and General Spaen who commanded his
Forces on the Rhine, obtaining a Meeting with Monsieur Colbert, and Monsieur
^alvo who commanded the French Forces, at Santhen, on the third of May, got the
Cessation prorouged to the 19 And on the 16 of May, the Elector of Brandenburg
wrote to the French King in such an excellent strain, as I thought it worth my
pains to Extract it verbatim.

A LETTER from the Elector of Brandenburg to the French King.
May the 16th. 1679. My Lord,
IT is impossible, But that Your Majesty, according to the great Wisdom
wherewith God has endued you does easily ^erceive the Moderation and justice
of my pretensions; Elector of Bran^enbu^ghs ^ette^ to the French King.
And it being to that you must offer violence to that Generosity and Greatness
of Soul which is natural to Your Majesty; In for^eing me to Conditions of
Peace, that not only are ^^jurious to me, but Ignominious also. God, who is
just, seeing the Righteousness of my Cause, has prospered my Arms with the
conquest of all Pomeranta, and Your Majesty makes me give back the greatest
part of it, which I put into Your hands, that I might preserve the rest: which
is but a small matter, in respect of what I have gained with the loss of my
Blood, and with the ruin of my Subjects.

Is it not then just, My Lord, That since Your Majesty oblidges me to part from
so great and fair Cities, and so much of my Enemies Country, You should like
ways oblige the Swedes to leave me the rest: And that your Majesty having so
far concerned Your self for the Party that had no Right to demand any thing,
should concern Your self also for him who had Right to keep all, but yet yields
the greatest part, mei^ly in consideration of your Majesty. I am inf^rmed that
your Ministers object to me, the interest of your Glory and Honor, I know that
that is a powerful Motive to animate a great soul to Undertakings; But suffer
me to put you in mind, that Justice is the Source and Rule of Glory; And that I
having it on my side, it is far greater and more ^o^d Glory to support a just
and moderate pretention, then to favor one that is nothing less. And could
your Majesty but hear the discourse of all Europe, and weigh it with the
Reasons that interest suggests to you from my enemies. I am Confiden^ you would
instantly decide in my favors, and so prevent the judgment of disinterested
^ost^rity Withal, My Lord, I am very sensible that the Match is too unequal
betwext your Majesty's Forces and mine, and that I am unable to resist a King,
who alone has carried the burden of a War against the greatest Powers of
Europe, and has with so much Glory and Success gone through with it: But can
your Majesty find any advantage in the ruin of a Prince, who is so desirous to
serve you; and who being preserved, may contr^bute more to your service, then a
bare willingness? Your Majesty will certainly be the first that will regrat my
ruin, since you cannot easily find in all the World besides, one who is more
really, and with greater Respect, and Zeal then my self.

Your Majesty's etc.


SECT. 2
A skirmish near Minden, between Mr. Crequi and G^nerall Spaen.
But for all this, the King seemed to be inexorable, And the time of truce
being expired, Marshall de Crequi with the French Forces, drew near to Minden,
where General Spaen was posted, designing to make resistance. Crequi with a
body of Horse Crossing the Was^r at a Foord, he me^t with General Spaen on the
Head of three Thousand Horse, and some feild-Peices, whom he attached
vigorously, and after a sharp dispute, and the loss of many Men on both sides,
at last General Spaen retired into Minden; this was on the twentieth of June,
1679. and the last Action, that put an end to so great and long a War

The Peace between the Kings of France and Sweden and the Elector of
Brandenburg, were Signed at S^ Germans the ninteenth of June, the very day
before this rencounter, which had it been intimated but two days sooner, the
lives of many gallant men might have been saved.

The Articles (besides the Ceasing of all Acts of Hostility; Articles between
France Sweden, and the Elector of Br^ndenbu^g.
Act of Oblivion, and such other Articles that come in course, on all such
occasions) were, that the Treaties of Munster and Osnaburg are to remain in
full force. Brandenburg to restore to Sweden all he had taken in Pomerin
dureing the War, particularly Ste^^ and Stralsond. The Lands on the other side
of the River of Oder to remain to the Elector; but he oblidged, not to Build
any Forts on the said River, so far as the Territories of Sweden reaches. That
the Elector may carry away what Cannon or Ammunition he brought into those
places, but to leave what he found there. That till agreement be made between
France and Denmark. the Elector is not to Assist the latter.

The French King is oblidged to procure the King of Swedens Ratification o^ the
Peace within three Months, and as long as it is wanting, the Elector is not
oblidged to restore the Places abovementioned.

In a separate Article, the French King oblidges to pay or cause to be Fayed to
the Elector of Brandenburg three Hundred Thousand Crowns, to defray the Charges
he was at in the late War.

Brandenburg being now agreed with France and Sweden, Brandenburgs letter to
the States.
Writes to his late Allies the States of Holland, minding them of the good
Services he had done them, Representing withal the vast expenses he had been
at by Assisting them, and the low Condition his Subjects were reduced to
thereby: And lastly craveing from them, some suitable Reparation of all his
damnag^s and losses he had sustained, in Supporting and Assisting them.

The States Answer was in effect little more then a^n^eer Complement: They did
indeed own his great Freindship of Assisting them in that Dangerous War; The
States answer,
yet insisted in inly on the Considerable Actions and Vigorous Resistance made
at their own Cost; Promised the Continuance of their Faithful Freindship to the
Elector, and ^rayed the same from him to them; but not one word of any
Compensation for his losses Sustained: Only a while after, they paid him some
Arrears of Subsidies due to him upon the account of his Assistance in the War.
with which he was forced to rest Contented.

SECT 3.
Spaines Joining the Dutch so early, at the very beginning of the late War. was
so Seasonable and Acceptable, King of Spain, claims Mastrichs from the States.
as the States voluntarly promised to deliver the City of Mastricht to him, so
soon as they recovered it from the Frenck, in whose hands it was at that time.
Now the War being over, the King of Spain claims of the States, the
performance of their promise. The States acknowledge their promise, Which they
refuse and their reasons.
and that they lay under many Obligations to the Crown of Spain, for the great
kindness and Assistance they had given in the late War. But withal minded the
King of Spain of a vast Sum, due by him to the Prince of Orange, as also of a
great Arrear due to them for a Squadron of Men of War, Rigged out by them for
the Service of Sicilly.

And that when his Catholic Majesty had paid off these debts to the Prince of
Orange, and them, they should be ready to perform their promise of putting
Mastricht in his hands, but did not think themselves oblidged to do it so^mer:
And tho the Spainish Ambassador, Don En anuel de L^ra, promised in his Masters
Name, that all these debts they claimed should be paid often with all Conven^e^t
Speed, yet the States Continued resolut not to part with Mas^^^cht, till this
promise were effectually p^rformed.

SECT. 4
Denmarks Affairs to be adjusted and settled, which was soon after agreed on,
Peace agr^^d betw^^n the Kings of France Sweden and Den mark September 2d. 1679.
between the Damsh Ambassador Monsieur de Mayerkron, and Monsieur Pompone,
Empowered by the French King to that purpose, so a Peace is concluded between
the Kings of France, Sweden and Denmark, at St. Germans the 2d. of September.
1679.

The main Articles (besides these common in all such cases) were, The Articles.
That the Article of Rosebield, Copenhagen, and Westphalia shall be confirmed:
Denmark to restore to the Swedes, Lanascroon, Holsenburg, Monctrand, and
Wismar, with the Isles of Ru^en and Gothland, and all their Dependencies.
Sweden to restore all they had taken from Denmark in the late War. The King of
Denmark to take away all the Cannon he brought into the Swedis^ Garrisons, but
none that he found there when he took the Places, and if he had taken away
since, any belonging to the King of Sweden, he was to restore half of them: All
persons (on both sides) to be restored to all the Rights and Privileges they
enjoyed before the War. All Princes who desire it, may be comprehended in the
Treaty: And Lastly, The Frenc King promises, that the King of Sweden shall
ratify the Treaty within three Mone^^s, and that he himself will ratify is
within six Weeks.

And this ended thus long and bloody War in Europe, But with much
diss^isfaction to almost all the Allies; Especidly Denmark and B^ande^burg, but
many ways advantageous to France, and withal not very Hono^^rable to England,
whose Mediation conti^ed even to the last; and yet had not the happiness of
Signing any one of the Treanes.

SECT. 5.
England all this while. In the preceding year, Popish-Plot in England
^^ptember 29. 1678.
about the 29 of September 1678. Doctor Oats made a Discovery of a Popish Plot
against the Life of the King, the Protestant Religion, and for the Subversion
of the Government, on which Sir George Wakeman the Queens Physician, Coleman
Secretary to the Duchess of York and several Jesuits and Priests, were
apprehended and committed; As were, not long after, the Earl of Powis, Viscount
Stafford, Lord Arundel of Warder, Lord Petre, and Lord B^asis, these last five,
were all committed Prisoners in the Tower of London.

Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, a Justice of peace, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey Murdered.
who was appointed to Examine the Prisoners first committed, was Murdered on
the 12 of October, which confirmed all Men in belief of the Conspiracy, and on
the 1st, of November the Parliament (Nemine Contradicente) did declare
themselves fully perswarded of the same. Soon after, Godfreys Murder came to
be discovered by one Bedlow, prompted thereto by his Conscience, on whose
evidence (and one Prance's) Green, Berty, and Hul were Convicted and Executed.

Examinations, And farther Inquiries relating to the Plot, going on for two or
three Months, The long Parliament dissolved and and another called to sit the
6th. of March.
in all which time the King continued se^mingly doubtful and incredulous of the
same, and finding the Parliament more Zealous and forward in prosecuting that
Affair, then he approved of, on the 24th. of January, Dissolves them, after
they had sat seventeen Years and above eight Months: And called another to sit
the 6th of March following.

On the 28th. of February, He requires the Duke of York (by a Letter) to
withdraw from England, Duke of York leaves England.
which he obeys, and retires with his Family, first to the Hague, and then to
Brussels, To make all things appear more pausible, The King chooses a New
Council. viz.
Names of the Privy Councillers. 1 Prince Rupert 2 Arch Bishop of Canterbury 3
L. Finch Chancellor 4 Earl of Shalsburry Lord President of the Council. 5 Earl
of Anglesay, Privy Seal. 6 Duke of Albemarle 7 Duke of Monmouth, Master of
Horse 8 Duke of Newcastle 9 Duke of Lauderdale, Secretary of State for
Scotland. 10 Earl of Salisbury 11 Earl of Bridgewater 12 Earl of Sunderland,
Secretary of Stato for England. 13 Earl of Essex 1 st. Commissioner of the
Treasury. 14 E. of Bath, Groom of the Stool. 15 Viscount Falconbridge, Viscount
Hallifax. 16 Lord Bishop of London 17 Lord Roberts 18 Lord Hollis 19 Lord
Russel 20 Lord Cavendish 21 Henry Coventry Esquire Secretary of State 22 Sir
Francis North Lord Cheif-Justice of Common Pleas. 23 Henry Capel, Knight, of
the Bath; and 1st, Commissioner of the Admirality. 24 Sir John Ernley Knight
Chancellor of the Exchequer. 25 Sir Thomas Chichely Knight Mr, of the
Ordinance, 26 Sir William Temple 27 Edward Seymor Esqr 28 Henry Poule Esqr


Take notice, We have stepped back to bring up the the English Plot, and other
Affairs of Britain begun in 1678, and join them now to the year 1679.

The King finding his new Parliament slow in advancing Money for disbanding the
Army, Parliament dislolved and one called to sit the ^7 of October 1679,
and withal, beginning to nible at a Bill for Excluding the Duke of York,
first he prorogues them from the twenty seventh of May to the fourteenth of
August; and in the mean time, July the twelth, he dissolves them. So as this
Parliament proved as short lived, as the former was long. And another
Parliament is called to sit the seventeenth of October following.

SECT. 6.
Scotland, for on the first of June, a great party of the Presbeterions to the
Number of fifteen Hundred Rendevouz'd, under the Command of Robert Hamilton,
at Lowden-hill and Marching to Glasgow from thence Issued a Declaration,
Covenanters up in Arms in Scotland.
giving their reasons for taking up of Arms: But this business has been so
often and so fully published, and so universally known, as I think a
repetition, or a particular Relation of the progress and event, altogether
unnecessary, farther then to tell you, that the King sent the Duke of Monmouth
speedily down to Scotland, who so managed the matter, Defeated by the Duke of
Monmouth June 22. 1679.
that on the twenty second of June, Encountering this ill governed multitude at
Bothuel-bridge, he defeated them totally, near eight Hundred being killed, and
a greater Number taken. And so an end was put to this undertaking.

Tho the main design was to render the Duke of Monmouth Odious to the
Presbiterians, Duke of Monmouth declared a Ba^^a^d.
by sending him on this expedition, yet it proved quite otherwise, for the
whole Protestant party were now so affrayed of a Popish Successor, that they
cast their eyes on Monmouth so favorably, as they looked on him as the only
Person, after the Kings death, to stave off the Succession of his Brother whom
they so much dreaded; so this project failing, the next was to declare him
^llegit^^te, which on the third of March following the King did very solemnly,
giving it in writing with his own hand, it these words.

Given under the Kings hand.
For the avoiding of any dispute which may happen in time to come Concerning
the Succession of the Croun, I do hereby declare in the presence of Almighty
GOD, that I never gave nor made any Contract of Marriage, no^ was Married to
any Woman in whatsoever but to my present wife Queen Katha^^^e, now living.

CHARLES REX
Whitehall, March the third 1679.

CHAP. V. Anno 1680.
An. 1680.
Duke of York returns to England.
About the latter end of August 1680 the King fell sick, which the Duke of York
he^ing of, he came to England, and on the second of September, went to the King
at Windsor; the Consequent whereof was, the Banishment of the Duke of Monmouth,
Monmouth banished.
who reteired to Vtrecht; and a little after the Duke of York went back to
Bruss is, but with no design to stay long there, for on the twelth of October,
he, with his whole Family, arrived at St James's, to the astonishment of many.
And on the twenty seventh of November after, Both return soon to England, All
Monmouths places taken from him.
the Duke of Monmouth came to London, being welcomed by the Citizens with all
possible expressions of Joy, which so displeased the Court* and Irritated the
King, as all his places of prosite and trust are Immediately taken from him.

And soon after, the Duke of York is sent down High Commissioner into Scotland.
Duke of York goes to Scotland.
Well, the Parliament in England meeting the seventeen of October, as was
ordered by the King, The first Compliment they met with, The Parliament
proroged 5 times. in one year.
was a prorogation to the twenty sixth of January, and from thence, to the fifth
of April 1680. and from thence to the seventeenth of May, and again to the
first of July, and again to the twenty first of October, graciously declaring
they should then sit and do business. The whole Nation being deeply greived
with these strange proceedings, especially that of hindering the Parliament to
sit, several Addresses were made by three or four Counties, Addresses from
several Counties to the King but all rejected.
humbly beseeching his Majesty to case them of their greivances; but no
satisfactory answer was given, nor to be expected. Things going on at this rate
in England, and the Duke ruleing all as he pleased in Scotland, there could be
no serious prosecution of the Popish Hot; nay, it was so ridiculed by Estrange,
The Plot ridiculed.
and others of the Court party, as indifferent men began to doubt, if any such
thing was or no. While in the mean time, the Popish Faction began to trump up a
new Plott upon the dissenters.

King Charles finding himself weak at home, King Charles makes Alliance with
Holland.
and indeed having made himself so, thought it necessary to strengthen himself
by some Foreign Alliance; And to that end sends Mr. Henry Sidney (now Earl of
Rumney) Ambassador to Holland. to propose to the States the making a Treaty of
Guarranty for the Peace Concluded at Nimeguen.

The French King hearing of this, earnestly endeavors to defate the design,
and by his Ambassador Monsieur D'avaux, then resident in Holland, proposes an
Alliance with them, (the same being moved) at the same time, by Monsieur
Colbert, to the States Ambassador in Paris) Mr. Sidney gives in a Memorial
against this motion, with many insinuating Arguments; which was answered by
Count D'avaux, but in more threatening Terms.

The States having weighed the Arguments on both sides, in the Scales of
security and interest, at last the balance was cast in favor of England, all
the Provinces unanimously agreeing thereto, except Gronningen and Ommelands,
who inclined more to the French, but being overruled by plurality of votes,
Alliance with England is Concluded.

The Dauphing Married to the Duke of Bavaria sister.
The French King failing in this project, proposes Alliance with the Duke of
Bavaria, by Marrying the Dauphin to the Dukes sister, which is agreed on, and
soon-after Consummated.

SECT. 2.
February 1680. The Emperor and Empyr. by several Letters and Memorials,
acquainted the diet at Rattibone, The Emperor complains of the French Kings
breach of the late Treaty.
that they found themselves aggrieved, that the French had already Contraveened
the Peace, in no less then twelve Material Particulars, and that quite contrary
to all the Treaties, both of Westphaita and Nime^u^n. And the diet Examining
the matter fully, and finding it to be so; entreated the Emperor in behalf of
himself and the Empyr, by his Letters or Embassy, to require reparation of the
same from the French King.

But for all these Remonstrances, he was so far from giving the proposed
Satisfaction, as he began to enlarge his limits in Alsatia; And soon after a
paper was published (as was pretended, by the French King) bearing, that in
case the Dauphin were chosen King of the Romans, most of the Towns detained
from the Emperor should be restored, that ane Army of sixty Thousand French
should be maintained in Hungary against the Turks, without any Charge to the
Empire, and a Considerable Fleet should be employed against the Turks, toward
the Dardanello's, with many other plausible propositions; but these being
little taken notice of, the French King incroaches severely on the Prince
Palatine, which makes the Emperor and Empyr complain in every Court where there
was any hope of releif, particularly the States of Holland were solicited to
Employ their b^st Offices at the French Court that these Contraventions might
cease and be abolished; but the States finding, that notwithstanding all the
French Kings Caressess and fair promises, that their addresses to him in
behalf of the King of Spain their Alli^, had taken so little effect, they
thought it needless to expect* any better s^ccesse in this, and therefore they
made no progress in it.

Flanders and Italy allarmed by the French.
Nor was i^ Germany only that thought her self Injured, for in the Spring the
French made incursions in the province of N^mu^, possessing themselves of above
forty villages, and the Princes of Italy were Allarmed also, by the French
Troops marching to take Possession of Cass^l, sold by the Duke of Mantua to the
French King, for four Millions of Livers.

SECT 3.
Char^es makes an Alliance with Spain, as he had done with Holland. And at the
sitting of the Parliament, which was on the twentieth first of October 1^80 As
he had formerly promised, he desires Money of them for the releif of Tan^^er,
and that they should not meddle with the Succession of the Croun but to proceed
to the discovery of the Hot, and Trial of the Popish Lords.

Bill of Exclusion by the house Commons
The Parliament taking this into Consideration, and finding no expedient for
securing of the Protestant Religion, while the Duke of York had any Prospect of
the Crown, they resolve on a Bill for his Total Exclusion, which passed in the
House of Commons, the eleventh of November 1680. The bill of Exclusion is so
universally known in these Kingdoms, as I thought it but needless to insert it
here.

Rejected by the Lords.
The Bill being presented to the House of Lords, was by them rejected, and after
the first Reading a vote passed that it should not be allowed a second Reading,
which gave it such a dash as the House of Commons did not farther insist on it;
Lord Stafford executed.
And then the Parliament pr^ceeded to the Trial of the Lord Stafford, who being
convicted, was Executed on the seventh of December 1680,

The next thing they fell on, was the prosecuting and displaceing all Abhorrers
of petitioning the King for the meeting of the Parliament, the Chief of those
were, Sir Francis Withens, Sir George Jeff^^yes. Recorder of London, Sir Thomas
Jones, a Judge of the Kings Bench, Sir Richard Westone, a Barron of the
Exchequer, and Sir Francis North Chief J^st^ce of the Common pleas, who, for
his good service in Sentenceing to Death Steven College at Oxford, had the
great Seal of England Committed to his Custody.

As to the Kings demand of Money for releife of Tangie^, The Commons refuse
m^ney to the King.
or what ever pretended occasion the Parliament altogether declined it, giving
in many weighty reasons for so doing, nor did they stop here, but on the
seventh of January 1681. S^^lo novo, it was resolved. That whosoever should
lend or advance Money on any branch of the Kings Revenue, or whosoever should
buy any tally upon any part of the Revenue, And prohabite lending money on ^e
Revenue
or pay such a l^ally hereafter to be struck, should be Adjudged a hinderer of
the Sittings of Parliament, and should he Responsible therefore in Parliament.

Ea^l of Ossory's death
Oo the thirty* of July 1680. Dyed the Gererous and truly Noble, Thomas Earl of
Ossory, at White H^^, to whom, the Author gives a large, and deserved Eulogie,

Death of the Duke of (...), and (...) Pa^^^^^^ of the Rhine.
On the second of September after* dyed John George Duke of Saxo^^e at F^^burg;
the sixty eight year of his age.

And on the seventh of September dyed Ch^rles Lovis, Count Pelatine of the
Rhine. sixty three years old.

About the middle of November appeared a Comet, with a prodigious light toward
the West, the st^r was but sm^l whence it proceeded, and low at first, A Comet
app^a^s.
but arose higher and higher.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. 1.
An. 1681.
The King being netled at the Parliaments harsh usage of him on the tenth of
January 1681, he prorogue them to the twentyeth; And on the eighteenth, he
diss^lv^d them. Parliament dissolved another called to sit at Oxford
And summonds anot^e^ ^o meet at Oxford on the twenty first of March following;
t^is filled all thinking Men with Astonishment and ^errour* and a great many of
the p^^me Nobility, being utterly dissatisfied with the Kings Resolution in
this point, meet, and frame a Petition to hi^ M^j^sty, the Nobles Petiton the
King not to to order sitting at Oxford.
full of most weighty and unanswerable Arguments* b^s^eching him to let the
Parliamen^ sit at the usual pl^ce* in Westminster, which Petition was ^^esented
to him by the Earl of Ess^x who tend^red it with a pithy and pertinent Speech
to the same purpose.

The Pet^tion was Subscribed by these Noblemen following.
Monmouth. Kent, Huntington Bedford, Salisbury, Clare, Stan^ford, Essex,
Sha^tsbury, Mordant, Evers, ^aget, Gray, Herbert, Howard Delamere.
The Kings Answer to this Petition is recorded no where, The Petition rejected.
All that can be f^und is that he express^d his displeasure at it, by a froune.
However he continues firm and unmovable for the Parliaments siting at Oxford,
and withal sets a mark on the main contryvers of this Petition, as ye shall
find afterward.

SECT. 2.
Edward Fuzharris a Papist (prompted by the Duchess of Portsmouth and the
French Ambassador) tampers with one Everara an old Commerad of his, Meal-tub
Plot.
a Papist also, and an engenious fellow, to write an invective Pamphlet against
the Kings proceedings, which Everard undertook, and having perfited it, gave a
fair Copy of it to Fuzharris, the design being laid to fasten it on the Non
Conformists; But Everard having made Sir Wil^am Waller Privy to the Intrigue
all along, the mischievous fallacy came to be discovered, wnereupon Fuzharris
is apprehended and committed, and after two or three Months Imprisonment is
arraigned and found guilty of high Treason, Fitzharris Executed and the
pretended Primate of Ireland.
for which, on the first ^f ^n^y, he is Executed at Tiburn, together with
Oliver Plunket, the pretended Primate of Ireland, convicted of high Treason
also.

Parliament meets at Oxford
In the mean time, The 21. of March came, and the Parliament met at Oxford, the
Commons being generally the same as the last Parliament, or at least, of the
same Judgment and Humor.

So as they began in their proccedings, just where the last Parliament lest off.

The first thing they fell upon, was preparing a Bill to prevent the Duke of
Yorks suceession, Parliament at Oxford dissolved
and for prosecuting the P^pish Lords in the Tower, these were the two main
points handled.

But on the ^7th of March the 7th. day of their fisting) the King came suddenly
and u^exepectedly into the House of Pe^rs, and dissolved the Parliament; and
taking Coach immediately, drove as hard as he could to W^nsor, leaving both the
Houses in great Amazement: And on the 8th. of Ap^^l published a Declaration of
his Reasons for dissolving the Parliament, which satisfied but very few.

On this brisk Act of the King, the Papists begin to look big, and to think on
revenge against some of those, who had prosecuted them; Stephen College trye^,
Condemned and Ecuted
And the first they spit their Venom at was one Stephen College, a mean Man,
but a great talker against the Popish Plot. Against whom they frame an
Indictment of high Treason, but the Grand Jury being too honest to find it,
they transfer the case, and the Prisoner to be tried at Oxford, where, by a
strange and illegal proceeding (Sir France^ North being the chief Judge) the
innocent poor Man is sentenced, and Executed accordingly, on the 30th. of
August 168^.

Earl of Shaftsbury Committed
The next attempt was on the Earl of Shaftsbury, who is apprehended and
committed the 2d. of July, and being kept in the Tower to the 24th. of
November, he is brought to Trial, where, notwithstanding all the deep and
wicked contrivances laid for taking away his Life, the Grand Jury, (whereof Sir
Samuel Bernardiston was Foreman) returned Ignoramus upon the Bill, is tried and
acquitted.
whereat the People discovered their great satisfaction, not only by a general
shout, but by making several Bon^fires that night, in the City.

SECT. 3.
York is carrying on his designs in Scotland (under a Protestant Mask) for
secureing himself in succession to the Crown, the Parliament complying with
him, Duke of York makes the Test in Scotlana
and to that end the Test is made, and some other Acts, with which many of the
Members were not well satisfied, and desired that some other additional Acts
might be made.

Earl of Argyle Impeached and sound guilty of high Treason
The E. of Argyle insisting on this and proposing that all other Acts against
Popery might be added, for this his freedom, and under pretense of his putting
his own sense and ^nterpretation upon the Test, when he took it, (as was
allowed to many others) he is prosecuted with the greatest Cruelty and
Injustice imaginable, and on this trivia. Act, he is arraigned and found guilty
of high Treason. An. 1682.
However, this brave Man made a shilt to escape his destiny at this time, makes
his Escape.
by getting privately out of Edinburgh Castle, and flying beyond Seas; tho he
could not do it afterward, but a last fell a Sacrifice to the same Revenge,
that thus made him first Miscrable.

SECT. 4.
France. In September the French King draws his Troops toward Strasburg,
Strasburg surrendered to the French
under the Command of Monsieur Louvois, who it is believed, had before this
time, secretly corrupted severals of the Inhabitants of that City, He, using
great diligence and secrecy, appears before the Town with a great number of
Troops. On the 28th. of September, seizes on the Fort of Kie^ that guards the
Bridge of the City, and presently summonds the Magistrates to render the Oath
of Fidelity and obedience to the King his Master. Whereupon the Magistrates
make no hesitation to submit; only for forms sake, they propose some
Conditions, which were agreed to, and Signed, the 30th. of September 1681.

And tho this sudden and strange Act. Allarum'd both the Empire, and the
Emporour himself. yet, the former was so intent on keeping up a suffi^ient
force against the Encroachments of France; And the Latter having all his
thoughts busied, how to defend himself, and the Empire against the Invasion of
the Turks, which threatened him, and came on, next year, that this business of
Strarburg was little minded or regarded at this time.

CHAP. VII. Anno 1682.
We return again to England. The Ignoramus Bill of my Lord S^astsbury stuck so
deep in the Stomachs of the Court faction, The Charter of London questioned
as they set all their Wits on the Tenter hooks, how to take the Election of
Sherisls out of the power of the City; for doing which no expedient could be
found, An. 1683.
but by taking away their Charter, to which end, in Hillary Term 1682, they
bring a quo warranto against the City, Judgment against the City.
and so the King and the City enter the Lists, which occasioned strife, Debeats
and hard Struglings on both sides for a long time, but in Conclusion the Court
party prevailing, in Trinity-term following, Judgment is given against the
City, to the general astonishment of the whole Nation.

Prince Ruperts Death.
On the 29th. of November 1692, Dyed Prince Rupert in his House in
Spring-Garden, in the sixty three years of his Age, Beloved generally of all
England, and his Death bewailed.

CHAP. VIII. Anno 1683.
SECT. I.
Presbyterian Plot
of Murdering the King and his Brother on their return from New-mercat, and of
raising the People at Blackheath, on a pretended Football match. The main
design being against the Earl of Essex, and the Lord Russel, who are presently
apprehended and confined in the Tower, where, in a few days after, it was given
out, Essex murdered in the Tower.
that the Earl of Essex had cut his own Throat, but by many remarkable
circumstances, and especially, the odd proceedings at the Coroners inquest, the
certainty of this lies under great suspicion, and is much doubted of by all
impartial and uninterested persons.

That very day on which Essex Murder happened, the Lord Russel was on his
Trial, Lord Russel Executed July 21th. 1683
and being Condemned, was Executed in Lincolnes Inn fieilds, a few days after
protesting his innocence at his last Hour, and leaving a Paper in the Sheriffs
Hands, to declare the same to the World, dated July 21. 1683. But too long to
be inserted hero

These Tragical Acts were followed with the Execution of Bateman, And three
more soon after.
Walcot, and Rouse.

And though some escaped with Life, yet they were oppressed with exorbitant
Fines, from Ten thousand, to an hundred Thousand Pounds, for Scandalous Words,
against the Duke of York.

The next person of quality brought on the Stage, was the Honorable Colonel
Sidney, a Man inferior to few for his Noble Extract, Algernoon Si^ney,
Impeached Condemned* and Executed
but, for his excellent virtues hardly to be matched by any: who being ranked in
the same Categorie with Essex, and R^ss^^, Con^piring to depose the King, and
stirring up Rebellion, is Impeached, convicted, and Condemned for High Treason*
and Executed on Tower Hill, the 7th, of December 1683* making such an excellent
Speech on the Scaffold, as makes the name and Memory of Algernoon Sidney,
Savory and famous.

SECT. 2.
The Charters of all Corporations questioned
and that was to ingross the Charters of all the Corporations in England, and
get them wholly in the Kings Hands, as they had that of London, knowing that
this would quite subvert, and alter the constitution of the Parliament. For the
House of Commons consisting of Five hundred, and Thirteen Memb^rs, whereof
only Ninety two are Knights of Shires, near five parts of six must consist of
Burgesses and Citizens, and all those (if this project take effect) must
doubtless be of the Kings choosing, and must have their dependency on the Court
favor, and so it may be easily judged where the plurality of Votes would run,
when matters fell in debate, between the Court and its opponents. So all the
Wits about Court are actively employed in carrying on of this important Affair,
which (by many strange and irregular methods) at last, they accomplished.

A farther step the Court made, by demolishing and quirting the Garrison of
Tangier, Tangier quitted and demolished, and the Forces brought over to Enland.
(the keeping whereof for above twenty years, had cost the King an Hundred
thousand pound per annum) and by bringing over the Forces (being most part
Papists, both Officers and Soldiers) and quartering them in the most
considerable parts of England.

In this pitiful state we shall leave England for a while, and take a view of
the terrible War ensueing, betwixt the Emperor of Germany, and the Turks.

The French Kings pretensions in Germany, Flanders etc.
In the mean time take notice, that the French King not only Seizes the Towns of
Homburg and Bissul, the only two places remaining to the Duke of Lor rain, of
all his Duchy; but ripping up all the old Monuments and Records of the
Parliament of Metz, he endeavors by them to prove a Title to many Countries
and Villages, both in Germany and Flanders, and actually claymes them; This did
so alarm all the potentats on the Continent. as the Emperor, Sw^dland, and
the States of Holland, Franconia, and several other free and Imperial Cities,
enter into a Mutual League of Defense, The league of Ausburg.
which was called the League of Ausburg; In bringing which to pass, the Prince
of Orarge was Eminently active, But the King of England was not at all
concerned in this grand affairs on which my Author makes a-severe re-mark.

SECT. 3.
Germany, and Hungary; take notice of the ground of this War. which was
occasioned by a discontented party in Hungary, of whom, Count Teckeley became
the sole Head after the fall of Serins; several Expedients being proposed, for
accommodating matters between them, and taking no effect, nothing would
satisfy the mal-contents, but the calling in of the Turks to assist them: The
Emperor finding them resolved on this, thought fit to strengthen himself by
entering into a strict Alliance with the King of Poland, Alliance between the
Emperor, Pole and Venice.
and the next year, he drew in the State of Venice, so as it became a
Tripartite Confederacy.

On the sixth of May 1683. The Emperor gives the Command of his Army to
Charles Duke of Lorrain, Duke of Lorrain General of the Imperial Army.
who presently Marches with the Army to Newhousel and beseidges it. on which
making several sharp attacks, he was forced at last to quit it, hearing that
the Grand Vizier was on his March to Buda with an Army of above two Hundred
Thousand Men: Beseiges Newhousel, but quits it on the Turks aproach.
The Duke hasts through the Isle of Schut, toward Raab, and in few days after,
the Turkish Army draws thither, and Encamps within veiw of the Imperial Army.
The Duke of Lorrain finding the Turkish Army far above his number, hasts
toward Vienna, whither the Grand Vizier soon followed. As the Duke made his
retreat, on the sixth of July, three Thousand Tartars, sallying out of a Wood,
suddently and furiously, attacks the left wing of his Army (Guarding the
Baggadge on the Front) dissorders, Retreats to Vienna, the Turks follow him.
and beats them back on the main Body, and tho the Germans opposed and rooted
them yet they carried off most part of the Bagadge with them. In this Conflict,
Prince Lewis of Saxony and the young Duke of Arschot were killed.

The Emperor hearing of the approach of the Turkish Army removed from Vienna
to Lintz leaving the City in great dissorder and Consternation, and many fled
and left it.

SECT 4
July, the Duke comes to Vienna with his Army, in good order, which cheered up
the drooping Citizens very much; And Count Staremberg, Vienna biseiged by the
Turks.
the Governor* put all things in the best posture he could, for making a
Vigorous defense against the Enemy, who on the fourteenth formed the Seige
Encamping between the Town and the south side of the Danube.

This Famous and Memorable Seige was carried on by the Vizier Bassa, with
better Conduct and greater Resolution, then had appeared in any of the Turkish
Enterprises, for many ages preceding, and was ^ndefatigably continued for the
space of nine Weeks: And was (with no less policy and Valor Vigorously
defend^d by the Noble Governor Staremberg.

To enter upon a minute account of the many brisk attacks and furious Assaults
made by the Enemy, and the no less Valiant Resistance made by the Germans, were
to swell and enlarge this work beyond the proper and ordinary bounds of an
Abridgement. So as for the satisfaction of the more curious, in that point, I
must refer them to the Original, and entreat them to rest contented with the
Summary account following.

A breife account of the Seige.
The Duke of Lorrain lying with his small Army entrenched beyond the Da^ube, and
hearing that Count Teckcley was ravaging all Moravia, Marched thither, and
drove him thence: On the seventeenth of August he had a letter from Staremberg
giving an account of all Remarkable Actions on both sides, preceding the date
of his letter: That a Jamsary being taken told him that they had already lost
ten Thousand men, two Bassa's and many great Officers; But he wrote withal
that their losses and dangers in the Town encreassed dialy, and implored
roleife, with all possible speed. To which the Duke Answered, That the
Auxiliary Forces were now almost Joined; that the King of Poland was hasting
hither, in Person; that he expected the arrival of all the joint Forces* before
the last day of August, that he had recovered Presburg from Count Teckcley, and
beaten him once a^a^n near the Marow. And prayed him to persevere in his duty,
till releife came. Which letter did much Encourage the Governor and the whole
City. But the first of September being come, and no sign of releif, the
Governor gives the Duke notice once again, of the Extremities they were
reduced to; and on the sixth at night, they espied five Rockets on the top of
the Calemburg, near the Dukes Quarters, as a sign that the Succors were at
hand, which filled them all with exceeding joy.

The Turks decamp.
The Grand Vizier having Intelligence of the approach of the Confederate Forces,
carries on his attaches with great diligence, till the eleventh, and that
afternoon, Decamps, and Marches with his Forces toward the Calemburg, to which
the Christian Army was come.

The battle of Calemburg.
The Turkish Army amounted to an Hundred and twenty Thousand Fighting Men, above
sixty Thousand being lost in the seige; The Christian Army not exceeding eighty
Thousand, and six Thousand in the Town.

The King of Poland Commanded the Right wing. The Dukes of Bavaria and Lorrain,
the left, the Duke of Saxony and Prince Waldeck Commanding the main body.
Whereupon Ensued a fierce and cruel Battle, being maintained with a great
obstinacy and resolution on both sides, for a long time. Durcing the hottest
of the Battle, the Turks (left at the Seige by the Grand Vizier) attached the
Town with incredible Vigor* and Fury, which put the beseiged so to it, that
the Governor was forced to send to the Duke of Lorrain for Assistance, who
sent presently Prince Lewis of Baden with a body of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons
into the City, with whose help all the Turks that were in the attack were cut
in pieces.

The Turks desea^ed.
In short, toward the evening, the Enemy gave way, and fled, the Christians
pursuing them beyond their Camp, and standing to their Arms all night, the next
morning being the thirteenth, they plundered the Enemies Catrip, took fifty
piece of Cannon, two Horse tails, the Grand Seigniors Standard, and the Grand
Visiers own Horse, with all their Tents and Provisions; In this ba^tle, which
was on the twelth of September, 1683. the Turks lost above fifteen Thousand
Men, and the Christians not above on Thousand.

Names of the Auxiliaries.
The Princes Assisting the Emperor in this battle, were, The King of Poland,
the Electors of Saxony and Bavaria, The Duke of Lorrain, Prince Waldeck. the
two Princes of Baden, the Prince of Anhalt the Duke of Croy, the Prince de
Salm, the Marquess of Brandenburg Bareith, the Landtgrave of Hesse, the Prince
of Hannover, the two Princes of Newburg, four Princes of the House of Saxony,
three of Wirtemburg, and the Prince of Hoenzelles.

Emperor returns to Vienna.
The Emperor being informed of this Glorious Victory, came the next day to
Vienna, and going to St Stevens Church, with the two Electors, and many other
Princes and Nobles, caused Te Deum to be sung, which was followed with a Triple
discharge of all the Cannon.

Battle of Barkan
The Polish and Emperial Armies, having refreshed themselves a few days, pursue
the Enemy, and near the Fort of Barkan, they find fourteen Thousand Turks
Encamped, whom they attack and root so entirely, as scarce four Thousand of
them got safe in to the Garrison of Barkan, which the Christians presently
attacked, and took it by storm, Turk^ defeated.
putting all to the sword, except five hundred Janisaries: in this place the
Duke of Lorrain put a good Garrison, and on the twentieth of October he passed
the Dannbe with the Imperial Army, and Marched toward Gran. Gra^ (...)


The Duke of Lorrain Beseiged this Town, and plied it so warmely, An. 1684.
as on the twenty seventh of October (which was but three days after the
opening of the Trenches) the Turks desired to Capitulate which the Duke
listened to, and the Articles being agreed on, the Turks marched out, to the
number of two Thousand Ja^nisaries, and four Thousand of the Inhabitants, and
were conducted by a safe Convoy in their way to Buda. So Gran was recovered,
with the loss of an Hundred and fifty Men, after it had been seventy eight
years in Possession of the Turks.

CHAP. IX. Anno. 1684.
Courtray, Dixmude and Luxemburg serzed by the French.
Ye have heard, this last year, of the King of Frances pretensions to several
Seigniories and Towns in Germany, and Flanders etc. In prosecution whereof,
about the latter end of 1683. he surprised Courtray and Dixmude, and in May
after, beseiged Luxemburg, which was surrendered to him, on Articles, the tenth
of June, 1684. which vexed Spain extremely.

Genoa Bombarded and submits to the French King,
The French King having picked a quarrel against Genoa, tho no just provocation
was given him, sends his fleet before the City on the seventeenth of May, 1684.
which Bombarded it severely for four or five days, this being the first place
he ever Bombarded by sea; The Genoise made pretty good resistance, till the
twenty fourth; at which time, the sea growing high, the French Fleet weighed
off, which the City was glad of; but fearing their return, and knowing
themselves unable to Cope with so potent an Enemy, they send their Do^ and four
Senators to the French Court, and make their humble Submission.

SECT. 2.
Lorrain whom we left in Gran, who on the twentyeth of May, 1684. begins his
March toward Buda; Vicegrad taken by the Duke of Lorrain.
and Vicegrad lying in his way, it surrendered to him: from thence he marched
to the plains of Waisen, where he found fifteen Thousand Turks drawn up in
Battle array. On the twenty sixth of June. he attacked and defeated them,
killing a Thousand Turks and one Basha, the broken Troops fled in to Waisen,
which surrendered to the Duke on discretion. On the tenth of July he marched
the whole Army over the Danube, and Encamped at St Andrew, Turks defeated at St
Andrew Buda beseiged,
where the Turkish Army engadged him, the encounter was sharp on both sides,
but the Turks being baffled and repulsed by the Christians on all hands, they
retired at night (with a great dale of loss) toward Buda; the Duke followed
them, and on the fourteenth of July invested the Town: On the ninteenth, the
Germans attacked the lower Town and drove the Turks out of it, and the Town
being fired both by the Turks and Christians, before might it was almost
reduced to ashes. And totally rooted at Hanschabets. July 21 1684.
The Duke having advice that the Turkish Army was Encamped at H^uschabets, two
German miles beyond Buda, Marches toward them on the twenty first; the Turkish
Army amounted to twenty Thousand, whom the Christians attacked, and after a
long and obstinat Feight, routed them, Killing four Thousand, of whom their
were a Thousand Janisaries all killed on the place.

In the persute, a great many more were killed, Wounded, and taken Prisoners.
They took their whole Camp, and all their Artillary, and their Bagadge, which
was very Rich; Together with Machomets great Standard, and the Serasquier
Bassa's Pavilion, who Commanded the Army in the Grand Visiers Absence. Of this
great Victory, the Duke of Lorrain gives the Emperor an account the next day
by an express, highly extolling the valor of all the Officers, especially,
Prince Lewis of Baden, and the Count de Caprara.

The Duke continued the Seige till the 25. of October, dureing which time, The
Duke raises his Seige from Buda
a great many Warlike and gallant Exploits were performed on both sides, the
Assaliants making many brisk Attaks, and the Defendants, many bold and
desperate Sallies. But the Weather growing Rainy, and the Cavalry wanting
Forage, and withal, the Serasqueir having in this time reinforced his Army,
with a design to relieve the beseiged; The Duke (by the full advice of a
Council of War) resolved to march off and accordingly did so, on the 29. of
October 1684.

But to mitigate this disappointment at Buda, the Emperors Armies proved more
successful in other parts, The Emperor successful in Sclavonia by General Lesly
this Campaign; For in Sclavonia, Count Lesly took Virovitza, the chief City of
that Country, and defeated the Basha of Maratha and the Beg of Zerneg, who
(with near Four thousand Men) designed the relief of Virovitza, killing a great
many, and taking twenty Prisoners of good quality, and all the Provisions
designed for the relief of the place.

And though he had but Fourteen thousand Men, he repulsed the Serasquier Basha,
who attacked him with Thirty thousand Men; and fortifying his post, he went to
Vienna to give the Emperor an account of all.

And in upper Hungary
In upper Hungary also; General Schultz took Zeben by storm, killing all the
Christian deserters he found there. And having advice that Teckelys Army lay
secure, not far from him, on the 17th. of September in the Evening, General
Shultz defeats Tecley near Zebon
he marches silently, and about three in the next Morning, fell suddenly in
upon his Camp, which, in a trece, he made himself Master of entirely rooted the
Army, killed Four thousand in the Action, took all Teckelys Tents and Bagadge,
his Coach, and Standard (himself narrowly escaping) and all his Apparel, ^ate
and Money and his Papers also. After this, Schultz took Barthfieldt, and
several other small Garrisons, and so retired with Honor and Riches to his
Winter Quarters.

About the middle of August 1684. The King of Poland randevouzed his Army at
Bucksaes, King of Poland takes Jaslowick, routs out the Tartars killing 3000
from whence he sends a Detachment to Attack the Fortress of Jaslowick, which
soon surrendered. After this he marched to Kolenzan, where meeting with a
considerable detatchment of Tartars, he Commanded his Vanguard to attack them,
which they did with that Bravery, that the Enemy fled, leaving Three thousand
behind them slain; The Poles loosing but an hundred.

And so this Action concluded the Pollish Campaign.

Morosins made Captain General of the Venetian Forces
The Venetians having perfited their Alliance with the Emperor and the King of
Poland, make Morosint Captain General of their Forces, who, in June Randevouzed
the Fleet, at Lessina, and on the 19th, of July arrived before Sancta Maura,
situate in the Gulf of Prevesa. And Landing some Forces, raised two Batteries
on the East and West sides of the Town, which after some resistance, He takes
Sancta Maura
surrendered on Articles, about the latter end of July, wherein they found
Eighty pieces of Brass-Cannon, and great quantity of Ammunition and Provisions.

From thence the Captain General Steers toward Prevesa, and lays Seige to it
the 20th. of September. And plying it briskly with Cannons and Bombs by Sea and
Land till the twenty eight, And Prevesa
the Enemy desired to Capitulate, and Articles being agreed on they Matched out
on the 30th. of September; leaving behind them Forty four Cannon, (eighteen
whereof, shot a fifty pound Ball) with a great quantity of Ammunition and
Provisions, After which the Venetians went to their Winter Quaters at Corsu.

The Venetian Troops were successful in Dalmatia also, this Campaign, Venetians
successful in Dalmatia
for they beat the Turks in several small Rencounters, making Incursisions into
their Quarters, An. 1685.
and still returning with Victory and Booty; They took in the Isle of Narenta.
and the Castle of Narim, and then retired to their Winter Quarters. And so we
conclud this year 1684.

CHAP. X. Anno 1685
Death of King Ch: the 2d.
The first thing remarkable in the year 1685. is The Death of Charles the 2d.
King of great Britain, who dyed of an Appoplexy on Saturnday, the 7th. of
February in the 37. year of his Reign, after he had lived 54 years, 8. Months,
and 8 days: passing over the the first part of the Character my Author gives of
him, I take notice only of the latter part, His Character.
which says, he was a Prince the most fit to govern of any other, and applied
himself the least to it, which was great pity, since he had such an insight
into Men and things, that no Monarch of his Age could pretend to compare with
him, besides a mild Disposition, which made him at his Death be so universally
Lamented by all sorts of his Protestant Subjects, especially by the Dissenters,
and that more out of fear of his Successor, then any great kindness to him. A
witty Quaker appearing very jovial; and all about him seeming sad, was asked
his reason for being so, who Answered, They had two to deal with before, and
now, GOD he thanked, they had but one.

Now the Duke of York ascends the Throne, and the same day his Brother dyed,
King James Speech to the Privy Council
Assembled the Council, and declared that he intended to follow his Brothers
example, in clemency and tenderness to his People, That he would make it his
business, to preserve the Government both in Church and State, as established
by Law, he commended the Church of Englands P^inciples and Members; and that as
he would never depart from the just Prerogatives of the Crown, so he would
never invade any Man's Property.

King James being solemnly Crowned at Westminster, the twenty third of April
1685, King James Crowned.
He appoints a Parliament to meet the Twenty second of May after, to whom,
Repeating much of what he had said to the Council, His Speech to the Privy
Council repeated to the Parliament, and his demand of Money.
he proceeded to the demanding a large supply of Money, laying before them many
plausible Reasons and Arguments, for moving them thereto.

The Parliament (being in a manner fashioned and molded before, to his
Inclinations) not only settled the Customs and temporary Excise upon him, as
they were before upon his Brother, but laid a new Imposition upon Wines,
Vinegar, Sugar. Tobacco, and other Commodities, so as in short, his revenue
(with the hereditary Excise, and other Revenues of the Crown amounted to Two
Millions four hundred thousand Pounds per annum, Which is granted.
to which add an Hundred and fifty thousand Pounds per annum, which he had,
when Duke of York, the whole amounted to Two Millions, and five hundred and
fifty thousand Pounds per annum.

SECT. 2.
Scotland of the Earl of Argyles Landing in the Highlands; Argyle lands in
Scotland.
That he had put out two Declarations, one of which he presently communicated
to them. Which is so generally known in Scotland, and elsewhere, as saves me
the Labor of repeating it here. To be short, in a few days after, the Earl's
small Forces were dissipated, and each Man shifted for himself; And he himself
falling unhappily into the hands of a Countryman, was soon after brought to
Edinburgh, He is taken and Executed at Edinburgh he dyed very piously.
where (for his former unpardonable Crime, req^ireing care should be taken for
the Protestant Religion, and for explaining himself on taking the Test) this
brave (tho unfortunate) Man was beheaded. June the 30.

But a blacker Cloud appeared about this time, in the West of England, Monmouth
lands in England.
by the Duke of Monmouths Landing at Lyme in Dorset-shire, on the 12. of June,
where he presently put out an ample Declaration, in his own name, and the rest
of his followers. Which Declaration being very large, and being generally known
all Britain over, I shall now overpass.

The Prince of Orange hearing of Monmouths Landing in England, Prince of Orange
offer to King James
presently sends over the Six English Regiments, in the Dutch Service and Pay,
and by Monsieur Benting, not only offers King James, the loan of his Troops,
but to come in person and command his Army, if his Majesty pleased. But before
Benting reached London; Skeleton, King James Envoy at the Hague, had sent the
King so bad a Character of the Prince, Rejected.
as he told Benting, that their common Interest required the Princes stay in
Holland, and hinted as much to him, as he thought, his Zeal for his Service was
not seasonable at that time, and this was the thanks the Prince had for his
Service offered.

Providence so favored King James at this time, as the Duke of Monmouths
Forces are defeated at Sedgemore, Monmouth Executed
and he being taken soon after, was brought to London, and Beheaded on the 15.
of July.

Jessereys Bloody Work in the West.
Hereupon followed the Tragical proceedings in the West, The Lord chief Justice
Jessereys, being clothed with a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, to try and
prosecute all who had any way appeared or concurred with Monmouth; At
Dorchester, 30. being Impeached, he hanged Twenty nine of them, and again, of
two hundred and forty three, eighty suffered and almost as many at Exeter, at
last, he finished his Bloody Assizes, at Tauntoun and Wells, where above 500.
were Condemned, and of them 239. were Executed; Yet for all his Bloody Humor,
Covetousness put in for a share. For he had the Conscience to take Fourteen
thousand, and Five hundred Pounds for saving the Life of one Man.

And Kirks also
Nor was Colonel Kirk much short of him in Cruelty, for at Taunton, he caused
Ninety Wounded Men to be Hanged, and that with the Solemnity of Trumpets,
Drums, and Bag-pipes making a noise all the time of their Execution. And after
all this Alerman Cornish a Worthy Honest Citizen of London, is Apprehended,
Arraigned, Condemned, Mr. Cornish Executed.
and Executed, and that for no other Cause, Realy, but that being Sheriff of
London at the Discovery of the Popish Plot, he had appeared Active in
prosecuting the Conspirators, and this was the Demonstration of the Kings
Clemency and tenderness toward his People, which he so fairly promised, first
to the Privy Council, and soon after, to the Parliament.

SECT. 3.
England with the King, he begins to take Ireland under consideration, and in
the first place, he begins to turn out some Eminent Protestant Officers, as the
Lord Shannon, Captain Robert ^itzgerald, Captain Richard Coot, and Sir George
St. George, all Captains of Horse, and fills up these Vacancies with Popish
Officers: Then he calls over the Duke of Ormond, Colonel Talbot sent to Enland
to no other end, then that by divesting him of the Government of that Kingdom,
he might make way for the advancement of his darling Richard Talbot, a bigot
Papist, whom he first makes a Colonel of Horse, and afterward. Lord Deputy
and General of all his Forces in Ireland, and creats him Earl of Tirconnel, who
being clothed with this Grandour and Power, He disbands Protestants
began presently to Exereise it, he Disbanded whole Companies and Troops at
once, stripping them of their Clothes, and depriving them of their Horses and
Accutrements, all which they had paid for; he turned off two or three hundred
Protestant Officers, And makes up the Army of Irish Papists.
many of Whom had purchassed their Commissions at a dear rate, and in a short
time turned out of the Army Five or Six thousand Protestant Soldiers; most
part of whom, went a Begging; and formed the Army entirely of Irish Papists,
with a mixture of some few French Officers, all Papists.

King James being elated and animated with his Success hitherto, The Kings
speech to the Parliament in November 1685.
both in England and Ireland: and finding his Parliament so pliable to all his
desires, in the last Session; at their meeting in November 1685 he lays before
them, the necessity of Encreassing the Army, and of a continual standing Force
to defend Him and the Nation from all attempts of their Enemies, either abroad
or at home, and desires a supply answerable to the necessary expense in that
matter. And in the next place he extolls the Loyalty and good services of many
Popish Officers he had taken into the Army, and declared plainly, that he would
not expose them to disgrace, nor deprive himself of the benefit of their
service, if a new Rebellion should happen.

The Parliament taking their motions into Consideration, The answer of both
houses.
the Lords Voted (tho faintly, and not unanimously) that thanks should be
returned to his Majesty; for his Speech: But the house of Commons went to work
more Ingenuously and roundly, for on the sixteenth of November, they addressed
the King, That finding his Majesty not fully satisfied with the Militia, in the
late troubles, they would take care to make them more useful for the future
(but not on word, of Encreassing the Army) and for the Popish Officers, they
were preparing a Bill for indemnifying them, from the penalty they had incurred
by Law; but because the continuing them in the Army (without ane Act of
Parliament) might be thought a dispensing power with that Law, they humbly
prayed he would be pleased to give such directions therein, that no Jealousies
might r^main in the hearts of his faithful Subjects The consequent of this
address was, The Parliament dissolved.
^ust a prorogation, and then a dissolution of the Parliament. And so the King
is left at liberty to pursue his designs by such methods as he thought fit.

SECT. 4.
En^land to Hungary, yet thither we go, to enquire how affairs went there, this
last campaign. Hungary.
On the the thirteenth of June, 1685. The Duke of Lorrain arrives at the
Imporial Camp, Newheusel beseiged by Lorrain.
between Newheusel and Barkan, where the Seige of Newheusel is resolved on,
thither the Duke marches, and on the eleventh of July, the Trenches are opened;
and the Seige carried on with great resolution till the end of july, the
beseiged making obstinate resistance. Duke of Lorrain. marches to relieve Gran
beseiged by the Turks.
The Duke having certain advice that the Scrasquier Basha had Beseiged Gran
with an Army of near sixty Thousand Men; resolved to leave a sufficient body
for carrying on the Seige, and with the greatest part of the Army, to march to
the r^leise of Gran: The Emperor approving this resolution, on the first of
August The Duke began his march toward Gran, and on the fourteenth Encamped
very near the Enemy. The Turks beleiving the Christian Army to be not above
twenty Thousand, attached them with great fury, but were so warmlie received,
as they were soon convinced of their mistake, and repented of it. tho to late.

The Turks totaly routed at Gran.
The Imperialist pursues them hotly, even to their Camp, making great slaughter,
and without any stop, drove them from their Camp, and gave them a total
overthrow. In this action, the Turks lost sour Thousand Jamsaries, and two
thousand Spah's their Baggadge and all their Artillery, being twenty three
prices of Cannon and four Mortars. The Christians lost not above an Hundred
Men, and of them, no person of Note.

Vicegarde taken by the Turks.
But while the Serasquier lay before Gran (where he lost near three Thousand, in
the attaches) he detach't a party to Vicegrade, which after a whiles brave
defense, was forced at last to surrender, carrying off their Arms and Baggage,
and came safe to the Imperial Army.

This small loss was a boundantly Compensed with the gaining the strong Garrison
of Newheusel. which was thought invincible; Newheusel taken by storm by the
Duke of Croy and Caprara.
for the General Caprara and the Duke of Croy (who commanded the Forces left at
the Seige by the Duke of Lorrain) having by great application and industry made
their approaches so near, as their Cannon had made a breach in one of the
Bastions, so broad, that three Men might enter a breast, resolved on a general
Assault the next day, being the ninteenth of August, which accordingly was
performed and carried on with such incredible Resolution, that (notwithstanding
the Vigorous resistance made by the Defendants) they rushed into the Town, and
put all to the Sword, only Hassan Basha (who was ill wounded) and ten Officers
were saved. They found in the Town seveny five pieces of Cannon, besides a
great quantity of Warlike provisions.

This great loss of the Turks, moved the Serasquier Ipradim, to wri^e to the
Duke of Lorrain, offering some Proposals for Peace, which was earnestly
seconded by the Aga who brought the Letter* To which, the Duke answered. That
he had no Instructions to listen to any Overturs for Peace, but that he would
acquaint His Imperial Majesty with the Serasquiers Proposals; And so we leave
Affairs here, and see what the Gern^an^ have been doing in other places, all
this time.

General Leslie Commanding in Croatia, formed a design against Esseck, and on
the ninth of August directed his march thitherward. General Leslie takes Esseck.
The Town of Michalowitz lying in his way, and hearing it was keept by sixty
Turks only, he forced it to surrender at discretion; and so continued his march
toward Esseck, to which he drew near, the fourteenth of August; where being
opposed by a Body of Turks, he attached them, and drove them into the Town,
and followed them so closs, that his men presently scaled the Walls, which were
not very strong and made themselves Masters of the Town, the pillage whereof
the General gave to the Soldiers. And so (with the loss of no more then sixty
Men) he returned to Michalowitz.

Esperies taken by General Leslie.
In upper Hungary, General Schultz lays Seige to Esperies, which was stoutly
Defended, but at last, the Governor understanding some Additional Forces were
coming to the Beseigers on the 11 of September he desired a Parley, when
Articles being agreed on, the Town is put into the Germans hands on the 12. And
Baschaw by Caprara.
And soon after the City of Baschaw was taken by General Caprara; Agria was
Bombarded by the Baron de Merci, and all the Country round it ravaged and
destroyed: After which the Troops went into their Winter Quarters.

SECT. 5.
Poles this Campaign, for they suffered the Provinces of Podolia to be ravaged
by the Tartars, Poland.
They came late into the Field, under the Crown General, Poland does but little.
made two or three small skirmishes with the Enemy, and so returned to their
Winter Quarters.

Francisco Morosins, Venetians
Captain General of the Venetian Forces, set Sail for Coron, in July. Morosins
beseiges Coron.
To which he laid Seige, but was soon Assaulted by a Body of Turks, whom he
defeated, killing four Hundred of them, and as many wounded; yet in a few days
after* the Turks rallied again and on the 30th of July made a new attempt of
brea^ing into the Venetian Trenches, Be^ts the Tu^ks tuice.
but were valiantly repulsed, and beaten back to their own Retrenchments:
lossing near four Hundred more, and Kalib Basha, killed with a Cannon bullet;
yet for all this, the Beseiged make a brave Resistance, and will not listen to
any proposals, trusting always for releif from the Turkish Camp, which lay not
far from the Venetians, the Captain General understanding this, resolves (wi^h
consent of all his Officers) to force the Enemies Camp, He forces the Turks
Camp and and outs them.
which the next morning early, they attempted and proved therein very
successful, for the Turks (expecting no such thing) were mightly surprysed both
with the suddenness and boldness of the attempt, and being in great Terror and
Confusion, forsook their Camp and fled, the Venetians making a horrible
slaughter of them in their flight.

They found in the Camp a rich Booty of Artillery, Arms, and all sorts of
provisions. After this, the Beseiged began to flag and loss Courage, yet
holding out obstinatly, till at last (after 49 days Seige) the Beseigers made a
General Assault, and porsecuted the same so eagerly, as they took the Town by
mere Force, He takes Coron be storm
putting all to the Sword; without respect of age or sex. In the Town they found
a Hundred and twenty eight Pieces of Cannon, whereof sixty six were Brass, with
a great deal of Riches, and Provisions of all sorts.

After this he took the strong Garrison of Zarnata, which surrendered to him
the 11 of September, thence, coming to Calamata, he was attached by the Captain
Bassa, and ten Thousand Turks, whom he valiantly fought and defeated, possessed
himself of Calamata, and brought the whole Province of Mayna under the
Jurisdiction of the Re-publi^k.

This was a fatal year to the French Protestants, for for by an Edict, the 22d.
of October, An. 1686
the Edicts of Nants and Nisines are repealed, P^rsecution of the French
Protestants began.
whereon followed a severe Persecution.

CHAP. XI. Anno 1686.
SECT. 1.
England. The late Parliament being dissolved, the King endeavors to get all
the Judges in Westminster Hall to be such as would Justify all his Actions,
England.
so as he might (at least seemingly) have the Law on his side: To which end, he
begins to Bargain with them, that they should declare the Kings Power of
dispensing with the Penal Laws and Tests, made against Recusants out of
Parliament, and manadged this design so, as he brought it a great length.

The high Commission.
In the next place, he gives a Commission of Ecclesiastical Affairs to the
Bishop of Chester (the Bishop of Canterbury refuseing the Employment) and
several others of Clargie, and Ley-men; which Commission is to be seen at large
in Cokes Detection etc. The first that this Commission fastened upon, Bishop of
London suspended by it.
was the Bishop of London, whose Crime was, that he did not suspend Doctor
Sharp for Preaching in his Parish Church of St Giles, against the Frauds and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome, for which he is suspended, ab Offici^, tho
the real cause was for moving (in the last Parliament) that the Kings speech
might be Debeated, which stuck in the Kings stomach, and is now remembered to
the Bishop.

Also, the fellows of Magdalen College.
The next blow the Commission gives, is at the Fellows of Magdalen College in
Oxford, for chuseing for their President Doctor Hough, a person very well
qualified; and refuseing the Bishop of Oxford, Recommended to them by the King:
but after they had chosen the other, for which cause, the Commissioners, not
only turns them out of their Fellowships, but makes them incapable of any other
Ecclesiastical Preferments.

Now comes on the stage, Thomas Dangerfe^d, who discovered the Meal-tub-plot,
Dangerfend killed.
for which he is sentenced to be whip't with Doctor Oats, and at his return
from Tyburne toward Newgate, he is run into the eye, with a Tuck on the end of
a cane, by Robert Francis a Papist, of which (and the agony of his severe
whipping) he dyed soon after. However Francis is hauged for that base and
Barbarous Act.

Mr. Johnson whip't and for what crime
And Mr. Samuel Johnson a Minister, was Sentenced also to stand 3 times in the
Pillory, and to be whip't between Tyburne and Newgate, which was executed
severely, his crime being, a humble and hearty address, to the Protestant
Officers in the Kings Army. Showing them the sin and danger of Associating
themselves with Papists, and earnestly exhorting them to separate themselves
speedily from them.

Kings Letter to Scotland. in favor of Papists
About this time, The King wrote a Letter to the Council of Scotland, in which
he takes no notice at all of Protestant Dissenters, but recommends to them his
innocent Roman Catholic Subjects, who with their Lives and Fortunes had been
always assistant to the Crown in the worst of Rebellions etc. These he
heartily recommended to their Care, that they might have the benefit of his
Laws, and that security under his Government, as others of his Subjects had,
and that Obligations might not be imposed upon them, which their Religion could
not admit of, wherein they would do him most acceptable Service, etc.

SECT. 2.
Hungarian War calls us thither again. The Duke of Lorram joining the Imperial
Army in June, Hungary
Marches toward Buda, where he arrived the 21st, The 2d. Seidge of Buda.
and placed his Men in their Old Trenches, near the lower Buda; A deserting
Ja^^sa^y coming to the Duke, told him there were not above Six thousand Men in
the Town, and that the Garrison was not near so strong, as at the former Seige,
which Intelligence did much encourage the Beseigers.

The Seige is carried on with a great deal of industry till the 4th. of July,
On which day the Brandenburgers arrived in the Camp: The 9th. the Beseidged
made a Sally, and did considerable Damnage; but were repulsed: The 13th, the
Duke commanded a Lodgement to be made on the Breach, in which Attack, he lost
near a Thousand Men, besides many Officers, and Fifty Volunteers, whereof were
several Noblemen, and diverse English Men of good quality.

On the 22d. The Turks Sallyed on the Bavarian Quarter, and did considerable
Execution: On the 27. the Duke made a general Assault, and the Germans fixed
their Lodgement on the first Wall: On the 3d. of August, they made a general
Assault, again on the second Wall, but were beaten off with a considerable
loss. On the 13th, the Duke had certain advice that Nincy thousand Turks were
on their March toward him; Whereupon, leaving Twenty thousand Men to carry on
the Seige, he marched all the rest of the Army out of the Lines, and drew up in
order of Battle.

A sharp skirmish.
And hearing that the Grand-Visier had detached Six thousand Jaussaries, and
Four thousand Spahis, all choice Men, to take up some Advantageous posts on the
Neighboring Hills, he sent off seven Regiments of Horse, and some few
Hungarians to oppose them, who (with the help of the Regiments of Taff) forced
the Enemy headlong down the Hill, Turks worsted
with so great fury and slaughter, as near three thousand Jaussaries lay on the
spot, and the rest retired toward Esseck.

The Germans brought back with them, eight pieces of Cannon, thirty Colors and
Standards, with three hundred Prisoners; And perhaps a more vigorous Action
was never performed by Horse alone.

The two Armies being drawn up in Battle array, Confronted one mother, Buda
Attackt
at a respectful dutance, for some time; at last the Turks drew back by degrees
toward the Hills, on which the Christians advanced their right wing some ^h^t
before their main Body, which the Turks perceiving, made a faint Attack, but
were repulsed; It drawing late. the Christians retired toward their Trenches,
slowly and in good order.

The Grand Vizier also retired with his Army toward A^ba Rega^^^, and ordered
the Basha (who gave him an account of the Defeat in the Morning) to be
strangled, only for saying, they charged the Christians like Lions, but they
received them like Devils.

The Seige is still curryed on with all the force and industry possible for
Men, till the 1st. of September, the Grand Vizier, in the mean time, using all
endeavors to throw in some Men into the Town, which he could not possibly
perform. That day the Christian Army was strengthened by the Accession of ten
thousand Men, under the Command of Count Scherffenberg; whereon it was
unanimously agreed, to storm the Town the next day, which was performed
accordingly, for all things being put in due order, the Cannons and Mortars
playing all the Forenoon, and the signal being given at three Afternoon, all
the Detatchments advanced, and mounted the Breaches, with as great Order as
Courage.

Buda taken by Storm.
The Germans were twice beaten back, but being animated with the Dukes presence,
who led them on himself, made a third Attack, so furiously, as they entered the
Town with the slaughter of eight hundred Janisaries who defended that Breach,
where the Vizier Basha was in person, who through the whole Action gave great
proofs of his Bravery, and being first Wounded, was at last killed in the
breach. The other Detatchmen's going on with the like Resolution, entered the
Town on all sides, so as in little more than an Hours time, they made
themselves absol to Masters of the Town.

The Soldiers round in the Town a great dale of Plate, Jewels, and Money, so
as many of them had two or three thousand pound for his share. Of Five thousand
Men in the Town at first, above three thousand were killed, and about a
thousand five hundred of them getting in to a Redoubt, hung out a Flag, and
begged Quarters, which the Duke was pleased to grant. The number of Christians
slain, was about Five hundred, and not so many Wounded; The Grand-visier
retires with shame to Alba Regalis
they got in the Town Four hundred pieces of Cannon. This Victory was the more
Glorious, that it was acquired in the sight of the Grand Vizier and his
powerful Army, who had not Courage to attempt the relief of it, but so soon as
he knew the Town was taken, he set Fire to his Camp, and retired with dishonor
and grief to Alba Regalis.

Things being set in order in Buda, the Duke sends the Prince of Baden to take
in five Churches, Prince of Baden takes five Churches Syclos, and Capsowar.
Burns the Bridge of Esseck.
in which Garisonthere was a Basha, seven Beys and two thousand sive hundred
Men; Notwithstanding which force the Prince plying them hard with Cannon, which
made a great Breach, forced them (on the 20th. of October) to surrender at
discretion. so as the Garrison and all the Inhabitants were made Prisoners of
War.

The Prince sends the Count of Sherffenberg with the half of his Forces to
beseidge Syclo^, And then retires to Winter Quarters
who arrived before it on the 25 of October, and the Garrison (after a faint
resistance) surrendered at discretion. After this, the Count re-joines the
Prince at Darda, who marched straight to Esseck, where he burnt all the Bridge,
from Darda to the Drove and all the Turks Boats on that River. From thence he
marched back to Capsowar, which surrendered on Articles, And, the Weather
growing bad, he sends all his Troops into Winter Quarters.

SECT. 3.
Baden to take in Five Churches he sent Count Caraffa from Buda also, Segedin
beseiged by General Wallis
with a strong to Detatchment, to lay Seige to Segedin, at which place he
arrived on the 5th. of October, but he being recalled by the Duke, the Seige
was carried on by General Wallis, who (being reinforced by some Horse and
Dragons from the Duke, commanded by General Veterans* carried on the Seige
resolutely, the Garrison making a stout resistance. Veterani Defeats the Turks
at Scinta. Twice
But hearing that the Grand Vizier had detatched two thousand Turks and four
thousand ^artars to relieve Segedin, and that they were within four Hungarian
Miles of his Camp, he sends Veterani with about five thousand Men to attack
them, who marches that night, and by break of day next Morning, fell into their
Camp at Scinta, and routed them totally, Killed many, took many Prisoners, and
all their Baggadge: But on his return to Segedin, he is attackt, by twelve
thousand Turkish Horse, and five hundred Janisaries on foot, the Grand Vizier
himself commanding; And finding it impossible to avoid fighting, he attacks
them with incredible courage, and after an obstinate fight for two hours, he
routed them, killed above two thousand, took all their Baggadge and Cannon,
many fine Horses, four hundred Mules, and five hundred Camels, all Loadned
with Ammunition and Provision for the relief of Segedin, Segedin yielded.
which was so daunted with this defeat, as it surrendered, the 23. of October
and this concluded the Campaign all Hungary over.

SECT. 4.
Turks were earlier in the field than the Venetians; Venetians.
The Captain Basha lays seige to Chialapha with ten thousand Foot and three
thousand Horse, The Turks beseige Chialapha.
the Captain General. Morosim hearing of this, sailed with the Fleet to Porto
Vitulo, and on the 30th. of March landed five thousand Men, who, that night
attackt an outpost near the Turks Camp, The Seidge raised.
and possessed themselves of the place, which so frightened the Beseigers, as they
marched off before day: but the Venetians pursued them, killed five hundred,
and took all their Cannon. And so Chialapha was relieved.

From Porto Vitulo, the Captain General Sailed to old Navarino, Old Navarino
surrendered to the Captain General Morosini
which surrendered June 23. from hence General Coning^mark marched to new
Navarino and invested it, and hearing the Serasquier Basha was on his march,
with ten thousand Turks, to relieve it, he left a competent number to guard the
Works, and on the 14th. of June marched to meet him, and three times,
endeavored to engadge hun, but the Turks retired, and passing over a River,
posted themselves on very advantageous Ground, The Serasquier Basha rooted, and
new Navarino surrendered
Coning^mark being reinforced with fourteen thousand Men from the Fleet,
pursues, passes the River, attackes their Camp, and after two Hours hot
dispute, defeats them totally, kills near a thousand, takes many Prisoners and
all their Baggadge. After this he returns to the Seige, where a Bomb setting
Fire in their Magazine, blew up a hundred and fifty of the Garrison, and the
Basha who commanded in it, and they surrendered on the 17th. of June, in the
Town they found sixty three pieces of Cannon, and much Ammunition etc. Modon
surrendered to the Captain General


The Captain General his and Men encouraged with this good success, lay seige
to Modon, a conside Garrison in the Morea, in which were three thousand men, a
Basha being Governor.

The Seige began the 22d. of June, and continued till the 6th of July, with a
great dale of Courage on both sides, when, the besieiged hearing nothing of the
Succors, which the Serasquier promised to send them, Capitulated and
Surrendered both the Town and Castle, leaving near a hundred pieces of Cannon,
thirteen Mortars, with a great quantity of all Provisions.

The next place attacked by the Captain General, is Napols de Romania the
ancient Nauplia) in which was Mustapha Basha Governor, and two thousand three
hundred Men, the seige was laid the 14. of July, and carried on resolutely
till the 29th. in which time, the Serasquier Basha made three several attempts
on the beseigers, but was still repulsed with loss, losing in the last Action a
thousand five hundred of his best Men and a hundred and twenty taken
Prisoners; Napolide-Romania surrendered
the Governor despairing now of any releif, and not daring to abide a general
Assault, which the beseigers had resolved on, capitulated and surrendered, much
on the same terins as Modon had done. This Victory occasioned a great joy in
Venice, that Garrison being very considerale.

About the latter end of this Campaign, Signior Cornaro, Providitor-General in
Dalmatta, and the Prince of Parma, drew together [near Scalona] a thousand
Horse, and three thousand Foot of Regular Troops, and five thousand Morlaques
commanded by the Chivalier Janko, and march toward Sign, Sign taken by storm.
to which they laid seige on the 23d. of September, which continued till the
26. only, for the Beseigers having, in two days, made a considerable breach,
on the third made a general Assault, and took the place by Storm, putting all
to the Sword, save some few Women and Children, the taking of this made the
Venetians Masters of the fertile Province of Ze^tina.

SECT. 5.
English, Hungarian and Venetian, Affairs, this last year 1686, King of
Polands expedition into Moldavia.
it remains to give some Account of Affairs in Poland. the last year there,
passing without any Memorable Action. The King having made Alliance Defensive
and Offensive with the two Czars of Muscovy; Marchces, Poland.
in July (on the Head of his Army) toward Moldavia and it was the middle of
August before he reached Iassi, the Capital City of that Country. Where he
expected the Hospodar of Moldavia should have Joined him, as he had promised,
but the Hospodar had retired from lassi before the King came, and sent his
excuse for not Joining him, his Children being then in the Turks hands as
Hostages.

Though the King was a little troubled at this, ye^ he Marched on as far as
Falsun, where eight Thousand Tartars suddenly attacked the Vanguard of his
Army; and after a hot dispute, for near two hours, they were repulsed with the
loss of eight Hundred Men, as many more prisoners being taken, and one of the
Cham, sown standards; from this the King advanced to Falxin, with an intention
to continue his March to Budz^^ck. but being informed he had great Mountains to
pass over, that the Towns were burnt, and the forradge destroyed by the
Tartars, he Marched back to Ias^, in 6 days time, but the Enemy gave him no
rest there, vexing him with continual Allarmes; at last understanding that the
main Body of the Tartars, Fights and defeats Sultan Nuradin.
Commanded by Sultan Nuradin, was come near to his Camp, and that a party of
four Thousand Men were advanced before the main Body, he sent the Court Marshal
and the Court Treasurer about midnight to attack them, himself following with
the whole Army; the Marshal accordingly attacks them and totally routed them,
An. 1687.
taking above three Hundred Prisoners; soon after, the two main Bodies
advanced and Engadged and after a short Fight. The Tartars were routed, and
fled, leaving a great many sl^ in and many taken prisoners, but not without
loss on the Poles side, several Officers and persons of Quality being, killed
particularly the Palatin Podos^ker; after this the King Marched homewards, and
in this expedition acquired no great applause.

CHAP. XII. Anno 1687.
SECT. 1.
England last year, taking notice of the Kings kindness to his Roman Catholic
Subjects in Scotland, England.
by his Letter to the Council, in their Favors, but now follows a more
General Act of his to that end, Tolleration of Religion.
for on the 12th. of February he Issues out his Proclamation, for a Tolleration
of Religion unto all. But for all this his trusty Tirconnill, now chief
Governor in Jreland, would scarce allow the benesite of this Proclamation, to
the Protestant Subjects there; for he (Succeeding the Noble Earl of Clarenden)
exerted his Authority to the hight, Tirconnels proceedings in Ireland.
in his Proclamation, the letter end of February, he promised to defend the
Laws, Liberty and Established Religion; yet he left out the preservation of the
Act of Settlment and explanation, resolving speedily to repossesse the Irish of
their forfeited Estares.

The King goes on, without any stop, in making Popish Judges, And King James's
in England.
Justices, Magistrates, and deputy Leivrennants, all England over, The privy
Council is filled up with Papists. Popish Schools Encouraged in London, and
through all the Kingdom, and four Foreign Popish Bishops, as Viccars
apostolical are allowed in Ecclesiatickal Jurisdiction, over all England and
Wales. And further, the Earl of Castlemain is sent Ambassador to Rome, to
Tender the Kings Obedience to the Holy Apostolical See, Earl of Castlmain sent
Embaslador to Rome.
with great hopes of extirpating the Northern Pestilent Heresy, in a short
time. And to secure the dispensing power, Tirconnel sends him over a
considerable Detachment of Irish Papists to strengthen his Army, who are now
become intollerably insolent.

SECT. 2.
Hungary, this Campaign, Hungary.
The Imperial Army Consisted of sixty two Thousand nine Hundred Fighting Men, a
third part whereof was to Act in upper Hungary, under the Duke of of Bavarta;
Duke of Lorrain marches toward Esseck.
a another third part in lower Hungary, under the Duke of Lorrain; and the third
on the Frontiers of Cr^a^ta, under General Dunewald, The whole Army Rendevouzed
near Barkin, where the Duke of Lorram arrived on the thirteenth of May: on the
seventeenth of June the Duke of Lorrain advanced toward Esseck continuing
there about for near three Weeks, without any Considerable Action, on the
thirteenth of July, he passed the Drove, Passes the drove.
where the Duke of Bavaria Joined him with his Forces, as Dunewald had done (a
Week before) with three or sour Thousand of his party, so as a review of the
Army being taken, it was found to consist of fifty five Thousand Men.

The Duke being informed that the Grand Vizier (with near eighty Thousand Men)
was Encamped near Mohatz, repassed the Drove, and Marched toward him, the
Dukes Army being Joined (on his March) with eight Thousand Swabian Troops, so
he came near to Mohatz on the 29 of July, where he spent some days endeavoring
to draw the Turks to a Battle, and finding them to decline an ingadgement, he
made a show of retireing toward Syclo^, on purpose to draw them after him,
which had the wished effect, for the Grand Vasier being animated with the Dukes
Retreat, on the 12 of August advanced, and ordered ten Thousand Spaht's and
five Thousand Janisaries to attack the Imperialists left Wing, which they did,
with great fury: but were bravely repulsed by General Dunewald, Turks defeated
at Mohatz. 16000 killed.
and so both Armies entirely engadged, the Turks observing better order in that
Bartle then ever formerly, the Fight continued for a long time, with great
courage on both sides: But by little and little, the Turks began to loss
ground, and at last took themselves to open flight.

The Christians persued closs, and entered pel mel with them in their very
Camp, making a horrible slaughter, in which Action the Christians lost not
above seven Hundred Men, but of the Turks, there were killed on the spot, and
drowned in the Morasses and River, few less then sixteen thousand.

The Christians got a very rich Booty in their Camp, with a Hundred and
sixteen piece of Cannon. The Duke of Bavaria had for his share, the Grand
Visiers Tent, which resembled a Castle for bulk, enriched wi^h Gold, Pearls,
and Precious stones, he got also all the I late, Jewels, and forty thousand
Du^kats in Cash.

Butschin yealded
From Mohatz, the Duke detached General Dunewald, with Forces to attack
Butschin, which lay between the Drove and the Save, to which he laid Seige the
11th of September, and followed it so vigorously. as on the 14th the Aga who
Commanded, surrendered at discretion; this strong Fortress being gained,
brought above a Hundred Villages about it; under Contribution, it covered
Virovitz^, and hindered the Turk of sending any succors to Sigeth and Camsia.

Esseck abandoned by the Turks.
The Garrison of Ess^ck being allarum'd and daunted with the lofs of this
Important place, abandoned it on the 29th. of September, which General Dunewala
hearing of, sent Count de Lodion with a detachment thither, who entered the
same without any opposition, finding in it fifty two pieces of Cannon, four
Mortars, and a vast quantity of Ammunition and other provisions.

After this, the Turks surrendered Walpo at discretion, and abandoned Possega,
the Capital City of Sclavon^a, and some other small Garrisons.

Transilvanta revolts.
To return to the Duke of Lorram he understanding that Abafit Prince of
Trans^invama had declared in favor of the Port notwithstanding of his Treaty
made with the Emperor, (about the 15th. of September) passed the Theysse, and
Marched his Army directly toward Transilvama which he presently reduced under
the Emperors Obedience, and concluded an advantageous Treaty with Prince
Abasts and the States of Transilvama, Reduced by Lorrain.
And from thence he went to Presburg, the Capital City of upper Hungary where
the Emperor then was, and who, by this time had so settled all Affairs with
the States of the Country, Joseph Arch Duke elected King of Hungary and
crowned.
as they were willing to accept of Archduke Joseph, the Emperors eldest Son;
for their King, whose Coronation was performed on the 9th, of December
following, with the greatest Pomp and Solemnity.

To all this good success, is added the surrendry of Agria to Count Caraffa,
Agri^ surrendered.
which was kept by Rustem Basha, and four thousand Turks, who were starved out
of it, only by a Blockade. An. 1596 it was taken by Sultan Mahomet with an
hundred and fifty thousand Men.

SECT. 3.
Mohatz, with the loss of Butschin, Esseck, and Agria, caused a great deal of
discontent amongst the Turks, both in the Army, and at the Port. Which was
increassed by an irreconciliable feud between the Grand Vizier and Osman Basha,
the latter getting the Ascendant of the former, in the Affections of the
Soldiers, gets the Army to Mutinee against the Grand Vizier, who thereupon
fled to Costantinople, after whom, Os^an sent four Deputies, who informed the
Grand Seigni^r of many Malversations of the Grand Vizier, and p^^vails so far
as to get Osman advanced to that Command: however, the Mutinous Army Marches on
toward Constantinpole, The Grand Viser beh^^ded.
and the Grand Seignior being ass^a^ed of their rage, and designing to ap^^^ase
them sends them the head of Solomon the late Grand Vizier together with many
fair ^romises of full satisfaction, notwithstanding this, they advance: The
Sultan Mahomet ^earing his being deposed, designs to cut off his brother
Solomon, and his own Sons also supposing this the surest way ^o continue
himself in the Goverament, Sul^an Mah^met depos^^. and his brother So^^man set
on his Throne
when there was none left of the Royal Line to set on the Throne; but this his
wicked and Bloody project being discovered by the Caimacan, the Musti, the
Caydelesker, and several ot^ers of the Grand Ministers, they clap him up in
prison, and set his brother Solomon on the Throne, which presently brought all
matters into a tolerable Setlement. Venetians.


SECT. 4.
Turks were early in the field this Spring, in Dalmat^^, and two Bal^a's laid
S^ige to Sign, which was stoutly defended by the Marquis de Borrs and seven
hundred Men, till the 22d. of Aprile at which time, the Seige was ^aised by the
aproach of General Carnaro, who soon also saved the Fertresse of O^usch
beseiged by the Ba^^^a of Erzegovina.

Calilen^^o (...) en by Gen^ral Carnaro.
General Carnaro, having joined the Auxiliary Galleys, and ^ade other necessary
provisions he came in sight of Cas^^enovo on the 1s. of S^ptember, where he
Landed his Forces, tho with some dissioulty and opposition, he made himself
Master of the Enemies first Trenches, and the next day he took the second
Trenche^ also, tho with consideral le loss on both sides, the Town being hotly
plied with Cann^n, Eombs, etc. till the 28th. the Christians made a sharp
assault, but were beaten off, with the loss of two hundred M^n* but on the
first of October They made a fresh Assault, wherein they had so good success,
as the beseiged came to a Parley, and yielded upon condition to march out with
their Arms, unmolested. After which, Winter coming on, he dispersed the Troops
into their Winter Quarters.

Mor^sini takes Corinth, Sparta, and Athens.
But General Morosini^^ success in the Morea was far more considerable, for on
the 23d. of July he sets Sail for Patras^, where being arrived, he landed a
part of his Troops, and hearing the Serasquter was encamped near that place
with Eight or Nine thousand Men, he ordered Count Con^^smark to advance and
attack him, and after an obstinate Fight, the Turks were defeated, with the
loss of Five hundred Men, and the Basha of Va^^ona, the Count losing near a
hundred. Presently after this loss, the Turks abandoned Patrass, the Castles of
La. Morta and Romalia, and the City and Castle of Lepanto. From thence the
Captain General made Sail to Corinth, and when he came there, he found it
abandoned, and set on sire by the Turks, which he took care in all have, to
extinguish. After which the Castle of Fornesse yielded and all the Villages
about Corinth submitted, as did also the ancient and renowned City of Sparta,
and the Cities of Cartena and Drobloghina, sent him their Keys and voluntarly
submitted; And after this, on the 20th. of September, he Arrived at the old
samous Atheus, which presently capitulated and surrendered. And now, the Season
growing Stormy, and his Forces being much weakened by supplying so many
Garrisons, lately fallen in his hands, he thought fit to ly by a while, and give
his Men so^erepose, till he should receive farther orders from Ventre, Peland,


SECT. 5.
We come to Poland, An. 1688.
who did very little Memorable, last Cam^aign, and, for any thing I find,
little more in this. For tho they made a great noise about their preparations
to Bombard Caminieck made no great matter of it, tho Prince James was at the
head of the Enterprise, And the King himself in the Field, to cover the Attempt.

Nor is there much more to be said of their Allies, the Moscovites, who
returned home, without doing any more, then threatening the Tartars.

And whose General Gallitzen, to save his own credit, charged all the
miscarriages upon Samu Blowitz, General of the Cossaeks, on which pretense, he
took both him and his Son Prisoners, and sent them to Moscow, and we do never
hear any thing of them afterward, and so ended this mock Campaign, on that
side.

CHAP. XIII. Anno 1688.
England
since the dissolution of the Roman Empire.

A mighty Monarch thrust from his Throne; And, by the All-wise Providence, a
Prince raised up, [by his merit, and excellent conduct] not only to the
possession of three Crowns, but to become the head of the most Serene Allies,
not only in the management of the War, but in the prosecution and
accomplishment of the Peace that ensued, with equal Glory to himself, as
advantage to his Confederats, and it is reasonably hoped, The King orders his
Declaration for Toleration to be read in all Chs.
will prove most of all so, to his own Subjects

Without repeating how far the dispensing power was carried on, I now proceed
to show you, how absolute the King would be in the same; For on the 4th. of
May, he passed an order in Council, that his Declaration of Indulgence should
be read, through all Churches of England and Wales. Seven Bishops Petition him
not to insist on that
The Archbishop of Canterbury and six Bishops more finding this inconsistent,
both with the Laws and their Consciencos, humbly Petition His Majesty, not to
insist on it, nor press them to it. The Petition subscribed* by Will. Cant.
Wll. Asaph Fr. Ely. Jo. Cacestr. Tho. Bathon, and Wellen. Tho. Peterburgen,
Jonath. B^^stol. To which the Kings Answer was.

I have heard of this before, but did not believe it. The Kings Answer.
I did not expect this from the Church of England, especially from some of you.
If I change my Mind, ye shall hear from Me: If not, I expect my Command will be
Obeyed.

The King resolves to prosecute them for High Treason, at the Kings Bench-Bar,
being advised thereto (as was said) by the Chancellor, and so, The Bishops
committed to the Tower
they are committed Prisoners to the Tower, And that, on the day before the
Legendary Birth of the Prince of Wales, that they might not have the
opportunity [as it was the place of some of them] to be present, or make
inspection into that pious fraud.

At Trinity Term, they come to their Trial; Tried at Kings Bench
And though the King and his Chancellor thought themselves sure enough of all
the Judges, yet Master Justice Powel, both Learnedly and Stoutly, defended the
Cause of the Bishops, nor did the Jury make any great difficulty in acquitting
them; However this bred so much discontent in the Minds of most Men, as in a
short time after, And acquitted.
broke out with a Witness. And wakened even the great Men, who thought it now
high tune, to propose some remedy against the impending Evil.

SECT. 2.
Agria made a joyful Conclusion of the last years Campaign, Hungary
so the taking of the Fortress of Mongatz early this Spring, was as pleasing
to the Emperial Court. Mongatz yields.


This Fort was held out by the Princess Ragotzi, Count Teckleys Lady, ever
since the beginning of the War, And Alba regalis.
and was reduced merely by Famine, as was Ag^^^ formerly, and for the same
reason, Alba regalis surrendered soon after, tho held by three Ba^ha's and five
thousand Men, who were all convoyed safe to Beigrade, this happened on the 8th.
of May.

About this time Count Caraffa lays Seige to Lappa and tho the Garrison was
strong and made great opposition, And Lippa.
yet he took it by Storm, in a few days, putting all to the sword, except a
party who made their escape to the Castle, but they were forced to render at
discretion, on the 21th. of May. This did so terrify the Garrisons of Illock
and Peter-waradin as they set sire to the Towns, The Turks quit ^llock and
Peter-waradin.
and then abandoned them, by which means, the imperialists became Masters of
all the Da^u^e, as far as Belgrade.

The Duke of Lorrain being then sick, The Elector of Bavaria, Elector of
Bavaria b^^^^ges Belgrad.
Marched the Army toward Belgrade, and on the 9th of ^^gust came within four
L^agues of it, and advanceing without any oppsition he invested the Town* and
sell presently to opening of the Trenches.

The Seige was carried on, with all the resolute attacks and sallies usual on
such occasions till the 24th when a short Cessation was occasioned by a letter
from Osman Basha of Aleppo, to the Elector, desiring a Pasport for two of the
Grand Seigniors chief Officers, sent by him to the Elector, with some proposals
for Peaces which was granted. On the 29th, the Elector sent a Captain (with a
Greck for his Interpreter) to summon the Governor to surrender, who was so
enraged at the Message, as he Imprisoned the first, and Hanged the other; this
so incensed the Elector, as he doubled his indevours Battering the Walls
incessantly with his Cannon till the 6th of September, and having made a
considerable Breach, gave a general and forious Assault, and the defendants
made so obstinate resistance, as they were twice beaten off* Belgrad ta^^^^ by
Storm
but a third Assault being made with greater violence then ever* the Turk^ fled
toward the Castle, the Christians pursueing close and slaughtering all,
where^n the Basha brought five Hundred Christian slaves all chained, whom, he
placed between the reteiring Turks and the Christians shot, in compassion to
whom, the Soldiers stopp^d, tho in the heat of blood, and the Elector
Commanded to give quarter; And so the Governor Basha, and two Basha's more and
five Hundred Men yielded, and were made Prisoners of War.

In Bosnia. The Prince of Baden hearing on the 4th of November, Battle of Brod.
that four or five Thousand Turks were Encamprd near Brod, he Marches with
three Thousand Horse and Dragoones to attack them, but was surprised when he
came near, to find them fifteen Thousand under the Conduct of a Basha, and
finding it impossible to get off without Fighting he encouraged his men and
engaging the Enemy with wonderful courage, Turks overthrown
after a long and obstinate Fight on both sides, he puts them first in disorder
and pushing on, put them totally to flight, killing five Thousand, and taking
two Hundred Prisoners thrity six Colors, and all their Baggadge

SECT. 3.
Venice, Venice:
Marco Antonio Justimano Dyed this year, on the 28th. of March to whose Office,
the Sen^te thought fit to adyance Morosini, their Captain General. The Doge
deed the 28th of Marc^
And to that end sends Secretary Luccato to him with the Ducal Cap and a letter
from the Sena^e signifying their Election of him for Doge, Morosini (...) his
place.
ordering him to continue in the Levant, and Act their as formerly, till they
sent him farther Ins^r^ctions.

Morosini had been very successful and fortunate hitherto in all his
enterprises against the Turks, and now by this preferment he was got to the top
of Fortunes Wheel, and had he died so soon as be got the Ducal Cap, it would
have contributed much to the honor of his Memory, for neither during all this
Campaign, nor indeed hence forward I cannot find his Actions any way suitable to
his former brave and fortunate Exploits.

And for the Affairs of Poland this last year, I find them so altogether mean
and inconsiderable, as saves me the trouble of inserting them.

And so we return to take notice of matters of greater Importance, nearer home
there appearing a greater rupture like to happen between the Emperor and the
French King about the Succession to the Elector of Cologn, who dyed the 2d. of
June this year, The Candidats being Prince Clement of Bavaria, favored by the
Emperor, and the Cardinal De Fus^omburg, A Congresse of several Princes at
Minden.
backed by the French King There ensued, at Minden in Westphalia, an interview
and a long conference between the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, the
Landtgrave of Hesse Cassel, the Princes of the House of Lunemburg, and the
Prince of Orange, under pretense of the Affairs of Cologn.

But much more about concerting methods how to divert the Storm hanging over
Britain, Warlike preparations in Holland.
and to confine France to the bounds set to it by former stipulations and
Treaties. The consequences of this was, great preparations made in Holland,
both by Sea and Land, whereof Mr, Shelton, the Kings Ambassador then in
Holland, De avaux Memorial to the States.
got some glimering, and informed the King thereof, once and again, but he was
so infatuate, as he took no notice of it. Yet the French King did, being
quicker sighted, and thereon orders his Ambassador De Avaux then in Holland, to
give in to the States a Menaceing Memorial* bearing, that if they designed or
attempted any harm or disturbance to the King of Great Britain, he would take
it as a Rupture of the Peace, and resent it accordingly.

SECT. 4.
James is informed more certainly of the preparations in Holland and that the
design was against him, England
and believed it so. And now began to turn Car in pan, declaring in Council on
the 2d. of October, that he would restore the Charter of London, and on the
5th. declared that he would dissolve the Commission for Ecclesiastical Causes:
King James alarmed
And impowers the Bishop of Winchester to resettle all the Affairs of Magdalen
College, but hearing of the disaster of the Dutch Fleet at Sea, he recalled
that Commission, and hearing afterward of their approach, he renewed it again,
so sickle was he, and so at last the said Bishop perfected that business.

The Wind continued for three Weeks still at west, and in London, the question
every Morning was, have we a Protestant Wind yet, and a Seaman cursed openly,
the Dragon on Bow steeple, for turning his Head, where his Tail should be.

But about the latter end of October the Wind came Easterly, Prince of Orange
lands at Torbay
and the Dutch Fleet (consisting of near five hundred Sail, whereof there were
fifty one Men of War, and eighteen Fire Ships) came with a fair Gale upon the
English Coast, and Landed all safe at Torbay, the 5th. of November.

And in a short time, the Princes Army was increased by the Junction of diverse
persons of good quality with him: And soon after his Declaration was published.
Which was dated at the Hague the 10th of October 1688. His Declaration published
The substance whereof was a Relation of the Subversion and Violation of all
the Laws of England both in Church and State, all which he imputed to the Kings
Evil Counselors, which disorders could not possibly be rectified, nor Affairs
regulated, but by a lawful and Free Parliament; the calling and sitting
whereof, was the main cause of his coming to England.

The Declaration being very large, and withal supposing it well known to all
intelligent observing persons, I thought the transcribing of it unnecessary.

Prince of Orange writes to the Protestant Officers in England.
About the same time, The Prince wrote a Letter to all the Protestant Officers
in the Kings Army, laying before them their Error in joining with a Popish
party and their danger, if they persisted, and earnestly invited them to
concur with him for preservation of the Protestant Religion, and freedom and
Privileges of the Subjects.

This Letter did very much influence most of those to whom it was directed:
About the middle of November, the Lord Delamare came to the Prince with a
considerable ^arty.

Association at Exeter
Before the Prince left Exeter, there was an Association drawn and Sworn to by
all the Noble^en, and Gentlemen then present, for a close adherence to the
Prince of Oran^e and to one another an prosecuting of that work they now
engaged in, and for avengeing the Princes Death, if done, by any barbarous
indirect means.

The 1st. Bloodshed
On the 20th. of November, a Skirmish happened at Win^anton, between eighty
Horse and Dragoons, Commanded by Sarsfield, and thirty of the Princes Horse,
Commanded by one Campbel where (notwithstanding the inequality of the Number)
the former were defeated, which much daunted King James's Army, and as much
encouraged the other party.

Associ^^ion a^ Not^ingham
On the 22d. of November, The Nobility and Gentry assembled at Nottingham,
delaring their just greivances in eight material points, and implying many more,
indefinitly, Associate and bind themselves, much to the same purpose as these
at Exeter had done.

The Nobility about the King labor earnestly to persuade him to call a free
Parliament but he continued inexorable; Prince George, Dukes of Graslon and
Ormond, and other Nobles go to the Prince
On which, the Duke of Graston, the Lord Churchil, and several other Noblemen,
lest him, and went over to the Prince then as Sherb^^^, And on the 25th, of
November, Prince George, the Duke of Ormond, and Sir George Hewet followed
them. Before Prince George went off, he wrote to the King a very pertinent
Letter for his Excuse. as did also the Lord Churchil: and Princess Ann,
withdrawing privately from London (after the Princes departure) left a very
passionate Letter to the Queen, begging her Majesty's pardon for leaving the
City, without her leave, and waiting upon her.

The King comes to London
The 26. of November, the King returns to London, and Issu^s writes for a free
Parliament to sit the 15, of January; but this was too late, for by this time
the Nation was generally in such a ferment, as nothing he could either do or
promise, would appease them.

The Prince of Orange understanding that most of the considerable Cities and
Towns in England had complied, published (as was said another Declaration at
She^burne Castle, the 28. of November. But it appeared soon after (by the
Princes disowning it) that this Declaration was contrived by some private
person, who had put his name to it, to give it Authority.

The main purport of the Declaration was, a strict order to all Magistrates,
both in the Cities and Country, to disarme and secure all Papists; and tho
this was a bold and presumptuous attempt of a private person, yet it happened
to have very good effects.

Proposals by the King to the Prince
The Prince of Orange being at Windsor, the King sends ^a^^^sax, Nottingham, and
Godolphine to him, desiring him to make what proposals he thought necessary for
sitting of the Parliament, and for their security while they sat. The King
leaves London
They return the next day with seven Proposals, which were so unsatisfying to
the King as that night he left London, and went to, Rochester.

Before he went, he wrote to the Lord Feversham, Exhorting him and all the
Officers to continue him in their Loyal Principles, but gives him no orders for
any Action.

On Receipt of which Letter, Feversham disbands his Forces, being about Four
thousand, and presently after, acquaints the Prince therewith, by a Letter.

Returning the 16 of December
On the 16 of December, the King returns to London, being advised and invited
thereto, by some Lords. On the 17. at twelve at Night, he receives a Letter
from the Prince, advising his removal to Ham, Goes to Rochester
but he inclining rather to go to Rochester, moves that to the Prince who
assented, and so on the 18. he goes thither, accompanied with the Earl of Arran
and some others.

That same day the Prince came to St. James's, innumerable Acclamations, The
Prince comes to London
Bells and Bon-fires, signifying how welcome a Guest he was to London.

King James and the Queen go to France
On the 23 of December, the King Embarked at Dover for France, the Queen Landing
there, the 10th. Before he went, he left a Letter written with his own hand,
declaring his Reasons for leaving the Kingdom, desiring it might be published,
which was done.

At St. James's, about Sixty Peers Signed an Association, and meeting with the
Commons at Westminster, on the 25. of December, they Sign and present an
Address to the Prince, desiring him to take upon him the Administration of
Affairs both Civil and Military, till the Meeting of a Convention the 22d. of
January, which he agreed to.

And so we conclude this Year with the Death of one of the most generous and
bravest Princes in Europe, An. 1689
Elector of Brandenburg his Death.
the Elector of Brandenburg, who dyed the 10. of May, the Sixty Ninth Year of
his Age.

CHAP. XIV. Anno 1689
SECT. 1.
January fall presently to their work, The Commons Vote the Throne Vacant.
and the first Vote passed in the House of Commons, is as follows.

Resolved, That King Jame the 2d. having endeavored to subvert the
Constitution of this Kingdom, by breaking the Original Contract between King
and People, and by the Advice of Jesuits and other wicked persons, having
violated tho Foundamental Laws, and having withdrawn himself out of this
Kingdom, has Abdicated the Government, and that the Throne is thereby Vacant.

Debeat about the word, Abdicate
This was sent up to the House of Lords, who not liking the word Abdicated,
Erazed it and put in the word Deserted; This alteration the Commons would on no
terms allow. This occasioned a stiff debate between the Two Houses, for
several days, at last on a inutnal conference held on the 5th. of February, the
Lords agreed to the Vote, in the first Terms Voted by the Commons.

The next thing taken into consideration, WILLIAM and MARY Voted and Declared
King and Queen
was, the Form of Government to be established, and after Mature deliberation,
a Declaration is drawn up, wherein all King James's Enormities and Miscarriages
in Government, are fully held forth:

for which Reasons (and because of his Abdicating the Government, the Throne is
Vacant. And finally, It is resolved and finally declared that WILLIAM and MARY,
Prince and Princess of Orange shall be King and Queen of England with the
Dominions thereto belonging dureing Their Lives* and the Life of the Surviver
of them; And after their Deceases the Crown and Royal Dignity, to be succeeded
to by the Heirs of the Body of the said Princess; And for default of such
^ssue, by the Princess Ann of Denmark and the Heirs of her Body; And for
default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of Orange.
And the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons do Pray the said Prince and
Princess of Orange, to accept of the same accordingly.

And that the Oaths hereafter mentioned be taken by all persons, of whom the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy might be taken in Law, in stead of them. And
that the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, be abrogated.

The Oath of Allegiance
I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will bear Faith and true
Allegiance to Their Maj^sties, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.

So help Me GOD.

Oath of Abjuration
I do Swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest and Abjure as Impious, and
Heretical. this Damnable Doctrine and Position, that Princes Excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome, may be deposed or
Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do declare, that no
Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority Pre-eminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical, or
Spiritual within this Realm, Soon after the King and Queen are proclaimed, and
so take peaceable possession of the English Crown.

SECT. 2.
Scotland met, about this time* and the Throne is declared Vacant there also,
Act of Recognition in Scotland
and an Act of Recognition is drawn up, which is so generally known, as I need
nor here repeat it: Only the substance of it was, to declare the now King and
Queen of England etc. to be King and Queen of Scotland also.

And the same Oath of Allegiance as was Sworn in England to be Sworn in
Scotland also.

William and Mary declared King and Queen of Scotland
This Act being past, The Earl of Argyle, Sir John D^lrymple, and Sir Robert
Montgomery of Skermurly are sent up Commission^rs, and on the 11 of May
tendered the Coron^tion Oath to Their Majesty's, who holding up their Right
Hands repeated it word by word after the Earl. And immediately the Convention
was turned into a Parliament.

Castle of Edinburgh surrendered
On the 13. of June, the Duke of Gordon Sur, rendered the Castle of Edinburgh.

And on the 16 of July, there was an Engagement between Major General Mckay,
Dundee killed
and the Lord Dundee at Ki^licrankie, where the former was defeated and the
latter killed in the Field.

After whose Death King James's party dwindeled away. doing nothing
considerable thenceforth. For soon after, Leivtenent Colonel Cleland, with the
Earl of Augus's single Regiment engaged with near Four thousand of them, at
Dunkel, and gave them an entire overthrow, where the Leivtenent Colonel (a
very brave Man) was unfortunatly killed.

SECT. 3.
James's party in Scotland. Tirconel was Active in Ireland. Tirconel Active its
Ireland
leaving a great many Regiments of the Irish, and with all possible Dilig^n^e,
Arming them, and training them up in Martial Exercise to make them capable of
Service, when ever the late King should h^ve use for them.

The late King bemoaning his Ca^amity to the Emperor. Craved his Assistance,
Who Answers him with many pertinent and reasonable Ex^uses, Emperors Letter to
the late King
why he could not be serviceable to him at that time, his circumstances being
considered, and withal gives him a modest, but sharp Reprimand, for the bad
measures he had taken, in putting his whole confidence in France, and rejecting
the offers of such Allies, as would have been more freindly and faithful to
him.

But though the late King had small encouragement from the Emperor, Ireland
or any other Prince (except the French King) being informed of Tirconnels
diligent endeavors in Ireland, The late King goes to Ireland.
thither he goes with about a Thousand eight hundred French Auxiliaries and
landed the 12 of March 1689. and found a great number in Arms for him, and
almost all the Country at his Devotion, save a f^w in the North, who (for want
of Encouragement and Aid from England) were unable to make any considerable
debeat, and on the 14 of March were defeated by Livetenant General Hamilton at
Drumore, most of them flying to Londonderry and Inneskillin, where they
defended themselves, with great Bravery, till relieved by Colonel Kirks
Arrival in the Lough, where he lay seven or eight Weeks before he gave any
relief to Londonderry, being hindered (as he alleged) by cross Winds, though a
worse cause was suspected and talked off by severals, little to his
Commendation.

The defending of Londonderry so long, by a mere Rabble of undisciplined Men (a
few Gentlemen and Officers exceepted) against a powerful Army of Trained Men
well furnished with all Warlike Engines, Seige of Derry.
and other Provisions needful for such an undertaking and under the Command of
skilful Generals and other Officers both French and Irish, as it was matter of
Admiration in this Age, so it will seem altogether incredible by our posterity.
However, it was resolutly defended by the good conduct of Colonel Henry Baker,
and after his Death by Colonel Mitch^iburn, assisted by Mr. Walker, a
Minister, who had the oversight and distribution of the Stores, and who was
afterward killed at the Battle of Boyn, closs by the Duke of Shomberg, and who
(before his death) wrote a narrative of the Seige of Darry, but there was on^
written after by one Mr. John Mcke^zie a Mimster, Six thousand Irish beaten by
two thousand I^^skilliners, Major General Maeharty taken Prisoner
allowed generally to be more true and impartial that the other.

On the 30 of July (the very day before the relief of Dar^y) about two thousand
of the Iniskilline^s, encountered Six thousand of the Irish commanded by Major
General M^kartie, at a place called Newtounbutler, routed them, killed and
drowned near three thousand of them, and took Mekarty pri^oner, losing only
twenty Men, and about fifty wounded.

SECT. 4.
Irish Service. Duke of Shomberg Lands in Ireland
And on the 13. of August, The Duke of Shomberg Landed at Carrickfergus with
those Men being about Ten thousand Horse and Foot. On the 20. the Duke marched
several Regiments toward Carrickfergus, from Belfast, to which place he had
marched, next day after his Landing, and presently drawing the Trenches, and
raising some Batteries, Takes C^^ rick sergu^
he played furiously upon the Town, which so terrisied Mackarty-more, the
Governor, as on the 26, he parlyed, and agreed to march out with Arms, and
some Baggage.

Presently after this, The Duke began his March to wards Dundalk, Matches to
Dundalk.
ordering the Train to be shipped and carried about to the Bay of Carlinso^ra,
eight Miles from Dundalk. He Eucamped at Dundalk, the 3. of September, the
Irish Army being Twenty thousand, lay at Drogheda.

King James offers Battle
On the 20th, of September, The Irish Army drew near Dundalk, and on the 21.
they drew all out Horse and Foot, advanced the Standart Royal, and approached
toward, the Dukes outworks; Whereupon, he ordered all to stand to their Arms,
but kept his Camp, and made no advance toward the Enemy, Reteirs
who after a bravado for three or four Hours drew off, and reteired toward
Ardoe, eight Miles off.

A Conspiracy is found out in the Army, one Du^pl^ssey a French Man being the
chief, who (with six more) is hanged, and above 200, in the French Regiments,
being found Papists were disarmed, and sent under a Guard, to England.

Five thousand Iri^h defeated
On the 27. of S^ptember, Colonel Lloyd, with a thousand Ini^kill^ners defeated
five thousand Irish marching to Sligo, Killed Seven hundred, took Killie the
Commander, and Forty other officers, and eight thousand Cattle, and all with
the loss of fourteen Men. But within a short while after, both Sti^o and
Jamestoun fell into the hands of the Irish, which loss was inconsiderable to
the English being compared with the great Mortality that ensued in the Camp.
There dyed, Sir Edward Deering, Colonel Herry Wharton, Sir Thomas Gower,
Captain Hungersoo^a, Mortality in ^he English Army
and a great many more brave Officers, and of the Soldiers, a thousand seven
hundred dyed at Dun^alk, 1970 Sick, were shipped off to Belfast, most of whom
dyed on Shipboard, and in short, near one half of the Army which came from
England, Flanders
dyed before February.

SECT. 5.
Flanders was commanded by ^rince Wa^deck as was the French Army by Mareshal de
Humtere, between whom happened no considerable Action this Campaign. French
defeated at Forge
Only on the 25. of August, the Armies lying near to one another, the Mareshal
sent out a party to attack the ^rinces Foragers near the Village of Forge,
hereon ensued a sharp skirmish, which lasted for some Hours, Recruits coming in
on both sides to the parties engaged at first, at last the French r^teired in
great haste, leaving their Cannon, and near two thousand Killed and Wounded; on
the other side were Slain about three hundred, and Leivtennent Colonel Grahame.

Keyse^wart taken by Brandenburg
In Germany, the Armies were early in the Field; on both sides. In June,
Keyserwart in the Duchy of Cleve, is beseiged by Brandenburg, and on the 29.
it was surrendered on Honorable Conditions, leaving in the Town Fifty eight
pieces of Cannon, and Two Mortars.

Menta, taken be the Duke of Lorrain
In June the Duke of Lorrain with Twenty thousand Men. lays Seige to Men^z,
which was carried on with a great deal of Courage, and Slaughter of many Men,
on both sides, till the 11. of September, on which day, the French marched out
of it with Drums beating, Colors flying, Six pieces of Cannon, and Two
Mortars. The modest computation of loss to the Germans, make it above Six
thousand amongst whom were Four Princes, and the French lost Five thousand,
besides the Wounded, about Six thousand marching out of the Town.

That Summer, the French miserably ravaged the Palatinate, and on the 4th, of
August Mareshal de Duras laid seidge to Hesaelberg, and making one attack only
(wherein he lost 400 Men) he retreated toward Philipsburg; and a little while
after, he attackt Brushal, and carried it.

On the 25th. of July, the Marquess de Bouslers, Cocheim taken by Bousle^,
sell in into the Electorate of Tr^ves with Fire and Sword, and marching to
Cocheim, he attackt it with great sury, where being stoutly resisted for a
while, at last took it by Storm, putting to the Sword, Man, Woman, and Child,
but the fury being a little over, Quarters was given to about three hundred.

Bonne taken by Brandenburg
In July, the Elector of Brandenburg laid seidge to Bonne, but several things
interveening, retarded his progress till the 27. of September, on which day the
Dake of Lorrun came to him, after which, the Town was so hotly plied, as Baron
de Hasstield the Governor, fearing taking of the Town by Storm, he Capitulate,
and on the 12, of October Surrendered, leaving all his Cannon and Provisions,
as also, all Count Mainard of Shombergs Baggage, which the French had basely
seized on, a little before.

SECT. 6.
Lorrain, Germany
this Year, in service on the Rhine, he give the chief command of the Army in
Hungary, to Prince Lewis of Baden, who well deserved it, and as well managed
it: The 10th. of June, he arrived at Belgrade. From thence, he sent orders to
Picolomini to come and join him with his Forces, On the 27 of August. his foot
Army randevouzed near the: Bridge of Gravovez, and the Horse came to him the
next day. The Turkish Army about Fifty thousand lying not far from him, sent
out some detachments to attack his Foragers, which occasioning some Skirmishes,
at last engaged both Armies in a Battle, near Potochin, which was managed with
a great many Warlike Stratagems, and martial Exploits, Battle of Potochin
on both sides, for a long time, Prince Lewis having the great advantage on his
side, of several Politic and Expert Generals, as P^^olomins, Veteram the Duke
of Crot, Count Palfi, Count Staremberg, etc. by whose excellent conduct tho
Prince beat the Turks from one Wood and one Retrenchment to another, Turks
rooted by the P^^nce or Baden
till at last he attackt their main Camp. out of which he drove, and put them
to a total Root, taking a hundred and five piece of Cannon, three Mortars,
several Bombs, a great quantity of Ammunition and other Provisions, and
abundance of Riches.

The Prince having advice that the defeated Turk, had rallied again near Nissa,
thither he Marches with about seventeen thousand Men, where he arrived on the
23 of September, where he found the Turkish Army entrenched much more regularly
than ordinary but without any delay, Battle of Nissa Turks rooted
he drew up his Army in Battle array, and attackt them: The Enemy being above
twice the Princes Number, and very strong in Horse. made a stout resistance for
several Hours, but toward Night, the Turkish Caval^y fell into disorder, and
fell foul of their own infantry, which put them in great confusion, which the
Prince observing, laid hold of the opportunity, and making a furious onset,
routed them entirely, who fleeing toward the Bridge which they could not find
(being now dark) they took the River, thinking to Swim over, but the Stream
being rapid, a great many Men and Horse were drowned. In the Camp, the Prince
found thirty pieces of Cannon extraordinary big, with abundance of Ammunition,
and great store of all necessary Provisions, Of all which, the Prince took
nothing for his share, but the Scrasquiers Tent, which was very Rich, and was
sent him by the Grand-Visier, his own being lost at the Battle of Potochin.
After they had pillaged the Camp they entered Nissa without any opposition,
Nissa yielded.
wherein they found provision for the Army for Six Weeks, and three thousand
Horses and Mules, having lost in this Action, not above three hundred: Whereas
it was computed there were Killed and Drowned of the Turks, near Eight thousand.

The Prince immediaty fortifyed Nissa, and made Picolomini Governor of it, and
all the adjacent Country; and on the 6. of October set foreward with the Army
toward Widin a strong place, with a good Castle, lying on the Danube; and being
informed that two Basha's with their Forces were Encamped near Widin, he hastes
thither, and arrived in the Plains of Widin on the 14. early; The Enemy was in
a consternation at the Princes sudden Arrival, Turks des^^^^d at Widin
however at first they made brisk op^osition, but being furiously assailed by a
Victorious Army, they gave back, and re^eired to the City, the Christians
pursuing closs, entered with them, pellmed into the City. In which Action they
killed near Two thousand, with the loss only of Four hundred Men.

The broken Forces sled into the Castle, with a Resolution to defend it, but
the Prince presently ordered to open the Trenches, in order to a S^ige, and
sent to Semena^^a for his great Cannon, Widin yeilde.
which the beseiged understanding, and having no great Stomach to abide their
coming, on the 18 of October, marched out with ^rms and Baggage.

The Prince having, with great Success and Honor, run sho^ow this Campaign,
sends his Army to Winter Quarters, in Transtivania, and Va^achia, and goes
himself to Vienna.

The Otoman Ambassadors at Vienna, being utterly dissatified with the Proposals
made by the Emperor an his Allies, go home in great discontent; and the War
goes on.

SECT. 7.
Venetians, Venice
had but bad success in the former Campaign, and little better in this for
after a along Seige of Napon de Malvesia in the Morea, General Mo t^o worsted
by the Turks ^ea.
and loss of many brave Men, they were forced to convert it into a Blockade,
and then retired to Winter Quarters. And in Dalmatta also, Molino the
Providitor General, Narenta
meeting with a party of Turkish Horse, near Narenta. he and his Mo^laques, are
by them basely bassled, and forced to make a dishourable Retreat,

This Year. The 12^ of August Died Pope Innocent 11th. An. 1690.
Odeschaici by Name, called the Protestant Popr, And was succeeded by Peter
Otobom, a Vene^^an, of Eighty Years Old.

CHAP. XV. Anno 1690.
SECT. 8.
England
We begin with the Affairs of Britain. The first thing the Parliament did, Act
against a Pop^^h K. or Q.
was making of an Act, that if any King or Queen of England should Embrace the
Roman Catholic* Religion, or Marry with a Roman Catholic, the Subjects should
be absolved from their Oath of ^^llegiance. Next, They annulled the pretended
Parliament in Irelan; And ordained, that all who should take up Arms against
the King, after the 24th of P^bru^^, Parliament dissolved, and a new Parliament
called
should be guilty of High Treason. And on the 6th, of February, they were
dissolved, and a new Parliament ordered to meet on the 30th, of March, who
meeting accordingly, The King declared to them his design of going for Ireland,
and desired them to concert and settle all Affairs relating thereto, with that
expedition as a matter of that importance required, and told them farther, that
he intended to leave the Government in the Queens hands, during his absence.

On this Speech the Parliament went roundly to Work; The first Act passed, was
one of oblivion, as the King had desired: The next was of putting the
Government in the hands of the Queen, during the Kings Absence in Ireland, or
any where else; The King lands in Ireland June^a.
And dispatched all other Affairs with that celerity, as the King (having
prorogued them to the 17. of June) hastened to Ireland, where he arrived safe
on the 14th, of that Month, at Belfast.

SECT. 9.
The Rebels in Scotland, under the Command of Colonel Cannon, Scotland
kept together in the Hills and places unaccessible, from whence they made
frequent inroad on the Low lands, whom King James reinforced, by sending from
Dubline; Colonel Buchan, Colonel Wachop, and near Forty Commission Officers
more, together with Clothes, Arms and Ammunition for the supply of Cannons
party; which so encouraged t^em (being about a thousand five hundred strong)
as they marthed in to Strathspay in the County of Murray. Sir Thomas
Livingstoun being informed of this, Cannon and Buchaen rooted by Sir Thomas
Livingston
marches speedily toward them, with Eight hundred Foot, Six Troops of
Dragoons, and Two of Horse, and falling in to their Camp at Crumdel early in
the Morning the 1st. of May, he put them immediately in confusion and dissorder,
and in short, they betook them to Flight leaving four or five hundred slain on
the spot an hundred were taken Prisoners of whom were Four Captains, and Five
or Six subaltern Officers, and had it not been for a thick Mist that fell on,
few of them had escaped, And in Mull, Major F^r^^son destroyed several places
they held, and forced them to desert the Castle of Dewart. Presbyterian
Ministers restored


The Parliament sitting in Scotland, the first Act they passed, was for
restoring the Presbyterian Ministers, thrust from their Churches, since the
first of January 1661. And the next Act they made, was declaring all those to
be Rebels, who were actually in Armos against the King and Queen.

This Summer, a dangerous Conspiracy in England, is detected and defeated. The
English Fleet worsted by the French


The French Fleet entered the Channel in June, and the King he^ring, that they
veered sometime on the English Coast, sent orders to the Admiral Torrington, to
Fight them, which accordinly he did on the 30 of June, but with so bad success,
as occasioned dishonor to him, and discontent to the Loyal Subjects, which was
alleviated soon after, by good News of the Kings Victory at the Boyne the 1st.
of July.

SECT. 10.
Ireland. Colonel Woolsl^y having taken Belturbet from the Irish, was informed
that a strong party was come the length of Cavan, Ireland
with a design to re^ake Be^turbet, Colonel Woolsley beats the Irish at Cavan
where he then lay. Whereupon he marched with Seven hundred Foot, and Three
hundred Horse and Dragoons toward Cavan where the Enemy lay, being but eight
Miles off: when he came, he found about Four thousand Men drawn up in good
order; though the odds was great, yet he resolved to attack them, and
encouraging his Men, he fell on them with a great deal of courage, and after a
hot dispute, beat them all in to the Town of Cavan and pursued them so closs,
as the Irish Horse fled quite beyond the Town, and the Foot reteired into the
Fort, in this Action the Irish lost many; And Woolsleys Men, having plundered
the Town, and set it on Fire, he marched off, and shortly after, he took the
Castle of Killishandia, with which good Services, the General was mightily
pleased. About this time, Sir John Lanter, with a party of a Thousand Foot,
Horse, and Dragoons took Bedlow Castle ^ear Dundalk, with the Ensign commanding
it, and a Thousand five hundred Cowes.

On the 18 of April being Goodfryday, Sir Clovesly Shovel, sailing from
Belfast, A Friggate of King James's taken by Sir Clovesly Shovell
came up to the Bay of Dubline, and hearing of a Friggate, (belonging to King
James) that lay at Pol^beg, he went in with two or three Ketches and long
Boats, toward her, which Bennet Captain of the Friggate perceiving, he run her
a ground, and Fire-ship coming up, he and his Men (except eight slain) took the
long Boat and quitted here, and so Sir Clov^sl^ carried her off with him. King
James was on the Shore, and beheld all this, and returned much vexed at the
adventure. The General sent several Regiments, in April, to blockade
Cha^lemount Castle, which was a very strong Garrison, and senta Summonds to Old
Teague Or'egan the Governor to deliver it up, who bid the Messenger tell his
Master, from Old Teague O'regan, that he was an old Knave, And, by St, P^^^ck,
he should not have the Town at all.

The Duke smiled, and said, he would give Teague greater reason to be angry,
Charlemount Castle yielded.
in a short time, as it fell out, for Teague's Victuals sailing, so did his
Courage, and on the 12. of May, sent Two Officers to capitulate, and Terms
being agreed on the next day they marched out and went to Armag^, on their way
to Dubline: The Duke coming to take a view of them, on their March, Old Teague
was on the head of them, Description of Teague Oregan
mounted on an Old stoned Horse, Lame with Scratches, Spavin, Ringbones etc.
And so vicious withal, he fell a squeeling and kicking, if any came near him;
Te^gue himself, had a bunch on his Back, a pla^n Red-coat, an old weather
beaten Wig* hanging down at full length, a little narrow white Beaver, cocked
up, a yellow Cravat-shing, but all of o^^e side, his Boots with a thousand
Wrinkles, and, though it was a very hot day, he had a great Must hanging before
him, and to Crown all, was Tipsie with Brandy. Thus mounted and eq^ipt, he drew
near the Duke with a Complement, but his Horse would not allow it to be long,
falling presently soul on the Duke, who had not time to return the Complement,
only smiled, and said afterward, Teagues Horse was very Mad, and himself very
Drunk. Well on they go toward Armagh.

And on the way a Dragoon (being on of the Guard) falls in discourse with a
Priest about Religion, A Merry S^^^y
and what Topic did they six on, think ye but Transubstantiation, the Draggoon
being a Merry Witty Fellow, drolled on the Priest, and put him so to it, as he
flew in a passion, and struck at the Dragoon, who not being used tamely to be
beaten, falls on the Priest, and threshes his Fatherhood soundly.

Complaint being made of this at Armagh, to Tea^ue, as he sat at Dinner with
the English Officers, all he said was, That he was very glad on it; what the
Deel said he) had the Priest to do, to Dispute of Religion with a Dragoon.

These late padages seemed to me so Comical and pleasing, as I thought it worth
my pains to transcribe them verbatim, for the Readers diversion.

SECT. 11.
Ireland on the 14, of June, And without any delay, he ordered all the Forces
to March, and on the 22. he took a view of them at Loughbricklen, and on the
27, they marched to Dundalk, where the Forces of the several Nations being
joined, made up an Army of Thirty six thousand serviceable Men. The King
advanced with the Army by e^sy Marches; And on the last of June he Encamped on
the northside of the Boyne, two Miles Westward from Drogheda, King Jamer's
Army being Encamped on the southside of the River, in direct opposition,

The King Wounded slightly
That Evening, the King Rideing along the River side, observing the Enemies
posture, was struck by the rebound of a small Cannon Bullet, on the point of
his Right Shoulder, which tore his Coat, Wast coat, and Shirt, and made some
Impression on the Skin and Flesh, whereof he took little notice, but kept on
his pace, saying only, there was no necessity the Bullet should have come
nearer, That Night he called a Council of War, wherein he declared he was
resolved to attack the Enemy the next Morning, which the Duke of Shomberg
dissuaded, but finding the King positive, it was concluded, and orders was
given to all Men to be at their Posts, and in readiness, on a Minutes warning,
each Man to have a Green sprig in his Hatt, the Enemies Sign being White-paper.
That Night the King Rod at 12 a Clock quite through the Army, with Torch-light.

Battle of Boyne
And on the next day being the 1st. of July) followed that Memorable and happy
Battle whereof (to my great satisfaction) I was an Eyewitness, and had better
opportunity than any other, to take notice of all the various passages that
happened that day, being tied to no post, but left at my own Liberty, to Gallop
to and again, and to make particular observation of all occurrences, my
Employment and Duty at that time, strickly obliging me thereto. The
circumstances of that Engagement were so various and numerous, as a particular
rehearsal, would not only require a great dale of time of Writing* but make my
Comp^nd swell above its proper bulk, so as must referr the Reader, either to
such Narratives as he has formerly seen, or to my Author (when he comes abroad)
whose Information in that matter, I own to be very good, for he gives a very
full and true account of that days proceedings; and I can find nothing material
wherein his Intelligence has failed, except in that point relating to
Leivtenent General Hamilton, where he says, the King asked him (being then
Prisoner) if the Irish would Fight any more; who Answered, Yes an't please Your
Majesty, upon my Honor I believe they will, etc. Now to my certain knowledge,
there was no such Dialogue, for when Major Cha. Butler (Brother to the Duke of
Ormond) and I brought him to the King on his return from beating the left wing
of the Enemies Horse, all the King said to him was, Sir, I am sorry to see you
there; to which Hamilton made no Reply at all, nor did he bow, or pay the King
the least Reverence, but standing like a statue, with an assured Countenance,
looked him earnestly in the Face, and when the King was turning away from us, I
asked His Majesty what we should do with the Leivtenent General; carry him up,
said he to my Horse-guards, and order the commanding Officer to take care of
him; which we did accordingly: and for Wounds in his Head, he had none but a
little scratch on his Nose, which he told me he got, when his Horse (being
killed^ fell under him,

The Irish Army defeated
This brief account I will only give, when the Enemy were beaten from all their
Posts on the River, they made a Retreat of four or five Miles, and indeed in
better order than was expected, for their Horse Marched on the Rear, and still
when our advanced parties came near them, they made an halt, faced about, and
with two or three small Guns they had carried off, Fired, and put our Men to a
stand, till their Foot were got a pretty way off, and then their Horse
followed, And I well remember, that Leivtenent General Dougass was passionatly
concerned, that the King would not suffer him to attack them with the
Iris^killiners, who were so furious, as they would have fallen on them with
their Swords, or with Stones, rather than fail, but the King pursued them
slowly, contenting himself with driving them quite out of the Field, and
scising their Camp and all their Baggage, and having followed them till Ten at
Night, he returned to Dewl^^k, and Encamped there. Of the Enemy were killed, a
Thousand five hundred, besides, we know not how many were killed among Corn,
and in Houses, Gardens, and Backsid^s, about Dewl^^k, of whom no certain
account could be gotten: And of Officers, the Lords Dungan and Carlin^sord, Sir
Neal O'^eal, and many Inferiors. On our side were (...) killed about Four
hundred, which had not been so much noticed, had not the renouned Duke of
Shomberg been of the Number, Duke of Shomberg killed
who was unfortunatly killed on the very brink of the River presently after he
had led the first Batallions through the Foord. He was a Man of incomparable
parts, and dyed here the 81 Year of his Age, Monsieur Callim^t, Colonel of a
French Regiment, was killed also, and was much bemoaned, being a Religious good
Man, and an Experienced Old Soldier.

The King managed all Affairs that day, to admiration, which, the very Enemy
took so much notice of, as they declared, If the English would change Kings
with them, they would Fight the Battle overgain; But Old England begged their
Excuse, King James fled that night to Dubline: King James fled to Dubline
thence to Waterford, and then to France
The Lady I^^connel asked what his Majesty would have to Supper; said he, I
have got such a Breakfast, as I have no great Stomach for Supper: And next
Morning, he took Post for Waterfoord, and within two days, he went Aboard, and
so set Sail for France, once again.

Drogheda yields
Next day after the Battle, the King rested, allowing his Men some time to
refresh themselves, but withal sent Colonel Melonier with some Regiments to
attack Drogheda, which Surrendered on Articles, to march out with their
Baggage, without Arms.

The King marches to Dubline
The 3d. day after the Battle, The King marched within two Miles of Dubline,
from thence he sent Leivtenent General Douglass with three Regiments of Horse,
two of Dragoons, and ten of Foot toward Athlone Fifty Miles Northwest of
Dubline, where he arrived the 17 of July, and presently Summond the Town, but
Old Colonel Grace the Governor, fired a Pistol toward Douglass, Leivtenent
General Douglass to Athlone
saying, these were the Terms he was to. Douglass made some attempts on the
Castle (which was very strong, both by nature and Art) but in vain, for his
Cannon were too small for such service, and having advice, that Sarsfeild was
on his March toward him with Fifteen thousand Men, On the 25th. he marched
off, having lost about Thirty Men at the Town, besides Three hundred lost by
other Dis^sters.

The King on the 11 of July marched the Army to K^^kulien Bridge, Germany
and so onward by easy marches to Carrick, Waterfood and Duncanon Fort yield,
where he arrived the 21 from thence he sent Major General Kirk with a party to
Waterfoord, which on the 25, the Irish Surrendered marching out with Arms and
Haggage: And a few days after, the strong and regular Fort of Duncannon, well
furnished with Guns, surrendered also.

The King goes to Dubline and returns
On the 27, the King went toward Dubline, in order for England, but coming
there he had account from England, that Affairs were not so bad as he heard and
feared, he returned to the Camp (then at Golden Bridge) On the 22d. of August.
And on the 27, he marched to Carrickae-Gl^^sh, Douglass returns and joins the
King
where Douglas and his party joined him the day following

SECT. 12.
Lamrick. And on the 9th, the Army made their approach to the City in excellent
order; Seige of Lamrick
And though the Irish had considerable parties of Horse, Drag^ons, and Foot
posted advantagiously in enclosed Grounds and behind hedges, for near two Miles
from the Walls of the Town, the English went resolutely on, beating and driving
the Enemy from hedge to hedge, to their very Wal^s, losing but 11 or 12 Men in
that difficult and hazardous enterprise, and before five at Night, the Army was
posted, and the Seige formally laid.

That Night the King sent a Summonds to the Governor to yield, which he
utterly rejected, and so they went to Work. It Is Reported, that a French Man,
and a Gunner deserted the Army the day before, and getting into Limrick, gave a
particular account of the Artillery, which was coming from Dubline; Whereon,
Sarsfie^ld with a body of Horse passed the River in the Night time, Sarsfeid
takes the Artillery at Cullin
far above Limrick, and marching about, through the Hills, on the 12. of
August, fell in upon the Train by day break, at Cu^len, killed about sixty of
the Guard, and of the Waggoners; The Troopers picked up as much of the best of
the Baggage, as they could carry away with them, and then drew together the
Carriages, Wagons, Tin-boats, Ammunition and all the provisions, into a heap
about the Cannon, and filling them full of Powder, and putting their Muzles
under the Ground, laid a short Train, and at their marching off, fired it,
which blew up the whole heap with a hideous noise, The Night before, Sir John
Lanter was ordered out to Cullen (being within 9 Miles) with Six hundred Horse
to bring the Artillery safe into the Camp, but he came too late, by an hour, in
which time Sar^fi^^ld was got out of his reach. This unhappy adventure was very
unpleasing to the whole Army; however the Seige went on, and the Trenches were
opened on the 17, Batteries are presently raised, and it happening that at the
blowing up of the Train at Cullin, Two of our Cannon, Twenty four Pounders,
escaped spliting, these were brought up and mounted, which did special good
service, dureing the Seige.

My Author says, That it would be an endless task to trace, particularly all
the attacks and defenses made at this Seige; And I say so too being present at
it; so passing by circumstances of the proceedings. I shall (as he does) give
you an account of the most material Action, and of the Conclusion of this
unsuccessful enterprise. After a breach had been made, over the black Battery,
Limrick attackt
nigh St. John's Gate of about twelve Yards in length; On Wednesday the 27th. of
August, the King ordered the Counterscarp to be attackt, and the signal being
given, half an hour after three afternoon, the Granadeers went boldly on, and
(in a Trice) beat the Irish quite from the Co^nterscrap, they flying to the
breach, the Granadeers pursued and lodged themselves upon the breach, whereon,
many of the Irish forefook both the breach and the Walls, and fled in to the
Town, and had not the Regiments that were to second the Granadeers, The
Asseliants beaten off
stopped, by some unhappy mistake, they might undoubtedly have carried the Town,
at that first Assault, but the Irish observing that the attack was not pursued
and push^ on with that vigor as they expected and feared, returned to the
Breach, and so peppered the English with incessant fireing, as after three
hours resistance, they were forced to retreat.

The Brandenhurgers (at this time) had got upon the Black battery, closs by the
Breach, where a great deal of the Enemies Powder lay, which (unhappily) taking
sire blew a great many of them into the Air, and falling down again on the
hedge-stakes which were fixed round the Battery, there they hung like
Skar-Crows.

At this Attack, there were killed five hundred and above a Thousand Wounded,
and the Army was so greived at this unexpected repulse, and the King himself so
much concerned, as he resolved to raise the Seige. The King goes for England
And so the very next day he went to Dun^annon [accompanyed with the Prince of
Denmark and several other Lords] and on the 5th. of September took ship, and
arrived at Kings-road near Bristol the day following, and on the 9th, he went
to Windsor.

Before he left Limrick, he appointed the Lord Sidney and Thomas Connin^by
Esquier, Lord Sidney, and Thomas Coninsby Esqueir Lord Justices
Lords Justices of Ireland, and Count Solms General of the Army; who going to
England soon after, left the Command to the brave General Ginkle. Within three
days after the Kings departure General Solms breaks up the Seige, and dispersed
the Army into Winter Quarters. The Seige broak up


On the 21 of Septermber, The Earl of Marelborough, with some Forces, arrived
in Cork ^arbour, and being joined by the Duke of Wirtemberg, Major General
Scravenmore, Major General Tetteau and Four thousand of their Forces, on the
26, He presently formed the Seige, Cork yielded
which continued not long, for they plied the Town so warmly, as Colonel
Mckillicut the Governor came to a Parley, and surrendered, the Garrison
consisting of Four thousand were made Prisoners of War, Kinsale yielded
and all the Ammunition and Arms in the Town, delivered up to the Victors.

And before the fifteenth of October, Kinsale and both the Forts were
surrendered to Marlburrough.

Leaving Ireland We step over now to inspect how Affairs go between the
Confederates and the French King. The Duke of Savoy having continued neutral
hitherto, The French King presses him to declare; And in the mean time (for
security of his Neutrality) requires the Citade^s of Verceil and Turin to be
put into his hands; which motion being declined by Savoy, and France becoming
more and more suspicious of him, Monsieur Catinat is commanded to march the
French Troops as far as Turin, which he did, yet forbearing, for a time, all
Acts of Hostility: Duke of Savoy joins with the Confederates
The Duke of Savoy having spun out the time as long as he could, by some
unsatisfying Overtures to the French King at last openly declares himself, and
allying himself first with the Empeperour and the King of Spain, soon after he
Embarques with all the Confederates.

The first Article of his Treaty with the Emperor was this, He engages not to
enter into any Treaty of Alliance with the most Christian King without consent
of the Emperor show he kept this Article, the World knows) and the next
Article was, he engages himself to act jointly with the Emperor and the rest
of the Confederate Princes against France and her Adherents. The Articles
betwixt the Emperor, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Savoy, are written at
length, by my Author, The Sum of all being a full and firm mutual
Confederacy, against France, Defensive and Offensive, together with some
particular Articles and Conditions between Spain and Savoy.

SECT. 13.
Waldeck lying with the Dutch Forces at Pieton in Flanders (having intelligence
that the Duke of Luxemburg drew near the Sambre, Flanders
intending to cross the River between Namure and Charleroy, in order to waste
the Spanish Countries) Decamped from Pieton the 3d. of June, and marched toward
Fleur^; Prince Weldick marches to Flreus
(or Flerus) lying near the Sambre. Prince Waldeck ordered off the Count of
Berle with a thousand five hundred Horse to observe the Enemies motion, and
after him the Count of Flodorp with four or five Regiments of Horse, The French
beat his advanced Troops
and after him, the Count of Webennum with another detachment.

The French attack Berlo, who was killed on the spot, and his party forced to
retire to Flodorp, who being oppressed with numbers, was driven back to
Webennum, where rallying, they put a stop to the Enemy; And so they all
retreated to the Body of the Army, which was by this time drawn up in Battle
Array.

The States Army consisted of about Twenty five thousand, whom the Prince drew
up in two Lines. But the French were above Forty thousand, so as Luxemburg
formed his Army in 3 Lines, which was great odds: The Armies advanceing and
engaging, ^^ux ^^be^g attacked first, the left wing of the Princes Army, Battle
o^ Florui
observing them to be the weakest; who received them with great Courage driving
back the French Horse who assaulted them, on their Infantry; But fresh
Batallions of French coming up, the Dutch (quite tired with the Brunts they had
already sustained) were forced to give ground. The Princes Right wing engageing
with the Enemy, routed them several times, and General Dupuy had ga^^^d ten of
their Cannon, but the French being still relieved with fresh Batallions, the
Dutch Cavalry were so dispersed and broke as they could never be rallyed again,
which has brought on them the bad Character of being the worst Horse in the
Confederates Army, but the Infantry stood stoutly to it, chough a^andoned by
their Horse, suffering the French Squadrons to come up within Pistol shot, and
then let fly, with such a sleddy aim, that the whole Squadron seemed to sink
altogether into the Ground; And this they did so often as at last they laughed
at their Enemies, crying out, Let them come on, we wi^^ give them their Belly
full on it.

And the French were so dash't with the Execution done upon them, Waldeck
retrea^s
as they durst no more attack them, but suffered them to retreat in good order,
without pursueing them.

Luxemburg said, It was fit for Prince Waldeck to remember the French Horse,
and for himself never to forget the Dutch Infantry.

The Battle was Bloody on both sides, The Dutch owning they lost four thousand
six hundred upon the place, Loss on ^^^n sides computed
a great many Wounded, and near Three thousand Prisoners taken, besides a part
of their Cannon: amongst the slain, were the Prince of Sax^n Masque^g, the
Count of S^rum, the Count. de ^erlo, one of the young Counts of Nassaw, the
Baron de Heide, and several Col^onels, Captains, and Inferior Officers. The
French loss was computed to be twelve thousand killed, Wounded and taken
Prisoners, though themselves would never own near that Number.

The Dutch Recruited their Army with a great dale of Celerity, Count ^^lly
General of the Forces of Liege, joined them on the 22d. of July with Ten
thousand Men; And soon after the Elector of Brandenburg j^ined them with his
Forces, which made up the Army to Fifty five thousand strong. Luxemburg
Recruited his Army also, very speedily, yet there was no more Ac tion this
Campaign, in F^anders: And so we will take notice how things went in Germany.

SECT. 14.
Joseph, Germany.
and King of Hungary, King of the Romans, which (with Vnantmous Consent) was
agreed to.

Duke of Lorrain dies, and the Dauphiness.
On the 18th. of April, the Brave and Famous Duke of Lorrain dyed suddenly of a
Quinzie near Lintz. And within two days after dyed the Dauphiness of France.

The Duke of Lorrain being dead, the Emperor gives the Command of the Army to
the Elector of Bavaria to whom, the Duke of Saxony joins his Forces, heading
them himself and his two S^ns. Soon after, the Emperial Army Marched toward
Mentz. The Dauphin (who Commanded the French Army on the Rhine) Marches with
forty Thousand Mon to the plain of Strotbission on the Rhine, where he Eneamped
on the 16th. of August designing to open a passage into Wirtemberg, which
project the Duke of Bavaria intended to prevent, and joining the Saxons, the
two Electors March straight toward the Enemy, and endeavored to e^^^^^ him to
Fight, but he could not be moved ((...) their endeavors) to hazard a Battle)
And so the time was trifled away betwixt them without any memorable Action,
that season.

2. In the beginning of this year happened a dangerous Insurrection in
Catalonia, Insurrection in Catalonia,
under pretense that they were affraied of being Invaded in their Privileges,
and complaining of the intolerable Impositions lying upon them, h^lding
Correspondence, in the mean time, with the French, who promised them asistance.
About two Thousand of them getting into a Body, seized on three or four Troops
near Barcelona, and Committed several outrages in the Country about, but the
Duke de villa Harmoza the Vice roy sent out some Forces, which defeated them,
and chased them to the Mountains; from thence, they sent to the Duke and begged
his pardon, which was granted, so as all seemed to be pretty quiet again; but
soon after this, they broak out again, with greater force then before, and tho
the Duke de Noailles made all the have he could to join them, yet before he
came, the Vice roy had so thresh't and dissipated them, as they were not able
to make any Body, to join the French who had no other benefit by this revolt,
then that they were got earlier to the field then the Spainard, which gave them
the opportunity of taking some Castles and small Forts. But by the Month of
August the Viceroy having got together ten or twelve Thousand Men, Marched
toward them, and used all means to draw them to a Battle, which they declined,
retireing safe by the way of Rousillon; King of Spain Married.
and so ended this Campaign without any farther Action, The Court of Spain
being more taken up with the Jollities of the Kings Marriage with the Princess
of Newburg, then with the cares and fatigues of a Campaign. Piedmont.


3. The Duke of Savoy having now actually engaged with the Confederats, joins
his Troops with the Milanese Forces, and so makes up an Army near as strong as
Monsieur Catinats; and on the 17th. of June. he Encamped at Calalarga, near to
Catinat, the Po being betwixt them.

French beaten at Carignon.
On the 16th. of July both Armies Decamped, and moved toward Carignan the Duke
taking the start of the Enemy, sent a strong Detachment before, which ^ossest
themselves of Ca^ignan; and in a few hours after came the French indeavoureing
to regain that Important place, but were repulsed and beaten off with the loss
of Monsieur de Savon, and many of their Men, At Lucren


But the French received a greater blow in the Vailies of Peidmont; for they
having three Thousand Foot and six Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, C^mmanded
by Monsieur de F^uquteres; at Lucern, Monsi^ur de Loches (having with him three
Thousand of the P^edmout Militia, and a considerable party of Vaudois, and
French Exiles] Attacked them, and beat them out of Lucern, and pursued them to
Briqueras, putting their Infantry into the Town and Castle, and their Horse and
Dragoons to cover them. And at Briqueras.


But the Vaudois Attacked them so briskly, as they first routed the Horse and
Dragoons, and in a short time drove the French both out of the Town and Castle,
and pursued them as far as Mission, loseing [all the while] but forty eight
Soldiers and nine Officers: But the French lost twelve Hundred, with several
great Officers, besides many wounded, Duke of Savoy beaten at Salusses.
who were carried in seventeen Wagons to Pignerol.

But soon after this, Catinat paid them off soundly at Salusses, where on the
18th, of August, the Duke and he Joined Battle, and after an obstiuat Fight for
some hours, the Dukes Army betook themselves downright to flight, many of them
being drowned in the Po the Duke himself reteired with a part of his Tronps to
Carignan, having lost [as the French say] four Thousand Men, eleven great
Guns, and all his Baggage the French loseing only one Hundred and fifty, and
four Hundred wounded.

The Duke [haveing put four Thousand Men into Cartgnan, and secured Carm^gnola]
reteired to Moncla^r, to Recruit his Army, and to wait for the German Troops*
Who coming up to him [together with some Milanese Troops [he found himself near
twenty Thousand strong, with which force, he Decamped from Monclair, the 16th.
of September, and advanced toward Catinat, who stood his ground. Monsieur St
Ruth, in the mean time reduced all Savoy, and brought them under the French
Kings obedience, for which good service, he is made Governor of it, with an
Annual Pension of four Thousand Lavers.

Suza yielded to ^rtinat.
Suza is a strong City, being so situat, as every King of France who intended
a^ Invasion of Italy coveted the Possession of it, for it opened a passage out
the Dauphinate into Piedmont.

This City, Catinat Beseiges, and Count de Land the Governor, having in it
only seven Hundred Men, without any resistance Surrenders it, on Terms, to
March to Tu^^n with Arms and Baggage.

We gave you formerly an Account of the Duke of Savoys Alliance with the
Emperor and Spain, Tho the Count de Latour, his Envoy, had [in the main]
concerted All affairs between the King of England and the States of Holland,
and the Duke of Savoy, at the Hague, yet the Duke thought fit [on his late ill
Successe] to send him to England, to Congratulate his Majesty's Glorious
Accession to the Crown, and to insinuat a more strict Alliance, and a greater
considence in, and dependence on his Majesty's favor. And here we shall leave
the Dukes Affairs, and Inspect into those of Hungary, in this year; where we
shall find quite another face of things then we left them in, last year?

SECT. 15.
Tartars fell into Albania, Destroyeing all with fire and Sword, Hungaryt
the Duke of Ho^stein who Commanded there, finding himself unable to cope with
so great a force, The Duke of Holstein defeated.
kept himself [with all possible care] from Engadgeing, but the Ta^ars [being
strengthened by the Turke] pursued, and at last surprised him, and forced him
to Engage, and [tho he made a vigorous resistance] they over powering him with
numbers, at last defeated him totally, killing no less then five Thousand
Germans.

The Tartars, flushed with this success, The Tartars over run Albania.
sixteen Thousand of them entered into Warachia and over run all the Country
with their accustomed Crueltys General Heuster finding himself too weak to deal
with them, was forced to reteire into Transilvanta.

Canissa yeel^ed to the Emperor.
To comfort the Imperialists a little after these losses; The strong Garrison of
Canissa in the lower Hungary, being blocked up for almost two years, was
surrendered to them.

The Prince of Baden, showed very much aversion to the service this Campaign,
so as it was the first of August before he came to the Army, and when he came,
the first news he met with, was that the Grand-Visier had laid Seige to Nissa,
with thirty Thousand Foot and ten Thousand Horse; that the Serasquier had laid
Seige to Widin, with ten Thousand Men: And Count Teckeley with near sixteen
Thousand was entered Transilvanta, given him by the Grand Signior, now that
Prince Abast^^ was dead: The Prince in all these straits, Count Teckeley
defeats General Heuster, and takes him, prisoner.
called and consulted a Council of War, wherein it was concluded that Nissa and
Widin. should be laid a side and Transilvanta releived; but before he could get
thither, Teckeley had possessed himself of almost the whole Country and
surrounding Heuster and four Thousand Germans, (being all the Forces he then
had] he killed the one half and took the rest Prisoners, not above three
hundred of them who escaped death or servitude, Heusler himself being taken,
and Teckeley, as a mark of his Victory, sent the Grand-Segnior, a great many
Colors and Kettle-drums.

Nissa yielded to the Turks.
Now we return to Nissa, which was kept by Count Guid^ of Staremberg, and twenty
five Hundred Soldiers, with abundance of resolute resistance for a long time,
but he hearing of the defeat of Heusler, and of the Prince of Badens March to
preserve Transylvania, and seeing no hopes of any releif, and with all, his
provisions growing very searce, on the 8th. of September he Capitulated, and
upon very Honorable Conditions, Surrendered: And after many Hardships and
Hazards, [by the Enemies Breach of promise] he came to Belgrade, the 22d.

Widin yielded to the Turks
The Garrison of Widin, hearing of the loss of Nissa, Surrendered also, the 29th.
of September.

The Grand Vizier, soon after took Semendria by Storm, and put all to the
Sword being nine Hundred, except the Lievetenent, who commanded, and a few
other Officers; and on the first of October laid Seige to Belgrade, defended by
Count Aspremout, and and six Thousand old German Soldiers, Belgrad beseiged.
who behaved themselves Valiantly, and would have, doubtless, made a long
debate, but for an unhapy accident, for a Bomb from the Turks Camp, lighting
upon a Tower where the Magazin lay, set it on sire, which blowing up, killed
above twelve Hundred of the Beseiged; and wounded a great many, threw down the
Walls in several places, and almost ruined all the Houses, but which was worse,
the sire took in other Magazins of Powder, so as the whole Town was all in one
blaze, which caused such a consusion and desolation, as cannot be imagined,
nothing to be seen but the sad spectacle of dead or dying Men; The Turks took
hold of the Occasion, made a furious Assault, and tho they were repulsed
several times, yet, Belgrade taken by Storm.
over powering the Beseiged by numbers they entered and took the Town, where
six Thousand Gallant Men perished, The Duke of Croy, the Counts of Asperment
and Archinto, and some Officers with about six Hundred Men saved themselves and
got over the Danube in Saiks, yet one of them being over loaded, sunk; and thus
was the Famous City of Belgrade lost on the 18th day of October 1690.

Esseck beseiged.
From Belgrad, the Grand Vizier sent Mustipha, Basha of Bosina to Beseige
Esseck, who sat dow^ before it on the 30th of September, the Duke of Croy and
Count Sta^emberg having got into it a little before, who perceiving the
Basha's confidence or ignorance, proceeding against the common Rules of
Military Policy, on the 3d of Novem^er made a Sally with three Hundred Foot and
a^ Thousand Horse, Attacked the Enemy, killed three Hundred and took five
Colors, which he sent ^o the Emperor, yet the Turks continued the Seige, till
the Duke of Croy out witted them by a stratagem, The Seige broak up.
causing a great noise of Trumpets and Kettle-drums to be made in the night, a
little distance from the Town which the Turks apprehended to be a Body of Men
come to relieve the Town and so they fled that same night in great terror and
confusion, leaving their Cannon and Baggage behind them,

Prince of Baden beats Teckeley out of Transilva^ta,
To make the Turks some ammends for this disaster, they took Lippa in upper
Hungary, and reinforced the Garrisons of great Waradin and Tames-Ware with Men
and Provisions, which had been Blocked up by the Imperialists, for a long time
before.

We left the Prince of Baden on his March to Transilvanta, wherein he made so
great expedition, and ^ith so much secrecy; as he was up closs with Teckely,
ever he was aware, who finding himself too weak to engage with the Prince,
retreated to Moldavia, but in so great haste as he left a part of his Baggage
behind him, and had near three hundred of his Rear Guard cut off. So as in a
Trice, the Prince cleared all Transilvanta; And leaving a good Body to secure
the Province, under the Command of Veterani, on the 1st. of November, he
separated his Army, and went himself to Vienna, where he received abundance of
Honor, for that and other his good Services.

Foland
This Year the Turks and Tartars attempted hard to disunite the King of Poland
from the Confederacy, The King makes an inroad into Moldavia
^ut without success; And in the mean time, their Forces committed a Thousand
disorders on the Fronters of Poland. The Pols being nettled at this, drew a
Body hastily together, pursued and overtook the Enemy, and charged them so
vigorously that they were forced to repass the Bor^^^henes, when being got over
and rallying again, and observing the Pols marching in disorder, and carelessly
they suddenly repass the River, attack them, and cut off Seventeen Companies of
them, and making a second inroad in the Country, did a great deal of more
mischief than at the former, this roused up the Polish Courage, once more, so
as raising an Army of Five thousand Horse, Two thousand four hundred Dragoons,
and Twelve thousand Foot, the first o^ September they past the Neister with
their Artillery, and march in to Moldavia, where the King taking Sockow, the
chief City of that Province, he furnished it with a Garrison of Eight hundred
Men, And returns home
under the Command of General Halstar, and all needful Provisions, and so
returned home.

The S^eur Cornar^, Venice
being made Captain General of the Venetian Forces, Napoli ai Malvesia
surrendered to the Vnettanse
in the place of Morosini, now Doge, he is ordered by the Re-publick to attack
Napoli di Malvesia which they had blocked up of a long time before, thither he
goes and pursues the matter with that industrious Application, that though the
beseiged made a resolute defense for a while, he forced them to Surrender, on
the 12, of August, and with it, the enteir conquest of the Morea to the
Republic, In it he found Seventy three piece of Cannon, and a Hundred and
thirty Christian Slaves, now happily released.

Vallona taken by the Venetians
The Season being fair, The Captain General bends his course toward Vallona,
which is a strong City in the Kingdom of Macedon, and arrived at it, the 12 of
September, where the Turks made some opposition at their Land^ng, but were soon
put to flight.

The Turks, to the Number of Six thousand Foot and a Thousand five hundred
Horse were encamped before Vallona, but on the approach of General Spaar with
four thousand Foot, and four hundred Horse, they fled.

And so they began to Batter the Town with Cannon and Bombs from their Ships,
and withal sent a Summonds to the Governor to Surrender, who desired time to
consider of it, till the next day, and on the Morrow, one being sent with a
second Summonds, he found the Gates open, the Turks having quitted the Town in
the Night, and so the Captain General took possession of it that Day being the
19 of September: And in this place, Death of Captain General Carnaro
this brave Man dyed, on the 1st. of October following: which the Senate being
informed of, they appoint Seigmor Mocenigo to succeed him.

Turks beaten at Sea
The Venetians were not Victorious at Land only, this year but at Sea also. for
General Delphino being ordered to convoy the Garrison of Napol^ d^ Malvesia, to
Cands, on the 18. of August, he was joined with Captain Contar^nt, who had
Twelve Mon of War, and Two Fireships with him; And on the 29th, he understood
that the Admiral Basha, who had with him, 27 Galleys, 32 Ships, and 6 Galleons,
was resolved to attack him. On the 7th of September he had a sight of the
Ottoman Fleet, and on the 8th, he bore directly upon them, and engageing, a
sharp Fight was maintained for a good while, in which Action, General Delphinos
hand was shot off, which did not hinder him to keep his Station till the Fight
was over, and at last, the Turkish Vessels being fore shattered, they were
forced to flee to Meteans, And General Delphino, being unable to overtake them,
steered away for the Morea.

This year, the differences about the Franchises, and other things done by the
French Clergy as was esteemed in prejudice of the Holy Sea, are amicably
composed between the two Courts of France and Rome; The French King making
great Concessions on his part, to effect it; And the Old Dad, to make him a
recompense, laid a design to reconcile the Emperor and France; But all his
endeavors could never bring the Emperor to relinquish the Alliance he had so
solemnly entered into, and so the project fell to the Ground.

Elector Palatine dies
This Year, dyed the Elector Palatine in a good Old Age. The Princess of
Portugal dyed also this same, which we will conclude with some Remarks on five
considerable Battles fought, in cach of which, there was something worth
particular observation, viz.

The First, in Transylvania, where Treachery contributed as much to the Victory
as Valor. The Second, In Flanders, wherein Surprise had a great share. The
Third, At Sea, where only Number got the Advantage. The Fourth, In Ireland,
where Fortune declared in favor of true Merit and Prowess. The Fifth, In
Savoy, where want of good intelligence, gave the Victory to the French:
CHAP. XVI. Anno 1691.
SECT. 1.
Now we come to the Year 1691, in the beginning whereof, Congress at Hague King
Williams
there was (at the Hague a famous Congress of the Confederats: Thither came the
King of great Brit^ain, who, in an excellent speech to the Princes and all
other concerned, Speech to the Pruncee
encouraged and exhorted them all, unanimously to concur, and speedily and
effectually to prosecute that great Work, which they were now so deeply engaged
in, promising his personal presence (with a considerable force) to assist them,
in that laudable Enterprise.

This Generous Speech did so animate the whole Assembly, as they freely and
solemnly promised to follow his advice, and to contribute their Endeavors to
that noble End.

The Frenc^^ King knowing of all this, resolved to be before hand with them,
three Garisens in Savoy taken by Catinat
and in March he divides his formidable Army into two great Bodies, one of
which he sent into Savoy, under the Command of Catinat, who on the 13 of March,
invested Neice (the French Fleet coming about at the same time, Nice bes^idged
and lying before the City) from whence he sent three Batallions, who (before
the 26, of that Month) took in Valla Franca, St. Auspice, and M^ntalban, all
which surrendered, without making any great Resistance.

On the 26. the Consuls of Nice [most treacherously] made a private Contract
with Catinat for delivering up the City to him, on Condition that the Citizens
should not be damnified, and should enjoy all their Privileges and Immunities
as formerly; all which Catinat engaged to perform; so as (notwithstanding the
Governors out most endeavors to the contrary) the French got possession of
the City, An. 1691.
that very Night. but the Governor of the Castle stood our stoutly, Betrayed
and yeildded to Catinat
till the 30. day, when unhappily his Powder Magazine took Fire and blowing up
killed above five hundred of his Men, so as he was forced to Capitulate, and
getting very Honorable Conditions, he and his Men surrendered the Castle, and
marched out on the 2d, of Aprile.

The French King with the other Body of his Army [formerly mentioned] beseiges
Mons, whether he came in person, on the 21 of March, and the 'Trenches being
presently opened, he proceeded with such incessant and vigorous Application, as
he forced the Governor to Capitulate, on the 8. of Aprile, Mons yielded to the
French King
being urged thereto by the Treacherous and Cowardly Inhabitants, threatening
(if he refused) to deliver both the Town and him also, to the French, so as he
was necessitate to yield, and he and his Men marched out on the 10th. of April.

SECT. 2.
William at this time, made a step over to England, Ireland.
where he gave all necessary orders for the Reduction of Ireland, leaving the
management thereof to Leivtenent General Ginkle; and soon after he returned to
Flanders, to carry on the War there, where we leave him, and return to Ireland.

Both Armies there, continued quiet, without any great Action all the Winter
and Spring, In the beginning of June, Ginkle Beseiged Baltimore, which yielded
to him on the 10th.

From thence he Marched to Athlone, and on the 19th. his Van^guard beat the
Irish from several out Ditches, into the English Town of Athlone, on the
North-East side of the Shannon and on the 20th. they took it by Storm, many of
the Irish being killed, and drowned in the River.

Then Bateries being planted on the 22d. the Cannon and Mortars began to play
on the Irish Town and the Castle. The Seige was carried on with great Industry
to the 30th day. The Beseiged all the while making a resolute defense; Athlone
taken by General Ginkle
And then a General Assault was made: The deepth and strength of the River,
together with whole vollies of great and small shot from the Castle and the
Town Walls, made the attempt amazingly dangerous, and deserving a perpetual
Memory, all which difficulties, the English passed through with invincible
Courage, and within less than an Hour made themselves Masters, of the Town, the
Castle, and all the Trenches. Monsieur St. Ruth, General of the Irish Army,
hearing of this, said, It was impossible for the English to attempt, or pretend
to take a Town, and he so near with an Army to succor it: But within a few
days he found (to his Grief and Ruin) the English durst and could do much
more: for General Ginkle continuing at Athlone till the 10th. of July, for
refreshing of his Men, on the 11. Marched toward the Irish Army, which was
Encamped near to Aghrim, and observing their posture, and consulting, Mackay,
Talmish, and the rest of the General Officers, resolved to give them Battle the
next day, which Saint Ruth understanding seemed forward enough to engage, and
that day made an encouraging Speech to his Army.

The Conclusion whereof was this. He assured them of King James's loving and
rewarding them of Lewis the Great, his protecting them; himself to lead them
on; of the Church to Pray for them; of Saints and Angels to Carresse them; and
in short, of their being made all Saints, and Holy Mary to lay them in her
bosom.

On Sunday, the 12th of July, the English Army advanced upon the Enemy, but the
way being rough and difficult, and all the Approaches and out posts being well
guarded by the Enemy, the day passed away in skirmishes, till near 5 Aclock,
and then so sowed a closs Engagement on all sides; The Battle was managed by
both Generals with all the Martial Policy and good Conduct Imaginable, Battle
of Aghrim.
and prosecuted with no less courage and bravery, by the Soldiers, this being
(without question) the sharpest Fight that happened during the whole course of
this War, the Irish behaving themselves here with greater Gallantry then ever
formerly, and where the English Valor was extended to the greatest degree of
Glory imaginable. However, over passing the various Actions during the Fight,
which were too tedious to relate here, The Victory (at last) fell to the
English. The Irish r^nted,
Of the Irish there were no less then Seven thousand slain on the spot; And of
the English, six hundred Soldiers and seventy three Officers besides 960
Wounded, and many Officers. The English Army did not amount to full seventeen
thousand Horse and Foot; whereas the Irish were twenty thousand Foot, and five
thousand Horse and Dragoons.

The English Army, having a few days allowed them for Refreshment, Galoway
yielded.
Marched on to Galoway, which [tho the Lord Dillon the Governor pretended to
hold out resolutly) surrendered on Articles, on the 20th of July, and from
thence they marched toward Limrick. where they arrived the 25th of August the
Duke of Tirconnel dying a few days before in that City. Limerick bes^iged Duke
of Tirconnel dies.
The Seige was carried on without any extraordinary Action on either side,
except on the 22d. of September, The English Granadiers, sustained by four
Regiments of Foot, made an attack on the Works that covered Thomonds Bridge,
which the Irish defended resolutly, but in end the Granadiers beat them from
their post and pursued them to the Town Gate, where the Officer Commanding,
(fearing the English would enter pell mell with the Irish) pulled up the draw
Bridge, and so left them to the mercy of the English Granadiers, who killed and
took the most part of them.

The English by this means getting footing on the south side of the Town, and
the River cut off all communication between the Irish Cavalry and the Town, by
which the Beseiged were so much discouraged, as on the 23d. of September they
beat a Parlie, Limerick yielded.
and the next day Leivtenant General Sarsfeild and Major General Wachop came
out to the General, and desired a Cessation for 3 days, which was granted, in
which time, the Articles were concerted and agreed on, and on the 1st of
October they were signed, The Sum whereof was. That not only Limerick but all
other Garrisons and Forts in the Possession of the Irish, in Ireland should be
surrendered; and that so many of the Irish Army as had a mind to go for France,
should have free leave. And so General Ginkle taking Possession of Limerick, in
effect ended the War in Ireland.

King James a letter to the Irish in France,
Those who went to France, on their arrival received a Consolatory Letter from
King James (directed to Leivtenant General Sheldon their Commander, to be
communicated) Giving them hearty thanks for their faithful services in
Ireland, and promising [when in a Capacity] to confer such marks of his favor
on them, as might be suitable to their Merits.

SECT. 3.
Scotland this year worth mentioning. Neither was there any thing extraordinary
happened at Sea, tho the Fleets on each side were very powerful. The French
had a design of Intercepting our Turkey Fleet, which was very rich, Our Turkey
Fleet comes safe hom^.
but providence brought them all safe into Kinsale, whereof the brave Admiral
Russel, [now Earl of Onfoord] being informed, he took special care to convoy
them all in to their several Har^ours in England; And then with the Grand I
leet, set Sail in quest of the Enemy, whom he understood to be lying at
Bel-Isle, but so secured as it was Impossible to attack them, and therefore he
returned toward the Coast of England; where we will leave him for a while and
see where King William was all this while.

We left Him in England toward May last, but he quickly returned to Flanders,
and put himself on the Head of the Confederate Army, Waldeck attacked by
Luxemburg near Cambrun.
which was somewhat stronger then the French in Foot, but weaker in Horse; And
tho his Majesty did all he could to bring Monsi^ur Luxemburg to an Engagement,
yet all would not do, and so marching the Army toward Aeth, the 16th. of
September he went to Loo, leaving Prince Waldeck in the command, who leaving
Aeth on the 17th. marched toward Bonair. Luxemburg laid hold on this
opportunity, and marching with a considerable Body of the best Horse in France
on the 19th, came up with Waldecks Reer-Guard near Cambrun, by which the
Confederate Forces were surprised, Prince Waldeck lost an thousand in this
Action.
expecting no such thing. However Prince Waldeck drawing up with all the have
he could, made head against the Enemy, the French Kings Household attacked the
first line, and put them to a retreat, and the 2d. line also, but at length the
Princes Cavalry rallying and coming up, the French thought fit to retire,
having killed an thousand Men in this Action, with the loss of five hundred of
their own. And this concluded the Campaign in Flanders.

In Catalonia, Catalonia.
The Duke of Noailles advancing with a part of the French Army to Belee^* sent
Lievtenent General Chazeron with the rest, Vigel yielded to the French.
to beseige Vrgel, garrisoned with a thousand five hundred Spaniards, all of the
regular Troops, which place in a short time, they basely surrendered, the whole
Officers and Soldiers being made Prisoners of War, And if the Spaniards
behaved so dastardly at Land, they did little better at Sea, when they could
not prevent the Marshall d' Estrees Bombarding of Barcel^na for two days
together, which brought a terrible desolation in the City.

The French prevail on the upper Rhine.
On the upper Rhine, the French attackt Algesheim, five or six Leagues from
Men^z, which, after some resistance they took. And soon after, passing the
Rhine, they took the Town of Portz beim, in the Marquisat of Baden Dourlach,
with which, and taking of another small place called Genbac^, and ravaging a
part of Ju^ziers, was all their Summers Work on that side. The Duke of Saxony
General of the Emperial Army, doing nothing considerable all this Campaign.

In Italy, Savoy
The French having taken Nice in the spring soon after they took Villana also,
Vil^ana ye^lded to the French
from thence Catinat marched, and beseiged Carmagnola, nine Miles from Turin.

The Trenches were opened the 8. of June, and three Attacks formed, which were
carried on with that vigor, as the Garrison Capitulated to march out with their
Arms, Also Carmagnola
and to be convoyed safe to Turin. Which was no sooner done but the Marquess de
Feuquieres was commanded with a strong detatchment of Horse, Foot and Dragoons,
to invest Coni, a place naturally strong and furnished with above a thousand
two hundred Men.

Feuquieres hearing of Three thousand Spaniards on their March to relieve Coni,
Coni beseidged.
attacks them smartly, where many were slain on both sides, but at last the
Relief got in, and presently it was beseiged again with Fourteen thousand
F^ench Commanded by Monsieur de Bullond, who hearing ^rince ^ug^ne of Savoy was
coming with Four thousand And Re^^e^ed
Horse and Six thousand Foot to relieve it, he broke up in confusion, leaving
one Cannon three Mortars, great store of bombs, Powder, and other Warlike
Ammunition and many sick Men, but for this good Service, Catinate had orders to
seize and secure him.

Montmelian yielded to the French
By this time the Duke of Bavaria, with Eight thousand Germans, comes up, on
which Catinat repasses the Po, and sends the Marquess de Hoquincourt to beseige
Montinelian, who took it a trice, but the Castle held out still. The Dukes of
Savoy and Bavaria did what they could to draw Catinat to a Battle, which he
altogether declined: And passing the Po, Carmagnola taken by Prince Eugina
Prince Eugine invested Carmagnola, on the 27 of September and on the 8, of
October the Garrison Capitulat, and surrendered on Honorable Terms.

Montmelian Fortress yielded to Catinate
Not withstanding this, Catinat has orders to attack the Fortress of
Mountmelian, which he did on the 16 of November, wherein conflicting both with
the rigor of the Season, and a desperate Enemy, he overcame all with that
patience and constancy, as the Fortress was Surrendered to him on the 22d, of
December, upon Honorable Terms, by which place, the French became entire
Masters of all the Duchy of Savoy.

SECT. 4.
Hungary, Hungary
Prince Lewis of Baden headed the Imperial Army near Peter Waradin, from
thence, Prince of Paden worsted by the French
in August he marched toward the Enemy, who encamped at Semom on the Save,
where he used all means to draw them out of that fastness, wherein they were so
securely Encamped, with a hundred and fifty pieces of Cannon all mounted on
Batteries, which seeing he could not effect, he retreated toward Salankemen;
The Turks thinking he fled, pursue him, which pleased him very well; On the 18.
of August, he posted his Army on all the rising Hills about Salankemen. By this
time the Turkish Army was come pretty near; and in the mean time Buquo's
Regiment of Dragoons, being detacht to secure two hundred Wagoons, who were
coming from Peter Waradin, was surrounded by the Enemy, and after a valiant
resistance, were all killed and taken: and the same day, the Recruits of
Hoffkirken and Caprara's Regiments, fell under the same misfortune, all the
Women, Baggage, Wagons, and Led-horses were lost, with two hundred Wagon load
of Provisions, and twelve hundred Oxen that drew them. In the mean time, the
Prince observed that the Enemy were posted on much more advantageous Ground
than his own Army, and finding a necessity, either of hazarding to attack them
in their Camp, or starving in the place, his Provisisions being almost
exhausted, he generously resolved on the former, nnd on the next day being the
19 of August, he put all things in order, to the best advantage.

The great battle at Salankemen.
The Prince draws out his Army, and with undaunted Courage marches on and
attacks the Enemy who received him with great resolution. It was near 3 in the
afternoon, before the Armies were fully Engaged, but once Engaged there was
Bloody work on all sides till night came on, about which time the Turks being
over powered with downright force and fury, fell in disorder, and in short,
betook themselves to flight; the Christians pursued them till it fell dark, and
all next day, killing a great many who had hid themselves in the Boggs, and
amongst the rushes, and then possessed themselves of the field of Battale, and
of all their Tents. Cannon, Baggage. Ammunition, and all other Provisions.

The Tinks routed.
The loss on both sides was very great, the Conquerors themselves owning that
they had near seven thousand killed and wounded, and among them, many good
Officers: But of the Turks, they reckoned no less then eighteen thousand killed
in the Battle; and almost all their Officers were killed, wounded, and taken
Prisoners; And to complete the Victory, The Grand Vizier killed and eighteen
thousand Turk.
not only the Serasquer Basha and the Capital Aga of the samsaries, were found
amongst the slain, but the Grand-Visier Cupergh also, who was the most
accomplished person in all the Ottoman Empire,

Several towns taken, all Sclavonia reduced to the Emperors obedience.
After this, General Capra^a took Lippa; And in Sclavonia, The Duke of Croy took
Bro^a, Grandisca Possega, and Ba^aros, so as all ^clavonia, became entirely
reduced under the Emperors obedience. Yet at great W^ra^in Seige, they had not
so good success. for tho the imperial Troops attackt it with much Vigor, yet
they could not prevail against it, so as [after all] they were forced to turn
the Seige into a Blockade, with which ended the Campaign in Hungary,

During which time, Sir. William Hussy, the King of Englands Ambassador at the
Ottoman Fort was Negotrating a Peace, between the two Empires, tho with little
appearance of Success.

We do not find any thing dono this year by the Venetians, worth mentioning.

King of Poland marches into Moldavia.
The King of Poland marched his Army, twenty thousand strong, once more into
Moldavia, designing to march that way, as far as Budziack: But he had not
marched far into Moldavia, till he heard a great body of Ta^tars were not far
from him; against whom, ho marched, but they retreated so fast as he could not
overtake them; so he marched to Jassi [which the Hospodar had quitted] and took
possession of it.

He took also, Roman, Nimick, and Novacran; And the ^e^son being now far spent,
retreated homeward with his whole Army.

On the first of February this, year dyed Alexander, the 8th Pope of Rome,
Remarkables on this year 1691. Pope Alexander the 8th Monsieur Louvois
after he had sit in the Holy Chair 15 Months and 21 Days: To whom succeeded
Pignatelli the Cardinal being then 76. years and 4 months old, taking on him
the Name of Innocent the 12.

On the 16th of July, dyed the Chief Minister and Secretary of State in France
Monsieus Louvois.

Duke of Saxony all die.
And on the 2^d. of September dyed at Tubing, John George, Elector of Saxony. he
had by Anna Sophia, daughter of Fredrick the 3d. King of Denmark, John George
the 4th. who was born on the 17th, of October, 1668. And Fredrick Augustus, who
(by his Brothers death, without Heirs) became Elector of Saxony, and now chosen
King of Poland.

CHAP. XVII. Anno 1692
SECT. 1.
The King goes to Holland,
on the 5th. of March, he Adjourned them to the 12th. of Aprile, and so he went
to Holland, where he Landed the 16th. of March, and after some stay at the
Hague, he went to Loo, and thence to the Army.

After the Kings departure, the Queen had some notice of an invasion intended
from France on which, she ordered the has^ning out of the Fleet, stopped the
Forces designed for Flanders, with whom [and some other Troops] she ordered a
Camp to be formed near Portsmouth.

The late King had at that time a considerable Army posted on the Coast of
Normandy, ready to be Embarked so soon as the French Fleet could come up to
receive them. But in the mean time, the French King sent orders to Monsieur
Tourville to Fight the English and Dutch Fleets, which accordingly he did, tho
he had better let them alone, An. 1692.
for on the 19th. of May he Engaged with Admiral Russel, Admiral Russel beats
the French Fleet.
who Fought him all day, and Banged him so soundly, as he forced him to flee
before night, and pursuing him, on the 21st Sir. Raloh de Lavalle brunt
Tourvilles own ship, the Royal Sun, carrying 104. Guns. The Admirable, of 102
Guns, the Conquerant, of 80 and 3 more of a lesser Rate. And on the 22d.
Admiral Russel himself at La-Hogue, burnt 13 men of War, besides several
transport ships of great burden.

This was the greatest blow that ever the French got at Sea; and the Action was
the more Glorious being done in sight of the French and Irish Camp, ready to
Invade us. This disaster moved King James to write a sad Letter to his Brother
of Franc, condoling the misfortune, occasioned by his bad stars.

Namure beseidged
This loss at Sea, the French King resolves to make up at Land, and in order
thereto lays Seige to Namur on the 22d. of May, himself being present, Flanders
and carried on the same with the outmost Application. The Confederate Army
being then equally strong with the French. King William used his outmost
endeavors to relieve the Town, but partly by the extraordinary Caution of
Luxemburg who covered the Seige, And yielded to the French King
and more especially by an excessive Rain falling for several days, his
endeavors were frustrated; And so on the 30th, of June, Town and Castle and
all fell into the French Hands.

SECT. 2.
The King lying at Hall with the Army, on the 1st. of August, he was joined by
the Hanover Troops, being Eight thousand, all fine Men. And hearing the French
Army were Encamped between Enghein and Steenkirk, he resolved to attack them.

This Enterprise bore a prospect of so great difficulty and imminent danger, as
no Man durst have attempted, but he who has always dared (slighting
difficulties and dangers) to attempt any thing that Justice and Honor prompted
him to. And who in all his Actions hitherto, has manifested himself a greater
stranger to that natural passion of fear, than any of this Age, or recorded in
former. And though we have an old Adage, Audaces fortuna juvat, yet here it
failed. For in this Eugagement, Battle at Enghein
though there was nothing wanting in the prudent Conduct of a politic and
Magnanimous General, nor in the vigorous endeavors of a brave and resolute
Souldi^ry, yet the Event proved not so Successful as so Heroic an undertaking
might have expected. My Author has given a particular relation of the wonderful
Exploits of that day, which (being both intricate and prolix) I overpass,
referring the curious Reader, to a full satisfaction from the Original.

I only make this Remark on the whole, the attack was carried on and maintained
all the day, with that admirable courage and constancy, as if Boussler had not
come in the Evening with his fresh Troops of Dragoons; King William Retreats
in all probability King William would have gone off with so famous a Victory
as would have ecclipsed the splendour of the greatest of his former Actions.
However he made an orderly, Honorable and safe Retreat, (the French not daring
to pursue him) and came with the Army to Hall, next Morning early; To which
retreat, the French King himself has given a Testimony, much to the Honor of
King William.

In this Fight were killed of King Williams Army about Two thousand, and Three
thousand Woundded, of whom Eight or Nine hundred were taken Prisoners. Mackey
killed, and Sir Robert Douglas
And here were Killed, the brave General Markay, Sir John Laneir, Sir Robert
Douglass Colonel Hodges, and many other brave Officers, of the several
Nations. and Colonel Hodges and Sir John Laneir


The loss of the French was not particularly known to us, but one of their
Officers told afterward, that it rather exceeded ours, and probably it had
been much greater, had not Mill^voix (a Servant of the Duke of B^varias) given
Luxemburg intellig^nce of the Kings design, whereof being convict^d* he was
fairly Hanged for his Labor

Sieur Granvale Excecuted
Upon the 11sh. of August, The Sieur Granvale, by name Barthol^mew d' Lintere)
was brought to his Trial, before a Council of War, the Earl of Athlone, Ginkle,
being president; for conspiring and intending the Assassination of the King of
great Britain. Which being sufficiently proven against him by his Associats, Du
mont, and L^efdale, who both discovered it, he was found guilty, and sentenced
by the Council of War* to be Drawn, Hanged and Quartered, which was Executed
accordingly in the Camp, the 13. of August 1692, his Trial is remarkable.

There happened little more of importance in Flanders, this Campaign, but the
Governor of Huy's surprising a strong party of the French, killing a great
many, and taking Four hundred Prisoners; And the Bombing of Charleroy, by the
Mareshal de Boufflers.

In England, The Queen and Council ordered the Forces Encamped at Portsmouth,
formerly mentioned, to be embarked, on the 3d. of August under the Command of
the Duke of Leinster, who on the 5th. set Sail, and went to Sea, where roaming
for a few days, acted nothing; and returned to England; which the King hearing
of sent orders for them to be transported immediately to Flanders, where they
Landed the 1st. of September, they possessed themselves of Dixmude and Fu^nes,
and began to fortify them, but toward the end of the Year, they were both
quitted to Bouflers by Count Horn, which the King resented so much, that the
Count, sinking under the weight of the Kings displeasure, did not live long
after.

SECT. 3.
Margrave of Bareith, and Landgrave of Hass Cassel, Duke of Witemburg de seated
and taken.
Commanded the Imperial Forces on the upper Rhine, this Campaign: And the Duke
de Lorge, the French; The Landgrave laid Seige to Eberemburg with a part of the
Army, but in a few days the Margrave sent him word, that De Lorge was
advancing, which required the rejoining of the^r Forces; And the Duke of
Wittemburg coming up to join them with Four thousand Horse, the French
surprised him in a Misty Morning, defeated his party killed near a Thousand
Men, and took many Prisoners, and the Duke himself, and sent him to Paris. And
ravaged all his Country at their pleasure: And forced the Landgrave of
Hass-Cassel, to raise his Seige at Eberemburgh. Yet before the end of the Year,
the Landgrave was quits with the French, who had laid Seige to Rhemf^ild, a
place of great importance, could they have carried it, for with great speed he
marched thither, and forced them to quite it with Dishonor.

2. Having now run through the Efforts made by the French, Savoy.
on the Flemish and German side let us see what is doing in Savoy, all this
while, The French having pretty good success there, last year, were contented
to be on the defensive only, this year.

Duke of S^^oy Invades the Dauphinate.
The Duke of Sovoy, in the Month of July, marches into the Dauphinate with
twenty thousand Men, where having pillaged La Roche, Chantelouvi, and some
other Villages; he marches to Ambrun, which on the 5th day after surrendered to
him upon Articles.

From thence he marched to Guillestre, which after a brisk Seige of about 9
days, yielded upon Articles, here he got 20 piece of Cannon, and the City
granted him forty thousand Livers Contribution; besides sixty thousand Livers
in Gold of the French Kings Money, Takes some Towns.
which he got in the hands of the Treasurer. From thence he marched to Gap, a
City upon the Frontiers of Provence, which on the first Summons, surrendered.

Falls sick, and returns. home.
He designed the taking of Brianson and Quieras, but the small Pox taking him
broke all his Measures and hindered his keeping of what he had Conquered in the
Dauphinate, so as his Army plundering all the Country, and burning and
destroying what they could not carry away, returned home, and so ended this
Campaign.

SECT. 4.
Salankemen, thought fit now to attack Great Waradin, Hungary.
which had been Blocked up for some years past, and appoints General Heusler
for that service, Great Waradin taken by Heusler
who arrived at the place about the end of April, and pushed on the Seige with
great vigor, to the 30th of May, throwing in an infinite number of Bombs, and
the same day sprung a mine to good purpose, he then sent a threatening Summons
to the Aga. who answered, he would perish in the defense of the Place, yet on
the 2d. of June, when he saw all things prepared for a General Assault, he beat
a Parley, and agreed on Articles, and surrendered. After which, the General
took a small Garrison on the Danube, caled Pescabara: And this was all the
service was performed on that side, also, Pescabara.
during this Campaign.

This year, on the 18th of July, the Venetians laid Seige to Canea, Venice.
in the Isle of Candia, the gaining whereof, they had good hopes at first, but
by the great policy and valor of the Basha of Retino, both their hopes and
endeavors were frustrate, in so much as they were forced to leave it,
re-infecta, and Sailed away toward Napoli di Malvasia.

Morosini made Captain General again.
This (with some Incursions of the Turks into the Venetians Territories) made
the Senate very uneasy so as they began to think of a new Captain General; And
this Trust and Honor, they unanimously devolved on the Serene Doge, Morosins,
who had formerly served the Re-pulick so succesfully, and which nothing but his
great age made him unwilling to accept off.

As for the Polish Army, they made a shift to get into the Field in September,
and in Ostober they Blocked up Caminiec. And so, for this Campaign, exeunt.

Mr. Robert Boil dyed this year.
This year dyed the Famous Robert Boil Esquire a Philosoper of a particular and
extraordinary Character; And yet he was so far from Atheism, that is too usual
for such Speculative heads, as he lived and dyed a sincere Christian, whereof
he gave a convincing Testimony at his death, by the Legacy he left to have a
Monthly Sermon Preached against Athism.

On the 7th of June, happened a terrible Earthquake in the Island of Jamaica,
Earthquake in Jamaica,
in the Town of Port Royal, the chiefest of the English Plantations, and the
greatest Mart in that part of the World: the Town was entirely ruined, with the
loss of fifteen hundred people.

And on the 8th of September we had a touch of it in England, but did little
hurt, bl^ssed be GOD.

The Elector of Bavaria and Prince Waldeck dies.
On the 24th of December, dyed the Serene Electoress of Bavaria, in Vienna 23
years old.

This year also, dyed the Valiant Prince Waldeck. And this year, the Duke of
Hanover a Protestant Ptince is Constituted the 9th Electorate of the Empir.

CHAP. XVIII. Anno 1693.
SECT. 1.
In Britain and Ireland, England.
things went well between the King and all his Parliaments, An, 1693
for Scotland and Ie^land appeared very forward in all matters tending to the
Common good and safety, and to the Kings Honor and Satisfaction; and the
Parliament of England came nothing short of the Kings expectation and desires,
passing many Acts, and laying on taxes and all for raising of Money for
carrying on the War against France. For all which, the King gave them hearty
thanks, and Prorogued the Parliament to the 2d. of May. and then he went to
Holland.

But before he went, he laid aside Admiral Russel (for causes to himself best
known) and constituted Henry Kuligrew Esquire, Sir Ralph Delavalle, and Sir.
Clovasley Shoved, Commanders of the Fleet this Summer.

The Smyrna Fleet attached by the Friend.
This year, our Smyrna Fleet, outward bound, consisting of near four hundred
Sail, of several Nations, under the Conduct of Sir, George Rook with a
Squadron of 23 Men of War, were attack't by the whole French Fleet. And tho Sir
George neglected nothing of the duty of an expert and resolute Captain, for the
safty of these under his protection, yet being over matched by a greafer force,
he could not prevent a great damage to the Fleet, of whom the French burnt ^7.
and took 32 Merchant Men. And 2 Dutch Men of war. And soon after Sir George
brought his Squadron, and many Merchant Ships, safe in to Kinsale in Ireland.

SECT. 2.
French Army in Flanders this year did exceed ours in number, very much, the
Troops of L^^ge being on their march to join the King; Luxemburg sent out a
strong Detachment, which surprising them in the hollow ways, charged them
smartly, and forced Count Tilly (who commanded them) to retreat toward
Mastreicht.

Huy taken by the French.
This encouraged Luxemburg to lay Seige to Huy, which he invested the 9th. of
July, and in few days had it surrendered to him. Which the King hearing of, and
fearing Luxemburg might attempt Let^e, being not far from it he sent ten
Batalions, who with great difficulty got into the Place. Luxemburg made as tho
he had a design on Liege, but he had a greater design really in his head, for
knowing the King had sent off the Duke of Wertemberg, and several other
considerable Detachments, he resolved on no less then atracking the King in his
Camp; his Army at this time being thirty five thousand stronger then the Kings
Army. Luxemburg. approaches the Kings Camp.
And with all carried the matter so closs, as (tho the King sent out several
parties to observe the Enemies) motion he could get no certain Intelligence,
till himself, Bavar^a, and some other Officers took Horse and went out, and
were not far till they met with Luxemburgs Vanguard, and found that his whole
Army were on their march toward the Kings Camp* Which made him presently draw
up the Army in Battle Array to oppose ^^e Enemy.

Night coming on, the King caused a slight Bres^work to be cast up before the
Foot from the Right Wing to the Left. And being on Horseback all the Evening,
not only giving all necessary orders, but seeing them Executed, he ordered his
Coach to come to the Bea^ of S^a^l^y's Regiment, wherein he reposed himself
about 2 hours; and early next Morning, sent for Doctor Menard, one of his
Chaplains to come into the Coach, to Pray with him, suitable to the occasion. A
Rare Example.

By Sun rising, Battle at Land^n.
the French were drawn up within Cannon shot of the Kings Camp* being the 19th.
of July; Our Cannon played on the French suriously and made a great slaughter,
which they endured with great constancy, till about 6 Aclock, and then they
made a movement toward our Retrenchments, at which time, the Batalions and
Squadrons from all sides, advanced and engaged. And it is certainly more casie
for a judicious Reader to imagine, than for any Man to relate the Bloody work
was there. But that terrible day drawing to an end, after the Confederate Army
had done all that was possible for brave Men to do being overpowred with
numbers they were at last forced to give ground, The ^^^ch (...) the field.
and to quit the Field of Battle to the Enemy, tho it was purchased at a costly
and Bloody Rate.

The Providence of GOD preserved the King, Miraculously being shot throw his
Peruque and throw his Clothes in several places; his very Enemies behold his
wonderful Courage, with admiration, and it was a common saying amongst them.
They wanted but such a King to make them Masters of Christendom; And the Prince
of Cont^ in his Letter to the Princess wis Wife (being Intercepted) Says he
saw the King every where present where there was any Action* Exposing his
Person to the greatest dangers, and that surely, so much Valor, very well
deserved the quiet Possession of the Crown he wore,

Loss on both sides Computed.
As to the loss on both sides, it is variously reported, the F^ench affirming
our loss to be twenty thousand, but it really appeared at the review of the
Confederate Army, soon after, there were not missid above five or six thousand,
killed wounded and taken. And for the loss on the French side it was past all
doubt they had above two thousand Officers killed and wounded, and few less
then eighteen thousand Soldiers, which may the rather be credited, first
because of Luxemburgs not pursuing the Viandory (which certainly he would not
have forborne if he had been in a condition) and next because of the great
Recruits sent him from the Sea Co^st, and by Bousslers from the Rhine, before
he laid Seige to Char^eroy. Which he did on the 31st, of August, And tho the
Garrison held out with more true courage than any other Town in Flanders had
done since the War began, yet* Char^eroy yielded to the French.
seeing no appearance of any releif, they were necess^at to Capitulat and
g^tting Honorable Conditions, they Surrendered, on the 1st of October.

And Roses also
This was not the only Town the Spaniards lost this year, for on the 29 of May
the French beseiged Roses be Sea and Land, and carry on the Seige with that
forwardness, as the Town was surrendered to them on the 5th. of June.

The Germans were so flow this Spring, and the French so forward, Heidelburg
taken and burnt by the French
that the Latter passed the ^hine at Philipsbuog, and on the ^8. of May, the
Marquess de Chamills with Twenty thousand Men invested Heidelburg, which (being
in no posture for defense, and a division also happening between the Inhabitants
and Soldiers, which put all in Confusion) was forced to surrender at
discretion of the Victors.

Soon after this, The Dauphine joined the Army which was Seventy thousand
strong; and having taken by storm, the Castle of Zwengenberg, he cr^ssed the
Neckar the 26 of July, and marched toward the Prince of Badens Camp, near
Flein: The Prince being far fewer in number, Dauphine bravad^
put himself in a defensive posture. On the 31, the Dauphine advanced with his
whole Army, and having raised some Batteries, ordered all the Cavalry and Four
thousand Granadeers to force the Entrenchments, and to encompass the left wing
of the Princes Camp* But at two a Clock, when the Prince expected that the
French would have fallen briskly upon him, they drew off, and repassed the
Neckar, with some loss. Nor did the Dauphine any thing more of moment only he
put a Garrison into Stugard, and sending one detachment to Charleroy under
Bousslers, and another into Piedmont, he returned in August to Versailles*

SECT. 3.
Savoy being recovered of his late Sickness joined his Army, which was pretry
strong, Duke of Savoy b^seiges Pignerol.
and presently laid seidge to Pignerol and took the Fort of St. Briaget that
covered it, with the loss of a Thousand five hundred Men; Put the Town made so
obstinate resistance, as it was debated, whether they should raise the Seige,
or Bomb the Town; In the mean time, Catinat being reinforced with the Troops
sent him from the Rhine descended into the Plains of Ma^siglia. The Duke of
Savoy learning he had a design on Turin, Raises his S^^ge and marches to
Marsig^^a
quit the Seige of Pignerol, and marched toward him, whereon followed a Bloody
Battle, on the 4th of October, The particulars whereof, the States of Hollands
Resident, then at Turin, sent to the States, by his Letter, Battle of Marsiglia
dated the 5th, of October, Wherein (with many other remarks on the Fight) he
highly commends the valor of the King of great Britains Subjects Commanded by
the valiant Duke of Schomberg, Schomberg killed
who was killed there, and two parts of three of his Regiments, and eighteen of
his Officers were taken many of them mortally Wounded: He names many other
brave Officers, Killed and Wounded there, but gives no account of the numbers
of Men Filled, The French Victors
on either side. only he says it was believed the French loss was fully as
great as ours. However, the French had the Victory, for the Dukes Army was
forced from the Field of Battle, and retreated to Turin and Mo^calier. About
this time there were some surmises, and a su^pition of the King of Polands
inclination to clap up a peace with the Fort, insligated by the French King,
but it did not appear.

Belgrade b^seidged by the Duke of Croy
This Year, The Duke of Croy had the chief command of the Imperial Army, with
which about the latter and of July) he laid seige to B^l^^a^^, which was
carried on with abundant Courage and Resolution (both of the Assaliants and
Defendents) till the 7^h. of September, on which day, the Beseigers made a
general and furious assault, but were repulsed, with great loss. The Seige
raised
And the General being informed that the Gr^novisier was on his March ^^wards
him with Eighty thousand Men, he broke up the Seige and made his Retreat,
without any loss. And so the Campaign terminated for this Year, on that side.

Return we now to England, England
So soon as the King came from Holland he discovered a great dislike of the Sea
proceedings that Summer, The Kings Speech to the Parliament
and presently restored Admiral Russel to his Command of the ^le^t, And in his
Speech to the Parliament, on the 7th, of November, he extenuated the
disadvantages at Land, which was to be imputed to the far greater numbers of
the' Enemy; but the mis^a^^iages at Sea, be resent^d extremely, and threatn^d
those who had neglected their Duty, with severe punishment; But withal told
them of the extraordinary provisions a making by the French for the next
Campaign, whereof the States of Hollana taking notice, had ordered suitable
preparations to be made on their part, which he des^ed the House of Commons to
take into consideration, hoping they would concert and settle all matters, with
that speed and diligence, as so weighty and important Affairs required.

The House of Commons came quickly to a resolution of complying with his
Majesty's desire, for increasing the Forces both by Sea and Land.

Bembow's Bombing and Burning some part of S^. Malois, about this time, Prince
La^^^s of ^^den comes to England
gave some sort of satisfaction to Men's Minds, though it made no repatation of
our late great loss at Sea: And so we ^^o^e this Year, on the last day whereof,
the brave brince ^^wis of Baden came to Wu^^ehall, and next day, went to wait
on the King at Kinsington, An. 1694
who received him with great civility and kindness.

CHAP. XIX. Anno 1694.
SECT. 1,
Medtterrancam, where by a violent storm (on the 18. and 19 of February) Sir
Francis Wheellers ship was Founched, himself and all his Men lost; Sir Francis
Wheeler ship wrackt.
And besides this, 9 English ships, and 3. Dutch, all of good value, were
driven a shore on the Est side of Gibraltar, and most of the Men were drowned;
but Admiral Neville, and the rest of the Fleet, happily escaped.

Parliament prorogued to the 18th of September,
The Parliament having ordered all things according to the Kings mind by the
middle of April, he gave them hearty thanks for their kindness to him this
Session, and so Prorogued them to the 18. of September, and soon after he went
for Flanders.

Admiral Russ^l was early at Sea with our Fleet, which was now in very good
condition, using all means to draw the French to a Fight, which they as
carefuly avoided, and raither than put it to that hazard (being Conscious of
their own weakness) they choose making a stop into the Mediterranean, whither
Admiral Russ^l follows them, but before he went, he sent off Captain Pickard,
with 2 Men of War and one Fireship, to attack a Fleet of 55. Sail of French
Merchant Men, lying then in Bertraume Bay, which Pickard performed effectually,
for he burnt and sunk 35 of the 55 Merchants, and run the Man of War (there
Convoy) among Rocks, and soon after she blew up.

The Lord Berk^eys attempt on Bres^.
Here follows in course, the unfortunate attempt made on Breast by the Lord
Berkley Admiral of the blew Squadron, with 29, Men of War, besides small
Fi^gats, Fireships, Well-boats, Bomb vessels etc. having with him also a
considerable number of Land forces, under the Command of the resolute
Leivtenant General Talmash,

A Narrative of this unsuccesful Expedition is fully given by the Marquis of
Carmarthen, Unsuccessful.
there present to which I refere the reader, having no stomach to make a
relation of such an unhappy adventure. In short, besides the damage done to the
Ships, there were lost four hundred belonging to the Ships, and of the Land
Forces, seven hundred were killed wounded, and taken, besides the brave
Talmash, killed there.

SECT. 2.
Flanders The death of the Bishop and Prince of Liege, Death of the Bishop and
Funce of Liege.
had almost made a Rupture amongst the Confederats; for the French Kings motion
for the Cardinal de Bovillions preferment, being rejected by the Chapter, one
part made choice of the Elector of Cologn, Brother to Bavaria; and the other,
of the Grand Moster of the Teutonick order, who was Brother in Law to the
Emperor. Which might have made a Fraction between his Imperial Majesty and the
Duke of Bavaria. but providence prevented this, Elector of Cologn prefered to
eige.
by the death of the Grand Master, so as fair way was made for the Elector of
Cologn, without any difficulty or opposition, which strengthened much the
Consederats power in Flanders.

The Army now under the Kings command, amounted to thirty one thousand and
eight hundred Horse and Dragoons, all well mounted, Armed and equip't, and
fifty one thousand Foot, besides seven thousand under the Command of Count Thun.

But tho the Dauphines Army was not much inseriour in number, he used all
endeavors to decline Fighting, which when the King could not draw him to, he
Couped him up under the walls of Hu^, and reduced him to considerable straits,
for a time: Where we shall leave them, and look after the English Fleet, now in
the Channel,

My Lord Berkley brought the Fleet before D^ip in Normandy, on the 12th of
July. And the Bomb-Galiots taking their proper stations, Lord Berkley Bombards
D^ep
presently began their destructive work, for from that evening, before 4 the
next morning they threw in eleven thousand Bombs and Carcasses. Which took so
good effect, as the whole Town was (in a manner) reduced to ashes.

From thence he Sailed to Haver de Grace, and on the 26 at even the Bomb^ began
and played till next morning, And Havre de Grace.
and so they left it in little better plight than they did D^^^.

In Flanders I find no memorable Action, since we left the Armies near Huy,
only a hasty march the French Army made, to prevent the Confederat Army's
getting into French Flanders, Huy yielded by the French.
as it seems the King had designed; but failing in that, he sent the Duke of
Holst^^^ Ploen with 16 Regiments of Foot, to Beseige Hu^, which was carried on
so effectually, as on the 27 of September, it was yielded up on Articles that
the Garrison should be convoyed safe to Namur.

In Catalonta, the French Army consisted of thirty thousand, Duke of Noailles
takes se^^^^
under the Command of the Duke of Noa^^l^s, being much stronger than the
Spanish Army and earlier in the F^ild to boot.

Towns in Catalonta.
On the 30 of May Noailles Beseiged Palamo^, which he took on the 7 of June by
Storm, making Prisoners of War, all those who escaped the Sword. Which so
terrified the Spaniards as they abandoned the Garrisons of S' Felix, Quinola,
and the Castle of St Elm.

On the 19 Noailles laid Seige to Gironue, which (tho they made a show of
resistance at first,) they surrendered on the 29. and on Ignominious Terms ^oo.
And presently after, he took in the Towns of Ostralick and Castle Folet, making
all the Soldiers therein, Prisoners of War.

SECT. 3.
Russel is g^t on the Coasts of Spain and down the Meattervanean, couping up
Tourvilie in his Harbor of Tholoun, Admiral Russel in the Strait^
from whence he attempted once to make his Escape, but Russel watched him so
narrowly, as he drove him in to his Harbor again; and leave we him there in
souce. for the rest of Winter, till we see what is a doing in Germany, where we
find no great Matters, Tourvills couped up in Thoulon by him.
for the Prince of Baden Commanding the Imperial Army, and de Lorge, the
French, the Latter passed the Rhine in Jure, and marched toward Hai^b^on, near
which the Prince was encamp^d who went out to meet him, but at Lorg,
considering of it, declined Fighting and marched toward Wil^^ock: the Prince
pursues him, and near ^^^s lo^k a sharp skirmish happened between the French
and German^, wherein the former lost near three hundred, and the latter half as
many: Both Armies moved again and marched toward Landau, where there was great
expectation of a full engagement, but heavy Rains falling, frustrated the
design, And so the Prince with his Army repassed the Rhine, carrying away
Fourteen thousand Cattle, and destroying a vast quantity of Forage in the
Country, and some Magazines of the French, and herewith ended the Campaign on
this side.

In Savoy there was nothing done this year worthy of Relation.

And as little in Hurgary; for though the Turks were considerably stronger than
the Imperialisls, yet the Grand Vizier could find no means to force Caprara the
General, to Fight, nor durst he attack him in his Cump at Carlowitz. So as on
the 1st, and 2d, of October, he drew off his Army and sent them into Winter
Quarters, and published Eight Causes very reasonable for so doing.

As to Affairs in Venice. Venice
Their Captain General, and Doge Morosini. dyed the 6th, of January, at Napoli
de Romama, Death of Morosini Doge of Venice
and they made choice of Seigmor Zeno for Captain General, in his place: About
the beginning of June, General Delsino with Twelve thousand Foot, and a
thousand Horse, landed on the 15, within a Mile of Ciclut, General Delsino
takes Ciclut
and plying the Town horly with Cannon and Mortar, and many sharp Assaults, he
made himself Master of the Town by the 21. of that Month.

The Turks were so vexed at the loss of this place, as they presently beseige
it with Sixteen thousand men; but the Garrison Delsino left in it, made so stout
a defense as the Turk^ (after the loss of Two thousand Men) were forced to
raise the ^eige.

Cobluch yielded to Delphino
Soon after this, Delphino took Cobluch, after a Seige of 9 days only

And on the 7th of September General Steinau Landed with an Army in the Island
of Scio, Scio yielded to General Steinau
and on the 9. he seized on the Suburbs of the City, the next day he played on
the Castle with four Cannon and four Mortars, and set it on Fire in several
parts, and on the 14 they sprung a Mine, the hideous noise whereof (together
with the havoc the Bombs had made) so terrified the defendents, as presently
they capitulate. and surrendered, on condition they should be transported safe
into lesser Asia, which was done accordingly.

SECT. 4.
Poles seemed still to be the faintest and slowest of the Allies, Pole
and tho they had Blockaded Camimeck last year, Ta tars routed by the Poles at
Caminice
they could not find themselves strong enough to hinder the Tartars [this year]
from releiving it with no less than Three hundred Wagons, laden with all
manner of provisions, and guarded with Twenty thousand Tartartan Horse, most of
whom, carried a Sack of Corn behind them; and ravaging all the Country about:
The Poles (being enraged herewith) fell upon them, Killed Three thousand, and
drove the rest out of the Country, and this was all they did this Summer.

Death of the Elector of Saxony
This year on the 7th. of May, dyed the Elector of Saxony, a young Prince, and
in the full vigor of his Age, he dyed of the small Pox, at Dresaan.

The King at his return from Flanders, told his Parliament, on the 20th, of
November, that all Affairs (both by Sea and Land) were in a much better
posture, than when they parted last (as in truth they were) which gave a great
satisfaction to all.

Queen Mary's Death
But Alas! That which happened soon after, imbittered all our sweet Morsels, for
this fatal year, made a Mournful conclusion, by the Death of our most Gracious
Sovereign Lady, MARY Queen of great Britain, France, and Ireland, who dyed of
the small Pox at her Palace of Kinsungton on the 28, of December. Many learned
Pens have attemped a Character of Her, though all came very short of Her Merit;
But very remarkable was that Answer of the Kings (who knew Her best) to the
Bishop of Canterbury, who went to Comfort Him on that great Loss. Who sa^d, He
could not choose but Greive, seeing She had been His Wife for 17. years, and yet
He never knew Her guilty of an Indiscretion.

A general Grief for the Queens Death
Hereon followed the Parliaments, and the whole Nations Condolence of the King,
upon this great Loss, and their Protestations to stand by Him, against all
opponents whatsoever, both at Home and Abroad: And if ever Addresses were
unseigned and affectionat, they were those made upon this occasion, since it
has been obvious to any Man of observation, that that sad Providence did very
much heighten Men's Affections to His Majestys Person, which being before as it
were divided between Him and that Beloved Princess, were now entirely cemented
into one, and all concentered in Him.

CHAP. XX. An. 1695.
SECT. 1.


Affairs in Flanders req^iring the Kings speedy repair thither; He was pleased
before His Departure) to appoint Lords Justices, for the Administration of the
Government, during His Absence, viz. The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord
Justices of England
The Lord Keeper, The Earl of Pemb^ook, The Duke of Devonshire, The Duke of
Shrew bury, The Farl of Dorset, and the Lord Godolphine: And so on the 12 of
May, He departed for Holland.

Villeroy General of the French Armies, after Luxemburgs Death
The Famous Luxemburg Dying the beginning of this Year, The French King gave the
Command of his Army to the Duke de Villeroy; The Confederate Army outnumbering
the French this Year, by Twenty thousand. The King formed his Army into Two
Camps, one commanded by himself, and under him, by the Old Prince de Vaudemont;
And the other, by the Dukes of Bavaria, and Holstein Pl^en. On the 27 of May,
the King went from Breda to Ghent, and his main design being upon Namure, he
detached the Earl of Athlone (with 40 Squadrons of of Horse, thitherward; And
finding he could not draw the Duke of Villeroy to a Battle, he concluded on the
Seige of Namure, and on the 19, of June, he marched to Rosclair, where he lest
the Army with Prince Vaudemont, and went himself toward the Muse. And in the
mean time sent orders to the Earl of Athione Encamped then at Tilmont) to march
and invest Namure, which accordingly he did; but wanting Troops to surround the
Town entirely, Bousslers took an opportunity to throw himself into the Town
with Eight Regiments of his choice Dragoons, but sent away most of the Horses.

Namure beseiged
The Duke of Bavaria's Forces coming up, all the Posts about Namure were taken,
and the Seige was completely formed by the 23d, of June. So we reckon from this
day, the Seige begun.

And here, In the First place. My Author gives a particular account of all the
defects of the Fortifications of Namure, of its Weakness, and the disadvantages
it ley under, when the French took it, and of the admirable Enfor ements and
improvements they had made in it since, to that height, as not only themselves
(but others) looked upon it now, as impregnable: Which gave them the confidence
to set up this Inscription over one of the Gates, Reddi non vinci potest, And
all this he Writes in proper military Terms, as if he had been an expert
professed Engenier. In the 2d. place, Prince Vaudemounts brave Retreat
He gives an account of Villeroys design of attacking Prince Vaudemonts Army,
on the 4th, of July, which he delayed till the next day, but that Night, the
Prince gave him the Slip, marching his Army entirely away, with that wonderful
secrecy and celerity, as by his excellent conduct, he made a safe retreat to
Ghent by six a clock next morning. This was so fine a piece of the art of War,
as can hardly be paralleled in History, to which, the King [now the greatest
Captain known] gave His Testimony, by his Letter to the Prince so soon as he
heard of his safe Escape

And in the 3d. place, He goes on with the full narration of the admirable
proceedings at this Famous Seige, in which truly, there are many remarkable
Exploits, very well worth the Observation, and memory of all such as have a
Maretal Genius. The particulars whereof I hope the Render will not expect from
me, my proper work being (in effect) nothing else, but as the large Contents of
a Chapter, so as he must be content at present with this brief accumulative
account. The Seige beginning on the 23d. of June (as a foresaid) it was carried
on with incessant application till the 2d. of August whereon, The Town of
Namure yielded
all things being ready for a General Assault, Count Guiscard, the Governor,
gave the sign for a Parley, whereon Hostages being exchanged, and Honorable
Conditions being granted, he surrendered the Town on the 4th, of August, but
the Castle held out still.

SECT. 2.


The French having no Fleet in our Channel, the English and Dutch Fleets had
the more liberty to insult them in their own ports: St Malo's Bom'd by the Lord
Berkeley.
And first they began with St Malo's. Into which, the Lord Berkely threw no
less then nine hundred Bombs, which (by the Frenches own confession) reduced it
almost into ashes.

But to return to Villeroy. Having failed of his design on Prince Vandemont, he
chose rather to play at small game, than ly out, and therefore he attacks
Dixmude, Dixmude and Deixse yielded to the French.
and takes it, making all the Garrison Prisoners of War, the silly defense
whereof, cost Major General Ellenburg his Head: The same fate befell the Garrison
of Dense. From hence Villeroy marches to Brussells, where (after a Compliment
premised of sparing that Lodging wherein the Electress of Bavaria was) on the
13 of August he Bombarded the Town seyerely reducing a great part of it to
ashes. Brussels Bomed by Villeroy.
After which, reinforceing his Army (which amounted now to a hundred thousand
Men) he marches toward Namure, in order to raise the Seige, whereof he failed
to his great grief and dishonor. However he advanced as far as Flerus, He
marches to the releife of Namur.
which obliged the King to leave the care of the Seige, to the Dukes of Bavaria
and Holstein-P^oen, and to repair to his Army to oppose Villeroy, who seemed
now fully resolved to Fight, and in order thereto, drew out his Army in formal
array, Retreats, re^insectr.
and attacked the advance Guard of the Confederats Horse but being repulsed by
the Hessian Horse, he retiered that night, sine ^editu.

The Seige of the Castle was carried on vigorously all this while, there being
no fewer than a hundred and ninty Cannon and Mortars playing continually upon
the Fort and Castle, The King finding scarcity to creep into the Camp; on the
19 of August Consults Bavaria, Vaudemont, and other General Officers, and a
general Assault is resolved on next morning, and so the disposition of the
several Officers with their Detachments to attack at such and such places, is
concerted, and appointed, which I pass over.

Namur Castle attack't.
Next morning early, the dreadful Assault begins in comparison with which, the
former Actions about taking the Town, were but like pickeiring or skirmishing
before a feirce Battle. The Fight continued all day, and was carried on with
incredible valor, on both sides, till the evening, by which time the
Confederat Forces had made themselves Masters of several important Lodgements;
but it cost them dear, for besides many Officers (some being of eminent
Quality) they lost near two thousand Men. All this notwithstanding, the work
goes on next day, the Cannon thundering continually against the Castle. On the
23d, the Beseiged beat a Parley, craving a Cessation till they buried their
dead, which was granted, and a little before it ended Count Guiscard came upon
the breach, and desired to speak with the Elector of Bavaria, who coming to
him, ^e proposed a Capitulation, the King (coming at that very time from the
Camp into the Town) consented, and so an agreement was made on Honorable
Term^s, and was Signed that night by the Marshall De B^uff^ers; And perhaps
this was the first Capitula^ion that ^ver was Signed by a Marshall of France
and so much the more to the Honor of the Confederate Arms, And surrend^ed,
who took this (almost. Im^regnable place, from an Army within it of fourteen
thousand choice Men, headed by a Marshall of France, in sight of an hundred
thousand Men without, who came to relieve it, but could only stand spectators
of the brave Action But none can pretend to so much Glory from t^is Conquest,
as the King of Great B^^ta^^, under whose conduct and direction, all was
happily A^chieved, the Confederats lost at the Seige between fifteen and twenty
thousand. And the French about two thirds of that numb^r.

The Ar^i^l^s being Signed, and the Confederats having taken Possession of the
C^^orne all things were prepared for a Triumphant volley of Cannon and small
shot, A Triumphant ^ol lay of shot.
the M^n being all dispersed to their several posts, along their Retrenchments;
The confusion of the (...) an^ noise from so many different places, was very
agreeable and delightful, and the Triple discharge of the small shot, seemed to
be but one of a long continu^nce.

On the 2^ of August Marshall de Boufflers and his Men marched out of the
Castle in very decent order, The King and the Duke of Bavaria on Horse back
stood before the breach and viewed them passing by, Boufflers arrested.
whom B^ufflers and Guiscard saluted with their Swords. But Boufflers had not
marched far, till he was arrested in the Kings name, by ^^etang, a Brigg^dier
of the life Guard at which he stormed extremely; but Monsieur Dickvelt told
him, tho reason was his Masters infraction of the Capitulations made at
Dixmude, and Deimse and that the King was resolved to detain him as a pledge
till his Men were released by the French King conform to that Treaty. Boufflers
giving his Master an account of this, And released.
the Prisoners are enlarged soon after by the French, and so Boufflers is
released. And with this, we conclud^ the Campaign in Flanders, for this year.

SECT. 3
Spaniards handled the French pretty roughly for first, The Spaniards worst the
French in 2 or 3 reincounters.
they attacked a Detachment of French marching from Bagnoles to Gironne and
routed them, And soon after, hearing that St. Sylvester was on his march with
eight thousand Men, and three or four hundred mules laden with provisions for
the releif of Castle Follet, they attacked him with so much courage, as they
routed him, killed above two thousand, and took above five or six hundred
Prisoners, and all the mules, but about thirty, who got into the Castle during
the heat of the Fight. which lasted about 6, hours. And presently after this,
they routed another Detachment of French marching from Pras de Melo, to join
Sylvester and his eight thousand lately beaten. Yet for all this they could not
carry Castle Follet, which they had blockaded so long. No nor Palamos either,
tho invested by Sea by Admiral Russel at the same time they Beseiged it at
Land, for hearing that Vendosme was on his march to relieve it, they withdrew
their Forces and left it. On the Rhine nothing considerable happened this
Campaign.

About the middle of June, Savoy.
the Confederat Forces Beseiged Casal, Casal Beseiged by the Duke of Savoy.
being Blocked up by them for a long time before, and carried on the Seige with
great industry till the 10 of July, and the Beseiged finding then that they
had all things prepared for a general assault, which they durst not abide, they
beat a Parley and so making the best conditions they could, An^ surrendered to
the Confederats.
surrendered it the next day.

The Duke of Savoy valued himself much upon the Reduction of this place, and
gave account of the same to the States of Holland by his Letter. In the
conclusion whereof he gives them new assurance of his adherence to the
Confederacy. which how he performed, ye will find in the Occurrences of the
next year.

The death of Sultan Ackmet.
This year on the 27 of Janiuary dyed Sultan Ackmet, at Adrianople. To whom
Succeeded Mustapha, Son to Mahomet the 4th. who had been deposed.

Mustapha made Sultan.
This Mustapha proved to be a more active Prince than any who had swayed the
Ottoman Scepter, of a long time.

The Imperial Court hearing of this, began to consider of a fit person to
oppose to this sprightly young Prince, Hungary.
and condescended on the Elector of Saxony; Saxony made General of the
Emperors Army.
The Emperor gives him the Sole command of his Army in Hungary, as the Elector
of Bavaria formerly had, Saxony obliging himself to bring eight thousand of his
own Troops into the Field.

In the beginning of July, the Grand Signior comes in person to B^lgrade,
together with his whole Army. Saxony being Encamped near Peter Waradin, The
Sultan thought it not safe to attack Saxony in his Camp; Lippa taken by the
Turks And Titul.
But rather than be idle, he Beseiges Lippa, which held out stoutly for a while
but being over powered by numbers, it was taken by Storm and all the Garrison
put to the Sword. Then he attacked the Fortress of Titull, which being not
Tenable, was surrendered upon Articles, which were not truly performed to them,
the Command^r of the Garrison and Palsies Batalion being sent Prisoners to
Belgrade.

The Duke of Saxony finding the Turks main aim to be on Transylvania, took his
march with the main Body of his Army thitherward, intending to join General
Veterans then in Transylvania with eight thousand Men only; but the Su^tan
prevented his design by sending a Body of near forty thousand Men to attack
Veterans, before Saxony could join him, which they did on the 21 of September
and engaging Veterans's small party near Lugos [after a sharp conflict for 5,
hours] defeated him, killed himself and three thousand of his Men, Battle of
Lugos
the rest making their retreat into Cara^s^hes. But this Victory coast the
Turks dear, for they lost above six thousand in that Fight. General Veterani
killed and 3000 Germans
And the Grand Signior (judging of the Lion by his paw) had no great stomach to
venture a Battle with the Imperial Army when he saw a handful of them make such
havoc of a great Body of his. And so (contenting himself with this dear bought
Victory, and the taking of Lippa) he resolved on reteiring into Winter
Quarters, as did the Germans also, where we leave them.

SECT. 5.
Venetians were proud of their Conquest of Scio, the last year; Venice
but the Turks recovered it this Year, without any loss or opposition, Scio
regained by the Turks
by the ill Conduct of Zeno, the Venetian General, for which he is degraded
with disgrace, and the Noble Alexander Molino put in his place. But the Turks
had not so good success in the Morea, for Ibrahim Serasquier of Negropont,
entering that Country with Twenty thousand Men, and advanceing as far as Argos,
General Steinau, Battle of Argos 3000 Turks ^illed
and the new General Molino joining their Forces, making Ten thousand Foot and
Two thousand Horse, encountered him, and after a Bloody fight for 3 Hours
forced him from the field of Battle, with the loss of Three thousand of his
Men. And that night, he fled out of the Morea with so much haste, as he left in
his Camp 14 pieces of Cannon, 2 Mortars, mary Bombs, and much Provision, with
700 Oxen, and 320 Camels and Horse, as a Booty to the Conquerours, who in this
Action lost not above Five hundred Men.

The King of Poland did nothing considerable this Campaign most of his time
b^ing taken up in reconciling a Feud between the Bishop of Vilna, Pole
and the General of Lathuama, both his own Subjects, this being the bad fate of
a Prince, who holds a precarious Crown. Nor did the Muscovites any thing
against the Tartars, England
but the blocking up of Asoph.

The King comes to England, Parliament dissolved, and a new one called.
We come home now to England. The King returning from Flanders in October, was
received with universal Joy, for His great Success that Can paign, and on the
11 of October, He ^^sued a Proclamation for dissolving the then Parliament, and
calling a new one to meet on the 22d. of November following.

At this time came an Envoy from the great Duke of Tuscany to Congratulate His
Majestys happy accession to the Throne; On which my Author has a pretty
drolling remark, taken out of Su^ton^us, who says, the I^^^en^es coming too
late to condole with the Emperor Tibertus, for the lose of his Son Diusus, who
Answered them, and I also condole with you, the Death of Your great Countryman
Hector.

The Kings Speech to the Par^^ament
At the meeting of the Parliament, The King made an excellent Speech, wherein he
highly extolled the valor of the English, in the great Actions of the last
Campaign; And withal laid before them, the necessity of considerable Supplys
for carrying on the War, and for other indispensable needful uses, cautioned
them against Hea^s and Divisions, and exhorted them to that quick dispatch of
business, as the importance of Affairs required. And a little after, he ordered
Admiral Roo^ to go into the Straits, in room of Admiral Russel, An. 1696
now come home with our great Ships.

Death of the B^sh^p of Mentz.
This year, on the 30 of March, dyed Auselm Francis Frencrick de Angetherm
Bishop of Mentz: And was succeeded in the Bishopric and Electorat, by Lethaer
Francis de Schonborn, his Coadjator, and ^ishop of Bemberg.

CHAP. XXI. Anno 1696.
SECT. 1,
England
This year began with a great deal of Murmuring and Complaint, about reforming
the Coin, A^d^^^b^e Pi^t discovered.
but that Affair was so prudently managed by the Parliament, as the querulous
humor lasted not so long, as the Mal contents desired and endeavored; For the
happy and seasonable discovery of their double hellish ^lot of assasinating the
King, and the Invasion of England from France gave all thinking Men, somewhat
of greater importance to employ their thoughts on, than the inconveniency
attending the rectifying of the Coin.

This wicked project had its first contrivance in the latter end of the year
1694. b^t, by several turns of a favorable Providence to us, was Embarrassed,
till this time. My Author having fully traced this Affair; with all its
circumstances, from first and last, I shall only give you a summary account of
what I think most material.

The preparations for the Invasion were carried on in France with that
expedition, as when the late King came to Catais on the 18 of February, he
found all in a readiness, and immediately ordered the Troops, the Artillery, and
Stores, to be put on board with all possible speed. The French Invasion
fidstrat^^
Which the King having notice of, ordered Admiral Russel to rendevouse the
Fleet in the Downs with all haste, in which their was so quick dispatch and
celerity used, as in 4. or 5 days, the Admiral had a fleet of near Sixty Men
of War in a Line of battle with which he stood over presently for the Coast of
Catais and Dunkirk, which laid an absolute Embergo on the French Fleet. Where I
leave them; and return to the Assasins who consulting and proposing several
ways and means, for accomplishing their Bloody and Villanons design, at last
concluded on attacking the King at a Bridge, between ^rent^ord and
Turnham-green, by which place His Majesty used often to return from Hunting.
And had so fully con^erted and settled the matter, in all points, as they fixed
on a day for putting this Hellish Enterprise in Execution, which was to be on
the 15 of February, But that Providence which has so miraculously and so often
preserved His Royal Person, prevented His going Abroad that day, as he had
designed. This unexpected Crossbite did so daunt 2 or 3 of the Villains, as
they broke off and abandoned the design, but the Devil was so predominant in
the rest of the Desperadoes, as they persisted still, and on a new meeting and
consultation, appointed the 22d, of February, for prepetrating the horrid Fact,
at the place formentioned.

The Plot discovered
But several days before this, heaven had blown up their Plot, for on the 14 of
February, one Mr. Pendergass, who was invited into the Assasination, but
consented not, came to the Earl of Portland (tho an absolute stranger to him)
and briefly said, My Lord, I pray persuade the King to stay at home to Morrow,
for if he go Abroad, he will be Murdered; One Mr. De la Rue, made the same
Discovery, a little after, And that Night Pendergrass and he being introduced
to the King gave a full relation of the whole Conspiracy, yet all this while
made no mention of the Conspirators Names, but the King pressing this home to
them, his obligeing carriage and Expressions, and the weighty reasons he gave
for the necessity of that Discovery, prevailed so with them, as they gave him a
List of all their Names, whereon he presently issues a Proclamation, for their
apprehension, promising 1000 pound for every one of the Offenders, that should
be taken and brought to Justice.

The King made a pertinent Speech to the Parliament, on this occasion; On which
after congratulating His Majesty's safety, on the 25 of February, they enter
into an Association to defend His Person and to Revenge his Death, and farther,
they made an Act, that all persons who bare any Office of Profit and Trust
should (besides Swearing the Oath of Fidelity) sign this Association, otherways
to be rendered incapable of their Employments. And in the mean time several of
the Assasin's being apprehended, Three of the Conspirators Executed
Robert Charnock (the most wicked and inveterat of them all) Edward King, and
Thomas Keys, were Brought to Trial on the 11 of March, And upon full evidence,
being all found guilty of High Treason, were sentenced, and upon the 18 of the
said Month, were Executed at Tiburn.

Five Conspirators tried and Executed
The next Five that followed the former three, were Sir John Friend, Sir William
Perkins, Cranborne, Rookwood, and Lowick, all convicted, sentenced, and
Executed.

The glad Tidings of the Kings safety going to Holland. The Confederate
Generals resolved to solemnize the same, with an extraordinary Bonfire, which
they did by setting fire to the French Magazine at Gevet, which gave them to
more Joy, than it did of Grief to the French.

Thoulon: Fleet arrives as Bresls
About the time that Admiral Russel lay before Calats and Dunkirk, the Thoulon
Fleet, came from the Straits, and got all sa^e to in Bresi, and other French
Ports.

Our Fleet had no great success in the attempt of Bombarding of Calais, though
yet there was burn^ and destroyed no less than Seventy five Houses, Calais
Bombarded
besides the Church and Convent.

But in the Isle of Rhee, where the Lord Berkley Landed the 14 of July, Some
French Towns Bombarded by the Lord Berkley
the French sustained far greater Damage, where the Town of St. Martins was
almost utterly destroyed; And after this, the Lord Berkley landing in the Isle
of Groa, and two other Islands near Bed^sl^, the Soldiers destroyed about 20
Villages; burnt a Thousand three hundred Houses, and brought away a Thosand six
hundred head of Cattle. The Fleet took Twenty Barks, and retook one of our West
India Ships, and a small Frigate, which the Privateers of St. Malo's had taken;
and so ended our Summer Expedition, with considerable Damages to the French.

SECT. 2.
Catalonia. Sovoy
The Duke de Vandosm having passed the Te^, and understanding that the Spanish
Cavalry were advanced from their Lines, to observe him, A Conflict in Catalonia
attacked them, The Spaniards stood stoutly to it at first, but finding great
numbers of the French infantry coming up to second their Horse, they retired in
good order to their Trenches, the French pursued them to their Camp, but being
ill treated by the Spanish Artillery they retired with considerable loss. The
Spaniards lost Three hundred and they alleged that the French lost more.

The French on the Rhine being stronger at first then the Prince of Baden, Rhine
offered him Batle, Prince of Baden Can^n^ds the French Camp at Newstadt
which he durst not accept; but being joined by the Hessian Troops, a while
after, he passed the Rhine and advanced to Newstadt, where the French lay
strongly Encamped, whom the Prince could not draw out to Battle, but he had the
Honor of Cannonading them for several days, not only in Newstadt, but in
their very Trenches,

So after he had got some Booty, and diverse Hostages for Contribution, he
repassed the River on the 8th. of October, and then marched in to Winter
Quarters,

The Duke Savoy having secretly Concerted all matters betwixt him and the
French King yet used all possible Artifices to conceas it a long time. Savoy.
Marshall Catinat had inded a strong Army in Piedmont, Duke of Savoy agrees
with the French King.
much Superior to the Confederats, and might certainly have distressed and
damnified the Duke of Snvoy very much, but having secr^et Instructions from his
Master, carried much more favorably toward the Duke than he used formerly to
do, in so far as the Grand-Prior of France taking notice of his remisnes,
Accused him to the French King by his Letter, which the King receiving, smiled
all the while he was reading it, and wrote to the Grand-Prior not to take notice
of Catinats Actions, for what he was doing was by orders from him. However, on
the 12. of July a Truce is concluded on for a Month* and before that ended,
followed the final conclusion of a Peace on Terms advantageous enough to Savoy
(had he not forfited his Honor otherwise by abandoning his Allies so
unworthily, and contrary to his solemn engagements) For the French made
restitution to him of all the new Conquests they had made, Terms of agreement
as also of Pigner^l; gave him 4 Millions of Livers toward the reparation of
his damages he had sustained during the War; engaged to assist him (when he had
occasion] with eight thousand Foot. and four thousand Horse, and that at the
French Kings charge and as a further tie, Excuses himself to the King of Spain
etc, But not to the King of great Britain.
his Daughter to be Married to the Duke of Burgundy, without a portion.

The Duke of Savoy, by his Letters, excuses himself to the Emperor, to the
King of Spain and to the Electors of Bavaria and Brandenburg, but not a line to
the King of Great- Britain which the King resented as much, as he did his
unjustifiable actions in the main.

And in September following the Dukes Envoy Marquis de G^ven makes a large
Harange to the late King, wherein he highly Complements him, and professes a
great deal of kindness: But withal makes a foul discovery of his own unsolid and
wavering Humor. And withal, on the 15. of September, he puts himself on the
Head of the French and his hwn Troops (being now joined) to drive his Friends
and Allies out of Italy, if they did not accept of a Neutrality: A strange
metamorphosis to see the same Man, in one Campaign Head 2 adverse Armies, and
take upon him to command both, the like where of can hardly be paralleld in any
History; However the Envoy's of all the partys concerned, Neutrality in Italy
signed.
meeting and taking this knottie and intricat Affair into consideration; after
long Debate, the Neutrality is agreed to, and Signed the 7 of October.

Presently after this, there followed a mighty discourse of a general Piece
between the French King and the rest of the Confederats, being much occasioned
by Monsieur Dickvelts traversing so often between the Hague and the Camp. But
of this more hereafter.

Hungary.
came early this year to Belgrade, on the Head of a powerful Army: And the
Elector of Saxony joined the Imperial Army in the beginning of June, whom he
sound to be little inferior to the Turkish Army, and to the end he might draw
them to a Battle, he made a feint of Beseiging Tames-ware, this took effect as
he wished, for being certainly informed that the Sultan with his whole Army was
approaching him, he leaves Tames-ware and marches to meat him. On the 21. of
August very early, they found the Turkish Cavalry to appear in great numbers on
which the Elector and General Caprara, caused the Army to march in order of
Battle. The Turks attacked them with great fury but they were repulsed and
beaten back to their infantry, A feirce Battle near Tames-ware.
and night coming on, they stood all to their Arms till next morning, that day
and the 2, following days, there was no engagment, only the Cannonading one
another Camps: but on the 25. the Ottoman Army forsook their Trenches, and
came fairly out and offered Battle; which presently began very hot on both
sides. The Body of the Imperial Army advancing in 2 Columns, the Turks detaches
against them twelve thousand Scuderbeeg^^'s on Horsback, being a sort of people
who usually run upon the hottest of the fire, and Fight like madmen, in hopes
of great rewards which the Sultan is wont to give them after the Battle it
over; these Men after they had forced the Calthropt of the Imperialists, broak
into the first line, 2. Batalions bein constrained to give way to their fury;
but they were soon repulsed by the Imperial Horse, and so the line was closed
again.

The Fight was very feirce, and pushed on with various success on both sides,
sometimes the one, and by and by the other party having the advantage, and
continued so till the evening, at which time, Caprara's and some other fresh
Re^gments making a furious onset, the Turks were driven back to their Trenches,
and behind their Barricadoes. The Turks retire.
But night coming on, the Elector thought not fit to attack them in their
Trenches, but kept his Army on the Field of Battle in their Arms all night,
and early next day offered the Grand-Signior Battle again, which he declined.
And so ended this Battle, which was fought with more resolution and bravery
than any in this age, and seemed to be like a drawn Battle, A drawn Battle.
the loss on both sides differing little, for the Imperialists computs the
Enemies loss, to be four thousand and their own three thousand, so granting
some small deduction, for partiality, the difference will not be great. General
Heidersheim killed in this Battle,
The only person of note lost by the Imperialists, was the brave General
Heidersheim.

In Croatia, Count Barthiant, Governor there, took the strong ^astle of
Vranogratz and the Fort of Tinderaw, which proved good Barriers against the
Incursions of the Turks, which often formerly they had made that way.

SECT. 4.
Venetiens, Venice
there is not much to relate this year, of any great remark. Only, the Basha
Laberach^ (borne in the old famous Leuctra, and said to be descended of the
ancient Kings of Sparta) abandond'd the Turks and came over to the Venetian
interest. Delfino active in Dalmatia: he takes Duleigno.
In Dalmatia, General Delfino laid Seige in August to Duleigno, routed five
thousand Turks who came to relieve it, and at last took the Town, but the
Castle (being very strong) held out still, and the Bash^ of Scutart attempting
the releif of it, was ^puls^d with a great slaughter, y^^ for all this the
Castle stood out so resolutely, as Delfino was forced to leave it and the Town
also, and ravaging all the Country about, marched safe of^

General Molino beats the Turks at Sea.
And general Molino engaged Mezzomorto the Turkish Admiral, and his Fleet near
Castello-rofl^ fought him a whole day and at last forced him to bear away, with
all the Sail he could make, to the port of Seto, having severals of his Ships
sore shattred, and six hundred of his Men killed.

King of Poland dies.
2. On June 17 died John Sobiesks King o^ Poland, being above 70. years old.

3. We have heard little of the Moscovites actions hitherto; But this Campaign,
the Czar Peter Al^xowitz, marched in person, on the Head of a vas^ Army, and
lays Seige to Asoph, a place of great strength and Importance, on the mouth of
the Rive^ Tanats and [having defeated at Sea some Turkis^ Vesells coming to
supply the Town with provisions he carried on the Seige so vigorously, An.
1321.
that the Gari^on [almost starved] were forced to surrender on Articles, the 28
of July. Asoph taken by the Czar of Mosco^^a.
And next day they march^d out being three thousand Turks, besides Tartars. ^n
the Town they found 90 piece of Cannon a great deal of Ammunition, but very
little other provisions, which hastened the surrendry of the place.

On the Kings return to Englan^ [which this year, was somewhat sooner then
ordinar] He gave the Parliament an account of the Negotiation set on foot
toward a General Peace, telling them withal that the proper and safe way to
Treat, was with Sword in hand, which he desired them seriously to consider, and
make preparations accordingly.

Death of the Queen Mother of Spain.
This year on the 7 of May dyed Mary Anne of Austria, Queen Mother of Spain.

CHAP. XXII. Anno 1697.
SECT. 1.
Preliminaries of the Peace Signed.
in order to the Peace, which were agreed on in Holland, and Signed, the 10 of
February, The particulars whereof I omit, being only matters of formality.

Reswick is agreed on by all parties, to be the place of Treaty, and on the 9.
of May the Conferences began, in which there was but a slow progress made for a
while.

The French having made a Peace with Savoy last year, made their Forces more
numerous and powerful this year, both in Flanders, and Catalon^a, Aeth taken by
the French.
so as they Beseiged* and in a short time reduced, Aeth in the former, and
Beseiged Barcelona in the latter; which they did, not with a design to retard,
but rather to quicken the Spaniards pace, toward a Peace, so that the
Conferences between their Plenipotentiaries and the Allies, went on under the
Mediation of the young King of Sweden [whose Father Charle^ the 11 dyed on the
^7 of April] by the intervention of the Baron de Lilliearot his Ambassador, An.
1697.
who went between the one and the other for the said purpose. King of Sweden,
Mediator in the Peace.
That which Embarrassed the proceedings of the Plenipotentiaries for a while,
was the expectation of news all of them had from diverse parts, which might
favor their respective Interests, and by which they might take their proper
measures, but more especially from Poland, the French being very confident that
the Prince of Conti would carry that Crown; while the Confederats had all their
eyes turned upon Prince James

But in the mean time in comes a third person (whom no body dreamt of] and ran
away with the bone; Elector of Saxony chosen King of Poland.
The Elector of Saxony, who [having with great Celerity and Secrery, Concerted
that project with his Imperial Majesty, and having privately reconcealed himself
to the Church of Rome) all of a sudden Musters up his Troops, and Marches
toward Silesia, and the Frontiers of Poland. And the next news they hear at
Reswick, was his being chosen King of Poland, on the 26 of June, by a great
majority of Voices, above the Prince of Conti who was also Proclaimed King by
the other party, tho the Expedition he made into that Country proved little to
his, or the French Kings satisfaction, Saxony having gained his point, before
Conti's arrival.

Tho this news was a great Mortification to the French Plenipotentiaries, yet
they proceed on the Treaty. The French Plenipotentiaries having several separat
Conferences with the Ambassadors of the States General, gave Umbrage to the
rest of the Allies Ambassadors, that the States were about making up a separat
Peace, as once formerly they had done; which the States Ambassadors hearing of
declared aloud, and with some sort of indignation, that that report was unjust
and false, and that they might make there sincerity more apparent, they oppenly
dissuaded the Ministers of the Allies from consenting to a Truce with the
Freech, which had been lately proposed by the French Ministers; This giving
satisfaction to rest of the Ambassadors they go on in the Negotiation of the
Peace.

Altercations about the Basis of the Treaty etc.
But there arose amongst them so many Disputes and Altercations about the Basis
of the present Treaty, and also so many intricat and thwarting overtures and
propositions on all sides, as took up a great deal of time before they could
be composed or brought into any settlement; all which were too tedious now to
relate.

On the 20 of July. The French gave in their project of Peace; The Spanish
Ambassadors s^eming most to be satisfied with the Concessions of the French,
the Emperors least, and the rest of, the Allies, not altogether disliking
them. On the 16 of August their was held an extraordinary Congress, which
lasted almost the whole day; And not long after came the News of the taking of
Barcelona by the French after one of the most vigorous Seiges, that had
happened almost in any former Age.

This made the Spaniards very uneasy, and very pressing to have the Peace
signed, upon the Conditions offered by France: To which the French seemed
rather to comply, because of a Report generally spread Abroad, that Sweden and
Denmark threatened to denounce War against France, unless they went more
seriously on with the business, and cut short all unnecessary difficulties.
This, and the conferences h^ld between the Earl of Portland and the Mareshal de
Boussiers (wherein were concerted all the pretensions of the King of England)
so ripened and forwarded all matters, as on the 20 of September, the English,
Spanish, and Dutch Pleniprotentiaries potentiaries (after a long conference
with those of France, The Peace signed
and having adjusted all matters in difference betwixt them) mutually signed
the Peace, a little after Midnight.

Emperors Ambassadors Complain
The Emperors and Empires Plenipotentiaries were in the Hall, almost all the
time, but were so far from consenting to what was done, as they required the
Mediator to enter a protestation, that this was a second time, that a separte
Peace had been concluded with France [meaning that of Nimeguea for the first
wherein the Emperor, and Empire had been excluded, and somewhat more to this
purpose; To which Don Bernardo de quires made so pertinent a Reply, as (tho it
did not satisfy) silenced them at that time.

The Articles of agreement between the 3 forementioned Confederates, and the
French King [especially, the advantageous and Honorable Terins King William
made for himself and his Dominions] are so extant every where, and so
universally known, as I do not think it necessary to swell this Compend by
inserting them.

Cessation of Arms on both sides
Though the Imperialists seemed a little disatisfied with these proceedings, yet
they thought it the most advisible way to agree to a Cessation of Arms which
was done two days after the Signing of this Treaty; But before advice of this
reached Prince Baden on the Rhine, he had taken the Castle of Eremburg, and was
going to lay Seige to Kirn also.

But herein the Emperor was unfortunate, for had the News of the Battle of
Zenta come a little sooner, in all probability those Powers who lately Signed
the Treaty, had not been so foreward, till they had made the French King more
compliant with the Emperors demands.

However passing that, We come to give some account of that Memorable Battle,
the like whereof has not been fought in the whole course of this long and
Bloody War.

SECT. 2.
Pola^^, a Rebellion broke forth in upper Hu^gary, which occasioned Prince
Eugenius of Savo^, to draw the Imperial Troops thitherward And though the head
of this Hydra was quickly cut off, yet the Grand Signior in person coming into
the Field on the Head of a formidable Army, threatened to give life to this
Monster again; Prince Eugen lying with the Imperial Army a B^le (...), had
intelligence on the 12 of September, that the Turks had a design on S^gedin,
and had de^a^c^^t out several Troops to ravage and burn all the Country about
it. And presently after, one Captain Toben brought him word, that the Turks
were at Zenta, and had detached a body of Horse to burn all the Country.

The Prince sends two parties of sixty Horse a piece, as Scouts to make
discovery, and to b^ing him a certain account of what they could discover. In
the mean time the Army decamped, before day, and marched in twelve Columns six
of Horse, and six of Foot, with the Artillery in the mi^le, And continued their
March so all day. The Hustars who were sent to from, brought word, that they
met the Enemies Guards near Zent; a Basha being taken informed the Prince, That
the Grandsignior had fully resolved to beseige Segedin, but understanding that
the Imperial Army was Decamped from Peter Waradin and was following closs at
his Heels, he st^pt at Zenta; that he had laid a Bridge over the Th^ese, which
had been built at Belgrade, by the advice of a French Man, and brought along in
Wagons, intending to march in to Transylvania and Upper Hungary, that the
Grandsignior had passed the Bridge in Person, with some Thousands of Horse,
that the Infantry and Baggage, and a hundred peice^ of Cannon were on this side
the River, but he knew not if they would pass it or not.

This obliged the Prince to advance with the Cave^^y, and some Artillery within
an Hours march of Zenta, Battle of Zenta
and there stayed for the Foot, who being come up, he drew up his Army in
Battle array, and advanceing near Zenta, they perceived Two thousand of the
Enemies Horse, whereon the Prince took Three Regiments of Dragoons, and two out
of the 2d. Line, with some pieces of Cannon, and so advanced toward the Enemy,
with all the speed he could, ordering the rest of the Army to follow in Battle
array. On the left wing, he planted some Cannon, which played incessantly on
the Bridge, as these did also on the right wing; and the Army coming up, the
Battle began. The Enemy had before them, two Ent^^nchments, besides a Barricado
of wagons, and all so strong, as it was an Admiration how the Foot could force
them, which yet they did in half an hours time, during which, nothing could be
heard or seen, for Fire and Smoke on both sides The Horse advanced also to the
very moat of the Ent^^nchments, where they stood the Enemies Fire, and charged
in the same manner as the Foot, which perhaps was hardly ever seen before, they
alighted from their Horses, and passed the moat on the bodies of the sl^in M^n:
In the me^n time, the Germans on the left wing cut off the Turks way to the
Bridge, whereon followed a most horrible slaughter, A terri^le slaughter.
as well in the Trenches, as upon the Bridge, and a great many were drowned in
the River, endeavoring to escape the Sword, the Germans giving no quarter, no
not to Basha's, nor General Officers, though they off^red great ransoms for
their Lives, so eag^^ the Sould^ers were on Hood, from whence it came to pass
so few were taken ^^isoners.

The Night put an end to the Battle; The gallant Conduct of the Officers, and
the Courage of the Soldier, cannot be express, nor sufficiently praised; But
above all the great skill and dexterity of Prince Engenius is to be highly
extolled, who being far inferior to the Enemy in number, was so critically
watchful of his opportunity, falling upon them whilst divided, so as the one
part could not relieve the other.

The Grandsignior fled in great consternation to Temeswaer, being pursued
thither by a Body of Horse, within half a Mile of the Town. A great many were
killed in the next days pursuit, The computation of the slain being at last
made, besides the Grandvisier, the Aga of the J^nisaries, Twenty seven Basha's,
and many other Officers; there were said to be killed, above Twenty thousand
Men, Grandvisier Aga and 27 Ba^ha's killed
and Ten or Twelve thousand drowned in the Thy^sse Six thousand Wounded, and
but few taken ^risoners. In the Camp they got the Grandsigniors Tent, and all
the rest, 160 pieces of Cannon, 5^0 Drums, as many Colors, 47 pair of Ket^le
Drums, Account of Men s^ain
a Coach with six Horses, wherein were Ten Women of the Seraglio. All their
Baggage and Provisions, 6000 Wag^ns laden with Amuniti^n etc. 6000 Camels 6000
Horses, 12000 Oxen, And of the Spoil
with a great number of other Rich Spoils, The Grandsigniors T^nt being valued
at 40000 Florins: Next Morning, a Transilvanian Commissary brought to the
^rince, the Grandsigniors Seal, a curious piece of Workmanship, which confirmed
the Grandvisiors Death, he being bound to carry the Seal always about his Neck.
This Victory was the more Glorious and happy to the Imperialists, because they
got it with the loss of so few Men, as they did not so much as condescend upon
a definite number. The Battle was fought on the 13th. of September 1697.

The only unhappiness of the Imperialists was, that this Victory fell so late
in the year, as they had not a convenient opportunity of following the blow;
and all they could do, the short remainder of the Campaign, was to make an
incursion into Bosnia, from whence they returned with a considerable Booty. And
so we shall return to make a Conclusion of the Negotiations of the Peace.

SECT. 3.
Loo, where notwithstanding the Conclusion of the foresaid Treaties, an
Offensive and Defensive Alliance, was whispered to be entered into, or rather
renewed between the Allies. Here again the Emperors Ambassadors begin to
complain how they were injured by an immature Treaty. To which it was Answered,
that it was much their own fault, by delaying to put in their Complaints in
time, Emperors Ambassadors sign the Peace
whereto they had so often been advised, and withal, the thing being done, it
could not be done overagain. So, the Imperialists seeing it in vain to complain,
applied themselves to adjust the remaining points in controversy with France.
And after several altercations, and fruitles strugles of the Imperialists, at
last they accorded, and on the 30 of October (being but 2 days before the time
limited by France, to accept her offers) the Treaty was Signed.

The Protestant Princes m^ve for favor to the Protestants.
The particulars whereof, if the Reader know them not, or be curious to know, ^e
may find them as easily as these of the rest of the Confederats.

Toward the Conclusion of the Negotiation, the Protestant Princes showed their
Zeal, in moving earnestly (by the Mediator) that some favor should be shown,
and privileges and Immunities granted to the Protestants of Stras^urg and
other Cities of Allatia, Took no Effect
which belonged to the French King; how the matter was managed amongst them, is
not well known, but the motion was so little regarded, as it took not the
effect wished for.

SECT. 4.
French King has made) determines the advantages of the Peace, very great on
the Confederats side.

And so he returns to King William in Holland, who stayed there till the whole
work was perfected, and having (justly and Honorably) paid off all the
Foreign Troops, who are now on their March toward their Respective Homes,
after the fatigue of this tedious War, He returned to England, and upon the 16
of November (at the Citizens request) he made his public entry through London,
King William returns to England
being attended by all the Men of quality in very great state; And never in one
day, in all his Life, His solemn Reception in London
saw so many People, (and all his own Subjects) And in whose affections ^e
triumphed as much as ever he had done at any time, over his Enemies; And may he
always do the first, and never have occasion for the second; but may we long
live under the benign influence of his happy Reign, who has rescued our
Religion and Liberties out of the Jaws of Hell and Destruction, has lo
intrepidly fought our Battles for us, And at lengh restored unto us the
Comforts and Blessing of a Firm and Honorable Peace.

Postscript.
HAving given a brief account of the Articles of agreement, betwixt the
Emperor and his Confederates on the one part, and the French King and King of
Sweden etc, on the other, Concluded at Nimeguen, in Anno 1676, I thought it fit
to subjoin the Heads of the Articles betwixt the King of Great Britain etc.
and the French King, Concluded on at Reysweck, in Anno 1697, for the Readers
greater satisfaction, which are as follows

Article I. AN universal, perpetual Peace is Concluded betwixt these two Mighty
Princes, their Hebs and Successors and all their Subjects, on both sides. II.
That all Acts of Hostility, by Sea and Land, between the said Princes and
their Subjects, shall cease, after the Signing of the Articles of Peace. III.
That an Act of Oblivion shall presently be made, of all damnages mutually
sustained by the Subjects on either part, dureing the late War; and no Act of
Hostility to be done or offered by either Party, on that account. IV. The Most
Christian King promises (upon the Faith and Word of a King) not to disturb the
King of Great Britain in the fice possession of all or any of His Kingdoms,
Dominions etc. nor aid or assist any of the said Kings Enemies, who shall
offer to disturb or n^olest Him, directly or indirectly: the King of great
Britain, being engaged to perform the same Freindship to the Most Christian
King. V. That there shall be a free Commerce and Trade between the Subjects on
all sides, without any stop or molestation, as their was formerly, in time of
Peace. VI. That the Administration of Justice shall be restored and set up,
through all the Kingdoms of both Kings, to which, the Subjects of either, may
have recourse for reparation, if any Damnage or In^thy shall be offered to
them. VII. The said Kings do mutually promise, to deliver up to each other,
all Countries, Islands, Forts and Colonies, wheresoever situated, which were
po^^est by either of them, before the Declaration of this present War. VIII.
Commissioners shall be appointed on both sides to adjust and determine the
Pretensiions which either of the said Kings has to the places situated in
Hud^ons-bay, The said Commissioners to meet in London within three Months,
and to determine the matter within six. XI. That all Letters of reprisal and
marque, shall be made null and void, and shall not be granted hereafter, by
either of the said Kings, against the Subjects of the other; unless it be
first made manifest, that right was required, and denied. X. Provision is made
for preventing any Disputes which may arise, concerning the restitution of
Ships, Merchandises etc. which either party may complain of taken and detained
from the other in remo^e places after the Peace is concluded, and before it be
notified there. XI. That if (by Imprude^ce^ any Subject of either of the Kings,
shall commit any Act, any where, contrary to the present ^reaty, that Act shall
not infringe or make vo^d the said Treaty, only the said person shall Answer
for his own Fact, and receive ^unishment for the same according to the custom
and Law of Nations. XII. If War happen to break out again, betwixt the two
^ings which God forbid the Goods of the Subjects on either side shall not be
con^^scated or stop^, but six Months shall be allowed for removing and
carrying off the same. XIII. The Most Christian King promises in reality, to
the King of Great Britain the ^rincipality of Orane^, and all other Lands and
Dominions belonging to the said King (conform to the separat Article of the
Treaty of Nimeguen, concluded between the Most Christian King and the States
General of the united ^rovinces, the 10th. of August 1678) together with all
the ^r^fits and Interest due to him, ever since he was dispossessed of the
same, in the time of the War, which was ended by the Trea^y of Nimeguen. XIV,
The Most Christian King ratisies all the Articles made between him and the late
Elector of ^r^nde^burgh, at St, Germans, in Lay, the 29th. of June 1679. XV.
He ratifies also the Treaty and Agreement, made between him, and his Highness
the Duke of Savoy, on the 9th, of August 1660. XVI. Both the said Kings allow
to be comprehended in this Treaty, all who shall be named by either Party, with
mutual consent, before the exchange of ratification or within six Months after
Especially, the Serene and Mighty Prince, Charles King of Sweden, sole Mediator
in the Grand Treaty. XVII. And Lastly, Both the foresaid Kings, appoint that
this agreement and Alliance made in due form, shall be delivered on both sides,
and mutually and duly exchanged at the Royal Palace of Reswick, in the P^ovince
of ^olland, within three Weeks. from the day of the ^ubscription, or sooner, if
it may be. In 'Testimony whereof, the former Articles were Signed by the
English and French Ambassadors, and by the extraordinary Ambassador, Mediator."
INDEX
ABdicat, debated in Parliament 77 Ackmet, Sultan dies 146 Addressis to King
Charles 25 And Rejected Ib. Act of Parliament in England against a Pop^sh King
and Qu^en 87 Act of Recognition in Scotland 79 Aeth taken by the French 157
Agria yielded to Count Carassa 65 A brim Battle 114 Alba Regalis, and Lippa
yielded to the Emperor 70 Alliance between the Emperor Pole, and Venice 36
Altercations about the Basis of the Treaty at Reswick 159 Argyle (Earl of)
convicted of high Treason 31 Makes his Escape 32 Lands in Scotland, is taken
and Beheaded in Edinburgh 45 He dyed piously Ib.
Argos Battle 147 Asoph taken by the Ozar of Moscovie 157 Athlone taken by
General Ginkle 113 Ausburg League 35 Auxiliaries Names for the Empe^our against
the Turks. 39
BAden (Prince of) takes Five Churches, Syclos, etc. 57 Burns ^sseck Ib. Beats
Count Teckley out of Transylvania 1^7 Comes to England 133 Ganonades the Fyench
Camp at Newstad^ 1^2
Barkan Batt^e 39 Bavaria El^ctress dies 127 Belgrade taken by Storm by the
Duke of Pavarid 71 Retaken by the Turks 107 Beseiged by the Duke of Croy 132
Berkley (Lord of) attaques Breast, and comes off with loss 134 Bombards Deip
etc. 136 And St. Malo's 142 And Calais and St. Martins 152
Beverning adjusts the Peace with France 4 Censured for it 12
Bishop of London Suspended 53 Bishops, Seven, refused to Read King James's
Declaration 69 They are Imprisoned, tried, and acqu^tted Ib.
Bill of Exclusion rejected by the House of Lords 27 Bonne taken by the Duke of
Lorrain and Brandenburgh 84 Boil ( Robert Esquire) dies 127 Boyn Battle, in
Ireland 92 Brandenburgh (Flector of) his Letter to the French King 16 And to
the States of Holland 18 His Death 77
Battle at Br^d, 71 Bouster takes Cochein 83 Brussels b^mb'd by Villeroy 142
Butschin taken by Dunewald 64 Buda beseidged by Lorrain 41 Seidge raised lb.
Bese^dged again by him, and taken by Storm 56

C.
CAlamburg Battle 38 Cambray, Citadel, yielded to the French 3 Cambrun Battle
116 Carricksergus taken by the Duke of Schomberg 81 Carignan Battle 103
Carmagnola yielded to the French 117 Retaken by P^^nce Fugine 118
Castlemain (Earl of, sent to Rome by Ring James 63 Castlenovo taken by General
Cornaro 66 Catalonia Insurection 102 Catalonia, a Conflict 152 Canissa yielded
to the Emperor 105 Casal yielded 145 Cessation of Arms between France and the
Confederates 6 Cessation between the Emperor and the Turks 60 Charles King
joins with the Dutch 7 His new Counselors after the Popish Plot 22 Makes
Alliance with the Dutch 25 His Death, and Character. 44
Charter of London made void 32 Charters of all Towns of England questioned 34
Charleroy yielded to the French 131 Ciclut and Cobluch taken by General
Delphino 138 Cochein taken by Bouslers 38 Col^^dge, Steven, Executed 31 Colo^n
Elector made Prince of ^^^^^ge 135 Commission High, by King James 35 Commons
House, voted the Crown vaccant 77 Com^^ prodigious 29 Couinsmark, defeats the
Turks, and takes new Novorino 59 Con^^ess at Nameguen 1 Cor^^th, Sparia, Athens
taken by Mo^osini 67 Coron Battle 51 Cornist Executed 47 Cor^^ taken 52 Cork
and Kinsale surrendered to King William 98 Cha^^emount in Ireland yielded to
the Duke of Schomberg 90 Congress at the Hague 111 Co^^ beseiged and relieved
117 Couriray, Dixmud, and Luxemburg, yielded to the French 40
D.
DAngerfeild Whip't and Killed 54 Dauphine of France Married to the Duke of
Bavaria's Sister 26 Dau^^ness dies 101 Delsino bea^s the Turks at Sea 109
Dix^^ude and Deinse yielded to the French 142 Doge of Venice dies 71 Douglas
(Livtenent General) marches with 10000 Men to Athlone 49 He ^^turns, and joins
the King, at Carrickmashure 95
Douglas (Sir Robert) killed at the Battle of Enghein 123 D' vaux Memorial to
the States 72 Dr^gheda yielded to King William 94 Du^dee (Lord of) defeats
Mackay at Killikraukle 79 He is killed in the Battle lb.
Duleigno taken by General Delsino 15^
E.
EArthquake in Jamaica, 127 Edinburgh Castle yielded by the Duke of Gordon. 79
Emperors letter to King James. 80 He agrees with Sweden. 45 His Ambassadors,
at Reswick complain, 160 Answered by the Spainish Ambassador, lb.
Emperor returns to Vienna, 39 Enghein Battle, 123 English Fleet worsted by
the French. 88 Esperies taken by General Leslie, 51 Esseck taken by General
Leslie, lb. Beseiged by the Turks, 107
Exceter Association, 74 Essex (Earl of) murdered, 33
F.
FUzharris Executed 30 Flanders and Italy allarmed by the French, 27 Flerus
Battle, 109 Forge, a Conflict, 83 French defeated there, lb. French Invasion
frustrated, 149 French Kings proj^ct of peace 5 Rejected by the Confederats,
lb. He offers Money to King Charles, 6 He writ^ to the Dutch. lb Breaks
Articles with the Emperor 26 Encroches on Flanders, and ravages it, 14 His
pretentions on Germany Flanders, etc. 35

G.
GAloway in Ireland, yielded to General Ginkle, 114 Genoa Bombardrd by the
French, 40 Godfrey (Sir Edmondbury) murdered 21 Gran Beseiged and yielded to
the Duke of Lorrain, 39 Gran Battle, 49 The Tu^ks defeated, lb.
G^ent taken by the French, ^ Granv^le (^^^ur) executed, 124 Grand V^sie^
beheaded, 6^ Grand Vizier, ^^^an^ 27 Basha's killed, at Zenta Battle, 163
H.
H^uover! Duke of) made the 9th Electorat 127 Hansch^^hets Battle, 41
Heidershean General, killed at the Battle of Temeswa^r. 156 Heidelberg taken by
the French. 131 Heusler General, ak^u by Count Teckeley, 105 Ho^slein ('Duke
of) d^feated, lb. Huy taken by the French, 128 Retaken by King William, 1^6

J.
JAmes King, Hi^ speech to the Council, 44 His Coronation, and His speech to
the Parliament, 45 His speech to the Parliament, 48 Displeased with their
Answer, and dissolves them. 49 His Letter to the Council of Scotland, in f^vour
of Pap^sts, 54 Alla^med from Holland, 73 Comes from ^ali^herry to London, 75 He
goes to Rochester, 76 Returns to London, lb. He leaves London again, and with
His Queen goes to France, lb.
King James goes to Ireland 80 Offers Battle to Schomberg at Dundalk, 87 He is
defeated at the Boyne, 93 He sle^s to Dublin, to Watersoord, and from thence to
France, 94 His Letter to the Irish, who came from Limerick Seige to France, 115
His proceedings in England, 62
Jessereys (Chie^^ Justice) His bloody work in the West of England, 64
Johnston, Min^^te^, wh^p^ 54 Joseph ( Arch Duke) Elected King of Hungary, and
Crowned 65
K.
KIng William, and Queen Mary procl^m^d ^o Scotland, 79 They take the
Coronation Oath, lb Declared King, and Queen, of England, 77
Kirk (Col^onel) bloody in the West of England, 47 Keyserwart Beseiged by the
Elector o^ Brandenburg, 8^
L.
LAnden Battle, 129 Lesl^e (Count) takes Esseck and Esper^es, 51 Liege (Prince
of) dies, 135 Lippa taken by the Turks, 146 Limerick Beseiged by King William,
95 The Seige raised 97 Taken by General Ginkle, 115
Livingston (Sir Thomas) routs Cannon and Buchan, 88 Lorrain, Duke of, agrees
with the French King 14 Made General of the Emperors Army 36 Takes Vicegrade,
and Weisen 40 Retreats to Vienna, lb, Dies at Wells April 18 1690. 101
Londondary beseiged, 80 Lords Justice of Ireland, 98 Lords Justice^ of
England. 140 Loyd (Colonel ^^oms 5000 Irish 12 Louvois French Secretary dies,
121 Lugos Battle, 1^7
M.
MAcharty ^^vetenant General routed and taken Prisoner 81 Mackay Livetenant
General, killed 123 Maestreicht beseiged by the Prince of Orange 2 Magdalen
College follows, suspen^ed by King James 53 Mal^^me^ Sul^an deposed, 66
Marsiglia Battle 132 Meniz Bishop dies. 149 Meniz taken by Lorrain, 83 Minden,
a confl^ct 17 A Congress of Princes there, 71
Moninou^h declared Bastard under King Charle's Hand, 23 He is banished, 24 He
returns, lb. He loses al his places, lb. He lands in. England, 46 He is taken,
and beheaded, lb.
Modon yields to Morosini, 59 Mohaiz Battle 64 Mo^ino General, beats the Turks
at Sea, 156 Molino beaten by the Turks ^6 Mong^iz yielded to the Emperor. 70
Mons yielded to the French, 112 Montmelian yielded to the French 118 The
Citadel yields, lb.
Mons Battle, 10 Mo^osini General of Venice, 127 He takes Sancta Maura etc. 43
He is Elected Doge. 71 He is made General again. 127 He dies. 138
Mount Casal Battle. 3 Mortality in Duke Schombergs Camp at Dundalk, 82
Muslapha made Sultan, 146
N.
NAmur taken by the French, 122 Retaken by King William, 142 Casal yielded 144
Napol^ de Romani yielded to General Morosini 60 Napoli di Malvasia yielded to
the Venetians. 108 Navarino, old, yielded to Morosini 59 Newheusel taken by the
Duke of Croy 50, Neutrali^y in Italy, signed 154 Nissa Battle 85 Taken by the
Emperor Ib. Retaken by the Turks 106
Nice yielded to the French, 111 Notingham Association, 74 Noailles Duke of
takes several Towns in Catalonia, 136
O.
ORange P. of, goes to England, 4 Marries and r^^urns to Holland, 5 His speech
to Sir William Temple. observable, 11 His offer of Aid to King James, in 1688,
rejected, 46 He lands at Torbay, 73 Publishes His Declaration, Ib. His Letter
to the Protestant Officers in King James's Army, 74 He comes to London. 76
Oaths of Allegiance, and Abjuration, 78 O'regan, Teague, His Comical
Equip^ge, 90 Ossory (Earl of) dies 28
P.
PArliament, long, dissolved and another called, 21 Parliament dissolved, and
another called, 23 Parliament prorogued 5 times in one year, 25 They refuse
Money to the King and forbid lending, 28 Dissolved and another called 29 They
sit at Oxford 30 And are dissolved, Ib.
Parliament dissolved, and another called, 87 Parliament dissolved, and another
called, 134 Peace between France and Holland, obstructed, 7 Agreed again, and
signed, 8 Ratified by the French King, 10
Peace between France, and Spain signed, 12 The Articles, 13 Signed by the King
of Spain, 14
Peace between the Emperor and France, and Spain, 15 Peace between France,
Sweden, and Brandenburg, 18 The Articles, Ib.
Peace between France, Sweden, and the King of Denmark, 20 The Articles, Ib.
Peace General between the French King and all the Confederates, in Septmber
1697. 16^ Palatine of the Rhine (Charles Lovis) dies 63 years old, 28
Philipbsburg yielded to the Emperor 2 Plot popish in England, 21 Doubted, and
ridiculed, 25
Plot, called mealtub, 30 Plot Presb^terian, 33 Plot against King William, 149
H^ppily discovered, 150
Polish King defeats the Tartars, 43 He marches into Moldavia, 61 He routs the
Tartars. 138 Marches again into Moldavia, 120 He dies, 156
^ope Alexander dies, 121 Pope Innocent 11th dies, 156 Potachin Battle 84
Presbiterian Ministers are restored 88 Prince George, and others go to the
Prince of Orange, 75 Process of the Plot against King William related, 150
Protestants persecuted in France, 53 Protestant Princes move for savor to
protestants, but not granted, 164 Preliminaties at Reysweck signed at the
Hague, 157
Q.
QUeen Mary of England dies, 139 Queen mother of Spain, dies 107
R.
ROses taken by the French 131 Rupert Prince dies, 33 Russel (Lord) Executed,
Ib Russel, Admiral, defeates the French Fleet 122 Russel coup's up Tourville,
in Thoulon 137
S.
SAlankamen Battle, 119 Savoy (Duke of) joins with the Confederates, 98 He
invades the Dauphinate* 125 He takes Amburn, Gap, and Guilestre, 126 F^lls si^k
and returns Ib. He takes Casal, 146 He agrees with the French King, 153 Ter^us
of agreement, Ib. He excuses himself to the King of Spain and others, but not
to the King of Great Britain Ib,
St Andrew Battle 41 Saxony Elector dies 28 Saxony, his son dies 121 Saxony,
his son dies 1^9 Saxony, General to the Emperor, 1^6 He is chosen King of
Poland 1^8
Salusses Batt^e 103 Sarsfeild (Livetenan^ General) takes the English Artillery
96 Schulis General, defeats Count Teckeley 42 Shastsberry committed, tried, and
acquired 21 Schomberg, Duke of, aryves in Ireland, August 14 1689, 81 He Is
killed at Boyn Battle 94
Schomberg, Livetenant General is son, killed at Mar^^glia Battle 132 Scinta
Battle 58 Scio taken by General Steinau 1^8 And retaken by the Turks 147
Sclavonia reduced to the Emperor 12^ Stafford (Lord) executed 28 Smirna Fleet
comes safe home 115 Sidney Colonel, executed 34 Smirna Fleet outward attacked
by the French 128 Sign taken by General Cornar^ 60 Schovel, Sir Clovesly, takes
a Frigate in Dublin bay 89 Solomon made Sultain 66 Spain (King of) claymes
Mastricht from the Dutch 19 Which they refuse Ib. He is married 102
Spainiards beat the French in Catalonia 145 Strasburg yielded to the French 32
Suza yee^d^d to the French 104 Sweden (King of) Mediator of the Treaty at
Reswick 158
T.
TAlbot, Collon^l sent to Ireland 47 Tangier quitted by King Charles 35 Tariars
routed by the Poles, near Caminieck 131 Temp^e Sir William, Commended 6 Temes
waer Ba^le 1^5 Thou'on Fleet ^omes safe to Breast 151 Tirconels actions in
Ireland 62 He fi^ls the Army with Irish papists 47 and 48 He dies at Limerick
114
Titul taken by he Turks 1^6 Torrington A^miral, beaten by the French 88
Triumphant volly at the taking of Namure 144 Transylvania reduced by the Duke
of Lorrain 65
W.
WAllis G. takes Segedin 5^ Warradin great, taken by General Heusler 1^6
Water^^o^^ and Duncanon Fort yielded to King William 95 Wheeler, Sir Frances,
Ship wrackt, and lost 134 Widin Battle 80 And taken Ib
William King lands in Ireland 87 He is wounded 91 He goes to England 97 His
speech to the Congress at the Hague 111 His speech to the Parliament in October
1963 133 His speech to the Parliament. In October 1965. 148 He returns to
England 165. His solmne reception in the City of London 165.
Waldeck prince beaten by the French at Cambrun 116. He dies 127
Wirtemberg, Duke of, routed and taken by the French: 125. Wolsley Colonel,
routs the Irish at Cavan 89.
V.
VAlenciennes taken by the Fr: 3. Valona taken by General Cornaro. 109 He dies
there Ib
Vau^em^nt, Prince of, his brave retreat 141 Veterani G^nerall routs the Turks
^ui^e at Scinta. 58. He is Kiled at Lugos Battle 147.
Vic^grade taken by the Turks 50. Vien^^a Seige 36. Villana ye^^ded to the
French 117. Villerny Duke, General of the French Army 140. He attempts to
relieve Namur. but sails of doing it 143. Orgell yielded to the French 116.

Y.
YOrk, Duke of, leaves England. 21. He return^s 24. He goes Commisioner to
Scotland, Ib makes the Test there 31.
Ypre taken by the French 5
Z.
ZEnta, a bloody battle 162 A terrible slaughter of Turks Ib

FINIS.

