A MANUAL of PRAYERS For the Use of the SCHOLARS of Winchester College.

HONI ^ SOIT QVI MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE
Manners makyth man.
W W


LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, 1675.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber
bookplate

A MANUAL OF PRAYERS For the Use of the Scholars of Winchester College.
An Exhortation to young Philotheus.
IF you have any regard, good Philotheus, to your own eternal happiness, it
ought to be your chiefest care to serve and glorify God. It Is for this end God
both made and redeemed you, and two excellent rules He has given you in Holy
Scripture, by the conscientious observation of which, you will be able, through
His grace, to dedicate your tender years to His glory.

The one teaches you what you are to do, Remember Eccles. 12. 1.
now thy Creator in the days of thy youtb.

The other teaches you what you are to avoid, Fly 2 Timothy 2. 22.
youthful lusts; that is, all those sins which are usually incident to young
persons.

You cannot imagine the unspeakable advantages a pious youth gains by the
practice of these two Rules; and how many ghostly dangers that Soul escapes,
which is seasoned betimes with the fear of God, before he is sullied with ill
Company, before he has contracted vicious habits, which will cost him infinite
pains to unlearn, before his affections are too far engaged in the World, to be
easily recalled, and before the Devil has got too strong a hold in him, to be
suddenly dispossessed.

O Philotheus, do but ask any one old Penitent, what fruit, what satisfaction
he has purchased to himself, by all those pleasures of sin, which slattered him
in his youth, and of which he is now ashamed. Will he not sadly tell you, he
has found them all, to be but vanity, and vexation of Spirit? How will he
befool himself, for the many good opportunities he has lost, and wish a
thousand times, that he were to live over his misspent days again? And how
bitterly will he with David, bewail the sins of his youth? Psalm. 25. 7


Learn then, good Phil. by the dear-bought experience of others, to accustom
your self, to bear Christ's yoke from your youth, and his yoke will sit easy on
your neck; for your duty will grow natural to you, by beginning betimes.

Do but consider, how welcome a young Convert is to God; it was to young Samuel
that God revealed himself, and that at such a time too, when the Word of 1 San.
3. 1.
God was precious, and very rare, to show how much God honored a young
Prophet; and you know that St. John, the youngest of all the Disciples, is the
only person of all the twelve; who was permitted to lean on our Saviors
bosom, at the last Supper, as dearest to Him in affection, and who is
emphatically called, the Disciple whom Jesus loved: and this is suitable to
that John 13. 23.
gracious promise, which God has made to encourage all young persons to serve
him; I love them that love me, ^rov. 8. 17.
and they that seek me early shall find me.

O Philotheus, let this Heavenly promise, excite in you a great zeal to s^ek
God, and to seek Him early; for if you do seek, you are sure to find Him; you
are sure, when you have found Him, He will love you, and you shall reap, all
the happy effects of Gods infinite Love, and of an early Piety.

An early Piety! then which, nothing will make you a greater comfort to all
your friends, or a greater blessing, to the very College where you are bred;
nothing will make you more universally esteemed, and beloved by all men, or
more successful in your Studies; and besides, that peace of Conscience, and the
pleasure of well-doing, you will at present feel; think if you can, how
unconceivable a joy it will be to you, when in your elder years, you can
reflect on your well spent time, and the innocence of your Youth; how great a
Consolation it will be to you, on your deathbed, how easy it will render your
accounts, at the great Day of Judgment, and how much a whole life spent in Gods
service, will increase your glory in Heaven.

God of his great mercy, Philotheus, make these and the like considerations,
effectual to create, holy Resolutions in you, and give you grace, to make good
use of these following Directions, which are designed to teach you, to fear the
Lord from your youth, and are 1 King. 18 12.
suited to your particular Age, and Condition, in hope they may the more affect
you. God grant they may.

Amen.
Directions in general.
AS soon as ever you awake in the morning, good Philo^heus, strive as much as
you can, to keep all worldly thoughts out of your mind, till you have
presented, the first fruits of the day to God, which will be an excellent
preparative, to make you spend the rest of it the better; and therefore be sure
to sing the Morning and Evening Hymn in your Chamber devoutly, remembering that
the Psalmist, upon happy experience (...). 92. 1.
assures you, that it is a good thing, to tell of the loving kindness of the
Lord early in the morning, and of his truth in the night season.

When you are ready, look on your Soul as still until you have said your
Prayers.

Remember that God under the Law ordained a Lamb to be offered up to Him every
Morning and Ex^. 29. 38*
Evening. A Lamb! which is a fit emblem of Youth, and Innocence; Think then
that you ar^ to resemble this Lamb, and be sure every day, to offer up your
self, a Morning and Evening Sacrifice to God.

If you are a Commoner, you may say your prayers in ^our own Chamber; but if
you are a Child or a Chorister, then to avoid the interruptions of the Common
Chambers, go into the Chapel, between first and second Pcal in the Morning, to
say your Morning Prayer, and say your Evening Prayer when you go Circum.

Now that every one, may have his duty proportioned to his capacity, the best
way is to distinguish, two degrees of young Christians in this College,
namely, those that are of an Age capable of receiving the Holy Sacrament, and
those that are not; and in one of the^e two degrees you are to rank your self.

Directions for the Youngest.
IF you are very young, good Philotheus, that Gods commands may not seem
grievous to you, at your first setting out, I shall advise you to no more, then
your Infant Devotion will bear; and that is, To take great care, to learn your
Catechism without Book, and to learn to understand it; for it is impossible you
can ever perform your duty, unless you first know what it is; it is impossible
you can ever go to Heaven, unless you learn the way thither: and that you may
beg Gods daily blessing, and his grace to assist you, learn these two short
Prayers by heart, and say them every day.

Morning Prayer.
GLory be to Thee, O Lord God, for all the blessings I daily receive from Thee,
and for Thy particular preservation, and refreshment of me, this night past.

O Lord have mercy upon me, and forgive, whatsoever Thou have seen amiss in me,
this night; and for the time to come, give me grace, to fly all youthful lusts,
and to remember Thee, my Creator, in the days of my youth.

Shower down Thy graces and blessings on me, and on all my Relations [on my
Father and Mother, on my Brethren and Sisters] on all my Friends, on all my
Governors in this place, and on all my Fellow-Scholars, and give Thy Angels
charge over us, to protect us all from sin and danger.

Lord bless me in my Learning this day, that I may every day grow more fit for
Thy service. O pardon my failings, and do more for me, then I can ask, or
think, for the merits of Jesus my Savior, in whose holy words I sum up all my
wants. Our Father which art in heaven, etc,

Evening Prayer.
GLory be to Thee, O Lord God, for all the blessings, I daily receive from
Thee, and for Thy particular preservation of me this day.

O Lord have mercy upon me, and forgive, whatsoever Thou have seen amiss in me,
this day past, and for the timk to come, give me grace, to fly all youthful
lusts, and to remember Thee my Creator, in the days of my youth.

Lord receive me, and all my Relations, and all that belong to this College,
into Thy gracious protection this night, and send me such seasonable rest, that
I may rise the next morning, more fit for thy service.

Lord hear my prayers, and pardon my failings, for the merits of my blessed
Savior, in whose holy words, I sum up all my wants. Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

This, good Pbil. is the lowest degree of duty, and it should be your daily
endeavor, to improve in your devotion, as well as in your learning, and the
more effectually to move you to so happy an improvement, I advise you on
Sundays and Holy Days, attentively to read over this following Meditation, and
to propose to your self, the Holy Child Jesus, for your example.

A Meditation on the Holy ^hild Jesus.
GLory be to Thee, O Lord Jesus, Glory be to Thee, who when Thou were twelve
years old, did go up to Jerusalem with Thy Parents, after the Luke 2 41.
custom of the Feast, to eat the Passover, and to worship Thy Heavenly Father.

O blessed Savior, give me grace like Thee, to make Religion my first, and
chiefest care, and devoutly to observe, all solemn times, and all holy Rites,
which relate to Thy worship.

Glory be to Thee, O Lord Jesus, Glory be to Thee, who when Thy Parents
returned home, did stay behind in Jerusalem, and after three days, wast found
of them in the Temple, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them,
and asking them questions.

O blessed Savior, who in Thy very Childhood, did triumph over all the vain
delights of youth; and would choose no place, but the Temple to reside in,
Mortify in me, all inordinate love of sensual pleasure, which may pervert me
from my duty; raise in me an awful reverence of Thy House, an early devotion in
my Prayers, and a delight in Thy Praises.

O blessed Jesu, who did choose before all others, the company of the
Doctors, and did both hcar them, and ask them Questions; give me grace to
abhor all lewd company, and all filthy communication, give me grace to love
wise, and sober, and profitable, and religious conversation, and to be
diligent, and inquisitive after learning, and whatsoever is good.

Glory be to Thee, O Lord Jesus, Glory be to Thee, who when Thy Father, and
Mother had sought Thee, sorrowing, did reply to them, How is it that ye
sought me, wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business?

O blessed Jesu, who from Thy infancy did make it Thy whole employment, to
do Thy Fathers will, kindle in me a forward zeal for Thy Glory, that I may
consecrate my youth to Thy service, and make it the great business of my life,
to know and fear, to love and obey, my Heavenly Father.

Glory be to Thee, O Lord Jesus, Glory be to Thee, who did at last return
home with Thy Parents, and were subject to them!

O blessed Jesu, give me grace to honor my Parents, and Governors, and
readily to obey all their lawful commands!

Glory be to Thee, O Lord Jesus, Glory be to Thee, who in those tender years,
were blessed with such Heavenly wisdom, that all that heard Thee, were
astonished at Thy understanding and answers, who did daily increase in this
Heavenly wisdom, and in favor with God and Man!

O Lord Jesu, bless me with all abilities of mind and body, that may make me
da^ly increase in my Learning; but above all, bless me with Wisdom from above,
and give me Thy Holy Spirit to assist, and enlighten me, that as I grow in Age,
I may daily grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of Thee, and in favor with God
and Man; and every day more and more conformable to Thy Unsinning and Divine
example.

Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen.
Directions for those that are more grown in years.
WHen you have attained to more knowledge, and proficiencie in grace, and are
of an Age capable of receiving the Holy Sacrament, God then expects more from
you; and it is high time for you, good Philotheus, to lengthen your prayers, and
to begin to add some ejaculations over and above, such as these are which
follow.

Ejaculations at waking or rising.
AWake, O my Soul, and Sing praises to God.

Glory be to Thee, O God, for watching over me this night.

Lord raise me up at the last day, to life everlasting.

Morning Prayer.
EArly in the morning will I cry unto Thee, Lord hear my Prayer.

Glory be to Thee, Lord God Almighty, Glory be to Thee, for renewing Thy
mercies to me every morning; Glory be to Thee, for refreshing me this night
with sleep, and for preserving me from the perils of darkness.

O do away, as the night, so my transgressions; scatter my sins as the Morning
Cloud!

Lord forgive, whatever Thou have seen amiss in me this night, [my -- Here if
you are conscious to your self of any sin committed in the night, confess it.]
O Father of Mercies, wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from
my sin.

And let Thy Holy Spirit so prevent, and accompany, and follow me this day,
that I may believe in Thee, and love Thee, and keep Thy Commandments, and
continue in Thy fear all the day long.

Lord make me chaste and temperate, humble and advisable, diligent in my
studies, obedient to my Superiors, and charitable to all men.

Lord deliver me, from sloth and idleness, from youthful lusts, and ill
company, from all dangers bodily and ghostly, and give me grace, to remember
Thee my Creator, in the days of my youth.

Bless and defend, and save the King, and all the Royal Family, and all Orders
of men amongst us, Ecclesiastical or Civil; Lord give them all grace, in their
several stations, to be instrumental to Thy glory and the public good.

Together with them, I commend to Thy Divine Providence [my Father and Mother,
my Brethren and Sisters,] all my Friends and Relations, all my Superiors in
this place, and all my Fellow-Scholars; O Lord vouchsafe us all, those graces
and blessings, which Thou know to be most suitable for us.

Unto Thee, O my God, do I dedicate this day, and my whole life; O do Thou so
bless and prosper me in my Studies, that I may every day grow more fit for Thy
service.

Hear me, O Lord, and pardon my failings, for the merits of Thy Son Jesus, in
whose holy words, I sum up all my wants. Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Directions for Reading Holy Scripture.
WHen you have said your Morning Prayer, good Phil. you may then go cheerfully
to your study, and rely upon the Divine Goodness for a blessing.

But first, if you have time, I advise you to read before second Peal, some
short Psalm, or piece of a Chapter, out of the Gospels, or Historical Books,
because they are the most easy to be understood; Remembering the example of
young Timothy, who was bred up 2 Timothy (...)
to know, the Scripture from a Child.

But if you want time on ordinary days, to read the Scripture, be sure to read
somewhat of it on Sundays, and Holy Days; and consider, that you have it daily
read to you in the Hall before Dinner and Supper, and at night when you are
just going to Bed, that you may close the day with holy thoughts; and if you
hearken diligently to it when it is read, you do in effect read it your self.

Now to make your reading, the more profitable to you, begin with one, or more,
of these Ejaculations.

Ejaculations before reading Holy Scripture.
WHerewithal, Lord, shall a young man cleanse Psalm. 119
his way? even by ruling himself after Thy Word.

Lord open my eyes, that I may see the wonderful things of Thy Law!

O heavenly Father! I humbly beg Thy Holy Spirit, so to help me at this time to
read, and understand, and remember, and practice Thy Word, that it may make me
wise to salvation!

When you are thus prepared, good Phil. then begin to read, and consider, that
it is Gods most holy Word you read; and that all the while you are reading, God
is speaking to you, and therefore read with attention, and humility, and
endeavor as much as you can, to suit your affections to the Subject you read.

For instance, If you read any of Gods commands, they should excite in you a
zeal to keep them.

If you read any of Gods threatenings against sinners, or his judgments on them,
they should excite in you a fear to provoke him.

When you read any of his gracious promises, they should encourage and quicken
your obedience.

When you read any of Gods mercies, they should excite you to thanksgiving.

When you read any great mystery, recorded in holy Writ, you are to prostrate
your Reason to Divine Revelation.

And to this purpose in the midst of your Reading, say,

Lord give me grace to obey this command; Or,
Lord deliver me from this sin, or this judgment; Or,
Lord I rely on this good promise; Or,
Glory be to Thee, O Lord, for this mercy; Or,
Lord I believe and adore this mystery.
Say any of these, according as best agrees with the subject you read; and when
you have read as much as conveniently you can, conclude with one of these
Ejaculations.

Ejaculations after Reading.
BLessed be Thou, O Lord, O teach me Thy Statutes! ^l. 119.


Lord make Thy Word a Lanthorn unto my feet, and a Light unto my paths!

Lord make Thy Word my delight, and my Counselor!

Directions for the Day time.
O Philotheus, you cannot enough thank God for the order of the place you live
in, where there is so much care taken to make you a good Christian as well as a
good Scholar, where you go so frequently to Prayers every day, in the Chapel,
and in the School; and sing Hymns and Psalms to God so frequently in your
Chamber, and in the Chapel, and in the Hall, so that you are in a manner
brought up, in a perpetuity of prayer.

Be sure Phil. that you are accountable to God for all these opportunities He
gives you of serving Him; and think how many blessings for your self, and for
the College you might obtain, if you prayed and praised God, rather out of a
devout affection, then merely to comply with the custom of the place.

Prayer, good Phil. is the very life of a Christian, and therefore we are so
frequently commanded to pray without ceasing: Not that we can be always on our
knees, but that we should accustom our selves to frequent thoughts of God, that
wherever we are He sees us; and when we think on God, we should have always
an ejaculation ready to offer up to Him, and by this means we may pray, not
only seven times a day with David, but all the day long. (...). 119.


In your reading holy Scripture, especially in the Psalms, you may easily
gather those short sentences which most affect you, for they are most proper
for this use; and when you have learned them without Book, say one of them now
and then, as they occur to your mind, or as occasion requires, or as your
devotion prompts you.

But be not troubled, if being otherwise lawfully employed, or if being
indisposed, you pass a whole day without saying any, for to omit them is no
sin; nor be you scrupulous in what posture you say them, for they being short
breathings of the soul to God, require not that solemnity, as Set Prayer does.

Now to give you some instances of ejaculatory Prayer, take these following.

At going out.
Lord bless my going out, and my coming in, from ^sal. 121.
this time forth for evermore.

After a sin committed.
Lord be merciful to me miserable sinner, and for the merits of my Savior, lay
not this sin to my charge.

After any blessing or Deliverance.
Glory be to Thee, O Lord, for this Blessing, or, for this Deliverance!

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within Psalm. 103
me, praise His Holy name.

At giving Alms.
O Lord, who did not despise the Widows mite, Mark 12. 42.
Accept of this little I now give, to relieve one of Thy poor members!

After having done any good.
Not unto me, O Lord, not unto me, but unto Thy Psalm. 115. 1.
Name be the praise.

In Temptation.
Lord succor me with Thy Grace, that I may overcome this Temptation.

Directions for the Evening.
COnsider, good Phil. how many that have gone to Bed well over night, have been
found dead the next morning; and therefore it highly concerns you to take care,
to make your peace with God, before you go to sleep.

I advise you therefore toward night, or when you go circum, to call your self
to an account how you have spent the day.

Examine your thoughts and discourses, and actions, and Recreations, and
Devotions, and see what has been amiss in any of them.

Consider what Idleness, or Unchastity, what lying or stubbornness you have
been guilty of; or whether you have had a quarrel with any of your fellows; and
if you have, be sure to be friends with him, before you say your prayers.

Again, Consider what particular blessing, or deliverance, God has vouchsafed
you the day past, that you may give thanks for it, and then say as follows.

Evening Prayer.
LEt my prayer, O Lord, be set forth in Thy sight Psalm. 14^.
as Incense, and the lifting up of my hands, be as an Evening Sacrifice!

Holy, holy, holy Lord God, I miserable sinner humbly acknowledge, that I have
offended Thee this day, in thought, word, and deed, [Particularly by -- Here
mention any sin you have been guilty of.] But I fly into the Arms of Thy
fatherly compassion, Lord, for Thy Mercies sake forgive me, cleanse me from my
wickedness, and strengthen my weakness, that I may overcome all the temptations
which daily surround me, and continue constant in my Obedience.

Accept of my Humblest Praise and Thanksgiving, O Lord, for all the goodness
Thou have this day showed me; for all the Helps of preventing, or restraining
grace, Thou have vouchsafed me, for whatever I have done this day, which is in
any measure acceptable to Thee, for whatever progress I have made in my Study,
for Thy Preservation of me, from all the miseries and dangers, which frail
Mortality, is every moment exposed to; [Particularly for -- Here name any
particular blessing, or deliverance, God has sent you.]

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, who saves thy life from destruction, and crowns
thee with Mercy, and Loving Kindness.

O Heavenly Father, to Thy Almighty Protection I recommend my self, and all my
Relations, and all that belong to this College; O Thou that never slumbrest
nor sleep, watch over us, to preserve us from sin, and danger.

Lord, let it be Thy good pleasure, to refresh me this night with such
seasonable rest, that I may rise the next morning more fit for Thy service; O
pardon my failings, and hear my prayers, for the sake of my blessed Savior, in
whose Holy words, I sum up all my wants. Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Ejaculations at going to Bed.
LOrd as I now go to my Bed, I must one day go to my Grave, O make me wise to
consider my latter End!

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for Psalm. 4^
it is Thou Lord only, make me dwell in safety.

Directions for Midnight.
IF you chance to wake in the Night, or cannot sleep, Beware, Phil. of Idle and
Unclean thoughts which will then be apt to crowd into your mind, and therefore
to arm your self against them, I advise you to learn the 130 and the 139 Psalms
by heart, or treasure up some Ejaculations in your mind, which will be
excellent matter, for your thoughts to feed on. For instance.

Ejaculaions for the Night.
THou Lord have granted, Thy loving kindness in Psalm. 41. 8.
the day time, and in the night season will I sing of Thee, and make my Prayer
to the God of my Life,

O Lord the Holy Angels are now before Thy Rev. 7. 15
Throne in Heaven, they never rest, day or night, from Thy Praises, and with
them do I now sing Hallelujah, Salvation, and Honor, and Glory, and Power be
unto our God, for ever and ever. Amen. Amen.

Lord I know Thou will one day call me, to give Mark 13 3^.
an account of my Stewardship, but when Thou will come I know not, whether at
Even, or at Midnight, or at Cock-crowing, or in the Morning.

O do Thou give me grace, to Watch, and to Pray always, that at Thy coming Thou
may say to me, Well done, good and faithful Servant, Enter into the Joy of
thy Master. Amen Blessed Lord, Amen.

But have a care Phil. you fix not your mind too much, neither strive to repeat
too many devout expressions, for fear of hindering your sleep, and of
indisposing your self, for the duties of the day following.

Directions for the Lords Day.
A Good Christian, Philotheus, that takes care to spend every day well, will
take more then ordinary care, to sanctify the Lords day, it being the proper
employment of that day, to attend Gods Worship, and to provide for our Souls,
and therefore it is fit you should add some Petitions to your Morning and
Evening Prayer, Relating to the solemn duties of the Day, such as these are
which follow.

Before Church time.
O My God, I humbly beseech Thee, to prepare my Soul to Worship Thee this day
acceptably, with Reverence, and Godly fear, Fill me with that faith which works
by love; Purify my heart from all vain, or worldly, or sinful thoughts, fix my
affections on things above, all the day long; and O Lord give me grace, to
receive Thy Word, which I shall hear this day, into an hon^st and good heart,
and to bring forth Lu^ 8. 15.
f^uit with Patience. Hear me O God, for the sake of Jesus my Savior. Amen,
Amen.

When you come into the Church, or Chapel, not only on the Lords day, but on
any other day, use this short preparatory Prayer, at your first kneeling down.

In the Church.
O Lord I humbly beg Thy Holy Spirit, to help my Infirmities at this time, and
to dispose my heart to devotion, that my Prayers, and Praises, may be
acceptable in Thy sight, through Jesus Christ my Savior.

Amen.
After Church time.
GLory be to Thee, O Lord God Almighty, Glory be to Thee, who have permitted
me, to appear, before Thee this day, and to tread Thy Courts!

Lord pardon all my failings in Thy Service, this day past, the wanderings, and
coldness, and indevotion of my Prayers. For the sake of my blessed Savior,
have mercy upon me.

Lord make me a doer of Thy Word, and not a Jam^s 1. 22.
hearer only, lest I deceive my own soul.

When you are called to Repetition at Night, remember Phil. to make some
amends, for your negligent Hearing at the Church, and treasure up in your
memory some little portion of those Instructions you have heard, to direct your
Practice.

Directions for receiving the Holy Eucharist.
THe Receiving of the blessed Sacrament, good Phil. is the most divine, and
solemn act, of all our Religion, and it ought to be the zealous endeavor of
every true Christian, by Gods assistance, to prepare his Soul, with the most
serious, and most devout dispositions he possibly can, to approach the Holy
Altar: you are therefore to consider, what you are to do before Receiving, what
in the time os Receiving, and what after Receiving.

Before Receiving.
The duties you are to perform before Receiving, are all comprehended, in that
one Rule which St. Paul gives us, Let a man examine Himself, and so let him eat
Cor. 11.
of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, which are in a manner Commented on by
the Church, in the Exhortation before the Sacrament, which I advise you to read
over in your Common Prayer Book.

To put this Rule in practice, it is your best way Phil. ^t some convenient
time, to withdraw your self, into your Chamber, or into the Chapel, and there
to begin to commune with your own heart, and to call your ^ins to remembrance;
but first pray heartily to God, for His grace to assist you.

^rayer before Examination.
Hear the voice of my humble Petition, O Lord, now I cry unto Thee, and lift up
my hands toward Thy Mercy Seat.

Behold Lord, I am now about to search into my own heart; but alas, alas! my
heart is d^ceitful, and desperately wicked, How can I know it? O ^r. 17. 9.
Thou therefore, that searchest the heart, and triest the reins, Discover to me
all the evil, and deceits of my own heart, that I may confess, and bewail, and
forsake them, and obtain mercy. Lord hear me, Lord help me, for the Merits of
Jesus my Savior.

Amen, Amen.
Rules to be observed in Examination.
Having prayed for Gods assistance, doubt not Phil. but he will vouchsafe it
you, and to guide you in your examination the better, observe these following
directions.

When you examine your self, either by the following Catalogue, or by that in
the Whole Duty of Man, or by any other. Pause a while on every particular; and
if you find your self not guilty, then say, Glory be to Thee, O Lord, for
preserving me from this sin! and so go on.

When your Conscience answers guilty, then it will be your best way, having
said, Lord have mercy upon me, and forgive me this sin, to write down that sin
in a Paper, that you may have it ready to confess to God, when your Examination
is done.

You are to consider Phil. that there are several degrees of young Penitents,
and some are more, some less sinful. For instance:

Some t^re are, who either through want of conscien^ous Parents, or through
often sti^ling good motions, or through Inconstancy, or Heedlessness, or
Unadvisableness, or Vicious Company, or Ill Nature, or Youthful Lusts, and the
like, have been from their Infancy very negligent of Learning, or at least of
practicing, their Duty.

Again, Some there are amongst these, whose sins are more heinous then
ordinary, in regard they are accompanied with several aggravations: For any sin
is Much aggravated, if it be committed Knowingly, or Deliberately, or
Frequently: More then that, if it be committed Obstinately, or presumptuously,
or on slight, or no temptations, or against Checks of Conscience, or against
Reproofs, or Admonitions, or Chastisements, or Vows to the contrary; but most
of all, If it be committed so long, and so often, till it becomes habitual,
till the sinner does take delight in it, or boast of it, or make a Mock at it,
or tempt others also to commit it. All these and the like Circumstances, do
very much heighten the guilt of any sin.

You may easily from hence guess, what progress you have made in wickedness,
and if you find your self in the number of any of these, by all means, good
Phil. Resolve to repent immediately, and to confess your sins with all their
aggravations; for be sure of this, that every other step you run farther from
Heaven, every other hour you continue longer in a sinful course, makes your
sins the more hard to be mastered, and your repentance the more difficult.

On the other side, some there are, though I fear but few, who having been
brought up in the Nurture and admonition of the Lord, have been by the goodness
of God, secured from violent temptations, and enormous Chron. 4. 3.
sins; who have like Josiah, while they were yet young, sought the Lord, and
have in a great measure kept their baptismal vow, and preserved a sense of
their duty.

Such as these, have fewer sins to confess, and those sins less aggravated, and
therefore have greater obligations, to Magnify Gods Mercy, then others; but if
you are in this number, have a care of growing careless in your examination, or
of presuming on your own Innocence: for if we say, or think, we have Joh. 1.
no sin, we miserably deceive our selves. O Phil. the best of men, God knows,
have very much evil in them to detest, and bewail, and have infinite need of a
Savior, and therefore let him that stands, take heed Cor. 10 ^2.
lest he fall. Whatever you do then, be sure to keep your heart with all
diligence, and to pray for constant supplies of Gods grace, for perhaps the
Devil defers his tempting you, till you are grown up, and become your own
Master, and have not that tenderness of offending, or that awe of Parents, or
Superiors, which you now have.

Be not over scrupulous, Phil. either to make your self guilty of more sins,
then really you are, or to reckon up all your infirmities or daily failings, or
sins of Omission, which would render your Examination endless, and impossible;
but examine your self chiefly, about your wilful sins, or sins of Commission;
and know there be many sins, even of Commission, that you may doubt whether you
have committed or no, many that you have quite forgot; but be not disheartened
at it, for Holy David has taught you, Psalm. 19. 12.
that a general Confession for such sins is enough, when he prays to God, to
cleanse him from his secret faults.

That you may gain a true sense of your sins, by your examination, Labor to
imprint in your mind, awsul apprehensions of the day of Judgment, and of God
the great Judge, in whose presence you now are, and to raise such
apprehensions, Dwell a while, on such Meditations as these.

Motives to Examination.
O My soul, Thou art now in the Presence of the great Judge of Heaven, and
Earth, before whose dreadful Tribunal, thou must certainly appear at the day of
Judgment, to give a strict account, of all thy Actions, of every idle word, of
every evil thought, and thy own Conscience will then be thy accuser!

Think, O my Soul, think if thou can, what un^maginable Horrors, will seize
an impenitent sin^er, when the last trump calls him out of his Grave, and the
Devils begin to drag him to Gods Judgment Seat! what would such a Wretch give,
to purchase one such opportunity of Repentance, as God now in great mercy gives
thee? If ever thou hopest to escape, those horrors, O my soul, Make thy peace
with God, Judge thy self here, lest thou be condemned hereafter!

The Examination it self.
I Adjure thee, O my soul, in the presence of the great Judge, who knows all
the secrets of thy heart, I adjure thee, as thou will answer, before Gods
Judgment Seat at the last day, to tell me:

Does not thy daily experience teach thee, that thy whole Nature is corrupt,
Prone to all that is evil, and averse to all that is good?

How have thou spent thy time from thy Childhood to this very moment?

How have thou kept the solemn Vow of thy Baptism?

What good duties have thou Omitted?

What sins have thou Committed?

In particular, What sins art thou guilty of, more immediately, Against God?

Art thou guilty of, Any Infidelity, or Atheism, Any distrust in, or
Presumption on, or despair of Gods Mercy?

Art thou guilty of, any Wilful Ignorance of God, or of any Idolatry in
Worshipping any Creature? Have thou loved any thing more then God, or feared any
one Above him?

Have thou been guilty of Hypocrisy in Gods service, or of forsaking God, and
of resorting to the Devil, to Witches, or Wizards?

Art thou guilty of repining or murmuring at Gods providence, or of being
impatient under his afflictions, or of being unthankful for His Mercies, or of
being disobedient to His Commands, or of being incorrigible under his Judgments?

When, and in what manner have thou been guilty of dishonouring God?

By blasphemous or irreligious thoughts, or discourses; or by tamely hearing
others blaspheme?

By taking Gods most Holy Name in vain, or by Customary, or false swearing, or
by the breach of any lawful Oath, or solemn Vows?

By any Sacrilege, or Irreverent behavior in Gods House, or mispending the
Lords day, or any neglect of, or Inattention to, Gods Word, read, or preached,
or unprofitableness, under the means of Grace?

Have I dishonored God, by Coldness, and Wanderings, and Indevotion, or
Carelessness in my Prayers, or by any Weariness in His Service, or by any total
neglect of it, or by Unworthy Communicating?

By Impenitence, or putting off the evil day, or superficial, and partial
repentances, or frequent Relapses, or Resisting the good Motions of Gods Spirit?

By abetting any Schism, or Heresy, or Profaneness!

O my soul, what sins art thou guilty of, more immediately, Against thy self?

Art thou guilty of Pride, either of thy Clothes, or of thy Estate, or of thy
Credit, or of thy Parts, or of thy own Holiness, or of boasting of thy own good
deeds, or of commending thy self, or of being greedy of Praise, or of
performing good duties to gain applause, or of committing sin to avoid reproach
of men?

Have thou been immoderately greedy of Riches, or of sensual pleasures, or
guilty of peevishness, or of too violent, or too lasting fits of anger, or of
Inconstancy, or of inconsideration, or of discontentedness, with thy condition?

Have thou been guilty of mispending thy time, or of negligence in resisting
temptations, or of not improving those opportunities of Learning, and Piety,
which God gives thee in this place, or of Abusing Thy Natural parts to Sin?

Have thou been guilty of any Intemperance in eating, or in drinking, or in
sleeping, or in recreations, spending too much time on them, or being too
greedy after them?

Have thou been guilty of Idleness, or of downright drunkenness, or of laughing
at it in others?

Have thou been guilty of any Uncleanness, of the Eye, or of the Hand, or of
the Fancy, of any lasciviousness, or Lust, or Fornication, or Adultery, or
have thou taken delight in lewd Company, or in vicious, or Unchaste, Songs, or
Stories, or expressions?

O my Soul, what sins art thou guilty of, more immediately, Against thy
Neighbor?

How, when, where, Against whom, have thou been guilty of, Any Injury, or
Injustice, or Oppression, or breach of Trust, or Promise, or of any Fraud, or
Theft, or Flattery, or Dissimulation, or Treachery, or Lying, or of giving any
just Scandal?

How, when, where, against whom, have thou been guilty of, Any Ill Language, or
detraction, or slander, or tale-bearing, or rash censuring, or backbiting, or
of Contemning, or Scoffing, at thy Neighbor, either for his Infirmities, or
for his being religious?

How, when, where, against whom, have thou been guilty of any Contentiousness,
or Spite, or Revenge, or of delighting Causlesly to grieve thy Neighbor, or
of Railing, or of actually Hurting him, Or of murdering him in thy mind, by Ill
wishes, or Curses, Have thou been guilty of bitter imprecations, or bearing
false witness, or Covetqusness of any thing He possesses?

Have thou been guilty of, Unthankfulness to those that have done thee good, or
have reproved thee, or of Uncharitableness to the Poor, or to any Christian in
distress, or of any Unnaturalness to any of thy Relations, or of any
Evil-speaking, or Dis-respect, or Stubbornness, against any of thy Governors,
either Civil, or Ecclesiastical, or in particular Against thy Parents, or
Superiors in this place, or of any Wilful Disobedience to the lawful Commands
of all, or either of them?

Have thou tempted any other to sin, by Connivence, or Encouragement, or
Command, or Persuasion, and Mightily increased thy own Guilt, by furthering the
damnation of thy Brother?

In case Phil. you do find this Examination, too difficult for you, or are
afraid you shall not rightly perform it, or meet with any scruples, or troubles
of Conscience, in the practice of it, I then advise you, as the Church does, to
go to one of your Superiors in this place, to be your Spiritual Guide, and be
not ashamed to Unburthen your Soul freely to Him, that besides His Ghostly
Counsel, you may receive the benefit of Absolution; For though Confession of
our Sins to God, is only Matter of duty, and absolutely Necessary, yet
Confession to our spiritual Guide also, is by many devout souls, found to be
very advantageous to true Repentance.

If upon your Examination Phil. you find you have any way wronged your
Neighbor, Resolve upon the first opportunity, to make him some suitable
satisfaction, and to ask his forgiveness; for you are first to be reconciled to
your Brother, before you come to the Man. 5. 23
Altar, to offer your Gift.

If you are guilty, of tempting any other to sin, Ask Gods pardon for him, as
well as for your self, and if you have any opportunity to do it, exhort him to
Repentance.

But if any has wronged you, forgive the Injury presently, for you beg
forgiveness of God, on this very condition, that you your self forgive your
Brother.

This Examination of your self, Phil. I suppose will be task enough for you at
one time, and therefore that you may not tire your self, you may conclude, with
this short Prayer.

A Prayer after Examination.
O Lord God, I have now by Thy Assistance, considered my own evil ways, O Thou
who only know the Heart, and who only can change it, Create in me such a
broken and contrite heart which thou have promised not to despise, and so deep
a sense of my own sin and misery, that my Repentance, may bear some Proportion
to my Guilt. O my God, Pardon all my failings, and perfect that good work, thou
have begun in me, for the merits of Jesus my Savior, In whose Holy words, I
sum up all my wants. Our Father etc.

At the very next opportunity of retiring you can get, Resolve, good Phil. with
the Prodigal, to return to your Heavenly Father, and humbly to beg forgiveness,
and having brought your Catalogue of Sins with you, Kneel down, and with the
lowest prostrations of soul and body, make your Confession to God, of your
Sins, and of their aggravations.

A Form of Confession.
O Thou great Judge of Heaven, and Earth, before whose Glorious Majesty, even
the Good Angels, who never sinned, fall Prostrate and tremble.

With what debasement, and dread, ought I to appear before Thy Awful presence,
who am but dust, and ashes, and which is infinitely worse, a miserable,
wretched Sinner!

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, Thou art of purer eyes then to behold
evil, with the least approbation, The way of the wicked, and the sacrifice
Prove. (...) 8.
of the wicked, is an abomination to Thee!

Woe is me then, O Lord, woe is me, for I have inclined unto wickedness with my
heart, but for, the sake of thy well-beloved Son, Cast not out my prayer, nor
Psalm. (...)
turn Thy Mercy from me.

Miserable wretch that I am, I have gone astray from the very womb, I was
shapen in wickedness, and in sin did my Mother conceive me! Who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean? What is man then, O God, that he should be
clean, or he that is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?

Thou Lord put no trust in Thy Saints, and the Heavens are not clean in Thy
sight, and the very Angels Thou chargest with folly! Job 4.


How much more abominable then, and filthy am I, who daily drink iniquity like
Water!

Lord pity, and cleanse, and forgive, and save me, for Thy Mercies sake.

I know, O God, that in my slesh dwells no good Romans 7.
thing, for when I would do good, evil is present with me, and I see a Law in
my Members, warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity,
to the law of sin.

Lord have mercy upon me, and deliver me from this body of death, from this
Tyranny of sin.

Alas, alas! My whole Nature is Corrupt, Infinitely prone to all evil, and
averse to all that is good, my Understanding is full of Ignorance and Error,
my Will is perverse, my Memory tenacious of all things that may pollute me, and
forgetful of my duty, my Passions are inordinate, my Senses the inlets of all
impurity, and I have abused all my faculties, I am Unclean, Unclean!

Lord Pity, and Cleanse, and forgive, and save me, for Thy Mercies fake.

O Lord God, How have I through my whole life, violated the solemn Vow, I made
to Thee, in my Baptism, by eagerly pursuing, the vanities of this wicked World,
by easily yielding, to the temptations of the Devil, by greedily indulging my
own Carnal desires, and lusts, by a fruitless and dead faith, and by
disobedience to thy Holy Will, and Commands.

Father I have sinned against Heaven, and in Thy sight, and am no more worthy
to be called Thy Son.

I have sinned, O Lord God, I have sinned Against Thee, by --

Here confess out of your Paper, the sins which you have committed, more
immediately against God, with those aggravations that accompany them. For
instance, Lord I have committed this sin, or these sins, frequently, against
Checks of Conscience, etc. and then add: Father I have sinned against Heaven,
and in Thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called Thy Son, O Pity, and
Cleanse, and forgive, and save me, for Thy Mercies sake.

I have sinned, O Lord, God, I have sinned, Against Thee, and against my own
self, by --

Here confess the sins you have committed more immediately against your self,
with their aggravations, etc. and say as before: Father I have sinned against
Heaven, etc.

I have sinned, O Lord, God, I have sinned, Against Thee, and against my
Neighbor by --

Here confess the sins you have committed more immediately against your
Neighbor, with their aggravations, etc. and add as before: Father I have
sinned against Heaven, etc.

O Lord God my wickedness is great, and my iniquities are infinite, they are
more in number then the Psalm. 40. 12.
hairs of my head, and my heart would fail me, but that I well know, Thy
mercies are more Numberless then my sins.

Have mercy upon me therefore, O Lord, according Psalm. 51.
to Thy great goodness, according to the multitude of Thy mercies, do away my
offenses.

Who alas, can tell how often he offends! O cleanse Thou me from my secret
faults, from all my sins of Ignorance, or Infirmity, or Omission, or which I
have not observed, or which I have forgot, Lord lay none of them to my charge,
Father forgive me, Lord Jesus have mercy on me.

O remember not the sins, and offenses of my youth, but receive me, O Heavenly
Father, into the arms, of Thy Fatherly Compassion, as Thou did the returning
Prodigal, and forgive me all my transgressions, for the merits of Jesus, Thy
only well-beloved Son, and my Savior. Amen, Amen.

When you have thus confessed your sins, good Phil. endeavor to be still more
sensible of them, and to bewail them, with a true Penitential Hatred, and
Shame, and Sorrow for them, then make steady resolutions of forsaking them, and
cry earnestly to God for pardon and grace, for you must as well put on the Ephesians.
4. 22
New man, as put off the Old; of all which acts of Repentance, I give you, the
following instances, and advise you to say them over, as devoutly, as possibly
you can.

Acts of Shame.
O Lord God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to Thee, for my
iniquities, are increased over (...) 6.
my head, and my trespasses, are grown up unto the Heavens!

O my Soul, what fruit have I reapt from all the pleasures of sin, which
flattered me, but vanity, and vexation of Spirit!

Lord I am ashamed of my own folly, and madness, and disingenuity, when I call
to mind, how greedily I have sucked in my own Pollution. How treacherously I
have betrayed my own Soul to temptations, and combined with the very Devils, to
hasten and increase my own damnation; How obstinately, I have fled from Thee,
when Thy Mercy pursued me with promises of Pardon; How unworthily I have abused
Thy Goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, which should have led me to
Repentance.

Surely, after I was turned, I repented; and since (...). 19
I have considered my ways, I am ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I bear
the Reproach of my youth.

Acts of Ab^orrence.
I hate all evil ways, O Lord, but Thy Law will I (...) 119
love!

O Lord God, nothing is more abominable in Thy sight, or more Diabolical;
Nothing more defaces Thy Divine Image, or makes me more odious in Thy Purest
Eyes, then Sin, and therefore I hate and abhor it!

O Lord God, I confess I have Nothing good in me, Nothing that can any way move
Thee, to compa^ionate so loathsome a Sinner, but Thy own free, and Undeserved,
and Infinite Mercy, and the merits of my Savior!

O Lord God, I cannot but admire the Riches of Thy Goodness, who have spared me
so long, and have given me this opportunity of Repentance, O do Thou yet
Magnify Thy mercy more, in my forgiveness; O Cleanse me from all that Filth my
soul has contracted, which now renders me odious to my own self, as well as to
Thee?

Acts of Contrition.
Miserable Wretch that I am, that I should begin so early to offend my
Creator, and sin so much, in so short a time!

Lord I fear, I never yet thoroughly considered, how evil, and how bitter a
thing it is to depart from Thee, O make me every day, more and more seusible of
the error of my ways, and of my own Infinite vileness!

Miserable wretch that I am, that ever I should commit those sins which expose
me to all the vials of Thy wrath; to all the Curses of Thy Law, to all Thy
Judgments temporal, or spiritual in this life, and to all the Horrors, and
despair; and torments of the Damned, in the life to come!

Miserable wretch that I am, that ever I should transgress that Law of Thine, O
God, which is so Just, and Holy, and good, and perfect, and so condescending to
my infirmiti^s; and in keeping of which there are so great, so Unconceivable
Rewards!

O that with Mary Magdalene, I could weep much and Luke. 7. 38.
love much, having so much to be forgiven!

O Gracious Lord, look on me, as Thou did on Peter, Luke 22. 61.
and let Thy Compassionote look so pierce my heart, that I may weep bitterly
for my sins.

O Lord God, Break this hard heart, for Thou only can do it, and melt it into
tears of Contrition! Miserable wretch that I am, that I should sin so much and
yet grieve so little!

Woe is me, Miserable wretch, woe is me, that ever (...) should offend so
Indulgent, so Liberal, so tender a Father!

Woe is me, that ever I should repay the infinite love, and the intolerable
Sufferings of my Savior for me, with Nothing but those sins, which occasioned
those very sufferings!

Woe is me, that ever I should grieve the Holy Spirit, by rejecting so many of
His good Motions, from whom only, I derive Grace and Consolation!

O Lord God, every slight worldly trouble, is apt to draw plenty of tears from
mine eyes, but when I should weep for my sins, which are the greatest
calamities that can possibly befall me, either my eyes are dry, or my tears too
few, to bewail so many Provocations!

O Blessed Spirit, instill true penitent sorrow into my soul, Make my Head
Waters, and my Eyes Fountains ^om. 8. ^6.
of tears, Or do Thou supply the want of them, with sighs and groans
Unutterable!

But alas, I know all the tears I can possibly shed, can never wash away the
least of my sins, It Is Thy blood only, Lord, that can do it!

O Blessed Savior, how can I ever sufficiently lament the guilt of my sins,
which was so great, that nothing but Thy own inestimable blood could expiate!

O Heavenly Father, in the defect of my own tears, I offer Thee the blood, of
Thy own well-beloved Son, for His sake, Have mercy upon me.

Amen, Amen.
Resolution.
O Lord God, with shame I confess, that Other Lords besides Thee, have hitherto
had dominion over me. ^sa. 26.


I have been in the Snare of the Devil, and have been led captive by Him, and
Sin has reigned in (...) Tim. 2. ^m. 6.
my Mortal body, and I have obeyed it in the lusts thereof, But henceforth I
resolve to serve none but Thee, and from this very moment, I utterly forsake
all my sins, and turn to Thee!

O my God, I do from my heart Renew, my Baptismal Vow, which alas, I have
hitherto so often violated, I do for ever Renounce, the Devil and all His
works, and all His temptations, I do for ever Renounce, all the vanities of
this wicked World, which may pervert me from Thy Service, and all the sinful
lusts of the flesh.

O my God, I do steadfastly believe, all the Articles of the Christian Faith,
and I will keep Thy Holy Will, and Commandments, and walk in the same, all the
days of my life.

All this am I bound to do and believe, and by Thy help, so I will, and I
heartily thank Thee, O Heavenly Father, who have called me to this state of
salvation, through Jesus Christ my Savior, and I humbly pray Thee for His
sake, to give me grace, that I may continue in the same to my lives end.

Oblation.
Blessed be Thy Name, O Lord God, who have set before me life and death, and
have bid me choose life!

Behold Lord, I do with all my heart choose life, I choose Thee, O my God, for
Thou art my life!

Save Lord, and Hear me, O King of Heayen, and accept my Sacrifice, even the
Sacrifice of my whole heart, which I now give Thee.

O my God, I offer Thee my Senses, and passions, and all my faculties, I offer
Thee all my desires, All my designs, all my studies, all my endeavors, all the
Remainder of my life, All that I have, or am, I offer up all entirely to Thy
service.

Lord sanctify me wholly, that my whole Spirit, Soul, and Body, may become Thy
Temple; O do Thou dwell in me, and be Thou my God, and I will 1 Co^
be Thy Servant.

Amen, Amen.
Acts of Charity.
O Lord God, I do from henceforth Resolve, to love my Neighbor as my self, and
to love him not in word only, but in deed and in truth! (...) 1.


I do from my heart forgive all men their trespasses, Do Thou Lord forgive them
also!

Lord bless them that Hate me, and do Good to them that have any way
despitefully used me, O Repay them, Good for Evil!

O my God bless all those that I have any way wronged, Have mercy on All those,
to whose sins I have been any way accessory, and give them all grace to forgive
me,

Amen, Amen.
Petition for Pardon.
O Thou Father of Mercies, and God of all Consolation, be merciful to me a
miserable sinner!

Lord Remember all Thy Gracious calls of sinners to ^k 18.
Repentance, All Thy Protestations that Thou delightest not in the death of him
that dies, and that Thou would have all to be saved! ^im. 2.


Lord Remember all the exceeding great, and precious promises, which Thou have
made to Penitent sinners!

Lord Remember, that Thy mercy is over all Thy works, that in mercy Thou
delightest, and that all the Holy Angels seeing Thee well pleased in the
exercise ^ke 15.
of that Mercy, Rejoice at the Conversion of a Sinner, that the greater my sins
are, the more will that Mercy be magnified in my forgiveness!

Lord Remember, that Thou did so love the world, as to give Thy only beloved
Son, a Ransom for it! ^n 3. ^n. 8.


O Heavenly Father, Thou that sparedst not Thy only Son, but deliveredst Him up
for us, will thou not with Him also freely give us All things? and if all
things, will Thou not also, give us the pardon of our sins?

O my God, I firmly believe Thou will, on that ransom my Savior has paid for
me, and on all Thy gracious promises of pardon, which for his sake Thou have
made to me, I wholly rely; Here only is the sure, and steadfast anchor of my
soul, to which my Faith, and Hope, shall for ever adhere.

All this Lord do I plead, to implore Thy forgiveness.

Behold Lord, though my failings are many, yet to the utmost of my power, I
have confessed, and bewailed, and forsaken my transgressions, Behold Lord I come
at Thy Call, and I come weary, and heavy laden, with the burden of my sins; Be
it unto me according to Thy Word, O Thou that art faithful and just forgive 1 John (...) Joh. (...)
me my sins, and cleanse me from all Unrighteousness. Lord do Thou in no wise
cast me from Thee, but Heal my Backslidings, and love me freely, Ease Hos. 1^
me of my Burden, that I may find rest in Thee, and say unto my Soul, Be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven M^. 1^ 29.
thee.

O Heavenly Father, for thine own Infinite Mercies sake, for Thy truth and
Promise sake, for all the merits and sufferings of the Son of Thy Love, in whom
Thou art always well pleased, Pardon all my sins, and fa lings, and receive me
into Thy favor.

Amen, O Lord God, Amen, Amen.
A Petition for Grace in General.
O Lord God, I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep Thy
righteous Judgments. (...) 19


But alas! I am able of my self, to do nothing that is good, not so much as to
think one good thought, and I no sooner shall rise from my knees, but I fear I
shall be tempted, to those very sins, I have now so solemnly renounced, and
those temptations will certainly overcome me, unless Thou Lord, do seasonably
interpose Thy grace to withold me.

But I can do all things through Thee strengthening me: Do Thou then, O blessed
Savior, perfect Thy (...).
strength in my weakness, for in Thee only is my trust.

O my God Thou have promised to give Thy Holy Spirit to those that ask it.
Behold Lord, I do humbly, (...) 11.
I do earnestly ask Thy Holy Spirit now of Thee, O fulfill Thy gracious promise
to me, O vouchsafe me that Holy Spirit I pray for, to purify my corrupt
nature, to strengthen my weakness, to comfort me in troubles, to support me in
discouragements, to succor me in temptations, and to assist me in all parts of
my duty, that I may ever hereafter live in Thy fear, and in constant, sincere
and universal obedience, to all Thy righteous Laws.

Thou O searcher of hearts, know the sin (or sins) I am most inclined to,
[here name it or them] and herein will lie my greatest danger of backsliding;
But O my God, I beg a double portion of Thy invisible aid against it, (or
them.) Hold Thou up my goings in Thy paths, that my Footsteps slip not; O work
in me that victorious Faith, by which I may overcome the World, the Devil and
my own corrupt Nature. ^n 5


True it is, O Lord God, that there are many sins which upon examination I
find, through Thy grace I have not yet committed, and therefore not unto me
Lord, but to Thy name be the glory; but alas! there is in my corrupt nature so
great a proneness to evil, so great a curiosity to try what sin is, that
without Thy restraining. Grace, every temptation when I shall have more age and
liberty and opportunity to enforce it, will be apt to draw me from my
obedience, and to overthrow all my present Resolutions.

But my Help stands in Thee, O great Creator, who have made Heaven and
Earth, and I commit 1 Pet. 4. 19.
my Soul to Thy keeping, O Thou that art faithful as well as Almighty, keep
that safe which is committed to Thy trust, watch over me, that I may not be
beguiled by the deceitfulnes of sin, or betrayed by my own treacherous heart,
or surprised by my ghostly enemies, and give me grace to watch and to pray
incessantly my self, lest I enter into temptation. Hear Lord from Heaven, and
succor me, for the alone merits of Jesus my Savior.

Amen, Amen.
Petition for particular Graces.
O That my ways, Lord, were made so direct that Psalm. 119.
I might keep Thy Statutes, for then shall I not be confounded, when I have
respect unto all Thy Commandments!

Vouchsafe me Thy Holy Spirit, therefore O Lord God to work in me, whatever is
well-pleasing in Thy sight, that for the time to come, I may bring forth fruits
meet for repentance!

O let it be Thy good pleasure, to create in me a saving Knowledge of Thee and
of my duty, justifying Faith, true sanctifying Grace, and a purifying Hope, an
ardent Love, and a filial fear of Thee, a constant desire of pleasing Thee, and
a great tenderness of offending Thee!

Lord create in me, a penitent heart, a resigned will, and mortified
affections, an habitual mindfulness of Thy presence, and a steady devotion in
my Prayers, sincere intentions, and Zeal for Thy Glory, Perseverance in all
Holy purposes, and constancy in all trials, and temptations.

Lord create in me, a Reverential awe of Thy Name, a delight in Thy service, a
sacred regard to Thy day and house of Prayer, and a great attention to Thy
Word; a daily care of my time, and diligence in my studies.

Lord make me chaste and temperate, humble, and advisable, and patient of
reproof, and create in me a cheerful and meek, a contented and considerate, a
quiet and peaceful spirit.

Lord bless me with Health and Competency of living, with a good understanding,
a retentive memory, and a ready apprehension, and with such a measure of
temporal good things, as Thou see fit for me, and give me grace to make a
right use of all those blessings, I have already receive^.

Lord Purify my thoughts, Bridle my tongue, Guide all my actions, Guard all my
senses, Stop my ears, and turn away my eyes, from sin and vanity.

Lord give me grace, to be just in all my dealing, to do to all men, as I would
they should do to me, to be subject to my Parents, and to all my Superiors, to
the King as supreme, and to all Civil Magistrates, To the Pastors of Thy
Church, and to all my Governors in this place, O grant that I may render due
honor and obedience to them all, in their several stations.

Lord make me willing to forgive injuries, and unwilling to offer any; Make me
grateful to my Benefactors, friendly to my equals, condescending to my
inferiors, compassionate to the afflicted, charitable to the Poor according to
my ability, a Lover of good men, and kind to my enemies, and give me grace to
keep always, a Conscience void of offense, toward Thee, and toward men, and
to continue in the Communion of Thy Church, without wavering.

O Merciful God, keep Thy servant, from all wilful, deliberate or presumptuous
sins, and let no wickedness have dominion over me.

From stubbornness and pride, idleness and sloth, intemperance and youthful
lusts, inconstancy and lying, Good Lord deliver me.

From irreligious principles, and false Teachers, unruly passions, and violent
temptations, from contracting vicious habits, or taking pleasure in sin, from
profaneness and ill company, envy and malice, detraction and uncharitableness,
Good Lord deliver me.

From the erros and vices of the Age, and all remanent affections to sin, from
the sin, (or sins) my corrupt Nature is most inclined to, [Here name it or
them,] from whatsoever is offensive to Thee, or destructive to my own Soul,
Good Lord deliver me.

Hear me, O Heavenly Father,, and conform my whole life, to the Example of my
Blessed Savior, and that for his sake in whose holy words, I sum up all my
wants, Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

You have now, Good Phil. by Gods help, gone over the hardest part of your
preparation for the Holy Sacrament, the next thing you are to do, is to examine
your self, whether you do sufficiently understand what the Sacrament is, then
to ask your self, with what intentions you do approach it, and to pray for Gods
grace to dispose you for Worthy Receiving, and all these particulars, together
with all that you are to know, and believe, concerning the Blessed Sacrament,
are contained in these following Meditations, which I advise you to read over
devoutly, at several times, till you are in some measure, affected with them.

Meditations on the Holy Eucharist.
On the ou^ward Elements.
I Adore Thee O Blessed Jesus, My Lord, and my God, when I consider, what that
Sacrament is, to which Thou now invitest me, and of what parts it consists; Of
an Outward and visible sign, and of an Inward and spiritual Grace! For Thou
Lord, who know our Infirmities, and how little able we are, to conceive
things heavenly and spiritual, In pity to our dark and feeble apprehensions,
have Ordained Outward, and Obvious, and Visible signs, to represent to our
minds Thy grace, which is Inward and Invisible; Thou have ordained bread and
wine, which is our Corporal food, to picture out to our Faith, the food of our
Souls.

On the Inward Part, or Thing signified.
I know O my God, that I must look through the Outward Elements, and fix my
faith on that which they signify, and which is the Inward, and Invisible
Grace, even Thy own blessed Body and Blood, which is verily, and indeed, taken
and received of the faithful in the Lords Supper.

But tell me, O Thou whom my Soul loves, How can Thou give us Thy flesh to
Eat?

Lord Thou have told me that Thy words, they are Spirit and they are life, and
are therefore not Carnally (...) 6.
to be understood, Lord I believe, Help Thou my Un-Unbelief!

I believe Thy body and blood to be as really present in the Holy Sacrament, as
Thy Divine Power can make it, though the manner of Thy Mysterious presence, I
cannot comprehend.

Lord I believe, that the Bread that we break, and the Cup that we drink, are
not bare signs 1 Cor. 10.
only, but the real Communication of Thy Body, and Thy Blood, and pledges to
assure me of it, and I verily believe, that if with due preparation I come to
Thy Altar, as certainly as I receive the Outward Signs, so certainly shall I
receive the thing signified, even Thy most Blessed Body and Blood, to receive
which inestimable Blessing, O merciful Lord, do Thou fit and prepare me.

Amen, Amen.
Who Instituted it?
I Adore Thee O Blessed Jesus, my Lord, and my God, when I consider, that this
Holy Sacrament, was Thy own Institution, For it was Thou Lord, who in the night
T^ou wast betrayed, did take Bread, and after that the Cup, and did bless
them, and give them to Thy Disciples; O blessed Savior, let Thy Divinity thus
stamped on it, strike into my Soul, an Holy Awe and Reverence in approaching it;
O Create in me Heavenly dispositions, to celebrate so Heavenly an Institution!

Amen, Amen.
For what end?
I Adore Thee, O Blessed Jesus, My Lord, and my God, when I consider, for what
end Thou did institute the Holy Sacrament, implied in Thy own Command, Do
this in Remembrance of Me.

But what need This Command, O Gracious Lord, is it possible for me, ever to
forget Thee my Savior, who have done so great things for me?

Alas, alas! my own sad experience tells me it is, woe is me, every temptation,
every vanity is apt to make me forget Thee, though Thy own Dying words bid me
remember Thee!

But O Blessed Lord, for Thy infinite Mercies sake, Pardon all my stupid
forgetfulness, and ingratitude hitherto, and do Thou now Create in me, such a
thankful and lively Remembrance, of Thy Dying for me, that may excite me, to
give up my self entirely to Thee, as Thou did give up Thy self, on the Cross
for me.

Amen, Amen.
A Thanksgiving for Christ's Sufferings.
O Thou my crucified Savior, Glory be to Thee, for causing Thy sufferings to
be registered in the Gospel; There I have read and Remember the Wonders, and
Triumphs of Thy Almighty Love, for which I will always Adore, and Praise Thee!

I Remember, O Gracious Lord, How Thou who thoughtst it no robbery to be equal
with God, wast made in the Fashion of frail man, of the vilest, and (...).
most contemptible of men; for Thou tookest on Thee, the form of a very
Servant; I Remember how many reproaches and contradictions, and blasphemies,
and persecutions, Thou did endure, from a wicked and perverse generation, and
all this to save us sinfulmen.

O Lord Jesus, was ever sorrow, like unto Thy sorrow? Worthy art Thou, O Lamb
that was slain to receive, Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and
(...).
Honor, and Glory, and Blessing! I Remember, O gracious Lord, How Thou did
endure, a most bitter Agony, and did sweat great drops of blood, falling to
the ground, How Thou who art God above all, Blessed for ever, wast
treacherously (...). 5.
betrayed, and apprehended, and bound as a Malefactor, How Thou wast set at
naught by Herod, and his men of war, and forsaken of all Thy Disciples, and
denied by Peter, and all this to save us sinful men!

O Lord Jesus, was ever sorrow, etc. I Remember, How Thou O God of Truth, wast
accused by false witnesses, How Thou whom all the Angels adore, wast
blindfold^d, and buffeted, and ^ocke, and spit upon, and stripped naked, and
scourged, and all this that we might be healed by Thy stripes, and to save us
sinful men!

O Lord Jesus, was ever any sorrow, etc. I Remember Lord, How Thou that art the
great Judge of Heaven and Earth, wast Thy self dragged to the Judgment Seat,
and condemned, How Thou O King of Heaven wast crowned with thorns, and oppressed
with the weight of Thy own Cross, and all this to save us sinful men!

O Lord Jesus was ever any sorrow, etc. I Remember O blessed Savior, How Thou
who art the Lord of Glory, and the sole Author of life, wast put to a most
ignominious death, How Thy hands and Thy feet were nailed to a Cross, How Thou
wast Crucified between two Thieves, and numbr^d with the Transgressors, How
Thou had a potion given Thee, to imbitter Thy very last gasp, and all this to
save us sinful men!

O Lord Jesus, was ever any sorrow, etc. I Remember O Gracious Lord, How when
Thou were hanging on the very Cross, Thou wast scoffed at and reviled, How
infinitely then Thou were afflicted, and bruised for our transgressions, when
the Isa 53.
Iniquities of us all were laid on Thy shoulders, How Thou did then express
an anguish, greater then all the tortures of Thy Crucifixion, when Thou didft
cry out, My God, my God, why have Thou forsaken Me, and how Thou did at last
give up the Ghost, and die Thy self, that we might live!

O Lord Jesus, was ever any sorrow, etc. I Unfeignedly believe, O Gracious
Lord, that Thou did suffer all this for sinful men, and in particular for me,
when we were all Thy utter enemies; and had nothing in us to move Thee to pity
us, but our extreme misery, Nothing to move Thee to save us, but our great
Unworthiness, and Thy greater Mercy!

O the depth of the Riches of Thy Love, Blessed Lord, How Unutterable is Thy
Mercy, and Thy Love past finding out!

O All ye Holy Angels, Behold, and Wonder, Wretched Man has sinned against
God, and God, himself has suffered the Sinners Punishment!

Was there ever any sorrow, like that which my Lord and my God, endured for me!

Was there any Love, like to that Love, my Lord and my God has showed to me?

Help me then, O ye Blessed Host of Heaven, to celebrate that Unknown Sorrow,
that Wonderful Love, which you your selves so much Admire, Help me to praise my
Crucified Savior!

O my Gracious Lord, my heart is now full, of the sense of Thy Love, and what
have I to return to Thee, but Love again? It Is all I have to offer Thee, Accept
it O merciful Lord, imperfect as it is, and Do Thou daily heighten my sense of
Thy Love to me, that I may daily heighten my Love to Thee!

O Thou Infinite Lover of Souls, with all my Heart I Love, I Praise, I Adore
Thy Love to me, but ala^, I can never do it enough!

O do Thou at last Gracious Lord, translate me to Thy Kingdom of Glory, that
there I may Love Thee to the Utmost Capacity of a Creature, and Praise Thee to
all Eternity.

Amen Lord Jesus Amen, Amen.
What benefits we receive by it.
I Adore Thee, O Blessed Jesu, my Lord, and my God, when I consider the
Benefits, which through Thy Mercy, we receive by the Holy Sacrament!

Glory be to Thee, O Lord, who there make Thy own Body, and Blood, to become
our spiritual food, to strengthen, and refresh our Souls!

Glory be to Thee, O Lord, who by this Heavenly food do mystically Unite us
to Thy self, for Nothing becomes One with our Bodies more, then the bodily food
we eat, which turns into our very substance, and Nothing makes us become One
with Thee more, then when Thou vouchsafest to become the very food of our souls!

Glory be to Thee, O Lord, who by this Immortal food, do nourish our souls,
to live the life of Grace here, and do raise us up to life everlasting
hereafter! John 6. 52.
Lord do Thou evermore give me this bread!

Amen, Amen.
Motives of Receiving.
O Blessed Savior! what more powerful Motives can I have, to persuade me to
Communicate, then Thy Command, and the Admirable effects of the Holy Sacrament!

But alas! my corrupt Nature, is apt to suggest to me, low and base inducements
to this duty, such as are, fear of my Superiors displeasure, if I abstain, or
shame of not appearing as devout as my Equals, or the mere Custom of the
Place, or of the Season!

But Lord I do from my heart, Renounce all these, and the like Carnal
Considerations, and I come to Thy Altar, to ^enew my Baptismal Covenant, with,
Thee, of which Thy Sacrament is a Seal.

I come to Testify my sense of Thy Love, O Heavenly Father, in So loving the
World, as to give up Thy only Son to die for me.

I come to testify my Faith in Thee, and my Love toward Thee, O Ble^ied
Savior, and thankfully to Commemorate, Thy Wonderful Love in dying for me.

I come Lord, to testify my stedfastness in the Communion of Thy Church, and
my Charity to all the World.

I come to Thy table O Lord, out of the sense I have, of the want of that
Spiritual food, to which Thou there invitest me.

Alas, Alas! I am soon apt to grow weary of welldoing, a few prayers, every
little duty is apt to tire me, Every slight temptation is apt to overcome. me,
and I know there is ^o food can strengthen my Soul but Thy Body, No Cordial can
revive my drooping Obedience, but Thy Blood, and It Is Thy most blessed Body,
and Blood, I hunger and thirst after, O Gracious Lord, Grant that I, and all
that communicate with me, may feel its saving efficacy, O Feed, O Refresh, O
Nourish our Souls with it, to life everlasting, and that for Thy own Infinite
Mercy sake, which moved Thee to offer up Thy Body and Blood for us!

Amen, Amen.
Prayer for Preparation.
Blessed Lord Jesus! I even tremble when I consider, that He that eats and
drinks Unworthily is 1 C^r. 11.
Guilty of Thy Body and Blood, and eats and drinks damnation to his own
Soul, and this severe Sentence on Unworthy Communicants, makes me afraid to
come to Thy Altar;

But when I consider, that Thy Sentence is as Severe against those, who being
invited refuse to Come, for Luk^ 16.
Thou have said, they shall not taste of Thy Supper, and Unless we eat Thy
flesh, and drink Thy blood, we have Jo^n (...).
no life in us, I am then afraid to Keep away;

But Ble^ied be Thy Mercy O Lord, for in this straight my Soul is in, Thou art
my Guide, Thou by giving me this opportunity of Receiving, Invitest me to Thy
table, Thou call me to seek Thy face, and my heart replies, Thy face Lord
will I seek!

If Thou Lord should be extreme, to mark what is done amiss, Alas, alas! I am
then Unfit not only to Communicate, but to say even my daily prayers.

I Know Lord, that if I should stay till I am Worthy to come, I should then
never come, and therefore though I am Unworthy, of so Unspeakable a mercy, yet
I come, to beg Thy Grace to make me Worthy, or at least Such as Thou will
accept!

O Blessed Jesus, do Thou so open my eye of faith, to discern Thy Body, and
Blood in the Holy Sacrament, Do Thou so Dispose my Soul, at this time to
Communicate, that I may feel all the happy effects of Thy own Divine
In^titution, that my Soul may receive such lasting impressions of Thy Goodness,
and be so Ravished with the Love of Thee, and with the Incomparable Delights of
Thy Service, and with such an early fore-taste of Heaven, that all the
pleasures of sin, which in my growing years may tempt me, may appear to me
tasteless and Unwelcome.

O Heavenly Father, Cloth me with the Wedding Garment, even the Graces of my
Blessed Savior, for then am I sure to be a Welcome guest to Thy Table, when I
shall come thither, in the likeness of Thy only well-beloved Son, in whom Thou
art always wellpleased!

O Heavenly Father, Fill me with a lively faith, profound humility, filial
obedience, enflamed affections, and Universal Charity, O raise in my Soul, all
those Heavenly transports of Zeal, and Devotion, of Love, and desire, of Joy
and delight, of Praise and thanksgiving, which become the Remembrance of a
Crucified Savior, which become one Redeemed by the Blood of God, and that for
His sake only, that Redeemed me, in whose Holy Words, I sum up all the Graces
and Blessings I stand in Need of. Our ^ather which art in heaven, etc.

This Prayer, Phil. is proper for you to add to your Morning Prayer, the day on
which you are to Receive.

Directions in time of Receiving.
IN time of Receiving, Good Phil. Labor all you can, to keep your heart
affected with the Public Prayers, and to fill up all the vacant minutes with
Holy Ejaculations, such as these which follow!

At going to the Altar.
In the multitude of Thy Mercies, O Lord God, do I now approach Thy Altar, O
Pardon my sins, and Receive me Graciously!

Amen, Amen.
At the Offertory.
Blessed be Thou, O Lord God, for all things come of Thee, and of Thy own do I
now give Thee! Chron. ^9.


O let this Alms be an Odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice ^hil. 4.
acceptable, and well-pleasing to Thee!

At Consecration.
O Blessed Jesu, In the bread Broken, I call to mind Thy Body torn with Whips,
and Thorns, and Nails; and in the Wine poured out, I call to mind Thy precious
blood, shed for my sins!

Glory be to Thee O Lamb of God, that did offer Thy self a Sacrifice, to take
away the sins of the whole World, Lord have mercy on me, and take away Mine
also.

Whilst others are Communicating.
O my God, whom have I in Heaven but Thee, and Psalm. 73.
there is none on Earth I desire, in comparison of Thee.

As the Heart pants after the Water brooks, so ^sal. (...)
pants my Soul, after Thee O God!

My Soul is athirst for Thee, O God, my God!

Blessed Savior, I am Thine, I am wholly Thine, for Thou have bought me with a
Price, with the inestimable price of Thy Own blood! 1 Cor. (...)


Lord suffer not the price of Thy own blood to perish, and I will always
glorify Thee in my Body, and in my Spirit, which are Thine.

If there be many Communicants, and thou have much vacant time, Phil. and do
want devout Matter to employ thy thoughts, till All have communicated, thou
may then repeat, the Thanksgiving for Christ's sufferings, p. 44. either in
whole, or in part, as thou see it needful.

When the Priest comes toward you.
O Lord God, I now desire to renew, my Covenant with Thee, and to seal it in
this Sacrament!

Lord put Thy Laws into my mind, and write them Heb. (...). (...)
in my heart, and for the Passion of Thy Son, which I now commemorate, be
merciful to my Unrighteousness, My sins, and my iniquities, remember no more,
and be Thou my God, and I will be Thy servant. Amen, Amen.

O my Soul, taste now, and see, How gracious the P^l. 3^
Lord is!

After receiving the Bread.
Glory be to Thee, O Lord, who feedest me with the bread of life.

O Lord God, who did sanctify us, by the offering Heb. 10. 10.
of the body of Jesus once for all, sanctify me, even me, O Heavenly Father!

After Receiving the Cup.
Glory be to Thee, O Lord Jesus, who permittest me to drink of the fountain of
life freely!

My Beloved is mine, and I am his!

Blessed Savior, Thou have Loved us, and washed us ^v. 1.
from our sins in Thy own blood, and therefore to Thee be Glory and Dominion,
for ever and ever. Amen, Amen.

Glory be to Thee O Jesus, My Lord, and my God, for thus feeding my Soul, with
thy most blessed body and blood, O let Thy Heavenly food transfuse new life,
and new vigor into my Soul, and into the Souls of all that Communicate with
me, that our Faith may daily increase, that we may all grow more humble, and
Contrite for our sins, that we may all love Thee, and serve Thee, and delight
in Thee, and Praise Thee, more servently, more incessantly, then ever we have
done heretofore! Amen, Amen.

After the Congregation is dismissed, Phil. if you cannot get privacie in your
own Chamber, I advise you ^t the first opportunity to go into the Chapel, and
there to give God thanks, for that great blessing, of which He has now made you
a partaker.

A Thanksgiving after Receiving.
O How plentiful is Thy Goodness, My Lord, and ^al. 31.
my God, which Thou have laid up for those that fear Thee, which Thou have laid
up for those, that put their trust in Thy Mercy!

Was it not Love Infinite enough, Dearest Lord, to give Thy self for me on the
Cross? Was not that Sacrifice of Thy self, sufficient to expiate, the sins of
the whole world? What Lord could Thou then do more for me?

All the mighty Host of Heaven stood amazed, to see the blood of God shed, to
see their King of Glory, Acts 20.
to whom from everlasting, they had sung, their Hallelujahs, Nailed to a Cross;
and all this to save Sinners!

Sure Lord, None of all those Blessed Spirits, with all the Glorious
illuminations they had, could ever have Imagined, how Thou could give Thy
self more to us then Thou had done.

And yet for all this, Thou have wrought new miracles of Love for us, and as if
it had not been Love enough, to have given Thy self for us on the Cross, Thou
have found out a way to give Thy self to us in the Holy Sacrament, to Unite Thy
self to us with the most intimate Union, that it is possible to conceive, to
become the very food, the Life, the strength, the support of my Soul, to become
one with me, to become the very Soul of my Soul!

O Lord God, This is so Unconceivable a blessing, this is so Divine an Union,
that the very Angels, 1 ^t. 1^ 12. Eph^s. 10. 1 Cor. 1^
who so much desire to look into the great Mystery of our Redemption, who learn
Thy Manifold Wisdom from Thy Church, and frequent the Places of Thy Public
worship, do crowd about our Altars, and with aweful Admiration, contemplate the
Holy Sacrament!

What thanks then Gracious Lord, can I return to Thee for those wonders of
Love, Thou have showed to me wretched sinner, which the very Angels, who never
sinned, so much admire!

O dearest Lord, raise Thou my devotion, to the highest pitch it can possibly
reach, to Praise Thee, Enlarge my Soul, to its utmost extent to Love Thee!

How can I ever more offend, such Riches of mercy, as are in Thee, O Crucified
Savior? and yet whilst I carrry this body of sin about me, I fear I shall,
But Lord I do from my heart, Renounce and abhor all things that displease Thee,
I resolve to the Utmost of my power to Resist all temptations, and to become as
totally Thine, as my frail Nature will permit me.

O Gracious Lord, who have so Infinitely Loved us, and given us everlasting
Consolation, and good Hope through grace, Comfort my Heart, and for ever
establish it, in every good Word, and Work!

Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power, be unto Him that sits on the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever!

Rejoice in the Lord Jesus, O my Soul, for of Him comes my salvation.

I will love Thee, O Lord my King, and I will praise Thy name for ever and ever!

Glory be to Thee, O Lord God, for giving me this blessed opportunity of coming
to Thy Altar! O grant I may never more Pollute my soul, which Thou have now
made Thy Temple to reside in, who art the God of Purity!

Praise the Lord O my Soul, while I live will I praise the Lord, as long as I
have any being, I will sing praises Unto Thee, O Blessed Savior, My King, and
my God,

O gracious Lord, Pardon all my failings, Accept all my prayers and praises,
and supply all my wants which I sum up in Thy Own blessed words. Our Father,
etc.

Remember good Phil. that when you have received the Holy Sacrament, your
Greatest Work is then but beginning, which is, to observe all the promises you
have made to God, of future Obedience, and therefore it is good for you, to read
over now and then, and to renew your Resolutions, and to examine your self, How
you have kept them, that you may preserve in your soul a serious sense of your
duty, and a conscientious care to perform it.

A Form of General Thanksgiving.
WOrthy art Thou O Lord of heaven and earth, to receive Glory, and Honor, and
Power, for thou have created all things, and for Thy pleasure they are, Rev. 4.
8.
and were created!

Thou have made heaven, the Heaven of Heavens with all their Host, the earth
and all things that are therein, Thou preservest them all, and the Host of
Heaven Neh. 9. 6.
praises Thee!

Glory be to Thee O Lord God Almighty, for creating man after Thine own image,
and making so great variety of Creatures, to minister to His use!

Glory be to Thee who give us life, and breath, and all things, who give us
fruitful seasons, and fillest our hearts with food and gladness! Acts 14.


Glory be to Thee O Lord God, for all Thy many blessings, and deliverances, for
all Thy forbearance, and long-suffering to this sinful Nation; Glory be to Thee
O Lord, who have made me also share in those public mercies, and for that
light of the Gospel Thou vouchsafest us, of which the greatest part of the
world is totally ignorant.

Glory be to Thee O Heavenly Father, for my being, and preservation, strength
and health, understanding and memory, friends and benefactors, and for all my
Abilities of mind, and of body.

Glory be to Thee O heavenly Father, for my competent livelihood, for my
education in this College, for all my known, or Unobserved deliverances, and
for the guard Thy holy Angels keep over me!

But above all, Glory be to Thee, for giving Thy only Son to die for my sins,
and for all the spiritual blessings, he has purchased for me, for my Baptism,
and all the opportunities Thou give me of serving Thee, or of receiving the
holy Eucharist, for whatever sin I have escapt, for whatever good I have done,
or thought, for all my helps of grace, and hopes of Heaven, Glory be to Thee!

Praise the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise His Holy Name.

Glory be to Thee, O Lord Jesus, for Thy inexpressible Love to Lost man, Glory
be to Thee O Lord, for Condescending to take our frail Nature on Thee, Glory be
to Thee, for all Thy Heavenly Doctrine to Instruct us, Thy great Miracles to
Convince us, and Thy unblamable Example to Guide us!

Glory be to Thee, O Blessed Jesus, for Thy Agony, and bloody sweat, for all
the torments and anguish of thy bitter passion!

Glory be to Thee, O Blessed Jesus, for Thy Glorious Resurrection, and
Ascension into Heaven, and Intercession for us at the right hand of Thy Father!

O Gracious Lord, Thou that have done so much for me, How can I ever
sufficiently, Praise and Love Thee?

Praise the Lord Jesus, O my Soul, and all that is within me, Praise His Holy
Name!

Glory be to Thee, O Blessed Spirit, Glory be to Thee, for all the Miraculous
Gifts, and Graces, Thou did bestow on the Apostles, to fit them to Convert
the World, and for Inspiring the Sacred Penmen of Holy Scripture!

Glory be to Thee for Instilling Holy Thoughts into my soul, for all the
Ghostly strength, and support and comfort, and illumination we receive from
Thee, for all Thy Preventing, and restraining, and Sanctifying Grace, Glory be
to Thee;

Blessed Spirit! let me never more by my sins grieve Thee who art the Author of
life, and Joy to me!

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, Praise His Holy Name.

Here Phil. if you recite this Thanksgiving, on any great Festival or Saints
day, you may add, Particularly, O Lord, am I bound to Praise Thee, for the
great blessing we this day Commemorate, [Here mention it, For instance, the
Nativity of our Blessed Savior, or the lik^.]

Or for the Saint, whose memory we this day celebrate, [Here you may name him]
and add,

Praise the Lord therefore O my Soul, and all that is within me, Praise His
Holy Name,

Blessing and Honor, and Thanksgiving, and Praise, more than I can Utter, more
than I can Conceive, be unto Thee O most Adorable Trinity, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, by all Angels, All Men, All Creatures, for ever and ever.

Amen, Amen.
A Form of General Intercession.
HOly, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, I miserable sinner, humbly acknowledge
that I am altogether Unworthy to pray for my self, but since Thou have
Commanded us, to make prayers and intercessions for all men, in obedience to
Thy Command, and in 1 Tim^
Confidence of Thy Unlimited Goodness, I commend to Thy Mercy, and Divine
Providence the Wants, and Necessities of all Mankind.

Lord let it be Thy good pleasure, to restore to Thy Church Catholic,
Primitive peace and purity, and to preserve it against the Gates of Hell.

Particularly, O Lord God, I implore Thy Mercy for this sinful Nation, for the
iniquity of the land is exceeding Great.

Alas, alas! we are Unthankful for Thy blessings, incorrigible under Thy
Judgments, and unprofitable under all the means of Grace, and what can we
expect from Thee, but to drink deep of the Cup of Thy Wrath?

And Wretch that I am, my sins, have increased the heap of the Public
Impieties, and made their Cry the louder to Heaven for vengeance!

But O Lord God in the midst of Judgment Remember Mercy, Turn Thou us, Lord,
and so shall we be turned, O be favorable to Thy people, and give us all
Grace, to Turn to Thee, in Fasting, Weeping, and Mourning, To put a period to
our provocations, and do Thou put a period to our Punishments:

O Lord God, out of the Multitude of Thy Mercies, give us grace to fear Thee,
and to keep Thy Commandments always, that it may be well with us, and Thou
may Rejoice over us to do us good. Amen, Amen.

O let it be Thy good pleasure, to bless us all, from the highest, to the
lowest, in our several stations.

To defend the Church of England, from all the As^aults of Schism, or Heresy,
or Sacrilege, and to bless all Bishops, Priests and Deacons with Apostolicol
graces exemplary lives, and sound doctrine!

O let it be Thy good pleasure, to save and defend our Sovereign Lord King
Charles, from all His Enemies, grant him a long and happy reign over us, and
endue him with all those gifts and graces, which may make him a terror to evil
works, and a great promoter of Thy Glory,

Bless Him and all His Royal relations with a great measure of all temporal
good things, and with eternal Glory in the world to come;

Lord let it be Thy good pleasure to grant,
To the Privy Council, Wisdom from above,
To all Magistrates, Integrity and Zeal for Religion,
To the Gentry and Commonalty, Pious and just, peaceable and loyal Hearts.

To our Armies, and Navy, Protection and Victory,
To the whole Nation, Healthful, and fruitful, and peaceful times.

Lord let it be thy good pleasure, to grant,
To all Jews, Turks, Infidels, Atheists, and Heretics, Conversion.
To all Malefactors, and wicked men, timely Repentance.
To all Holy persons, increase of grace, and perseverance.
To all that I have tempted any way to si^, or with whom I have been a
Companion in evil, Contrition and pardon.

Lord let it be Thy good pleasure, to bless all those I have any way wronged,
and to forgive those that have wronged me, To Comfort the disconsolate, to give
health to the sick, ease to those that are in pain, Patience to the afflicted,
food to the Hungry, Clothes to the Naked, liberty to the Captive, and a safe
delivery to women with Child.

Lord be Thou a Guide to the traveller, safety to those that are at Sea, a
Refuge to the oppressed, Be Thou a Father to the fatherless, Take care of
Widows, Pity and Relieve all poor Prisoners of debt, and Have mercy on all
Idiots and mad persons.

Lord let it be Thy good pleasure, to Bless my Parents, my Brothers and
Sisters, and All my Relations, All my Friends, All my Governors in this
College, All my Fellow-Scholars, All who have commended themselves to my
Prayers, [Particularly -- Here you may name them if you see occasion,] Lord
Thou best Know all our Conditions, All our Desires, All our Wants, O do Thou
therefore suit Thy graces and blessings, to our several necessities of Body or
Soul!

Hear O merciful Father, my Supplications, and that for the sake of Thy Son
Jesus, who died for us all, in whose Holy words I sum up my own, and the wants
of all I pray for: Our Father which, etc.

If you are a Child of the College, Good Phil. I advise you now, and then to
say that usual Collect, wherein you give thanks for the Founder, and pray for
the College, both which you have great reason to do, in private, as well as in
public, when you Consider, that God has made the Founder, an Instrument of
doing you much good, in advantaging your education, and the blessings you pray
for on the College, you have your self a part in.

A Thanksgiving for the Founder.
I Give Thee Humble and Hearty thanks, O most merciful Father, for our Founder
William of Wickham, and all other our Benefactors, by whose benefits, we are in
this College brought up, to Godliness and good Learning, and I beseech Thee to
give us grace, so to use these Thy blessings, to the Glory of Thy Name, that we
may become profitable members, in the Church and Commonwealth, and may be at
last partakers, of the immortal Glory of the Resurrection, Through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen, Amen.
Directions to use the foregoing Prayers.
HAve a great care, good Phil. that you make not any of the Rules here given
you, a pretense to neglect the Orders, and duties of the place you live in, or
of the School, for that were Idleness rather than devotion.

When you fix on a day to examine your Soul, or to confess your sins in,
Believe me Phil. nothing will more enforce your Prayers and Repentance, than if
they are accompanied with Fasting and Alms, as you may see in the example of
Cornelius, whose Prayers, Acts 10.
and Fasting, and Alms all joined together were so acceptable to God, as made
Him send first an Angel from Heaven, and after the Angel, an Apostle, and after
the Apostle, the Holy Ghost, to confirm, and enlighten Him.

But take notice Phil. that all the Fasting I advise you to, is only on some
Fasting-day, on some one Friday, or Saturday, when your Commons are less than
on other days, to Content your self with your bare allowance, and withal, to
lay aside some small matter according to your stock, for the Poor.

But beware, you do not your duty, only to be seen, and approved of by Others,
for this were Hypocrisy, and take lieed your performances, do not puff you up,
with a vain conceit of your Holiness, and that you are better than your
fellows, for this were abominable Pride, and alas! when you have done the best
you can, you fall infinitely short of your duty, and it is Gods mere Mercy, not
any the least worth in you, makes your service any way acceptable, to Him.

When you have once thoroughly examined your self, Good Phil. and made a
particular Confession of the sins of your whole life, and begged Pardon, there
is not the same Absolute Necessity, of such laborious Examination, at your next
communicating, especially if you examine your self carefully every Night, and
daily repent of the evil of the day past, and are not Conscious to your self,
of any Great, or Notorious Sins, since your last Confession, for if you are
not, the Examination and Confession only of what past since your last
Communicating, together with a General Confession of your former sins, and a
solemn renewing, of your former acts of Repentance, may serve the turn.

But if your Conscience Accuses you of any Culpable neglect in your last
Examination, or of any great relapses, or of any wilful violations, of your
last Vows and Resolutions, in those, and the like Cascs, it is the surest way,
to begin all your Repentance again.

Remember Phil. that though it is God that works in you to will and to do of his
good pleasure, yet God also commands you, to work out your own salvation your
self, and therefore you are to labor for those blessings, and to practice
those graces you pray for, so that you are to read your duty in your prayers.

If you find any particular Sin you are guilty of, or any particular grace
which you want, or any particular blessing which you are to give thanks for,
which is not here mentioned, it is easy for you to add it, to your prayers, as
occasion requires; in like manner if you meet with any passage, in any prayer,
which does not either so directly, or so fully express, the sense of your Soul,
as you could wish, leave it out.

If Opportunity, Leisure, and Devotion altogether, do at any time, when you go
home, or at times of liberty incline you, to make some present addition to your
daily prayers, or like Daniel and Holy David, ^an. 6. (...). ^al. 55. (...).
not only at Morning and at Evening, but at Noon day to Pray to God, thou
may then Use the Prayer for particular graces, p. 39. or those Acts of
Resolution, and Oblation, p. 34, 35. or on Sundays and Holy Days the Form of
General Thansgiving, or on Fasting-days, the Form of General Intercession, as
may best suit with the season, and with your own Affections.

Directions concerning Infirmities.
IF after all the Care and pains you can take, and your petitions also for Gods
grace, you find in the performance of any duty, in your daily Prayers,
Examination, Receiving the Holy Eucharilt, or the like, great Coldness, and
Wanderings, and indisposedness and weariness of Spirit, and that your heart is
little affected with it, and that you fall very much short of the Rules here
laid down, and therefore are ready to Conclude, that all you have done is in
vain, and displeasing to God;

Be not disheartened at this Phil. it is a good sign to be so much grieved for
your failings in your duty, it is an argument of a filial tenderness, and desire
to serve God better, that your spirit is willing though your flesh is weak, and
if you still continue your endeavors, and prayers, p^tiently relying on Gods
infinite goodness, and on his gracious promises of Hearing you, He will
assuredly Hear you, in His good time.

Know, good Phil. that this is the case of thousands, as well as of your self,
the very best of Christians, sigh under the pervcrsness, and impotence of their
corrupt nature, and even the Just man, falls seven times a day, through sins of
Ignorance, or Infirmity, or sudden surreption, or inadvertency, or the like;
though it is true, he rises again by an Habitual repentance, and therefore be
not discouraged, but daily beg pardon, for your daily failings.

To ease you in such indispositions, or when you are also straightened in time,
or diverted by any Unavoidable avocations, I advise you to shorten your
prayers, and for the longer Morning and Evening prayer, say the shorter; and as
for the other parts of Devotion, throughout this whole Manual, they are cut
into so many breaks and divisions, on purpose, that you may lengthen or shorten
your prayers, as may best comply with your Occasions, and Infirmities; Only
let me warn you seriously, that under color of Indulging your infirmities, you
do not indulge your sloth.

Be not then afflicted, good Phil. if you cannot come up exactly, to the Rules
here given you. Believe me, it was never imagined you would; it was only hoped
that you would endeavor it; and know that it is a great error of many devout
souls, to think all they do signifies nothing, because they fall short of the
Rules laid down, in their Books of Devotion; little considering, that it is
Sincerity God requires of us 2 Cor. 8. 12.
and not perfection; for if there be a willing mind in us, it is accepted,
according to that which a man has, and not according to that a man has not;
so that your Infirmities ought to humble, but not to discourage you.

For instance, Suppose you should not be able, after all your endeavors, and
prayers, to shed any, or but few tears for your sins, Be not too much cast down
at it, for to be troubled for want of tears, is one sign of godly sorrow; and
it is certain, though tears are very desirable, yet they are not always signs of
true Repentance, for Hypocrites may shed them, and there may be true godly
sorrow without them; and perhaps God will at last give them to you, when his
wisdom sees your Heart, in a fit temper for them.

Whenever then you are troubled, with an afflicting sense of your
infirmities, and for your many failings, I advise you to say this Prayer
following, and to rest satisfied that He that died for you, will both hear, and
accept, and succor you.

A Prayer against Failings.
O Thou Compassionate Savior of sinful man, look down from Heaven, and have
mercy upon me wretched sinner; O save me, O help me, for without Thee I can do
Nothing as I ought!

Miserable man that I am, my very Prayers, and Repentance, are accompanied with
so many failings, that I am sometimes afraid, that Thou Lord wilt not hear such
Prayers, nor regard such Repentance!

But O Blessed Savior, my Lord, and my God, it is Thy promise, not to
discourage, the least measure of grace, Thou will not quench the smoking Flax,
or (...). 12.
break the bruised Reed.

It Is Thy practice Lord, to comply with the weakness of Thy servants, Thou ar^
the good Shepherd who carriest the tender Lambs, in Thy very bosom, (...). 40.
and gently leadest those that be with young!

Nay Lord, It Is Thy very Nature so to do, for Thou Thy self, have felt humane
infirmities, and can not but ^b. 2. 20 4. 15.
commiserate those, that sigh under them!

Why art thou then so heavy, O my Soul, and why Psalm. 42.
art thou so disquieted within me! O put thy trust in thy Savior, who is the
help of my Countenance and my God!

O gracious Lord, do Thou Pity me, and Accept my weak and imperfect
performances, and supply by Thy boundless mercy, all the defects in my duty;
and if it be Thy pleasure, I should serve Thee better, O Lord God, increase Thy
succors of Grace, and I shall then increase my obedience!

O Thou lover of Souls, for the sake of that infinite Compassion of T^ine,
which moved Thee to die for me, Hear me, and Help me.

Amen Lord Jesus, Amen, Amen.
Directions in time of Sickn^ss.
FAr be it from you, good Phil. to Counterfeit your self sick at any time, to
avoid the School, or the like, Lest God send you sickness indeed, to punish
your Idleness and dissimulation.

But if it please God, to visit you with a real disease, let it be your first
care to make your peace with Heaven, for God by taking you off from your usual
Studies, does give you a Call to Repentance, and the ex^mination of your self
in the beginning of your sickness, is as seasonable, and necessary, as before
your Communicating; besides, if your sickness prove dangerous, you will then, I
doubt not, desire to Communicate, so that to fit you both for the Holy
Sacrament, and for Heaven, examination, and Repentance ought to be first in
your thoughts.

Beware, Phil. of deferring this duty, because you are young, and think you may
have time enough to repent Hereafter; for you see, that persons younger then
your self die, and you are not sure, to outlive this distemper; and if you
should put it off, till your sickness grows more on you, it may perhaps take
away your senses; or if it does not, be sure it will much more indispose you,
to Prayer, and Recollection.

In the beginning then of your sickness, begin your Repentance, and say over
this following Prayer, and do not only say, but practice it.

A Prayer in the beginning of Sickness.
O Heavenly Father, who in Thy wisdom know what is best for me, Glory be to
Thee!

Lord, if it seem good in Thy sight divert this distemper from me, which I now
feel seizing on me, that I may employ my health to Thy Glory, and Praise Thy
Name!

But if Thou art pleased, it should grow on me, I willingly submit to Thy
aff^icting hand, for Thou art wont to chastise those whom Thou do love, and I
am sure, Thou will lay no more on me then Thou will enable me to bear. 1 C^r.
1^.


I know, O my God, Thou sendest this sickness on me for my Good, even to
Humble, and reform me, O grant that it may work that saving effect in me!

Lord cr^ate in me, a true Penitent sorrow for all my sins past, A steadfast
Faith in Thee, and sincere resolutions of amendment for the time to come!

Deliver me from all frowardness, and impatience, and give me an entire
Resignation to Thy divine Will; O suffer not the disease to take away my
senses, and do. Thou continually supply my Thoughts, with Holy Ejaculations;
Lord Bless all means that are used for my Recovery, and restore me to my
Health, in Thy good time; But if otherwise Thou have appointed for me, Thy
blessed will be done. O wean my affections from all things below, and fill me
with ardent des res after Heaven; Lord fit me for Thy self, and then call me to
those joys Unspeakable, and full of Glory, when Thou please, and that for the
sake of Thy only Son Jesus, my Savior, In whose Holy Words I sum up all my
wants. Our Father, etc.

Ejaculations in time of Sickness.
FAther if it he possible, Remove this Cup from me, Man.
Nevertheless not my Will, but Thine ^e done!

Trouble and heaviness have taken hold on me, but my sure Trust, is in Thee, O
Lord!

Forsake me not, O my God, when my strength fails Psalm.
me, Haste Thee to help me, O Lord God of my salvation!

Lord teach me so to number my days, that I may Psalm.
apply my Heart to wisdom!

Deal Thou with me O Lord, according to Thy Name, for sweet is Thy Mercy!

Lord what is my Hope! truly My Hope is even in Thee!

O my Soul, Tarry thou the Lords leisure, be strong ^sal.
and He shall comfort thy heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord!

Into Thy Hands I commend my spirit, for Thou have redeemed me, O Lord, Thou
God of Truth!

In my Fathers house are many Mansions, and Thou Jo^.
Lord Jesus art gone before, to prepare a place for u^, that where Thou art we
may be also!

Lord be merciful to me Miserable si^ner!

O Lord God, we must all at the last day appear, before Thy Judgment Seat, O
Cleanse me from my s^ns, that I may be found blameless, at the Coming of the
Lord Jesus!

As the day goes away, and the shadows of the Evening J^ J^
are stretched out, so pa^ieth away my life even like a vapor, that appears
for a little time, and vanishes away!

Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart of 1 (...)
man conceived, the good things which God has laid up, for those that love Him:
Lord do Thou therefore en^ame my soul with Thy Love!

I know Lord that Thy Judgments are right, and Thou of very faithfulness, have
caused me to be troubled. ^al. 119


O Heavenly Father, my Hope is wholly in Thy Mercy, and in the merits, and
sufferings of my Savior, O for his sake forgive and save me!

To these and the like Ejaculations, Phil. which thou may gather thy self,
thou may now and then, either read a Psalm your self, or have one read to
you, as particularly the 23. or 25. or 27. or 51. or any other, that does best
suit with thy Condition.

I need give you no further directions, for the time of sickness, because I
presume, Phil. that when you feel your sickness prevailing on you, you will
then send for a spiritual guide, who will give you more particular Advice, and
minister to all the necessities of your soul, and therefore I shall only add
this form of Thanksgiving.

A Thanksgiving for Recovery.
GLory be to Thee, O Heavenly Father, for the sickness Thou have in mercy sent
me!

Lord, the stripes Thou did lay on me, were the stripes of Love, Glory be to
Thee!

Before I was troubled I went wrong, but now will I ^l. 119
keep Thy Word.

It is good for me, that I have been in trouble, that I might learn Thy
Statutes!

Glory be to Thee, O Lord, Glory be to Thee, for delivering me from the
terrors of death, and restoring me to my health again, Glory be to Thee!

I called upon the Lord in my trouble, and the Lord ^l. 118
heard me at large!

I shall not die but live, and declare the works of the Lord!

Praise the Lord therefore, O my soul, as long as I have my life, which at
first God gave thee, and which he has now restored me, I will sing praises unto
my God!

O Lord God, Who have in Thy tender mercy, prolonged my days in this World,
give me grace to spend that life, Thou have now lengthened, in Thy service. O
give me grace, to perform all my Resolutions of new Obedience, and so to live
in the filial fear of Thee, all the Remainder of my time, that I may at last
die at peace with my self, at peace with the whole World, and at peace with
Thee; and that for the sake of Thy well-beloved Son, and my Savior, in whose
Holy words, I sum up all my wants. Our Father, etc.

To this you may add, if you think fit, the 103 Psalm.

To conclude, good Phil. if you have reapt any good, from these Prayers, and
Instructions, be sure to give God hearty thanks for it, and let this encourage
you, to make the more frequent use of them, and God of his Infinite mercy,
bless them, every day more and more, to your growth in grace, and to his Own
Glory.

Amen.
FINIS.

