THE APOLOGY OF John Ketch Esquire THE EXECUTIONER of LONDON, IN VINDICATION Of
himself as to the Execution of the Late Lord RUSSEL, On July 21. 1683.
IT is an Old saying and a true one, that one story's good till another's
heard, but it is one of the most difficult things imaginable to dispossess the
World of any censure or prejudice, that is once fixed or has taken Root in the
Hearts of the People. However since it is not fit that so Public a Person as
the Executioner of Justice and the Law's; Sentence upon Criminals and
Malefactors should lie under the scandal of untrue Reports, and be unjustly
Exposed to popular Clamor, I thought it a matter of highest importance to me
to clear and Vindicate my self as to the manner of my Lord Russel's Execution,
and the hard usage he is said to have had in the Severing of his Head from his
Body.

As to the several reports that have been raised, as it has been always a
common Custom in the World, not only to magnify and misrepresent the truth,
but to forgo things that never were, the falsity of them will appear to
Judicious Persons as well by the Improbability of them, as by the testimony of
those that know the Contrary: As namely that I had been drinking all the
foregoing Night and was in Drink when I came upon the Sc^ffold when (...) al^
my Neighbors can testify that I went Orderly to Bed that Night and wholly
undisguis'd in Drink. That I had 20. Guennies the Night before, That after the
First blow my Lord should say you Dog, did I give you 10. Guennies to use me so
Inhumanly? It Is true I received 10. Guenies but not till after having disposed
of his Coa^ Hat, and Perriwig; I took the boldness to give him a small
remembrance of the Civilities customary on the like occasion, as to the report
of my striking my Lord into the Shoulder, how false it is, I appeal to those
that were the nearest Spectatours of the Execution, and for my being committed
Prisoner to Newgate, it is so Easy a matter to disprove the truth thereof,
that I need not trouble my self any farther about it.

But my grand business is to acquit my self and come off as fairly as I can, as
to those Grievous Obloquies and Invectives that have been, thrown upon me for
not Severing my Lords Head from his Body at one Blow, and indeed had I given my
Lord more Blows then one out of design to put him to more then Ordinary Pain,
as I have been Taxt I might justly be exclam'd on as Guilty of grater
Inhumanity then can be imputed even to one of my Profession, or had it been
occassioned by a Bungling and Supine Negligence, I had been much to blame. But
there are Circumstances enough to clear me in this particular, and to make it
plainly appear that my Lord himself was the real obstract that he had not a
quicker dispatch out of this World; since if I may Speak it of a Person of his
Quality? He died with more Galantry then Discresion, and did not dispose him
for recieving of the fatal Stroke in such a posture as was most suitable, for
where as he should have put his hands before his Breast, or else behind him, he
spread them out before him, nor would he be persuaded to give any signat or
pull his Cap over his Eyes, which might possibly be the Occasion that
Discovering the Blow, he somewhat heaved his Body. Moreover after having
reciev'd the Guinnies, and according to my duty ask't his Lordships Pardon; I
received some Interruption just as I was taking Aim and going to give the Blow.
Thus have I truly and faithfully exposed to the Public all that can be said
in this matter, and hope, what ever prejudice the Undiscerning Multitude may
retain to have given sufficient satisfaction to all rational judicious Persons.

LONDON, Printed for John Brown, 1683.


