AN EXPOSITION ON THE Church-Catechism, OR THE PRACTICE OF Divine Love.
COMPOSED For the Diocese of Bath and Wells.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom, at the Westend of St. Paul's; and William
Clarke in Winchester. 1685*

Imprimatur,

Io. Battely RRmo. P. Dno. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris domesticis.
Ex Aedibus Lamb. Aug. 9. 1685.
To the Inhabitants within the Diocese of Bath and Wells, THOMAS their Unworthy
Bishop, wishes the Knowledge, and the Love of God.
Dearly Beloved in our Lord,
THE Church has provided this short Catechism, or Instruction to be learned of
every person, before he be brought to be Confirmed by the Bishop, wherein she
teaches all things that a Christian ought to know, and believe for his Soul's
health; and she has enjoined All Fathers and Mothers, See the Rubric after the
Catechism.
Masters and Dames, to cause their Children, and Servants, and Prentices, to
come to the Church at the time appointed, and obediently to hear, and be
ordered by the Curate, until such time as they have learned all that is here
appointed to be learned.

How seasonable and necessary this Injunction is, in these days, our woeful
experience does sufficiently convince us, when we reflect on the gross
Ignorance and Irreligion of persons in those places, where Catechizing is
negl^cted, which all sober Christians do sadly deplore.

Since then the Providence of God, who is wont to glorify his strength in the
weakness of the Instruments he uses, has caught me up from among the meanest
Herdmen Am. 1.1.
, into the Pastoral Throne, and has been pleased to commit you to my care; The
Love I ought to pay to the chief Shepherd, obliges me to feed all his Lambs and
his Sheep that belong to my flock, John 21.15, 16.
and according to my poor abilities, to teach them the Knowledge, and the Love
of God* and how they may make them both their daily study and practice.

One thing only I most earnestly beg of you all, whether old or young, that ye
would help me to save your own Souls; that ye would learn, and seriously
consider, again and again, the terms on which your Salvation is to be had.

As for you who have Families, I beseech you to instill into your Children and
Servants their Duty, both by your Teaching, and your Example: In good earnest,
it is less cruel and unnatural to deny them Bread for their mortal Bodies, than
saving Knowledge for their immortal Souls.

Ye that are Fathers, or Masters, I exhort you to tread in the steps of
Abraham, the Father of the faithful, and the friend James 2.23.
of God, and like him, to command Genesis 18.19.
your Children and Households to keep the way of the Lord.

Ye that are Mothers, or Mistresses, I exhort you to imitate that unfeigned
Faith 2 Timothy 1.5.
, which dwelt in young Timothy's Grandmother Lois, and his Mother Eunice, who
taught him from a Child 3.15.
to know the Holy Scriptures, which were able to make him wise to Salvation;
and like them, to bring up your Children and Servants in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord Ephesians. 6.4.
.

I passionately exhort and beseech you all, of either Sex* never to cease your
conscientious zeal for their instruction, till you bring them to Confirmation*
To renew their Baptismal vow; To make open profession of their Christianity; To
discharge their Godfathers and Godmothers; To receive the solemn* Benediction
of the Bishop; To share in the public Intercessions of the Church, and to
partake of all the Graces of God's Holy Spirit, implored on their behalf; that
God who has begun Phil. 1.6.
a good work in them; may perfect it till the day of Christ; and that I my self
at that dreadful day, may render Heb. 13.17.
an account of you with joy.

How much the Catechism of our Church may conduce to so desirable an end, you
will in some measure judge by the following Explication, as imperfect as it is,
and which, by God's gracious assistence, I have so contrived, that at one and
the same time, it may both inform your understanding, and raise your
affections; and that it might the better suit with every ones leisure and
infirmities, it is Penned in short Forms of Devotion, to be used in whole, or in
part; in separate Collects or Ejaculations, or occasionally, as your Spiritual
necessities shall require.

God of his infinite mercy bless the whole, to his own Glory, and to your
Edification, through Jesus the Beloved. Amen, Amen.

AN EXPOSITION ON THE Church-Catechism, etc.
Question.

WHAT is your Name?

Answer.

N. or M.

Q. Why do you answer by that Name, rather than by your Surname?

A. Because it is my Christian Name, and was given me when I was made a
Christian, and puts me in mind both of the Happiness, and duty of a Christian.

The Happiness of a Christian.
Q. Where do you learn the Happiness, and the Duty of a Christian?

A. The very next answer teaches me the Happiness, and all the rest of the
Catechism, the Duty of a Christian.

Q. Who gave you this Name?

A. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a Member of
Christ, the Child of God, and an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Q. Show me from hence the Happiness of a Christian.

A. The Happiness of a good Christian, is altogether unutterable, he is one who
has Christ for his Head, God for his Father, and Heaven with all its joys and
glories, which are all eternal, for his Inheritance.

Q. Show me on the contrary the condition of a bad Christian.

A. The misery of a bad Christian is altogether insupportable, He has Christ
for his Enemy, the Devil for his Father, and Hell, with all its miseries, and
torments, and despair, which are all eternal, for his Doom.

The Christian's Choice.
Q. Which of these Conditions do you choose?

A. I adore the goodness of God, who has set Deuteronomy. 30.19.
before me life and death, blessing and cursing; and in great compassion to my
Soul, has bid me choose life, and with all my heart I choose life, even life
eternal.

Q. Are there not many in the World that choose death?

A. It is too too visible there are, such is the extreme madness and folly of
obstinate Sinners, that they choose the Service of the Devil before the Service
of God, and Hell before Heaven, the damnation of such men is wholly from
themselves Ezekiel. 23.11. Hos. 13.9.
, and having chosen death, even death eternal, it is most just with God to give
them their choice.

His Duty is Love.
Q. Blessed be God who has given you grace, to make a right choice; Tell me
what you must do to obtain that which you have chosen, life eternal?

A. All that I am to do is reduced to one word only, and that is Love; This
is the first and the great Command, which comprehends all others, the proper
Evangelical Grace; and eternal Truth has assured me, Luke 10.27, 28.
This do, and thou shall live; So that if I truly love God, I shall live
beloved by God to all eternity.

The nature of Love.
Q. Tell me wherein the love of God does consist?

A. The love of God is a grace rather to be felt than defined, So that I can
do no more than rudely describe it; It is the general inclination and tendency
of the whole man, of all his heart, and soul, and strength, of all his powers
and affections, and of the utmost strength of them all to God, as his chief,
and only, and perfect, and infinite Good.

Q. Is this love of God taught in the Catechism?

A. The Catechism having in the entrance of it presented to our choice the
happiness of a Christian, does throughout all the remaining parts of it
instruct us in the duties of a Christian, by which that happiness is to be
attained, which are all sum'd up in the love of God, which is here most
methodically taught.

The method of Love.
Q. In what method does the Catechism teach the love of God?

A. In a method so excellent and natural, that if by God's help, I can but
faithfully observe it, I shall not fail of the love of God.

Q. Explain this method to me.

A. It teaches me how the love of God is produced, how practiced, and how
preserved.

Q. Show me more distinctly in what parts of the Catechism each of these
particulars is coucht.

A. If I seriously desire the love God, I must first expel all contrary loves
out of my heart, and then consider the motives and causes that excite it, the
former is taught in the Vow of Baptism, the latter in the Creed.

When divine love is once produced, my next care is to put it in practice, and
that is, by bringing forth the fruits, or effects of Love, which are all
contained in the Ten Commandments.

When the love of God is produced in my heart, and is set on work, my last
concern is to preserve, and ensure, and quicken it; It is preserved by Prayer,
the pattern of which is the Lord's Prayer; It is ensured to us by the
Sacraments, which are the Pledges of Love; and more particularly it is quickened
by the Holy Eucharist, which is the feast of Love. So that the plain order of
the Catechism teaches me the rise, the progress, and the perfection of Divine
love, which God of his great mercy give me grace to follow.

Q. I beseech God to give you the grace you pray for, that you may prosecute
this method with your heart, as well as with your words.

A. It is the full purpose of my Soul so to do, and I trust in God I shall do
it.

Expulsion of contrary Loves in our Baptismal Vow.
Q. You are to begin with the vow you made at your Baptism, Tell me,

What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

A. They did promise and vow three things in my name.

First, That I should renounce the Devil and all his works; the pomps and
vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh.

Secondly, That I should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

And thirdly, That I should keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and walk in
the same all the days of my life.

Q. Do thou not think thou art bound to believe, and to do as they have
promised for thee?

A. Yes verily; and by God's help so I will, and I heartily thank our Heavenly
Father, that he has called me to this state of Salvation, through Jesus Christ
our Savior. And I pray unto God to give me his grace, that I may continue in
the same unto my lives end.

Q. The promises of faith and obedience, which you made in your baptism, will
be mentioned in their proper places, when you come to the Creed, and to the
Decalogue; that which now lies before you is to show, how your Abrenunciation
is preparatory to the love of God.

A. As all particular graces are but the love of God, varied by different
instances and relations, so all particular sins are nothing but concupiscence,
or the love of one Creature or other, in competition with, or opposition to,
the love of God; Now all the Creatures on which we set our love, are reducible
to these three, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and my heart must be
emptied of these impure Loves, before it is capable of entertaining the pure
love of God.

Q. If you are conscious to your self, that you have entertained these impure
Loves, and have violated your baptismal Vow, and have in your heart renounced
God, instead of renouncing his Enemies, what must you do to recover that
favor of God you have lost, and to be delivered from the wrath to come?

A. I must thoroughly repent of all the breaches of my vow, and I must seriously
renew it.

Repentance for our Vow broken.
Q. Express your repentance for breaking it.

A. I express it thus.

O Lord God, with shame, and sorrow, and confusion of Face, I confess and
acknowledge thy infinite mercy and goodness to me, my infinite vileness and
ingratitude to thee!

Thou Lord infinitely good and gracious wast pleased out of thy own free mercy,
first to love me, to excite me to love again, glory be to thee.

Thou Lord did vouchsafe, of a miserable Sinner, to make me a Member of my
Savior, thy own Child, and an Heir of Heaven, glory be to thee.

I infinitely wicked and unworthy, have despised, and rejected, and forfeited
all the inestimable Blessings, to which I was entitled by my Baptism; Lord have
mercy upon me.

Woe is me, wretch that I am, I have cut my self off by my sins, from being a
true Member of Christ's Mystical Body, and from all the gracious influences I
might have derived from my union to him; Lord have mercy upon me.

Woe is me, wretch that I am, I have by my numerous provocations, lost that
holy Spirit of Adoption, whereby I might become thy Child, O God, and call thee
Father, and am become a Child of wrath; Lord have mercy upon me.

Woe is me, wretch that I am, I have by my own wilful impiety, disclaimed my
being an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven, and am become an Heir to the
Kingdom of Darkness, Lord have mercy upon me.

Woe is me, I have easily yielded to the temptations of Satan, and have wrought
the works of my Father the Devil; Lord have mercy upon me.

Woe is me, I have greedily coveted and pursued the pomps and vanity of this
wicked World; Lord have mercy upon me.

Woe is me, I have often indulged the sinful lusts of the Flesh; Lord have
mercy upon me.

Woe is me, I have loved all things which thou Lord hate, and am my self
become odious in thy sight; Lord have mercy upon me.

Woe is me, I have neither believed in thee, O my God, nor obeyed thee, nor
loved thee, as I ought, and as I solemnly vowed I would; Lord have mercy upon
me.

O Lord God most gracious and reconcilable, Pity and pardon me.

I lament, O Lord God, my detestable impiety, for having so long, and so often,
and so obstinately offended thee.

In the bitterness of my Soul, O Father of mercy, I bewail and abhor my
unworthiness, and the hardness of my heart, that has despised Romans 2.4.
the riches of thy goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, which should
have lead me to repentance.

O Lord God, whatever thou deny'st me, deny me not a broken Psalm. 51.17.
and a contrite heart.

O that my head Ier. 9.1.
were waters, and my eyes fountains of tears, that I might weep much and love
much Luke 7.47.
, having much to be forgiven.

Lord, hear me, help me, save me, for thy own gracious promise sake, for thy
own tender mercies sake, for the merits and sufferings of Jesus thy beloved, in
whom thou have made Penitents accepted. Amen. Amen.

Our Vow renewed.
Q. Having repented of the violations of your Baptismal Vow, show me how you
will renew it.

A. I shall do it after this manner.

I have sinned, O Lord God, I have sinned, and done evil in thy sight, but I
repent, I turn to thee.

I confess Psalm. 38.18.
, and forsake my wickedness, and am sorry for my sins.

It grieves me, O most amiable Goodness, it grieves me that ever I offended
thee.

With all my heart, 1 Cor. 10.20 Ephesians. 2.2.12.
O my God, do I now renew the Sacred vow, which, alas! alas! I have so often
violated.

O Lord God, I do, for the future, Renounce the devil* that Arch-rebel against
thee, with all his Apostate-Angels.

I renounce all his worship John 13.2.
, all his impious suggestions, delusions 2 Cor. 4.4.
and temptations, for which he is called the tempter Mat. 4.3.
, and all the ways of consulting him, which ungodly men have taken Acts 19.19.
.

I renounce all his works, all those sins of the Spirit, all pride 1 Timothy 3.6.
, and John 8.44.
malice, and envy; all treachery 6.70.
and lying, revenge and cruelty; all tempting others to Sin, hatred to Holiness
Acts 13.10.
and Apostasy Jude 6.
, which are his daily practice, and are truly diabolical.

I utterly renounce, O Lord God, the pomps and vanity of this wicked world; all
covetous desires of honor, riches and pleasure Tit. 2.12.
; all sinful excesses in things lawful 1 Cor. 7.30, 31.
.

I renounce, Lord* all evil Romans 12.2.
customs, all evil companions Prove. 1.10. 1 Cor. 15.33.
, all that is vain or wicked John 17.15. 1 John 5.19.
in the world, all that friendship with the world, which is enmity with thee
James 4.4.
; all things that may alienate my heart from thee.

I renounce, O Lord God, all worldly comforts and possessions; all my natural
relations, and my own life Luke 14.26.
, whenever they stand in competition with my duty to thee.

I utterly renounce, O Lord God, all the sinful lusts of the flesh, all the
inordinate desires of my own corrupt nature, of my own carnal mind Romans
7.18.25.8.7.
, which is enmity with thee.

I Renounce, Lord, all fleshly lusts which war against thee 1 Pet. 2.11. 1 John
2.15. Gal. 5.19.
, and against my own Soul, all sloth, and idleness, and intemperance, and
lasciviou^ness; all filthiness of flesh and spirit, which render us unclean in
thy sight.

O Lord God, I utterly Renounce all things that may any way displease thee; 2
Cor. 7.1
from them all let it be thy good pleasure to deliver me.

I know, Lord, that Sin is the utmost abomination to thy purity Pro. 15.9.
, the most audacious outrage to thy Adorable Majesty, the perfect contradiction
to thy Deity, and therefore I utterly renounce and abhor it.

I know, Lord, that Sin exposes us to all the Vials of thy wrath, and to
vengeance eternal; I know it sets the Sinner at the extremest distance, and
opposition and defiance to thee, and therefore I utterly renounce and abhor it.

I know, Lord, I cannot love thee Psalm. 97.10.
, but I must hate evil, and therefore I renounce and detest it.

Turn thou me Ier. 31.18.
, O Lord God, and so shall I be turned.

Turn, O Lord, the whole stream of my affections, from sensual love, to the
love of thee.

O my God, let thy heavenly love be the constant bias of my Soul; O may it be
the natural spring and weight of my heart, that it may always move toward thee.

Thy love, O my God, shall hereafter be the sole rule and guide of my life; I
will love thee, and love whatever thou love, and hate whatever thou hate, I
will believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and I will keep thy Holy
Will and Commandments, and wa^^ in the same all the days of my life.

All this, O my God, I own my self bound to believe and do, and though of my
self I am impotent to all good 2 Cor. 3.4. John 15.5.
, yet by thy help Phil. 4.13.
I will perform it; and I heartily thank thee, O heavenly Father 1 Ephesians. 3. 1
Pet. 1.3.
, who, out of mere compassion to my Soul, have called me to this state of
salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Glory be to thee, O Lord, who have indulged me this opportunity of repentance;
Glory be to thee who have wrought in me this Will, to renew my Baptismal vow.

O my God, I humbly, I earnestly pray unto thee to give me continual supplies
of thy grace, that* I may continue in thy love unto my lives end, that being
faithful to death, I may receive the Crown of life Rev. 2.10.
.

O Lord God, I have sworn Ps. 119.106.
, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments.

My heart is empty and disengaged, and longs for thee; my heart is entirely
devoted to thee: Enter, O my God; possess it with thy gracious presence, and
fill it with thy love.

Lord, for thy tender mercies sake, restore me to thy favor; to all the graces
and privileges of my Baptism, of which I have been spoiled by my sins.

Lord, make me a living member of thy Church, the mystical body of thy Son 1
Cor. 12.13, 27.
.

O my God, unite me inseparably to Christ my Head Ephesians. 1.23.
, and from thence let his gracious influences, be ever streaming into my soul
4.15. 2 Col. 19.
.

Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy
to be called thy Son: But I return with the Prodigal Luke 15.18.
; O let thy paternal bowels yearn on me, and graciously receive me.

Lord, send thy Spirit of Adoption Gal. 3.26, 27.
into my heart, to instill true filial affections, that I may again be owned by
thee for thy Child, and call thee Father, and share in the blessings of thy
Children, and at last become an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven Romans 8.16,
17.
.

O heavenly Father, accept my imperfect repentance, compassionate my
infirmities, forgive my wickedness, purify my uncleanness, strengthen my
weakness, fix my unstableness, and let thy love ever rule in my heart, through
the merits, and sufferings, and love of the Son of thy love, in whom thou art
always infinitely pleased Mat. 3.17.
. Amen.

This Office may be used in times of devout Retirement, or on the Lord's day,
or in Affliction or Sickness, but especially before the Holy Eucharist.

The Motives of Love.
Q. Rehearse the Articles of your Belief.

A. I. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth.

II. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord,

III. Who was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the Uirgin Mary.

IV. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried, He
descended into Hell.

V. The third day He rose again from the Dead.

VI. He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty;

VII. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

VIII. I believe in the Holy Ghost.

IX. The Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints. Faith w^^king by lo^^


X. The Forgiveness of Sins.

XI. The resurrection of the body.

XII. And the life everlasting. Amen.

Q. What do thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy belief?

A. First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has made me and all the
world.

Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed me, and all mankind.

Thirdly, Its Object
In God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the Elect people of God.
The Vnit^ of God.


Q. What is the method of the Creed?

A. The Creed teaches me to believe in God, and to believe his Church.

Q. How in God?

A. It teaches me to believe in God, The Trim in Unity.
with respect to his Unity, and then to the Trinity of Persons in that Unity,
Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Q. How does it teach you to believe the Church?

A. It teaches me to believe the Church, with regard to its two different
states, either Militant below, or Triumphant above.

Q. How are the Articles of the Creed Motives of Love?

A. Every Article includes a Blessing as well as a Mystery, and is as proper to
excite our Love, as to engage our Faith.

Q. Give me such a Paraphrase on the Creed, that throughout the whole, your
Faith may work by Love Gal. 5.6.
.

A. I shall do it to the best of my power, in such Instructive and Pathetical
Aspirations, as follow.

I Believe.
Faith working by love.
My Lord and my God, with a full, free and firm assent, I believe all the
Articles of my Creed, because thou have revealed them; I know thou art
infallible Truth, and can not Deuteronomy. 32.4. Heb. 6.18.
, thou art infinite Love Psalm. 25.8.
, and wilt not deceive me: Glory be to thee.

With all my heart, O my God, do I love and praise thee, who art so infinitely
amiable in thy self, and so full of love to us, that all I can know, or believe
of thee, excites me to love thee.

Lord, daily increase my Faith; make it active and fruitful Iam. 2.20.
, that I may believe and love thee as entirely, as becomes one entirely devoted
to thee.

In God.
Its Objects.
I believe, O my God, that thou art One Deuteronomy. 4.35. Isa. 44.6.45.5, 6.
, and that there is no other God besides thee; thou art that One infinite and
independent Being, The Unity of God.
that One only true God, whom all Men, and all Angels are to Adore: All glory
be to thee.

O Lord God, help me to love and to praise thee with God-like affections, and a
suitable Devotion.

The Trinity in Unity.
I believe, O my God, that in the Unity of thy Godhead, there is a Trinity of
Persons Mat. 3.17.28.19. Ioh. 1.5, 7.
, I believe in thee, O Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in whose Name I was
baptized, to whose Service I am religiously devoted: All glory be to thee.

I believe, I admire, I love, I praise, I adore thee, O most blessed and
glorious Trinity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, for
being the joint Authors of our Salvation: All glory be to thee.

O sacred, and dreadful, and mysterious Trinity, though I cannot conceive
thee, yet let me daily experiment thy goodness; Let thy Grace, O Lord Jesus;
let thy Love, O God the Father 2 Cor. 13.14.
; let thy Communications, O Holy Spirit, be ever with me.

The Father.
The first Person of the Trinity.
I believe, and love, and praise thee, O my God, the first Person in the most
Adorable Trinity; the Fountain of the Godhead; the Eternal Father of thy
coeternal Son Ioh. 1.18.5.18.
, Jesus my Savior.

His distinctive Property, Father.
Glory be to thee, O God the Father, for so loving the world Ioh. 3.16.
, as to give thy only begotten Son to redeem us.

Glory be to thee, O Heavenly Father, for first loving us, and giving the
dearest thing thou had for us; O help me to love again, and to think nothing
too dear for thee.

Almighty.
His Attributes.
I believe, O my God, that thou art a Spirit Ioh. 4.23, 24.
most pure, and holy 1 Pet. 1.16.
, and infinite in all perfections Ps. 145.3.
, in Power Ps. 115.3.
, and Knowledge Isai. 40.28.
, and Goodness Mat. 19.17.
; that thou art Eternal Ps. 90.2.
, Immutable James 1.17.
, and Omnipresent Psalm. 139.1, etc.
; all love, all glory be to thee.

I believe, O Lord, that thou art most wise Ps. 147.5.
and just Romans 2.6.
, most happy Psalm. 16.11.
and glorious 1 Timothy 6.16.
, and all-sufficient 2 Cor. 12.9.
, most gracious and merciful, and tender, and benign, and liberal, and
beneficent Tit. 3.4. Ephesians. 2.4. Psalm. 51.1.
; all love, all glory be to thee.

I believe thy Divine Nature, O my God, to be in all respects amiable, to be
Amiableness it self, to be Love Cant. 5.16. 1 Ioh. 4.8, 16.
it self; and therefore I love, I admire, I praise, and fear, and adore thee.

Thou, Lord, art my Hope, my Trust, my Life, my Joy, my Glory, my God, my All,
my Love.

Maker of Heaven and Earth.
His Works.
I believe that thou, O Father Almighty, did create Heaven and Earth, the
whole World, and all things in it, visible and invisible, out of nothing, and
by thy Word only Genesis 1.1. Heb. 11.3. Psalm. 33.6.
: All glory be to thee.

I believe, O thou great Creator, that thy Divine Love made thee communicate
Being to thy Creatures; that thou love all things, and hate nothing thou
have made: Glory be to thee.

I believe, O God, that thou art the sole Lord, and Proprietour of all things
thou have made Deuteronomy. 10.14. Psalm. 89.11.
; that all things do necessarily depend on thee; that it is in thee only we
live Acts 17.28.
, and move, and have our Being: All Love, all Glory be to thee.

I believe, O thou Communicative Goodness, that thou do preserve, and
sustain, and protect, and bless all things thou have made, sutably to the
Natures thou have given them Read the 145 Psalm.
: All Love, all Glory be to thee.

I believe, O mighty Wisdom, that thou do most sweetly order and govern, and
dispose all things Psalm. 104.24.
; even the most minute Mat. 6.26, 28.10.30.
; even the very sins of men Genesis 50.20.
, to conspire in thy Glory; O do thou conduct my whole life, steer every motion
of my soul, toward the great End of our Creation; to love, and to glorify
thee.

I believe, O Lord, that thy Love was more illustrious in the Creation of Man,
than in all the rest of the visible World; thou were pleased to make him Genesis
1.26.
in thy own Image, and after thy own divine likeness: All Love, all Glory be to
thee.

Thou, Lord, did make Man for thy self, and all things visible for Man; Thou
designedst all creatures for his use Psalm. 8.
, and did subject them to his Dominion; the very Angels thou did charge Ps.
91.11.
to keep him in all his ways: All Love, all Glory be to thee.

Thy Works, O Lord, are wonderful and amiable Psalm. 111.2, 3, 4.
; I love, and admire, and praise thy Universal Providence over the whole World;
the perpetual flux of thy Goodness on every Creature: All glory be to thee.

I love and praise thee, O my God, for all the particular vouchsafements of thy
love to me Ps. 68.19.
, for all thy deliverances and blessings, either to my body or to my soul,
known or unknown Read the 103 Psalm.
; for all that I do not remember, or did not consider: All Love, all Glory be
to thee.

The longer I live, O my God, the more reason I have to love thee, because
every day supplies me with fresh experiments and new motives of thy manifold
love to me; and therefore all Love, all Glory be to thee.

And in Jesus.
The second Person in the Trinity, God the Son. His Offices.
I believe in thee, O Jesus, and I rejoice in that dear Name which is so full
and expressive of thy Love.

Thou art Jesus our Savior, because thou came into the World on purpose to
save us from our sins Mat. 1.21.
: All Love, all Glory be to thee,

O be thou ever Jesus to me; O let me feel the kind force of that sweet name,
in which I and all sinners do read our danger, and our deliverance, our guilt,
and our salvation.

O most benign Jesu! He well deserves to be accursed that does not love thee 1
Cor. 16.22.
: Who, Lord, can ever hope to share in thy Salvation, who does not love thee
his Savior?

Christ.
I believe, O merciful Jesus, that thou art Christ the true Messiah Ioh. 1.41.
Dan. 9.26.
, the Anointed of the Lord, the promised seed which was to bruise the Serpent's
head Genesis 3.15.
, long expected by the Fathers Luke 2.25.
, foretold by the Prophets Acts 10.43.
, represented by Types Col 2.17.
, which were all fulfilled in thee, O thou the desire of all Nations Hag. 2.7.
: All Love, all Glory be to thee.

I believe that thou, O Jesus, were Anointed with the Holy Spirit Acts 10.38.
Heb. 1.9.
, that all his Gifts and Graces were poured out, and diffused like a sweet
ointment on thy soul, without measure Ioh. 3.34.
; thou art altogether lovely, O Christ, and of thy fullness we all receive 1.16.
: All Love, all Glory be to thee.

I believe, O thou Anointed of God, that as Kings 1 Samuel 15.1.
, and Priests Lev. 4.3.5.16.
, and 1 Kings 19.16.
Prophets, were heretofore anointed with Material oil; so by thy Heavenly
Anointing Mat. 3.16.
, thou wast Consecrated to be our Prophet, our King, and our Priest, and in all
those three Offices, to manifest thy love to us; and therefore all Love, all
Glory be to thee.

Glory be to thee, O Christ, our Prophet Ioh. 4.25. Acts 7.37. Luke 4.18.
, who did teach, and reveal, and interpret thy Father's Will, and all saying
truth to the World.

Glory be to thee, O Christ, our King Luke 1.33.
, who do give Laws to thy People, do govern and protect us, and have
subdued all our Ghostly Enemies.

Glory be to thee, O Christ, our Priest, who do bless us Act. 3.26.
, who did offer thy self a sacrifice Isa. 53.10. Ephesians. 5.2. Heb. 9.14.
, and do still make intercession for us Romans 8.34. Heb. 7.25.
.

Our Redemption, our Illumination, our Support is wholly from thy Love, O thou
Anointed of God: All Love, all Glory be to thee.

His only Son.
His two Natures. 1. Of God. His Eternal generation.
I believe that thou, O most Adorable Jesus, art the Son of God by ineffable
generation Heb. 1.5. Isa. 53.8. John 1.1.
; thou did from Eternity derive thy Godhead from the Father; thou art the
brightness Heb. 1.3.
of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person: All Love, all Glory be to
thee.

Thou, O blessed Jesu, art the only Son of God, the only begotten Son, full
of Grace and Truth Ioh. 1.14.18.5.18. Romans 8.32. Mat. 3.17.
; Thou art the only beloved Son, in whom thy Father is well pleased; it is
only in thee, and for thee, that Sinners have Hope; and therefore all Love,
all Glory be to thee.

Thou art equal Phil. 2.6.
to thy Father, O Jesu, in amiableness and in love to us, and art equally to be
loved by us; and therefore all Love and Praise be to the Father that eternally
begat 1 Io. 5.1.
, and to the Son eternally begotten.

Our Lord.
His Deity.
I believe, O thou eternal Son of the Father, that thou art the great Tit. 2.13.
and true 1 Io. 5.20.
God, Jehovah our Righteousness Ier. 23.6.
, God above all blessed for ever Romans 9.5.
, and mighty to save Isa. 63.1.
: All love, all Glory be to thee.

I believe, O Lord Jesus, that thou did make John 1.3.
, and do sustain all things by thy Power Heb. 1.3, 10.
, and that thou art to be honored by Men, and by Angels, as thy Father is
honored Heb. 1.6. Phil. 2.10. Ioh. 5.23.
: All Love, all Glory be to thee.

I believe, O thou King of Kings, and Lord of Lords Rev. 19.16.
, that thou art the Lord, and the Author of the new Creation Ephesians. 1.21,
22.2.10.
, as well as of the old, that thou art more peculiarly Lord of us Sinners by
purchase 1 Cor. 6.20.
; O that I, and all that own thy Dominion, may for ever love, and revere, and
obey Luke 6.46.
so powerful and gracious a Lord!

Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost.
Of Man in his state of Humiliation. His Conception.
I believe, O most condescending Majesty, that when thou did stoop so low as
to assume our frail Nature, the Holy Ghost came on thy sacred Mother. and that
the Power of the Highest did overshadow her Luke 1.31, 34, 35, 42.
, and that she did conceive, and lodge thee in her Womb, where thou, who
fillest Heaven and Earth, were about nine months for our sakes imprisoned; and
therefore all love, all glory be to thee.

Born of the Uirgin Mary.
His Birth.
I believe, O most adorable Humility, that thou wast at last born into the World
Luke 2.6, 7.
, that thou having only God for thy Father, and Mary, a pure Virgin, for thy
Mother, whom all Generations do call Blessed Luke 1.48.
, both thy Conception and Birth were perfectly immaculate, that being without
sin thy self 1 John 2.1, 2.
, thou might be a fit sacrifice to atone for us Sinners, who being born of
unclean Parents, were all by nature unclean Job 14.4.
; and therefore all love, all glory be to thee, O immaculate Lamb of God, who
take away the sins of the World Ioh. 1.29.
.

I believe, O blessed Savior, that the two Natures of God, and of Man, were in
thee so mysteriously united, without either change, or confusion, that they
made in thee but one Person, but one Mediator 1 Timothy 2.5.
, one Lord Ephesians. 4.5.
: Thou, O Eternal Word, did become flesh, and did dwell among us Ioh. 1.14.
, on purpose to save us; and therefore all love, all glory be to thee.

Suffered.
His Life of sorrow.
I believe, O adorable Love, that thy whole life was made up of sufferings, and
that for sinful men, and in particular for me; O let me never cease to adore
and love thee.

It was for us Sinners, O tenderest Love, that in thy very infancy thou wast
circumcised Luke 2.21.
, and designed by Herod for slaughter, and forced to fly into Egypt Mat. 2.13,
16.
, and therefore I praise and love thee.

It was for us Sinners that thou, O afflicted Love, were all thy life-long, a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief Isa. 53.3.
; that thou wast persecuted and reviled, despised and rejected, and had not
where to lay thy head Mat. 8.20.
, and therefore I am bound to praise, and love thee.

It was for us Sinners, that thou, O compassionate Love, when thou tookest on
thee our nature, wast touched with a feeling of our infirmities, and wast in all
points tempted like as we are, yet without sin Heb. 4.15.
, that thou might the more affectionately pity the weak, and succor the
tempted; and therefore I praise and love thee.

It was for us Sinners, that thou, O beneficent Love, did go about doing good
Acts 10.38.
, preaching repentance, publishing the glad tidings of salvation Mat. 4.17.
Luke 4.18.
, sending thy Disciples Mat. 10.1, 5.
, confirming thy heavenly Doctrine by many glorious Miracles 11.5.
, and illustrating it by a God-like example; all thy life is full of
attractives of sweetest love and pity to us Sinners, which 2 Cor. 5.14.
kindly and forcibly constrain us to praise and love thee.

O most exuberant Love, how amiable are all thy Graces, O fill my heart with
thy love, and transform me into thy likeness Romans 8.29. Phil. 2.5.
, that I may all my life-long imitate thy perfect obedience, unspotted
Holiness, unchangeable Resolution, universal Charity, uninterrupted Devotion,
contempt of the World, Heavenly-mindedness, gracious Condescension, ardent Zeal
for thy Father's Glory, and unbounded Love, and that for the sake of that
dearest Love, which inclined thee to become incarnate for me.

Under Pontius Pilate.
His Sufferings previous to his Crucifixion.
I believe, O my Lord, and my God, that though thou did suffer all thy life
long, yet thy greatest sufferings were under the Roman Governor of Judea,
Pontius Pilate; I believe all those mighty sufferings, but am as little able to
express the greatness of them, as I am the greatness of thy love which moved
thee to suffer: All I can do is to love, and to praise thee.

How great were thy sufferings, O Savior of the World, when the very
apprehension of them made thy Soul very heavy, exceeding sorrowful even to
death, made thee offer up prayers, with strong crying and tears, that if it
were thy Father's will the Cup might pass from thee, Heb. 5.7.
threw thee into an agony and bloody sweat Mat. 26.38. Luke 22.43, 44.
, insomuch that there was an Angel sent from Heaven on purpose to strengthen
thee! O thou agonising Love, impress on my heart so tender a sense of thy
sufferings for me, that I may agonise with thee, that I may feel all thy
sorrows, that though I cannot sweat blood like thee, I may dissolve into tears
for thee, that I may love and suffer with thee throughout every part of thy
Passion.

O suffering Jesus, when my Meditations follow thee from the Garden to Mount
Calvary, I grieve and I love all the way.

I grieve, and I love, when I see thee, O Incarnate God, who could command
more than twelve legions of Angels for thy rescue; out of love to Sinners, and
in particular to me, one of the vilest of all that number, humbling thy self to
be apprehended, and bound by the rude Soldiers, as a Malefactor Mat.
26.47.52.57. John 18.4.
.

I grieve, and I love, when I see thee, O gracious Lord, for my sake, betrayed
by the treacherous kiss of Judas Mat. 26.49, 56, 70.
, denied by Peter, and forsaken of all thy Disciples.

I grieve, and I love, when I see thee, O spotless innocence, out of love to
me, dragged to Annas John 18.12.
and Caiaphas Mat. 26.57, 59. Luke 22.66.
the High Priest, when I see thee accused by ^alse Witnesses, arraigned and
condemned.

I grieve, and I love, when I see thee, O divine Majesty, out of love to me,
spit upon, and blindfolded, and buffeted, and mocked Mat. 26.67. Luke 22.63.
, sent to Pilate an Infidel Judge Mat. 27.2.
, then to wicked Herod Luke 23.6.11.12.
, who with his men of war set thee at naught, arrayed thee in a white Robe of
Mockery, and sent thee again to Pilate.

I grieve, and I love, O injured Goodness, when I see thee, though declared
innocent by the very Traitor Judas, who out of horror for his Crime, went and
hanged himself, though declared innocent by Pilate himself, the Judge to whom
thine Enemies appealed, yet worried to death by the clamours of the Rabble,
that cried out Crucify, Crucify, when I see Barabbas a Traitor and a Murderer
preferred before thee Luke 23.14, 18, 19, 21. Mat. 27.3, 4.5.
.

I grieve, and I love, when I see thee, O lover of Souls, for my sake most
unjustly given up into the hands of infidel Soldiers, to be stripped naked, and
tied to a Pillar, and scourged John 19.1. Psalm. 129.3.
; to see the Plowers plowing on thy back, and making long furrows.

I grieve, and I love, O King of Heaven, when I see thee out of love to me,
humbling thy self to be arrayed in Purple Mat. 27.28, 29.
, with a Reed in thy hand, when I see thee crowned with Thorns, to multiply thy
torments; when I see thee mocked by barbarous Wretches, with their bended knee,
and with hail King of the Jews.

I grieve, and I love, when I see thee, O Lord God, whom the Angels worship,
spit upon again, and buffeted Mar. 15.19.
, and for my sake, made the ex^treme scorn, and contempt, and sport, of thy
insolent and insulting Enemies; and though still declared innocent by Pilate
Mat. 27.24, 26.
, yet surrendered to the unrelenting Cruelty of the multitude, to be crucified.

My Lord, my God, my Savior, with all my heart, I love and adore thy infinite
love and benignity to Sinners; with all my heart, I lament and detest the
hatred, and outrage of Sinners to thee.

Was crucified.
His Crucifixion.
I grieve, and I love, O sorrowful Jesus, when I see thee for my sake oppressed
with the weight of thy own Cross John 19.17.
, till thy tender Body, quite spent with sufferings, sank under it Mat. 27.32.
.

I grieve, and I love, O thou great Martyr of Love, when for my sake I see thy
virgin Body stripped naked, thy Hands and thy Feet nailed to the Cross; when I
see thee crucified between two Thieves Mat. 27.38.
, and numbered with the Transgressors, when I see Gall given thee to eat, and
Vinegar to drink Psalm. 69.21.
.

I grieve, and I love, when I see thee, O incarnate Deity hanging on the Cross,
and for my sake, by thy own People, in the height of thy anguish, derided,
reproacht and blasphemed, with wagging of their heads, mocked by the Soldiers,
and by the impenitent Thief Mat. 27.39. Luke 23.39.
.

I grieve, and I love, when I see thee, O God blessed for evermore, O Fountain
of all blessing, hang bleeding on the Cross, and made a curse for me Gal. 3.13.
; How does my indignation swell against the injustice, and ingratitude, and
inhumanity of the Jews, who could thus cruelly treat so unreproachable an
Innocence, so amiable a Charity, so compassionate a Savior!

Alas, alas, it was the Sinner, O Love incarnate, rather than the Jew, that
betrayed, and derided, and blasphemed and tortured and crucified thee; the sins
of lapst mankind Isa. 53.6.
, and particularly my sins, they were thy Tormentours; and therefore from my
heart I bewail, detest and abjure them.

My Lord, and my God, instill penitential love into my Soul, that I may grieve
for my sins, which grieved thee, that I may love thee for suffering for us
Sinners, who occasioned all thy griefs; O may I always love thee, O may I never
grieve thee more!

Dead.
His Death.
I grieve, and I love, O bleeding Love, when I see thee on the Cross, quite
spent with pain and anguish, when I see thee in thy dying pangs commending thy
Spirit into the hands of thy heavenly Father Luke 23.46.
, bowing thy head John 19.30.
, and giving up the Ghost. Thou, O Lord of life, did for us Sinners humble
thy self to death, even to the death of the Cross, a death of utmost shame and
ignominy, and of torment insupportable; all love, all glory be to thee.

Was ever any sorrow, O crucified Lord, like that sorrow my sins created thee?

Was ever any love, O outrag'd Mercy, like that love thou did show, in dying
for Sinners!

All the frame of Nature, O dying Savior, fell into convulsions at the
crucifixion of their great Creator; The Sun was darkened Mat. 27.51.
, the veil of the Temple was rent from the top to the bottom, the Earth quak't,
the Rocks clave asunder, the Bodies of dead Saints rose out of their Graves,
insomuch that the Centurion and infidel Soldiers acknowledged thee to be the
Son of God; thou wast lovely, and glorious, and adorable in thy lowest
humiliation; all love, all praise be to thee.

His unknown Sufferings.
Thy bodily Sufferings, O almighty Love, were intolerable, but yet thy inward
were far greater.

I grieve, I love, I melt all over, when I hear thee on the Cross crying out,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me Mat. 27.46.
. Ah sinful Wretch that I am, how infinite and unconceivable were the inward
Dolours and Agonies thou did undergo for us Sinners, when thou did tread
the Winepress of thy Father's wrath alone Isa. 63.3.
, when it pleased thy own most beloved Father to bruise thee, and to put thee
to grief, when the iniquities of the whole World were laid on thee Isa. 53.6,
10.
, and my numerous sins increast thy load, and heightened thy torment, when thy
own Deity withdrew all consolation from thee, when God, offended by our sins,
did afflict thee in the day of his fierce anger Lam. 1.12.
; no sufferings, no love was ever like unto thine for me; no grief, no love but
thy own should exceed mine for thee.

For whom, O unutterable goodness, did thou suffer the extreme bitterness o^
sorrow, but for the vilest of all thy Creatures, sinful man, and for me one of
the worst of Sinners? and therefore I praise and love thee.

For what end did thou suffer, O most ardent Charity, but to save Sinners
from all things that were destructive, the Curse of the Law Gal. 3.13.
, the Terrors of Death Heb. 2.14, 15.
, the Tyranny of Sin Romans 6.14.
, the Powers of Darkness, and Torments Eternal 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
, to purchase for us all things conducible to our Happiness Ephesians. 1.7. Heb.
9.12, 15.
, Pardon and Grace, Consolation and Acceptance, and the everlasting Joys and
Glories of the Kingdom of Heaven; and therefore I praise and love thee.

Out of what motive did thou suffer, O boundless Benignity, but out of thy
own preventing love 1 John 4.19.
, free mercy, and pure compassion, and therefore I praise and love thee.

When no other Sacrifice could atone thy Father's Anger, O thou the beloved
Son of God, and reconcile Divine Justice and Mercy together, but the Sacrifice
of God incarnate, who as man was to die Heb. 9.28.
, and to suffer in our stead, as God was to merit and make satisfaction for our
sins; 'twas then that thou, O God the Son, did become Man, the very meanest
of Men, did take upon thee the form of a Servant Phil. 2.7.
, and did on the Cross show us the mystery and the Miracle of Love, God
crucified for Sinners, and Sinners redeemed by the blood of God Acts 20.28.
.

O thou propitious Wonder, God incarnate on the Cross, by what Names shall I
adore thee, all are too short, too scanty to express thee, Love only, nothing
but Love will reach thee, thou art Love 1 John 4.8.
, O Jesu, thou art all love, O tenderest, O sweetest, O purest, O dearest Love,
soften, sweeten, refine, love me into all Love like thee!

By the love of thy Cross, O Jesu, I live Gal. 2.20.6.14.
, in that I will only glory, that above all things will I study 1 Cor. 2.2.
, that before all things will I value Phil. 3.8.
; by the love of thy Cross I will take up my Cross daily Luke 9.23.
, and follow thee, I will persecute and torment, and crucify Romans 6.6. Gal.
5.24.
my sinful Affections and Lusts, which persecuted, tormented and crucified
thee; and if thy love calls me to it, I will suffer on the Cross for thee, as
thou have done for me Acts 21.13.
.

How illustrious and amiable were thy Graces amidst all thy Sufferings, O thou
afflicted Jesu; I admire, and I love thy profound Humility, unwearied Patience,
Lamb-like Meekness, immaculate Innocence, invincible Courage, absolute
Resignation, compassionate love of Souls, and perfect Charity to thy Enemies. O
my Love, I cannot love thee, but I must desire above all things to be like my
Beloved; O give me grace to tread in thy steps 1 Pet. 2.21.
, and conform me to thy Divine Image, that the more I grow like thee, the more
I may love thee, and the more I may be loved by thee.

And Buried, He descended into Hell.
His Burial and descent.
I believe, O crucified Lord, that thou wast really dead, and that there was a
separation of thy Body and Soul: That thy side was mortally wounded, and
pierced with a Spear on the Cross Ioh. 19.34.
, and thy sacred Body was buried Mat. 27.57, 60.
, to assure us of thy death: All love, all glory be to thee.

I believe, O pierced, O wounded Love, that thy Soul in the state of separation
did descend into Hell Ephesians. 4.9.
, to vanquish Death and all the Spirits of darkness in their own Dominions, and
therefore I adore and love thee.

Glory be to thee, O thou great Champion of Love, who did for our sakes
singly encounter all our ghostly Enemies, who did thy self taste of death
Heb. 2.9.
, that thou might take away the sting of death 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.
, who did wrestle with principalities and powers Col. 2.15.
, and all the force of Hell that we might share in thy Victory; for which
wonderful Salvation I will always praise and love thee.

In his state of Exaltation.
The third day he rose again from the dead.
His Resurrection.
I believe, O Almighty Love, that, according to the Types and Prophecies which
went before of thee Luke 24.26, 27. Mat. 12.40.
, and according to thy own infallible predictions, thou did by thy own power
Ioh. 2.19.
rise from the dead the third day: All love, all glory be to thee.

Glory be to thee, who did lie so long in the Grave to undergo the full
condition of the dead, and to convince all the world thou were dead; and did
rise so soon that thou might not see corruption Acts 2.31.
or retard our joy Ioh. 16.22.
; All love, all glory be to thee.

He ascended into Heaven.
His Ascension.
I believe, O Victorious Love, that thou, after thy conquest over Death and
Hell, did ascend in triumph to Heaven Luke 24.51. Acts 1.9, 10.
, that thou might prepare Mansions for us Ioh. 14.2.
, and from thenc^ as Conqueror bestow the gifts of thy conquest on us Ephesians. 4.8.
, and above all the gift of thy Holy Spirit Ioh 10.7.
; that thou might enter into the Holy of Holies, as our great High Priest
Heb. 6.19, 20.10.20, 21.
, to present to thy Father the sweet smelling Sacrifice of his crucified Son,
the sole propitiation for Sinners; and therefore all Love, all glory be to thee.

Glory be to thee, O Jesu, who did leave the world and ascend to Heaven about
the 33d year of thy age, to teach us in the prime of our years to despise this
world, when we are best able to enjoy it, and to reserve our full vigor for
Heaven and for thy Love.

O thou whom my Soul loves, since thou have left the world, what was there
ever in it worthy of our Love! O let all my affections ascend after thee, and
never return to the earth more; for whom have I in heaven but thee? and there
is none upon earth that I desire in comparison of thee Psalm. 73.25.
.

And sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty.
His Session.
I believe, O Triumphant Love, that thou now sit in full and peaceful
possession of bliss 1 Pet. 3.22.
, and at the right hand of God, that thy humane Nature is exalted to the most
honorable place in Heaven, where thou sit on thy throne of glory, adored
by Angels Rev. 5.8, 9, 12.
, and interceding for Sinners Romans 8.34.
; and therefore all love, all glory be to thee.

Glory be to thee, O Love enthroned, thy Resurrection, Ascension and Session,
are all signal instances of thy love, and earnests of our future felicity, the
entire purchase of thy love: All our hopes of Heaven, our Resurrection,
Ascension and Glorification depend on, and are derived from thine, and are all
the trophies of thy love to us; and therefore I will ever praise and love thee.

From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
His coming to Judgment.
I believe, O Glorified Love, that from thy Throne at God's right hand, where
thou now sit, thou will come again Acts 1.11. Phil. 3.20*
to judge the world, attended with thy holy Angels 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
. All glory be to thee.

I believe, O thou adorable Judge, that all mankind shall be summoned before
thy awful Tribunal. All the D^ad, who shall be waked out of their Graves when
the Angel shall blow the last Trump 1 Cor. 15.52.
, and all that are then Quick, and alive, shall then appear before thee. All
glory be to thee.

I believe, Lord, that I and all the world shall give a strict account of all
our thoughts, and words, and actions; that the Books will be then opened, that
out of those dreadful Registers we shall be judged Romans 14.10. Matt. 12.36.
Rev. 20.12.
; that Satan and our own Consciences will be our accusers. O let the last Trump
be ever sounding in my ears, that I may ever be mindful of my great accounts
Eccles. 12.13, 14.
, and that I may neither speak, nor do, nor think any thing that may wound my
own Conscience, or provoke thy Anger, or make me tremble at the awful day.

I know, O thou adorable Judge, that Love only shall then endure that terrible
Test, that Love only shall be acquitted, that love only shall be eternally
blessed; and therefore I will ever praise and love thee.

Glory be to thee, O thou beloved Son of God, to whom the Father has committed
all Judgment Ioh. 5.22.
.

How can they that love thee, O Jesu, ever despond, though their love in this
life is always imperfect, when at last they shall have love for their Judge,
Love that has felt and will compassionate all their infirmities; and therefore
all love, all glory be to thee.

I believe in the Holy Ghost.
The Third Person in the Trinity.
I believe in thee, O thou Spirit of God, the third Person in the most adorable
Trinity; I believe, O blessed Spirit, that thou art the Lord 2 Cor. 3-17, 18.
, that thou art God Ioh. 4.24. Acts 5.3.
eternal Heb. 9.14.
and omniscient 1 Cor. 2.10.
, a Person distinct from both the Father and the Son, eternally proceeding from
both Matt. 10.20. Romans 8.9.
, and equally sent by both Ioh. 14.26.16.7.
, and joint-authour with both of our Salvation; and therefore all love, all
glory be to thee.

I believe, O blessed Spirit, that thou art Holy, essentially Holy 1 Pet. 1.15.
, in respect of thy own Divine Nature, and being essentially Holy, art
infinitely Amiable; and therefore all love, all glory be to thee.

I believe, O blessed Spirit, that thou art personally Holy, that thou art the
Author of all internal Holiness, and all internal and sanctifying Grace Gal.
5.22.
, that thou art the principle of all spiritual life in us Ioh. 3.5.
; and therefore all love, all glory be to thee.

Glory be to thee, O Love Incarnate, for sending the Spirit in thy stead, and
for promising it to our Prayers Luke 11.13.
; all love, all glory be to thee.

Glory be to thee, O Spirit of Love, for shedding the love of God abroad in our
hearts Romans 5.5*
, for filling all that love thee with exuberance of joy and consolation; all
love, all glory be to thee.

O thou blessed Spirit the Comforter, purify my Soul, and infuse thy love into
it, and consecrate it to be thy Temple 1 Cor. 6.19.
, and fix thy Throne immovably there, and set all my affections on fire, that
my heart may be a continual Sacrifice of Love offered up to thee, and the flame
may be ever aspiring toward thee.

The Holy Catholic Church.
Our Belief of the Church 1. Militant. Its Nature.
I believe, O blessed and adorable Mediator, that the Church is a Society of
persons, founded by thy love to Sinners Matt. 16.18. Ephesians. 5.25.
, united into one Body of which thou art the Head Col. 1.18.
, initiated by Baptism Matt. 28.19.
, nourish't by the Eucharist 26.26.
, governed by Pastors commissioned by thee, and endowed with the power of the
Keys Matt. 18.18. Ioh. 20.22, 23.
, professing the Doctrine taught by thee Acts 2.41, 42 --
, and delivered to the Saints Jude 3.
, and devoted to praise and to love thee.

I believe, O holy Jesus, that thy Church is holy like thee its author; holy
by the original design of its Institution 2 Timothy 1.9.
, holy by baptismal dedication, holy in all its administrations which tend to
produce holiness 2 Timothy 2.19.
; and though there will be always a mixture of good and bad in it in this world
Matt. 13.24.
, yet that it has always many real Saints in it; and therefore all love, all
glory be to thee.

I believe, Lord, this Church to be Catholic, or Universal, made up of the
collection of all particular Churches; I believe it to be Catholic in respect
of time, comprehending all ages to the worlds end, to which it is to endure
Matt. 16.18. Matt. 28.20.
; Catholic in respect of all places, out of which Believers are to be gathered
Matt. 28.19.
; Catholic in respect of all saving Faith, of which this Creed contains the
substance, which shall in it always be taught Ioh. 16.13*
; Catholic in respect of all Graces, which shall in it be practiced, and
Catholic in respect of that Catholic War it is to wage against all its
ghostly enemies, for which it is called Militant: O preserve me always a true
Member of thy Catholic Church, that I may always inseparably adhere to thee,
that I may always devoutly praise and love thee.

Glory be to thee, O Lord my God, who have made me a member of the particular
Church of England, whose Faith, and Government, and Worship are Holy, and
Catholic, and Apostolic, and free from the extremes of Irreverence or
Superstition, and which I firmly believe to be a sound part of thy Church
Universal, and which teaches me Charity to those who dissent from me; and
therefore all love, all glory be to thee.

O my God, give me grace to continue steadfast in her bosom, to improve all
those helps to true Piety, all those means of Grace, all those incentives of
thy Love, thou have mercifully indulged me in her Communion, that I may with
primitive affections and fervor praise and love thee.

The Communion of Saints.
Communion.
I believe, O King of Saints, that among the Saints on Earth, whether real or in
outward profession only, there ought to be a mutual catholic participation*
of all good things 1 Ioh. 1.7.
, which is the immediate effect of catholic Love. Thou, O God of Love restore
it to thy Church.

I believe, O thou God of Love, that all the Saints on Earth by profession
ought to communicate one with another, in evangelical Worship, and the same
holy Sacraments, in the same Divine and Apostolical Faith Acts 2.42, 46.
, in all Offices of corporal Gal. 6.10.
and spiritual Charity Romans 12 -- 9, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Heb. 10.25.
, in reciprocal delight in each others Salvation, and in tender sympathy as
members of one and the same Body 1 Cor. 12.13.26.
: O God of Peace, restore in thy good time this catholic Communion, that with
one heart and one mouth we may all praise and love thee.

O my God, amidst the deplorable divisions of thy Church, O let me never widen
its breaches, but give me catholic Charity to all that are baptized in thy
Name, and catholic Communion with all Christians in desire. O deliver me from
the Sins and Errors, from the Schisms and Heresies of the Age. O give me grace
to pray daily for the peace of thy Church Psalm. 122.6.
, and earnestly to seek it, and to excite all I can to praise and to love thee.

I believe, O most holy Jesu, that thy Saints here below have communion with
thy Saints above Heb. 12.22.
, that they pray for us, while we celebrate their memories, congratulate their
bliss, give thanks for their labors of love, and imitate their examples, for
which all love, all glory be to thee.

I believe, O gracious Redeemer, that thy Saints here on Earth have Communion
with the holy Angels above; that they are ministering Spirits Heb. 1.14.
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation, and watch
over us Psalm. 34.7.
, and we give thanks to thee for their protection, and emulate their incessant
praises and ready obedience; for which all love, all glory be to thee.

I believe, O my Lord and my God, that the Saints in this life have Communion
with the three Persons of the most adorable Trinity 1 Ioh. 1.3. Phil. 2.1.
, in the same most benign influences of love in which all three conspire; for
which all love, all glory be to thee, O Father, Son and Holy Ghost, world
without end.

Glory be to thee O Goodness infinitely diffusive, for all the Graces, and
blessings in which the Saints communicate, for breathing thy love, as the very
Soul into thy mystical Body, that all that believe in thee may love one
another, and all join in loving thee.

The Forgiveness of Sins.
Reconciliation with God.
I believe, O my God, that none can forgive Sins but thou alone Mar. 2.7.
, and that in thy Church forgiveness is always to be had; and for so
inestimable a blessing all love, all glory be to thee.

I believe, O thou lover of Souls, that without true repentance we cannot hope
for pardon 1 Ioh. 1.9.
, that our repentance is at the best imperfect, that it is out of thy mere
mercy, O heavenly Father 3 Tit. 4.5.
, and for the merits and passion of thy crucified Son 1 Pet. 1 -- 18.
that thou do accept our imperfect repentance, and art pleased to forgive us;
and therefore all love, all glory be to thee.

Glory be to thee, O most adorable Trinity, for thy infinite love in our
forgiveness Romans 5.8, 10.
; Glory be to thee, O Father forgiving, O Son propitiating, O Holy Ghost
purifying, I miserable sinner, who sigh, and pant, and languish for thy
forgiveness, and to be at peace with thee Romans 5.^.
, praise, and adore, and love that most sweet, and liberal, and tender, and
amiable mercy, that delights in forgiving sinners.

The Resurrection of the Body.
Triumphant. Resurrection.
I believe, O victorious Jesu, that by the virtue of thy Resurrection all the
dead shall rise 1 Cor. 15.20. John 5.28, 29.
, bad as well as good; all love, all glory be to thee, by whom death is
swallowed up in victory 1 Cor. 15.54.
.

I believe, O Almighty Jesu, that by thy power all shall rise with the same
bodies they had on earth Job. 19.26.
; that thou will recollect their scattered dust into the same form again, that
our Souls shall be reunited to our Bodies, that we shall be judged both in
Body and Soul, for the sins committed by both, that the Bodies of the wicked
shall be fitted for torment, and the Bodies of the Saints changed in quality,
and made glorified Bodies 1 Cor. 15.53. Phil. 3.21.
, immortal and incorruptible, fitted for heaven and eternally to love and enjoy
thee; for which glorious vouchsafement I will always praise and love thee.

And the Life everlasting.
Happiness eternal.
I believe, O great Judge of Heaven and Earth, that after all the Quick and Dead
have appeared before thy Judgment Seat, then the most just and unrepealable
Sentence shall pass, and be executed to all eternity, joyful only to those
that love thee; and therefore all love, all glory be to thee.

I believe, O righteous Jesu, that the wicked shall be set on thy left hand,
and be damned to Hell, to be tormented with everlasting and unconceivable
anguish and despair, by the Devil and his Angels Matt. 25.41.
and their own Conscience, both in Soul and Body, in the lake of fire and
brimstone Rev. 14.10, 11 --
, from which there never can be any redemption; O just reward of those that do
not love thee.

O merciful Jesu, how desirous art thou that we should be happy in loving
thee, when thou have created Hell on purpose to deter us from hating thee, and
Heaven to compel us to love thee; and therefore all love, all glory be to thee.

I believe, O my Lord and my God, that the righteous shall be rewarded with
joys unspeakable and full of glory, with the beatifick Vision and love of thy
self in Heaven 1 Ioh. 3.2. 1 Cor. 13.12.
, with a happiness of Body and Soul, which shall be in all respects most
perfect, eternal and unchangeable 1 Pet. 1.4.
, that they shall never sorrow nor sin more Rev. 21.4.
, which is all the free gift of thy infinite love Mat. 29.34.
, O heavenly Father, and the purchase of thy blood, O God incarnate; for which
I will ever, to the utmost of my power, adore and love thee.

O boundless love, when shall I love thee in heaven without either coldness or
interruption, which alas too often seize me here below.

When, O my God, O when shall I have the transporting vision of thy most
amiable goodness, that I may unalterably love thee, that I may never more
offend thee.

O thou whom my Soul loves, I would not desire heaven but because thou art
there, for thou make heaven wherever thou art.

I would not, O Jesu, desire life everlasting, but that I may there
everlastingly love thee.

O inexhaustible love, do thou eternally breath love into me, that my love to
thee may be eternally increasing, and tending toward infinity, since a love
less than infinite is not worthy of thee.

Amen.
O thou great author and finisher of our Faith, do thou daily increase my
Faith and heighten my love; O grant that in holy ardours of love, to love
crucified, my love may at last ascend to the region of love, that I may have
nothing to do, to all eternity, but to praise and to love thee. Amen. O
infinite Love, Amen, Amen.

This Office may be divided into several parts, and used on the Lord's days, or
on Holy Days, especially on the great Festivals of Christmas, Easter,
Pentecost, in Lent also, and particularly on Good Friday, and before the
reception of the blessed Sacrament, as is most suitable to the occasion, or to
the state, temper and disposition of every devout Soul.

The Fruits of Love.
Q. You said your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you, that you should
keep God's Commandments.

Tell me how many there be.

A. Ten.

Q. Which be they?

A. The same which God spoke in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus, saying, I am
the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House
of Bondage.

I. Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

II. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the water under
the Earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. For I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children,
unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: For the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

IV. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy Son, and thy
Daughter, thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant, thy Cattle and the stranger
that is within thy Gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the
Sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall do no Murder.

VII. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not Steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbor's House, thou shall not covet thy
Neighbor's Wife, nor his Servant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Q. What do thou chiefly learn by these Commandments?

A. I learn two things: my duty toward God, and my duty toward my Neighbor.

Q. What is thy duty toward God?

A. My duty toward God is,

I. II. To believe in him, to fear him, and to love him, with all my heart,
with all my mind, with all my Soul, and with all my strength: to worship him,
to give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him, to call upon him.

III. To honor his holy Name and his Word;

IV. And to serve him truly all the days of my life.

Q. What is thy duty toward thy Neighbor?

A. My duty toward my Neighbor is,

To love him as my self, and to do to all men as I would they should do to
me.

V. To love, honor, and succor my Father and Mother. To honor and obey the
King, and all that are put in Authority under him. To submit my self to all my
Governors, Teachers, spiritual Pastors and Masters, To order my self lowly
and reverently to all my betters.

VI. To hurt no body by word or deed.

VII. To be true and just in all my dealings.

VIII. To bear no malice nor hatred in my heart.

IX. To keep my hands from picking and stealing.

X. And my tongue from evil-speaking, lying and slandering.

XI. To keep my body in temperance, soberness and chastity.

XII. Not to covet and desire other men's goods, but to learn and labor truly
to get mine own living, and to do my duty in that state of life unto which it
shall please God to call me.

Q. You have showed me how the Creed presents to us the Motives; show me next
how the Ten Commandments contain the Fruits, or Effects of Divine love.

A. Jesus our Love, the great Prophet of Love, has given us this trial of our
love, If ye love me, keep my Commandments John 14.15.


Q. Are there not some general Rules, very useful to be observed, in
expounding the Commandments?

A. Divine Love does suggest to us the best Rules, and is the best Expositour
to teach us the full importance of every Command.

Q. Show me how.

A. The Love of God does necessarily include these two things, a tenderness to
please, and a fearfulness to offend our Beloved, and this Love will be a sure
guide to us, in both the affirmative, and the negative part of each Command.

Q. Express this more distinctly.

A. I shall do it in these following Particulars.

Rules for expounding the Commandments
1. O my God, when in any of thy Commands a duty is enjoined, Love tells me the
contrary evil is forbidden; when any evil is forbidden, Love tells me the
contrary duty is enjoined 2 Cor. 6.14.
; O do thou daily increase my love to good, and my antipathy to evil. 2. Though
thy Commands and Prohibitions, O Lord, are in general terms, yet let thy love
direct my particular practice, and teach me, that in one general are implied
all the kinds, and degrees, and occasions, and incitements, and approaches, and
allowances relating to that good or evil, which are also commanded Mat. 5.21,
22, 28. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
or forbidden, and give me grace to pursue, or to fly them. 3. O my God, keep
my love always watchful, and on its guard, that in thy negative Precepts I may
continually resist evil; keep my love warm with an habitual zeal, that in all
thy affirmative Precepts I may lay hold on all seasons and opportunities of
doing good. 4. Let thy love, O thou that only art worthy to be beloved, make
me careful to persuade, and engage others to love thee, and to keep thy
Commands, as well as my self Heb. 10.24. Mat. 5.16.
. 5. None can love thee, O Lord, and endeavor to keep thy holy Commands, but
his daily failings in his duty, his frequent involuntary and unavoidable slips
and surreptions, and wanderings afflict and humble him Prove. 24.16.
, the infirmities of lapst nature create him a kind of perpetual martyrdom,
because he can love thee no more, because he can so little serve thee.

But thou, O most compassionate Father, in thy Covenant of Grace do require
sincerity 2 Cor. 8.12.
, not perfection; and therefore I praise and love thee.

O my God, though I cannot love and obey thee as much as I desire, I will do
it as much as I am able, I will to the utmost of my power keep all thy
Commandments, with my whole heart, and to the end Psalm. 119.2.6.112.
; O accept of my imperfect duty, and supply all the defects of it by the
merits, and love, and obedience of Jesus thy Beloved.

6. Glory be to thee, O thou supreme Lawgiver, for delivering these Commands
to sinful men; they are the words which thou thy self, O great Jehovah did
speak, O let me ever have an awful regard for every word thou have spoken; O
let me ever love thee for speaking them, and for giving us the Laws of Love. 7.
Glory be to thee, O Lord God, who to make every one of us sensible of our
obligation, have given all thy Commands in the second Person, and by saying
Thou, have spoken in particular to every Soul, that every Soul might love and
obey thee.

Glory be to thee, O my God, who in this short abstract, in these Ten
Commandments have comprised the full extent of our Duty, all the effects of
Divine Love.

Teach me, O Lord, to examine my Love by thy Commands, that I may know how to
please thee, that I may know wherein I have offended thee, and grieve for my
offenses, that I may bewail all my commissions of sin, all my omissions of duty.

Teach me, O Lord, by this thy Law, which is the rule of Love, and of all my
Actions, to examine not only my several sins, but also all their several
aggravations, whether they have been wilful, or known, or frequent, or
obstinate, or habitual, or ensnaring to others, that Love may shed the more
tears, and in some measure proportion my contrition to my guilt.

8. Glory be to thee, O Lord God, who give us Christians higher obligations
to keep thy Commands than thou did to the Jews, they had only the memory of
their temporal deliverance out of the Land of Egypt, and the House of Bondage
set before them, we are delivered out of spiritual Egypt, from the bondage of
Sin, the power of Satan, and the torments of Hell; O give us grace to exceed
them as much in our love, and thanksgiving, and obedience, as we do in our
blessings. 9. Glory be to thee, O great Jehovah, who to constrain us to love
and obey thee, art pleased to honor every faithful Soul with a near and
intimate propriety in thy self, and graciously to declare, I am the Lord thy
God.
O merciful Lord, what is it possible for me to desire more than to have thee
for my God Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy. 26.17. Exodus 19.5, 6.
? If thou be my God, the relation ought to be mutual, and I must be thy
Servant; Lord be thou mine, and I will be for ever thine.

My Beloved is mine, and I am his.

My God, my Father, my Friend, my Love, whatever is thine I will love, and
particularly thy Law will I love for teaching me to love thee, thy Law I will
highly esteem, and diligently read and study, thy Law shall be daily my
delight, my consellour, and my meditation Psalm. 1^9.24.97.
.

O my good God keep me always thine, and let nothing ever divorce me from thy
love.

Q. You have laid down proper rules for interpreting the Commandments, show me
now how they are divided.

A. Into two sorts, or Tables, suitable to the two respects they have to God,
and to our Neighbor.

The First Table.
Q. Begin with the first Table, and show me the number and order of the
Commands which it contains.

A. It contains the four first Commands which relate to God, and teach us the
Worship of God, even that reverential Love we are to pay to God, which
naturally arises from a true sense of his infinite both goodness and greatness.

This Worship of God is either inward or outward.

The inward Worship, being that of the Heart, is the nobler of the two, and
this, together with the right object of our worship, is taught in the First
Commandment, as the foundation of all the rest.

The outward is comprised in the three following, which teach us the regulation
of God's Worship in reference to our Gestures in the Second, to our Tongues in
the Third, to our Time in the Fourth.

Q. Which are the duties of the Second Table?

A. They are the six remaining Commands, which do all relate to our Neighbor,
of which I shall speak in their due place.

Q. What have you farther to observe of the Commandments in general?

A. It Is observable that those which refer to God are put first, to teach us
that the love of God is the chief and original Command, and ought chiefly to be
studied, and to teach us also, that all the duties of the Second Table must
yield to the First, whenever they stand in any competition Luke 14.26.
.

Q. Go over all the Ten Commandments in particular, and show me how they are
all the genuine fruits and effects of Divine Love, exercised either in doing
good, or eschewing evil.

A. I shall gladly do it, and as distinctly as possibly I can, taking every
Commandment apart.

The First Commandment.
^^^ies com^^nded.
O thou who only art Jehovah, if thou be my God, and if I truly love thee, I
can never suffer any creature to be thy Rival, or to share my heart with thee;
I can have no other God, no other Love but only thee Mat. 6.24
.

O infinite Goodness, thou only art amiable, whatever is amiable besides thee,
is no farther amiable, than it bears some impressions on it of thy amiableness;
and therefore all Love, all Glory be to thee alone.

O my God, O my Love, instill into my Soul so entire reverential a Love of thee
Deuteronomy. 1^.12.
, that I may love nothing but for thy sake, or in subordination to thy Love.

O Love, give me grace to study thy Knowledge Ioh. 17.3*
, that the more I know thee, the more I may love thee.

O my God, O my Love, do thou create in me a steadfast Faith Heb. 11.1.6.
in the veracity, a lively Hope 1 Pet. 1.4.
in the Promises, a firm trust Ps. 9.10.
in the Power, a confident reliance Psalm. 34.8.
on the Goodness, and a satisfactory acquiescence Ps. 62.1.2, 5.
in the All Sufficiency of thee my Beloved.

O my God, O my Love, do thou create in me an ardent desire of the presence
Psalm. 42.1*
an heavenly delight in the fruition 37.4.
of thee my Beloved.

O my God, O my Love, fill my heart with Thanksgiving 34.1.
for the Blessings, Praise 147.1.
of the Excellence, Adoration of the Majesty 99.5.
, Zeal 1 Cor. 10.31.
for the Glory of thee my Beloved.

O my God, O my Love, fill my heart with a true Repentance Ezekiel. 18.20.
for offending, with a constant fear Ps. 112.2.
of provoking thee my Beloved.

O my God, O my Love, fill my heart with an affective Devotion Iam. 5.16.
in Prayer, and with a profound Humility Ps. 115.1*
, in ascribing all Honor to thee my Beloved.

O my God, O my Love, create in me a sincere Obedience Mat. 7.2^*
to all the commands, a submissive Patience Ps. 39.9.
under all the chastisements, an absolute Resignation Mat. 26.39.
to all the disposals of thee my Beloved.

O my God, O my Love, let thy All-powerfull Love abound Phil. 1.9.
in my heart, and in the hearts of all that profess thy name, that in all
these, and in all other possible instances of thy Love, our Souls may be
continually employed to praise and to love thee.

O my God, O my Love, let me ever be seeking occasions to excite all I can Ps.
34.3.107.8.
to adore and love thee.

Sins forbidden.
O my God, O my Love, I renounce, and detest, and bewail, as odious and
offensive to thee, as directly opposite to thy Love, and to thy Glory,

All self-love 2 Timothy 3.2.
, and inordinate love of things below 1 John 2.15.
.

All wilful and affected ignorance 2 These. 1.8.
.

All Atheism Ps. 14.1.
, or having no God, and Polytheism Ier. 16.11.
, or having more Gods than one.

All Heresy 2 Pet. 2.1.
, Apostasy Heb. 10.39.
, and Infidelity 2 Thessalonians. 2.12.
.

All presumption Ps. 50.21.
and despair Mat. 27.5.
, distrust Ps. 78.22.
and carnal security Eccl. 8.11.
.

All voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels Col. 2.18.
; Reliance on the creature Ps. 52.7.
, or recourse to evil spirits Lev. 20.6.
.

All unthankfulness 2 Timothy 3.2.
and irreligion Ps. 10.4.
, lukewarmness Rev. 3.15, 16.
and indifference Zeph. 1.12.
.

All impenitence Luke 19.41.
and disregard of divine wrath Isa. 5.12.
.

All indevotion Isa. 29.13.
and pride Pro. 8.13.
, disobedience Romans 2.8.
, impatience and murmuring 1 Cor. 10.10.
.

All the least tendencies Ps. 141.4.
to any of these Impieties.

From all these and the like hateful violations of thy love, and from that
vengeance they justly deserve; O my God, O my Love, deliver me, and deliver all
faithful people.

O my God, O my Love, I earnestly pray, that thy love may so prevail over our
hearts, that we may sadly lament and abhor all these abominations, and may
never more provoke thee.

The Second Commandment.
Sins forbidden.
O my God, O my Love, I know the true Love of thee is incommunicable to any but
thee; and therefore I renounce, and detest, and bewail, as odious and offensive
to thee, as directly opposite to thy love, and to thy glory,

All making of Idols or false Gods, or of graven Images, with intent of
worshipping and bowing down before them Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26.27.15.
.

All representations and picturing of thee, O my God, by visible likenesses of
things in Heaven or in Earth.

All corporeal shapes, which are infinitely unsuitable to thy invisible and
spiritual nature, and derogatory from thy adorableness Deuteronomy. 4.15. Isa. 40.18*
Act. 17.29*
.

All Idolatry Isa. 2.8, 9*
and Religious invocation of Creatures Rev. 19*10.14.9*10.
.

All sacrilege Prove. 2^.25.
and prophanations of thy House, and of things sacred Mat. 21.13.
.

All abuse or disesteem, or carelessness of thy Word Mat. 13*15. Iam. 1.22*
, and contempt of thy Ministers Luke 1^*16.
.

All superstitious or unlawful rites Ier. 10.^^3.
, superfluities or mutilations Deuteronomy. 4.^* Ps. 106.3^^
, irreverence or indecencies Eccles. 5.^^ Mal. 1.7, ^* 14.
in thy public worship, by which thou art any way dishonored.

All resting in mere outward observances Mat. 1^*9, 11.
, or refusing to give thee bodily worship, and to fall down before thee Isa.
45.23.
.

All the least tendencies to any of these impieties.

From all these and the like violations of thy incommunicable Love, and from
that vengeance they justly deserve; O my God, O my Love, deliver me, and
deliver all faithful people, etc. as p. 39.

Duties commanded.
O my God, O my Love, imprint on my soul an Awful Love of thy Majesty Isa. 8.1^
, that I may worship thee in spirit and in truth Ioh. 4.2^*
, and in a manner worthy of thee.

O my God, O my Love, make me so tender of the Honor of thee my Beloved, that
I may show a due regard to all the parts of thy worship.

That with lowest humiliation of soul and body Ps. 95.^* Mat. 26.3*
, whenever I appear in the presence of infinite-Love, I may fall down and adore
thee.

O my God, O my Love, O may I always enter thy house, the habitation of
unbounded Love, with recollected thoughts, composed behavior, becoming
reverence, and sincere intentions of Love Genesis 28.17. John 2.17.
.

O my God, O my Love, O may I ever frequent the public Prayers, and approach
thine Altar with fervent and heavenly affections, with holy impatience for the
blessings of thy Love Psalm. 84.1, etc. 48.9.36.8.63.1, 2, 5.
.

O my God, O my Love, O may I always read and hear thy Word, the heavenly
register of thy Love, with a serious attention, an inflamable heart, and a
particular application, and ever learn from it some lesson of thy Love Luke
8.15. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
.

O my God, O my Love, for thy dearest sake, give me grace to pay a religious
veneration Mat. 10.40.
to all sacred persons, or places Lev. 19.30.
, or things Ezekiel. 22.8, 26.
, which are thine by solemn dedication, and separated for the uses of Divine
Love, and the communications of thy grace, or which may promote the decency and
order of thy worship, or the edification of faithful people 1 Cor. 14.4.26.40.
.

O my God, O my Love, let thy All-powerfull Love abound in my heart, and in the
hearts of all that profess thy Name, that in all these, and in all other
possible instances of thy love, our souls may be continually employed to praise
and to love thee, etc. as p. 39.

The reason of the Commandment.
Thou, O my God, O my Love, art a jealous God, jealous of thy own Honor Deuteronomy.
4.24. Isa. 42.8. Exodus 34.14, 15.
, and of the chastness of my Love; O let me never run after other Loves, or
commit spiritual Adultery against thee, to provoke thee to anger.

Thou, O my God, O my Love, do visit the iniquities of the Fathers upon the
children; Thou when thy jealousy burns like fire Ps. 79.5.
against Idolaters, and those that rob thee of thy worship, art wont to punish
them in their very posterity, with temporal evils, and with spiritual too, when
their children tread in their steps; for then thou make their Father's sins
occasions of hastening, or of increasing thy judgments, though thou always
sparest the children that repent Isa. 65.6, 7. Ezekiel. 18.17, 20. Ier. 31.30.
; O let thy just indignation against violating thy Worship, deter me, and all
that profess thy Name, from such violations.

Thy jealousy, O my God, O my Love, falls heavy upon them that hate thee; but
how is it possible for any one to hate thee, who art infinite love? and yet,
alas! all that are enemies to thy Divine Worship; all that exalt any lust, any
creature into thy Throne, to ascribe their happiness, to sacrifice their
esteem, and zeal, and affections, and to offer up Sovereign Honors to it; what
do they do but love false Gods, and hate thee, and are therefore hated by thee
Deuteronomy. 7.10.
.

O Lord God, to hate thee is the proper character of Devils, and Lucifer
himself cannot sin beyond that utmost extremity of evil, the hatred of thee;
and my heart is full of horror and grief, to think, that ever those that bear
thy Image, and daily subsist by thy love, should turn themselves into Devils,
and this World into a Hell, by hating thee 1 John 3.8. Romans 1.30. Ioh. 15.18.
: O boundless Love, turn them, O turn them into men again, and then they cannot
choose but love thee.

Glory be to thee, O my God, who show mercy to them that love thee, and keep
thy Commandments: Love and Obedience always go together, and entail a blessing
on the posterity of thy Lovers Deuteronomy. 4.40.
; O keep me always one of that happy number; O let me ever love and obey thee.

Glory be to thee, O Lord God, whose Love is more diffusive than thy Anger;
they vengeance extends but to the third, or, at most, the fourth generation,
thy mercy unto thousands; and the more diffused thy Love is, the more
powerfully it moves us, to praise and to love thee.

The Third Commandment.
Duties commanded.
O my God, O my Love, thy Name is thy own glorious and amiable self Psalm. 83.18.
, thy Divine Nature, and Perfections, and Works, most worthy to be adored, most
worthy to be loved Psalm. 5.11. Psalm. 29.2.72, 19. Ezekiel. 36.23. Neh. 9.5.
, and therefore I will always adore and love thy Name.

O my God, O my Love, may I ever have awful thoughts of thee Psalm. 111*9.
, may I never mention thy venerable Name, unless on solemn, and just, and
devout occasions; may I never mention it on those occasions without acts of
love and adoration Isa. 12.4.^8.1*
.

O my God, O my Love, to love, and to glorify thy Name is the great end of our
Creation, which is still more enforced by our Redemption; O let it be the
greatest busine^^ of my whole life to love, and to glorify it all the possible
ways I can, by my mouth Psalm. 51.15.
, by my conversation Mat. 5.16.
, by my public confession of thee before men, even to death Mat. 10.32. 1 Pet.
3.15.
, whenever thou art pleased to call me to it, by engaging all I can to glorify
and love thee; O happy life, O blessed death, which is spent, and expires in
glorifying, in loving thee!

O my God, O my Love, my heart shall ever be jealous of thy Name 1 Kings 19.10.
, I can have no true love, no real concern for thee if I do not, to the utmost
of my power, assert and vindicate the Name of my Beloved whenever I hear it
dishonored.

O my God, O my Love, fix in my Soul an habitual pure intention of thy glory in
all my actions, that whether I eat or drink, or whatever I do, I may do all
to the glory 1 Cor. 10.31.
of my Beloved.

Oaths.
The honor of God's Name is more particularly concerned in Oaths,
O my God, O my Love, fill me with a religious awe of Oaths, in which the honor
of thy beloved Name is so highly concerned.

I know, O great Jehovah, that in an Oath I solemnly invoke thee, as a Witness
to attest the truth of what I swear Genesis 31.50.53.
, as a Judge to punish me if I swear falsely.

Far be it from me, O Lord God, ever to swear, and in swearing, to invoke thee,
unless upon inducements lawful and important, when thy Glory Deuteronomy. 6.13.
, the Command of my Superiors, the visible good of my Neighbor, the ending of
strife Heb. 6.16.
, or my own Innocence obliges me to it.

O Lord God, whenever I am duly called to an Assertory Oath, grant I may swear
in truth, in righteousness, and in judgment Ier. 42.
.

Whatever lawf^^^ Promissory Oaths I ^^ke, Lord give me grace (...) iously to
perform them, though to my own hin^^ance Psalm. 15.4. 2 Samuel 21.7.
.

Uows.
And in Vows.
The glory of thy most beloved Name, O great Jehovah, next to the truth of our
Oaths we invoke thee to attest, is c^^cern'd in the sincerity of those Vows we
o^^er thee ^o accept Eccles. 5.4, 5.
; O do thou therefore create in me a serious sense of the religiousness of
Vows, that my Vows may not dishonor thee.

O my God, O my Love, whenever I voluntarily vow a Vow to thee, give me grace
to vow with all the due caution I can, that I may vow those things only which
are lawful and acceptable to thee Genesis 28.20, 21, 22.
, and which thou have put in my power Number. 30.5, 8.
, that I may vow with deliberation and ghostly advice, and on weighty and
considerable occasions only, and with a design of glory Psalm. 132.2.
, and thankfulness, and love to thee.

O my God, O my Love, give me grace faithfully to perform all the Vows I make
to thee Psalm. 61.8.
, especially my Baptismal Vow, and all my repeated Vows of amendment, in which
I have so often vowed, to glorify and love thy Name.

O my God, O my Love, let thy All-powerfull Love abound in my heart, and in the
hearts of all that profess thy name, that in all these, and in all other
possible instances of thy Love, our Souls may be continually employed to
praise, and to love thee.

Sins forbidden.
O my God, O my Love, who is there that knows thy great, thy beloved Name, can
ever in the least dishonor it Deuteronomy. 28.58.
?

O my God, O my Love, I renounce, and detest, and bewail, as odious and
offensive to thee, as directly opposite to thy love, and to thy glory,

All taking of the Name in vain.

All use of it on trivial occasions, and without holy awe Psalm. 139.20.
.

All abuse of it in impious Jests, in Charms, or Curses, or Imprecations, or
telling Fortunes, or exploratory Lots Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12.
; all irreverent thoughts of thy Name Psalm. 10.11, 13.50.21.
, profaneness and blasphemy James 2.7. Lev. 24.16.
.

All denying thee by my works Tit. 1.16.
, or refusing publicly to confess thee, when called to it John 12.42.
, or tamely enduring to hear thee dishonored Psalm. 139.21.
.

All heathenish, or customary, or rash Oaths, or swearing in ordinary
communication, or by any Creature Matt. 5.34, 35, 36, 37.
.

All breaking of lawful Oaths, Perjury, false-swearing, and invoking thee, O
God of truth, to attest a lie, sins most destructive to public Faith and
Society, and to our own Souls, and most dishonorable and hateful to thee
Zach. 8.17.5.4. Ier. 23.10. Hos. 4.2, 3.
.

All hasty, or unlawful, or superstitious, or impossible Vows Mal. 1.14. Ier.
44.25.
, all breaking those that are regularly made Psalm. 22.25.
.

All the least tendencies to any of these impieties.

From all these, and the like hateful violations of thy Love, and from that
vengeance they justly deserve, O my God, O my Love, deliver me, and deliver all
faithful People.

The Threat annexed to the Commandment.
O great Jehovah, thou art jealous for thy glorious and beloved Name, and
without a particular and serious repentance thou will not hold him guiltless,
that takes it in vain; thou will pour on him the vials of thy wrath, thy wrath
eternal Psalm. 74.10, 18, 22, 23.
, and yet thy ever blessed Name, is, alas! alas! daily, hourly blasphemed Isa.
52.5.
.

O Apostate, Infamous World, wherein Infinite Goodness is so often blasphemed;
were not thy Name Love 1 John 4.8.
, O Lord, as well as Jehovah, thou had long ago avenged thy self of the
blasphemous World, with a vengeance worthy of God.

Glory be to thee, O Long-suffering Love for thy forbearance, efficacious of
its self to convert the whole World, did the World but seriously consider it.

O Almighty Love, thou can as easily diffuse thy Love over the World, as thou
did at first diffuse Light; O let thy Fear, and thy Love so universally
affect the Age, that thy great and beloved Name may be universally adored and
loved!

The Fourth Commandment.
Duties commanded.
Glory be to thee, O my God, O my Love, who in compassion to humane weakness,
which is not capable of an uninterrupted contemplation of thee, such as the
Saints have above, have appointed a solemn day on purpose for thy remembrance.

Glory be to thee, O my God, my Love, for proportioning a seventh part of our
time to thy self, and liberally indulging the remainder to our own use.

O my God, O my Love, let me ever esteem it my privilege, and my happiness to
have a day of rest set apart for thy service Isa. 58.13.
, and the concerns of my own Soul, to have a day free from distractions,
disengaged from the World, wherein I have nothing to do, but to praise, and to
love thee.

Lord, grant that I may not only on thy day give thee due worship my self, but
may give rest and leisure also to my Family, to all under my charge, to serve
thee also Josh. 24.15.
, to indulge ease to my very Beasts, since good men are merciful even to them
Prove. 12.10.
.

Glory be to thee, O blessed Spirit, who on the first day of the week did
descend in miraculous gifts and graces on the Apostles 2 Acts 1.
; O descend upon me, that I may be always in the spirit on the Lord's day.

O my God, O my Love, give me grace on thy day to worship thee in my Closet,
and in the Congregation, to spend it in doing good Mar. 3.4.
, in works of necessity, devotion and charity, in prayer, and praise, and
meditation; O let it ever be to me a day sacred to Divine Love, a day of
heavenly rest and refreshment.

Thou, O my God, O my Love, did ordain the Jewdaical Sabbath as a shadow of
the true Gospel-sabbath Col. 2*16.17.
; O may I every day keep an Evangelical Sabbath, and rest from my sins, which
are my own works, while I live here, and may I celebrate an eternal Sabbath
with thee Heb. 4.9.
in Heaven hereafter.

O my God, O my Love, for the like purposes of Piety, and of thy Glory, give me
grace to sanctify the Feasts and Fasts of thy Church Ps. 42.4. Isa. 58.6,
7.8.10.
, as in the number of those happy days set apart for the remembrance of thy
love.

Reason of the Commandment.
Glory be to thee, O Lord God, who did command the Sabbath or seventh day to
be kept holy, and strictly observed by the Jews as thy Sabbath, in memory of
the Creation Genesis 2.2.
; of thy making Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and of thy
resting the seventh day; of thy blessing the seventh day, and hallowing it.

We Christians, O Lord God, following the moral equity of thy Command, and
authorized by Apostolical Practice Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2.
, celebrate the Lord's day Rev. 1.10.
, the first day of the week, in memory of our Redemption, in memory of thy
Resurrection from the dead, O most beloved Jesu, when thou did rest from the
labors and sorrows of the New Creation Luke 24.1.
, O may I ever remember thy day, and thee.

Glory be to thee, O my God, my Love, who have under the Gospel delivered us
from the Rigours, but not from the Piety of the Jewish Sabbath.

Lord, since the blessing of everlasting Salvation, which we Christians on thy
day commemorate, does wonderfully exceed the Creation commemorated by the Jews;
O let our love, and praise, and devotion, and zeal, proportionably exceed
theirs also Mat. 5.20.
.

O my God, O my Love, let thy All-powerfull Love abound Phil. 1.9.
in my heart, and in the hearts of all that profess thy Name, that in all
these, and all other possible instances of thy love, our Souls may be
continually employed to praise, and to love thee.

Sins forbidden.
O my God, O my Love, I renounce and detest, etc. as p. 39.

All profanations of thy hallowed Day, and of all other holy Times Ezekiel. 20.13,
16, 24.
dedicated to thy praise, and thy love.

All Jewdaizing Severities Mark 2.24. Luke 6.7.
, all Worldly-mindedness, and unnecessary business Neh. 13.15.
, or not allowing those under my care liberty and leisure for thy service Deuteronomy.
12.7.
on thy day.

All unmercifulness to my very Beasts Luke 13.15.
.

All indevotion, or forgetfulness of thee Deuteronomy. 6.12.8.14.
.

All the least tendencies --

From all these and the like, etc. as p. 39.

The Second Table.
Next to thy glorious self, O my God, O my Love, and for the sake of thy
supreme, independent Love, thou have commanded me to love my Neighbor, allied
to me by nature, or by grace, all Strangers and Enemies as well as Friends Luke
10.29, 30.
. To honor all men, as being made after thy likeness, and the greater likeness
they retain to thee, to honor them the more 1 Pet. 2.17.
; Glory be to thee.

Thou, O my God, O my Love, have commanded me to love my Neighbor as my self,
O for the sake of thy love, give me love to relieve and assist him in all
instances wherein he may need my help, as freely, as fully, as affectionately
as I my self would desire to be treated, were I in his condition Mat. 7.12.
.

O my God, O my Love, for the sake of thy dearest Love, give me grace to love
my Neighbor, not in word, and in tongue only, but in deed, and in truth 1
Ioh. 3.18.
; to wish well to all men, and to contribute my hearty prayers and endeavors,
and to give them for thy sake all lawful, and reasonable, and necessary
succors Col. 3.12.
.

Glory be to thee, O my God, O my Love, who by commanding me to love my
Neighbor as my self, do imply the regular love of my self Ephesians. 5.29.
; that I should do all I can to preserve my self free and vigorous to glorify
thee in my station: It Is for thy sake only I can love my self, and he does not
wish or endeavor his own happiness, he really hates himself, that does not
love thee.

Thou Lord by enjoining me to love my Neighbor as my self, have intimated my
duty of loving those best, which either in blood are nearest my natural self,
or in grace nearest my Christian self; O let thy love teach me to observe the
true order of Charity in loving others.

O thou eternal source of Goodness, give me grace to imitate that boundless
Goodness, let thy love work in me an universal propension to love, and to do
good to all men, to be merciful to others, as thou Lord art merciful Luke
6.36.
.

Q. Show me how the love of your Neighbor is in the Second Table divided.

A. The love of my Neighbor, which is the fulfilling of the Law, of all the
Commands of the Second Table is divided according to those different conditions
of our Neighbor, wherein we most exercise our love or hatred to him.

Q. In how many ruling Instances may we exercise that love or hatred?

A. Either in outward acts, or inward disposition.

Q. How in outward acts?

A. Five several ways, in respect of his superiority, in the Fifth Commandment.

His Safety in the Sixth.

His Bed in the Seventh.

His Propriety in the Eighth; or,

His good Name in the Ninth.

Q. How in our inward disposition?

A. By regulating our very Desires in relation to him, as the Tenth obliges us
to do?

Q. Let me hear how Divine Love moves in each of these Commands.

A. It moves in such acts as follow.

The Fifth Commandment.
Duties commanded in general.
Let thy reverential Love, O my God, teach and incline me, to show respectfull
Love to all my superiors, in my inward esteem, in my outward speech and
behavior 1 Pet. 2.17.
.

Glory be to thee, O Lord, who have comprehended all that are above me, under
the tender and venerable Names of Father and Mother, that I looking on them as
Resemblances and Instruments of thy Sovereign Power and Paternal Providence to
me, may be the more effectually engaged for thy sake to reverence and love them.

In particular, Of Natural Parents.
O my God, give me grace to imitate thy Paternal Goodness, and for the sake of
thy Love; to love and cherish, and provide for; to educate and instruct, and
pray for my Children Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Ephesians. 6.4. Col. 3.21. 2 Cor. 12.14.
; to take conscientious care to give them medicinal correction and good
example, and to make them thy children, that they may truly love thee.

Of Children.
O my God, give me grace for the sake of thy love, to Honor my Father and
Mother, to render them all love, and reverence, and thankfulness* and all that
regard which is due from a Child Ephesians. 6.1* 2, 3. Col. 3.20.
, that I may pay obedience to their commands, submission to their corrections,
attention to their instructions, and succor to their necessities Matt. 16.4,
etc.
, and may daily pray for their welfare.

Of Political Parents. The King.
Thou, O Lord, have set our most Gracious King over us Prove. 8.15.
, as our Political Parent, as thy Supreme Minister, to govern and protect us,
and to be a terror to those that do ill: O grant Him a long and happy Reign,
that we may all live a peaceable and quiet life under Him, in all godliness and
honesty 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
. Defend Him from all His Enemies; let Him be ever beloved by thee, and let Him
ever love thee, and ever promote thy love.

The Queen and Royal Family.
Multiply, O Lord God, the blessings of thy love on our most Gracious Queen
Mary, Catharine the Queen Dowager, their Royal Highnesses Mary Princess of
Orange, and the Princess Anne of Denmark, and on all the Royal Family: Give
them grace to exceed others, as much in Goodness as in Greatness, and make them
signal instruments of thy Glory, and examples of thy Love.

Of Subjects.
O my God, give grace to me and all my fellow subjects, next to thy own infinite
self, to love and honor, to fear and obey our Sovereign Lord the King, thy own
Vicegerent, for Conscience sake Romans 13.1, etc. 1 Pet. 2.13. Tit. 3.1.
, and for thy own sake, who have placed Him over us; O may we ever faithfully
render Him his due tribute; O may we ever pray for His prosperity, sacrifice
our fortunes and our lives in His defense, and be always ready rather to suffer
than resist.

Of Ecclesiastical Parents.
Glory be to thee, O Lord, who have ordained Pastors, and have given them the
Power of the Keys; to be our Ecclesiastical Parents; to watch over our Souls;
to instruct us in saving Knowledge Mal. 2.7.
; to guide us by their Examples; to pray for, and to bless us; to administer
spiritual discipline in thy Church, and to manage all the conveyances of thy
Divine Love.

Of the People under their care.
O my God, for thy Love's sake, let me ever honor and love the Ministers of thy
Love, the Ambassadors thou do send in thy stead, to beseech us sinners to be
reconciled to thee 2 Cor. 5.20.
, to offer thy Enemies conditions of Love, of love eternal; O may I ever hear
them attentively, practice their heavenly doctrine, imitate their holy
examples, pay them their dues, and revere their censures Heb. 13.7, 17. 1 Timothy
5.17.
.

Of Oeconomical Parents, Master and Mistress.
O my God, for the sake of thy love, grant I may ever love, and provide for my
Servants [servant,] and may treat them like Brethren; let me never exact from
them immoderate work; O may I always give them just wages, and equitable
commands, and good example, and merciful correction: Grant, Lord, I may daily
allow them time for their prayers, indulge them due refreshments, and may take
care of their souls, and persuade them to love thee; remembering, that I also
have a Master in Heaven Col. 4.1. Ephesians. 6.9.
.

Of Servants.
Give me grace, O my God, for the sake of thy Love, to honor, and love, and
obey my Master [and Mistress] and to serve him [her] with diligence and
faithfulness, and readiness to please 1 Timothy 6.1, 2. Col. 3.22, 23, 24. Ephesians.
6.5, 6, 7, 8.
, and to pray for him [her] them; and whatever I do, to do heartily as to
thee, O Lord, and not to him, [her] them*]

Of other Superiors.
O my God, let thy love incline me to love, and to honor all whom thou have any
way made my superiors, sutably to their quality, Lev. 19.32. 1 Timothy 5.1, 2, 3.
1 Pet. 5.5.
or age, or gifts, or learning, or wisdom, or gravity, or goodness.

O my God, grant that for thy sake, I may ever love and honor all that are, or
have been, instruments of thy love to me, in doing me good; O may I reverence
my teachers Gal. 6.6.
, be grateful to my benefactours, and may I have always a peculiar respect to
my particular Pastor.

Of Equals and Inferiors.
O my God, let thy love engage me to love those whom thou have obliged to love
me; to show constancy, and fidelity, and sympathy, and love, and
communicativeness to my Friend; to be affectionate to my Brethren and Sisters;
to be kind and affable to my Equals; condescending to my Inferiors; to be all
the possible ways I can, universally helpful and obliging, and loving to all
Romans 14.10. 1 Pet. 3.8.


O my God, O my Love, let thy All-powerfull Love abound in my heart, and in the
hearts of all that profess thy Name, that in all these, and in all other
possible instances of duty, our lives may be continually employed to love thee,
and for thy sake to love our Neighbor, and to excite our Neighbor to love
thee.

The several Forms which contain the Duties of Parent and Child, of Master and
Servant, etc. are to be used by every one, according as may suit with his
Circumstances, or as he stands in any of those Relations.

Sins forbidden.
O my God, O my Love, I renounce, and derest, and bewa^l, as odious and
offensive to thee, as directly opposite to thy love, and the love of my
neighbor, for thy sake,

All dishonor to our Superiors, in either despising them, speaking evil of
them, or in irreverent behavior.

All unnaturalness to Children.

All undutifulness, or stubbornness, or disobedience, or disrespect to Parents
2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4.
.

All rebelling, or reviling, or murmuring against the King, or against his
Ministers 1 Samuel 26.9 Eccl. 10.20. Act. 23.5.
.

All defrauding, undervaluing or rejecting lawful Pastors Mat. 10.14.
.

All Schism 1 Cor. 1.10. 3 Epist. John 9.
, and contempt of their regular censures.

All falseness or negligence, or refractariness to Masters or Mistresses 2 Tit.
9.10. Mal. 2.10.
.

All rudeness, ingratitude, treachery, want of brotherly love and
unfaithfulness.

All the least tendencies to any of these impieties.

From all these and the like hateful violatious of thy love, and of the love
of my neighbor, and from the vengeance they justly deserve, O my God, O my
Love, deliver me and all faithful people.

O my God, O my Love, I earnestly pray, that thy love, and the love of our
neighbor may so prevail over our hearts, that we may sadly lament and abhor
all these abominations, and may never more provoke thee.

Glory be to thee, O Lord, who to teach us the importance of this duty of
subjection, have placed it the first of all the second Table, of all that
relate to our neighbor, Promise annexed to the Commandment.
and have made it the first Commandment with a promise Ephesians. 6.2.
to every soul that conscientiously keeps it, that thy days shall be ^^ng in
the ^and which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Who would not love and obey thee, O my God, and for thy sake his Superiors,
when thou have promised to reward our Duty with a long happy life here, or if
thou see it best for us, and to take us away from the evil to come Isa. 57.1.
by living a long tract of Holiness in a little time, and at last by prolonging
our bliss to all eternity in Heaven; for which gracious promise, all love, all
glory be to thee.

The Sixth Commandment.
Sins forbidden.
O my God, O my Love, I renounce, and detest, and bewail, as odious and
offensive to thee, as directly opposite to thy love, and to the love of my
neighbor* for thy sake,

All duels and unlawful War Iam. 4.1, 2. Genesis 4.10, 11.
.

All doing hurt to the body and life of my neighbor, directly by wounding or
murdering him Gal. 5.21.
.

Indirectly by contriving or employing others to harm him Luke 22.2.
.

All the ways of procuring Abortion Exodus 21.22, 23.
.

All malice and envy, hatred Tit. 3.3.
and revenge, contention and cruelty.

All injury and violence, all rash, causeless, immoderate or implacable anger
Ephesians. 4.26. Romans 1.30, 31.
, or contumelious speaking and reviling Matthew. 5.22.
.

All wilful vexing, grieving or disquieting him.

All threatening, ill-wishes or curses Ephesians. 4.29, 31.
.

All needless endangering our selves, and self-murder 1 Timothy 5.23. Ephesians. 5.29.
.

All murdering of Souls 1 Timothy 5.22.
, by encouraging, ensuaring, tempting, commanding them to sin.

All the least tendencies to any of these impieties.

From all these and the like, etc.

Duties commanded.
O my God, O my Love, let thy unwearied and tender love to me, make my love
unwearied and tender to my neighbor, and zealous to procure, promote, and
preserve his health, and safety, and happiness, and life, that he may be the
better able to serve and to love thee.

O my God, O my Love, make me like thy own self, all meekness and benignity 2
Cor. 10.1. Gal. 5.22.
, all goodness and sweetness, all gentleness and long-suffering.

Fill me full of good wishes and compassion, of liberality in Almsgiving
according to my abilities 1 John 3.17.
, and of readiness to succor, and relieve, and comfort, and rescue, and pray
for all, whom thy love or their own necessities, or miseries, or dangers,
recommend to my charity 1 Cor. 13.4.
.

O let thy love, thou God of Love, make me peaceful and reconcilable, always
ready to return good for evil, to repay injuries with kindness Mat. 5.44. Romans
12.20.
, and easy to forgive, unless in those instances, where the impunity of the
criminal would be injustice or cruelty to the public.

O thou lover of Souls, let thy love raise in me a compassionate zeal to save
the life, the eternal life of Souls Dan. 12.3. Iam. 5.20.
, and by fraternal, and affectionate, and seasonable advice, or exhortation, or
correptions, to reclaim the wicked, and to win them to love thee.

O my God, O my Love, let thy All-powerfull love, etc. as p. 51.

The Seventh Commandment.
Sins forbidden.
O my God, O my Love, I renounce, etc. as p. 52.

All adultery and violations of my neighbor's bed, in the gross act, robbing
him of that he loves best.

All adultery and unchastity of the eye or the hand Mat. 5.29.
.

All the kinds and degrees of lust, fornication, pollution of our own bodies,
and works of darkness, which it is a shame to mention Ephesians. 5.11, 12.4.19.
.

All things that provoke, or feed lust, impure company, discourse, songs, books
or pictures Ephesians. 4.29.
.

All lascivious dresses 5.3, 4, 5. 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3.
, or dances, or plays; all idleness or luxurious diet Romans 13.13, 14. 1 Pet.
4.3.
.

All the excesses or abuses of lawful Marriage, all unreasonable jealousies,
and all things that lessen the mutual kindness, or alienate the affections of
those that are married 1 Timothy 2.12. Mat. 19.6.
.

All the least tendencies to any of these impurities.

From all these, etc. as p. 52.

Duties commanded.
O my God, my Love, let thy purest love, who art Purity it self, create in me a
perfect abhorrence of all impurity, that I may purify my self as thou Lord art
pure 1 Ioh. 3.3.
.

I know, O Lord, that I can never be partaker of the Divine Nature, unless I
escape the pollution that is in the world through lust 2 Pet. 1.4.
, O do thou therefore cleanse me from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, that
I may perfect holiness in thy fear 2 Con. 7.1.
: Give me grace to possess my vessel in sanctification and honor 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
and to keep thy Temple holy, that thy Spirit of Love may always there inhabit.

O my God, let my love be chaste to thee, chaste to my self, chaste to my
neighbor.

O my God, may thy Love set a strict guard on my Senses; turn away mine eyes
Job 31.1.7.
, stop mine ears, bridle my tongue, and restrain my hand from all uncleanness.

Lord, give me grace to fly 2 Timothy 2.22.
all incitements, or opportunities, or instruments of defiling, either my
neighbor or my self, To beat down my body, and to bring it into subjection 1
Cor. 9.27.
.

O my Love, let me live ever watching or praying, or profitably employed or
busied in thy love, that I may leave no room if possible for any unclean Spirit
to enter into my Soul and tempt me.

O my God, O my Love, let thy all-powerfull love abound in my heart and in the
hearts of all that profess thy Name, that in all these and in all other
possible instances of duty, our lives may be continually employed to love thee,
and for thy sake to love our neighbor, and to excite our neighbor to love
thee.

Duty of married Persons.
O thou God of Love, who have ordained the marriage state for the cure of our
passion 1 Cor. 7.9.
, and the comfort of our life Genesis 2.20.
, and have made it the emblem of that Divine Love and Union thou art pleased
to bear toward thy Church Ephesians. 5.22, 23, 24, etc.
: Let the force of thy mystical love teach us to love each other, and both of
us to love thee.

O thou who have made us one flesh, make us but one Soul also; let our love be
mutual, constant and inviolate Col. 3.18, 19. 1 Pet. 3.1.7. 1 Cor. 7.3, 4, 5.
, full of compliance, and condescensions, and Sympathy, and forbearance toward
each other.

Fill us, O God of Love, with reciprocal care and zeal, and charity for each
others happiness temporal and eternal, and with a delight in each other
exclusive of all loves but thine.

Lord give us grace to keep our marriage always honorable, and our bed
undefiled Heb. 13.4.
; let the affectionate authority of the one, and the submissive sweetness of
the other, produce an entire friendship and harmony of dispositions, and
fervent intercessions for each other; Give us, O Lord, an unafflicting
foresight of our parting here, and a passionate longing to be beatified near
each other, in neighboring mansions above, that from thenceforth our love to
each other and to thee may be coeternal with thine.

The Eighth Commandment.
Sins forbidden.
O my God, O my Love, I renounce, as p. 52.

All kinds of stealing, by open Robbery, Violence, or Invasion E^h. 4.28. 1
Pet. 4.15.
.

All Oppression, or Extortion, or Rapine 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
, vexatious Lawsuits, or griping Usury.

All fraud in Trade and Contracts, false Weights, and Measures, and Coin 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Amos 8.5.
.

All concealing the defects of our own Goods, or depretiating those of our
neighbor Prove. 20.14.
.

All making haste to be rich, or taking advantage of the ignorance or necessity
of the persons we deal with.

All withholding our neighbors dues, or detaining the hire of the Labourer
James 5.4.
.

All borrowing and not paying, injurious keeping the goods of others Psalm.
37.21.
, and refusing to make restitution Luke 19.8.


All b^each of Trust, or removing Landmarks Prove. 22.22, 23, 28.
, wastfull prodigality, avaritious gaming, or idle begging.

All outrages to the Fatherless, the Widow and the Stranger Ier. 7.6.
.

All the least tendencies to any of the these acts of injustice.

From all these and the like hateful violations of thy Love, and of the Love
of my neighbor, and from the vengeance they justly deserve, O my God, O my
Love, deliver me and all faithful people.

Duties commanded.
O my God, O my Love, let the love of thy eternal and amiable justice, teach me
a steady justice in giving all men their due, since I cannot love my neighbor
if I am unjust to him.

Lord give me grace to use my neighbor as my friend, as my self, to buy and
sell by just Weights and Measures, and to be content with moderate gain. Prove.
11.1.20.10.17.21.
.

To pay debts and wages, and conscientiously to make restitution for injuries
or wrongs, or for goods unlawfully gotten Matt. 5.23.
.

Teach me, O my God, to use this world so as not to abuse it 1 Cor. 7.31.
; to receive and manage all thy temporal blessings with thankfulness to thee,
sobriety to my self, and charity to all besides Luke 11.41 --
.

Make me ever, O my God, upright and faithful in Trusts, and Trade, and
Agreements, diligent and honest in my station and Calling 2 Thessalonians. 3.10, 12.
, and according to my ability willing to lend, and remit to my poor neighbors
Psalm. 37.26.
.

Whenever, O my God, I am forced to go to Law, O let me ever contend more for
right than victory, and in all prosecutions preserve a charitable and an
equitable disposition Luke 17.3, 4.
.

O my God, O my Love, let thy all-powerfull love abound in my heart, and in the
hearts of all that profess thy Name, that in all these and all other possible
instances of duty, our lives may be continually employed to love thee, and for
thy sake to love our neighbor, and to excite our neighbor to love thee.

The Ninth Commandment.
Sins forbidden.
O my God, O my Love, I renounce, as p. 52.

All manner of bearing false Witness against my Neighbor, All false
accusations, or glosses, or pleadings, or testimonies, or sentences in Courts
of Judicature Psalm. 82.2. Matt. 26.60. Tit. 2.3. Micah 3.9.
, by concealing or overspeaking, or perverting right and truth.

All things prejudicial or destructive to my neighbors good name.

All censoriousness Matt. 7.1. Prove. 26.18, etc. James 3.6. 2. Pet. 2.12, 18.
and slander, detraction and calumny, forced consequences, or invidious
reflections.

All scoffing, or exposing the infirmities of others.

All whispering Romans 1.29. 1 Timothy 5.13. Exodus 23.1.
and tale-bearing, or raising of evil reports, suspicions or jealousies, and
all evil-speaking.

All equivocations and dissembling, flattery and lying Ephesians. 4.25, 31.
.

All the least tendencies to any of these injurious falsehoods.

From all these and the like hateful violations of thy love, and of the love,
etc. as page 52.

Duties commanded.
O my God, O my Love, who do love truth, and do hate a lie, as perfectly
Diabolical, instill into my Soul an unalterable love of truth, that nothing may
tempt me to deviate from an entire veracity Prove. 23.23. Psalm. 119.163. Ioh.
8.44.
in my whole conversation, or become a liar, which thy Soul abhors.

O Lord give me grace ever to speak the truth, and let my heart and my tongue
always go together.

O my God, give me grace to be tender of my neighbor's good name Prove. 22.1.
Eccles. 7.1.
, since I cannot love him if I take that from him which I know to be most dear
to him.

Grant, O my God, for the sake of thy own love, that I may be always ready to
vindicate my neighbor's good name on all occasions, that I may judge the best
1 Cor. 13.5, 7.
, and speak well of him, and conceal or excuse his infirmities, that I may be
impatient to hear, slow to believe, and unwilling to propagate evil reports;
that I may put candid interpretations on his actions, since the more he is
defamed the less able he is to serve thee, the less credit he has to persuade
others to love thee.

O my God, O my love, let thy, etc. as page 51.

The Tenth Commandment.
Sins forbidden.
O my God, O my Love, I renounce, as p. 51.

All the inordinate desire of what is my neighbor's, All coveting his House,
or Wife Matt. 5.28.
, or Servant, or Maid, or Ox, or Ass, or any thing that is his.

All discontentedness with my worldly condition, and worldly solicitude Mat.
6.24, 25, etc. 13.22.
.

All covetousness, or repining at the happiness of others 1 King. 21.4, 5.
.

All taking pleasure in sin, or complacence in past impurities 1 Romans 32. Iam.
5.5. 2 Pet. 2.13.
.

All the first motions, all the least tendencies to concupiscence Matt. 15.19.
.

From all these and the like hateful, etc. as p. 52.

Duties commanded.
O my God, O my Love, thou art the great searcher of hearts, and do not only
require outward acts of duty but the inward disposition of the heart, the heart
is the chief sacrifice Prove. 23.26* 4.23. Matt. 15.19.
thou requirest, the heart is the proper seat of thy love, and my heart I
wholly devote to thee.

O my God, create in me a clean heart Psalm. 51.10.
, that the fountain of action being clean, the streams may run clean also.

Give me a heart, O thou who only can change the heart, entirely turned to
thee, that may suppress and resist all the first springings of Lust, before
they shoot up into consent 1 Iam. 14.15.
, approbation and desire, before lust conceiving brings forth sin.

Lord, make me contented Heb. 13.5. Phil. 4.11, 12. 1 Timothy 6.6.
, and thankful and well-pleased with that portion thy providential love has
allotted me, and to acquiesce in thy choice as best for me.

O great Lord of hearts, lodge my neighbor in my heart next to my self, let
all my desires be for his good, and let it be the subject of my joy Romans 12.15.
, and praise, and love, to see thy love liberal to him, to see him abounding in
thy blessings.

O my God, my love, what can a Soul enamored of thee ever desire but thee; O
let the world never more have place in my heart, all my affections I withdraw
from that to fix on thee.

Forgive me, O my God, if I am unmeasurably ambitious, it is only of thy
favor; forgive me if I am unsatiably covetous, it is only of thy fruition;
forgive me if I am perpetually discontented, it is only because I cannot love
thee more

O unconceivable happiness of Heaven where my Ambition shall rest on a Throne,
where my Covetousness shall be filled with the ^eartifick Vision, and where I
shall be eternally satisfied with love.

O my God, O my Love, let thy, etc. as page 51.

Q. My good child, know this, that thou art not able to do these things of thy
self, nor to walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him without his
special grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent
Prayer. Let me hear therefore if thou can say the Lords Prayer?

A. Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Q. What desire thou of God in this prayer?

A. I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, who is the giver of all goodness,
to send his grace unto me, and to all people, that we may worship him, serve
him, and obey him as we ought to do. And I pray unto God, that he will send us
all things that be needful both for our souls and bodies. And that he will be
merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins, and that it will please him to save
and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily, and that he will keep us from
all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death.
And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. And therefore I say Amen. So be it.

Previous considerations.
O infinite Lord, it is my duty and my happiness to love thee; but alas! my own
sad experience teaches me, how little able I am to love.

Our Impotence to good.
Ah Lord, there is a dark cloud of Ignorance spread over my Soul, that
intercepts thy beams, I cannot clearly see, I cannot fully know how lovely thou
art.

Ah Lord, when ever any gleams of thy loveliness break in upon my Spirit, and
attract my will; a crowd of strange Loves importune and tempt me to wander
after them.

God is our Refuge.
Since O my God, I can of my self neither know, nor love thee, since I cannot by
my own strength do those things thou requirest, nor walk in thy Commandments,
nor serve thee, nor think so much as one good thought 2 Cor. 3.5.
: whither can I fly but only to thy free and unbounded love? Thou art my hope,
my help, and my salvation Psalm. 62.7. John 15.4.5.
; thou only can teach and enable me to know and to love thy own goodness.

Our Assistance from God.
By thy special Grace, O my God, by thy particular assistance, by the strength
of thy Love I can do all things Ephesians. 3.16. Phil. 4.13.
: O let thy Grace ever enlighten and inflame me; let it ever prevent, and
accompany and follow me; let it ever excite, and increase, and support thy love
in my heart; O let it ever work in me both to will and to do of thy good
pleasure 2.13.
.

Gained by Prayer.
I know Lord, that thy Grace, and all other blessings I must learn at all times
to call for by diligent Prayer, and I adore and love thy infinite Benignity to
sinners, in indulging us the privilege, the honor, the happiness to pray to
thee Romans 1^.13
, to pour out our souls, to breath out our desires, to present our wants, and
to unbosom our griefs at thy Throne of love.

Encouragements to Pray.
I praise and I love thee, O sovereign Love, for not only permitting us
miserable Wretches to pray to thee, but also for giving us all imaginable
encouragement to so important and divine a Duty.

I adore and love thee, O munificent goodness, for inviting Psalm. 50 15.
, for commanding us to pray Phil. 4.6.
: I adore and love thee for pouring out thy holy spirit of grace and
supplication on us, Zach. 12.10.
to help our Infirmities, to assist us in praying, to make intercessions for us
with Sighs and Groans that cannot be uttered Romans 8.26.
, with the utmost ardours of a penitential and indigent love. I adore and love
thee for giving us so many glorious promises Mat. 7.7*
of hearing our Prayers, so many firm assurances of a gracious acceptance.

A Pattern of Prayer.
O thou great Prophet of Divine Love, who, as if thy invitation, and command,
and assistance, and promise were not enough to move us to pray; have
condescended to teach us this duty thy self; and to give us a perfect pattern
of Prayer, for which I adore and love thee.

A Form most condescending.
Glory be to thee, O blessed Master of Devotion, who in dictating a form of
Prayer, and enjoining us to use it Mat. 6.7, 8, 9. Luke 11.2^
, have complied with our weakness, and warned us not to rely on rash and
unpremeditated Effusions; who in dictating a short form, have taught us to
avoid vain repetitions, or thinking we shall be heard for much sp^aking, and to
measure our Prayers rather by their fervency than length.

Most Divine.
That Prayer which was composed by thy own self, O God that hear Prayer, we
are sure is most divine and excellent, and perfect like its Author, and most
agreeable and acceptable to thee, for which I adore and love thee.

Most Acceptable.
O Blessed Jesus, the only beloved of God, thou best understandest the language
of Love, and in that language thou have taught us to pray, and whenever we pray
in that language, we have an humble confidence thy heavenly Father will hear
us, who with the words of his own beloved Son will ever be well pleased; and
therefore I adore and love thee.

Necessity of Prayer
Thou O heavenly Guide of our Devotion and our Love, by teaching us to pray,
have showed us that Prayer is our treasury where all Blessings are kept, our
Armoury where all our strength and weapons are stored, the only great
preservative, and the very vital heat of Divine Love. Give me grace therefore
to call on thee at all times by diligent Prayer.

Misery of those who do not Pray.
O the unspeakable misery of those who either totally neglect the duty of Prayer
Psalm. 10*4.
, or else profane it by drawing near to God with their lips, when their hearts
are far removed from him, whose Prayers being void of all Devotion and concern,
are turned into fresh sins Psalm 109.7.
: How deservedly shall he have God for his Enemy; who would not beg pardon of a
most reconcilable Father? How deservedly shall he suffer eternal wrath, who
thought Heaven not worth the asking?

Prayer Ought to be daily.
O my God, let me daily offer up to thee my morning and evening Sacrifice Psalm
5.3.141.2.
in private, and in public too, if my circumstances permit, and as near as I
can, let me omit no opportunities of praying, or of praising thee.

Incessant.
O my God, may I ever keep my self in thy Love, by praying in the holy Ghost
Jude 20.21.
, and by praying without ceasing 1 These. 5.17.
, since I incessantly want the succors of thy Love.

Ah Lord, I know my Devotion has daily many unavoidable and necessary
interruptions, and I cannot always be actually praying, all I can do is to beg
of thy Love, to keep my heart always in an habitual disposition to Devotion,
and in mindfulness of thy divine presence, that I may perpetuate my Prayer by
frequent Ejaculations.

O my God, as thy infinite Love is ever-streaming in Blessings on me; O set my
Soul be ever breathing Love to thee.

Joined with reading and meditation.
O my God, to Prayer whereby I address to thee, give me grace to add the daily
reading and meditation of thy word Psalm. 1.2.
, whereby thou art pleased to converse with me.

It is thy abundant Love to us, O Lord, that thou indulgest us thy word in our
own mother Tongue, that from those dear Volumes of thy Love, every devout Lover
may daily and on all occasions supply proper fuel to his Love; for which all
Love, all Glory be to thee

The method of Prayer.
I adore and love thee, O heavenly Oracle of Love, for contriving this Prayer in
that admirable method; that thou have withal taught us all the requisites of an
acceptable Prayer; thou in the Preface have taught us how to Pray: In the
Petitions for what to Pray: and in the Conclusion, what ought to be the end of
our Prayers, for which I adore and love thee.

Father.
The Preface teaches how to pray.

To whom? To God only.

For Jesus sake.

With the affections of a Child.


Glory be to Thee O Jesu, who have taught us to whom to direct our Prayers, to
God only, Psalm. 65.2.
since he only is Omniscient to know, and allsufficient to succor, all our
necessities.

Glory be to thee who have taught us for whose sake only we can hope to be
heard, even for thy own, O blessed Jesus, for it is through thy alone
Mediation, John 16.23. Ephesians. 1.6.2* 18.
that we sinners can call God Father, or have access to his Throne.

Glory be to thee, O beloved Jesu, who in teaching us to call God Father, have
taught us to pray with the affections of a Child, with Reverential Love, and
Reliance on the Paternal care, and benignity, and love of our Heavenly Father.
Isa. 63.15, 16. Luke 11.13. Mal. 1.6.


Our Father.
Glory be to thee, O Lord, who in teaching me to call God, Of a Brother.
Our Father, has taught me not to confine my Charity to my self, but to pray
also with the affections of a Brother, Ephesians. 4.6. 1 Pet. 3.8.
to all mankind, who are children by Creation, to all Christians, who are
children by Adoption, of the same Heavenly Father. O give me that Brotherly
kindness, to them all, that I may beg the same blessings for them, as for my
self, and earnestly pray that they may all share with me in thy Fatherly Love.

Which art in Heaven.
With the humility of a Supplicant.
Glory be to thee, O thou beloved of the Father, who in teaching us to pray to
Our Father in Heaven, have taught me the infinite distance between God and us,
and to pray with the Humility of a supplicant Eccl. 5.1. Hebr. 12.28, 29.
. with that awe that becomes a frail Creature, a miserable Sinner, before his
Creator, and his Judge.

O Father Almighty, though thou fillest all places, yet thy Glory is most
manifested in Heaven, and there thy Majesty does most Illustriously dwell, and
to thy Throne there, Psalm. 11.4. Isa 57.15
are we to lift up our hearts when we Pray, O let my soul fly up to thee, when
I pray, in Heavenly Thoughts, and Desires, and Love: O let me savor nothing of
the earth, whenever I treat with thee in Heaven!

Petitions in general teach us for what to Pray. For things lawful. And in what
order.
Glory be to thee O Gracious Lord, who in the Petitions of thy most Divine
Prayer, have taught us for what we are to Pray, for all blessings Temporal, and
Eternal, for all things lawful, and acording to thy will. 1 John 5.14, 15.


Glory be to thee, O Jesu, who in ranking the Petitions for Spiritual blessings
first, have taught us to seek Heaven in the first place, Mat. 6.33.
grant Lord that I may always beg thy blessings in their due order, that I may
pray for blessings Spiritual with holy violence Mat. 11.12.
, with importunity, and resolution not to be denied, as being the proper
ingredients of thy Love and absolutely necessary to my eternal welfare, Genesis
32.26.
and for Temporal, with Indifference and Resignation to thy will, since I may
Love thee, and be eternally happy without them.

In particular for Blessings Spiritual relating to God.
Hallowed be thy Name.
O Lord God, may Thy Name, Psalm. 8.1.9.111.9.
thy own Glorious, and Amiable self have a Love and Honor separate, and
incommunicable. May thy infinite Goodness and Greatness be for ever, by all Men
and all Angels, Confessed, and Admired, and Adored, and Magnified Ps. 148.
both in Private and Public, in our Hearts, our Mouths and our Lives.

All Creatures share in thy Goodness Ps. 145.9, 10.
O God, O let all Creatures help us to Glorify thy Name.

O may every thing that has breath, praise the Lord.

Thy Kingdom come.
O thou King of Kings, may Thy Kingdom of Grace, Luke. 1.32 Mat. 3.2. 1 Col. 13.
the Church Militant, the Catholic Seminary of Divine Love, come to its utmost
Evangelical perfection in this life.

O may thy Gospel, Lord, be daily propagated, Unbelieving Nations Converted,
Isa. 2.2.3
and the number of thy Saints augmented.

Grant, O Lord God, that thy true Religion, thy Word, thy Conveyances of Grace,
all the Holy Institutions, Laws and Governors; fixed by thee in thy Spiritual
Kingdom, Ioh. 18.36.
may be Loved and Honored, and Obeyed: and that thy faithful Subjects may be
protected against all the malice of wicked men, or the powers of darkness. 1
Pet. 3.13. Mal. 12.28, 29,


O my God, let it be thy good Pleasure to put a period to sin and misery, to
infirmity and death; to complete the number of thine Elect, and to hasten thy
Kingdom of Glory: 2 Pet. 1.11.
that s, and all that wait for thy Salvation, may in the Church Triumphant
eternally Love, and I Praise thee.

Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
O my God, thy Will, and thy Commands, are most Holy, Just, and Good, Romans 7.12.
and condescending to our weakness, and by no means grievous, 1 Ioh. 5.
O give me Grace Conscientiously to observe them.

Thy blessed Angels, O Lord, always behold thy Face in Heaven, Mat. 18.10.
They have the Beatifick Vision of thy incomparable Amiableness, they cannot
but unalterably choose thee, they must needs to their utmost capacity Praise
and Love thee. Mat. 18.10.
they cannot possibly offend thee, Ps. 103.20.
they ever perfectly obey thee, and are always upon the Wing at thy Command.

Lord give me Grace, in imitation of the blessed spirits above, to set thee
always before me, O six my serious Contemplation on thee. Ravish my soul with a
lively sense of thy infinite Am^ableness, O vouchsafe me one short glimps of
thy Goodness. O may I once taste and see how Gracious Thou art, Psalm. 34.8.
that all things besides thee may be tastless to me, that my desires may be
always flying up toward thee, that I may render thee Love, and Praise, and
Obedience, Pure and Cheerful, Constant and Zealous, Universal and Uniform, like
that the Holy Angels render thee in Heaven.

Give us this day our daily Bread.
Petitions relating to our selves.
Glory be to thee, O Heavenly Benefactor, who openest thy hand, and fillest all
things living with plenteousness. Ps. 145.16.


O let it be thy good pleasure to give me, and all the wait on thy Beneficent
Love, our food in due season, Give us Bread, and all that is comprehended by
it, Health, Food, Raiment, and all the necessaries of Life.

Give us, O Heavenly Father, Daily Bread, nothing to gratify our Luxury, but
such a competence Prove. 30.8, 9.
as thy Divine wisdom sees fittest for us.

Give us, O bountiful Creator, Daily Bread this day, Teach us to live without
covetous anxiety for to morrow, with a fiducial dependence on thy Fatherly
Goodness, and to be content and thankful for the present portion, 1 Timothy 4.4. 1 Timothy 6.6. 1 Pet. 5.7.
thy Love has indulged us.

O merciful Lord, give us Our Bread, that which is our own Bread, by honest
Labor, Genesis 3.19. Deuteronomy. 21.17.
or a lawful Title, and grant that we may never eat the Bread of Idleness, or
of deceit.

Do Thou Lord, Give us our Bread, for unless thou give it, we cannot have it,
and together with our Bread give us thy blessing, Eccl. 5.19. Mich. 6.14.
otherwise our very Bread will not nourish us.

Above all, O Lord God, give us the Bread of Life, the Bread that came down
from Heaven, the Body and Blood of thy most Blessed Son, to feed our Souls to
Life eternal.

Blessed Jesus, O that it might be my meat, as it was thine, to do the will of
thy Heavenly Father! Ioh. 4.34.


And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
For thy own in^inite mercies sake, and for the Merits of the Son of thy Love,
Forgive me, and all penitent sinners Our trespasses, our sins Known or Secret,
of Omission or Commission, which are the vast debts Mat. 6.12. Luke 11.4.
we owe, to thy vindictive justice.

Forgive us, O Lord, as we forgive all them, even our greatest Enemies that
t^^es^^ss against us, their trespasses, which are infinitely inconsiderable in
comparison of our trespasses against thee.

Glory be to thee, O Lord, who to teach us Charity, have made our forgiveness,
the condition of obtaining Thine.

O Easy, O Gracious condition of Pardon, who would not forgive his Brother a
few pence in this Life, to have ten Thousand Talents, Mat. 18.22, 24, 28.
forgiven in the next!

O let my love, Lord, learn from thine, not only to forgive my Enemies, but to
be Zealous also to do them good.

And lead us not into temptation.
O Lord God, thou see how our Ghostly Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, are every moment soliciting, enticing, alluring, or tempting us to evil;
O be merciful to us, save, and help, and deliver us.

Thou see, O my God, how infirm I am, and how ready my own deceitful heart is
Ier. 17.9.
, to surrender it self to the Tempter; and I know that Satan cannot tempt me
without thy permission Mat. 8.31.
: O lead me not if it be thy good pleasure, suffer me not to fall into violent
or lasting Temptations, that may endanger my perseverance.

I know O heavenly Father, that to be tempted is no sin, for thy own beloved
Son, God incarnate, was tempted Mat. 4.1.9.
to the most horrid of all Sins, to fall down and worship the very Devil, I
know Lord, the Sin lies in yielding to the Temptation.

O my God, if thou for trial of my Love, lead me into any great Temptation, and
let me continue under it, thy Will Lord be done, not mine 1 Cor. 10.13. 1 Pet.
5.8. 2 Cor. 12.7, 9. Iam. 4.7.
: O let thy paternal tenderness limit and control the Tempter: O let thy
All-sufficient Grace restrain my consent, and keep me always on my guard,
watching and praying, and let me at last be more than Conqueror.

I am content, Lord, to be tried and assaulted, so I be not wicked, though it
be grievous for those that Love thee, to be tempted to offend thee.

But deliver us from evil,
O Father of mercy, if thou think fit to lead me into Temptation, deliver me
from the Evil to which I am tempted: Deliver me from the Evil of Sin, and the
Evil of Punishment, from the evil one 1 Ioh. 2.14.
, from the evil World, Gal. 1.4.
and from my own evil Heart Heb. 3.12.
, and from all suggestions to Evil, for all that is Evil is most hateful to
thee, who art infinite goodness, and most destructive of thy Love. And
therefore from all that is Evil, O Almighty Lord defend me.

The Conclusion teaches to Pray for a right end, Gods Glory.
For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever.
I adore, and Love thee, O Jesu, who by concluding, this Prayer with a
Doxology, have taught us, that the right end of our Prayers should be the Glory
of God, that we should be ever careful to mix Praise with our Prayers, and to
be as zealous to give thanks for what we receive Phil. 4.6. Neh. 9.5, 6.
, as to Pray for what we want.

To thee, O Lord God, do we pray, on thee only we rely and depend for
acceptance, to thee only we offer up our Praises, for thine is the Kingdom
Psalm. 47.2.7.
and Sovereign Right to dispose of all things, thine is the Power 135.6.
Almighty, to relieve and bless us, thine is the Glory Ps. 96.7, 8.
. All, the Communications of thy Goodness, as they flow from thee, return to
thee again in Sacrifices of Love, of Praise, and Adoration.

Amen.
For the sake O Heavenly Father of thy beloved, 2 Cor. 1. Rev. 3.14.
in whom all thy Promises are Amen, and who is himself the Amen, the faithful
and true Witness of thy Love to us. Hear me, and pardon my wanderings and
coldness, and help me to sum up and enforce my whole Prayer; all my own wants,
and all the wants of those I pray for, in a hearty and fervent, and
comprehensive, Amen.

The Pledges of Love.
Q. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?

The Sacraments.
A. Two only, as generally necessary to Salvation, that is to say, Baptism and
the Supper of the Lord.

Their Number.
Glory be to thee, O Crucified Love, out of thy Wounded Side flowed Water and
Blood, Ioh. 19.34.
the two Sacraments which thou have Ordained in thy Church, Baptism, and the
Supper of the Lord, the one to initiate, the other to confirm us, in our
Christianity.

Glory be to thee, O Lord, who having Ordained two Sacraments only, and made
them Generally necessary to Salvation, Ioh. 3.5 6.53.
art yet pleased to have Mercy rather than Sacrifice, in cases where they
cannot be had, and where a surprise of Death may prevent their Administration,
thou do supply the want of them by thy merciful acceptance of those persons,
who earnestly desire, and who are disposed to receive them.

O blessed Jesu, the greater thy Compassion is to those sincere persons who
want thy Sacraments, by reason of their infelicity, not their choice, the
greater will be thy indignation against those who wilfully neglect, or contemn
Luke 14.24.
what thy Adorable Love has ordained to be throughout thy whole Church used and
revered, from which neglect and contempt of thy Love, good Lord deliver me.

Nature.
Q. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?

A. I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace, given
unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same,
and a pledge to assure us thereof.

Q. How many parts are there in a Sacrament?

A. Two: the outward visible sign, and the inward spiritual grace.

Glory be to thee, O tenderest Love, who to stoop to our weak and gross
apprehension, have in the two Sacraments made an Outward and visible, and
familiar thing, to be the sign, and memorial, and representation, of an Inward
and invisible Mysterious and Spiritual Grace.

Glory be to thee, O bountiful Love, for Ordaining and Giving us the Holy
Sacraments, Mal. 26.26, 27, 28.
thou thy self only art the Author, and Fountain of Grace, and thou only have
the right of instituting the conveyances of thy own Grace: all Love, all Glory,
be to thee.

Glory be to thee, O mighty Love, who have elevated these obvious and outward
signs, to an efficacy far above their Natures, not only to signify, but to be
happy Means, and instruments, to convey thy Grace to us, to be Seals, and
Pled^es, to confirm and (...) to us the Communications of thy Love, that our
sight may assist our Faith, that if with due preparation, we receive them, both
parts of the Sacrament will go together, as certainly as we receive the Outward
and Visible sign, so certainly shall we receive the Inward and invisible Grace,
for which all Love, all Glory, be to thee.

Baptism.
Q. What is the outward visible sign, or form in Baptism?

A. Water: wherein the person is baptized, In the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Q. What is the inward and spiritual grace?

A. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness: for being by nature
born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the children of
grace.

Q. What is required of persons to be baptized?

A. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the promises of God, made to them in that Sacrament.

Q. Why then are infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age, they
cannot perform them?

A. Because they promise them both by their sureties: which promise, when they
come to age, themselves are bound to perform.

The Outward sign.
Glory be to thee, O Lover of Souls; it was by thy preventing Love, that I was
Baptized with the outward sign, Water, in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost Mal. 28.19.
. That I should believe in the most Holy Trinity; that I should depend on the
gracious assistances, and live wholly devoted to the three most adorable
Persons, that it should be my chief care to Love and Glorify that tri-une
Love, the Author of my Salvation.

The Invisible Grace.
Glory be to thee O Jesu, who by Water, that washes away the filth of the Body,
do represent to my Faith thy invisible Grace in Baptism Ezekiel. 36.25.
, which spiritually washes and cleanses the Soul.

Glory be to thee, O blessed Lord, who in Baptism savest us, not by the outward
washing, but by the inward purifying Grace accompanied with a sincere Vow, and
^^^pulation of a good Conscience toward God 1 Pet. 3.21.
; by which thy propitious Love brought me into thy Church, the spiritual Ark,
to save me from perishing in the Deluge of Sin, which overwhelms the generality
of the World; and therefore all Love, all Glory be to thee.

Glory be to thee, O all-powerful Love, by whose invi^^ble Grace, we in Baptism
die to sin Romans 6.3, 4.
to all carnal Affections, renouncing and detesting them all, and resolving to
take no more pleasure in them than dead persons do in the comforts of life. O
may I ever thus die to Sin.

Glory be to thee, O Jesu, who from our death to Sin in our Baptism, do raise
us to a new Life, and do breath into us the breath of Love; It Is in this
Laver of regeneration Tit. 3.5.
, we are born again by Water John 3.5.
, and the Spirit, by a new Birth unto righ^eo^^ness: that as the natural Birth
propagated sin, our spiritual Birth should propagate Grace, for which all Love,
all Glory be to thee.

Glory be to thee, O most indulgent Love, who in our Baptism do give us the
holy spirit of Love, to be the principle of new Life, and of Love in us, to
infuse into our Souls a supernatural, habitual Grace, and ability to obey and
love thee, for which all Love, all Glory be to thee.

Glory be to thee, O compassionate Love, who when we were conceived and Born in
Sin Psalm, 51.5.
, of sinful Parents, when we sprang from a root wholly corrupt, and were all
Children of Wrath Ephesians. 2.1.
, have in our Baptism made us Children of thy own Heavenly Father by Adoption
and Grace Romans 8.15.
: When we were Heirs of Hell, have made us Heirs of Heaven, even joint Heirs
with thy one self, of thy own Glory; for which with all the powers of my Soul,
I adore and love thee.

Conditions required, 1. Repentance.
I know, O dearest Lord, that I am thine no longer than I Love thee; I can no
longer feel the saving efficacy of my Baptism, than I am faithful to my Vow I
there made; no longer than I am a Penitent, no longer am I Christian; if I name
the name of Christ, I am to depart from Iniquity 2 Timothy 2.19.
. O do thou give me the Grace of True Repentance for all my Sin, for my
original Impurity, and for all my actual Transgressions, that I may abhor and
^^rsake them all, wound my Soul with a most affectionate sorrow, for all the
Injuries, and Affronts, and dishonours I have offered to infinite Love.

2. Faith.
Glory be to thee, O most liberal Jesu, for all those exceeding great and
precious Promises 2 Pet. 1.4.
of Pardon, and Grace, and Glory which thou have made to us Christians in the
Sacrament of Baptism: O may I ever steadfastly believe, O may I ever
passionately Love, may I ever firmly rely on thy superabundant Love in all
these Promises, for which I will ever adore and love thee.

Glory be to thee, O sweetest Love, who in my infancy did admit me to holy
Baptism, who by thy preventing Grace when I was a little Child, did receive
me into the evangelical Covenant, did take me up into the arms of thy Mercy,
and bless me Mar* 10.16.
. Glory be to thee, who did early dedicate me to thy self, to prepossess me
by thy Love, before the World should seize and defise me.

Ah Gracious Lord, how long, how often have I polluted my self by my Sins? But
I repent, and deplore all those Pollutions, and I consecrate my self to thee
against*: O thou most reconcilable Love, pardon and accept me, and restore me
to thy Love: O let the intenseness of my future Love, not only Love* for the
time to come, but retrieve all the Love I have lost.

Sureties.
Glory be to thee, O tenderest Jesu, who when by reason of my Infancy I could
not promise to repent and believe for my self, did mercifully accept of the
promise of my Sureties, who promis^^ both for me, as thou did accept for good
to the Paralytick ^ 5.
; the charitable intentions of those that brought him to thee, and of the Faith
of the* Woman of Canaan Mar. ^.5.
; for the Cure of her Daughter: for which merciful acceptance, all Love, all
Glory be to thee.

O my God, my Lord, the promise which was made by my Sureties for me, I
acknowledge that as soon as I came to a competent Age, I was b^^^d my self to
perform, and I own and renew my Obligation: I promise, O my Lord, with all the
force of my Soul to Love thee, O do thou ever keep me true to my own promise*
^^ce thou art ever ^^alterably true to thine, for which I will ever adore and
love thee.

The Supper of the Lord.
Q. Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained?

A. For the continual remembrance of the Sacrifice of the death of Christ, and
of the benefits which we receive thereby.

Q. What is the outward part or sign of the Lords Supper?

A. Bread and Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received.

Q. What is the inward part, or thing signified?

A. The body and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken, and
received by the faithful in the Lords Supper.

Q. What are the benefits wherewe are partakers thereby?

A. The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of
Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and wine.

Q. What is required of them who come to the Lords Supper?

A. To examine themselves whether they repent them truly of their former sins,
steadfastly purposing to lead a new life; have a lively faith in Gods mercy
through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death; and be in charity
with all men.

Institution.
Glory be to thee, O crucified Love, who at thy last Supper did ordain the
Holy Eucharist, the Sacrament and Feast of Love.

It was for the continual remembrance of the Sacrifice of thy death, O blessed
Jesu, and of the Benefits we receive thereby, that thou wast pleased to ordain
this sacred and awful Rite; all Love, all Glory be to thee.

Ah dearest Lord, how little sensible is he of thy Love in dying for us, who
can ever forget thee?

Ah woe is me, that ever a Sinner should forget his Savior, and yet alas how
prone are we to do it.

Glory be to thee, O Gracious Jesu, who to help our memories, and to impress
thy Love deep on our Souls, have instituted the blessed Sacrament* and
commanded us, Do this in remembrance of me.

O Jesu, let the Propitiatory Sacrifice of thy Death which thou did offer
upon the Cross for the Sins of the whole World, and particularly for my Sins,
be ever fresh in my remembrance.

O blessed Savior, let that mighty Salvation thy Love has wrought for us never
slip out of my mind, but especially let my remmbrance of thee in the Holy
Sacrament be always most lively and affecting.

O Jesu, if I love thee truly, I shall be sure to frequent thy Altar, that I
may often remember all the wonderful Loves of my Crucified Redeemer.

I know, O my Lord and my God, that a bare remembrance of thee is not enough; O
do thou therefore fix in me such a remembran^e of thee, as is suitable to the
infinite Love I am to remember: Work in me all the holy and heavenly
affections, as become the remembrance of a Crucified Savior.

Glory be to thee, O adorable Jesus, who under the outward and visible part,
Parts outward.
the Bre^d and Wine, things obvious and easily prepared, both which thou have
commanded to be received, do communicate to our Souls, the Mystery of divine
Love, the inward and invisible Grace, thy own most blessed Body and Blood which
are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in thy Sup^e^, for
which all Love, all Glory be to thee.

Invisible.
O God incarnate, how thou can give us thy Flesh to eat, and thy Blood to
drink; How thy Flesh is Meat indeed, and thy Blood is Drink indeed; How he that
eats thy Flesh and drinks thy Blood, dwells in thee, and thou in him; How
he shall live by thee, and shall be raised up by thee to Life Eternal John
6.54, etc.
; How thou who art in Heaven, art present on the Altar, I can by no means
explain, but I firmly believe it all, because thou have said it, and I firmly
rely on thy Love, and on thy Omnipotence to make good thy Word, though the
manner of doing it I cannot comprehend.

Real Presence.
I believe, O Crucified Lord, that the Bread which we break in the Celebration
of the Holy Mysteries, is the Communication of thy Body 1 Cor. 10.16.
, and the Cup of Blessing which we bless, is the Communication of thy Blood,
and that thou do as effectually and really conveigh thy Body and Blood to our
Souls, by the Bread and Wine, as thou did thy holy Spirit Ioh. 20.22.
, by thy Breath to thy Disciples; for which all Love, all Glory be to thee.

Lord, what need I labor in vain, to search out the manner of thy mysterious
presence in the Sacrament, when my Love assures me thou art there? All the
faithful who approach thee with prepared hearts, they well know thou art there,
they feel the Virtue of Divine Love going out of thee, to heal their
infirmities, and to inflame their affections, for which all Love, all Glory be
to thee.

O Holy Jesu, when at thy Altar I see the Bread broken, and the Wine poured
out, O Teach me to discern thy Body there 1 Cor. 11.29.
, O let those Sacred and Significant actions, create in me a most lively
Remembrance of thy Sufferings, how thy most blessed Body was scourged, and
wounded, and bruised, and tormented; how thy most precious Blood was shed, for
my sins, and set all my powers on work to Love thee, and to celebrate thy Love
in thus dying for me.

Both kinds.
Glory be to thee, O Jesu, who did institute the Holy Eucharist in both Kinds,
and have Commanded both to be received Mat. 26.26, 27. Ioh. 6.53.
, both the Bread and the Wine, both thy Body broken, and thy Blood shed: thy
Love, O Lord, has given me both, and both are equally Significative and
Productive of thy Love: I do as much Thirst after the one, as I Hunger after
the other, I equally want both, and it would be grievous to my Love to be
deprived of either.

Ah Lord, who is there that truly Loves thee, when thou give him two
distinct Pledges of thy Love, can be content with one only, what Lover can
endure to have one half of thy Love withheld from him? And therefore all Love,
all Glory be to thee for giving both.

Benefits.
O my Lord, and my God, do thou so dispose my heart, to be thy Guest at thy Holy
Table, that I may feel all the sweet influences of Love Crucified, the
Strengthening and Refreshing of my soul* as our Bodies are by the Bread and
Wine, for which I will ever Adore and Love thee.

O merciful Jesu, let that immortal food, which in the Holy Eucharist thou
vouchsa^est me, instill into my weak and languishing soul, new supplies of
Grace, new Life, new Love, new Vigor, and new Resolution, that I may never
more faint, or droop or tire in my duty.

O Crucified Love, raise in me fresh ardours of Love and Consolation, that it
may be henceforth the greatest torment I can endure, ever to offend thee, that
it may be my greatest delight to please thee.

O amiable Jesu, when I devoutly receive the outward Elements, as sure as I
receive them, I receive thee, I receive the Pledges of thy Love, to quicken
mine; O Indulge me, though but for a moment, one Beatisick foretast of the
deliciousness of thy Love, that in the strength of that deliciousness I may
perseveringly love thee.

Preparation.
Glory be to thee, my Lord and my God, who have now given me an invitation to
thy Heavenly Feast. Mat. 11.28. Luke 14.17.
All Love, all Glory, be to thee.

Lord, give me Grace, that I may approach thy awful Mystery, with Penitential
preparation, and with a heart sully disposed to love thee.

Examination.
O my God, my Judge, give me Grace I most humbly beseech thee to E^amine 1 Cor.
11.28.
my whole life past, by the Rule of thy Commandments, before I presume to Eat
of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup, give me Grace sadly to reflect on, and
deplore all my provocations, lest coming to the Holy Eucharist impenitent, and
unprepared, I receive Unworthily, and Eat and drink my own damnation.

O thou Great Searcher of Hearts, thou know all the Load of Impiety and
Guilt under which I lie, O Help me so Impartially to Judge, and Condemn my
self, so humbly to Repent, and beg Pardon, that I may not be Condemned at thy
Tribunal, when I shall appear there at the last day, that I may be set at thy
Right Hand, amongst thy Lovers.

Lord, give me Grace to search every secret of my Heart, to leave no sin, if
possible, unrepented of; ^ill my Eyes full of Tears of Love, that with those
Tears I may lament, all the Indignities I have offered thy Love.

But alas alas, after the most strict examinatinon we can make, who can number
his impieties, who can tell how often he offends, Psalm. 19.12.
Lord therefore cleanse me from my secret faults, which in general I renounce
and bewail.

Repentance.
O my God, thou who alone changest the Heart, O be thou pleased to change (...)
change my aversion to thee, into an entire L^ve of thee. O give me a filial
Repentance, that with a Broken and Contrite Heart I may Grieve, and Mourn, and
Repent for all my ^orm^r sins, and may for ever forsake them, and return to my
Obedience.

Amendment.
Let thy Love, O my God, so perfectly exhaust my soul, that I may for the
future, steadfastly ^urpose to le^d a new life, that I may renew my Baptismal
Vow, that I may hereafter live, as a sworn Votary to thy Love.

Faith.
O Heavenly Father, settle in my soul, a Livel^ Faith in thy Mercy through
Christ, a steady belief of all thy Love to sinners, and an affectionate
Reliance on the Merits and Mediation of thy Crucified Son, Ephesians. 1.1.
of my being Accepted in the Beloved, for whom I will ever Adore and Love thee.

Thanksgiving.
O my Crucified God* thou Sovereign Inflammative of Love, let the Remembrance of
thy Death, set all the powers of my Soul on work, that I may desire, and pant
after thee, Ps. 42.1.2.63.1.
that I may Admire, and Adore thee, that I may take Heavenly delight in thy
Gracious Presence, that with Praise and Thansgiving, with Jubilation and
Triumph I may receive thee into my Heart, there I will have Love, only Love,
always Love, to entertain thee.

Charity.
Lord, when I present my self, and my Love, as all the Gift I have to offer at
thy Altar, next to my Love to thee, and for the sake of thy infinite Love to me
which I there remember, give me Grace to love my Neighbor, and to be in
Charity wi^h all men, and to walk in Love, Ephesians. 5.2.
as thou have loved us, and have given thy self for us, an Offering, and a
Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor, for which all Love, all Glory be
to thee.

In Forgiving.
O most Reconcilable Jesu, in this Memorial of thy Sufferings, I see how thou
did forgive me, and did love me when I was thy Enemy, O for thy dearest
Love to me, give me Love to forgive all my Enemies, Mat. 6.14, 15.
and to be at peace with the world, as I desire to be Loved and Forgiven, and
to be at peace with thee.

All that have any way injured me, O my God, I freely forgive, for thy sake, O
do thou also forgive them: incline them to Brotherly Charity, and let them at
last feel the comfort of that Reconciliation thou did make upon the Cross,
for which I will ever Adore and Love thee.

Restoring.
O my God, if I have wronged, or injured my Neigbour, O give me Grace to beg his
pardon, and as I have opportunity, to make him satisfaction, and restitution
according to my power.

Giving.
O crucified Love, whenever I see thee in any of thy poor Members, Hungry, or
Naked, or in Distress, Matt. 25 35.
O let the Remembrance of thy Love, in Dying for me, engage me to contribute
all I can to thy relief, O may I ever be liberal in my Alms to thee, who were
so liberal of thy inestimable Blood for me.

It is very advisable, that persons before they Communicate, should read over
the whole Communion-Office, or at least, the exhortations there, which they
will find to contain very proper, and plain, and excellent Instructions.

It were much to be wished, that people would make more use of their Common
Prayer Books than they do, and apply the Prayers they meet with there to their
own particular conditions, for the Book is always at hand, and the Prayers are
most safe and familiar, and devout, and the more they affect us in our Closet,
the more they will affect us in the Congregation, and well meaning souls will
reap great spiritual advantage from this practice.

Prayer for the Holy Spirit.
For example, an humble poor Christian, who it may be has no other Book but his
Common Prayer Book, and who intends to come to the Holy Communion, may learn to
turn the Communion-Office to his own private use, after this manner.

Almighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid, cleanse the thoughts of my heart by the inspiration of thy
Holy Spirit, that I may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy Holy
Name, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Thanksgiving for our Redemption.
I give most humble and hearty thanks to thee, O God the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, for the Redemption of the World by the Death and Passion of our
Savior Christ, both God and man, who did humble himself even to the death upon
the Cross for us miserable sinners, who lay in darkness and the shadow of
death, that he might make us the Children of God, and exalt us to everlasting
Life.

Glory be to thee O Jesus, our master and only Savior, who to the end that we
should always remember thy exceeding great Love in thus dying for us, and the
innumerable benefits which by thy precious Blood-sheding thou have obtained to
us; have Instituted and Ordained Holy Mysteries as Pledges of thy Love, and for
a continual remembrance of thy Death, to our great endless Comfort.

To thee therefore, O blessed Savior, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, I
will give (as I am most bounden) continual thanks, I submit my self wholly to
thy Holy Will and Pleasure, and will study to serve thee in true Holiness, and
Righteousness, all the days of my Life.

Confession.
Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of all
men, I acknowledge and bewail my manifold sins, etc.

Praise.
I lift up my heart unto thee, O Lord, I give thanks unto thee, O Lord our God,
it is meet and right so to do: it is very meet, right, and my bounden duty,
that I should at all times, and in all places give thanks unto thee O Lord,
Holy Father Almighty, everlasting God.

But chiefly am I bound to praise thee for giving thy only Son Jesus to dye for
my Sins, and to rise aagain for my Justification.

Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and with all the Company of Heaven I
laud and magnify, etc.

Prayer for our Communicating worthily.
I do not presume to come to thy Table, O merciful Lord, trusting in my own
righteousness, etc.

Glory be to God on high, and on earth Peace, good will toward men: I praise
thee, etc.

Praise.
To these, as you see occasion, you may add many very good Prayers, short and
plain, and pertinent to your purpose, which you may collect out of the Common
Prayer, and which will much further your Devotion; such as these.

For Fear and Love.
O Lord, who never ^ailest to help and govern them whom thou do bring up in
thy steadfast Fear and Love; keep me I beseech thee, under the protection of thy
good Providence, and make me to have a perpetual Fear and Love of thy Holy
Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

For Love.
O God, who have prepared for them that love thee, such good things as pass Man's
understanding; pour into my heart such Love toward thee, that I loving thee
above all things, may obtain thy promises, which exceed all that I can desire,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Lord of all power and mig^t, who art the Author and Giver of all goo^ things,
graft in my Heart the Love of thy Name, increase in me true Religion, nourish
me with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep me in the same, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

For Charity.
O Lord, who have taught me that all my doings without Charity are nothing
worth, send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into my Heart that most excellent gift of
Charity, the very bond of Peace and of all Virtues, without which whosoever
lives is counted dead before thee. Grant this for thy only Son Jesus Christ's
sake, Amen.

For Imitation of Christ.
Almighty God, who have given thy only Son to be unto us both a Sacrifice for
Sin, and also an example of Godly life* give me grace that I may always most
thankfully receive that his inestimable Benefit, and also daily endeavor my
self to follow the blessed steps of his most holy Life, through the same Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

They that are ignorant, or that cannot read should go to their Parish Priest,
or to some other discreet and learned Minister of Gods Word, and desire him to
teach them their Duty in private, and they that thus sincerely seek the Law at
the Priests mouth, shall find that the Priests Lips do preserve Knowledge, and
shall not go away without a Blessing.

To God the Father who first loved us, and made us accepted in the Beloved, to
God the Son who loved us and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood: To God
the Holy Ghost, who sheds the Love of God abroad in our Hearts, be all Love and
all Glory, for time, and for eternity. Amen.

FINIS.
To the poor Inhabitants within the Diocese of Bath and Wells, THOMAS, their
unworthy Bishop, wishes the knowledge and the love of God.
Dearly beloved in our Lord,
THe Catechism truly teaches all Christians, that they are not able of
themselves to do those things they have vowed in their Baptism to do, namely,
To walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him, without his special
Grace, o^ favorable Assistance, and this they are to learn at all times to call
upon God for, by diligent Prayer.

How good and seasonable this advice is, you will all see, if you consider what
helpless and needy Creatures the very best of Men are. Alas! our weakness is
very great, our wants are very many, our dependence on God for all things, all
our lives long, is entire, and absolute, and necessary, and there is no way in
the World to gain help and supplies from God, but by Prayer; so that it is as
easy, and as possible to preserve a natural Life without daily Bread, as a
Christian Life without daily Prayer.

It was for this reason, that our Savior himself took a particular care, to
teach his Disciples to pray, [ Luke 11.1.] and it is for the same reason, and
in imitation of our Heavenly Master, that I have joined these directions for
Prayer to the Catechism.

Sure I am, the Zeal I ought to have for your Salvation, can suggest to me
nothing more conducing to the good of your Souls, than to exhort and beseech
you all, of either Sex, to learn how to Pray.

This is the first general Request I shall make to you, and I am the more
earnest in it, because my own sad experience has taught me, how strangely
ignorant common People usually are of this duty; insomuch, that some never Pray
at all, pretending they were never taught, or that their memories are bad, or
that they are not Book-learn'd, or that they want money to buy a Book; and by
this means they live, and die rather like Beasts than Men; nay, their condition
is much worse than that of Beasts, for the misery of a Beast does end at death,
but the misery of a wicked man does then begin, and will endure to all Eternity.

To prevent then as much as lies in me, the damnation of those Souls which God
has committed to my care, and to cure that lamentable ignorance and
forgetfulness of God, which is the cause of the damnation of so very many, I do
not only incessantly pray for you my self, but I beg of you all to pray for
your selves, and I beseech you to read the following Instructions; or if you
cannot read your selves, to get some honest charitable Neighbors to read them
often to you, that you may remember them, and God of his great mercy reward the
Charity of such Neighbors.

If any of you, either by your own negligence, or by the negligence of your
Parents, or for want of Catechizing in your Parish, are wholly ignorant of your
duty; though it be a most shameful and dangerous thing, for one who calls
himself a Christian, to know nothing of Christ or Christianity, yet if you are
willing to learn, and beg pa^don of God for your wilful ignorance hitherto, and
will sincerely do your endeavor to get saving Knowledge, and heartily pray to
God to assist you, you shall find, that the very entrance of Gods word gives
light, that it gives understanding unto the simple. [Psal. 119.130.]

I must warn you beforehand, that corrupt Nature will be very busy in
hindering the learning of your duty, and thoughts will arise in your mind that
the task will be too hard and too tedious for you to undertake; but I
faithfully promise you, to impose no hard or tedious task on you, but such as
you your selves shall confess, to be very complying with your Infirmities; for
our most compassionate Savior teaches me to say no more to you, then you can
bear. [ John 16.11.]

All I shall exhort you to, is to learn your Catechism, which you may do by
degrees: If you learn but a line or two in a day, you will, by Gods blessing,
in a very short time learn it all over, and you will rejoice, and thank God,
for the sudden and happy progress you have made.

God forbid you should ever think your selves too old to learn to serve God,
and to be saved, both which are taught in the Catechism, and therefore the
Catechism is of necessity to be learned: For how can you go to Heaven, if you
never learned the way thither? How can you be saved, if you do not know your
Savior?

It Is a great Error, to think that the Catechism was made for Children only,
for all Christians are equally concerned in those saving Truths which are there
taught; and the Doctrine delivered in the Catechism, is as proper for the study
and as necessary for the salvation of a great Doctor, as of a weak Christian,
or a young Child.

But you will be the more encouraged to learn your Catechism, when you see how
excellent a help it will be to Prayer, for it will at the same time further
your Knowledge, and your Devotion both together; and the Prayers I intend to
commend to you, are chiefly the very Answers in the Catechism, which being
daily repeated, will be the better fixed in your memory, and you cannot imagine
any advice for Prayer can be more easy and familiar, than that which directs
you to turn your very Catechism into Prayers.

You are by this time I hope satisfied, that the Duty to which I exhort you, is
no hard task; and yet I will endeavor, by Gods assistance, to make it more
easy, by putting you into an easy method to attain it.

If you are wholly ignorant of your Catochism, let it be your first care to
learn such Ejaculations, such short Prayers as these, and say them often, and
heartily.

Lord have mercy upon me.

Christ have mercy upon me.

Lord have mercy upon me.

Lord pardon all my wilful ignorance, and gross ^arelessness of my duty, for
the sake of Jesus my Savior. Amen.

O my God assist me in the learning of my Duty.

Lord help me to know, and to love thee.

Lord pity me, Lord save me, Father forgive me.

Glory be to thee, O Lord, who have hitherto spared me.

O that I might at last learn to glorify, and love, and serve thee!

Such short Prayers as these, you may easily get by heart, and the method in
which I advise you to proceed, is, that in which Children are commonly taught,
in regard I am now to look on you as a Child: For there are two sorts of
Children; there are Children in age, and Children in understanding, [1 Cor.
14.20.] and in this latter respect you are Children, and the same method for
the most part is proper for you, which is proper for those that are Children in
Age.

I must therefore feed you with Milk, before you can be capable of strong Meat,
[Heb. 5.13.] and I must look on you as Lambs of my ^lock, which I am to use
tenderly, and these following Directions which I give to Parents* for the
training up their Children in Piety, I do equally design for the training up of
you. God of his Infinite Goodness, bless them to you both.

I exhort all you who are Parents, to instill good things into your Children as
soon as ever they begin to speak^ let the first words they utter, if it be
possible, be these, Glory be to God: Accustom them to repeat these words on
their knees, as soon as they rise, and when they go to bed, and often times in
the day, and let them not eat or drink, without saying, Glory be to God.

As their speech grows more plain and easy to them, teach them who Made, and
Redeemed and Sanctified them, and for what end, namely to glorify and to love
God; and withal, teach them some of the shortest Ejaculations you can, such as
these; Lord help me. Lord save me.
Lord have mercy upon me.
All love, all glory be to God who first loved me.
Lord keep me in thy love.
Within a little time you may teach them the Lords Prayer, and hear them say it
every day, morning and evening on their knees, with some one or more of the
foregoing Ejaculations; and by degrees as they grow up, they will learn the
Creed, and the whole Catechism.

Be sure to teach your Children with all the sweetness and gentleness you can,
lest if you should be severe, or should over-task them, Religion should seem to
them rather a burden than a Blessing.

As their Knowledge increases, so let their Prayers increase also, and teach
them as they go to turn their Catechism into Prayers, after the manner which I
shall show you, and to confirm and improve their knowledge, bring them duly to
the Church to be Catechized by the Parish Priest, that by his familiar and
devout Explications of the Catechism, they may learn to understand it, and may
be capable of reading the Exposition on it, and other Books of Piety.

Take conscientious care to season your Children as early as you can, with the
love of God, which is the first and great Commandment, [ Matthew. 22.38.] and
with the fear of God, which is the beginning of Wisdom, [ Psalm. 111.10.] for
the awful love, and the filial fear of God, must always go together.

The same method you observe in teaching your Children, the same you may
observe in teaching your Servants, according as you see they want teaching, and
you your selves will reap the benefit of it, as well as your Servants; for the
more devout servants they are of God, the more faithful Servants will they be
to you.

Remember, you must teach both your Children and Servants by your Example, as
well as by your Instruction, for they learn best by Example; and if they see
you give an example of fraud or lying, of revenge or calumny, of uncleanness or
drunkenness, of cursing and swearing, and irreligion; instead of teaching them
to obey God, you teach them to provoke him; instead of teaching them to honor
God you teach them to blaspheme him; instead of leading them the way to Heaven,
you lead them the way to Hell; and you will increase your own damnation, by
furthering theirs, which God forbid you should ever do.

Now that you may the better give a good Example to your Family, I will by Gods
help give you a method of daily Devotion, taken for the most part out of the
Catechism, which will be suitable to all Christians, be they never so well
instructed, and which you may by little and little teach your Children; and
which those who have been bred up in ignorance, and are Children in
understanding, and are yet willing to be taught, may learn to say also, as the
capacities of either do increase; for a Christian must never stand at a stay,
but must be always growing in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, [2 Pet. 3.18.]

A method of daily Prayer.
As soon as ever you awake, offer your first thoughts and words to God, saying,
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: Three Persons
and one God blessed for evermore: All love, all praise be to thee.

As you are rising, say, I laid me down and slept, and rose up again, for the
Lord sustained me: All love, all glory be to God. [ Psalm. 3.5.]

As soon as you are dressed, kneel down, as our Savior himself kneeled, [Luke
22.41.] at his Prayers, and remember you are in Gods presence, and say your
Prayers with Reverence and Devotion.

Morning Prayer.
Glory be to thee, O Lord God, for* my preservation and refreshment, and for
all the Blessings of the night past, for which, All love, All praise be to thee.

Father, forgive me all the evil of the night past, for the merits of Jesus my
Savior. Amen.

O merciful God, keep and protect, and bless me this day, and prosper me in my
Calling, and preserve me from sin and danger, for the merit of Jesus my
Savior. Amen.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

All love, all glory be to thee, O God the Father, who have made me and all the
World.

All love, all glory be to thee, O God the Son, who have redeemed me and all
Mankind.

All love, all glory be to thee, O God the Holy Ghost, who do sanctify me,
and all the elect people of God.

All love, all glory be to thee, O Father of mercy, who in my Baptism did
make me a member of Christ, thy own Child, and an inheritor of the kingdom of
Heaven.

O my God, I do this day dedicate my self to thy service, and do renew the
promise and vow of my Baptism.

I do from my heart renounce the Devil and all his works, the pomps and vanity
of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh; from all which,
Good Lord deliver me.

I believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and I will keep thy holy
Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my life.

All this, O Lord, I am bound to believe and do, and by thy help so I will; and
I heartily thank thee, O Heavenly Father, who have called me to this ^tate of
salvation, through Jesus Christ my Savior; and I pray unto thee to give me thy
Grace, that I may continue in the same to my lives end.

Lord, hear me, help me, pardon my failings, supply all my wants, and the wants
of all faithful People, which I (...) up in the words of thy own beloved Son,
Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

After the like manner you may pray at night.

Evening Prayer.
Glory be to thee, O Lord, for my preservation, and for all the Blessings of
the day past; for which, all love, all praise be to thee.

Father, forgive me all the sins I have this day committed, either in thought,
or word, or deed, either against thee, or against my neighbor, for the sake of
Jesus my Savior. Amen, Amen.

It grieves me, O merciful God, that I should daily offend thee: But I repent,
O pity and pardon me, for the sake of Jesus thy Beloved, Amen, Amen.

O my God, keep and protect, and bless me this night, and preserve me from sin
and danger, for the sake of Jesus. Amen, Amen.

Lord, refresh me this night with seasonable sleep, that I may rise the next
morning more fit and able to serve thee in my Calling, for the sake of Jesus,
thy Beloved. Amen, Amen.

I believe in God the Father, etc.

All love, all glory be to thee, our God the Father, who, etc. as in the
Morning.

I desire thee, O Lord God, O Heavenly Father, who art the Giver of all
goodness, to send thy Grace unto me, and to my Wife and Children, to my Husband
and Children, Father and Mother, Brethren and Sisters, Kindred and Friends,
Master and Mistress, [you must name these Relations, according as you stand
related] and to all people, that we may worship thee, serve thee, and obey
thee, as we ought to do: And I pray unto thee, that thou would send us all
things that be needful, both for our souls and bodies, and that thou will be
merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins; and that it will please thee, to
save and defend us, in all dangers, ghostly and bodily, and that thou will keep
us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from
everlasting death: And this I trust thou will do of thy meecy and goodness,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Lord, so be it.

Lord, hear me, help me, pardon my failings, supply all my wants, and the wants
of all for whom I pray, which I sum up in the words of thy own beloved Son,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

As you are going to bed, say, I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest,
for it is thou, Lord, only that make me dwell in safety,

[ Psalm. 4.9.]

As you began the day, so end it with glorifying God, and when you are in bed,
say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, three
Persons and one God, blessed for evermore. All praise, all love be to thee.

I earnestly beg of God, to make you sensible your selves, and to give you
grace to make your Children and Servants sensible also, how Necessary, and
Happy, and Heavenly a Duty Prayer is, and how many exceeding great precious
Promises God has made to those that devoutly pray to him; and if you are thus
sensible, you will not content your selves with Morning and Evening Prayer
only, but you will be desirous, if you have Opportunity, to retire about
Midday, for a few Minutes, that you may imitate the Devotion of Holy David,
and of Daniel, and pray three times a day, Dan. 6.10. and that you may not want
a help for Noon tide Prayer, the Catechism shall supply you.

Prayer at Noon.
At evening, and at morning, and at noonday will I pray, and that instantly,
Lord, hear my voice, [ Psalm. 55.19.]

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: As it was in
the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

All love, all glory be to thee, O God the Father, who have first loved us, and
have given thy beloved Son to die for our Sins, and to rise again for our
Justification.

Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.

Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me, for the sake
of Jesus thy Beloved. Amen.

O Lord God, who see I am not able of my self to walk in thy Commandments,
and to serve thee; be pleased to help and strengthen me by thy special Grace,
that I may daily and sincerely perform my duty toward thee, and my duty
toward my neighbor, for the sake of Jesus my Savior. Amen.

O my God, give me grace to believe in thee, and to love thee with all my
heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my strength; to worship
thee, to give thee thanks, to put my whole trust in thee, to call upon thee, to
honor thy holy Name and thy Word, and to serve thee truly all the days of my
life, for the sake of Jesus thy Beloved. Amen.

O my God, give me grace to love my neighbor as my self, to do to all men as I
would they should do to me; to love, honor and succor my Father and Mother
[this clause must be left out, if your Father and Mother be dead] to honor and
obey the King, and all that are put in Authority under him; to submit my self
to all my Governors, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors, and Masters; to order my s^^f
lowly and reverently to all my betters; to hurt no body by word or deed; to be
true and just in all my dealing; to bear no malice nor hatred in my heart; to
keep my hands from picking and stealing, and my tongue from evil speaking,
lying and slandering; to keep my body in temperance, soberness and chastity,
not to covet or desire other men's goods, but to learn and labor truly to get
mine own living, and to do my duty in that state of life, unto which it has
pleased thee to call me, for the sake of Jesus thy Beloved. Amen.

Lord hear me, help me, pardon my failings, supply all my wants, which I sum up
in the words of thy Beloved Son, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Instead of these two last Prayers, you may sometimes say the Ten Commandments,
which you may turn into a very good Prayer, by saying after every one,

Lord have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this Law.

Where you not only beg pardon for the sins you have committed against each
Commandment, but you also beg Grace to keep it.

At the end of them you may say, Lord have mercy upon me, and write all these
thy Laws in my heart, I beseech thee. And so conclude with the Lords Prayer.

Do not think that this Practice of Prayer will be too hard, or too long for
young persons, or for laboring people; for if you cannot say them all, say as
much as you can; or if you are at Day Labor, or have not time or convenience
to say them, offer up to God two or three hearty Ejaculations in their place:
But if you can get time and convenience, say them all, and I dare assure you,
that all the three* Forms of Prayer which I commend to you, will not in all
take up a quarter of an hour; and certainly that Person has very little sense
of his Duty, very little concern for his immortal Soul, very little Honor for
God, or value for Heaven, who will not spend one quarter of an hour in the
space of four and twenty hours, in the Service of God, and the Salvation of his
own Soul.

I do by all means exhort you to give your Servants a few Minutes leisure at
Noon, to Pray after your Example, and to use your Children to do the same, for
they will soon be able to say the Lords Prayer, and two or three Ejaculations,
and teach them to say these at Noon, as well as at Morning and at Night, and
it is incredible to think how much good this Practice will do them, and what
great comfort you your selves will reap from the early Devotion of your
Children.

To further this Devotion in your Children, instead of Idle Tales and Songs,
which pollute their Souls, and when they come to be serious* will cost them
great pains to unlearn: You must teach them short Psalms by heart, which will
exercise their Memories and Piety both together; and as you teach the Psalms to
your Children, I exhort you to learn them your selves.

You cannot imagine the great benefit of learning Psalms by heart; for when you
are under any Temptation, or are in any Affliction, or when you lie waking in
the Night, or when you are Sick, these Psalms will come into your mind, and the
Devout repeating them will yield you most seasonable Consolations.

The very Common People, in the first and purest Ages of the Church, were so
sensible of the Spiritual advantages of learning Psalms, that they learned the
whole Psalter by heart, and sang or said the Psalms in their Shops, and at the
Plow, insomuch that St. James makes it the proper expression of Christian
mirth, [Iam^* 5.13.] If any be merry, let him s^^g Psalms.

This is the way to store your own and your Childrens minds with Ejaculations,
or short Prayers for all Occasions, which I advise both Old and Young to
accustom themselves to, because it is the true way of Praying without ceasing,
and it is a kind of Prayer most easy, and may be used at any time of the day,
or in any place, and is one of the most efficacious means in the World to keep
us in Gods favor (...) is of all things most desirable.

Ejaculations.
At going out, or coming in.

Lord, bless my going out and my coming in, from this time forth for evermore.
[ Psalm. 121.8.]

At Meals.

Lord grant, that whether I eat or drink, or whatever I do, I may do all to thy
Glory. [1 Cor. 10.31.]

At Work.

Prosper thou the work of my hands, O Lord, O prosper thou my handy work. [
Psalm. 90.17.]

In the Shop or Market.

Lord, give me grace to use this World, so as not to abuse it. [1 Cor. 7.31.]

Lord, grant that I may never go beyond, or defraud my brother in any matter,
for thou art the Avenger of all such. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.

In temptation or danger.

O God, make speed to save me: O Lord, make haste to help me.

At any time of the day.

Wherever I am, whatever I do, Thou Lord see me: O keep me in thy fear all
the day long. [ Prove. 23.17.]

Lord, give me grace to keep always a conscience void of offense toward thee,
and toward men. [ Acts 24.16.]

Lord, teach me so to number my days, that I may apply my heart to Wisdom. [
Psalm. 90.12.]

O let my mouth be filled with thy Praise, that I may sing of thy Glory and
Honor all the day long, [ Psalm. 71.7.]

All love, all glory be to thee, O God, who did first love me.

Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our ^^ns in his own Blood, be glory
and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. [ Rev. 1.5.]

O blessed Spirit, shed abroad the love of God in my heart.

Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, Praise his holy Name. [
Psalm. 103.1.]

Praise the Lord, O my soul, while I live will I praise the Lord: yea as long
as I have any being, I will sing Praises unto my God. [ Psalm. 146.1.]

You that have Families, I do further exhort, that besides your private
Prayers, you would offer up to God a Morning and Evening Sacrifice in your
Families, and that every one of you would take up the Holy Resolution of
Joshua, As for me, and my House, we will serve the Lord, [Iosh. 24.15.] And the
Prayers I advise you to use, are taken out of the Common Prayer, as being most
familiar, and of greatest Authority withal.

If any of your Family are gone abroad to their Work before the rest can be
ready, call that little Congregation about you that is at home, and you that
are present, pray for those that are absent, and by this means those that are
absent upon necessary Employments, will share in the blessings for which you
pray.

Morning Prayer for a Family.

Let the words of our mouths, and the meditations of our hearts, be always
acceptable in thy sight: O Lord, our Strength and our Redeemer.

O God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the World, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God, have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O Lord we beseech thee, mercifully hear our Prayers, and spare all those who
confess their sins unto thee, that they whose consciences by sin are accused,
by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, who see that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves, we give thee humble thanks for thy preservation of us this day past [or
this night past] and for all the blessings thou daily vouchsafest us; and we
beseech thee to keep us both outwardly in our bodies, and inwardly in our
souls; that we may be defended from all adversities which may happen to the
body, and from all evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the soul, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and power Infinite, have mercy
upon the whole Church, and so rule the heart of thy chosen Servant James our
King and Governor, that he (knowing whose Minister he is) may above all things
seek thy Honor and Glory; and that we and all his Subjects (duly considering
whose Authority he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him, in
thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed Word and Ordinance, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns ever one God, World without end. Amen.

Unto thy gracious mercy and protection, O Lord, do we commit our selves this
day [or this night] and all our relations and friends: Lord prosper us in our
callings: Lord bless us and keep us: Lord make thy face to shine upon us, and
be gracious unto us: Lord lift up thy countenance upon us, and give us Peace,
both now and evermore, for the sake of Jesus thy beloved, in whose own blessed
Words, we sum up all our wants.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The same form, changing but one word, is proper for the Night as well as the
Morning, to make Family Prayer the more easy to you.

That Prayer which I have set down, wherein you pray for the King, and pray for
your selves also, that you may be good Subjects, I exhort you never to omit,
because you know that the Country wherein you live, was the only seat of the
late Rebellion, and the Tares of Sedition have been Industriously sown among
you, and you have the greater reason to pray that you may continue firm in your
Allegiance; besides, St. Paul teaches you, that to Pray for Kings, is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, [1 Timothy 2.2, 3.]

To your Family Prayers, you may add, as you see occasion, one of these
following.

Almighty and everlasting God, give unto us the increase of Faith, Hope and
Charity, and that we may obtain that which thou do promise, make us to love
that which thou do command, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Lord we beseech thee, Grant thy people grace to withstand the temptations of
the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and with pure hearts and minds to follow
thee the only God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Prevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name; and finally, by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

These and ^he like short Prayers, may be said alone in the Closet, as well as
in the Family, by changing only the number, and for (we) saying all along (I)
and for (us) saying (me.) As for Example, when you read any part of the Holy
Scripture, either alone by your selves, or with your Families, both which you
should do daily, if you have leisure, but if you have not, see that you do both
on the Lord's days, and on Holy days, and before Reading, say this Prayer.

Blessed Lord, who have caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our
learning, Grant that we [I] may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort of thy Holy Word, we [I] may
embrace, and ever hold fast, the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou
have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

God of his infinite Mercy bless these Instructions to his Glory, and to the
furtherance of your Devotions, through Jesus the Beloved. Amen. Amen.
FINIS.

