The Royal Sufferer.

A MANUAL OF MEDITATIONS AND DEVOTIONS.

Written for the Use of a Royal, though Afflicted FAMILY.

By T -- K -- D. D.

Printed in the Year 1699.

TO THE KING.
Great Sir!
PErmit me, I beseech You, to lay at Your Royal Feet this small Manual, which
has no other design but the Supporting of Your Sacred Majesty, and Your
Faithful Friends and Adherents under those Calamities which Your Majesty has
born with so much Magnanimity, Patience, and Christian Resolution, that it
shows You to be the Heir not only of Your Royal Father's Crown, but of his
Afflictions and Sufferings; Exerting the like Constancy and Courage under them,
as that Blessed Martyr did. It Is true, indeed, Your Royal Father was a
Protestant, and Lived and Died in and for that Profession; and I could heartily
wish that Your Majesty was so too: For then we might quickly hope to see an end
of our present Miseries in a short time. But though so great a Blessing be denied
us, yet shall my Loyalty and Duty approve it self the same, as if You were
(...); for I cannot conceive (what ever some may think) that Your Majesty's
being of another Persuasion than my self, can discharge me from my Allegiance
to You. And I hope Your Majesty will not the less regard what I have here
Written, because I profess my self, as I always did, to be a Member and an
Unworthy Son of the Church of England: For as it has always been my Judgment,
that he that Believes, Lives, and Prays, according to the Rules that Christ has
given us, is a True Christian and a happy Man; so I believe that the next way
to Heaven is not to look after Controversy, but Conscience; and to spend our
Zeal and Time not in being Contentious, but Religious: And therefore
wheresoever I live in the Christian World, whither East or West, it is not my
being a good Scholar that will make me happy, but a good Christian; not a
Learned Disputant for Christ, but a Devout Servant to him: Nor the being of
such or such a Party or side in the Church, but a True Member of his Body.

AND if Your Majesty would Vouchsafe to bear with me a little, I could easily
demonstrate this to be the most Safe Way: For, if I am Regenerated by the holy
Spirit, and made a Christian by true Baptism, believing the Scriptures; can it
with any Color of Reason, be Supposed that I shall suffer Damnation for not
equally Believing Traditions? And if I make Conscience to serve and Worship
GOD, can it be thought I shall Perish for not Worshipping Images? If I pray to
GOD, as our Blessed Savior has taught me, saying, Our Father, etc. Who can
think I should incur the Sentence of Damnation for not Invocating Saints and
Angels? And if I receive the holy Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, in
both kinds, according to Christ's Institution, as even the Roman Church
Confesses, who can believe I shall be damned, because the Cup is taken away by
a Council?

THESE things I urge with all humility, only to let Your Majesty see what
reason I have to believe the Protestant Religion to be the most Safe Way: And
if through the Divine Blessing they should be made Efficacious, to cause Your
Majesty to Return to, and Embrace the Religion professed even to Death, by Your
Royal Father, for whom I am sure You have so justly a great Veneration, it
would be the Joy and Rejoicing of all Your People; and would open a Door of
hope to 'em, even in this Valley of Achor. But if for our Sins, we shall still
be deprived of so great a Blessing, it is yet our Duty to submit to the
Sovereign Will of our Almighty Maker, and to continue our Loyalty to Your
Majesty, praying, That the Divine Goodness would graciously support You under
those great and many Troubles wherewith it has pleased Him to Exercise You
here; and at last to Translate You to a brighter Crown, even a Crown of
Immarcessible Glory. Which is the Daily and Earnest Prayer of,

Your Majesty's most Loyal, Faithful and Obedient Subject and Servant, T. K.

INTRODUCTION.
HAVING with grief of Heart, observed that Uninterrupted Series of Afflictions
that has now for some Years attended one of the most Royal Families in Europe
(to which I have the Honor to be particularly related, and thereby am involved
in their common Fate, my self having run the same Risque with that of my Royal
Master, and suffered the loss of all as well as He) I have thought it my Duty,
by the Ensuing Meditations, to cast my Mite into the Royal Treasury, and by
considering the Vicissitude and Uncertainty of all Sublunary States and Things,
to offer some Support under that weight of Sorrow, which a Mind less
Magnanimous than that of our Great Master, would have sunk under long ago.

AND since the Holy Scriptures do inform us, that Afflictions rise not out of
the Ground, neither does Trouble spring out of the Dust, it will not be
unnecessary to inquire into the Cause from whence our great and sore Calamities
arise; for as in the Case of a Diseased Body, to know the Cause from whence the
Morbifick Affect proceeds, is accounted half the Cure; so if by a through search
we can come to know the Cause why it has pleased the Sovereign Majesty of
Heaven to Bring and to Continue these Calamiries upon us, it may, (accompanied
with the Divine Blessing) go a great way toward the Removal of them: There
being nothing more certain, than that the way to have our Offended Maker
Reconciled unto us, is, To Search our Hearts, and try our Ways, and to turn
unto Him against whom we have sinned; and so may we hope He will have Mercy
upon us, and say to the Proud Waves of Affliction that have so long been
rolling over our heads, Thus far have ye gone, but ye shall proceed no further,
and here shall your proud Waves be stopped: For the same GOD that puts a stop
to the Raging of the Sea, can soon put a Period to the Madness of the People,
and bring back our Captivity as the Streams in the South.

NOW since the Loss of what we formerly Enjoyed, is that which makes us the
most Uneasy, and gives us the greatest Disquiet, I will first Endeavor to
remove it, by giving you a Scheme of the Vanity and Emptiness of all those
things; and consequently that it is not worth our while to afflict our selves
for the Loss of that which is so Fading and Transitory in its own Nature, and
when Enjoyed in its greatest Advantages, adds so very little to our happiness:
Which things are properly reducible to three Heads, viz. Honors, Riches, and
Pleasures, which I shall distinctly consider in Meditations upon each. And that
what I write may be the more effectual to the End for which it is written, I
shall Address my self to the Divine Majesty for a Blessing thereupon.

A PRAYER.
O Most Gracious and Blessed GOD, who art the Source and Fountain of all
Blessings, without whose Gracious Influence the best of all our Performances
will neither bring glory to thee, nor Profit to our selves, Look down, we pray
thee, in Mercy upon us, and let this Work be so attended with thy Blessing,
that it may be Efficacious through thy Grace, to take off our Hearts and
Affections from the love of those things of which thou have justly deprived us
for our Sins; that so we may now with more earnestness and intenseness of Soul,
seek after those things that cannot be taken from us; to which end, we pray
thee, show us the emptiness of all present things, whether they be Honors,
Riches, or Pleasures; and that Thou only art that chief Good which alone can
satisfy our Souls: Hear us, O Lord, and help us, for Jesus Christ his sake:
And let these Words of our Mouths and Meditations of our Hearts, be acceptable
in thy sight, O LORD our GOD and our Redeemer.

Meditation I.
Of the Vanity and Uncertainty of Honor.
THERE is certainly nothing so convincing as our own Experience; and if we
truly consider it, it is no small Advantage that we reap even by our Losses, if
thereby we come to be convinced of the Vanity of that which we have lost. For
such is the Deceitfulness of our Hearts, and the Corruption of our Natures,
that while we are in the Possession of any outward Good, we are loath to let it
go; and though we find no real Good in it, we are yet so much pleased with it, as
to Endeavor with all our Might to retain it: And let us hear from the
Ministers of GOD's Word never so long and learned Harrangues of the Vanity and
Uncertainty of them, we are unwilling to believe them. But when the Storm of
GOD's Anger is come upon us, and the Tempest of his Wrath has covered us, and
taken from us, our King, our Queen, our Princes and Nobles, all our pleasant
and delectable things; we by our own Experience come to see that Honor is but
an Empty Puff of Air, that it is only Vox and preterea nihil, a Voice and
nothing else; and that all is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

BUT to come a little more particularly to show the Vanity of Honor: What
Certainty is there in that which consists in Popular Applause, and depends on
the breath of the Vulgar? Well may it be compared to Wind, for with every Wind
it changes: Did not the common People change their Notes like the Wind, even to
our Savior himself? How did they cry Hosamna one Day, and the next Crucify
him? Now the Blessed Jesus is esteemed a Prophet by 'em, and anon reputed a
Samaritan that has a Devil. Nor had his Followers less Experience of the
Inconstancy of the People: When St. Paul escaped Shipwreck, and was cast upon
the Island called Melita, a Viper fastened on his hand, which made the People
take him for a Murderer; but when they saw him shake it off, without doing him
any harm, they changed their Minds and said he was a God: And the same St.
Paul, accompanied with St. Barnabas, were at another time first honored with
Paganish Devotion, as though they had been Jupiter and Mercury, and soon after
stoned, as tho they were Malefactors. Again, St. Paul and Silas were one time
imprisoned in the lowest Dungeon at Philippos, and afterward Honored and
Adored of the same Jailer that was their Executioner: Even as our Blessed Lord
was honored of the same Judas that was his Betrayer, and of the same Pilate
that was his Condemner. How lamentable was the Case of Zedikiah, who of King of
Judah, was made a Captive to the King of Babylon, and put in Chains; he had
indeed for a short time his Eyes spared, but it was only that he might behold
the Dreadful Slaughter of his Children, and then the Light of his Eyes was
obscured in utter Darkness: O lamentable Vicissitude of Worldly Honors! When
Crowns and Scepters are tumbled under Foot! And Royal Blood is shed like Water
on the Ground, that cannot be gathered up again! How soon was Pharaoh tumbled
from his Triumphal Chariot, (when he pursued the Israelites) and was made Food
for Fishes, and all his Pomp lay buried in the Sea! The like unhappy, but just
Fate, befell Adonibezeck, who from a great and a Puissant King, was
disgracefully mangled in his Hands and Toes, and forced to Eat such Crumbs as
fell under the Table, like a Dog. And Agag likewise, another Royalet, was hewn
in Pieces like an Ox, even when he thought the bitterness of Death was past.
And Iezabel (who well deserved her fate) though a great Queen her self, and a
Kings Daughter, was Eaten up and gnawed by Dogs like Carrion. Nay, the great
Nebuchadnezzar, that Universal Monarch of Chaldea, whilst he was hugging of
himself in his own Happiness, and Contemplating the Glory of his Kingdom, and
the honor of his Majesty, was turned out of his Palace, and forced to graze
like a brute Beast in his own Park. See here the Instability of Worldly Honor!
And what prodigious changes a moment can produce! When from the highest Pinnacle
of Glory, a Mighty King whom all the World obeyed, is turned a grazing with the
very Beasts!

NOR do we find that profane Histories are wanting in producing Numerous
Examples of the Uncertainty of Worldly Greatness, and how Airy a Nothing the
Breath of Honor is: Of which one fatal Instance is that of the great Bajazet
the Emperor of the Turks, who like a Wolf, or some wild Beast of Prey, was
carried up and down by Conquering Tamberlain, in an Iron Cage, and exposed to
that Contempt which he thought worse than Death, and therefore to release
himself, he knocked out his Brains against the Bars of the Cage in which they
kept him. Valerian the Emperor was another Instance likewise, who as a Slave
and Vassal to Sapores King of Persia, was forced to hold his Stirrup whilst he
got up on Horseback, as though he had been Pope. And even amongst Christians
Frederick the Third, one of the best of Emperors, was Trod upon by Alexander
the Sixth, one of the worst of Popes, in St. Mark's Church in Venice, as if he
had been an Asp or a Basilisk, the Pope most Blasphemously using these Words,
Thou shall tread upon the Lion and the Adder, the Young Lion and the Dragon
shall thou trample under feet. Nor is it without a just Compassion to be
remembered, that the Emperor Mauritius had his Empress and his Children slain
before his Eyes, by that Bloody Phocas, his Servant, who, after he had slain
his Master, and usurped his Empire, was Countenanced in all his Villainy by the
Pope, because he styled him Universal Bishop. This sudden change of Fortune
likewise, befell the Aged Priam King of Troy, and Palaeologas the Emperor of
Constantinople, when those two Famous Cities were destroyed, the one by the
Greeks, the other by the Turks: These and many more Great Ones in the World,
have been suddenly thrown down from the Top of all their Worldly Glory, to the
most Abject Condition; and cast, as was threatened to Capernaum, from the Heaven
of highest Exaltation, to the Hell of lowest Confusion.

BUT we have no need to cross the Seas for Examples of this nature; our own
Chronicles afford us fatal Instances: Witness Edward and Richard the Second,
both Kings of England; who found by a too sad Experience, there was but a small
distance between the Prisons and the Graves of Princes. -- And to come nearer
to our Times, I need not question but there are many still alive, who can
remember Charles the First, the Potent Monarch of Three Opulent and once
Flourishing Kingdoms, Overcome by His Rebellious Barbarous Subjects, and
shedding, at His own Pallace-Gates, His Royal Blood upon a Scaffold by the
Hangman's Hands. -- This is indeed too sad an instance of the Uncertainty of
Worldly Honors! To see the Fountain of it thus barbarously Butchered under a
pretense of Justice, as if he had not been the Lord's Anointed! The very
thoughts on it fills my Soul with horror, so that my Trembling Hand can hardly
hold my Pen; and I could even wish my Head were Waters, and my Eyes a Fountain
of Tears, that I might weep Day and Night, for the Untimely Tragic Fall of
this Illustrious Martyr; and well may He be called so, since He Died for His so
firm Adherence to the Church of England: Yet neither the Sacredness of his
Majesty, which in His lowest Ebb of Fortune, shined brighter than the Diadem He
wore, nor all His God-like Innocence, were able to preserve Him from being made
a Victim for His People; nor hinder the Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of
the Lord, from falling into the hands of the vilest of Men. Well therefore
might Solomon say, There is one Event both to the Righteous and the Wicked; and
that no man can know Good or Evil by any thing that is before him in this Life:
For we daily see the Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong,
nor Bread to the Wise, nor Riches to Men of Understanding: But Time and Chance
happens unto all.

BUT whither has my Grief Transported me? The consideration of the Father's
Death, has kept me from Deploring the unhappy Fate of His Son, my Royal Master;
who is yet a fresher Instance of the Mutability of Worldly Honors; who from
all the Pomp and Splender of a Crown, with which we have seen His Royal Head
incircled, has been forced to seek for shelter in a Foreign Country, and live
upon the Alms of others: And that the Church of England, (who until now has had
no Blot upon her) should be concerned in such a Revolution, even that Church
for whom His Royal Father died a Martyr, is that which most of all amazes me.

BUT this abundantly confirms this Truth, That no Estate of Man on this side
Heaven, is free from Mutability and Changes; and sufficiently shows how vain a
thing it is for any Man to place his Felicity and Happiness in Eminency of
Dignity, and high Exaltation, since in the Twinkling of an Eye all humane Glory
may be laid in the Dust, and the Sun of Honor either Set, or Eclipsed, or
Clouded in Ignominy and Disgrace; as the hot gleaming Sun often turns into a
sudden Storm; like the Honor of Proud Haman, that was taken from Feasting with
the King and Queen, and immediately hanged upon the Gallows.

AND as the slipperiness of Honor is always an Allay to the Enjoying of it,
and extremely debases and lessens its value; so likewise is the little
satisfaction it gives us when we do Enjoy it: What Content did it give Haman,
though he was the Kings peculiar Favorite, and that his Seat was set above all
the Princes of Persia, and reverenced and bowed to, by all the Kings Servants?
So far was he from being Contented with the Honor that he had, that he never
Enjoyed it; it availed him nothing, because Mordecay the Jew did not bow to him
and give him reverence. Honor is very apt (unless it be kept within due bounds
by supernatural Grace) to puff up the Minds of Men, so that they often forget
both God and themselves; They are ready to think of themselves above what they
ought, when they find that all Men's knees are bowing down to 'em. Herod found
Honor a very fatal thing to him; when the People honored him, and cried, It Is
the Voice of a God! He was so impious to take that Honor to himself, and gave
not God the glory; and therefore God soon made him know he was a mortal Man;
for he was immediately smitten with Worms and Died, and all his Honor was
covered with the greatest Ignominy. It indeed renders a Man more unsafe, for
the higher any Man is placed, the more Enemies he has, and the more he is
liable to be attacked; yea, the more obnoxious he is to those that seek his
ruin. The lofty Oaks are sooner ruined by the stroke of Thunder, than the
humble Shrubs: He that stands upon a Pinnacle, though he may be gazed at by the
Crow'd, stands more unsafe than he that walks upon the ground, and passes
unobserved. Solomon tells us, That Honor is not seemly for a Fool, and yet it
oftentimes becomes their Portion. When Men are laden with much Honor, they
have need to be well Balasted with Wisdom, lest they be Over-set. Besides, what
Satisfaction is there in those things of which we can have no Assurance of
Enjoyment? What Comfort can a Man take in a House, when he is but a Tenant at
Will, and may be turned out, at the Pleasure of his Landlord, at an Hours
warning? What Content has he that Pitcheth his Tent on the Sand, ready to be
washed away with the rolling of every Sea? And what greater certainty is there
in Honors, which like the Spokes of a Wheel, are now Uppermost, and
immediately after at the Bottom? How often have we seen the Sun shine bright
and gloriously, when the next moment, through the interposing of some envious
Cloud, it is muffl'd up in Darkness. There also is another thing that makes
Honor less Honorable; and that is, when it is not honorably obtained; for if
Honor be worth any thing, it is when it is the Guerdon and Reward of Virtue:
'Twas this that made at first a Difference among Men: Those that had done great
things for the Public, and deserrv'd well of their Country, had a peculiar
Mark of Honor put upon them, as the just Reward of their Merits; and this it
was that made 'em truly Honorable. But afterward, as Men degenerated more and
more, so Honor became Mercenary, and thereby lost its Value: And that indeed
has been the chiefest cause of Envy's Lacquying after it: For when Men were
preferred above their Brethren, whose Worth and Merit came far short of theirs,
they straight way Envied 'em, as Men unworthy of the Honor they possessed:
What Honor can we think that Man deseves, who by Extortion and Oppression has
amassed together a vast sum of Money, and with that Money purchased Honor? It
must surely be an ill Purchase that is encumbered with a Curse; and that Honor
cannot but prove ruinous, that is built on Ruins.

I do confess I have been much affected, when I have considered how some
Persons very meanly born, Sons of the Earth, and taken from the Dunghill, have
been raised from their Original Dust, and set up with Princes: Such were
Maximinus, Probus, Aurelius, Pertinax, and others; who from common Soldiers
became Emperors; Iephthah and Abimelech, though Bastards, were both Renowned
Generals, and famous for their Arms; and the Norman Duke William, whom we call
William the Conqueror, was one of the same Classis. So likewise Peter
Comestor, Gratian the Collector of the Decretals, Lumbard the Master of the
Sentences, first Founder of School Divinity, were all the Bastards of Nuns, and
all Famous for Arts: Agathocles was the Son of a Potter, Abdolominus a
Gardener, Iphicrates and Marius meanly born, and yet came to be Kings of
Sicily, Syria, and great Potentates. And what shall we say to Saul and David,
of whom Sacred Writ tells us, His add Saulum et Davidem, Asinas et Oves
passenter ad Regnum pervenienies; the one was taken from seeking Asses, and the
other from following of Sheep, and advanced to the Kingdom, 1 Samuel 9. and 16.
How strange was the Exaltation of Cosmus de Medices Of Florence, whom Machiavel
in his Florentine History tells us, lived all his Youth obscure and miserable;
when on a sudden the Sun of his Glory shined forth, as from under a cloud? How
was Huniades fetched out of a Prison, and Henry the Third, of Portugal, out of
a Poor Monastry, to be Crowned Kings?

THESE are so many Instances of the great Uncertainty that all Men meet with
here in their Pursuit of Honor: Some are the Favorites of Providence, and
from a mean Condition raised to the highest Pinnacle of Worldly Glory; whilst
others from the Summit of their hopes, have in a Moments time been thrown into
Despair, and all the glittering Brightness of their Crowns have only served to
light 'em to Destruction.

AND yet though most Men so unweariedly pursue this gaudy Idol Honor, let us a
little now consider what it is they are the better for it. And one would think
that those whom Nature sends into the World with Crowns upon their Heads, and
Scepters in their Hands, that from their Birth are placed in such a Sphere of
Glory that they have nothing more to wish for, have all the cause that may be
to esteem themselves happy: And yet if we Enquire of them, whether the
Dignities that they Enjoy, and the high Station they are in, has made 'em
happy? They Will tell us the quite contrary. No Good whatever can make a Man
happy, without it be permanent and lasting; and whatever it is that is not so,
must needs leave the Soul short of Happiness: And that Honors, I mean Worldly
Honors, are not permanent, is what I have already proved by many, and some too
fatal Instances: And yet this is not all, for while they do Enjoy 'em, they
find their Crowns are lined with Care, and sometimes made of Thorns; nay,
oftentimes the Scepter that they Weild proves but a Reed, and cannot be
depended on. And can we think such Crowns and Scepters can Cure the Chagrin of
the Mind, or keep off Cares and Griefs from hovering about 'em? No, on the
Contrary, it is the Crown that brings 'em, and the Scepter that attracts 'em. O
Crown, said the great Persian Monarch, He that did but know how heavy thou
sit on the Head, would hardly take thee up, though he should meet thee on his
way. This Prince gave Law to the whole World, and each Man's Fortune was what
he pleased to make it; and therefore to appearance could give to every Man
Content; and yet he here confesses he wanted it himself. And what better
Account can the rest give us, if they will speak their Minds Impartially? And
here I will not ask of Dionysias the Tyrant of Sicily, who was more content
with a handful of Twigs, to Whip the little Children of Corinth in a School,
than with the Scepter wherewith he had beaten all Sicily: Nor will we ask of
Sylla, who having robbed the common wealth of Rome, (which had her self before
robbed the whole World) never found means of Rest in himself: Nor, to come
nearer home, will we Enquire of Charles the Royal Martyr, the luster of whose
Crown did only serve to Tempt his Enemies, not only to take it from his Head,
but even to take his Head off too; and whose Scepter was too weak to overcome
the Force of Armed Rebels: Nor will we ask of his two Exiled Sons, of which the
Eldest endured twelve years of Banishment ere he Enjoyed his Crown; and he who
still survives, warned by his Royal Father's Tragic End, was forced to fly for
Refuge to a Neighboring Monarch, whose Generous Goodness has ever since
supported him. It is of none of these Unhappy Princes that we will ask what
Happiness they found in Honors: But surely Solomon may very well be Esteemed
Capable of giving the best Answer to this Question; who had arrived to all the
Honor that the World is capable of giving, both with respect to his singular
Wisdom, which without doubt made him a very competent Judge of this matter; as
well as for that vast Affluence of Riches which he had amassed together; and
more especially for that largeness of heart he had to make use of it: And yet
this is the Summa Totalis of all his Honor and Glory, That all is Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit.

BUT because we will have more than one Man's Opinion, let us ask of the
Emperor Augustus, who Peaceably possessed the whole World, and we shall hear him
bewailing his Life past, and among infinite Toils wish for the Rest of the
meanest of his Subjects, esteeming that a happy Day that would ease him of his
insupportable Greatness, and suffer him to live quietly among the least.

AND if we Enquire of Tiberias his Successor, he will tell us, That he holds
the Empire as a Wolf by the Ears; and that, if he could do it without danger of
being bitten, he would gladly let it go: Complaining of Fortune for lifting him
so high, and then taking away the Ladder that he could not get down.

IF we ask Dioclesian, a Prince of great Wisdom and Virtue, in the Opinion of
the World; he will prefer his voluntary Banishment at Solona, before all the
Roman Empire.

AND, to conclude this Head, if we Enquire of the Emperor Charles the Fifth,
who is generally esteemed the most happy that has lived these many Ages, He
will Curse his Conquests, Victories and Triumphs; and not be ashamed to own,
That he has felt more good in one day of his Solitude, than in all his
Triumphant Life.

NOW how can we imagine those happy in this imaginary Honor and Greatness, who
think themselves unhappy in it? And especially, since they profess that
Happiness consists in being Lesser, and not Greater. In a word, whatever
Happiness Honor and Ambiton promises, it is nothing else but suffering of
much Evil to get more. Men think by daily climbing higher to make themselves
happy, and yet the height whereunto they so painfully aspire, is the height of
Misery it self.

BUT having thus considered both the Uncertainty and Vanity of Worldly Honor,
it is necessary to see what use is to be made of it, before we proceed any
further.

The Soul's Expostulation.
AND now, O my Soul, why should thou Disquiet thy self for the loss of that
which is not worth the keeping? If the Possession of it could add nothing to
thy Happiness, what have thou to complain of, now it is lost? Is it not better
to enquire what just Title thou had to it, than to repine at the loss of it?
If thy Honor was the Reward of Virtue, it is still thy own; for whilst the
Cause continues, (which is Virtue) the Effect cannot cease; and then thou have
no reason to complain: But if thy Honor came from any other Cause, thou truly
never had any real Honor, it only was an empty Name, and nothing else: For
it is Virtue is the Life and Soul of Honor. Thou ought therefore, O my
Soul, to look well before thou leap'st into the Chair of Honor; or else the
higher thou climbest, the lower thou fallest: If Virtue prefer thee, then
Virtue will preserve thee: But if Gold or Favor do advance thee, thy Honor is
but pinned upon the Wheel of Fortune, and when that Wheel shall turn, thy
Honor falls, and thou remain'st an everlasting monument of thy own Ambitious
Folly. If therefore thou desire, O my Soul, to purchase Honor with thy Wealth,
consider first how that became thine: If thy Labor got it, let thy Wisdom keep
it; if Oppression found it, let Repentance restore it; and if thy Parents left
it, let thy Virtues deserve it. For if thou art a Palace, Honor (like the
Sunbeams) will make thee more Glorious; but if thou art a Dunghill, the Sun may
shine upon thee, but it cannot sweeten thee: Thy Prince may give thee honor,
but not make thee honorable. The best way therefore, O my Soul, is to despise
that empty Nothing which the World calls Honor; and seek after that Honor
which none can Rob thee of, or take away; and that is, in a word, to seek the
Honor which GOD gives: For they that honor Him, He has promised to honor;
whereas they that despise Him shall be lightly esteemed.

A PRAYER.
O Almighty and most gracious Lord God, who alone rulest in the Kingdoms of
Men, and suffer one to be plucked down, and another to be set up, as best
seems good in thy sight: Thou give, and thou take away, blessed be thy
holy Name for ever. O Lord be pleased in Mercy to look down upon an unworthy
Sinner now before thee; and graciously Support me under the present
Dispensation of thy Providence, and quiet my Soul under thy Wise and Sovereign
Disposal of (...) Affairs; and make me willing to suffer whatever it shall
please thee to inflict upon me; O Lord, make me sensible that thou have dealt
favorably with me, and have punished me less than mine Iniquities deserved: I
do confess I have been too much puffed up with that Honor which comes from
Man, which therefore I am justly deprived of; and O that now thou would help
me to take shame to my self, and henceforth to see after that Honor which
comes from God only. That so unfainedly turning to thee by true Contrition and
Amendment of Life, Thou also may graciously return unto me, with Mercy and
with Loving Kindness. Hear, O Lord, and help, and Answer, for the sake of Jesus
Christ thy blessed Son, and my alone Savior: To whom, with thee, O Father, and
the holy Spirit, be ascribed all Honor, and Glory, and Power, henceforth and
for ever more. Amen. Our Father, etc.

Meditation II.
On the Uncertainty of Riches.
THERE is nothing in the World more certain than the Uncertainty of Riches;
therefore it is that the Apostle St. Paul calls 'em Uncertain Riches, bidding
us not to trust in Uncertain Riches, but in the Living GOD. And though there be
many in the World that make Wings for Riches, I mean, that Study and Contrive
how to spend it, as thinkthey shall never be poor; yet they need not be so much
concerned about that, and might well save themselves that Labor, for whether
they make them Wings or no, Solomon tells us that Riches will make themselves
Wings, and fly away; yes, says he, they will fly so far as never to return any
more, for they will fly as an Eagle toward Heaven: Riches are such Volatile
things, as he compares them to NonEntities; Will thou, says he, set thy Heart
on that which is not? Riches are like Quicksilver, so Volatile, there is no
fixing of 'em; for they fly away, when their Possessors think themselves as
sure of 'em (having them close Prisoners in Bags and Bolts, under Lock and Key)
as the Romans thought themselves of the Goddess Victoria, when they clipped her
Wings, and Walled her within their City. And though in this respect also our own
Experience is more convincing than a Thousand Witnesses, yet will it not be
amiss to recite some Examples of the Uncertainty and Emptiness of Worldly
Riches; and the rather, that we may see there is nothing has befallen us in the
late Revolution, but what has befallen others in former times, who have been
better than we: Now that we are Tried in the Furnace of Affliction, we may have
good hopes of coming forth like Gold, refined and made better; but if we faint
in this Day of our Adversity, it will argue our Strength is but small.

AND first, The Example of Job is Illustrious, who was not more Eminent for his
Riches than his Piety, which was so very remarkable, that he was the Nonsuch of
his Age, the very boast of Heaven: Have thou considered my Servant Job, says
the Almighty, that there is none like him, a Perfect and an Upright Man, one
that Fears God, and Escheweth Evil? What Man could have a fairer Character,
especially considering who it was that gave it? And yet this holy Job, this
Favorite of Heaven, was deprived in one Day, Nay in one Hour, of such an
Estate, (besides his Children, which were more dear to him than all the rest)
in Oxen, Camels, Sheep and Movables, as the greatest Man in the East did not
possess the like: And yet Job never murmured at his Loss, but only made this
Inference from it, Naked we came into the World, and Naked shall we go out
again: The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, and blessed be the Name of
the Lord. There is at this Day an Illustrious Instance in the World, that has
well near Equaliz'd Job in his Afflictions: God grant that he may do it in his
Patience and his Piety; and then we may all hope for the like Issue.

BUT to Enumerate more Examples of the Mutability of Riches, is to hold a
Candle to the Sun; for who can walk the streets without meeting Variety of
Instances? How many Men, who formerly lived plentifully, and were in good
Esteem for Wealth and Riches, are now reduced from a Springtide of Plenty, to
the lowest Ebb of Poverty? Neither has this befallen one sort of Men alone, but
Men of all Ranks and Qualities, Gentlemen* Merchants, Mariners, Tradesmen,
Mechanics, Citizens and Countrymen, Yeomen and Farmers: Those who were
formerly as Rich as Croesus, are now as poor as Conon; and from a Dives, turned
into a Lazarus: And if you should Enquire by what means all this comes to pass,
some would inform you 'twas by Shipwreck at Sea, others by Suretiship on Land;
some by bad Debtors and Politic Bankrupts, those Pests of Trade, and
Shopwracks of the Citizens; others by Sickness, Physic and Physicians; and
some by grinding Usury; others by paying Forfeitures and double Taxes, have
been brought to an irrecoverable Consumption: Some have been undone by
Careless, Thievish, and Fugitive Servants: And even Loyalty, and a sense of our
Duty to God and the King, has through the Cunning Craftiness of some Men, been
made the occasion of Ruining many. But besides all these, there want not many
that have been their own Ruin; Some by Good (or rather Bad) Fellowship; others
by great Housekeeping, their Minds being too big for their Means; some by
Hawks, Hounds, Horses, and Whores; these are destroyed by their own Lusts, and
Eaten by the Wolf bred in their own Flesh; or, as it is Fabled of Actaeon, are
devoured by their own Dogs. And surely those may well be called Uncertain
Riches, that have so many Wings to fly away. I had forgot to mention Fire,
which where it gets the Mastery, proves very fatal, and in a few hours time
makes Beggars of the richest Merchants; of which that dreadful one in London in
the Year 1666. Serves for a thousand Instances. Which shows sufficiently the
mutability of Worldly Riches, and what small cause we have of Trusting in 'em.

BUT though perhaps some Men may prove more fortunate, and that their Riches
should stay with 'em, as though they had been wedded to 'em, not to depart for
term of Life; yet there must be a Separation when they come to dye: For as the
Word of Truth, besides our own Experience, infallibly assures us, The Rich Man
when he dies shall carry nothing away with him, his Pomp shall not descend to
the Grave. And therefore as the Excellent St. Augustine has it, Vide Viventem
cogita morientem, quid hic habet, quid secum tollit, etc. Eye the rich Man,
poise and ponder his Estate, living and dying, to consider what he has here,
and what he takes with him from hence. Damascene has a Notable Fiction of
Three Friends, which all professed Love to a Man, and the Trial of it was this:
One Friend would stay with him all the time of his Health and Prosperity; that
Friend was Pleasure, Voluptuousness and Mirth: The Second Friend would stay
with him in his Sickness, yea, to the hour of Death; that Friend was Riches;
but having brought him to the Grave, there it left him: The Third Friend goes
with him beyond the Grave, even to God's Tribunal, and pleads for him there,
and this Friend is God's Fear, and God's Favor: This Friend is more worth than
all the rest: For as for the second Friend, Riches, that leaves us, you see, at
the Grave. These Friends, says Bernard, either have their End before we dye,
or see our End when we dye; either they forsake us, or are forsaken of us. We
have already heard what holy Job said, Naked came we into the World, and Naked
shall we go out again: And the great Saladine, the Conqueror of Asia (a second
Tamberlain) well applied it to himself; for dying in his Army, instead of all
other Obsequies, he ordered only a Linen Cloth, a Windingsheet, to be carried
before him on the Top of a Spear, throughout the Camp, with this Proclamation,
Saladini quod Reliqnum: Here Is all that is left of great Saladine: Ensigns,
Trophies, Victories, Triumphs, are all included in this Linen Rag, the cover
for my Dead Corpse; and except this, all the rest must remain behind: Our
Houses, Lands, Wife, Children, we must shake hands with 'em all, and bid a long
Farewell to 'em when we come to dye. Gulielmus Parisienses compares those that
load themselves here with thick Clay, to a Parcel of Boys that have robbed an
Orchard, who after they have Eaten what they can, stuff their Pockets, Sleeves
and Coats full, to carry out with them; but at the door there stands one that
searches them, takes all they have, and sends them away with no more than they
brought in: The World says he, is the Orchard; the Cormorants of the World are
those greedy Boys; the Fruit stolen, are Riches engrossed; and the Porter is
Death, who makes 'em leave it all behind 'em. It is also compared to a poor Man
invited to a rich Man's Table; he has the use of his Plate to drink in, and of
his Silver Spoons to Eat his Broth with, while he is there at the Feast; but if
he presumes to pocket up any Plate, or to carry away the least Spoon, there is
search made by the Porter for what is missing, and it is taken from him with
disgrace. We are in the World as in an Inn, says Tully; and we may use it as
our Hosts House, and our Bed too, that proper place to which God has called
us, for the time we lodge; but we must carry away no Clothes, no Coverings,
except we borrow a Winding Sheet, useful only as the Secondine to the Child, to
wrap us in; for Excepting this, Death as a Common Pyrate, or a Thief, strips us
of all the rest.

NOW what Contentment or Satisfaction can we propose to our selves in the
Enjoyment of such Uncertain fluctuating Things, Which either ere long will
leave us, or of necessity we must leave them? It is surely a great argument of
our Minds being placed upon Wrong Objects, when we can mourn for the loss of
such Flying and Lying Vanities.

The Soul's Expostulation.
DISQUIET not thy self, O my Soul, about the Things of this World; nor set
thine heart on that which is not: If thou had not lost the World, perhaps
thou might have lost thy self, in setting thy heart too much upon it. And
since God's Word has told thee, That if any Man love the World, the love of the
Father is not in him; thou have cause to rejoice that thou have lost that,
which might (had thou kept it) have caused thee to lose the Favor of GOD:
And yet what have thou lost in losing it? Or what did thou gain by it when
thou had it, except Trouble and Care? Thou had then no more than Food and
Raiment, and that thou have still, though thou have lost thy Riches: When thou
had most occasion for 'em, then they left thee, and fled away to strangers:
Is it not therefore far better to trust in the Living God, than in uncertain
Riches? For Riches profit not in the Day of Wrath, but Righteousness delivers
from Death. And if thou make it thy chief Business to seek first the Kingdom
of GOD, and the Righteousness thereof, there is nothing necessary for thee, but
GOD has promised it shall be added to thee. And will thou grieve because thou
art deprived of Unnecessary Things? Learn* O my Soul, to make the Will of God
the measure of thy Desires: And when thou desire nothing but what God wills,
thou may desire what thou will, and obtain it. Thou may assure thy self
that God wills what is best for thee, and when thou have conformed thy Will to
his, thou need not fear a blessed Issue. And if what God has done, appears
not at the present best to thee; it is not because it really is not best, but
because by reason of thy present Darkness, thou can not see it so. God sees
the End of all his Works from the beginning, and perfectly knows the Events of
all his Dispensations; but thou, O my Soul, are shortsighted, can not see
far before thee; and since thou can not see what God intends by his present
Providence, it is now thy time to live in the Exercise of Patience; and
glorify him by believing.

A PRAYER.
O Most Merciful and gracious God, who art the Wellspring of Life, and an
inexhaustible Fountain of Goodness, be pleased to look in Mercy upon me poor
and miserable Sinner, who had been immersed in the things of this Life, and
drowned in the Love of the World, had not thou in mercy taken them away from
me: O help me to acknowledge thy righteous hand herein, and kiss that Rod
wherewith thou have so mercifully chastised me. And O most gracious God, will thou please for the time to come, to take off my Heart from the inordinate Love
of Riches, and all other things of this World, and to place my Affections upon
thy blessed Majesty, who art my Souls supreme and ultimate Happiness, and its
exceeding great Reward: Convince me more and more of the Wickedness as well as
Folly of my former Life, in forsaking Thee the Fountain of Living Waters, and
hewing out to my self Cisterns, broken Cisterns that could hold no Water:
Suffer me, O Lord, no longis to follow after Lying Vanities, and so to forsake
my own Mercy: And let thy Love, O thou God of my Life, purge my Soul from the
love of all other things whatsoever: Thou have said in thy Word, That those
that love Thee shall inherit Substance, whilst I, like a wretched Prodigal,
have been feeding on Husks, and grasping at Shadows: O let me not henceforth
trust in uncertain Riches, but in Thee the Living God; and buy of Thee Gold
Tried in the Fire, that so I may be truly rich, and white Raiment, that I may
be clothed. Grant this, O Lord, and whatsoever else Thou see necessary for
me, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen. Our Father, etc.

Meditation III.
Of the Vanity of Worldly Pleasures.
PLEASURE is that which all pursue and covet, though most mistake the Object of
it: It is that for which Men value their lives, and without which they think it
would scarce be worth the Living: But if they mean the Pleasures of this World,
abstracted from the Love of God, and those unspeakable Delights that are in
him, there is nothing in which men are more mistaken: So far is Worldly Pleasure
from making of Men happy, that it puts 'em in a state of Death: This St. Paul
assures us, 1 Timothy V. 6. She that lives in Pleasure, is dead while she lives.
And large Experience confirms this Truth; for those that have most affected it,
have always found it fatal.

LET us give a few Instances: (For we are apter to be led by Examples than
Precepts) The Philistines had taken Sampson through the Treachery of Dalilah;
Sampson would needs enjoy his Pleasure with Dalilah, but she refused to let
him, unless he told her where his strength lay; which when she knew, she
straight betrayed him to his Enemies: And this was the effect of Sampson's
Pleasure. When the Philistines had obtained this Prize, it made 'em mighty
merry, and they must needs go take their pleasure too: And Sampson (whom they
barbarously had blinded) must be sent for, that he might make them Sport: But
it was fatal Sport to the Philistines; for Sampson having with some assistance
grop'd out the two Supporters or chief Pillars of the House, praying to God to
strengthen him that he might be avenged for his two Eyes, was heard and
answered, and Sampson pulls the House about their Ears, whereby they all were
slain, which put a bloody Period to their Pleasure.

THE Persians were a People given up to Pleasure above other Nations, which
made 'em so effeminate, as rendered 'em an easy Conquest to their Enemies:
Belshazzar was a Prince given to Pleasure, and lived in great Voluptuousness;
and that not only in a time of Peace, but when he was surrounded by his
Enemies, and Darius lay with a Vast Army on the other side the River Euphrates:
This notwithstanding, Belshazzar was resolved to take his Pleasure, and makes a
great Feast to a Thousand of his Lords, and drinks Wine before 'em, even out of
the sacred Vessels taken out of the Temple of the House of God which was at
Jerusalem. But while Belshazzar was taking of his Pleasure, and Carrousing with
his Lords, there appears suddenly a Hand Writing upon the Wall, which though the
King understood not, yet his Countenance was changed, and his Thoughts so
troubled him, that the Joints of his Loins were loosed, and his knees smote one
against another: This quickly put an End to all their Pleasure, and filled 'em
with Confusion and Astonishment: And the sad Epilogue to this Jovial Feast,
was, That God had numbered his Kingdom. and finished it; and that he was
weighed in the Balances and found wanting, and his Kingdom was divided, and
given to the Medes and Persians: And that Night Belshazzar himself was slain,
which put a final End to all his Pleasure. So that it is very evident that what
is affirmed of Wordly Sorrow, is much more true of Worldly Pleasure, That it
works Death. And Solomon, who of all Men was best able to Extract the
quintessence of Pleasure, and taste what was in it, gives us this poor yet true
Account of it, after he had made the Experiment, Behold this also is Vanity,
Eccles. II. 1, 2. Not only Vain, but Vanity it self, in the Abstract; and as if
this was not enough, he lays a greater Imputation on it in the next Verse,
where he tells us, I said of Laughter, It is mad; and of Mirth, What does it?
And this he further Exemplifies, by telling us, It is better to go to the House
of Mourning, than to go to the House of Feasting Eccles. VII. 2.

INDEED all Pleasures, if they die not like Children in their very Birth, yet
they are liable to so many accidents, that they quickly wither and decay, and
all their Gust is gone: The pain in one Tooth, the Cramp in one Joint, the Gout
in one Toe, the Megrim in the Head, the Colic in the Guts, the Fever in the
Blood, the Sciatica in the Thigh, the Fistula or Hemorrhoids in the nether
parts, or any one of these, takes away the relish of our Pleasures, and
imbitters all the Voluptuous Persons Enjoyments; turning his Singing into
Sighing, his Music into Mourning, and his Riot into Rage. And who would mourn
the loss of things so Subject to a Thousand Accidents, which have so little
real Good in the Enjoyment?

The Soul's Expostulation.
AND now, O my Soul, consider with thy self, how vain and how pernicious the
Pleasures of the World are! For though Mankind do generally give up themselves to
the Pursuit thereof, yet how full of Pain do they find these Pleasures!
Consider, O my Soul, that sensual Pleasures are the Pleasures of Beasts; which
relish them with more delight than Men, and use 'em according to the Dictates
of Nature, and for the Satisfying of their Wants; and that with more
Moderation; for they only drink for the quenching of their Thirst, and Eat for
the satisfying of their Hunger: Whilst Men, endowed with Reason, and born to a
higher End, even to Glorify and Enjoy their Maker, do immerse themselves in
the filthy Puddles of Drunkenness and Gluttony, and other base Carnal Delights,
and thereby degenerate below the Beasts that Perish. Raise up thy Affections
therefore, O my Soul, and place them upon Things above; there are Pleasures and
Delights that are worthy of thee, even such as are adequate to thy Wants, and
capable of Satisfying the Desires of an Immortal Soul. And though thy outward
Circumstances and late Losses, have rendered thee incapable of Pursuing the
Pleasures of this World, thou art thereby the more fitted to aspire to those
Pleasures that the World cannot take from thee, and which alone are Worth the
Enjoying: If thou hearkenest to the Enchanting Sirens of Worldly Pleasure, they
do but entice thee with their Pleasant Songs (as they would have dove Ulysses)
till they bring thee to cast thy self into the Sea of Destruction, and
overwhelmed thee with Eternal Ruin. But if, O my Soul, thou waitest at the
Gates of Wisdom, and hearkenest to her Voice, thou soon shall find, not only
that her Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, but also, that all her Paths are Peace.

A PRAYER.
MOST Gracious and Merciful Father, who art the God of all Consolation and
Comfort, in whose Presence there is fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand
there are Pleasures for evermore; be pleased to look down in mercy upon me a
wretched and miserable Sinner, who have been so long seeking that Pleasure and
Satisfaction in the Creature, which is alone to be found in thy Self; and grant
that my Mind and Affections being taken off from all Carnal Delights, and fixed
upon thy Self, I may henceforth lay aside every weight, and the Sin that does
so easily beset me, and may run with Patience the Race that thou have set
before me. And since I find in thy Word, that that it is the Character of some
in the last Day, That they shall be Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of
God; make me, I humbly beseech thee, in the Number of those that have rather
chose to suffer affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures
of Sin for a season: Like Moses esteeming the Reproaches of Christ, to be far
more Eligible than the Pleasures of Egypt. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ
his sake, thy Beloved Son, and my alone Savior; who has further taught me to
Pray, saying, Our Father, etc.

Meditation IV.
Of the Nature and Causes of Afflictions.
NOtwithstanding what has been said in the three former Meditations of the
Uncertainty and Emptiness of Honors, Riches, and Pleasures, and what little
Cause we have to be troubled at the loss of them; yet since the best of Men are
apt to look upon the loss of those things as Afflictions; and are more forward
to bemoan themselves under them, than to Enquire into their Causes; and since
the finding out of their Causes, is the best way to remove their Effects; I
will now Enquire into the Nature and Causes of Afflictions, and therein what
were the Sins that procured those Calamities under which our Royal Master and
his Family has so long suffered.

AFFLICTIONS are always Evils in themselves, and in their own Nature; though
through the Overruling Providence of Almighty God, they are often turned to
the great Advantage of those that suffer 'em: So the Author to the Hebrews
tells us, No Chastening for the Present is Joyous but Grievous; nevertheless
afterward it yields the Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness to them that are
excercised thereby, Heb. XII. 11. And this was the Experience of the Royal
Prophet, Before I was Afflicted, I went astray, but now, says he, have I kept
thy Word. And in another place he tells us, It is good for me, that I have been
afflicted: And yet these Afflictions were grievous to him to bear, for he cries
out, They made him go mourning all the Day long. But these sufferings are never
brought upon a People, or a Family without a Cause, for God does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men; and St. Peter tells us expressly,
that it is not without need be, that we are in Heaviness -- And it is as sure
that Sin is always the cause of Suffering. And therefore the Psalmist says,
When thou with rebukes do correct Man for Iniquity, thou make his Beauty
to consume as the Moth: And the Prophet Jeremiah asks Wherefore does a living
Man complain, a Man for the Punishment of his Sins? So that nothing can be more
clear then that Sin is the cause of Affliction: Which being laid down as an
Undoubted Truth, it remains that we Enquire what those Sins are, which are most
likely to bring down National Judgments; and then to Examine whether we have
not been guilty of those Sins; that so we may thereby come to know wherefore it
is that God contendeth with us; and knowing that, that we may repent of our
Iniquities, and return unto him against whom we have Sinned, that he may return
unto us with Mercy and with loving kindness.

1. THE Sin of Profane Swearing and Cursing, is that which brings Gods
Judgments on a Nation: Hence the Prophet tells us, That because of Swearing the
Land mourns; and this Sin is expressly forbidden by the third Commandment; which
enjoins us not to take the Name of the Lord our God in vain; and threatens,
that God will not hold him guiltless that does so; whereby is implied, That GOD
will charge the guilt and violation of his holy Law upon such a one; the taking
his Name in vain being a Profaning of it: Whereas we are commanded to fear
that great and dreadful Name, The LORD our GOD: And this profane Swearing is
also forbidden in the NewTestament, our Blessed Savior strictly enjoining us
not to Swear at all; Mat. v. 34. And this St. James presses further, saying,
Above all things, my Brethren, Swear not, Jam. v. 12. Not that hereby we are
forbidden to testify the Truth of a matter upon Oath before a Magistrate, as
some dream; for in this case St. Paul tells us, That an Oath for Confirmation
is an end of all strife, Heb. vi. 16. The intent therefore is, That we abstain
from all profane Swearing, which is a Taking of God's Name in vain, and a
procuring Cause of his Judgments upon a People and Nation; of which there wants
not plenty of Examples, both Sacred and Profane, were it needful to insert 'em.

BUT that which more concerns us, is, To Enquire whether we are not grievously
guilty hereof our selves, and so are justly made an Example to others? And in
this case, I must say, Our guilt is too evident to be denied; for we declare
our Sin as Sodom, and hide it not: Our Tongues being oftener used in imprecating
Divine Vengeance, even Damnation it self, upon our Souls, than in imploring the
Pardon of our Sins. How many are there that pretend Love and Loyalty to our
King, yet will show it no other way, but by Drinking his health, till they have
lost their own; and by their horrid execrable Oaths, defying of the Majesty of
Heaven? Alas! What can be expected from those Men, that are every hour bidding
Defiance to the Almighty, and Daring God to damn them? With what face can they
pretend to love their King, that thus affront their Maker? Whoever thus
hardened himself against God and prosper'd? It was these Fighters against
Heaven that brought the Royal Martyr to the Block; and were more guilty of his
Death, than the Regicides that condemned him, or the Villainous Executioner that
severed his Royal Head from his Sacred Body: And it is such as these that have
turned our Royal Master out of his Throne, and forced him to Abdicate (as some
will have it) his Crown and Kingdoms: For when GOD was thus Engaged against
him, by the reiterated Blasphemous Imprecations of his pretended Followers, how
could he hope to stand? For shame, therefore, Gentlemen, let us either lay
aside our pretenses of Loyalty to the King, or cease to offend GOD as we do
every Day, by Belching forth such Vollies of loud Oaths and Blasphemies against
him. For had we but as frequently Employed our Tongues in praying for him, as
we have done in cursing of our selves, and in Blaspheming God, we might have
long since hoped a better Issue. If therefore we would show our selves good
Subjects to the King, let us approve our hearts to God as good Christians,
which we cannot do but by walking in his Ways, and keeping of his Laws. We have
seen the fatal effects of Cursing and Swearing, let us now steer a contrary
Course, and betake our selves to Prayers and Tears, the Churches only Weapons
in suffering Times. Of which I shall say more at the Conclusion. -- But,

2. Whoredom and Adultery is another crying Sin that brings down God's
Judgments upon a Nation: This Sin is directly against the Seventh Commandment;
which forbids us to commit Adultery; and however the Fools of this Age, I mean
such as make a Mock at Sin, have styled it but a Trick of Youth; and that the
Roman Church calls it but a Vanial Sin; yet we have a more sure Word of
Prophecy, even the holy Scriptures, which tells us, That for these things the
Wrath of God comes upon the Children of Disobedience: And well it may, since
the Author to the Hebrews assures, That (how slight so ever others make of it,
yet) Whore-mongers and Adulterers God will judge. And that this Sin brings down
Judgments on a Nation, the Prophet Jeremiah informs us, Ier. v. 7, 8, 9. --
When I had fed them to the full, then they committed Adultery, and assembled
themselves by Troops in the Harlots Houses: They were as fed Horses in the
Morning; every one Neighed after his Neighbors Wife: This was their sin: And
what the effect of it was, the next Verse shows us; Shall I not Visit for these
things, says the Lord? And shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this? This sufficiently expresses God's Anger against it, especially when it is
grown common.

IT now concerns us therefore to Examine our selves, and see whether this also
be not registered in that black Catalogue of Sins which we are guilty of! And I
am much afraid that there is but few of us that can say in this respect, my
heart is clean: For the foot steps of this Sin are but too plainly to be traced
among us. And therefore all of us have reason to humble our Souls before God,
and to say, O Lord, to us belongs confusion of Face, to our Kings, to our
Princes, and to our Nobles, (as well as to the Commons) because we have sinned
against thee. For my part, I know not what unaccountable Liberty some Men give
themselves in this matter; as if those in high places had a Toleration, or a
License to Sin: But I am sure God's Word allows none; no, not to the greatest
of Men: The Law of God is, Thou shall not commit Adultery; and I know of no
Exception. Of this sin, When King David himself was found guilty, though he had
an Illustrious Pardon sent him from Heaven, Thou shall not dye; yet it did not
Exempt him from Temporal Judgments, for the Prophet Nathan told him plainly,
The Sword should never depart from his House, because he had despised God, in
taking the Wife of Vriah -- Therefore let all that are concerned herein (how
great soever they be) humble their Souls under the mighty hand of God, and turn
from the Evil of their doings, that God may be thereby reconciled unto us, and
have Mercy upon us. For this is a sin that if not repented of, will keep good
things from us; and make a Separation between us and our God: And such have the
more reason to do this, because their Example may have corrupted many: For,
Regis ad Exemplum totus Componitur Orbis. And indeed this Sin has spread so
exceedingly upon that account, that I am persuaded it has been none of the
least causes of God's heavy displeasure against us. Yet will not this in the
least justifye them, of a lower degree, who shall follow so ill an Example, for
by them God's holy Law is violated, and Himself provoked by their Filthiness;
and themselves thereby made the cause of bringing down the Judgments of God
both upon King and People; such have therefore great reason forthwith to break
off their Sins by Righteousness, and turn from the Evil of their Ways; that the
Lord may pardon their Sins, and heal our Land.

3. Cruelty and Bloodshed is a great and crying Sin, which defiles the Land,
and brings down* Judgments from Heaven upon it: Nay, it causes the Divine
Majesty to shut out our very Prayers, so that he will not hear us: The Prophet
Isaiah gives us a full account of this, in the first Chapter of his Prophecy,
in the 7th Verse he gives an account of God's Judgments on the Israelites not
altogether unlike what has befallen us; for, says he, Your Country is desolate,
your Cities are burnt with fire; your Land, strangers devour it in your
presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers. And in the 15th
Verse, GOD tells them, When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine Eyes
from you, and when you make many Prayers, I will not hear: Would you know now
what it is that has provoked the Almighty against them? He assigns this as the
reason of all, in the latter End of the 15th Verse, Your hands are full of
Blood. This is also farther Evident from the Example of King Saul, who was a
Bloody Man, not only in commanding the Priests of the Lord, even Fourscore and
five Persons that wore a linen Ephod, to be slain, but also because he sought
to slay the Gibeonites, under a pretense of Zeal to the Children of Israel and
Judah, 2 Samuel xxi. 2. But these things brought down public Judgments upon the
Land several years after; for when in the Reign of David there was a famine in
the Land for three Years, and David Enquired of the Lord to know the cause
thereof, he was answered, It is for Saul, and for his Bloody House; and nothing
could appease God's Anger, till seven of Saul's Sons were hanged on that
account: So loud is the cry of Innocent Blood against the shedders thereof.

LET us now Enquire how far we are concerned in the guilt of this Sin also: And
should we go about to clear our selves herein, the very Gates of the great City
of the Kingdom would cry out against us: And all the West of England would
testify the contrary to us. I am well assured that our Royal Master is not a
Prince that does delight in Blood, and I wish with all my heart, that I could
say as much for all his Servants: But alas! How many are there that under a
pretense of Zeal for the King's Service, have executed their own Private
Revenge, and thereby exceedingly disserv'd the King, on whom the Odium always
lay: We all know there was a Rebellion in the West of England, and there is no
question but Justice required some Examples should be made: But had the Kings
Ministers (to whom he entirely left it) made as much use of Mercy as they did
of Justice, I am sure they would have done the King more Service; and I have
reason to be of this Opinion, since Solomon tells us, (who had also a Rebellion
broke forth at the beginning of his Reign, against him) That the Kings Throne
is Established by Mercy. But I will say no more of that, because those who were
the chief Instruments therein, have long since given an Account of their
Actions before a higher Tribunal, where they have received the just Recompense
of their Reward. And if there be any of us yet alive that have been concerned
in shedding of Innocent Blood, or that have pursued our own Revenge under a
show either of Loyalty or Justice, they have great reason to acknowledge their
Sin, and to humble their Souls before God, and take shame to themselves, as
having, to the utmost of their Power, therein brought down the Judgments of God
both upon our King and on his People. As to my self, I can appeal to the
Searcher of Hearts, that I was grieved to see that Effusion of Christian Blood,
and would have prevented it, had it lain in my Power; and as I had an
Opportunity, I showed Mercy; and where I could not, I have not been wanting to
pray that the guilt of that Blood might not fall upon the King, nor on his
Royal Issue. For even then my fore-boding Soul had great apprehensions that it
would cry loud for Vengeance.

BUT in the Fourth Place, Opression and Injustice, is another crying Sin that
brings down Judgments on a Nation. To this, the Word of GOD abundantly bears
Witness: Hence it is that God so often complains, That they Judge not the
Fatherless, neither does the Cause of the Widow come unto them; but every one
loves Gifts, and follows after Rewards; and that he looked for Judgment, but
behold Oppression; for Righteousness, but behold a Cry: And therefore the
Prophet Isaiah exhorts them, if they expect Mercy, to seek Judgment, relieve
the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, and plead the Cause of the Widow;
threatening that if they refused, they should be devoured with the Sword; for
the Mouth of the Lord had Spoken it. And in another Place the Prophet
complains, That Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar
off; for Truth is fallen in the street, and Equity cannot enter: And for this
God threatens that the whole Land shall be desolate; and that the Earth shall
mourn, and the Heavens above shall be black: These things sufficiently declare
the dreadful consequences and effects of Injustice and Oppression; And that it
brings down National Judgments.

LET us now Enquire how far we are concerned in the Guilt of this Sin. And I am
afraid that neither in this shall we be able to acquit our selves; for though I
would not be thought to charge my Royal Master in this matter, yet I am very
sure that those through whose hands the Administration of Affairs then passed,
made so many false steps, that they can by no means be acquitted of Injustice,
as well as great Imprudence: And this I am the bolder to say, because it was
for Their Mis-management, that the King now suffers. And that this may the
better appear, I will descend to a few Particulars.

TO say nothing of Turning the West into a Slaughterhouse, and making such a
shambles of the Roads and Highways there; exercising this Cruelty upon many
that the whole Country knew were altogether innocent of that for which they
suffered, which was the ready way to bring an Odium upon the King, by making
the People believe that he was as Inexorable as his Ministers: I say, To pass
by this, having before said something of it, It was undoubtedly a great Piece
of Injustice to set up a New Court for the Management of Ecclesiastical
Affairs, contrary to the Express Laws of the Land; whereby the Church and
Clergy of England were Subjected to the Wills of some Men that were Enemies to
both; who made the Kings Authority a staulking-horse to their own private
Malice and Revenge, and thereby put many fears into the Hearts of those that
were the King's best Friends, who could not but foresee the fatal Tendency of
such Proceedings.

IT was likewise a great Piece of Injustice to suspend the Right Reverend the
Bishop of London from the Exercise of his Pastoral charge, for that which in it
self was no offense; the said Bishop having acted (at least in that Affair)
with all that Caution and Prudence which the Duty of his Place required. Which
besides the Injustice and Oppression of it, was a great disservice to the King;
in disquieting the Minds of his good Subjects, who began to grow doubtful
whereto such things might tend; and many of 'em (as the Event too sadly showed)
began to entertain such thoughts of his Majesty, as was inconsistent with their
Duty; and might have forewarned the Authors of those Irregular Actings, that,
that which was their Sin, would quickly be their Punishment.

THE Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, (though it might indeed show the
Kings Lenity to Dissenters) was certainly a false step in the Advisers, both as
it put too great a Power into the Dissenters hands, who had been lately so
severely Prosecuted; as also because it was expressly against Law: For though the
Dissenters might have been connived at in their different Way of Worship (which
would have satisfied them, and have been serviceable to the Government, in
making them easy, and so keeping them quiet: Yet to make 'em capable of
holding Offices in Corporations, and setting 'em upon an Equal Foot with the
Church of England (or rather above it) was too bold a stroke at once; and made
the People too much inclined to think it was designed to serve another
Interest, rather than that of Protestant Dissenters. And though in this I am
Verily persuaded of the King's Sincerity and Uprightness, I cannot be so of
some that were very near him, and to whom he could scarce deny any thing.

THERE was also another false step in the putting out of this Declaration, and
which was a great piece both of Injustice and Oppression, and that was, The
Enjoining it to be sent to the Bishops of every See, to be by them ordered to
be read by their Respective Ministers in each Diocese. Why should the Bishops
be denied Liberty of Conscience, when it was granted to Dissenters? And why
could not the Dissenters enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences without the
Bishops being enjoined to read the Declaration, which they knew to be contrary
to the Law, and therefore illegal? Not that the Bishops were against Indulgence
to Dissenters, when it should be proposed in Parliament, but they then saw
there was latet in Anguis, a Snake in the Grass, which many were not aware of:
And that the Bishops should be Imprisoned in the Tower, for Refusing to do that
which was against their Consciences, was certainly a very false step in the
Advisers, besides a great piece of Injustice: And I am very sorry that the
fatal Consequence thereof was no more perceived by the King and his Ministers.
I have however, this Consolation in my Self, That what I acted at that time,
was out of Duty both to God and the King; and that I am no way to be charged
with what afterward followed thereupon; and if I was at all mistaken, or acted
beyond what I ought to have done, I humbly beg Pardon both of God and the King;
being well assured in my own Integrity, and that it was without any Evil
Design. I did indeed soon perceive of what ill Consequence it would be to his
Majesty, and what Improvement his Enemies would make of it; but it was not in
my power to help it.

THE Violent Proceedings against the President and Fellows of Magdalen-Colledge
in Oxford, was also very Unjust and Oppressive, and a very false step, both in
the Advisers and Actors: And what I cannot remember, when I consider what
effect it had upon the People, without great Compassion to his Majesty; who by
the Violent Passions of some hot and fiery Spirits, was precipated into such
fatal Counsels; where all the Profit would redound to others, but all the Odium
rest upon the King. As to the Fellows, I must own they did but their Duty, and
they could not choose otherways then according to the Statutes of the College.
And indeed to compel them to do it, was both against Law, and against the Kings
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, which surely extended to them as well as
to others, they having the same Plea.

IT is not without cause that I have so largely insisted on these several
Instances of Injustice and Oppression: For these things carried the Evident
Tokens of Divine Displeasure along with 'em, and were afterward made the chief
Motives for Introducing the late Revolution: Which though it was too wide a
stretch, and very unreasonably urged so far, (for a Chimney that smoaks may be
mended, without any danger of the House being pulled down) yet was it such a
Rebuke to the Authors of those precipitate Counsels, that (as I said before)
they might easily see their Sin in their Punishment; nor should I have at all
mourned their Fate, had they not involved my Royal Master in the same Ruin
with them.

UPON a serious Reflection on the forementioned Sins, and our own guilt
therein, we may plainly discern that it is not without very great Cause, that
it has pleased God to bring these Afflictions upon us; And that we have reason
to join in that Confession of the Church in the Lamentations, The Lord is
Righteous, for we have rebelled against his Commandments: Thou have made us as
the offscouring and refuse in the midst of the People: For we have
transgressed and rebelled, and thou have not pardoned; but have covered us with
Anger, and Persecuted us; yea, thou have covered thy self with a Cloud that our
Prayer should not pass through. The Lord has accomplished his Fury, he has
poured upon us his fierce anger, for the Sins of her Prophets, and the Iniquity
of her Priests.

WHAT then remains, but that knowing the cause of our Afflictions, we endeavor
to remove them, by humbling our selves under the mighty hand of God, and by
searching and trying our Ways, and turning again to the Lord: For the Lord will
not cast off for ever, but if we repent of our sins, and turn unfainedly to
him, though he cause grief, yet he will have compassion, according to the
multitude of his Mercies; for he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
Children of Men; to turn aside the right of a Man before the face of the most
High, to subvert a Man in his Cause, the Lord approves not: Let us therefore
in good Earnest set about this Work of Repentance and Reformation; for were we
once but a Reformed People, we should soon be a happy People: Our Losses would
soon be made up, and strangers should no more rule over us. But whilst we are
going on in our old Sins, we must still expect that GOD will follow us with his
Judgments until we be consumed. For if we do wickedly, we shall be destroyed,
both we and our King.

NEITHER let our Hearts fret against the Lord; but submit to his Will; for it is
he that has done it, and it is our duty to be patient under it, and wait his
Time for our Deliverance: To go about to deliver our selves, is but to make our
Bonds the stronger; and to entangle our selves more: Our Strength is to sit
still, and to wait for the Salvation of God: For when he works, there is none
can let it; and till he does arise and work, all we can do, will be in vain.
And this many have found to their cost. Let us learn to be wise, by other men's
harms. There are many Devices in the heart of Man, but the Counsel of the Lord
that shall stand: And whoever goes about to resist it, will find him self sadly
deceived. I will always maintain my Loyalty to the King, and quietly submit to
the Power that Protects me. That so I may keep a Conscience void of offense
both toward God, and toward Man. And it is the grief of my heart to see any
otherwise minded: For if we must not Speak wickedly for God, nor Talk
deceitfully for him, much less must we Act wickedly for him. And yet I would be
found doing too; I mean, I would be found in the daily Exercise of Faith and
Repentance, and endeavor to get a broken and a contrite Heart for my past
Sins; because God has assured me, that with such Sacrifices he is well pleased.

The Soul's Expostulation.
AND now, O my Soul, consider with thy self, If Sin be the procuring Cause of
all thy Troubles, have thou not greater Reason to be troubled for thy Sins,
than for thy Sufferings? Afflictions may make thee better, but Sin always makes
thee worse. It may be necessary sometimes to choose Sorrow, but it never can be
so to choose Sin. It Is God alone is that Wise Alchymist that can Extract Good
from Evil; and make even the Sins of his People turn to his Glory: Thus through
the working of God's Grace, thy Pride may tend to humble thee, and a due sense
of thy Passion may produce Patience. But this is alone the Effect of God's
Grace, for the Nature of Sin is only Evil. What reason then, O my Soul, have
thou to bless God, who has made thy Outward Losses prove thy Inward Gain; by
taking thee off from the Pursuit of Sin, and Training thee up in the School of
Affliction! Sure, O my Soul, it concerns thee to see what good Lessons thou
have learned there; for if thou art not the better for it, thou will certainly
be the worse: Affliction is a Furnace, and if thou come not forth purified
like Gold, thy dross will appear the more. But if thou can say with David, It
has been good for me that I have been afflicted, thou have great cause to bless
God for it. If these Trials have done thee good, what have thou to complain of?
And if by the light of Affliction thou have seen the greatness of thy Sin, and
that sight of Sin has humbled thee, and brought thee to Repentance, thou art
hereby become a greater Gainer, than all the outward Prosperity in the World
could make thee: For there is no Comparison between Temporal Losses, and
Spiritual Gains: For all the things that are seen, are but Temporal; but the
things that are not seen, are Eternal: How blessed a thing is it, O my Soul, to
be afflicted! Seeing these light Afflictions that are but for a moment, work
out for thee a far more Exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory: T his, O my Soul
is enough not only to make them rejoice, but even glory in Tribulations, since
they have so blessed an effect: See then, O my Soul, that thy Tribulation
works Patience, and Patience Experience, and Experience Hope, even that Hope
which makes not ashamed; and so shall thou have rejoicing in thy self, and not
in another.

A PRAYER.
O Almighty and merciful Lord God, who made all things for thy own Glory, and
can Overruled all Events so, as to bring glory to thy Name, and good to thy
People, out of the darkest of thy Dispensations toward them; Grant I beseech
Thee, that these Afflictions with which thou have been pleased to Exercise me,
may by thy gracious Ordination bring forth the Peaceable fruits of
Righteousness unto me; that I may be Enabled to say, It is good for me that I
have been Afflicted. And suffer me not, O Lord, neither to despise thy
chastening, by going on in those Ways of Sin and Rebellion against thee, which
have brought thy Judgments down upon this Nation; nor to defer my Repentance
for those Iniquities which I have been guilty of: And since thou have declared
in thy Word, That he which hides his Sins shall not prosper, but that those
who confess 'em and forsake 'em shall find Mercy; Help me, I humbly beseech
thee, with all thy People, to make our Confession unto thee, and to acknowledge
that we have sinned, and have committed Iniquity, and have rebelled, by
departing from thy Precepts and thy Judgments; neither have we hearkened to thy
Servants, the Ministers, which spoke in thy Name to our Kings, our Princes, and
our Fathers, and to all the People of the Land: And therefore, O Lord,
Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us Confusion of face, as at this day,
to our King, our Princes, and our Judges, because we have sinned against thee:
And have added this Evil unto all the rest, that yet we have not made our
Prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our Iniquities, and
understand thy Truth. O Lord our God, we pray thee hear, incline thine Ear, and
open thine Eyes, and behold our low Estate: For we do not present these our
Supplications before thee for our Righteousness sake, but for thy great
Mercies, through Jesus Christ, our Lord and only Savior. Our Father etc.

Meditation V.
Of the Benefit and Advantage of Afflictions.
WE have in the former Meditation Inquired into the Nature of Afflictions, they
are Evils in themselves, not joyous but grievous; and into the Causes of them,
which generally is Sin; and what some of those Sins are, we have also examined,
and found our selves to be concerned in them; which calls for our hearty Sorrow
and Repentance. But as a wife Physician will so temper Poison, as not only to
allay its Venom, but turn it into an Antidote; so does the great Physician of
our Souls do with Afflictions; making them work together for our Good, and
bring forth for us the Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness. And here I will a
little Meditate upon the reasons why it pleases God to Afflict his Children,
and what the Benefits are that we reap thereby.

1. Because we might show our Conformity to our Blessed Redeemer, who first
Suffered, and then Entered into his Glory: In like manner we are told that if
we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him: And the greater Trials we
endure here, the brighter will our Crown of Glory shine hereafter: The Author
to the Hebrews, having given a large account of the sufferings of the People of
God, in former Ages, and of their not accepting Deliverance, gives this as the
reason, that they expected a better Resurrection: Agreeable to which, our Lord
tells us, That those that are persecuted here for Righteousness sake, are
blessed, because theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: And seeing the Captain of our
Salvation was made Perfect through Sufferings, why should it not also be the
same with his Followers?

2. Another Reason why it pleases God to Exercise us here with Afflictions, is,
That our hearts might be drawn off from the love of the World, which is an
Enemy to God; The inordinate love of the World, makes the Soul incapable of the
love of God; for St. John tells us expressly, That if any Man love the World,
the love of the Father is not in him: How much better is it then to have the
hatred of the World, and to have God our Friend, than to have the World our
Friend, and God our Enemy? And sure we have no reason to complain of
Afflictions, since St. Paul tells us, We are chastened of the Lord, that we
might not be condemned with the World. God is pleased to imbitter the World to
us by Afflictions as a Tender Mother does her Teat, when she would wean her
Child from the Breast; she rubs her Nipple with Aloes or Wormwood, which the
Child tasting, will take the Breast no more: So when the World would entice us
to the love thereof, by its Delights and Pleasures, our merciful Father sends
us Tribulations and Afflictions to take our hearts from the love of present
things; which could we have quietly Enjoyed, we should have been for building
Tabernacles here. Could the Prodigal Son have filled his Belly with Husks, he
would never have thought of Returning to his Father; but Want and Affliction
brought him from the Swine, with whom he would have staid, could he have got
his Belly full.

3. Another Benefit we receive by Affliction is, That we are thereby Cured of
our Soul-Disease; and that too, of such as are otherwise almost incurable.
Honors, Riches, and a Prosperous Condition in the World, causes us too often
to contract those sinful Habits which we never come to reflect upon, much less
to repent of, until Affliction makes us: Therefore it is that Solomon tells us,
The Rod and Reproof give Wisdom. The Story of Ioseph's Brethren is remarkable;
they had sold their Brother to the Ishmaelitish Merchants, and made their
Father believe he was torn in pieces of Wild Beasts, and then thought all was
well; and were not at all troubled that they had sold their Brother, and
deceived their Father: But afterward when they went down to Egypt, and were
there put in Ward, and charged as being Spies, this Affliction brings to their
remembrance their former Usage of their Brother Joseph, and now they cry out,
We are verily guilty concerning our Brother: We saw the anguish of his Soul,
when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come
upon us. Had it not been for that affliction, in all probability they had never
repented of their Cruelty to Joseph. One likeneth Afflictions to the Rod of
Moses, for as the striking that upon the Rock, brought forth Water; so the Rod
of Affliction often mollifieth stony-hearted Sinners, and makes the Waters of
Repentance to gush out. Another compares it to a File, for as that cleanses the
Iron from its Rust, and make it bright, So Affliction files off that Rust of
Sin, which worldly Prosperity has contracted, and makes our Graces shine more
bright and glorious. The Scripture likewise compares it to a Furnace wherein
Gold is tried, and purged from all its filth and dross, and brought to the
greatest degree of Perfection. It may also well be compared to a Purging
Potion, for as that drives the corrupt and ill humors out of a diseased Body;
so Afflictions drive out evil Passions and corrupt Desires and Affections out
of the Soul; such as Pride, Vainglory, Sloth, Niceness, Lust, Gluttony,
Drunkenness, and many more. And Elihu speaking to Job of the Afflictions with
which God uses to exercise his People, tells him, It is that he may withdraw
Man from his Purpose, and hide Pride from him; he does indeed, says Elihu,
chasten him with Pains upon his Bed, and the multitude of his Bones with strong
Pain; so that his Life abhors Bread, and his Soul dainty Meat; yea, his Soul
draws near to the Grave, and his Life to the destroyers: Lo these things,
says he, works God oftentimes with Man: But would you know to what End? It Is
to bring back his Soul from the Pit, to be Enlightened with the light of the
Living.

4. Another Benefit of Affliction is, That it is a Preservative from Evil, and
keeps us from many Sins which we should otherwise run into: This is what God
intends, by the Prophet Hosea, when he tells the Children of Judah, that were
bent upon Idolatry, and resolved to go after their Lovers, that God would
prevent 'em, and put a stop in their Way; I Will hedge up thy way with Thorns,
says God: That is, I will bring such afflictions upon you, as shall be as so
many Thorns in your sides, which shall put a stop to your Careir in Wickedness.
And this was the Experience of holy David long before: For he tells us, Psalm.
cxix. 71. It is good for me that I have been Afflicted: If you ask why it was
good for him, or what Benefit he found by it? He readily tells you, Verse. 67.
Before I was afflicted, I went astray; but now have I kept thy Word: And
therefore instead of murmuring against God for Afflictions, he justifies God; I
know, O Lord, says he, that thy Judgments, are just, and that in faithfulness
thou have afflicted me.

5. ANOTHER Advantage we reap by Afflictions, is, That hereby God puts us upon
the Trial of our Graces: There are many that will swim with the Tide, that
will not venture when the stream is against 'em. What the Devil falsely said of
Job, is but too true of many Men, they will not serve God for naught! When God
blesses them with the good things of this Life, and they have all that their
Hearts can wish, then they will be for God, and for the Profession of Religion;
but if he puts forth his hand, and takes away what they have, they will be like
those that the Prophet Isaiah speaks of, who when they are hungry, and hardly
bestead, shall fret themselves, and curse their King and their God. And
therefore Job's Constancy under those great Afflictions, made his Piety and
Patience so much the more Illustrious. It Is Affliction that shows us which are
Hypocrites, and which are sincere Christians; a sincere Christian varies not
with the Times, but is semper idem, always the same; whereas a Hypocrite is a
Timeserver, and will turn with the Times, rather than be turned out: If
Tribulation comes, he is for avoiding of it, let it come from what Quarter it
will. How many can we remember that made the greatest Pretenses of Loyalty to
the King, that could be; and had there been no occasion to try their Loyalty,
would have been Loyal still; but when Times of Affliction and Trial came on,
and the King was forced to withdraw himself, they likewise withdrew their
Loyalty. This shows that times of Affliction are times of Trial; by which God
proves the Truth of our Love to him, and our Zeal for him: And by which we also
may come to know the Deceitfulness of our own Hearts; which is also the Design
of God in our Afflictions, as the holy Ghost testifies 2 Chronicles. xxxii. 31.
where speaking of Hezekiah, we have these words, Howbeit, in the business of
the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon, who sent unto him, to enquire of the
wonder that was done in the Land, God left him, to try him, that he (i. e.
Hezekiah) might know all that was in his Heart.

6, Another Benefit that we receive by Afflictions is, That they make us run to
God: Fullness and Prosperity often makes us forget God, and run away from him, but
Afflictions generally drive us to him; and indeed is the only way to reclaim
us. This the Prophet Hosea tells us, where God speaking of his People that had
gone away from him, and followed Idols, threatens to bring Afflictions upon
'em; I will be as a Lion, and as a Young Lion to the House of Judah, I will
tear and go away; I will take away, and none shall rescue. Would you know God's
design herein? I will go, says he, and return to my Place, till they
acknowledge their offenses, and seek my Face: But when will that be? O, says
God, In their Affliction they will seek me Early. When we are walking abroad in
the Fields, and the Weather is good, we are not solicitous about a Place of
shelter; but if a Storm arises, and a Shower comes, then we look out for a
Shelter, and make haste unto it: God is called in the Scripture, A Covert from
the Storm and from the Rain, Isa. iv. 6. And therefore when the Tempest of
God's Wrath arises, and the Storm of his Anger is poured upon the World,
whither shall we run for safety, but to Him who is a Covert from the storm and
from the rain? At such times especially we run to God, as to our great Assylum
and Refuge; knowing that under the shadow of his Wings we shall be safe. Thus
it was in the Wilderness with the Israelites; a stiff-necked generation,
continually provoking God by their unbelief; and this they did to that degree,
that God often sent his Judgments amongst them, by which many of them were
destroyed; and these Afflictions made them seek after and run to God; for so
the Psalmist tells, Psalm. lxxviii. 34. When he slew them, then they sought him;
and they returned, and enquired early after God. And though the Psalmist tells
us, that they did but flatter him with their Mouth, and lied unto him with
their Tongue, and that their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant; yet this running of theirs to him in the time of
their affliction, did so far prevail with God, that he being full of Compassion
destroyed them not; but turned his Anger away, and did not stir up all his
Wrath. And David himself frequently professes that God was his Refuge in time
of Trouble, whereto he did continually resort. So that this is certainly a
great Advantage that we gain by Afflictions, that they drive us to God, to whom
we fly for Refuge, and where we find Security.

7. There is also this Advantage in Afflictions, That by means of them we come
to live in the daily exercise of all Virtues; which without Afflictions we
could not do: This St. Paul affirms, Romans v. 3. We glory in Tribulations also,
knowing that Tribulation works Patience; and Patience, Experience; and
Experience, Hope; and Hope makes not ashamed: This is the natural Consequence
of Afflictions; for then we live in the Exercise of Faith, by believing Gods
Promise, that all things shall work together for our Good; and relying upon him
for our Deliverance: We live in the Exercise of Hope, by an assured Expectation
of the Reward promised to them that suffer: And in the Exercise of Charity, by
having our hearts inflamed with the love of Christ, who gave himself for us,
whereby we are made willing to offer up our selves a Free-will-Offering to him,
both in Life and Death: Our Patience is Exercised in suffering the Will of God,
with Quietness and Resignation of Soul; and our Humility, by abasing our selves
in the sight of God, and being willing to suffer shame for his sake.

8. ANOTHER Advantage that we reap by Afflictions (which is the last I shall
mention, because I affect brevity) is, That when they have brought forth in us
the Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, our Mouths (and our Hearts too) shall be
filled with Songs of Deliverance: Thus David rejoiced in God, Psalm. LIX. 16. I
will sing of thy Power, yea, I will sing aloud of thy Mercy in the Morning; for
thou have been my Defense and Refuge in the Day of my Trouble: The Children of
Israel had been kept a long time in the House of Bondage, in the Land of Egypt,
where they were made to serve with Rigor: But with what Songs of Praise were
their Mouths filled, upon their Deliverance! How did they exult in the Lord,
and glory in the God of their Salvation! There had been no occasion for those
Songs of Deliverance, had they not been kept in Bondage! Nor had they seen the
Power of God so wonderfully displayed on their behalf, which made them cry out,
Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods! Who is like unto thee! Glorious
in Holiness, Fearful in Praises, doing Wonders! Had King David come to the
Crown without meeting with those Troubles that preceded it, he had not been so
sensibly affected with God's Mercy in Delivering him, as he was, nor in all
probability have writ that excellent Song of Praise recited both in 2 Samuel
xxii. and in Psalm. xviii. Entitled, A Psalm of David the Servant of the LORD,
who spoke unto the LORD the words of this Song, in the Day that the LORD
Delivered him from the hand of all his Enemies, and from the hand of Saul: In
which he first gives an Account of his great Distresses; for, says he, The
Sorrows of Death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly Men made me afraid;
nay, he goes further than this, and tells us, The sorrows of Hell compassed him
about, and the snares of Death prevented him: And then exults in GOD for his
great Deliverance; The Lord was my stay: By Thee have I run through a Troop; by
my GOD have I leaped over a Wall: As for GOD, his way is perfect: The Word of
the LORD is tried: He is a Buckler to all those that trust in Him: For who is
GOD save the LORD? Or who is a Rock save our GOD? The LORD lives, and blessed
be my Rock, and let the GOD of my Salvation be exalted: It is GOD that avengeth
me, and subdueth the People under me -- He delivers me from mine Enemies:
Yea, Thou liftest me up above those that rise up against me: Thou have
delivered me from the Violent Man: Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, O
LORD, among the Heathen, and sing Praises unto thy Name: Great Deliverance
gives He to his King, and shows mercy to his Anointed, to David and to his
Seed, for evermore. Thus David's being delivered out of his Troubles, filled
his mouth with Songs of Deliverance to his great Deliverer. [GOD is the same
GOD still, and has the same Power to save, and the same Bowels of Compassion to
show Mercy. Let us therefore lift up our Eyes and our Hearts to Him: We have
been long looking to Men; but they have proved but as broken Reeds, that have
rather pierced our hands, than helped us: We have experienced the Truth of what
David long ago affirmed, That Men of low degree are Vanity, and Men of high
degree are a Lie: And therefore let us all say as he does, Psalm. LXII. 5. My
Soul wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from him.] -- But to
proceed: It is (as I have said before) none of the least Benefit of
Afflictions, That it makes deliverance more sweet to us: For as after a great
drouth, a shower of Rain is more refreshing to the Earth; or when we are
extreme thirsty, a draught of Drink is sweeter to us; and a Calm is rendered
more pleasant and acceptable to Passengers, after a troublesome Tempest; so
will our deliverance be more grateful to us, after we have been exercised with
great and sore Afflictions. Thus in the LXVIII. Psalm, and the 13th verse. Though
ye have lien among the Pots, (like Sons of Clay, esteemed as the filth of the
World, and the offscouring of all things) yet (when your Deliverance shall
come) ye shall be as the Wings of a Dove covered with Silver, and her Feathers
with yellow Gold: i. e. Ye shall be so much the more bright and glorious; and
for every Sorrow you underwent in the time of your Affliction, you shall
receive redoubled Consolations after your Deliverance. And this Deliverance
will come in due time, if with Faith and Patience we be found waiting for it:
For though Heaviness may endure for a Night, yet Joy will come in the Morning;
especially if we let Patience have its perfect work: But if through impatience
we seek to hasten it, we shall but retard it; for he that believes, makes not
haste. -- And that we may the more quietly submit to the good Pleasure of GOD,
and rest satisfied in his Wise Disposal of things, our next Meditation shall be
of our Resignation to the Will of GOD.

The Soul's Expostulation.
LET us now, O my Soul, a little Contemplate on the adorable Wisdom of GOD, who
is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in working; whose way is in the Sea, and
his Path in the great Waters, and his footsteps are not known: Since then, O my
Soul, his Judgments are such a great deep, that all the Lines of a created
Understanding can never fathom them, Is it not much better to accept of his
Fatherly Chastisements, than to quarrel with his Proceedings? Present
Afflictions may be far better than a Prosperous Condition, if thou have Wisdom
to improve 'em to the end for which GOD designs 'em. Will it be a Mercy to be
made conformable to thy blessed Redeemer, who first suffered, and then entered
into his glory? And will it not be thy happiness to have the same mind in thee
as was in Christ Jesus? And if Afflictions do this, surely thou ought to
Thank God for Afflictions, and rejoice that thou art counted worthy to be a
Partaker of Christ's sufferings. Again, If by Afflictions thy heart be weaned
from the World, and thy Affections set upon the things above, where there are
better and more durable Treasures, thou art certainly an infinite Gainer by the
Bargain. And if outward ease and Prosperity has caused thee to contract sinful
habits and evil Diseases, which are purged away by Afflictions, what reason
have thou to complain? Or if God by his afflicting hand hedge up thy way with
Thorns; that thou can not do all the Evil that is in thy heart, is not this
the greatest Mercy that can happen to thee? And if by outward sufferings thou
approvest the sincerity of thy heart to God, ought thou not to rejoice
therein? Thou can not but know, O my Soul, how apt thou art to start aside
from GOD, like a deceitful Bow; and if to Cure thee of that Evil, the Floods of
Affliction, like those of great Waters, do arise, and force thee to run to God
as thy strong hold, for safety and Refuge, is there not a hand of Mercy to be
eyed therein, which thou ought thankfully and humbly to adore? And likewise,
if Afflictions cause thee to live in the Exercise of Faith, Hope, Charity,
Patience, Humility, and other Divine Graces, thou have exceeding reason to be
thankful to God, and to say with David, It is good for me I have been
Afflicted. Lastly, O my Soul, consider how pleasant it will be to look back,
upon the various Issues of Divine Providence, when God shall have wrought
Deliverance for thee? How will thou then, O my Soul, exalt and magnify the
Lord, and rejoice in God thy Savior? Thou art now apt to blame the Conduct of
Divine Providence, and to say with good old Jacob, All these things are against
me: But then thou will be of another mind, and conclude that he has done all
things well, so that it could not be done better; and break forth into that
Pathetical Exclamation of the holy Apostle, O the depth of the Riches both of
the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his
ways past finding out! And thence conclude with him, That of him, and through
him, and to him, are all things: To whom be glory for ever. Amen.

A PRAYER.
GRACIOUS and Merciful Father, help me thy poor unworthy Creature to adore thee
for that Goodness and Mercy which thou have been pleased to Vouchsafe to me, by
all the various Methods of thy Providence toward me; and more particularly for
those Afflictions which it has pleased thee to Visit me withal: O Lord be thou
pleased to make them effectual for those gracious Ends and Purposes designed by
Thee; That by them I may be made more conformable to my Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, who was a Man of Sorrow, and acquainted with Grief; and who learned
Obedience by the things that he suffered; and having suffered, entered into his
glory; and that by them also I may find my Heart and Affections drawn off from
the love of the World, because the Friendship of the World is Enmity to God;
but grant, O Lord, that my Affections may be raised, and set upon things above,
even where my blessed Redeemer sits at thy right hand; that so when he shall
appear, I also may appear with him in glory: Grant also, O Lord, That though no
Affliction at the present is Joyous but Grievous, my Afflictions may be so
tempered with the Oil of Mercy by the great Physician of my Soul, that they may
purge out all those sinful Distempers and Evil Habits that Prosperity and Ease
has caused me to contract, that so being purged from my Sins, and refined in
the Furnace of Affliction, I may come forth like Gold. And seeing my Foolish
and Deceitful Heart is so ready to run after Lying Vanities, let thy
Chastisements be as so many Thorns to hedge up my Way, that so being stopped from
running into the Paths of the Destroyer, my Soul may be like a Garden enclosed,
a Spring shut up, and a Fountain sealed: And blessed Lord, grant also that by
my Patient continuance in well doing, under thy Afflicting hand, I may Evidence
the sincerity of my Love totowards thee; which the Waters of Affliction can
never quench, nor all the Floods of Tribulation drown. And though former
Prosperity has caused me to forget thee; yet let this storm that it has pleased
thee in thy Righteous Judgment to bring upon me, cause me to fly unto thee for
shelter, who art a Covert from the Storm and from the Rain; and my only Refuge
and Rock of Defense, where I can be safe against the fear of Evil. And as the
depressing of a Palmtree makes it grow the Straighter, and the treading of
Cammomile makes it smell the Sweeter, so let my present Afflictions cause the
Graces of thy holy Spirit in me to send forth the greater Fragrancy, and to
appear more Eminently: And further be pleased to grant, O Lord, through thy
Wise and all-Disposing Providence, these light Afflictions that are but for a
moment, may work out for me a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory:
And that when thou shall graciously please to accomplish all the purposes of
thy Grace toward me by thy Afflicting hand, and caused thine Anger toward me
to cease, that my Mouth may be filled with Songs of Diliverance, That I may say
with thy Servant of Old, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me
bless his holy Name; Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his
Benefits, who forgiveth all thine Iniquities, who heals all thy Diseases, who
redeemeth thy Life from Destruction, and Crowns thee with loving Kindness and
tender Mercies! Grant this, O Lord, for the sake of Jesus Christ, thy blessed
and only Son, who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and
despised the Shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.
To whom, with thee, O Father, and the Eternal Spirit, be ascribed all Honor,
Glory, Power and Praise, World without End. Amen.

Meditation VI.
Of our Resignation to the Will of God.
OUR Blessed Savior, in that most Excellent Form of Prayer he has taught us,
has made this one Principal Petition in it, Thy Will be done on Earth as it is
in Heaven: And though I hope we all make use of this Prayer, yet how few of us
are there that understand what we ask? Though there is nothing more pleasing to
God, nor nothing that tends more to the Establishment of our own quiet, than
this Resignation of our Wills to the Will of God, which we therein pray for:
For could we in times of greatest Trouble, and at the lowest Ebb of Affliction,
consider that it is the Will of God, without whom nothing comes to pass, and
whose alone Will is the Rule of all Righteousness, that consideration would
soon allay all those storms of Passion and Discontent, which are so ready to
arise in our Souls under such Dispensations of Providence, and make all calm
and quiet there. And this was that which silenced all the Complaints of Gods
People in the Days of Old, when they were even covered with the Cloud of his
Anger. Of which, though many Instances might be given, I shall confine my self to
a few.

AND the first shall be that of old Eli the Priest, who was a good Man, but too
indulgent a Father his wicked Children, -- who thereby took Encouragement to
sin; by which God was so provoked, that he sent Samuel to Eli with such a
Message as was enough to make his Ears to tingle; importing no less than the
destruction of him and his house, and that the Iniquity of his house should not
be purged with Sacrifice nor Offering for Ever, because his Sons had made
themselves Vile, and he restrained them not. And yet even under so heavy a
Message as this was, the good old Man resigns himself up to the Will of God,
saying, It is the LORD, let him do what seems him good.

A Second Instance shall be that of King David, when he was forced to fly from
the Rebellion which Absalom (his own Son) had raised against him. Absalom
having aspired to the Kingdom, and wheedled the People out of their Loyalty and
Allegiance, upon a Pretense of the Mismanagement of his Father, telling those
that came to the King for Judgment in any Cause, That there was no Man deputed
of the King to hear them, and then wishing he was made Judge in the Land, that
he might do them Justice: By which sly Insinuations he had stolen away the
hearts of the Isralites from his Father: And when by these ill Practices,
things were ripe for an Open Rebellion, Religion too must be brought in for a
Part, and a Vow to the Lord is pretended to be paid at Hebron, on which
pretense Absalom having obtained leave to depart from the King, blows the
Trumpet of Rebellion throughout all Israel, and makes himself King in Hebron.
This News being brought to David, he finds himself in Danger from his
Rebellious Son, and thereupon resolves to Abdicate the Royal City of Jerusalem,
to which Absalom was hastening as fast as he could. In this flight of the King,
he had several of his Loyal Subjects to attend him, and among them were Zadok
and Abiathar the Priests, and the honest Levites with the Ark of God: But the
good King, (who was more concerned for the Ark of God than for himself) knowing
that God had chosen the Gates of Zion before all the Dwellings of Jacob, would
by no means suffer the Ark to be carried after him, but sends it back again
into the City; (not knowing how God might deal with him) with this Noble
Resignation of himself to the Will of God: Carry back (says he to Zadock) the
Ark of God into the City; if I shall find Favor with the Lord, he will bring
me again, and show me both it and his habitation: But if he thus, say, I have
no delight in thee; behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto
him. This is a truly Royal Example, and well worthy Imitation.

A Third Instance of this Resignation of our Wills to the Will of God, shall be
that of King Hezekiah, who after his Recovery from Sickness, having Received
the Congratulatory Ambassadors of Merodach Baladan the King of Babylon, was so
pleased with the Honor which he thought was thereby done him, that he showed
the Ambassadors the House of his Precious Things, the Silver, and the Gold, and
the Spices, and the Precious Ointment, and all the House of his Armor, and all
that was found in his Treasure. But this thing was displeasing to the Lord, who
saw Hezekiah had his heart lifted up thereby, and therefore he sends the
Prophet Isaiah to him, with this heavy Message, Behold the days come, that all
that is in thine House, and that which thy Fathers have laid up in store until
this day, shall be carried to Babylon; nothing shall be left, says the Lord:
And of thy Sons that shall Issue from thee, which thou shall beget, shall they
take away, and they shall be Eunuchs in the Palace of the King of Babylon.
Would we know now how Hezekiah took this doleful Message? Why instead of
fretting against God, or going about to excuse himself, he resigns himself up
to the good pleasure of God, saying to the Prophet Isaiah, Good is the Word of
the Lord which thou have spoken; For there shall be Peace and Truth in my Days.

THE Fourth and last Instance I shall mention, shall be that Illustrious One of
our Blessed Savior: Who being under a sense of Divine Wrath, in that bitter
Agony and Bloody Sweat which he underwent for our Sins, in the Garden, and
which none but himself could have born, (for it would have crushed all Mankind
into Nothing, and all the Angels too, to have lain under it) he prayed to his
Father, saying, If it be possible let this Cup Pass from me; nevertheless, not
as I will, but as Thou will. Matthew. xxvi. 39. And in the 42d verse. he went away
again, praying the second time, and said, O my Father, if this Cup may not pass
away except I drink it, Thy Will be done: And in verse. 44. He prayed again the
third time, saying the same words.

THIS is indeed the greatest Instance of Resignation to the Divine Will, that
can be given. And after such an Instance, sure none can deny that it is a
Christians Duty. Nor is it more our Duty than it is our Privilege: For when
our Wills are thus resigned to the Will of God, there is no cross Accident that
can surprise us, nor no Affliction trouble us; because we have given our selves
up to his Disposal, who best knows how to order all things for us; and are
secured in so doing, that all things shall work together for our good.

THIS Resignation of Soul to the Will of God, consists principally in an
absolute Acquiescence to the Divine Pleasure, in every State and Condition of
Life; whereby we are willing that God should choose that Condition which he sees
best for us; whether it be Sickness or Health, Life or Death, Poverty or
Riches, Honor or Disgrace: And this without Murmuring, or Repining, or
Thinking we are not well dealt with, or that we could have provided better for
our selves; but on the contrary we ought to think our present Condition the
best for us, be it what it will, because it is the Result of Divine Providence;
and this requires, or supposes in us, a steadfast belief of God's Governing the
World, and ordering all Affairs in it according to the Counsel of his own Will.
And he that by a steadfast Faith in God (believing him to be the most Wise, most
Powerful, most Just, most Merciful and Beneficent Being) has resigned himself
up to his Disposal, is prepared for all Events; and though he may lose Crowns,
Kingdoms, Riches, Honors, Friends, Relations, and all things else which are
looked upon as outward Blessings, yet he can never lose that inward Peace of
Conscience and Satisfaction of Mind, which the World can neither give nor take
away.

The Soul's Expostulation.
CONSIDER, O my Soul, if thy Resignation to the Divine Will, be so absolute a
Duty, what progress thou have made therein; and whether thou have so given up
thy self to the Will of God, to be absolutely at his Disposal: That thou art
so, is indeed unquestionable; and so are the Devils too; for notwithstanding
all their Rage, and all their Malice, they cannot break those Chains of
Darkness wherein they are bound, to the Judgment of the great Day; But they
have not resigned their Wills unto his, but on the contrary do whatever they
can to oppose it, tho in Vain -- But, O my Soul, is thy being at the Disposal
of Divine Providence, the effect of thy Choice, as well as of God's Power? If
it be so, it is what it ought to be: But then, what means this bleating of the
Sheep, and lowing of the Oxen, as Samuel said to Saul in another case? What
means all this murmuring and repining at thy present Condition? What means that
hankering after those Honors, Riches, and Pleasures, that thou Enjoyedst
heretofore? And thy present Uneasiness under the want of them? Do thou
believe that thy present Circumstances are the Result of the Divine Providence,
and what God thinks best for thee? Then let thy Mouth be stopped for ever; For
nothing can be more unreasonable than to complain: How preposterous is it, O my
Soul, to pray to God, Thy Will be done; and yet when it is done, to murmur?
This seems strongly to insinuate, that thou art no further willing God's Will
should be done, than as it suits with thine; which is the Reverse of what thou
have prayed for. Therefore, O my Soul, either leave off Praying Thy Will be
done, or cease to let thy Practice thus contradict thy Prayers. Remember, O my
Soul, that it is the foolishness of Man that perverteth his way, and makes his
heart to fret against the Lord. And take heed lest thy repining makes thee
appear to be such a one. Is it not far better to give up thy self to his
Conduct, by an entire Resignation of thy Will to his, who better knows how to
order thy Affairs, than thou thy self do? So may the bitter Draught of
Affliction be made a wholesome Potion to thee; whereby thou may Experience
the Truth of Sampson's Riddle, Out of the Eater comes forth Meat, and out of
the Strong comes forth Sweetness.

A PRAYER.
O Almighty and Eternal God, who workest all things according to the Counsel of
thy own blessed Will, and whose Will is the Rule of all Righteousness; Look
down in Mercy upon a poor and worthless Sinner before thee, whose heart was
lifted up, and forgot God, in the time of my Prosperity; and therefore thou
have justly deprived me of those Mercies which I did not Improve to thy Praise:
And since I would not serve thee in the fullness of all things, it is but just I
should serve thee in the want of them. And yet such is the Vainty and
Deceitfulness of my heart, that I am now apt to repine against thy Providence,
and fret against thee for what thou have done, instead of Kissing thy Rod, and
Submitting to thy Fatherly Chastisements: O therefore be thou pleased to subdue
this Rebellious heart of mine, and by an entire Resignation of my Soul to thy
Sovereign Disposal, cause me to rest satisfied in every condition into which it
shall please thee to bring me: And however things may seem to me, through the
blindness of my Mind, and the Darkness of my Understanding, to go contrary to
my Interest, yet make me to know, O Lord, that it is my great Interest to
acquiesce in thy Will, who do all things well. Pardon, I humbly beseech
thee, the Stubbornness of my Heart, and the Unwillingness of my Will to submit
to thy good Pleasure; and make me sensible that there is nothing more obstructs
thy restoring of former Mercies to me, than my murmuring and repining at thy
Present Dispensations. Give me therefore, O Lord, such a composedness of
Spirit, that I may thankfully entertain whatever thou art further pleased to
bring upon me, how hard soever it may seem to Flesh and Blood, and be made
willing to say, The Will of the Lord be done. And if the blessed Angels, that
are always in thy presence, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect, rejoice
in the fulfilling of thy Will, what am I, sinful Dust and Ashes, that I should
murmur and repine thereat! Help me, O Lord, to Consider, that, however my heart
may fret against it, yet thy holy Will is the Result of Infinite Wisdom, as
well as the Rule of all Righteousness: And that therefore it is both my Duty
and Interest willingly to submit thereto. And help me also, O Lord, to believe,
That when thou have humbled me by thy present Providence, and brought me to
lie at thy foot, in a due sense of my own Unworthiness, and a just
acknowledgment of the Righteousness of thy dealings toward me, that thou will
again cause the Light of thy Favor to shine upon me, and make the Bones that
thou have broken, to rejoice. Grant this, O Lord, and whatsoever else thou
see needful for me, for the sake of Jesus Christ, thy beloved Son, and my
alone Savior, who has further taught me to pray, saying, Our Father etc.

HAVING by the afore-going Meditations Endeavored to show the Uncertainty and
Emptiness of our former Enjoyments, and considered the Nature and Causes of
Afflictions, and how far by our Sins we have brought them upon our selves; and
also shown you the Advantages that accrue to us by a Patient continuance under
them; and laid before you both our Duty and Interest, in an entire Resignation
of our Souls to the Will of God, under the Darkest Dispensations of Divine
Providence; I shall in the next Place, as what I think will be very seasonable,
furnish you with a Manual of Devotions upon all occasions, fitted for Times of
Trouble, to render it more Proper for our present use. -- And conclude with
some general Rules for our Daily Practice; and so leave the whole to the
Blessing of God, who alone is able to make it effectual to the End for which it
is designed.

A Manual of Devotions FOR Times of Trouble and Affliction. Morning-Prayer.
Psalm. LXXI, LXXIII, LXXIV: Or CXXIV, CXXV, CXXVI, CXXIX.
Proper Lessons. Dan. IX. or Ezra. IX. and X. to Verse. 7. or 2 Chronicles. XXXVI.
Ier. XIV. Luke XXI.
A Collect Confessing and Deprecating Judgments.
O Lord we are brought into Times of great Sorrow and Affliction, and we have
seen Violence and Spoil before our Eyes: Our Houses are full of Mourning, and
our Hearts of bitter Lamentation: And though thy Temples are not shut up, yet
several of thy Ministers are shut out of thy Temples! Dearest Lord! These
things are due to our Sins; Thou art Just and Righteous in thy Dealings, but we
are sinful and wicked: For we have sinned against the great Means of thy Grace,
and the Mercies of they Goodness for many years Vouchsafed to us, and to our
Fathers before us: Notwithstanding which, we are full of Hypocrisy, full of
Profaneness, full of Lewdness, and most Abominably wicked: And I, even I, have
contributed by a great measure of my Sins, to fill up those Woes. But O God!
That art Merciful, as thou art Just, (that delightest not so much to appear
Just as Merciful) Pardon those Sins of ours that cause these Woes, and pardon
those Sins of mine which concur to that Cause! And with the pardon of our Sins,
grant us a release of our Punishments: Let all Feuds and Animosities cease, and
true Piety and Peace flourish again amongst us! Thou that out of Evil can
work Good, and out of Confusion did set up the Order of the World, be pleased
out of those Evils and Confusions that are upon us, to bring forth a blessed
Establishment for us! O thou King of Kings, and Judge of the World, plead the
Cause of thy Servants to the faces of all those who seek to distress and
destroy us! And do thou from Heaven own us in our Extremity, and deliver us! O
thou that Powerfully can, Mercifully do this for us: To the Honor of thy
great Name, and to the Comfort and Happiness, both in Body and Soul, of us and
ours, and all that truly fear and love thee, and true Religion in and for Thee!
Even for thy Tender Mercies sake, hear us; and for the Precious Blood and
Passion of our dearest JESUS, help us! Even for his sake, in whose Merits and
Mediation alone stands all our Hope and Help, thy dear Son, our only Savior,
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for Preservation of the Church.
O Lord, the Church is thy Body, and thou art her Head; She is thy Spouse, and
thou art her Husband; O save thine own Body, preserve thine own Spouse! Protect
her from all Enemies, Men and Devils! Keep her from all Ills, Errors and
Dangers! Thou did Purchase thy self a Church at the Price of thy Blood, O let
no hand seiz and spoil so dear a Purchase!

MORE particularly, O Lord, hear my Prayers for that part thereof in this
Nation: The Petition of a poor unworthy Child for a dear distressed Mother!
Many, O Lord, are the Enemies that would destroy it, and few are the Friends
that it has to defend it; Strong are the Arms that are ready to pull it down,
and weak are the hands that are willing to uphold it: But, O Powerful God, do
not thou desert it! Uphold it with thy mighty Arm! Maintain the Religion
Established amongst us; and thy holy Truth and Worship in that Religion!
Maintain a Clergy that may be able by Learning and a holy Life, to defend thy
Truth and Worship; and the Means that may continue such a Clergy: Let not Error
and Heresy corrupt it, Ignorance blind it, Superstition infect it, Profaneness
over-grow it, Schism tear it, Sacrilege devour it, Atheism lay it waste,
Persecution make it desolate. Lord make us as happy as we were, and more
thankful, and less sinful, that we may be so happy! Let Errors vanish, Sects
cease, Fury leave us, and the Spirit of Truth and Love again possess us! Let
Confusions end, and all Irreverences in thy Service be banished from us, and
holy Order and Decency be more regarded amongst us. Let Divisions be cemented,
and Names of Reproach buried in Oblivion, and the Voice of True Peace and Joy
be heard again in our Land. Lord, let us have that Religion which may make us
happy in Heaven, and that True Peace which may give Time and Leave to Enjoy
that Religion! And to that end, let Power be Established upon Righteousness,
and Employed for the Preservation of thy Church and People; and then maintain
that Power and them! O Thou, by whom Kings Reign, who have promised to make
them Nursing Fathers, to thy Church, Grant us these Blessings, to the Glory of
thy Name, the Quiet of our Lives, and the Saving of our Souls! Even for thy
dear Son our Savior's Sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Mercy to the Nation.
O Lord, we are a Nation not to be beloved, a Nation ready to be ruined for our
Iniquities, and for our Sins thou may justly destroy us, both Prince and
People! But spare us, good Lord, spare us for thy Mercy sake! Let the Blood of
Jesus Expiate all our Guilts, and the Spirit of Jesus amend our Misdoings! O
thou who would not have one Sinner Dye, suffer not Millions of poor Souls to
perish! Be reconciled to us in a Meditators Blood, and be the Reconciler of us
in a firm and blessed Peace! God of Pity and Peace, be at Peace with us, and
make it for us, Even that Peace which none can take from us, do thou make us
Partakers of, O thou holy One of God, who came into the World to take away
the Sins of it. O thou Prince of Peace, pity a poor Church and Nation, ready to
Perish! Pity that Church that has so long maintained thy Truth and Worship in
the Nation; Pity them who are ready to perish for seeking to maintain thy holy
Truth and Worship in thy Church! And do thou from Heaven Preserve It, and Us,
and Them. O thou that have the Power of Heaven and Earth in thy hand, who
stillest the raging of the Sea, when the Waves thereof roar and lift up
themselves, make bare thy holy Arm for our Deliverance; O God make haste to
help us, for we are brought very low; stir up thy strength and come and save
us, and make no long tarying, O our God, but deliver us for thy Mercy sake.
Amen.

A Prayer for those that are in great Distress and Danger.
O God of Power and Pity, who have promised to regard the Prayer of the
destitute, and not to despise their Cry, Look down, O Lord, from thy Sanctuary,
from the Heavens do thou behold the Earth, to hear the groaning of the
Prisoners, and to loose those that are in danger of Death: Rescue them from the
rage of Violence, and show thy self Merciful to them in this time of their
distress, O thou Preserver of Men! And grant them all Graces and Mercies
needful for the saving of their Souls! And let them glorify thee both in Life
and Death, and do thou glorify them with Life Eternal, through the Merits and
Righteousness of Jesus Christ our Lord. In whose blessed Name I further beg for
Mercy for all that suffer in these Times of Trouble: Chiefly for those that are
Destitute, for the Widows and the Fatherless: Let thy Mercy be extended to
them, in the daily supplying of their several Wants and Necessities: Take them
into thy peculiar Care, O thou Father of the Fatherless, and Judge of the
Widow: And be thou their Comfort, Help and Succor, for Jesus Christ his sake.
Amen.

A Collect for Grace.
O God I can ask no greater Gift than thy Glory, and therefore beg no better
Gift than thy Grace; yea, even this perfect, is nothing else but that: Nor can
I come at it but by the way of Grace. I do therefore for Jesus Christ his sake,
beseech thee bestow on me this blessed Gift, Grace to do thee Service on Earth,
that thou may give me thy Salvation in Heaven, through the Merits of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Collect for Peace.
O God, my poor Soul is an humble Suitor for Peace; the Blood of Jesus is my
Plea, thy Spirit my Advocate: I deserve by my Sins Eternal Enmity, but for thy
dear Sons sake, have Favor for me: By whom the World is Attoned, O let me be
Reconciled to thee! I know not how to pray this as I ought, but thy Spirit can
make Effectual Intercession for me. Lord let thy Spirit move, and thy Son make
my Peace. Subdue my Lusts; Conquer Satan for me that my Conscience may have
Peace with thee, and I in it, by thy Grace, through the Mediation of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Collect for Health.
O Lord, when I am Sick, let me think I may Die; when I am in Health, that I
may be Sick; that I may not misspend the stock of my Life, but do thee Honor
with my Health, and thou may give me Comfort for it in my Sickness: Even
this, that Sin has not bound me to my Bed, but thy Providence has cast me
down, which can and will lift me up, or to Health in this World, or to
Happiness in a better. Such an Enjoyment of Health give me, I beseech Thee, for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Collect for Safety.
O Lord, so many days as I live, so many Lives I owe Thee; Thou renewest my
Lease every day; A poor Tenant at thy Will, I am; and a frail Cottage of Clay,
by thy Power I keep: Lord, thou have hitherto spared me, still preserve me; and
let me pay (as I can) what I owe of Service, the only Rent thou requiest, for
Tenement and Appurtenances, Life, Health, Wealth, and all the good things I
have of thee, for which thou both grantest Term of Life, and give Eternity.
This to that, continue, I beseech thee, for his sake, who was Surety, and is
sole Purchaser for me, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Collect for Friends.
O Lord, graciously accept my Prayers for all my Kindred and Friends: Do thou
good unto them all, O God. To those that Err, show thy Truth; and those that
see it, keep from Error: To those that do amiss, give Grace to do better; and
those that do well, continue in so doing: To those that are Afflicted, give
Comfort and Deliverance; to those that Prosper, Humility and Temperance: Bless
the Sick with Health, and the Healthy from Sickness: Supply those that want;
and let those that want not, give Supply: To all, grant thy Grace, O God, and
show thy Mercy: Let Love bind us one to another, and Religion knit us all to
Thee; that all who are of Natural Kindred, may meet in Heavenly Consanguinity:
Even so, Lord, let the Blood of Jesus run through all the Veins, and the Spirit
of Jesus go along with the Blood, that the Glory of Jesus may be the End of us
all. And that hour we suffer and scatter on Earth, we may Live and Joy
together in the Bliss and Felicity of Heaven, by the Union of that holy Spirit,
and Communion of that blessed Blood. Amen and Amen.

A Collect for the Catholic Church.
O God of Peace, send Unity among all that Profess thy Name: As they have but
one Head, let them be but one Body; as they are but one Body, let them have but
one Spirit: The Spirit of Truth and Holiness, in Doctrine and Life, be in all:
Cease Schisms and Wars in the Christian World: Let them not Spill one another
Blood, for whom thy Son shed his. Let there not be many Hearts under one Head,
nor more Heads with it, least they make a Massacre in thy Body, or a Monster of
it. O let thy Scepter have Obedience, and thine Orders Observance, every where.
Suffer none by Delusion or Depravation of Mind, or Ambition of Spirit, to pull
down thy Throne, whilst they pretend for thy Scepter; and take down thy House
to set up thy Glory; and let Confusion and Tyranny into thy Church, whilst they
profess to bring in Liberty and Order. From Violence, Avarice, Sacrilege,
Schism, Herefie, Anarchy, and Tyranny, O thou King of the Church, do thou keep
us. Do thou Govern us, and let us Obey thee; Do thou save us, and let us serve
thee; Even all Christian Souls save throughout the World, Dear Jesus. Amen.

A Charitable Prayer, for Times of Affliction.
O Lord, that do not willingly afflict the Children of Men; Behold from thy
holy Habitation of Heaven, the multitude of Miserable and Afflicted Souls and
Lives amongst us, and have Mercy upon us.

HAVE Mercy on all Ignorant Souls, and instruct them; on all Deluded Minds, and
Enlighten them; on all Seducing and Seduced Spirits, and Convert them. Have
Mercy on all broken Hearts, and heal them; all struggling with Temptation, and
Rescue them: All languishing in spiritual Desertion, and receive them: Have
mercy on all that stagger in Faith, and Establish them: That are fallen from
thee, and Raise them; That stand with thee, and Confirm them: Have Mercy on all
that groan under their Sins, and Ease them; That bless themselves, and go on in
their Wickedness, and Curb and stop them. Jesus! That did shed thy Blood for
all Souls, to save them; shed thy holy Spirit on all, and heal them.

AND Lord, have Mercy on all Miserable Bodies! Those that are ready to famish,
for want, Feed them* Those that are bound to Beds of Pain, loose them: Those
that are in Prison and Bonds, Release them: Those that are under the Fury of
Persecution, and Cry under the Yoke of Oppression, Relieve them: Those that lie
smarting in their Pain and Wounds, Cure them! Those that are distracted in
their Thoughts and Wits, Settle them! Those that are in Perils of their Estates
and Lives, Preserve them* Jesus! That did freely distribute thy Comforts and
Cures, to all Miseries and Maladies of Men, when thou wast on Earth, have Mercy
on all, and help them; far or near, with us or from us; Lord, have Mercy on
all, even every Son and Daughter of Adam, at this time in Pain and Anguish upon
the face of the Earth, (wherever they are, whosoever they be) what Help I
would pray for my self from Thee, or Comfort from Man in their Condition; I
beseech Thee the GOD of all Help and Comfort, to give it them: Take them to thy
Care, and Tender them, supply them, and Succor them. Have Compassion on them,
and heal them: Jesus! That did give thy Blood for them, deny not thy Bowels
to them: Thou that did Redeem them all, Preserve them: Even all Miserable
Souls and Bodies, I beseech Thee for thine infinite Mercies sake. Amen

A Prayer against the Temptations of Troublesome Times.
O God who wilt not suffer us to be Tempted above what we are able to bear,
succor me that the Temptations of this Time of Trouble does not over-whelm me:
Discover to me the ways of thy Providence so far, that I may see why I should
neither Deny it, nor Doubt it. And make me know thy Judgments to be so
unsearchable, and thy ways past finding out, that I may humbly submit my Will
to thy Wisdom, and admire and adore that Justice which I cannot Comprehend. Let
me not be of so narrow a Mind as to confine thy Work to one World, which Thou
do not finish but in Two: Nor let me be such a Creature of Sense, as to
believe thou have no other Reward or Punishment, than what I See and Feel. O
let my Eyes look to the End of all, which is Heaven, or Hell: And let me Envy
no Ill Man's Happiness, which shall end in Hell; Nor bewail any Good Man's
Wretchedness, who shall have Heaven for his End. And let me understand that the
Prosperity of Sinners is a heavy Plague, because it spurs them on to Hell,
which is the greatest Punishment: And that the Adversity of the Saints is to
them a Mercy, because it is thy Rod, to whip them into Heaven, the best Reward.
Mean while let me not give a Breast full of thy Peace, for an Armful of that
Wealth which breeds Nests of Vipers and Adders in their Hearts, and continual
Stings in their Bosoms: But let me Prefer the Sufferings of Innocence, before
the Spoils and Triumphs of Violence.

O God, since a guilty Conscience is the greatest Punishment on Earth, because
next to Hell; and Accusing and Condemning thy Providence, and Forsaking my
Innocence, the greatest Guilt, To that Extremity let no Temptation ever lead
me. JESUS! keep me from it by thy Grace and Mercy. Amen.

The Concluding Prayer.
O Lord, it is thy Promise to grant whatsoever I ask in thy Sons Name; and thou will not perform less, because I ask so in his Words. In his Blessed Breviary
therefore I sum and offer up these my Imperfect Prayers; saying, as he has
taught me, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The Blessing.
GOD the Father Bless me; GOD the Son Defend me, GOD the Spirit Preserve Me,
and all Mine and His, now and Evermore. Amen.

EVENING PRAYER. Psalm. XLIV, LXXVII, LXXVIII, or LXX, LXXXIII, XCVIII, or
CXXXVII, CXL, CXLI.
Proper Lessons. 2 Chronicles. XIII, or XX: 1 Cor. X. or Iudes Eistle.
A Collect or Prayer against Revenge.
O Thou to whom Vengeance belongs, Keep me from a Revengeful Spirit, that I
fall not into the hands of thy Vengeance: And since it is thy Will that I
should exercise Pity, and Patience, and Pardon, let me not study Revenge, and
Returns of Injuries. What though I have lost my Estate wrongfully, and been
turned out of my Place for my Loyalty to the King, yet have I not justly
deserved it for my Rebellion against thee my God? why should I then Meditate
Revenge against the Instruments whom thou, O Lord, have made the just
Executioners of thy will for my Deserts: O help me rather to look unto thee,
who have justly suffered these things to befall me for my sins, than to study
Revenge against those that have Injured me. Thou, O most Meek and Merciful
Savior, did pray for thy bloody Enemies! O let me then forgive my greatest
Foes! Committing my Cause to thee, who wilt do Justice for me on them, if I
seek not to revenge my self; and for thy self upon me, if I do. Thine, O Lord,
is the Sword of Vengeance, and thine is the sharpest Sword. O let me not dare
to take it out of thy hand! Lest while I strike others, I fall justly by thy
Sword. Though Flesh and Blood provoke me to it, let thy holy Spirit withhold me
from it: And cast and keep out of me that Evil Spirit, by thy Power, O good God
and Savior, for thy infinite Mercies sake. Amen.

A Collect or Prayer against Malice.
O Thou Divine Goodness, that would not have me be of a Revengeful Spirit,
neither would thou have me be of a Malicious Spirit; and therefore, O Lord,
be pleased to keep me from Malice, which is the very Soul of Satan, and Sin of
the Devil: Thou, O God, art Love, but he is Hatred; And if Malice be in me, I
shall be as he is, even one whom (unless thou hate thy self) thou can not
love: Thou have commanded that I should love my Enemies, and would not have
me be malicious against them, nor bear them ill will for what they have done to
me, but rather to pray for them; yea, though they use me despitefully, thou
would not have me be despiteful toward them. And therefore from such a
hateful and damning Disposition, O Lord, Deliver me: Let not Satan's Brand be
on my Breast, and his Soul in my Body, lest being marked for him, he seiz me as
his own. But, O Lord, do thou stamp me as thy own, and set the Seal of thy Love
on my heart, that I may be owned by thee, and have thy Badge continually upon
me, which is, That we love one another: O let me not wear the Devils Badge, in
a visible or secret Malice to any. Make me, O Lord, a Child of thy Family, a
Dove of thy Flock, without any Gaul or Rancor, a Lamb of thy Fold, harmless to
all, and not doing Mischief to any; but delighting, like thy Blessed Self, to
do good unto all; Even for his sake who is holy, harmless, and undefiled, who
did good to all, and Evil to none, even Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Collect for Grace.
O Thou that have promised thy holy Spirit to them that ask it, give me thy
Grace, O God; that being strengthened thereby, I may with Courage and Constancy
Engage all my Spiritual Enemies, and subdue them: That I may pass my Pilgrimage
here in thy fear, and at last receive my Triumphs in thy Glory: Through the
merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Collect for Peace.
O God of Peace which art incomprehensible, give me Thy Peace, which passes
all understanding: Let me so live according to thy Rule, that I may have Peace
with my Conscience; and let me be so ruled by thy Will and Word, that my
Conscience may have Peace with Thee. Lord, make an Everlasting Peace with me,
and let me never do that which has any Tendency to break that League. Dear
Jesus! Let it be Ratified and Confirmed in thy Blood, and maintain it in me by
thy holy Spirit. Amen. Amen.

A Collect for Health.
IT is the wonder of thy Providence, O Lord, that a Body subject to thousands
of Frailties, and Casualties every Day, should Enjoy Health or Life an Hour;
yet through thy Mercy I have both at this instant. Lord, continue to me what I
have, and let me so improve it to thy Honor, that thou may continue it; and
suffer me not by any Sin to provoke thee to take it away from me, and to Smite
me with Sickness. Hear me, I beseech thee, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Collect for Friends.
O Lord, it is Joyful for Friends to love and live together on Earth; but the
Joy of all Ioys to live with thee in Heaven. I beseech thee let this happiness
be the Portion of all whom thou have made more Nearly and Dearly to be Mine.
Let us so live in thy Service, that we may die in thy Salvation. In the mean
while, what we want of any Earthly Good necessary for us, Give us: What is
amiss, and offensive to thy Heavenly Majesty in any of us, Forgive us: What is
requisite to make us so to serve thee now, that thou may save us then, in thy
Bounty bestom upon us; Even Truth and Grace, aright to See and Seek thy Face,
in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Kingdom.
O Lord, Our Distractions threaten Desolations to us, Preserve us! Our sins cry
aloud for thy Vengeance upon us! Pardon us! Thy Mercies have been great to this
Nation, O Lord remember them! Thy Deliverances of us have been many, O Lord
Renew them! That Iniquity be not our utter Ruin, give us Repentance! The Guilt
and Blood upon us, Forgive! Our Breaches, Repair! The Order which may bring
Peace, Establish! The Government thou have Established, maintain! What is Just
and Right in thine Eyes, set up! What thou see Evil, cast down! What makes
the Nation miserable, Remove! What may make it happy, Restore! Lord, for thy
Mercies sake, say, We have been miserable enough, and make us more happy. Let
the Light of thy Countenance shine again upon us, and grant us thy Peace! The
Power and Authority which may procure it, Preserve; and those to whom thou have
given that Power, Bless them to us, and us in them, and all in thee. For Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

A Collect for the Church Catholic.
BEhold, O God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; I, a Christian, and Child
of his True Catholic Church, Pray thy Mercies on my Good and great Mother, and
all my Brethren, and her Children, in thee and thy Son. For Errors amongst
them, send them Truth; For Schism, Unity; For Superstition, Warrantable
Worship; For Confusion, Order; For Profaneness, Piety; For Variance, Concord;
for War, Peace; That all may, as one Body, with one Mind, and Heart, and Mouth,
and Knee, Believe, Love, Confess, Adore, and so serve Thee, and Him whom thou
have sent, Jesus Christ, (the Great Lord and Common Savior of us all) as thou
may save us all in the World to come! O Thou Head of the Church, Save thy
Body! By thy Blood, Cleanse it; by thy Spirit, Sanctify it; by thy Power
Preserve it, and every Limb of it, dear. Jesus! Amen.

A Collect for the Church.
O Christ, Head of thy Body the Church, let not this poor Member of it amongst
us, Perish! What it is, Thou see, Lord; with Pity behold us: What it was,
thou know; O Lord in Mercy Restore us: Thy Primitive Order in Christian
Truth and Worship, for the saving of Souls, which is cast down, set up: The
Present Confusions, Distractions, Innovations, Errors, which are got up, cast
down: Set up thy Glory, O Lord, amongst us; And what is set apart to support
it, do Thou maintain, and continue to us, and our Posterities after us, for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Collect for Safety.
FORGIVE, O Lord, the Forfeitures I have made of thy Protection, by the
Wanderings of my Life: And tho I have not been (as I should) a Dutiful Child;
yet be Thou, O Lord, (as Thou ever art) a Merciful Father: Forget not thy
Fatherly Goodness to me, who pray thy Pardon for offending Thee, Thy Grace to
serve Thee; and Thy Providence to preserve me this Night, and Evermore, through
Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for one in Affliction.
O Lord, That Affliction which is now my Lot, is the Result of thy good
Pleasure, and as such let me Eye it, and improve it, to Reclaim me from Evil
Ways, and to direct my course into those that are Good: If it be so grievous to
bear it for a Time, what is it, O God, to suffer it, and ten thousand times
more misery than it, for Ever! Then if it be ill, let it be thy Rod to reclaim
me; and if Good, thy Staff to make me stand better in Grace, and advance me to
thy Glory; Thy Fan to Purge me, Thy Furnace to Prove me. So Adversity to my
Body, be the Prosperity of my Soul, let it come and Welcome, O Lord; that my
Soul may at last, everlastingly Prosper with Thee, in that Day of Bliss which
knows no Cloud of Ill, nor end of Good to Eternity. Since Affliction is a sign
of thy Mercy, a Badge of thy Favor, and a means of Glory, let me not be
Impatient under it, lest I perpetuate my Woes to two Worlds; and whom Thou have
but for a Time, make my self miserable for ever. Blessed Jesus! who did go
from a Cross to a Crown, and do Cross me to Crown me, let me carry mine
Patiently that I may come to thy Throne, and not cast my self from a Cross of
Woe, into a Gulf of Confusion. From such Miscarriages under my Present
Afflictions, O Lord deliver me. Dear Jesus! By the Merits and Example of thy
holy Cross, and by the Virtues and Works of thy holy Spirit, Do it for me, and
Sanctify it to me. Amen.

A Concluding Prayer.
BEhold, O Lord, what I have Prayed unto thee for, and grant, I humbly beseech
thee, the Requests that I have put up unto Thee this Evening, and hear the
Petitions of thy Servant: And do for me, for the Nation, for thy Church, and
for all Estates and Conditions therein, not only according to what I have
Prayed, but according to what I should and ought to have Prayed, and what any
else have prayed with me, for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose Name I have
presented them, with whose Words I desire to Perfume and Perfect my Prayers:
Beseeching Thee, That his Spirit may breathe in those Words in which I know I
Pray both what, and as I ought: And therefore (as Devoutly) Confidently say,
Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The Blessing.
BLESSED are the Afflicted and Troubled, and those that mourn under those
Calamities we feel and fear: The Blessing and Comfort of God the Father, and
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Consolations of the holy Spirit, be
upon me, and upon all such sad and sorrowful Souls with me, this Night and
Evermore. Amen.

Meditations and Prayers. FOR THE NOLY COMMUNION, BOTH Before, At, and After
Receiving.
A Meditation before the Receiving the holy Communion.
O My dear Lord! Thy Passion makes me full of all Passions! I am in Love, and
yet I Hate; I have my Longings and my Loathings: I both Rejoice and Grieve, and
Cherish Hope and Fear! I am Incensed and Ravished.

I am in Love with Thee, O blessed Jesus! I am Enamored of thy Person, O Thou
God-Man! The Son of God! The Beauty of Heaven and Earth! The Center of all
Created and Uncreated Excellency! The Mirror of the Godhead! The Wonder of
Angels! The Glory of Mankind! I am Inflamed with thy Love! Thou made thy Love
to Lazarus legible in thy Tears (See how he loved him, said the Jews) and shall
not I read it in thy Wounds? They saw Love in thy driping Eye, and shall not I
in thy Bleeding Side? They, in the Hot-water thou did bestow on his Dead
Body, and shall not I see it in that reaking Blood thou sheddest for my lost
and Dying Soul? O let not my heart be so hard to see those Wounds of so great
Love to me, and yet to have no Woundings of Affection for Thee! For thee, Lord!
Yes, and all in Heaven and Earth that have Relation to Thee.

I am also in Love with the God and Father of my Lord Jesus Christ, who would
give his Son, his only Son, the Son of his Love, so to suffer on Earth, for a
Time, that I might not suffer for Ever in Hell.

I am also in Love with Thee, O Thou Blessed and Holy Spirit of GOD, who did
anoint Jesus to be my Christ; and thereby Inaugurate him to his Crown of
Thorns, and Blessed, though most Bloody Passion, which he suffered for me.

I am in Love with the whole Blessed Trinity, whose glorious Essence and
Ineffable Unity I Adore, though I cannot comprehend; and whose Counsels fill my
Soul with the highest Admiration, though I am never able to search out their
Unfathomable depth.

I have also Love for the Sons of Men, for them especially for whom my Lord
Jesus shed his precious Blood, thereby to make them the Sons of God; and
Brothers of Christ: Thy Cross, O Jesus, shall make all Mankind my Friends; for
where thou gave thy Blood, why should not I give my Heart!

THUS, Lord, I love all for thee, and thee in all: And now I will love my self
for thy sake amongst them: O Lord, I am one in whom is thy Flesh, a Man; I am
one in whom is thy Spirit, a Christian* I am one for whom thou did shed thy
Blood, on whom thou have shed thy Spirit: (A redeemed esteemed Man by Thee) and
shall I be so poor, as to Value Dirt to thy Blood? Shall I be tempted to give
my self from Thee, to the Flesh, and to the World? O Lord, I will Value thy
Blood more, I will keep the Spirit better, I will set a higher price on my
self, than to sell thy Blessed Purchase to the Devil, for a base Piece of
Flesh, and a small portion of the World. So am I, and let me ever be in love
with Thee, O Lord.

BUT O Sin! I am in Hate with Thee, for my own, and for my Savior's sake! O
thou Enemy of God and Man, how execrable art thou! More than heart can think:
That made him lamentable more than Eye saw.

AND O Devil! I hate Thee, who did tempt Man out of Paradise, and so draw
Christ to a Cross: And could thy Temptations have prevailed and thy Power been
equal to thy Malice, would have cast the second Adam out too; that so nor the
First, nor his Seed, might ever have come in again.

AND, O World! I abhor thee, as the Imp of the Devil; who of his Jews and
Gentiles could find hands for such horrid Acts, and Sins that made those
Bloody Passions. So Sin, Devil, World, for the Death of my King, and Lord, and
Christ, you have my Hate.

I have also my Longings too: I Long for the Lord! My Soul Longs for God,
even the Living God. (yea, even for the Dying God!) When shall I come and
appear in the Presence of God? God Dying once, yet Living ever! When shall I
come before the Dying-Living God?

I long for the Chariot that will bring me to Thee, and will Kiss it, though it
be a Cross.

I long for the Inn which will lodge me near Thee, and will Embrace it, though it
be a Grave.

I long for the Bed which will raise me to Thee, and will climb to it, though it
be a Gibbet.

O Cup of Salvation, I will not refuse thee, Though full (even to the Martyrs
Measure) of Blood; If from him, thou shall be drank, and yet deemed nothing to
thy Savior's Blood.

I long to be in thy Courts, where thou art present in Spirit! To be in thy
holy Temple, (which is thy Chamber) at the Altar and Table, which is the Chair
of thy Presence; yea, where in high and ineffable Mystery, I find a Presence of
thy Body, and keep both a Commemoration and Communion of it and thy Blood. But
as I have my Longings, so I have my Loathings.

I Loath the Life in which I cannot see Thee: At best, an Exile; at worst a
Trouble to thee.

I Loath my self for casting away Love on so base and unworthy a Life; where I
do either Crucify Thee with my Sins, or Wound Thee with my Miseries! Where I
renew Thy Passion by my Guilts, or thine Agony by my Conflicts.

I Loath my self for Loving Thee no more, who have loved me so much. I likewise
Loath my self for Loving Sin so much, which has been so great an Enemy to my
dearest Lord. -- But then I have also my Joys.

I Joy in thy Cross, not in thy Grief, O Christ. For can I see thy Sacred Body
all gore, and my heart not bleed? The Spear be in thy Heart, and no Sword at
mine? I will not, I cannot endure it, O my dearest Lord: No! I Joy in the Root,
thine Infinite Mercy, O God: And in the Fruit, the Perfect Redemption of Man!
It is finished! Yes, Blessed be the Blood that was the Price, and blessed be
the Body that laid out that Blood! The Satisfaction is full; Salvation is sure!
Sin is nailed! Hell foiled! Satan chained! The World baffled! The Flesh
wounded! Death slain! The Grave buried! Every Adversary's Power is conquered by
Christ, Triumphant in the Chariot of his Cross over all: All is finished!

THERE are some very lavish in their Praises of the Wood of the Cross: But it
was the Blood of the Cross by which Redemption is Purchased: And what Good does
not grow from and upon that Pulpit of Repentance, Pillar of Faith, Anchor of
Hope, Magazine of Charity, Armory of Mortification, School of Patience, Mirror
of Obedience, Rock of Constancy, Shop of Humility, (the whole Duty of a
Christian.) O blessed Root of God's Mercy, that bring forth the happy Fruit
of Man's Grace and Glory! O Tree of Death, more blessed than the Tree of Life,
that have such a Root, and such Fruit: Thus are my Joys Triumphant in thy
Cross. -- But

I Grieve to see Thee Crucified again, O Christ, and my Soul is Crucified for
having a hand in thy Cross: Woe to the World for offenses, which make Thee bleed
afresh, and bring Thee to thy Cross again. Woe is me that see Thee daily
Crucified betwixt Heretics and Schismatics, Thieves of thy Truth; between
Hypocrites and Profligates, Thieves of thy Grace; amidst Men of Intemperate
Heats and Cools in Religion, Thieves of thy Honor.

I Grieve to see Thee Crucified in vain: So much of the World lost, when all
was paid for! A Price sufficient to have ransomed not a World only, but a
Hell-full of Devils, Effectual only to a handful of Men. Yea, even within thy
Holy Pale, which should preserve thy Blood to a drop, woe is me! how is it spilt
to a stream! Whilst so many make void by their Sins, the healing virtue of thy
precious Blood! By Unbelief how many Millions are lost out of the Church! And
by Mis-belief, how many Thousands in it! And by Miscarriage of Life, how many
Thousands of Millions both in and out! My heart bleeds to see thy Creed without
Faith, thy Decalogue without Obedience, thy Prayer without Use, thy Sacraments
without Reverence! Nay, to see it made Faith, Conscience, Devotion, Zeal, to
have no respect to Sacrament, Prayer, Decalogue or Creed! And, Lord, what
Tears, even of Blood, are sufficient to bewail it! O my dear Lord! Can my Eyes
see thee thus Crucified again Twice, and in vain Once, and my heart not grieve!
-- And yet though I grieve, I am not without Hope. And,

I hope in Thee, and the Blood of thy Cross alone. I hope for Pardon, because I
read it Sealed in thy Blood! I hope for Salvation, because I find it Purchased
under that Seal. Will thou not make good thy Seal? Will thou not prefer thy
Purchase? Nor Sin nor Devil then shall Damn me, O Christ; he shall not steal
thy Purchase, nor make void thy Seal: Thy Blood is my Plea against both: In it
I see my Pardon and Salvation Written; nor care I, so thou be my Advocate, for
Saint or Angel to set to their Hands. I hope in Thee for my Salvation.

AND so I do for my Mothers too, the Spouse bought with thy Blood, and Loved as
thy Body: O Lord thou art her Savior, and shall she want thy Salvation? O let
her not want thy Bowels for whom thou gave thy Blood! Behold her Miseries,
and forgive her Sins! Till thy Blood has no Virtue, she is not without hope.
And I know, O Lord, that the Streams of thy Blood are not yet drained, and that
the Sea of thy Mercy still flows as fresh and free as ever. And therefore will
I hope still. -- But,

I fear too: I dread Temptation: Thy Cross was made of Adams Tree: I fear,
because he fell: I Dread Desertion: I want both David's Grace, and Solomon's
Wisdom; and yet though I had both, I should fall, if thou forsak'st me: On the
Cross thy Disciples left thee, but let me never leave thee: I dread Apostasy! O
keep me from that Sin from which even thy Blood, thy Cross cannot or will not
save me. But then,

I fear my self for all this: As my Sins nailed thee to thy Cross, so my
Corruption rivets me in my Sins. The heart is deceitful above all things, and
mine is desperately wicked; and full of diverse Lusts and Abominations. And
therefore from a Tempest of Temptation, from the Gulf of Spiritual Desertion,
from the Precipice of Apostasy, and from my self above all, by the Virtue of
thy Cross, deliver me, O Lord.

O Christ, my Spirit is Incensed, and I am full of Indignation for the Affronts
and Injuries done unto thee! To see thy Blood spilt or scorned; to see thy
Passion forgot, or abused; Thy Love without Memory or Value, thy Pains without
Belief or Remorse. Who can endure, O blessed Jesus! to see thy Cross made the
Devils Standard? And thy Wounds (the only shelter for Sinners) turn 'd into
Cities of Refuge for Sins? To see thy Passion made the Nurse of Presumption,
and thy Mercy the Milk of all Abominations? When Indignation kindles in thy
poor Servants Soul at so great Indignities, how is it that Wrath flames not out
in Thine? How is it? Even so it is, because thou art Jesus! Love to save, and
art loath to destroy; Waitest our Repentance, and Wavest thy Vengeance.

I am Ravished with that good Spirit of thine, O Christ! Thou had it on the
Cross, and keep it on the Throne! Where it appears, it does Ravish me: In
thy Lips! Thou Prayest their Pardons that are shedding thy Blood! And thirstest
for their Salvation that are Butchering thy Body! In thy Arms! Stretched out to
Embrace all on Earth, and therefore strike not, though in all the Power of
Heaven! In thy Eyes! As Thou wast with one of my Mothers, I am with one of
Thine. Thy Fury frights me, O Lord: Thy Favor is that One: The Eye with which
thou did look at the poor Thief, and give him both thy Pardon and thy
Paradise: The Eye by which thou did look at thy dear Mother; and amidst all
thy Wounds choose her a Guardian, and have her in thy Cares. The Eye with which
thou did look at the dear Disciple, and Adopt him, of thy Servant, thy
Mothers Son. The Eye by which thou did look at poor Sinners to be saved, a
Church to be bought, and World to be Ransomed: But, in thy Heart, O Lord, O
what an Apparition see I there! Through the bloody Door of thy Wounded Breast,
a House full of Nothing but Goodness, Pity, Patience, Mercy! O what a
Perspective is there by the way of the Spear! To see the Prospect of a poor
Sinners sole delight, a Heart full of Grace and Favor, in the Breast of a
Jesus! A Saviors Heart! From that Heart, with that Eye, O Christ behold the
Afflicted Mother (thy Church) and thy dear Disciple, her Child! Breathe Comfort
to her for whom thou gave Blood! And to him who is the Son of her Comfort!
Make Peace between Mother and Children, where there should be Love. Let them
live by one Spirit, that are bought with one Blood! And no longer be one
another Cross, but bear one another Burdens.

Dart, Lord, from that blessed Eye of Pity, these Favors on the Face of that
bleeding Body: and with thy Arms, Nailed once to a Cross, now extended on a
Throne, Embrace her; and uphold her in Life! Advance her Throne for whom thou
did endure thy Cross; O Thou who did with thy Fingers work Heaven and
Earth, and upholdest all things by the Word of thy Power, those whom the World
treads under foot, take thou into thy Arms! In thy blessed Arms, O thou
Omnipotent and All Merciful Maker and Savior of the World, in thy blessed Arms
I leave the Wounded Mother, and at thy Feet I lay the bleeding Child.

JESUS, nourish these holy Passions in me, which my Heart has conceived, and
my Tongue now brought forth before Thee! Let thy holy Passion ever breed them
in me, and thy Spirit Nurse them for thee, even by the Merits of thy bloody
Passion, I beseech Thee. Amen! Amen.

A Prayer before Coming to the holy Communion, Acknowledging and Deprecating
our Unworthiness.
O Lord, I am every where in thy Presence, and under thy Eye, and therefore
should be profane no where; but thy special Presence and Face is in thy
Temple: There therefore I should be more holy; and thy Chair and Seat is at thy
Table, and therefore there I should be yet more so: Even the Angels are not
pure enough for such a Heavenly Presence; how then shall a poor mortal Man
appear at so high and holy a Service? How shall I dare to Communicate with
Thee, that deserve not to come before Thee? Lord, since I cannot come as I
should, pure, I will endeavor by thy Grace, to come as I may, Penitent. I will
be more humble, because less holy; and more Washed, because so Filthy. And O
Lord, give me Grace so to come. Let me look over my Life in the Glass of thy
Law, and make me wash with my Tears what is polluted in my Ways; and Cleanse in
Christ's Blood what I wash with my Tears: O Lord, in a Bath of this Water
warmed in that Blood, flowing from a Sinners bleeding heart, and Savior's
bloody side, shall I not be clean if I wash? Pierce my heart, O Lord, that I
may repent; open my heart that I may believe, that so I may wash and be clean!
Though I did not live, let me believe aright; and let me love whom I do believe,
even thee, O God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who did send thy Son to
shed his Blood and Redeem me; and Thee, O Son of God, who did come and shed
thy Blood to make a Bath and heal me; and also Thee, O holy Spirit of God, by
whose Grace and Work upon my heart, I come to have the Benefits of that Blood.
And whom I love, let me not grieve; Lord, let me no more offend thee: Let my
heart be set to serve thee, resolved to please thee: And do thou accept me,
Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Amen.

A Prayer before the holy Communion, to be Pardoned, and Prepared for it.
DEAR Savior! that have given thy Flesh and Blood to be my Meat and Drink, and
now invitest me to those Heavenly Dainties: Who am I, woeful and wicked Wretch
that I am, that I should dare with my unworthy hands to receive those high and
holy Mysteries! Originally Unclean, Actually Defiled; and even since my last
Coming and Communicating (for all my Vows and Protestations before thee) again
and again polluted. In these straits and stresses of Spirit, how shall my Soul
be satisfied? If I come not at thy call, I rebel against thy Mercy: If I come,
I trespass upon thy Purity! O my God, I will not stand out a Rebel; but rather
fall down an humble Suppliant before thee. I am guilty, Lord Pardon me; I am
polluted, Lord purge me: Though guilty, though polluted, I am thy Ransomed Soul,
Dear Redeemer, save me! Let the Merits of thy precious Blood, cleanse me from
the guilts upon me! Let the Graces of thy holy Spirit Sanctify me from the
stains within me! Let the Sighs and Tears which come from my bleeding Heart,
wash off those Blots by Virtue of that Precious Blood! Let the Cries and
Prayers which now come from my Believing Soul, obtain those Graces from thy
holy Spirit. True Repentance and Humility, a lively Faith and Charity, with all
those holy and heavenly Thoughts and Affections which may dispose and prepare
me for Thee! By these fit my Soul for thy Self, and my Body with my Soul to be
an holy House and Habitation for thee! Let thy holy Spirit and Body enter into
me; Come, dear Redemer, come to the price of thy Blood; seiz thine own, and
save me: Possess my Soul, Feed me, and Preserve me. Hereafter let me have more
Grace than to grieve thee. Give me care to keep my Body (thy Temple) more pure
from Sin, and holy to Thee; and my Heart (thy Bed) more clean from Lust, and
undefiled before Thee! In the strength of Thee, the Living Bread, let me grow
more able to serve thee. And by Virtue of so near an Union and Communion with
thee, let not mine, but thy holy Spirit from henceforth Lighten, Lead and
Enliven me; that I may shun Sin, which thou hate, and daily do those Duties
of Devotion and Charity which please Thee: So let this holy Sacrament at once
Seal to me thy Mercy and my Glory; where I shall for ever Communicate with Thee
in Perfect Purity and Felicity! To that happy Communion, by thy Grace, dear
Savior, ever Prepare me; and Now for a holy Communion with Thee. Amen, Amen:
Say Amen, Lord Jesus.

A Prayer At our Receiving the Holy Communion.
DID Thou not Invite me to thy holy Table, O Lord, I durst not come: Now thou
call me, I dare not keep away: And yet when I do consider Who and What is
here, I fear and tremble to come. Thou, O Lord, art a holy and dreadful
Majesty, and so thy Mysteries be. Holy Bread, and holy Wine; A most holy Body
and Blood: No Taint in his Blood, who is GOD as well as Man: The Lamb of God,
Immaculate, Undefiled, without Spot; All-Pure, most High and Holy! But alas! I
am Unclean, Unclean, Unclean; Originally, Actually, Every-way; in Heart, Hand,
and Lips; throughout Childhood, Youth, and Manhood, most Unworthy to approach a
Presence so Pure, who am so Unholy!

TRUE, Lord! But I Lament my Uncleanness, I Renounce my own Unworthiness: I
come, not because Worthy, but Needy! I come to be made Clean and Worthy: That
Body and Blood can make me Clean, (it is my Saviors.) and his Merits can make
me Worthy! (They are thy Sons, O Lord!) And here is a Conveyance of that
blessed Body and Blood; (It is thy Sacrament!)

LORD! Think me Worthy for his sake, and make me Worthy for thy Mercies sake,
by my Coming. Give my Sins, thy Pardon; my Soul, thy Grace; my Self, thy
Acceptance in thy Beloved. And what thou do Convey, Seal to me by what I now
Receive from Thee, the Blessed Body and Blood of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer and Thanksgiving After the Receiving of the holy Communion.
PARDON, O Father, the Errors and Infirmities of thy poor Child, which have
passed in thy holy Service, whether Before, or In, or Since the Sacrament. And
in and for the Precious Blood of thy holy Child Jesus, of which I have had the
holy Communion, Seal me my Pardon! And behold and accept thy Servant, from a
Heart full of thy Love, pouring out Praises to Thee, for the Inestimable
Benefits Received in those high and holy Mysteries! What am I, O Lord, or what
is in me, that thou should do this great Honor and Favor to me? I am
unworthy to touch the Tresholds of thy House, and Thou have taken me to thy
Table! I am not worthy to stand amongst thy Saints, and thou have made me Sit
with my Savior! I am not worthy to come before thee, and fall down before thy
Footstool, and Thou have been pleased to come into me, and make my Heart thy
Throne! I am not worthy to Eat the Bread of Men, and thou have given me the
Bread of Angels; Yea, Lord, the Angels hunger, but have not this Bread! What
they admire, I have Received; whom they Adore, I have Entertained: The Body and
Blood of Jesus, their Mirror, is my Meat! Christ and they are two, but I and my
Savior are One, Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone; One Blood, one Body!
O unspeakable Mystery! O incomparable Mercy!

LORD, I beseech Thee, since of my self I cannot enough Praise Thee, make me
some way worthy of Thee: Let my Hands which have Received thy Blessed Body and
Blood, be henceforth Sacred, and do no Deeds that may offend Thee: Let my Lips
which have touched those holy Mysteries, be hallowed from all Words that may
displease thee: And let my Heart, the Habitation of my Lord and Savior, be
hereafter holy, and no Vain Thoughts lodge within me! As I am one with him in
Body and Blood, let me be one in Spirit; the Spirit of Wisdom, Love and
Holiness: Truly to know Thee, serve Thee, and cleave unto thee. By the blessed
Sacrament of his Body and Blood, convey it to me. Confirm it in me! Let it be
to my Soul the Signet of thy Love, and Seal of thy Glory. And Even for the
precious Merits of that Blood and Body, receive me to it, I beseech Thee, that
I may be one in Everlasting Union and Communion with Thee, for Jesus his sake.
Amen. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for a Devout Soul, After Receiving the Communion.
O Thou that have given the Bread of Heaven to feed me, give me the Tongue of
Angels to praise Thee! Lord, the very Angels are not blessed with such Bread! O
what an high Mystery and Mercy is this, that my Savior is my Sustenance, and
their Maker my Meat! The Body and Blood of Christ, the Eternal Son of God, to
be in an holy Communion Eaten and Drunken, by the Mouth of a Mortal Man! O the
Infinite Condescending Goodness of a gracious God! To make my humble Heart the
Habitation of his Holiness! To come to me, Enter in me, and become one, not by
Reconciliation only, but Heavenly Union and Communion with me! O miraculous
Union! O mysterious Incorporation! O happy Soul, that art so near to thy
Savior! O blessed Savior, that art so near my Soul! O wretched Soul, if thou
esteem'st any thing too dear for such a Savior! Will thou not give thy Body
and Blood for his Truth? Will thou not offer thy Life as a Sacrifice to his
Glory? O Lord! Let my Soul, which by thy Sacrament is made so happy, by my Sin
never be made wretched. And since I have received thy Body and Blood, let thy
Spirit take Possession of my Heart, and Guide me, Lead me, Command me, and Rule
me: Be thou the Spirit of my Soul, and Soul of my Body. Let not the Flesh,
World, or Devil, have any Power in me: Live! O Live Thou in me, O Christ! Live
in my Earthly Tabernacle, and let me live for Ever with Thee in thy heavenly
Habitation! Even by the Merits and Virtues of thy precious Body and Blood, O
sweet Jesus, I beseech Thee. Amen.

I AM now come, through the Divine Assistance, to the last thing I Promised,
which is, Some General Rules and Directions for our Daily Practice: In which I
shall be very short, a few things well digested, being better than many; which
oftentimes prove burdensome to the Memory, and hinder, instead of help.

I HAVE already set down a Form of Prayer to be used Morning and Evening in
Times of Affliction; besides which, I will add,

Rules of Devotion for the Morning.
IN the Morning when you first awake, lift up your Eyes to God and say, I lift
up mine Eyes to the Hills from whence comes my help.

THEN lift up your heart to God, and pray, Lord keep me from all Sin and danger
this day, for Jesus Christ his sake.

WHEN you are up, kneel down, and say this Prayer: Almighty God, who have
touched my heart with a sense of thy fear, and holy dread of thy Majesty, I
beseech thee give me thy grace, so to govern my thoughts, and look to my Words
and Ways this day, that I may avoid all Sins, especially those to which I am
most inclined, or may be most provoked: That so my Soul and Body may be kept
pure, and unspotted before Thee; and whenever the hour of their Separation
shall come, may be ready and prepared for Thee, through the Merits and Mercies
of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

WHEN you are ready for your Morning Prayers, you may use the Service before
recited for the Morning:

Rules for the Evening.
AFTER you have Used the foregoing Prayers for Evening Service, and before you
go into your Bed, kneel down and say this short Prayer: O God, who have made
the Day for Labor, and the Night for Rest, let thy Sons Blood cleanse me from
this Days guilt, that I may sleep in thy Peace, and rise again refreshed and
preserved by thy Favor, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

AND this Thanksgiving and Prayer: Almighty God, who have preserved me this day
from many Sins and Dangers, I do humbly magnify thy Name for thy Grace and
Goodness toward me, beseeching Thee to forgive me all the Errors of this day,
whereof my Conscience does or may accuse me. And grant that those sins which by
my frailty I have Committed, may by the help of thy Spirit be more carefully
avoided; that I may ever stand in thy Favor, Walk under thy Protection, and
now rest and lie down in thy Peace, and at last come to thy heavenly Kingdom,
through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ. Amen.

When you lie down say,
I will lay down my head in Peace, and take my Rest, for thou only, O Lord,
make me to dwell in safety.

Then Pray thus:
LIGHTEN mine Eyes, O Lord, that I sleep not in Death; I commit my Soul and
Body to thee; keep me for thy Mercies sake. Amen.

Some General Rules for our Daily Practice.
1. REmember, That though Knowledge, especially the Knowledge of God, be an
excellent thing, yet it will be no farther available to thee, than as thou
put it into Practice: For Knowledge without Practice, is like Light without
Heat, which never ripens any Fruit to the Glory of God, or Good of thy own
Soul. Be sure therefore to labor after the Knowledge of Gods Will, and to put
that Knowledge into Practice.

2. Let the Worship of God have the first place in thy Affections and Actions.
And though Private Prayer and secret Ejaculations be necessary, yet let not
Public Prayers in the House of God be Omitted.

3. Neglect not the Common Prayers and other Public Duties of Devotion, but
say with holy David, I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the
House of the Lord.

4. Be careful that Divine Service be performed aright, as it ought to be, and
delight thy self in the Beauty of Gods House.

5. In all the Various Changes that befall thee, especially in Afflictions and
Distresses, make Prayer thy Refuge.

6. Set aside appointed times for thy Private Devotions, and observe them not
only out of Custom, but of fervency of Spirit, to increase thy Piety.

7. The Pious Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, esteem highly of; I mean
those which are not repugnant ot Gods Word; and on the other side, fly
Superstition.

8. Use constantly the Prayers for the Church; and by name, for all those for
whom thou art bound to pray, especially the Royal Family.

9. If thou art a Father of a Family, govern all under thy Care, piously and
religiously: Let all resort to Morning and Evening Prayer, either Privately, or
Publicly, if it may be. And let this be a Law to thy Family: Whosoever comes
within this House, let him be Sober, Just, Religious, and Honest in all things:
Lie not, Swear not, Forswear, nor Blaspheme not: Detract not from others, mind
not Cups and Revels; offend not any Bodies Ears, or Eyes, or Mind, either by
Words or Deeds. Whosoever does otherwise, let him depart hence.

10. Discipline thy Children betimes, and Train them up in the way they should
go, and when they are old they will not depart from it.

11. Rule thy Wife with Prudence; and provoke her to the Love of Virtue and
good Works, by thy Example.

12. If thou have Daughters, be solicitous about the Preservation of their
Chastity; the Age is corrupted, and full of Debauchery; and if they come to be
defiled, they are in danger of Eternal Ruin; and therefore this requires thy
utmost Care, for thou have no Treasure so much exposed as these. And to this
End, keep with a double-Lock their Ears and Tongue from Obscenity and
Scurrility; let none come near them, that use impudent Jests or Gestures, for
shameless Companions and evil Conversation, Corrupts good Manners, and ought to
be avoided as so many Serpents and Vipers.

13. Be careful to avoid all known Sins: To which End be sure thou commit not
the least fault wittingly or willingly, for the dearest Friends sake: It is
better to renounce all Friendship with Men, than to endanger the breaking of
thy Friendship with God. And nothing will break this Friendship sooner than Sin.

14. Use not thy self unto Swearing; I mean not only Vain and Profane
Swearing, but also Promisory Oaths: But if thou have made any such, take care
to perform 'em, though it may be to thy own outward hurt.

15. Vow nothing rashly, but upon great Deliberation; and what thou have Vowed,
pay.

16. Imitate the Life of thy blessed Savior; and follow the steps of his
Saints in all things wherein they ought to be imitated.

17. Next after thy Duty to God, consider what thou owe to thy Neighbor; and
do it whilst it is in the Power of thy hand.

18. Do good to all, according to thy Ability; Feed the Hungry, give drink to
the Thirsty, Entertain the Stranger, Cloth the Naked, Visit the Sick, Redeem
the Prisoners, and Bury the Dead. This Charity belongs to the Body.

19. There is likewise a Charity due to the Soul, which is, To instruct the
Ignorant, Correct the Sinner, Counsel the Doubtful, Comfort the Afflicted,
endure Injuries, forgive Wrongs, pray for Others, yea, for thy Enemies.

20. Observe Friendship with Constancy, fasten that knot; and if it be loosed,
tie it again. Reconcile those that are fallen out. Strifes and Contentions,
which are the Bane of Charity, Extinguish and Wipe away.

21. Interpret all things from others in the best sense; scorn none, nor
detract from any; neither provoke 'em by Railing or Opprobrious Terms; but give
to all, that honor that belongs to 'em.

22. Let thy gesture be without Affectation, yet not Fantastical; and let thy
Countenance be Free, but not Lofty, and Cheerful, but not Lowering; let thy
Speech be Sober, Simple, and Harmless, without Deceit or Flattery, and without
Mimical Actions, like a Stage Play.

23. Be sensible of the hand of God under all Afflictions; and think with thy
self that he does nothing without a Cause, and let that keep thee, humble, and
put thee upon a serious Reflection on thy past Actions.

24. If Reproaches, Revilings, and other Injuries be thrown upon thee,
strengthen thy Soul in God, and under-go them both with Courage and Constancey;
and, as far as thou art Innocent, with Rejoicing.

25. Under all Afflictions be silent, let the Causes be what they Will; for it
argues Impatience to Complain: Beware therefore that thou accuse neither Heaven
nor Men; for none is more injurious to thee, than thou to thy self, if thou be
Impatient. Righteous is the Lord, and true are his Judgments.

26. Be sure take heed, least under thy Afflictions thou forgettest thy
Creator, and seek Deliverance by indirect means: For many have stumbled upon
this Rock, and been broken to pieces by it: For such men would prescribe to
God, and have him directed by their foolish Fancies: But who has directed the
Spirit of the Lord? Or being his Counselor have taught Him? It Is a vain thing
to attempt it. Therefore to be willing to tarry till God sees good to deliver,
is the way to hasten our Deliverance; but to go about to deliver our selves,
and throw off the Burden that God has laid upon us, is the only way to bind it
on the faster, and to keep back that deliverance, which (for ought we know) may
be at the Door. And therefore,

27. If the Times compel thee to suffer for Righteousness sake, be not afraid:
The three Children lost nothing by being in the fiery Furnace, so long as there
was a Fourth there with them, which was the Son of God.

28. In times of Affliction especially, throw away all vain desire of Riches;
despise the World, and all the Allurements of it, whether they be Honors,
Pleasures, Friends and Acquaintance, or whatever else. That which keeps down
thy Affections from mounting to Heaven, and soaring Above, is a dead weight,
which thou had better be without.

29. Whatever thou losest, take care to keep thy Innocence: If thou losest all
the World, and keep thy Innocence, thou may yet be a Gainer. But if thou
losest thy Innocence, then indeed thou losest All, and thy Loss becomes truly
Unvaluable.

30. If thou would preserve thy Innocence, make Gods Word thy Rule, and
humbly implore the gracious Conduct and Guidance of his holy Spirit: For he it
is that leads in the way of Righteousness, and in the midst of the Paths of
Judgment; and he has assured us in his Word, That if in all our Ways we
acknowledge him, he will direct our Paths.

FINIS.

