TRICOENIVM CHRISTI, IN NOCTE PRODITIONIS SVAE.

THE THREEFOLD SVPPER OF CHRIST IN THE NIGHT THAT HE WAS BETRAYED.

Explained by EDWARD KELLETT, Doctor of Divinity, Canon of Exeter.

Balducus in praefatione in Iobum, Multa damus, aliis neque visa, neque audita,
quae meis sensibus attemperavit spiritus ille, qui, ubi vult, spirat.

Veruntamen; quia spiritus prophetici, subjecti sunt prophetis; ideo me, and
omnia mea, tam scripta quam scribenda, subjicio censurae Ecclesiae Anglicanae,
libentissime.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes, for Andrew Crook, at the green Dragon in
Saint Paul's Church yard. 1641.

Christ and the institution of the Eucharist in three registers THE THREE FOLD
SUPPER OF CHRIST
3
Christ with bread and wine before 11 kneeling disciples 2
Christ and the 12 disciples at the Last Supper at the moment when Christ
predicts his betrayal an inset of Christ washing the feet of the 12 disciples 1
Christ and the 12 disciples being served at the Last Supper By Dr. Kellet.

London Printed for Andrew Crook. 1641.

W. M. sculpsit.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR JOHN FINCH, BARON OF FORDITCH, LORD KEEPER OF HIS
MAJESTY'S GREAT SEAL, AND ONE OF HIS SACRED COUNCIL.
MY Miscellanies, I offered, unto Aaron (your elder Brother) who is set over
us, by our most gracious King; as a ruler of the House of God; I now think it
convenient; to offer unto you, as to Moses, a second part of my Studies; such
as they are, God bless them to be, as a spur to your devotion, and as a
partiary means of your salvation; and then I have my desire, in this world.
Let others joy in other matters: Your worth is known, you are inwardly endowed
with an excellent spirit; able to discern evil from good, shadows from
substance. To you therefore do I fly; stand but you in the gap, and defend
what I have written, I ask no more, and desire no less, as you knew the
particulars study of my youth; and of late (to my wonder) recalled and
recounted the very Books; in which they were written; so now I beseech your
Honor to accept with portion of the Studies of my old age. Lastly, you
vouchsafed to me many special particulars, whereof our Western parts take
notice; which binds me for-ever to acknowledge, and be thankful unto you; and
to consecrate the best part of my endeavors to the honor of your name, which
I pray to God, may be as glorious in heaven, as it is on earth; and that in the
mean time, you may daily grow up more and more into favor with God, and his
sacred Majesty, and as you do with all good men.

Your Honors at Command to serve you, EDWARD KELLETT.

TO THE READER.
READER,
Be thou gentle, or ungentle, I will tell thee my faults, and accuse my self;
which sometimes finds more love, than self-love does. In erring, there are
diverse degrees; and there is a difference between a deviation, a digression,
and a divagation: a deviation may be but a little way off, like the
exorbitancie of a wheel out of the wonted tract, or road, though still
running on in the high way; every Writer thus erreth oftentimes: And there may
be a digression, which is a fetching of a remoter compass, either for
necessity, or delight; as to see some fenced Castle, or royal Court, or some
excellent Monument; which being viewed, men return to their old way: this is
not much discommendable, sithence few men write, without using this liberty:
But a Divagation is of larger extent, and, in effect, may be compared to the
trayling of an Hare, and, after he is started, to the pursuing of him, in all
his wily turne-abouts, and doubles, over hills, over dales, through bushes,
buyers, and thorns, till he be quite tired. I could not avoid, but use
frequently many Deviations, and diverse times, some digressions. The third sort,
namely, Divagations, I use only on great occasions; if that be a fault, I
yield, and confess it; yet let one say truly, I do no where expatiate; but if
thou follow me, thou will find some pleasure; and I doubt not of good men's
approbation, when in quest and search after truth, J follow a Papist, as
Pererius was; or a stiff Opinionist, and over-rigid Lutheran, as Illyricus
was, and follow close to the heels the enemies of Truth, which way soever they
take, sithence the investigation of Truth, is a more refined Recreation, and of
a more spiritual refreshment, than the deceiving, sensual, and temporary
sports or pleasures can be. For all this, if thy nature cannot brook with such
extravagancies, skip clean over them.

And yet, good Reader, I have a greater fault. Thou will meet with some
passages nervous, and ponderous; others not polished, but savouring of my
Common-places, and not half digested: then follows one point ad amussim,
accurately handled, and ad subtle examinatum, as Censorinus phraseth it, unto
Caerillius, anacomized to the utmost: by and by another point remiss,
languide, and with a distinct, loose-flowing vestment: yet J will not despair
of thy favor, when thou considerest, that J have continued constant writing,
in moist and rotten weather, when a mist, or cloud hangs over my understanding,
in weakness, and in sickness: the first never departing from me, the second,
seldom, in grief of mind, and pains of body, by the Gout, and Stone, and
diverse other infirmities; in the distraction of thoughts between Study, on the
one side, and avocations irresistible, on the other side. Lastly, J assure
thee, J had rather make another new Book, then revise this again: My faults
make me crave thy pardon; and, good Reader, pray for me, whose age and
imperfections are hastening to the grave.

Thine in Christ, EDWARD KELLETT.

LIB. 1.
The Contents of the first Chapter.
Par. 1THe occasion of this Discourse. Fol. 1 Par. 2 The presumptuous ignorance
of some Caco-zelots. Fol. 2 Par. 3 The state of the Question. ibid, Par. 4
Four points propounded, Three preparatory. One decisive, and determining.
Par. These Preparitory. 1 What course the Jews took at their ordinary
meats. 2 What they used to do at their Festivalls. 3 What they especially
practiced at their Passover.
Par. 4 The main point is, what Religious, or civil rites our Savior more
particularly observed, when he kept the Passover, in the night of his
apprehension. ibid.
The Contents of the second Chapter.
Par. THe Jewish strictness in often giving of thanks. Fol. 3 Par. 2 The duty
of thankfulness exhorted unto. ibid Par. 3 Ingratitude condemned. Fol. 4 Par.
4 The Jews at their Feasts began their banquet with blessing of a cup of Wine,
what the particular words were, Poculum bibatorium, every one drank in order;
our most blessed Savior scorned not to follow that custom; The custom of the
Table of the King of Sweden. ibid. Par. 5 The Master of the Feast among the
Jews, consecrated the Bread: the very words of Consecration translated, are
set down. Fol. 5 Par. 6 Some recreations were at their Feastivalls: and wise
holy discourses: sometimes riddles were propounded: our Saviors divine
Table-talke. ibid Par. 7 The duty of thankesgiving appointed by the Apostle for
all our doings. ibid Par. 8 The temperance of the Primitive Church at their
repast, and at Feasts also, proved by Tertullian, and Minutius Foelix: also
their Prayers, and singing, and sober retyring. Fol. 6 Par. 9 Our age in a
double extreme: some over-prodigally feast it: the immoderate use of Tobacco
taxed. ibi. Par. 10 Some are inhospitable; in hospitality under pretense of
devotion disliked. Fol. 7 Par. 11 The mean in eating, and drinking commended.
ibid. Par. 12 Mirth and Feasting, practiced on the Lords day in Tertullians
time. Fol. 8 Par. 13. Holy Hester her baaquet of Vine: the brethren of Joseph
were temperate, though the vulgar has it, Inebriati sunt cum eo: Joseph's
liberality, and full table, was not intepemrate or immodest. ibid. Par. 14
Christ feasted on Sabbath days. ibid. Par. 15 Ahashuerus his moderation, and
Law, wished for to be in use. Fol. 9
The Contents of the third Chapter.
Par. 1 Diverse were the prescribed Customs of the Passover. Fol. 10 Par. 2.
Seven famous Passeovers mentioned in the old Testament, the first in Egypt,
the second in the Wilderness. ibid. Par. 3 The differences betwixt the first
and second, in Maimonides his judgment: only one of his differences proves
sound. ibid. Par. 4 A true distinction of the particular Eremiticall Passover
of some unclean, from the general Passover in the Wilderness: also a
distinction of both these, from the Egyptian Passover. ibid. Par 5. The Third
Passover under Joshua. Fol 10 Par 6 The Israelites for forty years, eat no
bread but Manna. Fol 11 Par 7 Manna commended. Fol ib. Par 8 The Israelites
bought water, and meat, in their Peregrination, but not bread; nor Corn had
they of the Nations, till they came to the planes of Jericho, though Masius
seems to think, they forbear only to eat of the corn of Canaan. Fol ib.
Par 9 The fourth Passover in the days of Samuel. Fol ibid. Par 10. The
deplorable estate of Israel, when Samuel entered on the government. Fol 12 Par
11. Samuel reformed the Ecclesiastical estate. Fol ibid. Par 12. Reformation
wont by former Precedents: David concurred with Samuel: Solomon followed David's
Will Nuncupative; and received from him in writing what the Spirit had taught
David: David guided by his Seers, by Samuel, by Aaron. Fol ibid. Par 13. All
preced^ntiall reformation must be according to Gods first guidance: David dwelt
with Samuel. Fol ibid. Par 14. Samuel dedicated things of worth, to the
enriching of the future Temple. Fol 13 Par 15 Samuel, one of the sacred
Trium-viri. Fol ibid. Par 16 Samuel governed the state politic: he was a
circuiting, or itinerant Judge. Fol ib. Par 17 The nice distinction of Latria,
and Dulia questioned. Fol ib. Par 18 The Parliament of Mizpeh: the sacred
water: Samuels burnt offerings accepted: in likelihood, about this time was the
great Passover kept. Fol ib. Par 19 Samuel a King, Priest, and Prophet. Fol 14
Par 20 Josephus defended against Salianus. Fol ibid.
The Contents of the fourth Chapter.
Par 1 IN the fifth great Passover specialized to be kept by Hezekiah; the
unsanctifyed in part ate it; and in the second month, by dispensation divine;
and the Priests and Levites only killed the Passover. Fol 15 Par 2 The Kings
prayer accepted both for the unclean Priests and people, and the people healed
at the good Kings prayer. Fol ib. Par 3 A voluntary Passover to supply the
imperfection of the former. Devotions half performed are to be renewed and
quickened. Fol 16 Par 4 The Priests and Levites prayers accepted of God for the
people. Fol ibid. Par 5 Religious thoughts must be produced into Acts. Fol ib.
Par 6 In the sixth glorious passover of Josiah, were most royal offerings,
both for the Pascha, and also for the Cagigah, which exceeded the offerings of
Hezekiah. Fol ibid. Par 7 Salianus against Vatablus, both reconciled. Fol ibid.
Par 8 The Masters of the family killed the Passover; but the Priests slew the
Festival offerings: Levites might not sacrifice, without divine inspiration,
or great exigents: any Levite might sacrifice the proper Passover for his own
family, or for the impure. Fol 17 Par 9 In what sense Priests are said to
profane the Sabbath, the Temple, Sacrifices, and Circumcision chase away the
Sabbath. Fol ib. Par 10 The seventh extraordinary great Passover was
fore-prophesied by Ezekiel, but not accomplished, till the return from
captivity, in the days of Ezra, and Nehemiah. Fol 18
The Contents of the fifth Chapter.
Par 1 THe registered Passeovers of the New Testament: Passeovers were duly
kept, (...), according to the custom of the Feast, and (...), yearly: The
Joseph and his spouse, and thrice sacred Virgin, observed the Passeovers:
thrice every year, all males were to appear before the Lord. Fol 19 Par 2
Maimonides his opinion, who might stay at home. Fol 20 Par 3 Maimonides in
diverse points erreth. Fol ibid. Par 4 Calvin Misopineth: It is unexpressed
whether Christ were carried to the Passover, till he were twelve years old:
Some Children forwarder than others: At twelve years of age Christ ascended.
Par 5 Diverse reasons that Christ at twelve years of age took the Passover:
he was a strict observer of the Law: they came to the passover principally for
devotion: None was ever so well prepared to receive, as our Savior. Fol 20 Par
6 The second Passover, which the New Testament records Christ to have
honored with his passover, was eighteen years after: then Christ cast out
buyers and sellers out of the Temple, and did many miracles, which Nocodemus
believed, and the Galileans: Christ then received the Passover, though so much
be not expressed: the confession of the Jews; that Christ strictly observed
their Passeovers. Fol 22 Par 7 The next years passover is pointed at, Joh
5.1. after this there was a Feast of the Jews: Melchior Canus reproved:
Zeppers distinction of feasts amended. Fol ib. Par 8 Holy days appointed by
the Church are sanctified by God, to God: the Feast of Purim, from Hamons
magical Lots, allowed: Queen Hesters decree confirming the ordinance of the
Jews: the feast of the dedication was of man's appointment: our most heavenly
Savior honored it with his presence, words, and works: What, and of what
this Dedication was; Zepper does ill confound Encaenia with Renovalia. Fol 23
Par 9 He is too strict against Encaenia, or feasts of Dedication. All dancing
is not forbidden: Encaeniare known to be all one with novam vestem induere:
Revels or Feasts for the Dedication of our Churches lawful, and ancient: the
lawful prescriptions for this point wise and holy. Fol ibid. Par 10 Maldonat
his insolency taxed: Canus and Cajetan confuted by Pererius. Fol 24 Par 11 The
Feasts of the Jews mentioned, Joh. 5.1. was not the Penticost, nor the Feast
of Tabernacles, but the Passover. Fol 25 Par 12 Pererius is too vehement, and
confuted. Fol ibid. Par 13 The next Passover Christ went not to Jerusalem:
the lawful reason thereof: the Jews come to him, because he came not to them.
Fol ibid. Par 14 Sacraments upon exigents, may be deferred. Fol 26
The Contents of the sixth chapter.
Par 1 IN what manner Christ kept his last passover with its particular rites,
cannot be sooner found than by the Jewish observation of the Sabbath in those
times. Fol 27 Par 2 The Jews had a liberty at the first to choose a Lamb, or
a Goat for the proper rasted Paschall Sacrifice. Fol 28 Par 3 A Lamb and a
Kid are not all one, against Paulus Burgensis. Fol ib. Par 4 The difference
between the Pascha and the Chagigah. Fol ibid. Par 5 The reason of some Jews,
and some late good Christians confuted. Fol 29 Par 6 Rupertus his over-nice
observation. Fol 30 Par 7 The Lambs or Kids in the Aepyptian Passover, were
culled out four days before. Fol ib. Par 8 This was also a temporary rite,
diverse reasons, why they then chose the Lamb, or Kid so long beforehand in
their first Passover. Fol ib. Par 9 Hunnius erreth in this point. Fol 31 Par
10 The str^king or sprinkling of the blood on the two side posts, and upper
doore-post was not any of the durable rites, but appropriated to the first
Passover. Fol ib. Par 11 Sprinkling of blood much used of old. Fol ib. Par 12
Empty houses in Goshen, needed not be sprinkled. Fol ib. Par 13 The Angelus
exterminator could not hurt, when the blood was sprinkled. Fol 32 Par 14 Such a
sprinkling as this was used in no other Sacrifice. Fol ibid. Par 15 The Jews
general consent, that such spinkling was never after in use, Fol ib. Par 16 A
true reason, why this ceremony ceased. Fol ib. Par 17 Christ was the door thus
be sprinkled. Fol ib. Par 18 Hannibal his imitation Fol 33 Par 19 The first
Posseover was eaten in great haste. Fol ibid. Par 20 The succeeding Passeovers
were not eaten in such haste. Fol ib. Par 21 Fair means, and foul were used
to hasten the Israelites out of Egypt. Fol 34 Par 22 Vitablus his opinion of
the four Ensigns, under which the Israelites marched. Fol ib. Par. 23 They
went out rather been cincti, than quintati. Fol. 34 Par. 24 Reasons why they
went not only five by five in a rank Fol. ib. Par. 25 Yet some went well
armed, and some unarmed. Fol. 35 Par. 26 The most probable manner of their
departure out of Egypt described at large. Fol. 36 Par. 27 The Israelites had
abundance of lesser standards, but four chief ones in several quarters. Fol.
37 Par. 28 They ate the Passover in great haste with their loins girt. Fol.
ib. Par. 29 Loose hanging vestments used ordinarily by the Jews: Close,
well-girt apparel on special occasions. Fol. ib. Par. 30 Their have is proved
from their being shod, the Hypallage of Calceamenta in pedibus, instead of
pedes in calceamentis, paralleled. Fol. 38 Par. 31 Going barefoote, was a sign
of sorrow. Fol. ib. Par. 32 Wearing of shoes, or sandals betokened haste. Fol.
ib. Par. 33 The staff in their hand, did argue their haste. Fol. ib. Par. 34
(In their hand) these words do not signify that their staves were never out of
their hands. Fol. ib. Par. 35 Jacobs staff passing over Jordane. Fol. ib. Par.
36 The usefulness of a staff. Fol. 39 Par. 37 The Talmudist say, it was not
eaten in such have ever after. Fol. ibid. Par. 38 Nor was there any need of
such haste. Fol. ib. Par. 39 A twofold haste, simple and comparative. Fol. ib.
Par. 40 The words, Exodus, 12.35. Ye shall keep this service, denote rather the
substantials, than the accidentals of the Passover. Fol. ib. Par. 41 A
specious objection, that all the precepts of the Passover were to be kept; the
answer thereunto, from a known distinction; from the authority of Maimonides;
from other learned Christians, skilled in Hebrew criticisme, from the sacred
Text. Fol. 40
The Contents of the seventh Chapter.
Par. 1 SOme think the Jews in the Egyptian Passover did discumbere in
signum libertatis: not so. Fol. 42 Par. 2 Josephus misunderstood, and
misapplyed. Fol ib. Par. 3 Christ was to keep it in things necessary, not in
the vanishing rites: Christ did something at his last passover, which cannot
be evinced to be done at the first passover. Fol. ib. Par. 4 The Jews
borrowed the fashion of discumbing from the Romans, says Josephus; but that
was of later times. Fol. 43 Par. 5 Julius Caesar feasted the Romans on twenty
two thousand Triclinia. Fol. ib. Par. 6 The Indians beds, Discumbing was used
in India by the Brachmans: Philostratus proves it: the armies of the Romans
never pierced into the heart of India: the Indian discumbing mentioned but as
of yesterday, in comparison with the first Passover: and rather a resemblance
of the Roman fashion, then the same. Fol. ib. Par. 7 The Romans imitated the
Grecians, and the Grecians the Asiatiques: most anciently the Romans did eat
sitting; so Alexander ab Alexandro, and Isidorus afterward women did sit,
though men lay down, says Varro. Fol. ib. Par. 8 Annarus King of Babylon, and
Nero discumbed with their harlots; this was Labentibus moribus. Fol. 44 Par. 9
Discumbing practiced by the Primitive Christians: even women discumbed, as
Tertullian professes: Tertullian ad Nationes, enlightened an obscure place of
his Apologetique. Fol. ib. Par. 10 The Grecians did also sit at feasts first of
all. Fol. ib. Par. 11 Accubation was in free prosperous times. Fol. 45 Par. 12
Curious Manlius first brought in triumph from Asia the Triclinia. Fol. ibid.
Par. 13 Banqueting beds in Ahashuerus his days. Fol. ib. Par. 14 Discumbing
was not in use with any Nation, before, at, or along while after the first
Mosaicall Passover. Fol. ib. Par. 15 The lying down of Angels in men's shapes,
Genesis 19.4. was not upon feasting, but upon sleeping beds. Fol. 45 Par. 16 Mr
Broughton censured. It is more probable that the Israelites did sit, than lie
down at the eating of the first passover, for diverse reasons. Fol. 46 Par. 17
Yet it is not expressly, either set down, or to be determined. Fol. ib. Par.
18 No place of the Old Testament enjoined them to stand at the eating of the
Passover: No place of the Old or New Testament testifies that they did stand:
no necessary consequence can produce so much. Fol. 47 Par. 19 Yet it is most
probable, that they did stand: diverse reasons for it; yet none of these reasons
demonstrative, but probable. Fol. ib. Par. 20 At the succeeding Passeovers,
they did not Discumbere: Philo and Josephus are to be interpreted of later
times. Fol. 48 Par. 21 No particular posture can be proved from any of the
great Passeovers. Fol. 49 Par. 22 They might not go out of doors in the first
Passover, till the Angel had examined their doors: After, they went forth:
this ceremony of not going out of doors, was only temporary: Abroad they
might go, home they might not go. Fol. ibid. Par. 23 Christ and his Disciples
went forth. Fol. 50 Par. 24 The Master of a scant family, and the next
neighbor to his house, were to join together, and to enter commons. Fol. ib.
Par. 25 If they had strayed far, the danger had been greater. Fol. ib. Par.
26 There being no such danger of an Abaddon in future times; they chose any of
the Vertuosi, whether they were friends or kindred, though their dwellings were
further off. Fol. 51
The Contents of the eight chapter.
Par. 1 The perpetual rites of the Passover were instituted at several
times. Fol. 52 Par. 2 The general perpetuity excluded not just Dispensations:
Fol. ib. Par. 3 In what Cases Dispensations were permitted. Fol. ib. Par. 4 Our
blessed Sacraments may be deferred Fol. ibid. Par. 5 Change of Rites might not
be. Fol. ib. Par. 6 Even included permission is Legal. Fol. 53 Par. 7 Some
rites of the passover unordained in Egypt, and prescribed in their journying.
Fol. ib. Par. 8 In extremities a Kid might serve for a Passover. Fol. ibid.
Par. 9 A Kid does not so exactly typifie our blessed Savior, as a Lamb does.
Fol. 54 Par. 10 The Paschall Lamb must be unspotted. Fol. ib. Par. 11
Party-colored things in high esteem. Fol. ib. Par. 12 Most s^eepe spotted
about Jewry. Fol. ibid. Par. 13 The Heathen vilifying their own gods. Fol. ib.
Par. 14 The perfectness of the offering to be made to God; the imperfections
signed out. Fol. 55 Par. 15 The bodily perfection of Aaronicall Priests, Fol.
ib. Par. 16 Diversifying in color, no blemish, but an ornament. Fol. ib. Par.
17 There may be spots without blemishes. Fol. ib. Par. 18 Blemishes without
deformity. Fol. ib. Par. 19 Christ was blemished, but most unjustly. Fol. 56
Par. 20 Blemishes of birds: a little reputed blemish hindered not the Lamb to
be the Passover: an ill blemished spotted Lamb might not be the Passover
Fol. ib. Par. 21 Difference between spotted, and party-colored. Fol. ibid.
Par. 22 The Paschal lamb must not be a female one, but a male: a male implies
perfection. Fol. ib. Par. 23 The Lamb must be under a year old; the Lamb of
one hour above a year old was to be refused, the son of a year. Fol. 57
Par. 24 The impuritie of creatures, till seven days be passed over them the
strangr effects, co-incident to the number of seven. Fol. ibid. Par. 25 The
Jews think a Lamb of nine days might be the Passover. Fol. ibid. Par. 26
It might be a burnt offering. Fol. ib. Par. 27 Reasons why it might not be a
Paschall Lamb. Fol. 58 Par. 28 A proportionable number was to be chosen to the
eating of the Paschall Lamb. Fol. 58 Par. 29 The exact number is not, cannot
be set down. Fol. ibid. Par. 30 Maimonides says, they ought to agree of the
number, before they chose their Lambs. Fol. ib. Par. 31 The fellow-communicants
were called the sons of the Society. Fol. ib. Par. 32 It is more probable,
that at the first Passover, they chose their Lamb first, and company
afterward. At the first Passover, the next neighbor, or neighbors were
brothers of the Society, or members of that brotherhood. At the after
Passeovers, they were not so strict, nor was it a durable Rite to have the next
neighbors. Fol. ib. Par. 33 Sometimes ten, sometimes twenty made up the full
number, says Josephus: most commonly ten: Cestius the Roman Precident his
policy. Fol. 59 Par. 34 Thirteen were at Christ's last Passeovers eating, even
Christ and his twelve Apostles. Fol. ib. Par. 35 The Romans imitation of these
Ceremony- sodalitates. Fol. ib. Par. 36 Rex convivii, in Macrobius, dominus
convivii, in Gellius; modimperator, in Varro. Fol. 60 Par. 37 The numbers no
where fixed, and certain; but ab libitum; varied as it pleased* the ^^^efe
Ruler of the feast, etc. Fol. ib.
The Contents of the ninth Chapter.
Par. 1 NOn-admittance of strangers to the Passover: diverse sorts of servants,
and strangers: servants of the seed of Israel, their estate^, and privileges:
servants of forgaine Nations; their hard conditions: hired servants; and their
differences from others: the hired servant might not be forced to be
circumcised. Fol. 62 Par. 2 Maimonides falsely opineth, that the seed of
Abraham were only to be circumcised. Fol. 64 Par. 3 There were three sorts of
strangers in Israel: two sorts of Aliens: Adam's six* Precepts to all the
world: Noah's additionall inhibition: the Law of Moses is a branch of the Law of
Nature: Bishop Andrews commended; and excellent passages of his Work
transcribed: The Roman Laws borrowed from the Jews, in Tertullians
judgment; The twelve Tables, and their supposed perfections: their
imperfection, in precept: the fragments only remain of them: some semblance
between the four first Commandments of the first Table in Gods Law, and
between the Roman Laws. Regalitives rejected: Gothofredus preferred:
Comparisons between the Gentiles keeping the Saturday; and Christians, the
Sunday: Saturday was the Sabbath of the Romans; kept with joy, and feasting,
as our Lords day: A large Treatis^ concerning the Lords day: the Christians
pray toward the East; the Reasons thereof: The holy Communion Table justly
placed at the East end of the Cha^cell; ignorant, and irreligious Censurers
taxed; and objections answered: the promiscuous use of the words, Altar, and
the Lords Table: The Commandments of the second Table of Moses followed by the
Papyrian Law, and twelve Roman Tables; except the tenth Commandment only: a
foreigner unfixed might not eat of the Passover: a sojourner, or stranger,
whose males were circumcised, might ea^e thereof, and so might their sons:
only Circumcised ones might eat the Passover all other was forbidden: women
were held as circumcised in the circumcisinn of the Jewish males. Fol. 65
The Contents of the tenth Chapter.
Par. 1 THe year of the world, in which the Passover was first instituted.
Fol. 90 Par. 2 The month of that year. The old Jewish account of the years,
and the new; anons sa^^^, and vulgaris. The year preceding the seventh
Sabbaticall year. viz. the 48. year after the old Iubilee, and the second
year before the new Iubile^; brought forth sufficient fruits for three years.
Fol. 91 Par. 3 The Magnalia performed, in the Month of Abib. Fol. 94 Par. 4
The Passover, upon some other occasions extraordinary, might be kept on
another month. Fol. ib. Par. 5 The proclaming of festival days commanded
both by Moses and some Heathen. Fol. 95 Par. 6 The appointed ^^y for the
Passover. Fol. ib. Par. 7 It was the fourteenth day of the month, not al^^ble
or, dispensible with. Fol. ib. Par. 8. The full Moon. Fol. 96 Par. 9 The Jews
hope that the Messiah shall deliver Israel, the same day that Moses did, and
that the Passover was kept. Fol. ib. Par. 10 Tertullian explained. Fol. ib.
Par. 11 The Jews unlawfully altered the day of the Passover. Fol. 97 Par. 12
Christ are the Passover on the fourteenth day of the month, the Jews on the
day following. Fol. 98 Par. 13 The strict observation of the Jewish festivals:
a trappe laid for Christ: and broken taxations are payable to Princes against
the opinion of Pharisaicall zelot Galilaeans. The mis-understood story of the
Galilaeans slain by Pilot explained, Fol. ib. Par. 14 Before the Jewish
Passover, our blessed Savior was crucified. Fol. 99 Par. 15 Christ kept the
Law exactly. Fol. 100 Par. 16 The hour of the day that the Jewish Passover
was kept in, the several beginnings of the day by several Nations. The Jews
began from the Eveneng. Fol. ibid. Par. 17 In the New Testament the reckoning
was from the morning. Fol. 101. Par. 18 The hour of the day, was a lasting
fixed Ceremony: It was to be slain between the two evenings: the diverse
meaning of the word, Evening: Maymonides reproved. Fol. ib. Par. 19 It was to
be eaten between Sunset, and any time till toward the morning: against the
opinion of Scaliger: It was usually eaten after the beginning of the second
Evening, and not long after sunset. Fol. 102 Par. 20 The fixed hour more
explained. Fol. 103
The Contents of the eleventh Chapter.
Par. 1 IT was a lasting Ceremony to keep the Passover at Jerusalem, and not
as any man fansied: yet this precept binded them not, till they came to
Jerusalem; and notwithstanding, under good distinctions, may truly be said, to
be no fading, but fixed Ceremony. Fol. 105 Par. 2 A most memorable passage from
Munster, concerning the last great fast of the Jews, The Jews keep no
passover now; because they are outed from Jerusalem. Fol. ib. Par. 3 The Jews
were to root out the Names, and Places, where Idolatry had been: Cities were
sometimes so called from the Idols, in that place worshipped. Fol. 106 Par. 4
Not till David's time, was the particular place known, where the Temple should
be. Fol. 107 Par. 5 David's great care for the Temple so soon as he was
enthronized. Fol. ib. Par. 6 That hard place explained (We have heard of it at
Ephrata, we found it in the fields of the wood.) Fol. 108 Par. 7 The Psalm
132. not made by Solomon, but David. Fol. 109 Par. 8 Solomon kept the first
Passover at Jerusalem. Fol. 110 Par. 9 The Israelites left all their cities,
even almost empty, to go to Jerusalem; and eat the Passover, God kept them:
when they forsook him, all mischief fell upon the City, the Temple the
People. Fol. ibid. Par. 10 Five things in the first Temple; which were not in
the second: the fire from heaven, which lighted on the Altar: the Urim and
Thummim was not in the second Temple: Bathchol, and its signification: the Arc
was not in the second Temple: in this third the Arc Ribera includes the two
other of those famous five things. Fol. 111 Par. 11 Diverse reckonings, and
estimates, what those five things were: Ribera censured: the Jews confuted.
Fol. 113 Par. 12 The last Temple had more glory than the first, by the presence
of Christ, our Messiah, and it is cleared by diverse memorable particularities.
Fol. 114 Par. 13 The Passover from the restoration of the second Temple by
Zorobabel, till Vespatian and Titus destroyed it. Fol. 116 Par. 14 The miseries
at the Passover, when the second Temple was destroyed, and the ensuing
calamities of the captive Jews. Fol. 117
The Contents of the twelfth Chapter.
Par. 1 THe Paschall Lamb was to be eaten in one house, and slain not in the
Temple, but in the house commonly. More Lambs might be eaten in one great
house. It might not be eaten without doors. No salvation without the Church.
Schism is forbidden. Fol. 118 Par. 2 Not only the Priests, but the people of
Israel migh, kill the Paschall-Lambe: the people might not slay any other
Sacrifice: nor the Levites ordinarily, but the Priests only. Every one in the
Congregation of Israel, did not slay the Passover; but the Chief, in one
household. Maimonides rejected. Bellarmine truly avoucheth this duty of offering
the Paschall-Lambe, to belong to the privilege of the firstborn, before
Aaron, or his sons were chosen to be Priests. Fol. 120 Par. 3 The Levites
might offer the sacrifice of the Passover for the Priests, if the Priests were
not sanctified, and the Priests might slay the Paschall-Lambe, for the people,
if the people were not sanctified. Fol. 221 Par. 4 Whether the head of the
family himself must of necessity slay the Passover; or whether he might
depute another in his place; Barradius rejected, for saying Christ himself slew
the Passover. Fol. 122 Par. 5 A strange story out of Suidas. Fol. 123 Par. 6
The Apostles prepared the Passover before Christ came. Fol. ibid. Par. 7 The
Passover was not slain, at the Altar near the Temple. Fol. ibid. Par. 8 The
roasting of it whole, is another fixed Ceremony. Fol. 124 Par. 9 They were to
eat it roasted with fire. Fol. ib. Par. 10 They were not to eat it raw. Fol.
ib. Par. 11. Not sodden at all with water. Fol. ib. Par. 12 The head was to be
roasted with the legs. Fol. 125 Par. 13 They were to roast the Purtenance
also. Fol. 126 Par. 14 The Jews came not empty, but offered according to
their abilities: and Christians are, to equalize, if not to exceed them. Fol.
ib.
The Contents of the thirteenth Chapter.
Par. 1 BRead and water imply all necessary foot; and sometimes, full store.
Fol. 128 Par. 2 Unleavened Bread was not to be eaten with the Passover, and
the flesh of the Passover, not to be eaten, with any other, save unleavened
bread. Fol 129 Par. 3 Maymonides. confuted. Fol. ib. Par. 4 Spure herbs must of
necessity, be also eaten with the Passover. Fol. ib. Par. 5 When leaven was
permitted; when the use of it forbidden. Fol. ib. Par. 6 The Israelites ate no
leavened bread; from their coming out of Egypt, till they trod on the borders
of the Land of Canaan. Fol. 130 Par. 7 Leaven betokens, either good or evil.
Fol. ib. Par. 8. Illyricus his criplex fermentum. Fol. 131 Par. 9. How
unleavened bread is called bread of affliction. Fol. ib. Par. 10. What are the
best Monuments. Fol. 132 Par. 11. The precepts of bitter herbs is a durable
Rite. Fol. ib. Par. 12 Why bitter herbs were to be eaten. Fol. ib. Par. 13
Christ ate ths Passover with bitter herbs, and the Mystical signification.
Fol. ib. Par. 14 The bitter herbs mentioned in the Law. Fol. 133 Par. 15 The
Jews used herbs for meat, as well as for sauce. Fol. ib. Par. 16 Salt, and
Vinegar were not only the Jewish sauces. Fol. ib.
The Contents of the fourteenth Chapter.
Par. 1 THe not breaking of a bone, was a perpetual Ceremony: Not a bone of
Christ was broken. Fol. 114 Par. 2 The marrow of the Paschall Lambs bones,
might not be taken forth: the Mysteries thereof; and of not breaking of a bone.
Fol. ib. Par. 3 No part of the flesh of the Lamb was to be carried out of the
house. Fol. 115 Par. 4 The Reasons and the mysteries thereof. Fol. 135 Par. 5
The Table-tlake was another Concomitant, fixed rite; and what it was in
particular. Fol. 136 Par. 6 Gods great care of keeping memorials. Fol. ibid.
Par. 7 Whether they sang at the Passover or no: and what they did sing. Fol.
137 Par. 8 Instructing of youth in the Principles of Religion, necessary. Fol.
ib.
The Contents of the fifteenth Chapter.
Par. 1 The ceremonies after their Table-talke. Fol. 138 Par. 2 They continued
to eat unleavened bread seven days. Fol. ib. Par. 3 But it seems the
Israelites were not bound to keep the festival, at their first Passover, or
Exodus, though they did eat unleavened bread. Fol. 139 Par. 4 Nothing was to
be left till the morning. Fol. 140 Par. 5 They burned the remainder of the
Passover if any remainder were: Reasons thereof: Holy Sacramental relics
not to be profaned: the Romans Protervia, or Feast of frowardness. Fol. ib.
The Contents of the fixteenth Chapter.
Par. 1 THe Jewish custom to wash their feet, especially at feasts. Fol. 14^
Par. 2 The Jews did not stink more than other men; against Cardinal
Baronius; Mr Fuller taxed also. Fol. ib. Par. 3 If the Emperor Marcus said so,
probable reasons for his imaginations at that time Fol. ibid. Par. 4 Of Judas
his stink, ewhen he was dead, out of Cedrenus; and the Jewish Nation defended.
The great number of the Jews long ago and now: from whom the Americans
descended: the Tartars came not from the Israelites. Fol. 149 Par. 5 The
Pharisees marvelling at Christ's not washing before meat: the double sin of
Pharisees in washing. Fol. 14 is Par. 6 Women in the Primitive Church washed
the feet of Saints. Fol. ib. Par. 7 In the Old Testament they only presented
water, but washed not the feet of their guests Fol. 150 Par. 8 The great sinner
is the first recorded to have washed another feet, even Christ's: and the
great Savior is first recorded to have washed many men's feet. Fol. ib. Par. 9
They sometimes washed and bathed their whole bodies, and anointed them also.
Fol. 151 Par. 10 The Jews used more than ordinary blessings at the Passover;
a particular explication thereof. Fol. ib. Par. 11 The reasons why I handle at
large the Jewish Passover Fol. 152 Par. 12 Christ kept all the fixed rites
preparatory, and the Sacramental Ceremonies: and the subsequent perpetual
customs. Fol. ibid. Par. 13 Christ a perfect observer of the Law; yet not
bound to the Jewish voluntary undertakings, or will worship. Fol. 153
The Contents of the seventeenth Chapter.
Par. 1 A Just Tractate against Pererius the Jesuit, concerning the
correspondencie between the Jews and the Romans in their feastings. Fol. 154
Par. 2 The Romans imitated the Jews, not the Jews the Romans in their
suppings, feastings, against Peretius. Fol. ib. Par. 3 The Jews not infected
with the manners or superstitions of other Nations, Fol. 155 Par. 4 Pererius
enterferes, Jewish, Roman customs, in festivals Cosin-Germans. Fol. 156 Par. 5
Conquerers condescend to the fashions of the conquered; diverse particularities
instanced in. Fol. ibid. Par. 6 Pererius his 13 specialties; wherein the Jews
(as he says) imitated the Romans: The place a Parlour, an upper Chamber,
supping Chamber. Fol. 158 Par. 7 Christ and his 12. Apostles lay on three beds
at his last supper: Judas the Traitor signed out a Supper. Fol. ib. Par. 8 The
ancient Romans supped in the open air, without any Tables. Fol. 159 Par. 9
Christ, and his twelve Apostles supped in a guest-chamber: houses in ancient
times builded with flat roofes. Fol. 159
The Contents of the eighteenth Chapter.
Par. 1 PErerius, his second Particular: the Romans feasted not, till they had
washed. Fol. 161 Par. 2 Washing among the Heathen twofold: sacred: unsacred.
Fol. ib. Par. 3 Reasons, why the ancient Romans often washed; first, because
they used not much linen: secondly, to remove their sweat. Fol. 162 Par. 4
The diverse manners, places, times of bathing among the Romans: bathing used
among the Romans, most commonly before meals: the sign of the Cross much
used in the Primitive Church: diverse hours of bathing; stately baths among the
ancient Romans. Fol. 163 Par. 5 The Jews used to wash, and bathe themselves,
long before Rome was founded: Apocryphal Scripture is to be preferred, before
any humane authority whatsoever: diverse costly kinds of Bathing: white Doves
among the Jews, sacred, and inviolable. Fol. 165 Par. 6 The Jewish traditions
not derived from the Roman Vsance; but expositions of Moses Law; commanded many
kinds of washings: Maymonides his Exposition of the Law of washing. Fol. 166
Par. 7 The difference between the Jewish, and the Roman washings: Fol. ib.
The Contents of the nineteenth Chapter.
Par. 1 PErerius his third Ceremony: Romans anointed themselves before feasts:
so might the Jews, but not ordinarily: the Pharisee reproved for not
anointing Christ: Mary's, anointing Christ, was of devotion, not fashion.
Fol. 167 Par. 2 Romans used unctions before feasts. Fol. 168 Par. 3 True joy
rests in virtue, not in vice. Fol. 169 Par. 4 The Grecians used annointings at
their feasts. Fol. ibid. Par. 5 Several oynments for several parts and uses:
Alexidemus, and Cleopatra's, and Aesop his son, excessive prodigality. Fol.
ib. Par. 6 Olives were of diverse sorts; and for diverse uses: Oil Olive
commended. Fol. 171 Par. 7 Jews used annoynting before the fiege of Troy:
Jews, Syrians, anciently abounded with Oils: Oil good for outward, inward
uses: Oil, some sacred, some of common use: The diverse uses of sacred Oil:
Kings. Priests, sacred things anointed, with it: The composition of it: David
anointed King, with Gods oil. David anointed King twice. Fol. 172 Par. 8 The
Jews commonly anointed only, head and feet, the Babylonians anointed all
their body. Fol. 173 Par. 9 The Jews used anointing, after washing: Ashers
dipping of his feet in Oil. Fol. 174 Par. 10 Mary Magdalen washed Christ's
feet with tears. Fol. ib. Par. 11 Jews anointed their heads, before ever
the head of Tolus was found. Fol. 175 Par. 12 Women among the Jews in Spain
the best perfumers. Fol. ib. Par. 13 Anointing the head ordinary among the
Jews. Fol. ib. Par. 14 Myrrh and Nard, precious ointments: Nard taken
sometimes for an berbe, sometimes for an Ointment. Fol. 176 Par. 15 Anointing
Corporal, Spiritual. Fol. 177
The Contents of the twentieth Chapter.
Par. 1 PErerius his fourth Ceremony. Fol. 178 Par. 2 Romans and Jews at their
feasts, changed their clothes. Fol. ib. Par. 3 The Romans Tricliniary
Ornaments; wearing apparel; Larding, and cramming, purple; scarlet, cloth of
gold, silver; Lex vestiaria. Fol. 179 Par. 4 The Bed-ornaments of the Jews.
Fol. 180 Par. 5 Ornaments of Idols; Levites, Priests, High Priest; Tabernacle.
Fol. 181 Par. 6 Wearing apparel of the Jews; variety thereof for diverse
occasions; for, 1. Gifts. 2. Appearance. 3. Disguise. 4. Sorrow, or
Mortification;
Sackcloth: feasting; white apparel: extraordinary apparel approved at
feasts; comely always: new-fanglednesse taxed, in French, English, Spanish;
English, in part defended; diversity of apparel for several ages, degrees:
abundance of apparel a blessing: the excess taxed. Fol. 181 Par. 7 Changing
of apparel at feasts, practiced by the Jews before the Romans: Romans bad
more than one garment on at feasts: the wedding garment not the only garment:
fashions at sacred civil feasts, different. Fol. 183 Par. 8 Wedding garment,
What? Fol. 184
The Contents of the one and twentieth Chapter.
Par. 1 PErerius his fifth Ceremony; bodily posture: the ancient Jews, and
Romans sat at Feasts. Fol. 186 Par. 2 Discumbing at feasts. Fol. 187 Par. 3
Pererius his 6. Ceremony omitted. Fol. ib. Par. 4 Pererius his 7. Ceremony;
supping on high beds: The woman standing behind Christ. Fol. ibid. Par. 5
Pererius his 8. Ceremony; Fasting barefooted: washing of feet practiced, in
Abraham's days. Fol. 189 Par. 6 Pererius his 9. Ceremony, lying in the bosom:
Abraham's bosom. Fol. ib. Par. 7 Pererius his 10. Ceremony: highest rooms at
feasts: the chiefest guests sat in the chiefest and highest rooms: which
place in discumbing was the highest? whether Christ in the Supper, at Bethany,
sat in the highest room? Christ had the middle place; and is said most
commonly, to be in the midst: highest in situation, not always highest in
dignity. Fol. ibid. Par. 8 Parerius his 11. Ceremony. Three on a bed;
Triclinium, whence so called: How many beds, at feasts: S sigma, what it was:
Biclinium: how many guests on a bed. Fol. 291 Par. 9 Whether Christ and his 12.
Apostles at his last supper discumbed, on three beds. Fol. 192 Par. 10 Order of
discumbing; Jesuits in this point dissent among themselves: fair collections
from the Scriptures, lawful. Fol. ibid. Par. 11 How far the Apostles
discumbed, the one from the other. Fol. 193 Par. 12 The words, dividite inter
vos, not to be understood of the Eucharist: Edentibus illis, interpreted:
Eucharist in stituted, after the Paschall Supper: Christ gave bread and wine to
his Disciples severally. Fol. ibi. Par. 13 Pererius his 12. Ceremony: the
Romans and Jews ate in Common: the Romans huge platters, Aesop's, Vitellius
Platters: Trojan Boar. Fol. 194 Par. 14 Romans and Jews, in their feastings,
had diverse dishes: the Roman, carving of fowls: Egyptians and Jews great
platters: M. Anthonies immania pocula: Vessels of the Sanctuary, vessels of
desire. Fol. 197 Par. 15 Romans did lie, not sit on beds discumbing, Pererius
affirms, denies it: Romans Supper at times, continued from night till
Morning; Romans changed their posture, in discumbing: Rosinus his description
of the Romans discumbing: ancient Romans temperance at feasts: Roman fashion in
drinking at feasts. Fol. 198 Par. 16 Pererius his 13 Ceremony: the Romans, in
their feasts appointed: Magistrum potandi, Regem vini; modimperatorem: the
manner of the Grecian, and Latin jolly drinking. Fol. 199 Par. 17 The Epitome
of all Pererius his twofold mistaking: the conclusion directly, against
Pererius. Fol. 200
The Contents of the two and twentieth Chapter.
Par. 1 HOw Christ with his 12. Apostles, kept his last Passover: (...): two
Disciples prepare it: Christ with the 12. eat it: in the Evening, they sit
down. Fol. 201 Par. 2 (...) expounded S. Matthews Evangelisme, written in
Hebrew: (...), its diverse significations; (...), and (...), interpreted; The
Apostles, in the description of the Lords Supper, single out words, properly
signifying, lying down. Fol. 202 Par. 3 Our English Translatours excused. Fol.
203 Par. 4 Sitting Communicants censured. Fol. ibid. Par. 5 As they did eat
expounded. Fol. 204 Par. 6 The use of the word Verily: Amen, its diverse
acceptions. Fol. ib. Par. 7 Future things are to others unknown; to Christ
known. The Table and its rites sacred, even among the Heathen. Fol. 204 Par. 8
Judas not necessitated to betray Christ: the manner of Christ's detecting him
traitor. Fol. ib. Par. 9 What was done in the first Paschall-Supper: Judas
detected for a Traitor in a generality; Disciples enquire. Fol. 205 Par. 10
Judas discovered for a Traitor, in a mixed manner: good for Judas not to have
been borne. Fol. ib. Par. 11 Thou say, is no full discovery of Judas, to be
the Traitor: Simon de Cassia his error: Judas, his treason not discovered till
the second Supper; diverse reasons thereof. Fol. 206
The Contents of the three and twentieth Chapter.
Par. 1 Christ's hearty desire, to eat his last Supper. Fol. 208 Par. 2 The
words (before) after, until, unto, from, etc. are particles, sometimes
inclusive, sometimes exclusive. Fol. ib. Par. 3 Donec, or until, negatively
used, de futuro. Fol. 209 Par. 4 Kingdom of God, what. Fol. ib. Par. 5 He
took the Cup, not the Eucharisticall Cap, first of the vine, spiritual
Nectar: Turks place eternal felicity, in sensual Pleasures. Fol. ib. Par. 6
Maldonates error, concerning the Cup. Fol. 210 Par. 7 Spiritual Table-talke at
Christ's last eating of the Passover. Fol. 211 Par. 8 Methodus rerum, aut
Historiae, not always observed, in Scripture: the Original, of greatest
authority: nothing to be altered, in the Scriptures. Fol. ibid.
The Contents of the four and twentieth Chapter.
Par. 1 MInisters or attendants, at Christ's last Passover: the blessed Virgin
Mary no attendant, difference between Apostles, and Disciples: Disciples might
attend. Fol. 212 Par. 2 Bishops, Presbyters, succeed the Apostles, the
seventy: Names of Apostles and Disciples, confounded: S. Augustine questioned.
Fol. 213 Par. 3 Whether any of the 70. Disciples, were Apostates, other
Disciples, beside the 70. Some of them backesliders: the 70. Disciple were the
future Presbytery Idolatar: the 70. Disciples who they were, whether there were
72. Disciples. Fol. ib. Par. 4 Diverse legal Types of the 12. Apostles, 70.
Disciples. Fol. 215 Par. 5 The Master of the house was not excluded, he might
wait on Christ, also some of the household might be attendants. Fol. ibid. Par.
6 Attendants, Male, and Female; three degrees of Male-attendants: diverse
offices of Attendants; Christ and his Apostles had their Attendants. Fol. 216
Par. 7 Some of the 72. were Christ's Attendants, to here his Table-talke;
Servitours, animated instruments. Fol. 217 Par. 8 The Synopsis, or sum of
all. Fol. 218
LIB. 2.
The Contents of the first Chapter.
Par. 1THree premises. Fol. 224 Par. 2 Christ's, and his Apostles Temperancie.
Fol. ib. Par. 3 The Paschall Supper a Sacrament Type
of the New Old
Testament. Christ eat of the three Suppers sparingly Fol. 225 Par. 4 Christ
did seldom eat flesh, Christ ate Butter and Honey. Christ's knowledge to
refuse the Evil, and choose the Good: The words, Ad scire ipsum interpreted.
Fol. 226 Par. 5 The Jews blasphemy against Christ. The words Emmanuel, aend
Samuel, whence derived. That Christ was God, proved from Scriptures, Rabins;
and the word Emanuel. Difference between Emmanuel, and Samuel. Fol. 227 Par. 6
The Jews blasphemy against Christ's Mother. Fol. 227 Par. 7 Christ borne
according to the Scriptures: borne of a Woman, not of a Girl. The Nobility of
Christ's Birth wherein in consisted. Fol. 228 Par. 8 Christ a Stone. ibid. Par.
9 Gnalam, or Glialam: and Gnelem, what it signifies. Fol. 229 Par. 10
Emmanuel. Jesus. is a name of Nature. Imposition.
ibid. Par. 11 Mary a Virgin; Aarons Rod; Christ borne of a Virgin by Miracle;
a threefold Union in Christ. Fol. 230 Par. 12 Christ made but one meal in one
day. The aspertion of Gluttony, in him rejected. Christ fasted, even to a
miracle: often times. Christ as God knew all things. Fol. 233 Par. 13 Why Christ
sought fruit on the Figtree? How Christ seemed ignorant of many things.
Admiration is of doubtful and great things In Christ a threefold knowledge:
Divine: Infused: Experimental. How Christ is said to wonder. No man's knowledge
ever equal to Christ's. Fol. 234 Par. 14. Why Christ cursed the Figtree? Fol.
235 Par. 15 Christ's hunger, rather Vluntary than necessary: Christ under-prised
Temporal food in respect of spiritual. Christ's abstinence from flesh. Fol.
236 Par. 16 Difference between Christ's eating before his Death. A double
Digestion after his Resurrection. ib.
The Contents of the second Chapter.
Par. 1 THe ancient Romans ate four times a day. Fol. 238 Par. 2 The Apostles
temperancie in meat and drink: A double daily refection allowed by God. The
Apostles provision not costly. Fol. 239 Par. 3 The Disciples of Christ fasted
often. The place, Act, 27.33. clecred. The woad All in Scripture, often used
for many. ib. Par. 4 Fasting much used in the old Testament. Fol. 240 Par. 5
Poenicentia Nineveh what it is. Hearty devotion the Salt of Religion. Why the
Ninivits made their beasts to fast. ib.
The Contents of the third Chapter.
Par. 1 ILlyricus his errors concerning fasting Confession, and beating the
breast in fasting. Fol. 242 Par. 2 Rising in the night to serve God. Christ
shall come at midnight. A Jewish Tradition. ib. Par. 3 Bowing down the head in
fasting. Fol. 243 Par. 4 Shaving the Head. Beard.
ib. Par. 5 Calixtus fourfold fasting. Jejunia quatuor temporum. ib. Par. 6
Illiricus his absurd Division of a religious fast into crupclosum jejunium
Holy. Hypocritical.
Fol. 244 Par. 7 Fasting taking for innocence of life. S. Augustine, and S.
Chrysostom fasly taxed by Illyricus. Jejunium generale. ib. Par. 8 Illyricus
wild positions concerning fasting. Fasting not always a sign of, but
sometimes a means to
a contrite heart, rending of garments. ib. Par. 9 Washing of guests feet.
Fol. 245 Par. 10 Rending of clothes: ib. Par. 11 The Ceremonies of fasts.
Lutherans crapulous repentance. ib. Par. 12 Illyricus his two Reasons against
fasting. The colder the climate, the hotter the stomach. Germans must fast
proportionably to the Jews. Fasting must tame* not disease or kill the body.
ib. Par. 13 Illyricus plays the Dy-dapper. He denies Fasting to conduce to
Prayer. Why Christ and his Apostles did fast. A broken heart sometimes goes
before Fasting, sometimes follows after fasting. God often commutes eternal
punishment into temporal. Fasting not always a sign of a contrite Heart.
Fol. 246 Par. 14 A body weakened by fasting is more fit to pray. Preparation
before the Sacrament necessary. Illyricus and Luther taxed. Fasting, the best
way to please God. Two extremes in fasting. Some fast too much; some fast not
at all. Illyricus an Epicure. The best Christians fast to pray, and pray to
please God.
The Contents of the fourth Chapter.
Par. 1 Sick and old folks exempted from fasting. Fol. 249 Par. 2 Night
meditations advance day-studyes. ib. Par. 3 The trouble of the body disturbes
not the intention of the mind. Homer falsely cited. The belly an importune
evil. ib. Par. 4 A difference betwixt Ordinances at Fasting, and Feasting.
Fol. 251 Par. 5 Fasting, a voluntary, not natural action. Diverse ends of the
same fast. ib. Par. 6 Sorrow prepares us to prayer. The Apostles did not
neglect fasting. A difference between neglecting, and not performing.
Hypocritical not true fasting faulted in the Jews. Christ fasted; and why?
ib. Par. 7 Sorrow a Concomitant of fasting: fasting and mourning, two distinct
things. Fol. 252 Par. 8 Illyricus makes Nature, Custom, and Chance, the
ground of fasting and prayer. Prayer not the only remedy for all evils. Fides
sola and solitaria saves not. Saving faith is not separated from other
Theological virtues. Fol. 253
The Contents of the fifth Chapter.
Par. 1 ALL in fasting must afflict their souls. Fasting commanded in the old
and new Testament. Fol. 254 Fasting is more than a temperate sober life. Par. 2
Diverse effects of sorrow. Diverse efficient causes of fasting. ib. Par. 3 The
Germans little practice Fasting. The singular commendation of Fasting by
Athanasius. S. Chrysostom. Leo Magnus. S. Ambrose. Bellarmine.
Fol. 255 Par. 4 A parting blow at Illyricus Fol. 256
The Contents of the sixth Chapter.
Par. 1 What several Evangelists wrote concerning the several Suppers. Fol.
257 Par. 2 The Supper of the Lord, instituted after the second, or common
Supper. ib. Par. 3 Why there is no express mention of a second Supper.
Consequentiall divinity, Proved, Approved. Creation of Angels: and when.
Infants Baptized. Scripture not always tied to express terms, Joh. 21.25.
expounded, reasons thereof rendered. Fol. 258 Par. 4 Diverse reasons why the name
of a second Supper is pretermitted. Fol. 262
The Contents of the^ seventh Chapter.
Par. 1 THat there was a second Supper at the Jewish Pascall. Proofs from the
old Testament. Unto the Paschall was annexed the Chagigah. Fol. 263 Par. 2
Difference between the first and second Supper. Maimonides, Schaliger, Beza,
and Baronius erred in this point. Fol. 265 Par. 3 The first Supper when it
begun. Fol. 265 Par. 4 The different m^ate^ at the First, Second, Supper.
Jews, and Gentiles at their great feasts did eat two Supers. ib. Par. 5
Christ's gesture at the Paschall Supper. Coena Domini Tricoenium Christi. Christ
in his last Passover kept the Ceremonies of the Jews. Coena Dimissoria, what
it was. Fol. 266
The Contents of the eight Chapter.
Par. 1 Proofs from the New Testament for a second Supper. Fol. 268 Par. 2
Proofs from the Fathers, especially Saint Cyprian. Cibus inconsumptibilis. ib.
Par. 3 The second Supper was Fibula Legis and Evangelii. Fol. 269 Par. 4 Inter,
or between, evinceth a Triplicity. Saint Augustine, Theophylact, Damascen. ib.
The Contents of the ninth Chapter.
Par. 1 Proofs from the Protestants for a second Supper Kemnitius, Beza (...)
Beza awry* Scaliger commended. Fol. 271 Par. 2 Diverse kinds of sauces at the
second supper. (...) what it signifies. ibid. Par. 3 Bellaria expounded,
Bacchus his Bellaria. Rich wines. Scaliger and Beza censured. Fol. 272 Par. 4 A
description of the Ceremony of the Passover. Poculum Hymneseos. Things in the
description of the Paschall Supper Redundant, and Deficient. Embamma, what it
was. At what time of supper Christ washed his Disciples feet. Benediction, at
what time of supper used. What kind of herbs were eaten at the Passover. The
second supper when it began. ib.
The Contents of the tenth Chapter.
Par. 1 Proofs from the Papists. Baronius amiss in some points of the
Paschall Supper. Baronius, Lucas Burgensis, Sebastian Barradius, and Maldonate,
prove a second Supper. Fol. 275 Par. 2. Maldonate doubts, whether the Paschal
be called a Supper: Piscator censured. Fol. 276 Par. 3. Tolet, Suarez,
Bellarmine, prove a second Supper. Fol. 277 Par. 4. Bellarmine censured; S.
Cyprian cleared. ib. Par. 5. Adam Conizen, and Scapleton, prove^^ second
Supper. Poculum bibatorium. The Tricoenium accomplished. Fol. 278 Par. 6.
Christ was present at the First, or Paschall Second, or common Supper. ib. Par.
7. The Jews at their solemn feasts, had double Commons. ib. Par. 8. When the
second Supper began, about six of the clock at night. How long the second
Supper lasted. When it ended. Fol. 279
The Contents of the eleventh Chapter.
Par. 1 WHat was Said Done at the second supper the first quarter. Christ began
the Chagigah with saying of grace. Grace and thankesgiving a prime duty at
feasts. Fol. 280 Par. 2 The form of Grace at The eating of Manna. Other feast.
The Paschall Festivity,
Fol. 281 Par. 3 The Jews began their second Supper, with the cup of Charity*
Wonderful great grapes. ib. Par. 4 An hymn was sung after the Grace cap among
the Jews. The hymn^ in the New Testament sung after the Eucharist Fol. 283
Par. 5 The discourse at the second Supper. ib. Par. 6 The Apostles contention
before they received the blessed Eucharist. The Apostl^^ contend for
superiority. ib. Par. 7 When Christ began to wash the Apostles sects. Osiander
rejected* Saint Cyrill rejected. The Jews began their second washing at the
beginning of their second supper, Christ in the middle of it. Baronius argument
confutes Osiander. Fol. 285
The Contents of the twelfth Chapter.
Par. 1. WHat was done, or said, the second of the third quarters of the hour
in the second Supper. Christ begins to wash his Disciples feet. The Scribes
book Commanded frequent washings. The Jews used much water for purifications,
both Legal; Prescribed. Fol. 290 Par. 2. S. Peter the Primate, and Prince of
the Apostles, Whether S. Peter lay on the discubitory bed above Christ. Fol.
291 Par. 3. Whether Christ washed S. Peter's feet first of all. Whether Judas
was washed at all. No washing of the feet: no partaking of the Eucharist. ib.
Par. 4 S Bernards Pedilavium no Sacrament: Christ's washing his Apostles feet,
an example of humility. Whether Judas was first washed. ibi. Par. 5 All the
Apostles were first washed. Uncertain who first. It matters not. S. Peter's
Privilege. Fol. 292 Par. 6 S. Peter's and Christ's Dialogue. Obedience required.
John the Baptist called a fool, Peter's double denial reproved. Fol. 293 Par.
7 Bodily washing, Spiritual washing. ibid. Par. 8. Christ kissed his Apostles
feet, even Judas his feet. Fol. 294 Par. 9 Whether Christ at the second
Supper had on a supping garment. Whether he had on a Cloak as Barradins,
thought. 3 Vestments, as Buthymius, thought. 5 As some others have thought.
Christ at his Passion had -- (...) (...)

ibid. Par. 10 The last quarter of the seventh hour, or the third part of the
second Supper. What was done, or said in it. The first passage is Christ's
Question. His Diversion. Fol. 294 Par. 11. The title of Lord, Master, forbidden
to the Apostles. The difference between Rab and Rabbi: Ambition forbibden. The
word (...) attributed to Man God in the Old New Testament. How God Man Christ.
is (...) a Lord.
Fol. 295 Par. 12. Woshing of feet imports humbleness of mind. Christ's
Precept, and Example to be imitated. Lorinus his story. Christ the most perfect
example of all. Seneca his advice. The difference between Examplar. Exemplum.
Examples move more than Precepts. The Worthiness, Unworthiness, of the
Administrant adds nothing detracteth nothing from the Sacrament. ibid.
Par. 13 Motives to Humility Fol. 296 Servants equal to their Masters in
participation of Troubles. Blessings.
Servants inferior to their Masters in Civil, Moral, Oconomicall,
affairs.
ibid. Par. 14 Nor worders, nor Krowers: but Doers enjoy happiness. Fol. 297
The Contents of the thirteenth Chapter.
1 THe Par. 2. Passage in the 3. quarter of the second Supper, is, the graduall
detection of the Traitor. The first degree. I ueds not chosen. Judas like an
Ass kicked against Christ. The second degree. Judas a Horse-leech, a
blood-sucker. Fol. 298 Par. 2 Judas aimed at in the Individuum vagum. One of
you, etc. The third degree. Judas. a bold, shameless, impudent man, a brazen
face. Fol. 299 Par. 3 Peter beckned to John. Beckes have their language. S.
John understood S. Peter's beck. S. John, S. Peter's Mediator to Christ. D.
Colins vindicated. ib. Par. 4 The first detection of Judas his uncleanness.
Fol. 300 Par. 5 The 2. detection; he lifted up his heel against Christ. God
fore-knew Judas would be a Traitor. He predestinateth no man to sin. Why
Christ would choose Judas. The Book of Gods Predestination cannot be opened.
ib. Par. 6 The 3. Detection of Judas. One should betray him. Christ's Passions,
and perturbations free from sin. ibid. Par. 7 The fourth and last Detection
of Judas. He it is to whom I shall give a sop. Many questions concerning the
(...). 1. Whether it were Bread or flesh. Diogines saying the Megerians. Nonnus
holds that
1. The thing delivered was Bread. 2. It was dipped in Wine. 3. It was Sacred and
Divine.
The Egyptians Custom. Pope Julius wholly forbade the Intention of the Bread
in the Wine. S. Augustine mistaken. Fol. 331 Par. 8 The Morsel was Part of the
second Supper, Not of the blessed Eucharist.
S. Bernard, Soto, Ludulphus, S. Augustine. S. Hilary. Soto mistaken in
Bucella. Salsamento.

Wine in all three Suppers. In the second Supper great varieties. The Sop not
dipped in Wine. Fol. 332 Par. 9 The second Quaere concerning the (...). Whether
Judas received the blessed Eu^^charist in it or no? Authorities that he did. S.
Augustine, Nonnus, Dominus, a Soto; and Aquinus from Chrysostom, Dionysius, S.
Hirerome, and S. Bernard think so; and Soto says that Haymo, and Remigius
thought so. Fol. 333 Par. 10 Soto his note upon the words. Edentibus illis. He
makes the Tricoenium complete. Fol. 334 Par. 11 Barradius, S. Hierome:
Eugenius; S. Cyprian: Euthymius, Equinas think so. S. Cyprian thought the sop
to be the Sacrament, ib. Par. 12 S. Augustine thought Christ praised the
Eucharist, by Word. Deed.
S. Augustine says, Judas received it. Theophylacts wild Crotchet. Fol. 334
The Contents of the foureteenth Chapter.
Par. 1 AVthorities, that Judas did not receive the blessed Eucharist.
Hilarious, Rupertus, Innocentius, 3. Theophylact, Tatianus, Alexandrinus,
Gregorinus, Pachymeres, Turian, Maximus, Ludolphus, Baradius, Beza. The ground
of S. Augustines, and many other famous men's errors concerning this point.
Fol. 336 Reasons to prove that Judas did receive the blessed Eucharist. Par. 2
The 1. Reason. Fol. 337 Par. 3 The 2 Reason. ib. Par. 4 The 3 Reason. Fol. 338
Par. 5 The 4 Reason. Par. 6 The 5. Reason. Christ never showed any
extraordinary favor to Judas. S. Augustine reports strange courtesies of
Christ to Judas. Judas borne at Marmotis, as says S. Bernard. Much holiness
required to the participation of the body and blood of Christ Notorius wicked
men not to be admitted to the Communion. 338 Par. 7 The 6. Reason, when the
Devil first entered into Judas. The prime intention of the compilers of our
Liturgy concerning those words -- Lest the Devil enter into you, as he did
into Judas, etc. Satan entered into Judas at several times. Fol. 339
The Contents of the fifteenth Chapter.
Par. 1 REasons proving that Judas was not present at the Eucharist. The 1.
Reason drawn from Christ's own Example. Examples pierce deeper than words.
Legal Conjunction. Fol. 343 Par. 2 A second Reason drawn from the Leviticall
Leaper, Leviticus 14.46. ib. Par. 3 A third Reason drawn form the Leviticall
Priests, Ezeck. 44.23. ib. Par. 4 The fourth Reason drawn form Christ's purging
the Temple, from profane things, Mark 11.11. ib. Par. 4 The fourth Reason
drawn form Christ's purging the Temple, from profane things, Mark 11.11. ib.
Par. 5 The fifth Reason drawn from David's example, Psalm. 26. Fol. 344 Par. 6
The sixth Reason, Judas a Devil, Ioh. 6.70. ib. Par. 7 The seventh reason
drawn from 1 Cor. 10.20.21. The cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils
opposite. ib. Par. 8 The eight Reason drawn from Christ's washing the Apostles
feet, Ioh. 13.2. The Schoole-mens opinion. ib. Par. 9 The ninth Reason drawn
from, Heb. 10.26. Fol. 345 Par. 10 The tenth Reason, from Judas his being
excluded from Grace, at the end of the second supper. ib. Par. 11 The
subsequent or concomitant occurences after the Traitors detection. The 1.
Occurrence, Satan's entering into Judas. When and how Satan entered into Judas.
Par. 11 The subsequent or concomitant occurences after the Traitors detection.
The 1. Occurrence, Satan's entering into Judas. When and how Satan entered into
Judas. Par. 11 The subsequent or concomitant occurences after the Traitors
detection. The 1. Occurrence, Satan's entering into Judas. When and how Satan
entered into Judas. Par. 11 The subsequent or concomitant occurences after the
Traitors detection. The 1. Occurrence, Satan's entering into Judas. When and how
Satan entered into Judas. Par. 11 The subsequent or concomitant occurences after
the Traitors detection. The 1. Occurrence, Satan's entering into Judas. When and
how Satan entered into Judas. S. Augustine says Affectu tantum and Voluntate.
Ludolphus. Essentially Not into his soul. But into his body.

Tolet not corporally; but taking a quiet possession of him. Theophylact:
Occupavit Cor ejus. Cyrill: praecipitem egit. Origin: Egit ut Ascensor equum.
Item Judas totum Satanam suscepit in se: After the sop. ib. Par. 12 How Judas
was tempted: Temptations are either
1 Ascendentes Inward. 2 Obrepentes Outward. 3 Immissae Darted in by Satan
himself. ib.
Par. 13 Three Conclusions, 1. Conclusion, the temptations of the world, are
several from the Devils. Three kinds of tempters
1 The World. 2 The Flesh. 3 The Devil.
2. Conclusion. The temptations has three degrees 1 Beginning. 2 Proceeding. 3
Consummation.
Or thus, Consider 1 The Primitive Motion. 2 The Assisting Commotion. 3 The
Plenary Agreeing.
Or thus, 1 Suggestion. 2 Delight. 3 Pleasure.

3 Conclusion. The Devil is the Author and cause of all, and every temptation.
The Devil a tempter. The World, and Flesh the Devils Instruments.
Fol. 347 Par. 14 How the temptations of the Devil be known: from the
temptations of the World, and the Flesh. Fol. 348 Par. 15 Satan's temptations
are Many. Manifold.
Which temptations are grievous, and fiery: Which temptation is the worst, and
most dangerous? How the World Flesh Satan tempts. The same sin may be of
the World. Flesh. Devil.
Fol. 348 Par. 16 The creatures of God tempt us not primarily, but by casualty:
the stars, and heavenly influences tempt no man to sin; no more does any
earrhly thing in its own Nature. What temptations be from Satan: the variety
of Satan's temptations. Fol. 349 Par. 17 All men have been tempted, even the
spiritual: not Christ himself, nor his Apostles free from temptations. The
manner of Satan's temptations. ib. Par. 18 Satan may enter into a man
oftentimes. Judas his state after Satan's second entrance into him. Fol. 350
The Contents of the sixteenth Chapter.
Par. 1 Christ's sentence of separation of Judas, That thou do, do quickly:
Whither those words were spoken to the Devil, or to Judas. Origin Cyrill
Ambrose
thinks they were spoken Either to the devil, or to Judas. Augustine says it
was Verbum Non Imperantis sed Exprobrantis.
The Apostles thought them spoken to Judas. 354 2 The Apostles Nesciencie
Christ himself knew Judas also knew and some think S. John knew
Wherefore Christ spoke these words, That thou do, do quickly. 3 The
Apostles misunderstanding Christ's words. The words were spoken not privately,
but openly. ib. 4. Christ needed nothing: for Himself. his Apostles.
Christ would have the Church plentifully provided of Temporalls. ib. 5. Cooks
Reports censured. Judas carried the bag. Fol. 355 The money in the bag to
be employed for Christ. Apostles. Poor.
Par. 6. Judas his speedy Egresse. His receiving the Sop imports Orall
manducation. Par. 7 Lanthornes, and torches import Outward light. Inward
darkness.
Judas his Egresse at night. At what hour of the Night Judas went forth.
Selneccerus his Distribution of the Night-watches. What was done in every
several watch. Selneccerus censured. The crowing of the Cock about what hour
of the night. ib. Par. 8. Two questions concerning this Cocke-crowing. 1.
Question. Whether this Cock did crow
Naturally or by Divine Motion.
Christ's look upon Peter was operative, and Virtuous, Corporal and
Spiritual. S. Augustine censured. Peter's three denialls, when, and where. Fol.
357 Par. 9. 2. Question concerning this Cock-crowing. How the different
Relations of the several Evangelists may be reconciled. Here are handled 4.
Quaeres. 1. Quaere, whether Christ said, as S. Mark, or as S. Matthew and S.
Luke has it. Fol. 344 Par. 10 The 2 Quaere, whether S. Peter's threefold
denial was accomplished, before the Cock crowed at all, or before it crowed
twice. ib. Par. 11. The 3. Quaere: How often S. Peter was questioned, or by
others affirmed to be Christ's Disciple. ib. Par. 12. The fourth Quaere: How
many times Peter denied Christ. ib. Par. 13. Answer to the 1. Quaere. Fol. 359
Par. 14. Answer to the 2. Quaere. ib. Par. 15. Answer to the 3. Quaere.
Cajetan thinks S. Peter was 7. times examined: thrice by Women, four times by
men. ib. Par. 16. Answer to the fourth Quaere. Cajetans frivolous objection.
Fol. 360 Par. 17. Three sorts of people questioned Peter. Peter's threefold
denial, and the manner thereof. ib. Par. 18. The Diverse Relations of the
Evangelists reconciled. Fol. 361 Par. 19. The Paschall Common Supper lasted
about 1. quarter 3. quarters of an hour. All the Leviticall Ceremonies
performed between 6. and 7. a clock at Night. Fol. 362
LIB. 3.
The Contents of the first Chapter.
Par. 1A Preface by way of Admonition to the Unlearned. Invocation of the
Learned.
Fol. 522 Par. 2 Reasons of the word Tricoenium, and, why I call the Work
Tricoenium Christi. A threefold Supper farther proved. The Papists offended for
calling the third Supper, the Supper of the Lord. A deviation concerning
Maldonat the Jesuit his Life, and Doctrine. The ancient fathers, both Latin
and Greek, call the third Supper, the Supper of our Lord. Fol. 523 Par. 3 A
discourse concerning the Agapae, or Feasts of Charity. They succeeded in the
place of the Chagigah, or second Supper. When Eaten. The Eucharists before
Tertullians days eaten in the Morning: The Agapae in the Evening. The
Eucharist and Agapae in the Primitive Church were kept near about the same
time. Christians falsely accused for eating Infants at their Agapae. The Agapae
kept on the Lords day. What scandals were taken by the Gentiles against the
Christians Agapae, Fol. 526 Par. 4 The second Eucharist, and not the Agapae (as
the Papists think) is meant by the Supper of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.20. The
Agapae never practiced before Christ's Ascension. The Agapae at first, were used
holily and religiously: sometimes Severally from Jointly with the Lords Supper.
The Corinthians did eat them before the Lords Supper. They were celebrated by
the Corinthians in the Church. Each Schism of the Corinthians supped a part,
by themselves. The poor neglected by the Corinthians in their Agapae. The
primary end of the Agapae, the relief of the poor. Fol. 229 Par. 5 Charity
modestly covers a multitude of sins. The ill fashions of the Corinthians in
receiving the Lords Supper reproved. Casaubone censured in two points. First,
that the Corinthians received the Eucharist in the Morning. Secondly, that the
Eucharist ought to be called a Dinner, or a breakfast, rather than a supper.
The Churches, both Western and Eastern, did receive the supper of the Lord
fasting in the fourth Age. On Good Friday the Church used to receive it thrice.
That use broken by Pope Honorius, and the Counsel of Tarracon. Pope
Eutichianus, his Decretall against such as received the Sacrament not-fasting.
Some Churches of Africa, and some Egyptians received it about Eventide
not-fasting. In the second age of the Church, in Tertullians time they received
it, some at Night, some as Mealetime, and some ere Break of day* We receive
the holy Communion in the Morning in remembrance of Christ's Resurrection. Fol.
530 Par. 6 In the Primitive Church they did lie on beds, when they did eat
their Love Feasts. Love Feasts forbidden to be kept in the Church by the
Laodicean Council, ancient Fathers, and later Divines. Kneeling in the time of
solemn Prayers, and administration of the Supper, commended by Calvin. Fol.
533 Par. 7 In S. Cyprians, and S. Augustines days, some received the Eucharist
every day others at certain times only. S. Augustines Rule, Let every one
follow the custom of the Church, wherein he lives. Eudemon Johannis by
Casaubone reproved. A Christian (...), or holy complying to avoid Schism, and
for concords sake, was practiced by the ancient Fathers, by other Christians,
and by Calvin himself; and commended by Causabone. Rigaltius, and others.
Calvin's good advise to Farellus. His divine temper against Luther. Fol. 534
Par. 8 The holy Kiss usually at the blessed Sacrament. Forborne on
Good Friday. The Kiss of Charity, why so called. It Is called holy to
discriminate it, from false amorous, and civil kisses. Why the holy Kiss was
omitted on Good-Fry-day. Diverse kinds of kissing. Some of salvation, some of
Adoration. Diverse manners of Kissing. Some kiss the lips, or mouth, former
parts, and hinder parts of the shoulder, cheeks, bands, back of the hands, the
feet, and the toe. The reason of Kissing the Popes toe. The Penitents in
Tertullians days did kiss the very footsteps of other Christians. Kissing of
a Tablet, or holy Board. The reason thereof. Holden by the ears in kissing
used among Heathen, and among Christians. The reason thereof. Joah held Amasa
by the beard, and kissed him. The custom of kissing one another at the
receiving of the Sacrament continued till S. Augustines days. The manner of
kissing in Prester John's Country, and among the Persians. Fol. 536 Par. 9 When
the Agapae began and ended, uncertain. Not to be eaten in the Church, and in
the Chancell. The use, and abuse of them, even in the Apostles times. The
abusers of them termed spots and blemishes in the abstract. The words, breaking
of bread, and breaking of bread from house to house. Act. 2. verse 44, 45, 46.
interpreted. The degrees by which abuses crept into the Agapae. Fol. 538
The Contents of the second Chapter.
1 Diverse ends, why the third holy Supper was instituted. 1 Reason. To
substantiate the preceding type. The diference between fulfilling of a Law,
and realizing or consummating of a type. Tertullian censured. Hierome
applaeuded. The Passover was a figure of the Eucharist, and of Christ's
Passion. All figures are not Antytipes. 541 2 2. Reason. To confer more grace
upon it, than was given unto the Jews. The figure must come short in
exellencie to the thing figured. The verity and effect of the Lords Supper in
us. 542 3 3. Reason. To prefigure Christ's death, and going out of the world.
All Sacraments of the old Law, were figures of the Eucharist: and did typifie
Christ's death. 543 4 4. Reason. To be a Remembrance to us of Christ's death,
till his coming again. Tholy Eucharist not only seals, and fignifieth
Grace; but also conferreth and exhibiteth it by it self in the true use
thereof. How far forth this effect is to be understood; Why Christ received
the blessed Sacrament before he went into the Garden. Christ had degrees of
devotion. Not to faint in Prayer. The blessed Virgin Mary not so full of Grace,
but that she was capable of more latitude. 544 5 5. Reasons. To unite us to
Christ. ib. 6. Reason. To breed brotherly love; and to unite us one to
another. Hence
the Communion of Saints. the Eucharist called Communion.
7. Reason. To be an Antidote against daily sins. The Eucharist called Panis
supersubstantialis; and by S. Ambrose, Panis quotidianus. 8. Reason. To further
our spiritual Life. 9. Reason Because it is the Sacrament of spiritual
charity, and filiation.
The Contents of the third Chapter.
Par. 1 What course Christ took in the perfiting of this third, or last
Supper, First he removed Judas. The ceremonies of the Grecians at their
Sacrifices. S. Augustines error, who thought Judas did eat the bread of the
Lord Sacramentally. A more probable opinion, that Christ did not institute the
blessed Eucharist till Judas was gone forth. After what words Christ began his
third Supper. The word When, does not always note the immediation of times, or
things consequent. Fol. 547 Par. 2 A discourse (by way of digression.) The
first part thereof. Concerning the division of the Bible into Chapters and
Verses. Neither the Evangelists, nor the Apostles divided their writings into
Chapters and Verses. Neither Christ nor his Apostles in the new Testament cited
Chapter, or Verse of the old Testament. Probable, that the Books of the old
Testament were from the beginning distinguished and named, as now they are. And
began and ended as now they do. The Jews of old divided the Pentateuch into
54. Sections Readings, or Lectures. The Jewish Section is either
Incompleate; termed Parashuh, or distinction, signed with three P.P.P.
Complete, styled Sedar, an Order marked with three S.S.S.
All the Jewish Lectures read over once a year. The first Lecture, what time
of the year it began. At what place of Scripture every one of the 54.
Lectures begins and ends. Six Books of Psalms according to the Jewish
division. Every Lecture of the Law consisted of 136 verses. Antioch rent the
Law in pieces. God more regards every Letter of the Law, than the stars of
Heaven. Fol. 549 Par. 3 Puritans taxed, who tax our Church for mangling the
Word of God, and patching up a Lesson. The Books of the Bible, were not at the
first divided by Chapters, nor the Chapters, by Verses, as now they are. The
Jews had by heart all the old Testament. Fol. 551 Par. 4 Traskites censured.
The Jews shall be converted to Christians; not Christians to Jews. Secondly,
the second part of the Digression. Against filthy prophaners of Churches and
Churchyards; more especially against them of the City of Exeter. Nero
be-pissed Venus tomb. The Heathens very zealous against such profanation.
Caecilius his opinion, concerning Vespasian forbade it. The Authors Apology.
His petition, both to the Clergy, and Laity of Exeter. Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 23.12.
against filthiness. The Cates, and the Birds cleanliness. God and his holy
Angels walk in the midst of our Temples. That Law of God, not Ceremonial, or
Judicial, but Moral. The Esseni diligent observers of it. Cleanliness a
kind of holiness. Uncleanness in the Camp was an uncleanness in the Jews
themselves. God commands cleanliness, and sweetness for man's sake; not for
his own. Vncleanlinesse makes God turn away from us. God a lover of internal
and external cleanness. The Abrahemium the first Churchyard in the world.
Jacobs reverence to the place where he slept. Some places more holy than other.
The Authors exhortation in this respect to the Magistrates of Exeter. Par. 5
Campanella The Friar examined, and censured. He learned Art magic of the
Devil. Every one has his Tutelary Angel, as Saint Hierome and Campanella are
of opinion. Campanella healed of the spleen (as he says) by charms. The
name of a Friar more scandalous than of a Priest. Proverbs and taunts against
Friars and Monks. A Friar, A liar. Friars railed against, both by Ancient and
Modern Writers. Priests and Jesuits at debate who shall be the chiefest in
authority. Friars Deifie the Pope. Friars lashed by Pope Pius the second.
Campanella a prisoner for twenty years together. The Iesuists nipped by the
Sarbonists: banished by the Venetians: scoured by Peter de la Marteliere in the
Parliament of France. Fol. 556 Par. 6 The third part of the Digression
concerning Conventicles. The usance of the Zelots at their Conventicles. The
effects of them. None of Gods children in ancient time ever practiced them,
unless in the days of persecution. Jews to be imitated in Sabbath Lectures.
Every one must labor to be Christi formis. Tertullian short of the truth
concerning the force of Laws. Reason and Religion must be regulated by
authority. General rules must be stamped by the approbation of public
Authority. Order must over-sway Subjects, and their Religion. Singularity
condemned. Guides of the Church a gift of God. Fol. 557 Par. 7 The Law of Moses
anciently divided into Books, but not into Chapters and Verses. Elias Levita
says, it was first divided into Chapters and Verses by the Jews of Tiberias.
The New Testament divided by the Ancients otherwise than now it is, both in
Chapters and Verses; witness Caesarius, Euthymius, Heinsius, Nonnus, Suadas,
Cyrill, Sextus Senensis, the Arabic Translators, and Junins, Heinsius and
Junius opinion concerning the ancient divisions. The Syriacke Translation of
the New Testament disliked by Bellarmine, and others. In all probability not
delivered by Saint Mark to the Churches of Syria, and Egypt. How the Acts of
the Apostles; the first and second Epistles to the Corinthians, are divided
into Chapters by the Arabicke translation. How the four Evangelists are
divided into Chapters by Ammonius. The division of the four Gospels not of
Divine institution; but of the Churches ordination. Fol. 559 Par. 8 The blessed
Eucharist instituted immediately upon Judas his Excommunication. The Sacrament
of the Lords Supper instituted, not whilst the Apostles were eating the second
or common Supper: yet before they departed out of the Coenaculum: Estius in
this point taxed. The practice of the Eastern Churches at the time of the
Celebration of the Lords Supper, and the reason thereof. Salianus taxed
profane persons to be excluded from the very beholding of holy Mysteries. Fol.
561 Par. 9 When Christ was about to celebrate the Sacrament of the New Law,
what Order he used: How he began: How he proceeded. Certain things may be
determined certainly; probable things can be resolved on but probably.
Aristotle's sayings preferred before other Philosophers. Small degrees of
knowledge that are agreeable to reason, are to be embraced: from small
beginnings many times follow strange Conclusions. Plato's divine history of
Socrates, and Alcibiades. Homers story of Minerva, and Diomedes. Salt Seawater
may be made fresh diverse ways. Diverse curious instances to this purpose. Art
may imitate Nature. Diverse rare instances to this purpose. The Island Arethusa
near Hispaniola. and diverse Rocks near the Island Navazza on the borders of
America, being in the midst of the Salt-sea, send forth fresh waters. The
reason why the Salt-sea sends forth fresh fish. New inventions are to be
admired. Many things may be perfected, which yet seem incredible. Gunpowder
may be made of river-water. The Turks have found it. Of Oil distilling from
Alume-hils: the Spaniards have practiced it. Why not of our Bath-waters? More
benefit by this invention than by the discovery of the man in the Moon: or the
Lord Verulam's new Atlantis: or Campanella's Northern Island. The best
load-stones in the East Indies, in China, and Bengala. The art of flying
thought possible by Campanella. The man in the Moon added much to this
Invention. Two ships of equal burden and shape, yet of unequal sailing: two
clocks of the same making, yet not of the same running: Campanella's reason
thereof. Light will peep in at a little hole: The West Indies found out per
minima indicia. Matters of greatest moment have many times the smallest
beginnings: diverse dainty instances to this purpose: especially the discovery
of the Gunpowder treason. Where evident Scripture fails, strong presumptions,
or tradition, or reason may carry it. Truth (says Democritus) is hid in a
deep well. Matters of faith and not to be grounded upon the bare opinions of
men. The Church not bound to do many things which Christ did, especially in
circumstance of time. They who defer Baptism till thirty years of their age
(as Christ did) are taxed. Christ had many reasons so to do. Christ's
administration of the Eucharist a Pattern not for the circumstance, but for
the substantial form thereof. Diverse Circumstances wherein we differ from
Christ in administering the blessed Eucharist. Altars in Scripture sometimes
called Tables; Tables sometimes termed Altars. Fol. 562
The Contents of the fourth Chapter.
Par. 1 THe second Particular of the fifth General; Wherein is showed that the
blessed Eucharist was instituted in the same room, wherien they ate the
Paschall, and Common supper. That room was a large upper Chamber, well
furnished, and prepared. In that room, The 120. Disciples, Act. 1. were
gathered together. Fol. 569 Par. 2 The third Section or Particular of the fifth
General, shows, that the most holy Eucharist was not instituted whilst the
Apostles were eating the second or common supper. but after that supper. The
Inadvertencie of this point, has bred many Errors. Aquinas his gross opinion
disliked by Estius. Both the bread and the wine were alike administered after
supper. ib. Par. 3 What gesture or posture our Savior used at the institution
of the blessed Eucharist, uncertain. Ludolphus twice taxed. Hugh Broughtons
wild Irish opininion touched at. More probable he did institute it on a Table,
that on the Pavement: 'Twas not the usual fashion in Christ's time, for the
Jews to eat their meat on the Floor. Fol. 571 Par. 4 The fashions of diverse
Nations in taking their suppers were diverse. The fashion of the
Turks, and Eastern parts of the World. Ancient Romans. Their three sorts of
Tables. Cylibantum. Cartibulum. Urnarium.
Jews, who had also diverse kinds of Tables.
A round Table. Aretius his story of King Herod; and of the precious Charger
which Christ used at his Supper. Sermo Domini in Coenaculo. A Table at the
consecrating of the blessed Eucharist, not of absolute necessity. Most probable
the Table Christ used was a square Table. Beza taxed for expounding the word
(Table) metaphorically. Origin buried the Scriptures in Metaphors, and
Allusions. King David's Table, Psalm. 23.5. what it was. The Jews made much
used of Tables. Fol. 573 Par. 5 The fourth Section or Particular of the fifth
General. Which shows, That the blessed Eucharist was instituted on a Table.
What manner of Table it was, our blessed Savior instituted the blessed
Eucharist on, is uncertain. The Table of Shittim wood, Exodus 25.23. What
allegorically it signified. The administering, and receiving of the Eucharist
called the Supper of the Lord. Christ's Table in his Kingdom. The Jews Tables
in Christ's time were not on the ground: but standing Tables. The use of Tables
is to eat and drink on them. To serve Tables, what it is. The most holy
Eucharist in Ignatius his days was celebrated on Tables. Christ given
For us, in the Sacrifice; Per modum Victimae. To us, in the Sacrament; Per
modum Epuli.
Banquets most commonly se^ on Tables. Altars are for Offerings, and Tables for
eating. Christ the Altar, Offering, and Priest. Christ used a table at the
first Consecration. The Christians in the Primitive Church in times of
persecution used tables, where ever they came. They made use of unconsecrated
tables, cups, and vessels. The name and use of Altar vindicated. The Devil had
tables erected to him by the Gentiles. God had tables erected to him by the
Christians. Fol. 576 Par. 6 The fifth Section, or Particular of the fifth
General, wherein is showed, that the holy Eucharist was administered by Christ
on a distinct table. Truth commanded: not forbidden to be searched out. A fling
at Campanella, who ascribes sense to stocks and stones; and reason to brute
beasts. Of two opinions, the most probable is to be preferred. Most probable,
the Deifying Sacrament was celebrated at a distinct table. Proved by arguments.
1 With reference to the parties Recipient. De maximis maxima cura est habenda.
Domitians folly. Nothing equal to Christ's Body, and Blood.
2 In regard of the party Administrant. Christ rose up from the Paschall Table
to wash the Apostles feet. Probable, he did the like to wash their Souls,
Christ's humility at his Prayers. A story of a devout Cardinal. Christ's holy
Gesture when he blessed any thing. At the first institution of any great
matter more reverence is used, than afterward. diverse instances to this
purpose. All Christ's Actions, as well as his person, pleased God.
Fol. 579
The Contents of the fifth Chapter.
Par. 1 IN the first point, Bellarmine is silent; Aquinas affirms it; Soto
seems to incline to the contrary opinion; Luther resolves he took it not.
Many Canons of the Church command the Priests to receive first. So does the
Council of Toledo. So did the Law of Moses. Soto his proof is ridiculous.
Saint Hierome is express for the affirmative that Christ did Receive first. So
is the Gloss on Ruth. 3. So is Soto in his answer to the objection to the
contrary. So is Barradius. So is S. Chrysostom. So is Titus the Abbreviator of
him. So is Isychius, and the old Rimer. Fol. 587 Par. 2 A double eating of the
Sacrament, Spiritual, and Sacramental. Christ received himself both ways.
So thinks Aquinas, Soto, and Alexander Hales. To receive Sacramentally without
the increase of Grace, how it happens. Incapability of Grace happens two ways.
1 When a sinner puts an Impediment against it. 2 When one is fall of Grace
before hand. So Christ. Dominicus Soto Confessor to Charles the first. Christ
might take the blessed Eucharist for example sake. Gregorius de Valentia
treads in Soto his steps.
Durandus faith, the Apostles did Con coenare, but not Con-celebrare cum
Christo; whom Cajetan approves. Lucas Burgensis is express, that Christ did
receive first So are many of the Fathers. Diverse collections for the
Affirmative, Bishop Lake puts it out of question.
Fol. 589 Par. 3 The first Section of the seventh General: Wherein is
declared what posture Christ used when he consecrated the Eucharist. All
Gestures in Religious worship reduced to two heads. Some belong to Hope, as the
lifting up of the Eyes and Hands. Humiliation, as the uncovering of the Head,
beating of the Breast, bowing of the Knee.
Some gesture or other is necessary at the receiving of the holy Sacrament.
What gesture Christ used, cannot be demonstrated. Certainly the Devoutest. In
old time they used to pray sometimes kneeling, sometimes falling down on their
faces, sometimes standing, and sometimes bowing down their heads.
Fol. 590 Par. 4 According to the degrees of Hope, Fear, there are degrees of
Worship. The Publicans gesture, Luke 18. descanted on. God gave to Man a lofty
countenance. Whence called in the Greek (...). Foure-footed beasts have seven
Muscles in their eyes: Man but six. Why the eyes are called by the Hebrews
Oogon. Naturally what one Eye does, but do. Eyelids, and the differences of
them in Men, Beasts, and Birds. One Eye in the singular number often used in
Scripture for both. Fol. 591 Par. 5 Falling on the Face, and Kneeling in Divine
worship. Examples thereof. And diversity of Opinions concerning the same. Men
have kneeled unto men. Examples thereof. In thankesgiving, and Blessings they
ordinarily stood up, with Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven. Variety of
gesture according to the variety of affairs, commendable, and necessary. A
fixed gesture is not essential to a Supper, Feasting, not gesture, makes a
Supper. Fol. 593 Par. 6 Adoration and the Degrees thereof. 1 Degree, Uncovering
of the Head. 2 Degree, Bowing of the Head and Face. 3 Degree, Kneeling. 4
Degree, falling on the face. 5 Prayer, Kneeling, Prostration, Rising again,
Standing in adoration what they signify. Jacobus de Valentia his degrees of
adoration rejected. Others preferred. 1 Reverence and its Act. 2 Veneration and
its Act. 3 Worshp. 4 Adoration.

Adoration produces
1 An act of the Intellect. 2 An act of Will. 3 Bodily Acts, bending, kneeling,
Prostration, etc.
Probable, when Christ instituted the blessed Eucharist, he prayed and kneeled.
Prayer, and thankesgiving, almost one. Two motives to Prayer, Fear and Hope.
The fruits and gestures thereof: both joined together in prayer. Fol. 594 Par.
7 By the ancient Heroes, and Semidei, are meant famous Men and Princes of
renown. Secundei (says Trithemius) successively rule the World. Pagan Gods
were very men. Arnobius, and Minutius Foelix do mention the places of their
Births, Countries, etc. Alexander wrote unto his mother De Diis Hominibus.
Tertullian wrote of Saturn that he was a Man, the Father and Son of a Man.
The Heathen Gods were borne and dyed. The Heathen to preserve the memory of
their Heroes, made Statues and Images of them. Minutius Foelix reproves their
manner of Deifying Men. The ancient Romans made an absurd decree, that the
Emperor might not consecrate a God without the consent of the Senate. The very
people did one day Deifie a God, and the next day Vndeified him. Tiberius the
Emperor approved Christ to be a God. The Senate reject him. Fol. 595 Par. 8
The Pagans had several kinds of worshipping their consecrated Gods. First
they did lift up their eyes unto them. Secondly, they blessed them. Thirdly,
they did sacrifice unto them. Fourthly, they did set their Idols upon their
Beast, and Cattle.
The lepid story of the Image of Isis set upon an Asses back. They made
Caroches, and Carts to caray their Images upon. They made Beds in their Temples
in honor of their Idols. They doubed them over with silver and gold. They
clothed them with costly garments. The story of Dionysius his sacraledge. The
story of the Knave that stole away Jupiters golden eyes out of his head. Fol.
596 Par. 9 Another kind of Adoration of Idols, at distance. To kiss the hand
in passing by the Idol. So did Cecilius worship the Image of Serapis. A
Creditour by the Law of the twelve Tables might-cut in pieces his condemned
Debtor, who was not able to pay him. The rigor of that Law commuted into
shame. The manner of shaming such debtors. There is a civil death of a man's
honor, and good name; as well as a corporal death of the Body. Fol. 597 Par.
10 Their fashion of Adoring their Idols, was either at Distance, or Close by.
Adoration at distance was diverse, either of Idols in heaven, or on Earth. If
they adored the Celestial bodies,
1 They looked up toward the Heavens. 2 They did in heart give the honor to
the Creature, which is due only to the Creator. 3 Their mouths did Kiss their
hands. 4 They prayed unto them, either audibly, or tacitly.
If they Adored their Images on Earth,
1 They stood before their Images, somewhat off. 2 They solemnly moved their
right hand to their lips. 3 They kissed the forefinger joined with the thumb.
4 They turned about their body on the same hand. 5 They did draw nearer, and
kiss the Images.
They kissed not only their Lips, and Mouths: but other parts of their bodies
also. Fol. 598 Par. 11 The manner of saluting one another among the Persians.
The story of Polyperchon. Adoration, whence so called. The reason why in
adoration they aid both bend and kiss. The reason why they put their hands to
their mouths in adoration. The ancient Romans had a house dedicated to the
Sun. A
greater Obeliske dedicated to the Sun. meaner to the Moon.
Kings adored before either Sun or Moon. The Persians worshipped the Sun.
The manner how. The buckler of the Sun, what it is. Servius Tullus built a
Temple in Honor of the Moon. The Manichees adored the Sun and the Moon.
Fol. 599 Par. 12 The original of Adoration. Kings and Princes had not their
original of worship from the adoration of Idols or Images; as Mr Seldom
opens. But Statues and Images had the beginning of their adoration from the
examplary worshipping of Kings, and famous Heroes: as Geverard Elmenhorst
proves from Saint Cyprian, Athenagoras, and Alexanders letter unto his mother.
About Serug his time, they begun to draw the pictures of Magistrates, Tyrants,
etc. About Terah's days, they made Statues and Images. Statues were made
1 Of Clay, by the Potter. 2 Of stone, by the Mason. 3 Of silver, gold, etc. by
the Goldsmiths. 4 Of iron, by the Blacksmith, And other Artificers.
The diverse Appellations of Images made for
Gods. Heroes. Kings. Wisemen. Well-deserving men.
The cause of Adoration sometimes
Greatness. Goodness.
Adoration, a
Reward for the dead. Illective for the living.
Both Men and Women for some evident privilege of Virtue, were deified. The
first inventors of every thing profitable for men, Deified. Jupiter, so called
a juvando. Jovis, Jovi, Jovem, Jove, corrupt derivations from Jehovah.
Fol. 601 Par. 13 The Cities, Countries, and Places of the Heathenish gods are
known, where they were Borne. Lived. were Buried.
The great variety of gods and goddesses, among the Heathen. Saturne^ the
ancientest among the Heathen Gods. Jupiter borne and buried in Crete. 300
Jupiters. The famous Heroes, and Princes were in the World before their Images.
Statues
were at first comforts. are now sacred relics.
Common people pray unto, and publicly consecrated Images. The mouths of the
Image of Hercules many Images at Rome
worn bare by kissing. Fol. 602 Par. 14 In ancient times living Kings were
worshipped, and adored. Sons of God, Genesis 6.2. were sons of Princes.
Elohim, the name of God; applyable to Princes. Great men in ancient times
adored for their wickedness, Men reverenced, and adored for their Name. In
ancient time great story of Kings. Nine in one battle, Genesis 14. Usual in India
for Subjects to kiss their Kings by way of Worship. Some Kissed their hands,
yet did not adore. Adored, yet kissed not their hands.
Adorare, to worship, used for Orare, to pray, both in Scripture, profane
authors, and Fathers: Praying to an Idol, makes it a false God. The true God
only must be prayed to. Prayer used for Adoration. Adoration for Prayer. The
story of the Father, ( Wisdom the 14) for the untimely death of his son.
Fol. 603 Par. 15 The story in the Mr of the Ecclesiastical History, concerning
the Original of Idols. Idolatry had diverse inventours. The Egyptian Idolatry
the worst. That place of Scripture; Then began men to call upon the Name of the
Lord, Genesis 4.26. vidicated from the misinterpretations of Bellarmine and
Waldensis; who apply it to a Monastical life. Others who gather from hence the
Original of Idolatry.
Examined at large, and truly interpreted. No Idolatry before the flood. Enos
was Called a God. Held a God for his admirable virtue and justice.

His sons called the sons of God, Genesis 6.2. So Adam: so are Kings, and their
Officers; so are Christians. Enos the first who called upon God, by the name of
Jehovah. How God was not known by the name of Jehovah to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. Two conjectures of the Author. Many words in the Hebrew Bible signify
contrary things; to excite our minds to a diligent search of the right
meaning. Authorities that Idolatry was not before the flood: Silianus, Cyrill,
Irenaeus, etc. The first Idols had their primitive Adoration from the Adoration
of Kings. The latter Kings, etc. have had Adoration from some kind of
Adoration derived from Idols. When Christ celebrated the holy Communion, it is
probable he fell down on his face. Falling on the face is the most forcible
Gesture exciting to Devotion. The prostration of the body is the elevation of
the soul. Christ in the celebration of his last Supper varied his gestures as
occasion required. The Church ought to imitate Christ in those things which
she commands.
Fol. 605
The Contents of the sixth Chapter.
Par. 1 THe first Action. He took bread. Christ never took any thing into
his hand in a religious manner, but it was bettered. Ignatius was (...), or the
child whom Christ took in his arms. Christ's Scourge had more virtue, than an
ordinary whip. Christ's touch imports virtue. Fol. 614 Par. 2 The second
Action, He blessed the bread. What it is to bless. Many kinds of blessings.
Gods blessing, what it is. The effects of Gods blessing. Joseph a Prophet.
Christ's blessing of the five loaves caused their multiplication, not in Number
but in Magnitude. Christ's blessing is like Gods blessing; it consists not in
mere words. It is effectual in operation. Christ's blessing of the bread, was
not the consecration of his Body. Parents blessing. Priests blessing; and the
effects thereof. Illyricus would have altered the doctrine of the Keys.
Christ's benediction consisted partly of Prayer. Thanksgiving.
Giving of thanks, and blessing, sometimes used promiscuously. Piscatot's
observation. How God Blesses. How Christ Blesses. How Man blesses God. Why
the blessed Sacrament is called the Eucharist. In the Celebration of the
blessed Sacrament Blessing Giving of thanks
all one.
The power of blessing greater than the power of Nature. Man's blessing of God,
a superlative kind of Thankesgiving. Christ's blessing of God, what it is. The
virtue of Christ's blessing. Man's blessing of Man, what it is. Christ's
thanksgiving, and blessing in the Sacrament, what it was. The Jews had
distinct Graces for their Suppers. Christ's benediction of the Bread in the
Sacrament, not the consecration of it.
Lyranus. Hugo, Innocencius, and S. Ambrose taxed in this point. The properest
use of (...) amongst men. How Christ in the blessed Sacrament did (...).
Bless. (...). Givethankes
Probable that Christ's blessing was not without Imposition, or lifting up of
his hands. Heave Wave
offerings in the old Law, typs of this. Possibly Christ might use Elevation
and waving of the bread at the Benediction. Fol. 614 Par. 3 The third Action,
He brake it. The end why he brake it. Maldonat (saying breaking of the bread,
and giving of it is all one) is exploded. Christ in breaking the bread,
following thee Hebrew custom. Breaking of the bread did properly signify the
breaking of his body on the Cross. How Christ's body was broken. Breaking of
the bread shows the ancient custom of imparting the Sacrament to the
standers by. Lorinus, in saying, the bread was cut with a Knife, is against
three Evangelists, and S. Paul. The ancient Fathers do not use the term of
Cutting, but Breaking of bread. The Not-breaking of the bread in the Sacrament,
is a trasgression of the first Institution. The Church of Rome herein censured.
The practice of the Primitive Church: both in receiving of the Bread and Wine.
The Papists taxed for baring the Laiety the Cup. Broken, and divided, not all
one, as Gaspar Sanctius ridiculously thinks. The Rabbin that taught Baronius,
direct against Lorinus. The form of bread at the Jews ordinary Feasts,
described by Baron. cut Lozing-wise. The form of the Panis discussatus,
religiously used among the ancient good Christians. A cross, or Christ
crucified on the Cross, was in ancient times impressed on the mystical bread.
The picture of a Dove, of the Holy Lamb, and of a Shepherd with a sheep at
his back; and the mystical signification of them. Fol. 619 Par. 4 The fourth
Action. He gave it to his Disciples. He himself gave it to every of his
Disciples particularly. The consecrated bread given by Christ, was unleavened
bread. We may consecrate either Leavened, or unleavened bread. It is probable,
Christ gave the Cup Himself to every of his Disciples. Musculus censured
therein. Aquinas saying. The Sacrament is many things materially, but one thing
formally. He gave it to his Disciples. The Communicants at this Eucharist, were
none of the common Disciples, but only the eleven Apostles. They in some sort
represented the rest of the Priesthood only. Christ never gave power to any
Layman to administer his sacred body. Common persons are not to meddle with
holy things. Gods judgments upon such profane persons. Christ at this
Eucharist gave his Apostles power to Consecrate the sacred Eucharist. After his
Resurrection, and before his Ascension, he seconded this power. The Apostles in
another regard represented the whole company of all his Disciples, and
Christians in general. Christ, when he Consecrated the blessed Eucharist,
represented the body of the Clergy Idealiter. But when he received it, he
represented the whole body of the universal Church, both Clergy and Laity.
The Apostles, qua Apostoli Discipuli represented the body of the Clergy.
Laity.
Fol. 21 Par. 5 Secondly, His words. First word: Take. He said, or Saying, were
not spoken by Christ: neither are they part of his Consecration. The words of
Consecration were onely-these; This is my Body, etc. Innocentius the third, his
opinion concerning Christ's Consecration of the blessed Sacrament, censured. A
second and third opinion, related by Aquinas, censured. Lucas Brugensis thinks
Christ used more words in the Consecration. When, or at what time Christ said
those words, Take, etc. Christ gave the Hallowed bread not in Promise, but in
exhibition. John the Baptist called a fool. Epictetus saying. Christ put not
the blessed Sacrament into the Disciples mouths, but into their hands. In the
Primitive Church, the Christians received it into their hands. So did they in
Tertullians time. So did they in Cyprians days. Taking is by the hand. Cases
may fall out, wherein the hallowed food may be put into the Recipients mouths.
We are not bound to do all, whatsoever Christ did at the first Celebration.
We must do all, whatsoever he commanded us to do. Authorities for taking the
blessed Sacrament into our hands. The Tripartite History. Chrysostom, Cyprian.
Tertullian. The Schismatics in old time divided not themselves from the
Catholic Church in this respect; as S. Augustine witnesses. Nor Novatus; as
Ruffinus records. The Christians in ancient time reserved the Sacrament. Some
reject things really tendered unto them. Fol. 623 Par. 6 The second word: Eat.
It is probable that Judas did receive the Sop into his Hand. Mouth.
Many of the Fathers did think so. Sins revealed grow more sinful.
Carolostadius his fancy by most Divines disliked, disploded. The Future tense
is never used for the Present tense, but the Present tense is often used for
the Future in Scripture. Fol. 627 Par. 7 The third word: This is my body, which
is given for you, etc. Transubstantiation roved at. The farther Disquisition
thereof wittingly and willingly forborne. The Authors Apology for the same.
His Valediction to the remainder of his Miscellanies. Resolves to spend the
remainder of his days in holy Devotion, and continual Praying. The Moors of
Morocco Pray six times every twenty four hours. The Lords Prayer highly
commended, and preferred before all other Prayers. It ought to be used by every
Christian at least seven times a day. The Church of England commended: Unto
which the Author submits himself, and all his Writings. Bishop Jewel, Bishop
Andrews, Bishop Morton, Bishop White, and incomparable Master Hooker, have
written Polemically the controversies of the Lords Supper: unto whose
unanswerable Writtings the Author refers all scrupulous Christians for their
better satisfaction.
The Contents of the seventh Chapter.
Par. 1 THe Word of God has omitted to set it down in particular. It Is
probable, they did kiss their right hand, and so received it. An evil custom
of false complementing by kissing the hand in Jobs days. In adoration our
hands must be lifted up. Our voice lowly, and submisse. In great Agonies it is
lawful to cry aloud, and roar. Probable it is, the Apostles received the
heavenly Sacrament humbly kneeling on both their knees. Tertullian is punctual
against Sitting, even after prayer. The Heathen after their prayers, and some
even at their prayers, did use to sit upon their Altars: Their servants had
three Sanctuaries to fly unto from their angry Masters. Numa's Law, to sit at
the time of adoring their false gods. A reason, why no passage, either in the
Evangelists, nor Apostles, commandelh Adoration at the Sacrament. How the
ancient Fathers are to be understood, when they say, The holy Eucharist is to
be adored. Fol. 635 Par. 2 Reasons, proving that the Apostles received the
blessed Eucharist kneeling. Par. 1 Reason. Most sacred reverence is to be
exhibited to most sacred things, Par. 2 Reason. The Fathers of the Primitive
Church received it kneeling. Par. 3 Kneeling does edify the simple. Par. 4 It
is an Ecclesiastical custom.
The manner of Reverence used both by Priests, and Lay people in S.
Chrysostomes days. God will be worshipped as well in our body, as in our
Spirit. The Penitents in Tertullians time did kneel down at the receiving of
Absolution. And it was the common practice of all other Christians in his days
to worship God kneeling: Except from Easter to Whitsontide, and on the Lords
day. Diverse of holier times, had knees as hard as horn by their continual
kneeling at Gods Worship. An admonition to stiffe-kneed Pure-trants. Fol. 637
Par. 3 Reasons why the devouter sort did forbear kneeling betwixt Easter and
Whitsontide. 1 The Church did so appoint it. 2 Hereby the people did show
themselves thankful. Whitsunday, whence it has its denomination. Kneeling
imports Repentance, and sorrow for sin. Standing, implies thanksgiving for the
pardon of our sins. The diverse usances of diverse Churches in the Primitive
times concerning Fasting, and Feasting on the Lords day: Kneeling and Standing
at the time of Prayer: and the reasons thereof. In the Primitive Church, they
baptized not any, except the sick, but at Easter and Whitsontide The newly
baptized stood to express their thankfulness to God for their baptism. The
people in some Churches stood praying at the Altar (on every Sunday between
Easter, and Whitsontide) in remembrance of Christ's Resurrection. The Christians
in the Primitive Church prayed, Recto vultu ad Dominum; to confront the
Heathen, who fell down flat on their faces, when they adored their false Gods.

Fol. 638 Par. 4 The great variations of the Primitive Churches concerning the
eating, or not eating of flesh offered to Idols, A just discourse to that
purpose. A good Rule for the peace of the Church. Why our Church has commanded
Kneeling at the receiving of the blessed Sacrament: when the Primitive Church
has commanded Standing. Churches have great power committed unto them. The
Church upon just motives may change her Orders. The meaner sort of all people
Ecclesiastical and Civil, are bound to obedience; are not to Order. Peter
Moulin found fault with the precise Ministers of our Church of England. The day
of Christ's Resurrection the first day of his Joy after his Dolorus passions,
Why the Fathers made Sunday their Holy Day. Why they forbade Kneeling and
Fasting upon that day. What indifferency is, according to S. Hierome. A thing
indifferent in it self, being commanded by the Supreme Magistrate, or Church,
is no longer indifferent to thee. Variety of Ceremonies, not hurtful, but
beneficial to the Church of Christ. The Bishop of Rome taxed; by Cardinal
Palaeotus excused. Rome Christian in too many things, imitateth Rome Heathen:
in public prayer, comes short of it. Heathen Rome began all their business
in the world with this Prayer, Quod foelix faustumque sit, etc. The greater
power the Pope and his Cardinals have; the more need they have to pray to God
before their public meetings in their Consistory. Kneeling at receiving the
holy Eucharist, never disliked as a thing of its own nature evil or
unlawful. In the Primitive Church after Whitsontide they used to kneel.
Kneeling at the blessed Sacrament, not prescribed by Scripture; but authorized
by tradition; confirmed by custom; observed by Faith. In the Primitive Church
when they received the Sacrament Standing Kneeling they prayed Standing.
Kneeling.
Our Factionists would follow the Primitive Church in one thing; but leave her
in another. Fol. 639 Par. 5. A third Reason. At the first Institution of things
Sacred, Profane, the solemnity is greater than in the sequel. Every new thing
has a golden tail. Proverb. Popular Lecturers have sunk even below scorn.
All sins of former times have descended down upon our days. An Epiphonema,
or Exclamation against the profane pretenders of Devotion now adays. The
lowest humiliation is too little for the house of God. They cried Abrech, or
how the knee before Joseph. He that boweth himself most before man, is most
right in the sight of God. Diverse examples of Prostration and Geniculation,
both out of the old and new Testament. A Viceroy of Ireland devoutly fell on
his knees, and asked an Archiepiscopall Benediction. The Heathen kneeled down
to worship their very Idols. S. Hieromes saying. By Kneeling we sooner obtain
what we ask at the hands of God. Not lawful for any to sit in the porch of
the Temple, but only the Kings of David's loins. The humble gesture of the
Jews, when they came in went out of the Temples. The Primitive Church kneeled
to the Altars. Altars, the seats of the body and blood of Christ. The Cross in
Chrysostomes days did always use to remain upon the Altar. An Angel an
assistant, when Christ is offered up. Ambrose. To this day we worship the flesh
of Christ in the Sacrament. Idem. No man eats the blessed Sacrament, before
be have worshipped Christ in the Sacrament. Augustine. Constantine the Emperor
in his Soliloquies with God, pitched on his knees, with eyes cast down to the
ground. K. Charles partaketh of the body and blood of Christ, with as much
Humility as the meanest penitent amongst his subjects. His holy and devout
gestures at the participation of the Lords Supper, turned the heart of a
Romanist to embrace the truth on our side. In Origens, Arnobius, and
Tertullians days, the Saints never met in holy places about holy things,
without decent reverence. The Papists in kneeling, adore the very materials of
the Sacrament. Yet the abuse of a thing, takes not away the right use. Proved
by diverse curious instances. Christians may lawfully use many artificial
things, though invented by Heathenish Gods, and Goddesses. To argue from the
Abuse of things to the whole removing of the use, is rediculous. Illustrated by
some particulars. Veneration of the Sacrament, is accorded on all sides. In the
very Act of receiving it, it is lawful to kneel down and worship Christ in
it. Calvin himself holds that adoration to be lawful. The Lutherans are
divided in this point. Illyricus denies Christ to be worshipped in the
Eucharist. Brentius and Bucer hold, That then we must worship Christ's body.
Luther himself styles the Eucharist, Sacramentum venerabile, and Adorabile,
Chemnitius says, None, but Sacramentaries, deny Christ to be adored in the
Sacrament. Chemnitius acknowledges these Theses. 1. Christ God Man, is to be
adored. Arrians deny this. 2. Christ's humane nature for the hypostaticall union
with the Divinity, is to be adored. None but Nestorians will deny this. The
Apostles worshipped the Humane Nature of Christ. Adoration precedeth
Communication; by the judgment of S. Chrysostom, and S. Augustine. Christ's
flesh, as made of earth, may be said to be Gods footestoole. So is the Arc.
All the Angels of God do Worship Christ. Christ is to be adored always, and
every where. Augustine, Ambrose. Nazianzene, and Eusebius Emissenus are
Chemnitius Co-opinionists. Not the material Elements, but Christ only in
them, is to be adored. If we must adore Christ when we celebrate the divine
Sacrament; much more did the Apostles. Habitual not (always) Actual
Adoration of Christ (...) ^^^^ired of the Apostles. The Apostles worshipped
Christ: 1 When he had newly performed any Super-humane work. 2 When they
begged great matters of him. 3 When he did heal some who were vehemently
afflicted. 4 When he conferred any extraordinary blessing on their souls: As
he did when he instituted the new Sacrament. Master Hooker terms Kneeling
an Adorative gesture. No kind of Worship accepted, that is not sometimes
conjoined with Kneeling. Gregory Nazianzens Story of his sister Gorgonia.
Eusebius Emissenus, and Origin say, Christ is worshipped in the Sacrament.
Kneeling at the Communion, commanded by the Book of Advertisments, set down,
set forth by Queen Elizabeth; by the Laws of the Realm, and the Queens
Majesty. Injunctions. They defraud the Knees of their chiefest office, and
honor, who refuse to bend them at the receiving of the blessed Sacrament.

Fol. 645
The Contents of the eight Chapter.
Par. 1 WHat gesture we are to use at the Administration of it to others.
Receiving of it our selves.
Both handled promiscuously. The English Liturgy our best guide. At the
Repeating of the Law, the people must kneel. Receiving of the same, the
Israelites did no less.

Never Patriarch, Prophet, Evangelist, Apostle, nor holy Man, nor Christ
himself prayed sitting, when there Was opportunity of kneeling. The Monks of
Egypt did pray sitting. The rule of Saint Benedict mentions Sitting at the
Reading of three Lessons. Rising up at Gloria Patri, etc.
Several gestures are to be used both by Priests and People, upon several
occasions. The Priests never kneeles, while the people stand; but he may stand
when they kneel. Great reason why they should kneel at the receiving of the
Body and Blood of Christ. No superstition, nor idolatry, then to kneel: but
obstinate irreverence, if not blaspemy, not to kneel. Prayer most an end used
with bending of the knees. The Pharisee stood Christ kneeled when he prayed.
The Rubricke of the Communion Book is to be followed by all obediently. Fol.
652 Par. 2 The Minister is to deliver the Communion to the people kneeling in
both kinds. into their Hands.
Maximus would have Men to wash their hands Women to bring clean linen
that will communicate. The nicetie of former times questioned. The sixth
Synod, Canon 3. against it. The consecrated bread must be carefully delivered,
and received. To let any crumme or particle thereof fall to the ground,
accounted a great sin by. Tertullian and Origin. Pope Pius the first,
punished those who let any of the Lords blood fall upon the ground or Altar. S.
Cyrill of Jerusalem gives a caveat to this purpose. Little tables set before
the Communicants in former times: as now we hold linen clothes, says
Baronius. The usual fashion of receiving the Consecrated bread between the
thumb and a finger or two, disliked. Receiving the holy bread in the Palm of
the hand, a safer way. In Tertullians days, the Christians did stretch abroad
their hands like Christ upon the Craffe, in their prayers. Damascene would have
us receive the body of Christ crucified with our hands framed like to a Cross.
The right hand being upward open, and hollow to receive the bread. This
accounted the safer Way. Saint Cyril commanded the same kind of usance. Other
manner of taking it, not sinful. In things indifferent we must not love
singular irregularity. All unseemly motions and gestures are so many
profanations of the Lords Supper. Seven general rules to be observed against
the profanation of the Lords Supper. The word (Amen) explaned: and kneeling at
receiving the blessed Sacrament, pressed. Fol. 653 Par. 3 Tenth General. What
Names are given to the blessed Sacrament by the Scriptures and Fathers, the
Latin and Greek Church. The hallowed bread is called in the Scriptures 1 The
Lords body broken for us: 2 The Communion of the Body of Christ. And the
reasons thereof.
Breaking of bread from house to house. 4 Holy bread, Blessed bread,
Eucharisticall bread, Heavenly bread: Joh. 6. In the Fathers. 1 Taking of the
Lords body, Tertullian. 2 Earthly bread sanctified by prayer, consisting of
Earthly and Heavenly things, Ire^naeus.
A Medicine of immortality, an antidote against death, procuring life, purging
sin, driving away all evils. idem. 3 Christ's Dole to his Church, Tertullian.
The plenty, abundance and fatness of the Lords Body. The Wine is called in the
Scriptures, 1 The New Testament in his Blood. 2 The Blood of the New Testament.
3 The Cup of the Lord. 4 The Communion of the Blood of Christ.
The blessed Eucharist consisting of both kinds, is styled in Scripture, 1 The
Lords Supper. And in what regards it is so called. The Papists dislike the
frequent use of this Phrase. Casaubone confutes Justinian and Maldonate the
Jesuits, and calls it The Great Supper. The most Divine Supper. The
Arch-Symbolicall Supper.
2 The Table of the Lord, 1 Cor. 10.21. With us, it is commonly called Christ
his last Supper. And the reasons why it is called the last Supper.
In the Fathers it has these titles. 1 The Communion of Saints, in the
Apostles Creed. 2 Peace of Christ, Ignatius and Cyprian. 3 A New Oblation.
Irenaeus. 4 Mystery, is a common appellation. Augustine^. 5 Life, so called by
the Africans. Augustine^. 6 The Oath and strictest band of Religion.
Augustine^. 7 The Mystical bread. Augustine^. 8 The holy Offering, in regard
of the offerings for the poor. Augustine^. 9 The Supper of God, and the Lords
Banques, Tertullian. 10 The Lords Testament or Legacy. 11 A Communion,
prohibiting schism, and division; and inclining to Peace and Union. 12 A
blessing. 13 A giving of thanks. 14 The Authentic performance of the Type,
Theodoret. 15 The Latins name is Missah, the Mass; which word some derive
from the Hebrew or Chaldee, and say, it signifies A Tribute of a Free Will
Offering of the hand. Cevallerius dislikes that derivation. The Heathen Greek
Priests dismissed their people with (...). The Pagan Romans with these words, I
licet, Missa est. Whence the Christian Roman Church borrowes their Mass. 16
The Greek Church calls it, (...). or Ministration. 17 Sacramentum
Sacramentorum, etc. Nicolaus de Cusa. 18 God. Tertullian.

Fol. 656 Par. 4 Eleventh General. Wherein is inquired, what speeches were
used by our Savior in the Coenaculum. After the third Supper was administered.
The gracious Sermon of Christ, His Prayer to God. An Hymn. 658
Tricoenium Christie Or the threefold Supper of Christ in the Night that he was
betrayed
1 The Passover wherein I consider 1 The occasion of this Discourse. 2 The
Introductories, 1 What the Jews used to do at their ordinary meals. 2 What
they used to do at their feasts.
3 The Paschall Supper it self, 1 As it was observed by the Jews of those
days. Here consider 1 What things the Jews were commanded. Which were of 2
sorts: some were 1 Temporary. In this I consider 1 The 7. great Passeovers
recorded in the Old Testam. 2 The 4. Passeovers specialized in the New
Testament, at which Christ was present. Besides one more, from which he was
absent. 3 How many Ceremonies were transitory, namely 6. 1 They might choose a
Lamb, or a Goat. 2 They prepared it 4. days beforehand. 3 They bloodied
their doors. 4 They ate the Passover in great haste, shod. girt, and staved;
rather standing than sitting, rather sitting than lying down at the first
Passover. 5 They went not out of doors. 6 They chose their next neighbors.

2 Perpetual: to continue during the Jewish polity: and these were either 1
Propitiatory 14. 1 They were to choose a Lamb. 2 An unspotted one. 3 A Male
Lamb. 4 Under a year old. 5 A Proportionable number were to eat it. 6 All
these were to be of the Jewish Church. 7 It was to be killed on the first
month of the Jewish year. The year of the World, when this first began, is
here handled. 8 On the 14. day of that Month. 9 Between the two Evenings. 10
At Jerusalem. 11 In one house. 12 The People, and not the Levites only might
kill the Lamb. 13 They must dress it whole. In this are 5. other precepts. 1
Rosy it with fire. 2 Eat it not raw. 3 Not sodden with water. 4 The head with
the legs. 5 And with the purtenance.
14 Every one was to bring an Offering according to his ability.
2 Sacramental, properly only 3. 1 To eat the Passover. 2 To eat it with
unleavened bread. 3 To eat it with sour herbs.
3 Subsequent ceremonies, 6. 1 A bone was not to be broken. 2 The flesh was not
to be carried out of the house. 3 The Table-talke appointed. 4 They continued
the feast of unleavened bread seven days after. 5 They were to leave none of
the flesh until the morning. 6 What was left, was to be burnt with fire.


2 What they performed voluntarily. 1 They washed 1 All of them their hands. 2
Many their feet. 3 Some their whole bodies.
2 They consecrated their 1 Wine. 2 Bread. 3 Flesh.
3 They imitated 13. of the Roman fashions says Pererius A full entire
tractate against Pererius, who groundlesly holds, that the Jews in Christ's
time did conform themselves in their feastings to 13. fashions of the Romans.

2 As Christ and his Apostles kept it. So far as the Old Testament enforced.
New Testament has related.
Whether at the eating of the Pascall Lamb were any servants present and
administrant. The sum of all, as it were in a picture.

3 The third Supper, or Supper of the Lord: the most blessed Eucharist. Vide
lib. 3.
TRICAENIVM CHRISTI, IN NOCTE PRODITIONIS SVAE.
The threefold Supper of Christ, in the night that he was betrayed.
LIB. 1. CHAP. 1. The Contents of the first Chapter.
1. The occasion of this Discourse.

2. The praesumptuous ignorance of some Caco-zelotes.

3. The state of the question.

4. Four points propounded, Three preparatory. One decisive, and determining.
These Preparatory. 1. What course the Jews took at their ordinary meats. 2.
What they used to do at their Festivalls. 3. What they especially practiced at
their Passover. 4. The main point is, what religious, or civil rites our
Savior more particularly observed, when he kept the Passover, in the night of
his apprehension.



PARAGRAPH. 1.
WHen I administered the thrice-blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ, to my Parishioners, among many other things, I bad them
take heed of the leaven of those refractory Ignorants (swarming otherwhere) who
at, and in the receiving of the holy Communion, where so devour prayers are
made, where so sacred things are conferred, refuse to kneel; and to their
chief objection, that they must imitate our Savior, and his Apostles, who did
not kneel, but sit, or lean, or lie down?

PARA. 2.
I Answered, that these presumptuous silly ones, know only the outside, and
not the inside of these mysteries; that it is not clearly revealed in any
place what posture was used, or what was the bodily situation at the giving, or
taking of the body of our Lord: but to build their pretended conformity on
uncertain, and unknown things, is not conformable to reason, much less
religion, sithence they, by so doing, do make their imagination their only
original, their crooked will their only rule.

PAR, 3.
THen did I enlarge the point, that Christ, and his holy Apostles (except
Indas, who went out before the Eucharist was taken) were altogether at three
Suppers in one night, in that night in which he was betrayed; and that those
Apostles certainly, and Christ himself partaked of all the three suppers;
that they kept not one constant form, but varyed their gestures; that there is
no firmness of consequence to argue, that whatsoever was done at the first
supper, the same was done at the second; or whatsoever was at the second
supper, that it continued in the same fashion, until the end of the third
supper; that these several Suppers were not in the same degrees of holiness,
and were attended with proportionable Rites, and different ceremonies; That the
eating of the Paschall Lamb, was the first Supper; That their joynt-eating of
common food was their second Supper; That the institution of the Eucharist, and
taking of it was their third supper, called by the 1 Cor. 11.20
Apostle, the Supper of the Lord.

To some intelligent people, which heard me, these things seemed, though new
and strange, yet probable, and analogall to faith; others, hung between doubt
and belief: but (...), Ecce Rhodus, Ecce salius, here is the man, here his
leap; Nunc specimen specitur, nunc certamen cernitur, now is the trial, you
may see it, as Mnesilochus phraseth it in Plautus; what I said, I am ready not
only to say again, but to prove, and justify: God the truth, and learned men
the Disciples of truth, being judges; Indocti procul este viri, procul este
profani.
Let men unlearned, and profane,
Be far from hence, they judge in vain.


PAR. 4.
THat I may bear the whole truth before me, necessary to the unfolding of what
our Savior practiced from the beginning of his eating of the Paschall Lamb,
till he had finished the most sacred Eucharist; I intend, (under the divine
benediction) to handle four points, three preparatory, the fourth definitive,
and decretory.

1. What the Jews of those times did, at their ordinary meals. 2. What they
then did at their Feasts, or Festival days. 3. What the Jews were wont to
observe at their eating their Passover. 4. What courses in particular our
blessed Savior took, and used, the night of his apprehension.
The Prayer.
ASsist me therefore, I beseech thee, O omniscient, supreamest intelligence,
most wonderful Vni-Trinity, Trin-Vnity, transcendent in fullness of knowledge;
and, O sweet Savior, most blessed Lord, whose cause I handle, whose truth I
search, and disclose, take the veil of ignorance from before my face; let me
see with thy piercing eyes; let my fleece be wet with thy dew from heaven,
distill upon me some drops of thy Divine knowledge, power thy sacred ointment,
and spreading oil upon my head, and fill me with humble veracity, for thine
own Names sake, O Savior Jesus, God and man, the gracious Mediator between
God and Men. Amen.

CHAP. II. The Contents of the second Chapter.
1. The Jewish strictness in often giving of thanks.

2. The duty of thankfulness exhorted unto.

3. Ingratitude condemned.

4. The Jews at their Feasts began their banquet with blessing of a ^^p of
Wine, what the particular words were, poculum bibatorium, every one drank in
order: our most blessed Savior scorned not to follow that custom; The custom
of the Table of the King of Sweden.

5. The Master of the Feast among the Jews, consecrated the bread: the very
words of consecration translated are set down.

6. Some recreations were at their Festivals: and wise holy discourses:
sometimes riddles were propounded: our Saviors divine Table talk.

7. The duty of Thankesgiving appointed by the Apostle for all our doings.

8. The temperance of the Primitive Church at their repast, and at Feasts also,
proved by Tertullian, and Minutius Foelix: also their Prayers, and singing, and
sober retyring.

9. Our age in a double extreme: some over-prodigally feast it: the immoderate
use of Tobacco taxed.

10. Some are inhospitable; inhospitality under pretense of devotion distiked.

11. The mean in eating and drinking commended.

12. Mirth, and feasting, practiced on the Lords day in Tertullians time.

13. Holy Hester her banquet of Wine: the brethren of Joseph were temperate,
though the vulgar has it, inebriati sunt cumeo: Joseph's liberality, and full
table was not intemperate, or immodest.

14. Christ Feasted on Sabbath days.

15. Ahashuerus his moderation, and Law wished for to be in use.

PAR. 1.
THe Jews were never wont to eat, or drink without Prayers, blessings, or
giving of thanks, especial thanks for especial blessings: sometimes shorter
ejaculations were in use, sometimes longer devotions; if they are but of Nuts,
Plumbes, Apples, Grapes, or the like, they had Peculiares preculas apt short
prayers. Zorobabel powered forth thanks for wisdom given unto him, 1 Esdras,
4.60. 1 Esdras 4.60.
The Psulmist was abundant in thankesgiving, above any other duty, both for
ordinary and extraordinary blessings, inviting all the Host of Heaven and
Earth, reasonable, sensible, vegetable, yea inanimate creatures to praise the
Lord.

PAR. 2.
GIfts of mind, body, and fortunes, are to be received with blessing of God;
general favors of the Almighty look for a return of thanks, yea are more
to be esteemed, as being more common.

That the heavenly Creatures move constantly in their Spheres, that the Sun
shines, that the Moon powers down the supernall influences; that our
preservation with the means thereof is continued, deserves from us the
Sacrifice of praise unto God: every grace of God unto us must be answered with
a grace, or thanks from us to God: all Rivers run into the Sea, says
Eccle^^ 1.7.
Ecclesiastes, Chap. 1.7. Unto the place from whence the Rivers come, thither
they return again. Adfontem (says Saint Bern. in cap. Iejunij, Sermon. 1
Bernard) unde exeunt flumina, revertuntur, ut iterum fluant; Flummis aqua, si
stare caeperit, and ipsa putrescit. and inundatione facta superveniens
repellitur: sic plane, sic gratiarum cessat decursus, ubi recursus non fuerit,
nec modo nihil augetur ingrato, sed and quod acceperat, vertitur ei in
perniciem: Rivers return to the fountains that they may flow again: if they
begin to stand they grow to decay: even so grace cease when it is not
returned: and to the ungrateful man nothing increases, but what he received
turns to his overthrow. Out blessed Savior spent a good part of his time, in
this holy duty; for brevity sake, I will infist only upon one place, Ioh. 6.11.
Job. 6.11. Christ [gave thankes] and then distributed the bread to his
Disciples. The Apostle gives a reason, God has created meats to be received
with thankesgiving 1 Timothy 4.3.
1 Timothy 4.3. It was Gods intention; they were created to that purpose, or end;
and they go against Gods intention, who are unthankefull.

He that eats, and drinks, and lets grace pass,
Sits down like an Ox, and rises like an Ass.
PAR. 3
THe ingratitude of the receivers indeed infecteth not the meat, but their
receiving is unclean, and filthy; even their mind, and conscience is defiled,
as God says in another case, Tit. 1.15.
Tit. 1:15. Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thankesgiving 1 Timothy 4.4.
1 Timothy 4.4. For it is sanctified by the Word, and Prayer, ver. 5. So
sanctified that the devil cannot use it, to the hurt, either of our souls or
bodies, by stirring us up to sin, so soon or so much, as if it were received
thankelesly. Aquine says truly, Satan had power over the creature, yea, over
us, by our sin; this power is taken away from Satan, through Christ, by prayer,
and thanksgiving: ingratitude is one of the greatest sins to humane society,
cum ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris, you cannot say worse of a man; Viper is a
fit Emblem of the unthankefull. This have I pressed the rather because the
Apostle says, ver. 6. If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things,
(which otherwise they are likely to forget, or neglect) thou shall be a good
Minister of Jesus Christ; which God grant me to be! Stands it not with reason
that if God blessed them for us, we should bless him for them? Creatures taken
without thanks are as flesh in our mouths, or in sacrifices without salt,
unsavory; see Levit. 2.11.
Levit. 2.11. The returning of thanks is naturally just, says Josephus
Antiquit. Judah. c. 4.6.
Josephus, Et pro compensutio^e rerum jam factarum, and pro invitatione
futurarum, thereby man is recompensed for what is passed, and allured to be
more kind afterward; with God this is approved; Cessonte gratiarum action
cessat decursus gratiae, God is not gracious when man is ^nthankefull. How
easy, how cheap a thing does God expect, when he is pleased with thanks? And
what can we return unto him, if we return not thanks? Psalm. 116.22.13, 17.
Psalm. 116.12.13. What shall I render unto the Lord for all bis benefit (...)
toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the
Lord; See also ver. 17. in every thing giving thanks, for this is the will of
God in Christ Jesus concerning you, These. 5.18.
1 These. 5.18. Who offers praise glorifieth God, Psalm. 50.23.
Psalm. 50.23. The Jews I fear will rise in judgment against us unthankefull
Christians, forgetful of our duty, of our Saviors actions, and example, who
was thankful both in public and private to his heavenly Father.

PAR. 4.
I Come now unto the second point; what the Jews did then at their Feasts, or
Festival days: whether the Jews were at marriage Feasts, or other more
solemn feasts? this they did generally, as appears by the Thargum of
Onkelos: the Master of the Family began with the blessing of the cup, which
being filled with Wine, he took in his right hand, and said, Benedictus sis,
tu Domine Deus nos^^r, qui cr^^^ fr^ctum vi^i^; blessed be thou O Lord, our
God, who createst the fruit of the Vine; then he drank, and gave every one to
drink; for it was the fashion of the Jews to have poculum bibatorium, or as
Bolducus in Job. 1.4.
Bolducus fathereth the word upon Oleaster, bibale, a cup before their meals;
Jobs childrens Feastings ran round, In orbem transibant Dies convivii, Job.
1.5.
Job. 1.5. and the Jews at their Festivals did drink in orbem, every one
partaked of it: To which fashion Christ alluded, both in his second and third
Supper, (as by his grace shall appear) when he said, Take this, and divide it
among your selves, Luke 22.17.20.
Luke 22.17. and again v. 20. He gave them the cup after Supper, and said,
drink ye all of it, or more properly, All of you drink of it, Mat. 26.27.
Math. 26.27.

At the late great King of Swedens Table, a credible eyewitness informed me,
that they are no part of their food, till the Divine, or Chaplain of honor
had given God thanks by a cup of blessing, which was first tasted; this was in
imitation of the Jewish custom continued by Christ.

PAR. 5.
THen did the Master of the house take up a loaf of bread in both hands, and
consecrated it thus. Benedictus sis tu Domine Deus, qui educis panem e terra,
bessed art thou, O Lord, our God, for bringing forth bread out of the earth:
Then did he eat, and give every one a morsel of bread; which sacred
ceremonies being ended, they fell to their other victuals.

In imitation whereof, when excellent bread has been served in at my table,
of Wheat, which grew by manurance of most barren ground with Lime; I have
often said, praise, and thanks be to our gracious God, who has taught us to
make bread of stones, and blessed us in the work of our hands, etc.

PAR. 6.
SO, when they were eating, or in the Feast time, as it is probable, they had
some recreations, as the good Father of the Prodigal child had music, and
dancing Luke 15.25.
Luke 15.25. so it is certain, they had many wise conferences, and heavenly
discourses: happy are these thy servants, says the 1 King. 10.8.5.
Queen of Sheba unto Solomon, which stand continually before thee, and hear
thy Wisdom; for she spoke of the attendance of his Ministers, at his Table;
it is also likely she spoke these words as she was at meat caroufing with him:
Esth. 7.2.
Est. 7.2. On the second day, at the banquet of Wine; began an happy discourse
for the Jews, which furthered their deliverance; in the royal Feast of
Ahashuerus, when the heart of the King was merry with Wine he sent for Vasthi,
when she would not come, Memucan the last of the seven wise Princes, who knew
the Times, spoke first, and made an Oration, Esth. 1.16.
Est. 1.16. tending to this end, that all women should give their husbands
honor, both great and small, ver. 20. And that every man should bear rule in
his own house, ver. 22. taking down the imperiousness of unruly women.
Sometimes they propounded riddles, as Sampson, Judge. 14.12.
Judge. 14.12. Vt dum in solutione mentis acumen exercerent, interea convivialia
jurgia, and intemperantiam vitarent; While they busied their brains to unfold
the riddles, in the mean time, they might avoid all quarrelling, and
imtemperance, which are too often the effects of feasting. When Christ was at
any feast, it was seasoned with Divine discourses; see Mat. 9.12. Luke 7.36.
Luke 10.38. etc. Luke 11.39. Luke 16.9. Job. 12.3. Christ about the midst of
the Feast of Tabernacles (you must not conceive it in the midst of dinner, or
supper) went into the Temple, and taught most heavenly Doctrine. Ioh. 7.14.
John 7.14.

PAR. 7.
What the Apostles practiced appears by their Precepts, 1 Cor. 10.31
1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God; To which that is conformable, Col. 3.17.
Col. 3.17. What ye do in word, or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God even the Father by him; This they did at their
meals, especially at their Festivals.

PAR. 8.
THe guise or order of the Primitive Church follows: first for their ordinary
meals, they had but poor commons, rose with appetite, pur as coenas, sine
animalibus coenas suppers without flesh, Clem. Alexand paeoa. 1.11.
Clemens Alexandrinus, (...), etc. Let our Supper says he, be small and short,
fit for men that watch, and not with variety of mingled meats; the Grecians
call prodigal men (...), well signifying their end, i. as it seems to me,
says Clemens, whilst they esteem them (...), that is, void of salvation, by
the elision of the letter [s] Sigma. Tertullian most signisicantly to the
prodigal intemperate Romans says thus, nostras coenulas sugillatis, cum
vestris ructibus acescat aer, you find fault with our short small suppers,
when the very air grows sour with your belchings. And yet the parsimony of
the ancienter Romans was exemplary, of which more hereafter; take only one
testimony out of Iuvenal. Satyr. 11. ver. 77. etc.
Iuvenal. Haec olim nostri jam luxuriosa senatus
Coena fuit: Curious parvo quae legerat horto,
Ipse foc is brevibus ponebat oluscula, quae nunc
Squallidus in magna fastidit compede fossor.
that is, The now luxurious suppers of the Senate
Of old were mean: Curious (when as he ate)
With a small fire cooked such few berbes, which he
Pick^ from his narrow gardens hus bandry,
As now a dirty Ditcher loathes to eat;
Though laden with cold Iron, and Gyves full great.


Secondly for the feastings of the old Christians, Minut. Foelix, in Octavio,
pa. 391.
Minutius Foelix says thus, Convivia non tantum pudica colimus, sed and
sobria; nes enim indulgemus epulis, aut convivium mero ducimus, sed gravitate
bilaritatem temperamus, casto sermon, corpore castiore, pudorem non facie, sed
meute praestamus, that is, our Feasts are observed with shamefastness, and
sobriety, we do not indulge, and glut our selves with dainties or draw out at
length the banquet by bibbing of wine; but we mingle and temper mirth and
gravity together, using chaste speeches, in more chaste bodies; our minds
out-blushing our faces: Ter^al. in Apolog. cap. 39.
Tertullian more at large shows the whole form of feasting thus; Non prius
discumbitur, quam or atio ad Deum praegustetur; editur, quantum esurientes
capiunt; bibitur, quantum pudicis est utile; ita saturantur, ut qui meminerint,
etiam per noctem sibi adorandum esse; it a fabulantur, ut qui sciant, Dominum
audire; post aquam manualem, and lumina, de Scripturis sacris, vel de ingenio
proprio, canitur; bine probatur quomodo biberit; aeque oration convivium
dirimit; inde disceditur, -- non in eruptiones lasoiviarum, sed in candem curam
modestiae and pudicitiae, ut qui non tam coenam coenaverint, quam disciplinam,
that is, we sit not down till we have first prayed to God; grace is the first
dish we taste of, we ear only to satisfy nature; we drink no more then is
fit for chaste people; we so eat and drink, as remembering we must rise in the
night, to worship God; our discourse is as in the presence of God; after
washing of our hands, by candle light we sing either some Psalms, or other
holy Hymns, or songs of our own invention; by which we see, that we have not
drunk much; Prayer also concludes the banquet; from whence we depart, not
running into lascivious course of chambering and wantounesse, or sporting our
selves, in the deeds of darkness; but impaling our selves within our wonted
bounds of modesty, and shamefastness; as if we had made our suppers, rather of
discipline, and religion, then of ordinary meats.

PAR. 9.
OUr age is much faulty in both extremes, of Prodigality, and covetousness,
neglecting the golden mean of liberality. Some with the glutton fare
deliciously every day, make their belly their God, join dinners to suppers,
and prorogue suppers till the morning-starre, and light approaches, to dim
the candles; turning with Heliogabalus night into day, and day into night;
their appetite makes raw digestion, and their foul stomachs, by being
over-loaden, do surfeit: the meat which is left behind in the dish, is more
behoofefull, and healthful to the Cormorant, or intemperate Epicure, then that
which he devoures;

Plures occidit gula, quam gladius,
The two fore-fingers and the thumb,
Kill more, then battle, sword, or gunne.
The earth, air, and water afford not enough for their gluttony, and though
saucy Art, second Nature, nor eye, nor desire is satisfied: the creatures
groan under their gross abuse; these are swinish Epicures, prodigal
consumers of Gods blessings.

Tobacco, the never unseasonable Tobacco, the all-usefull Tobacco, good for
meat, drink, and clothing, as they say; good for cold, heat, and all
diseases; this must sharpen their appetites before meat, must heat it at
their meare, and close up their stomach after meat, being the only curious
antipast, sauce, and post-past; wine, and beer must wash down the stench of
that weed, and it again must dry up their moist fumes.

PAR. 10.
ANother sort there is who call themselves the generation of the Just, that
fall into the other extreme, who are as unhospitable as Caucasus, as covetous
as Euclio, these, to save spending, spend whole Festivalls in the saving,
hearing (as they call it) of the word, and to turn out their poor friends, and
kindred, shut up their doors, and prick up their ears to needless
repetitions. Fasting on the Lords day is affected, because good cheer is
costly; an health at their own table is damnation, though they will carowze
four times the quantity, even to the overthrow of health at another man's
board. Some will lay up more devout Peter Pence at the years end, out of
thirty pound certainly, with the voluntary contributions, then charitable
hospitable men can do, with 200. pounds per annum: the root of all evil
yields them their desired fruit, and they live as if Mammon were the only God
they serve, and lecture it only to pick up Mammon; Mammon may be had, and
kept, and used without sin, yet Mammon must not be served, for ye cannot
serve God and Mat. 6.24.
Mammon.

PAR. 11.
But happy is he who keeps the middesse; first for meat, what need a
Christian solicitously provide for that which makes his ordure? Secondly, for
sauce, S. Bernard allows no sauce, but salt; a stomach dieted to a
continual appetite, is the best sauce Clem. Alexand^. paeda. 2.1.
Clemens Alexandrinns says, they do effeminate bread, who sift away the
branne; I am sure the one-way bread, the second bread, grows not moldy so
soon, and is both heartier and passes speedyer through the body. As for
drink, water was the only drink, till the flood, 2000. years or
thereabouts: Vino vis adhibetur sapientiae, Wine offers violence to wisdom:
Vt Venus in vinis, ignis in igne furit: Fire joined to fire is not more mad,
then lust, if store of wine't has had; which is almost all one with that in
Valerius Maximus, proximus a Libero patre intemper antiae gradus ad inconcessam
Venerem esse consuevit: Wine in the immoderate use is Sanguis Gigantum, the
blood of the Giants; Fell draconum the gall of the Dragons; fell Principum
tenebrarum, the gall of the Princes of darkness: So the Manichees
over-bitterly condemned wine wholly, though it be to the intemperate, Venenum
terrae, the very poison springing from the earth; yet moderately and physically
taken, it is the blood of the grape, Eccle. 50.15
Eccle. 50.15. and cheareth God and Man, Judge. 9.13.
Judge. 9.13. To age especially and some sick people.

Aquavita, or strong water, in the abuse is, Aqua mortis, the bayliffe of
death, the executioner, leading men to destruction. Tobacco is good for few;
the hourly, daily use is good for no complexion: oh that we would use these no
otherwise then Physic! It is not an 140. years since Sack was sold only in
Apothecaries shops. A little contents Nature; the eye is greater then the
belly: Summa medecinae, abstinentia, the abbreviation of all Physic is
abstinence: youth grows taller with slender fare, then with cramming:
diseased foul bodies, the higher fed, the more unhealthy they are; Convivia
Veneris sunt praeludia, said Accursius; Feasts make way for lasciviousness;
Venture vino plenus despumat in libidinem: Bacchus is a Pander unto Venus; the
gut pampereth the groyne; gula est vestibulum luxuri^; You go into the house
of Luxury, by, and over the threshold of Gluttony: but, se non satiare cibis,
studium est sanitatis; to eat sparingly is to study health; qui multum vult
comedere, comedat parum, as Ludovicus Cornarus both directed and practiced; a
slender diet brings one to a good stomach: a cheerful healthful life, a
painelesse old age. If thy appetite enlarge it self, put thy knife to thy
throat, says Solomon, Pro. 23.2.
Pro. 23.2. that is, Teach thy self temperance. I deny not but we may eat of
the fat, and drink of the sweet, Neh. 8.10. and make great joy, ver. 12. and
refresh our selves at feasts in a higher degree, then at our ordinary food;
otherwise there is no difference (post sacra peracta) between ordinary, and
extraordinary refection.

PAR. 12.
DIe Solis laetitiam curamus, and laetitiae indulgemus, says Tertullian, in
Apologetico: Iacobus Gothofredus upon Tertullian, ad Nationes, 1.13. thus, Die
Dominica ab omnipressura, id est, a ritu, qui moerorem aliquem inferret,
Christiani aberant and abstinebant; hinc jejunium, and geniculatio, ea die,
interdicta; and when the heathen objected against the Christians, that they did
curare otium and prandium, Tertullian denies it not, but does compare our
Dominicall feasting, to the saturnall feasts of the Gentiles, in imitation of
the Sabbaticall feasts of the Jews.

PAR. 13.
HOly Queen Esther kept a banquet of Wine, Esth. 5.6.
Cap. 5.6. The brethren of Joseph were merry, harmelesly merry with him at his
Feast; the vulgar makes the worst of it, when it says, inebriatisunt cum eo,
Genesis 43.34.
Genesis 43.34, Though the letter will bear it, and the Septuagint accord to it;
yet Vatablus learnedly expounds it thus, (...) Shacar.
Hinc videmus lautius fuisse Convivium, in quo large, and hilariter, praeter
quotidianum morem, excepti fuerint; hoc enim significat verbum (...) -- In
mensis hospitalibus major erat indulgentia; neque tamen hic notatur ulla
intemperies, sed honesta, modestaque liberalitas: Hence we discern that Joseph
kept a plentiful Feast, in which they were above the ordinary fashion, largely
and chearefully entertained; for so the word [Shacar] signifies both messes,
Wine and Mirth did exceed, when hospitality spread the tables for her guests.
In this passage Moses touches not at any distemper, but denotes honest, and
modest liberality, for these were holy Patriarchs, Fathers of the twelve
Tribes: and never any of them was overtaken with that devil drunkenness.

PAR. 14.
CHrist himself was at diverse Feasts, and that on Sabbath days. Christ went
into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread on the Sabbath day,
(a pure, and chief Pharisee then entertained him) to eat bread, that is, to
dine, and refresh himself; for by bread any sort of food is to be understood,
Luke 14.1.
Luke 14.1. Yea, it is likely that there was a very great feast, for diverse
guests were bidden, and they chose out the chiefest rooms, ver. 7. and Christ
gave them good counsel. ver. 8. and feasted the Pharisee himself, who invited
him with wholesome Doctrine, ver. 12. and one that was at meat replied holily,
ver. 25. On the Sabbath toward the evening, he was honorably entertained at
Bethany, by Simon the Leper, Lazarus sitting down at supper, Martha serving,
Mary annoynting him, says Lucas Brugensis, in his Itinerary; and the Apostles
accompanied him, Math. 26.6. Mar. 14.4. John 12.4. Six days before the
Passover. Tolet also accounts, that Christ was feasted, on the Sabbath day
at night: Christ also turned more water into Wine, at a marriage, then there
was need of, Ioh. 2.7.
Ioh. 2.7.

PAR. 15.
OH! that Ahashuerus his law were in force, that none should be forced, Esth.
1.8.
Esth. 1.8. or rather that men would force themselves to be a law unto
themselves! then might Temperance rule in our Feasts, and innocent mirth mixed
with edifying discourses, be heard at our Tables; and charitable hospitality be
better practiced in our houses; which was the good fashion of the Jews, and of
the Primitive Christians. Who desires to read more of the frugality of the
ancients, let him have recourse to Franciseus de Mendoza, in his Commentaries
on 1 Samuel 9.2. Sect. 4. etc.

The Prayer.
GOod God, grant that I may be really, and truly thankful to all, and every
one, to whom received courtesy binds me; to thee above all, for all thy
blessings vouchsa^ed unto me, concerning either this life, or the life to come:
It is thy self, most gracious Father, that crownest the year with plenty;
though the fields of Corn do as it were laugh, and sing: thou haste pleased
to give me enough, not for need only, but for recreation: and I beseech thee,
that I may make a right use of thy creatures, by taking them soberly and
religiously, giving due thanks to thee, their and our Creator, Through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

CHAP. III. The Contents of the third Chapter.
1. Diverse were the prescribed Customs of the Passover.

2. Seven famous Passeovers mentioned in the old Testament, the first in Egypt:
the second in the Wilderness.

3. The differences betwixt the first and second, in Maimonides his judgment:
only one of his differences proves sound.

4. A true distinction of the particular Eremiticall passover, of some
unclean, from the general Passover in the Wilderness: also a distinction of
both these, from the Egyptian Passover.

5. The third Passover under Joshua.

6. The Israelites for forty years, eat no bread but Manna.

7. Manna commended.

8. The Israelites bought water, and meat, in their Peregrination, but not
bread; nor Corn^^ad they of the Nations, till they came to the planes of
Jericho, though Masius se^meth to think, they forbear only to eat of the
corn of Cana^n.

9. The fourth Passover in the days of Samuel.

10. The deplorable estate of Israel, when Samuel entered on the government.

11. Samuel reformed the Ecclesiastical estate.

12. Reformation went by former Praecedents: David concurred with Samuel:
Solomon followed David's will nuncupative; and received from him in writing,
what the Spirit had taught David: David guided by his Seers, by Samuel, by
Aaron.

13. All Praecedentiall reformation must be according to Gods first guidance:
David dwel^ with Samuel.

14. Samuel dedicated things of worth to the enriching of the future Temple.

15. Samuel one of the sacred Trium-viri.

16. Samuel governed the state politic: he was a circuiting, or itinerant
judge.

17. The nice distinction of Latria, and Dulia questioned.

18. The Parliament of Mizpeh: the sacred water: Samuels burnt offering
accepted: in likelihood, about this time was the great Passover kept.

19. Samuel a King, Priest, and Prophet.

20. Josephus defended against Salianus.

PAR. 1.
THe third question succeeds; what the Jews were wont to observe, at their
eating of their Passover. That there were diverse usances appointed at the
eating of the Passover, is evident, Numb. 9.3.
Number. 9.3. In the foureteenth day of this month at even, ye shall keep the
Passover, in his appointed season, according to all the Rites of it, and
according to all the ceremonies thereof ye shall keep it.

PAR. 2.
BEfore I descend unto the particulars by precept, I wish you to consider what
was observed in seven famous Passeovers, which are specialized in the old
Testament; and in diverse also of the new Testament. The first Passover was in
Egypt set down at large, Exodus 12. of which more conveniently hereafter; the
second Passover was in the Wilderness, Numb, 9.5.
Number. 9.5. There were some defiled by dead bodies, ver. 6. And were kept back,
that they might not offer an offering of the Lord, in his appointed season, and
by especial direction of the Lord, the unclean by reason of a dead body, or
one in a journey afar off, were to eat the Passover, the foureteenth day of
the second month, ver. 10, 11. The reason why they were put back, was;
because the defiled by the dead were unclean seven days, Number. 19.11.
Number. 19.11. And the unclean were forbid to eat of holy things, Levit. 7.20.
Levit. 7.20. as after also appeared by the Dialogue of Ahimelech with David, 1 Samuel 21.4.
1 Samuel 21.4.

PAR. 3.
THe second general Passover differed from the first Mosaicall, in three
points, says Maimonides: whereas in the first Passover there must be no
leavened bread in the house, Exodus 12.15.
Exodus 12.15, And they were not to carry forth ought of the flesh abroad out of
the house, ver. 46. And both clean and unclean did take it (as in such a
promiscuous great multitude, and in so great an hurry, and haste (without
miracle, some men and women were unclean) for there were about six hundred
thousand men, besides women, and children, Exodus 12.37.
Exodus 12.37. In the second, says he, they might have leavened bread in the
house; they might carry it out of the house, (though he has no proof for
these two points, as hereafter more at large) they might not keep it in
uncleanness, which last passage is evident Numb. 9.6.
Number. 9.6.

PAR. 4.
THe particular Passover of the unclean, when they were in the Wild^rnesse,
is not discerned to vary from the general in ought; but that the general
Passover was kept in the first month, and the particular, in the second
month: these Eremiticall Feasts both of them, had another eminent distinction
from the first great Passover, at their Exodus, viz. that the unleavened bread
of these two, was made of Manna, and in the Egyptian Passover, their
unleavened bread was of common come only, of which see the proof, in the next
passover.

PAR. 5.
THe third remarkable passover was under Joshuah: the holy Sacraments
themselves being wholly omitted, during their Itinerary, not of Circumcision
only, but of the Passover, that being but once generally celebrated, namely,
the year following, which was in the first month of the second year, Number.
9.1.
Number. 9.1. Thirtynine years after, Joshuah at their passing over Jordan, by
Gods appointment reestablished them, Josh. 5.10.
Josh. 5.10. Those sacred ceremonies were not dead, but only slept.

PAR. 6.
THe unleavened bread, with which they are the Passover, the fourettenth day
of the month at even, in the plains of Jericho, was of Manna, as the second
great Passover was, for they did eat of the old corn of the Land, on the
morrow after the Passover, unleavened cakes, and patched corn, in the same
day, ver. 11. and the Manna ceased on the morrow, after they had eaten of the
old corn of the Land, neither had the children of Israel Manna any more, ver.
12. That the Israelites in their peregrination were willed to buy water, and
meat of the Edomites for money, is proved Deuteronomy. 1.6.
Deuteronomy. 2.6, But they were not commanded, neither needed they to buy corn of
them; for Manna supplied the room of it, and was better then Corn, and the
best flower of Wheat.

PAR. 7.
When the partial, and gluttonous mutiners said in a contemptuous loathing,
Number. 11.6.
Number. 11.6. There is nothing at all, besides this Manna, before our eyes; as it
proves, by their own confession, they had no other Corn but Manna; so though
their rebellious murmuring had not broke forth, God himself testifyeth Deuteronomy.
29.5.
Deuteronomy. 29.5. I lead you forty years: your clothes, and shoes are not old;
ye have not eaten bread, nor drunk Wine, or strong drink: and the divine
estimate judges better of it; witness these Eulogies, Neh. 9.15.
Neh. 9.15. God gave them bread from Heaven, for their hunger; and Psalm.
78.23.24.
Psalm. 78.23. God commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors of
heaven, and ver. 24. God rained down Manna upon them to eat, and gave them of
the Corn of Heaven, and ver. 25. Man did cate Angels food, as made by the
power of God, and ministry of Angels.

PAR. 8.
THe moderate Masius, is Josh. 5.12.
Masius, on Josh. 5.12. Inclines, that the Israelites abstained, it not from
other bread, yet from the bread of Canaan, till they were Circumcised, and till
they had kept the Passover; that they abstained from the bread of Canaan, till
then, is out of doubt; they could not eat it, till they came toward the
borders of Canaan, and about that time Manna ceased: but the place of Deuteronomy.
29.5.
Deuteronomy. 29 5, Joined with Deuteronomy. 2.6. seems to me demonstrative, that they are
no corn at all, of any other Nations, till they came to the plain of Jericho.

PAR. 9.
THe fourth great Passover See 2 Chro: 35.18.
recorded (though questionless between Joshua and Samuel many more were
observed) if probability may take place, was in the days of Samuel, at Mizpeh,
2 Kin. 23.22
2 King. 23.22. Surely there was not holden such a passover as Josiah kept,
from the days of the Judges that judged Israel (over whom Samuel was the last
Judge) nor in all the days of the Kings of Israel or Judah: consider the
change of the phrase: there was none from the days of the Judges, nor in the
days of the Kings of Israel, or Judah: and then we may both fairly conclude
for the negative, that no King of Judah or Israel, kept so great a passover,
as Iosiah's was; and affirmatively, that in the days of the Judges, such an
one was kept: and lest you might stagger, or be uncertain, it is expressly
de^ermined, 2 Chro. 35.18.
2 Chronicles. 35.18. There was no passover like unto that which Iosiab celebrated,
from the days of Samuel the Prophet: whence conjecturally we may infer, that
in the days of Samuel, there was a most famous passover, equal to Iosiah's,
if not superior, and in likelihood it was at Mizpeh.

PAR. 10.
A Farther enquiry may perhaps delight you, of Isreal's estate, at that time,
Josh. 18.1.
Josh. 18.1. all Israel assembled together at Shiloh, and set up the Tabernacle
of the Congregation there, Joshua being President: Shiloh was Gods place, where
God set his name at first, Ier. 7.12.
Ier. 3.12. And the Arc was in Shiloh, and there settled till the sins of
Eli, and his sons, made it errant, so God forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh,
Psalm. 78.60.
Psalm. 78.60. Whereupon all things went to wrack; the Philistines overcame
Israel in battle; the Arc in which they trusted, being sent for from Shiloh
did not help; but the Israelites were again overthrown, the Arc was taken,
the high Priest brake his neck, his children dyed sudden, and violent
death's: the Tabernacle was separated from the Arc, if not destroyed, Rulers,
Priests and people sinful: a very anarchy was in Jacob, and that which was
worst of all, God was offended with them.

PAR. 11.
IN this deplorable estate, Samuel enters on the government; and first for
the Ecclesiastical estate, he brought it into good order, for 1 Chro. 9.22
1 Chronicles. 9.22. Samuel, Samuel the Seer, was ordainer, and founder of Rules,
and Orders for the Levites, in the set offices: though David be mentioned as
joynt-reformer with Samuel, and named in the first place, before him (as Kings
are above Priests) yet if David had not followed his advice, it would never
have been said, David and Samuel did order it.

PAR. 12.
IT is true that every latter reformation of Religion went by former
precedents: King Josiah said, 2 Chro. 35.4
2 Chronicles. 35.4. Prepare by the houses of your Fathers, after your courses,
according to the writing of David King of Israel, and according to the writing
of Solomon his son: Again, 2 Chro. 29.25
2 Chronicles. 29.25. The Levites were set in the house of the Lord, with Cymbals,
Psalteries, and Harpes, according to the commandment of David, and of Gad the
King Seer, and Nathan the Prophet, as the Lord commanded; the song began with
the Trumpets, and instruments ordained by David, ver. 27. And they sang praises
to the Lord, with the words of David, and of Asaph the Seer, ver. 30. This was
in Hezekiahs Passover: Solomon before them, ordered the sacred things in the
Temple, he did not order those things by his own will, but by the last words
of David, Ecclesiastical affairs were ruled, as you may discern, if you
compare, 1 Chro. 23.27. and 1 Chro. 24.3.
1 Chronicles. 23.27. with 1 Chronicles. 24.3. And he was instructed for the building of
the house of God, 2 Chro. 3.3.
2 Chronicles. 3.3. Neither was Solomon ruled by David's mouth-speech alone, but
David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and other
particulars, 1 Chro. 28.11.
1 Chronicles. 28.11. And the pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, ver. 12.
Whence justly resulteth, that David had especial divine Revelations from God;
and it is likely, that from the day of the first unction by Samuel (when it was
said, 1 Samuel 16.13.
1 Samuel 16.13. The Spirit of the Lord came upon David, from that day forward)
that he made diverse of these gracious and divine Psalms, and took on him the
extraordinary thoughts of heavenly things: yea, David himself framed the
services of the Levites according to their manner under Aaron their Father, as
God commanded him 2 Chro. 24 19
2 Chronicles. 24.19.

PAR. 13.
THus winding up from the bottom to the to ppe, all true reformation, must
rest in him, from whom all order did spring, that is, God; As in the making of
the Tabernacle, there was nothing left to the invention of Moses, Exodus 25.9.
Exodus 25.9. According to all that I show thee, after the pattern of the
Tabernacle, and after the pattern of all the instruments thereof, so shall ye
make it. Which is re-confirmed in the New Testament; For see (says God) that
thou make all things according to the pattern showed thee in the Mount, Heb.
8.5.
Heb. 8 5. So, out of doubt, David had his patterns to follow: I named before
the Spirit, which taught him, and the direction of his Seers, and Prophets with
whom he conversed, and the example of Aaron. Last of all, I say (that I may
return from whence I digrested) it would never have been said that David and
Samuel ordered such and such things: if David had not rather followed Samuels
pattern, or directions, then Samuel David's: For Samuel was the ancienter both
man and Judge, and Prophet, yea, a known Prophet of the Lord, unto whom, in
trouble David resorted in private, 1 Samuel 19.18.
1 Samuel 19.18. And both he and Samuel went, and dwelt at Naioth, in Ramah, and
were both together, ver. 22. When it is likely he received instructions from
Samuel, concerning the future Temple.

PAR. 14.
FOr most certain it is, that Samuel the Seer had dedicated diverse things of
worth, which were employed on the enriching of the Temple, 1 Chr. 26.28
1 Chronicles. 26.28. When David was but in the poor fortune of a Reversioner: and
it is as certain that David and Samuel ordered diverse things, 1 Chro. 9.22
1 Chronicles. 9.22. as I said before: Yea it is added to good purpose, Samuel,
(...), Samuel videns, Samuel the Prophet; both to distinguish him from other
Samuels who were not Prophets (if any such men were) and to intimate, that his
joynt-reformation with David was determined, and agreed on, before hand with a
divine consent, flowing from the spirit of prophecy.

PAR. 15.
IN so much that Samuel is counted one of the Trium-viri, Psalm. 99 6.
Psalm. 99.6. which were the great instruments of Gods glory in Sion, whom the
Lord answered when they called on him; nor can any wise Christian think, but
Samuel, who in express terms is said to order the porters, 1 Chro. 9.22.
1 Chronicles. 9.22. Had far greater care of greater matters. Thus much for the
state Ecclesiastique, which Samuel reduced to good order, as a Seer.

PAR. 16.
SEcondly, for the state Politic, which he governed as a Judge; when in his
Circuites, which he yearly kept, as a Judge Itinerant to Bethel, Gilgal, and
Mizpeh, he had spoken unto all the house of Israel 1 Samuel 2.3.
1 Samuel 2.3. And counseled them to put away the strange gods, and Ashteroth
from among them, and to prepare their hearts, and serve God only ((...), says
the Septuagint.

PAR. 17.
NOw to show that both dulia and latria, belong only to God, and that the
distinction is over nice, and over-valued, Christ says to Satan [(...)] and
when the Israelites had done so, ver. 4. Then Samuel bad them gather all Israel
to him, and promised to pray for them.

PAR. 18.
VVHereupon a dyer, or parliament was gathered at Mizpeh, ver. 6. The people
drew water and powered it out before the Lord; though they drew it perhaps to
drink, as thirsty men (for it was no Sacrifice) yet being drawn, they would
not drink, but powered it before the Lord, as David did his longed-for water, 2 Samuel 23.16
2 Samuel 23 16. etc. They abridged their own desires, thwarted their own
appetites; certainly they fasted, and confessed their sins; then also did
Samuel offer a burnt offering, wholly unto the Lord, and Samuel cried unto the
Lord, and the Lord answered him, ver. 9. To which place the Psalmist alluded,
Psalm. 99.6.
Psalm. 99.6. yea, but what is all this to the Passover of Samuel? or where did
Samuel keep the Passover? I answer that in all probability, it was about this
time, the offering of a sucking Lamb, wholly for a burnt offering, might be no
hinderance but that both he, and all the Israelites might keep a great
Passover before, at, or after this great reformation, though it be not
described: for other reformations of Joshuah, Hezekiah, Josiah, were
accompanied with receiving a solemn Passover, and so might this. I am sure
Eccle. 46.14.
Ecclesiasticus 46.14. It is said of Samuel that he judged the congregation, by
the Law of the Lord, and that in all causes, says Tostatus.

PAR. 19.
THough the causes, concerning the divine Law, belonged to the high Priest, yet
some unusual privilege was granted to Samuel, who was both a Levite, and a
Prophet, and an extraordinary Priest, says the great Salianus, in his Annals;
let me add, that he was a judge also; and that the Judges had a regal power;
Samuel being herein a Type of Christ, a King, Priest, and Prophet. Lastly, let
the words before cited have their due consideration, 2 Chro. 35.18.
2 Chronicles. 35, 18. There was no Passover like to that of Josiahs, from the
days of Samuel the Prophet; and though we cannot punctually say, it was in
such a year of Samuel, yet this resultance is unforced, and may run among
the likely ones. In the days of Samuel the prophet, there was a passover like
to Josiahs.

PAR. 20.
I Cannot omit that Josephus l. 10. c. 5.
Josephus agrees with the Scripture in sense; A Prophetae Samuelis temporibus,
in hunc usque diem (says he of Iosiahs passover) nulla talis festivit as
celebrata fuit: he hits upon an excellent reason, quia tum omnia juxta
praescriptum legum, and antiquas consuetudines peragebant; which words (as
cited by Salianus) may have reference to the days, either of Samuel or Josiah.
Salianus churlishly finds fault with Josephus, as if he accused of Sacrilege,
and of breaking Laws, and neglecting ancient customs, in the greatest
Festivity and Sacrifice; both Hezekiah, Iosaphat, Asa, Solomon, and David
himself; yet Salianus himself both supinely passes over the passover of
Samuel, inhering in smaller matters, and does not observe, that Josephus
hitteth exactly the Scripture strain, namely not so much accusing others of
Sacrilege, neglect, or contempt, or any positive mischief, as saying in a
comparative reference, that upon reformation, there was no passover every way
so absolute, as Iosiahs passover was, since the great passover, in the days
of Samuel: Nulla [talis] Festivit as, which words of his may, Commodo sensu, be
well expounded; no passover since Samuels was ever so real, and exquisite,
for substance, manner, and matter, and so perfectly circumstantiated; which the
Scripture, before Josephus fully declared. And so much for the fourth great
passover, which would not have been omitted by all writers, for the place
thereof, if it could have been necessarily, and demonstratively proved from
hence; but indeed the argument is only probable, not apodicticall, or
necessary; and yet I thought fit to enlarge this point, because some matters
momentuall are couched in it, and diverse things conjoined, which lay scattered,
and therefore not usually observed, as parts of one history.

The Prayer.
MOst gracious Father, thine especial love to us has vouchsafed to ingirt,
and encompasse us thy servants of great Britain, not more with the Ocean, than
with a Sea of prosperity and gladness; here is no leading into captivity, no
complaining in our streets; peace is within our walls, and plenteousnesse
within our palaces; the breath of our nostrils, the light of our Israel, is
upheld, and comforted by thee; his most gracious spouse, his most fruitful
Vine brancheth forth joy for the present, and manifold stronger assorances for
the time to come. Most heartily we bless thee for this thy mercy, and humbly
desire the continuance of it upon our most Sacred Sovereign, and upon his most
gracious Queen; Upon our most hopeful Prince, and royal Progeny, and upon us
by them, for the mediation and merits of thy beloved only Son, in whom thou
art well-pleased, even Jesus Christ our only Advocate, and Redeemer; Amen.

CHAP. IV. The Contents of the fourth Chapter.
1. In the fifth great Passover specialized to be kept by Hezekiah; the
unsanctifyed in part ate it; and in the second month, by dispensation divine;
and the Priests and Levits only killed the Passover.

2. The Kings prayer accepted both for the unclean Priests and people, and the
people healed at the good Kings prayer.

3. A voluntary Passover to supply the imperfection of the former. Devotions
half performed are to be renewed and quickened.

4. The Priests and Levites prayers accepted of God for the people.

5. Religious thoughts must be produced into Acts.

6. In the sixth glorious passover of Josiah, were most royal offerings, both
for the Pascha and also for the Chagigah, which exceeded the offerings of
Hezekiah.

7. Salianus against Vatablus; both reconciled.

8. The Masters of the family killed the Passover; but the Priests slew the
Festival offerings: Levites might not sacrifice, without divine inspiration,
or great exigents: any Levite might sacrifice the proper Passover for his own
family, or for the impure.

9. In what sense Priests are said to profaine the Sabbath, the Temple,
Sacrifices, and Circumcision chase away the Sabbath.

10. The seventh extraordinary great Passover was foreprophecyed by Ezekiel,
but not accomplished, till the return from captivity, in the days of Ezra,
and Nehemiah.

PAR. 1.
THe fifth great Passover was in the time of Hezekiah, 2 Chro 30.15.
2 Chronicles. 30.15, For I pass by Hezekiah his precedent reformation, of taking
away the high places, and breaking the Images, and cutting down the groves,
and breaking in pieces the brazen Serpent, which Moses had made, to which the
Israelites burned incense, 2 King. 18.4
2 King. 18.4. I omit also the preparatives to this great passover, and begin
at the 15. verse. Where it is said, The Priests and Levites were ashamed, for
their sins, and the sins of the people, and sanctified themselves: And the
people received the passover, though they were not sanctified, and in the
second month: Wherefore the people themselves, or the Masters of the families,
killed not their Lambs, for the passover (as was their wonted guise or
custom, at other times) But the Levites had the charge of killing the
Passover for every one that was not clean, ver. 17.

PAR. 2.
Four other things are most observable about this passover. First, that they
who were not cleansed, and yet did eat the passover, otherwise then it was
written, were prayed for by the King, and the form of Hezekiahs prayer was,
The good Lord pardon every one, that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord
God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of
the sanctuary, ver. 18. etc. And that you may know the great power of the
hearty prayers of a King, even of Hezekiah (as well as of David, and Solomon in
other cases) The Lord harkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people: For the
Kings heart was clean, when the Priests, Levites, and peoples were unclean.

PAR. 3
THe second passage is this, that whereas other passeovers lasted but seven
days, what was wanting in the former part of their more perfect sacrifice, was
supplied in their voluntary assumed devotions: the whole assembly took
counsel to keep other seven days, and did keep other seven days with
gladness, ver. 23. Yea, a great number of Priests (belike, before
unsanctifyed) sanctified themselves, ver. 24. By which redoubled acts both of
priests and people, we are taught, if our prayers, or our own wandering
thoughts, or the sierce suggestions of Satan, not to give over, but to reunite
our forces, to renew afresh our endeavors, to double the times of our holy
exercises: and be thou assured, good Christian, though the devils temptarions
do trouble thee, and vex the; these repeated, and more perfect prayers of
thine; do more afflict and torment him, and all his infernal crew.

PAR. 4.
YEt that is not all, nor the chiefest joy, but toward the end of this
Festival, (that the people may know also the efficacy of Sacerdot all
benediction) both the Priests and Levites arose and blessed the people, and
their voice was heard, and their prayers came up to his holy dwelling place,
even unto heaven, ver. 27. which was the third observable puncto, in this great
Passover.

PAR. 5.
THe fourth, and last memorable passage was, that after all this was finished,
All Israel, that were present, brake the Images in pieces, cut down the
groves, threw down the high places, 2 Chro. 31.1.
and Altars, a 2 Chronicles. 31.1. Whence we may learn, that good sincere hearts
are more devour, after their religious exercises; that holy performances make
deep impressions, and bring forth fruits of amendment, and end in no end, but
reformation: Reformation, I say, not popular, which is never aright; but
regular, general, wherein Inferiors are guided by Superiors, and these by
Gods Word.

PAR. 6.
THe fixed most glorious passover was in the eighteenth year of the devout
Josiah, as appears 2 Kin. 23.21 2 Chro. 35.1.
2 King 23.21, and 2 Chronicles. 35.1. etc. Toward which were given for passover
offerings, 37000. Lambs, and Kids, and for other offerings, 3800. Oxen; the
first fort was of the flock, merely for the Pascha, and them the Master of
each Family killed, and they were roasted whole, and eaten by the family, as God
commanded by the hand of Moses; the second sort were of the herds, 3800 Oxen
(some say Calves among them) these were for the chagigah, for the Feast
offerings, and other offerings; some of these holy offerings they sod in pots,
cauldrons, and pans, and divided them speedily among the people; of the other
part, they made whole burnt offerings (of which the people had no portion at
all, but the fire consumed all) observe further, things were prepared the same
day, to keep the Passover, and to offer burnt offerings on the Altar of the
Lord, 2 Chr. 35.16
2 Chronicles. 35.16. And unto the Pascha was annexed the Chagigah; after their
eating the passover with sour herbs, they made up the rest of their supper,
a Rear, or a second supper, as you may well call it, with other comfortable,
and pleasant meats, according to the Law; this exceeded Hezekiahs passover,
both for number of paschall and other offerings, and for being kept in a more
legal way, for the time, viz. in the first month, and because all sorts of
men were more sanctified, at the beginning of Iosiah's passover, then at
Hezekiahs.

PAR. 7.
ERe I part with this passover, I cannot let slip; that there is a great
question, between two learned men, Vatablus and Salianus, viz. Whether it
belonged to the Priests only, or to the Levites also, to offer sacrifice.
Vatablus says, Levitae immo laverunt Pascha, and mactabant victimas, The
Levites slew the passover, and killed the beasts for sacrifices. Salianus 2
Chr. 35 11
confuteth him saying, Nusquam invenies hostias a Levitis jugulatas; mictatio
hostiae vel maxim ad Sacerdotes pertinet (so it should be read) you shall no
where find, that the Levites killed the Sacrifices, the slaying of them most
properly belonged to the Priests, 2 Chr. 29 22
2 Chro. 29.22. They, that is, the Priests (as is truly expounded) killed the
Bullockes, and Lambs, received the blood, sprinkled it on the Altar: This duty
is laid on the Priests, the sons of Aaron Levit. 1.5.
Levit, 1.5. etc. Again, Number. 18, 3. The Levites shall keep thy charge^ and
the charge of all the Tabernacle; only they shall not come nigh the vessels of
the Sanctuary, and the Altar, that neither they, nor you also dye. No less
then death is menaced, if the Levites come nigh the Altar, which they must do,
if they sacrificed aright. Both may be well reconciled thus; first, I say, that
the ordinary continued duty was committed by God to the Priests only; and the
Levites by their place, were not to meddle in sacrifices; yet if Levites were
divinely inspired by God, to do so, they might, and did; so did Samuel, a
Levite, offer a whole burnt offering, 1 Samuel 7.9.
and in exigents, the priests were helped by the Levites, 2 Chro. 29.35.
2 Chronicles. 29.35. The priests were so few, that they could not flay all the
burnt offerings, wherefore, their brethren the Levites did help them, till the
work was ended; now the flaying of beasts belonged to the priests, the sons
of Aaron, Levit. 1.6.
Levit 1.6. As this, upon extremity, was practiced by the Levites; so were the
other duties also; and Salianus says well in this point, Nunc ex necessitate
duntaxat, propter multitudinem victimarum, non ex officio, id munus usurpabant;
Not the place or office of Levites, but necessity privileged them for this
time, and for this Work.

PAR. 8.
LEt me add, when priests and Levites were too few, when Sacrifices were
superabundant, as in the Jewish passeovers, which were to be killed on a set
month; on a set day of that month, on a set hour, toward the end of the
day, on the first part of that hour, when all the Lambs could not be brought
nigh the door of the Tabernacle; not only every Levite, chief of an house,
but every Master of a Family was allowed to be as a priest, for that time; his
servants as under Levites, his house, as a Temple: That this was one true
reason of communication of that power to the Levites, and the people, appears
by the contrary practice, when the Sacrifices were few, when they kept the
passover, Ezr. 9.19.
Ezr. 6.19. The Priests and the Levites were purifyed together; all of them
were pure, and killed the Passover, for all the children of the captivity, and
for their brethren the Priests, and for themselves; the Priests and Levites
killed all the Lambs see 2 Chronicles. 29.21.
likewise: The sons of Aaron, offered a sin-offering for the Kingdom and the
Sanctuary, and for Judah (for the number of the sacrifices was but 21) and they
killed the bullockes, and received the blood, and sprinkled it on the Altar;
but when the Sacrifices and Thanke-offerings increased, when the priests were
too few, the Levites helped, as the Scripture said before; yet if the people
were unpure, they might nor, they did not, use their privilege; their
prerogative ceased: and not the impure people themselves, but the Clerus Dei
must reconcile the people: the Levites had the charge of killing the
passeovers, for every one that was not clean, to sanctify them unto the Lord,
2 Chro. 30 17
2 Chro. 30.17. Yet did the only right, in ordinary, belong to the priests, to
which sacrificing of beasts by the priests, Christ alluded Math. 12.5.
Math. 12.5. When he said, on the Sabbath days, the priests in the Temple
profane the Sabbath; which is more forcible then if he had said, they observe
not the Sabbath, because God commanded their Sabbaticall duty of sacrificing,
Number. 28 9.
Number. 28.9. etc. Which not Levites but priests fulfilled. Levit. 1.
Levit, 1.6.

PAR. 9.
THey profane the Sabbath not simply, but by an improper locution, because if
either Priests, or any others had killed, flayed, or cut a sunder any beasts,
any where else, it had been a sin; but the law priviledgeth the Temple, from
the Law of the Sabbath (the wiser Jews held in Templo non esse Sabbatum, there
is no Sabbath in the Temple, and a rule they have, that Circumcision chaseth
away the Sabbath, for it was exactly kept on the eight day, though the eight
day happened to be the Sabbath) it sanctified all the laborious works of men's
hands, done in it, done to the worship of God, and his service (which is
perfect freedom) makes those handy-workes lose their name of servile works.
Away then with those halfe-Jewes, strict Sabbatarians, who will not have bells
rung on the Sabbath days, nor water carried in pitchers, or payles to fill the
font, nor the raw air of the Church to be sweetened with frankincense,
perfumes, or wholesome odours, nor the decent ornaments of the Priests to be
put on; they are ignorant, that the Temple priviledgeth, if not sanctifies
such works; and what is done in ordine ad Deum, as tending toward the worship
of God, is no way forbidden; when their imperial censoriousnesse, and scorn
(the daughters of pride) are forbidden, for never had the common people
liberty to judge their Priests; oh! how humble was Hannah to erring Ely! The
heathen were very strict in keeping of their Holy Days, yet, says Macrob.
Sturnal. 1.16.
Macrobius Vmbro denied him to be polluted, qui opus vel ad deos pertinens,
sacrorumve causa fecisset, vel aliquid ad urgentem vitae utilitatem respiciens
actitasset: Scaevola denique consultus, quid Ferijs agiliceret, respondit, quod
praetermissum noceret; Wherefore, if an Ox fell into any dangerous place, and
the master of the family did help him out; or if a man under propped a broken
beam of an house, to keep it from ruin, he seemed not to break the holy
day, says Scaevola: which words I have the rather related, to show, not only,
as Clem. Alex. Strom. 5.
Clemens Alexandrinus has it, Philosophia peripatetica ex lege Mosaica, and
aliis dependet Prophetis; but even the very Roman Priests borrowed much of
Moses his Law; and in likelihood, even from the Gospel his particular
instance, that mercy is to be showed to the Ox in need, Luke 14.5.
Luke 14.5. Which of you shall have an Ox fallen into a pit, and will not
straight way pull him out on the Sabbath day? which is all one with that, which
Scaevola delivers after to the Romans.

PAR. 10.
ANd now I come to the seventh extraordinary great Passover, when the
Israelites came out of the Babylonish captivity; for the Passover appointed
in Ezekiel, was only in Vision, where there is mention indeed of the first
month, and foureteenth day of unleavened bread, Seven days, and other
offerings for the feast, to be provided by the Prince, Exek. 45.21.
Ezekiel. 45.21. but what Ezechiel fore prophefied, was not accomplished in his
time, but about 150. years after, it was performed by Ezra, which is the last
famous Passover specialized in the old Testament: when they were freed from
bondage, and had dedicate the Temple, Ezra 6.19.
Ezra 6.19. they kept the passover, for all the children of the captivity,
and for their brethren the Priests, and for themselves. And so much for the
seven more eminent Passeovers recorded in Scripture, from the first Mosaicall
Passover, which he kept through faith, Heb. 11.28.
Heb. 11.28. to this of Ezra.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, thou only art pure, and none of us can be pure enough, sanctify
us I beseech thee unto thy self, and teach and help us to cooperate
thereunto with thee; inform us inwardly, and outwardly; square us according to
thy Canon, make us strive for perfection pleasing to thee, but from the wild
reformations of the ignorant people, good Lord deliver us. Amen, O Amen.

CHAP. V. The Contents of the fifth Chapter.
1. The registered Passeovers of the New Testament: Passeovers were duly kept,
(...), according to the custom of the Feast, and (...), yearly: The just
Joseph and his spouse, the thrice sacred virgin, observed the Passeovers:
thrice every year all males were to appear before the Lord.

2. Maimonides his opinion, who might stay at home.

3. Maimonides in diverse points erreth.

4. Calvin misopineth: It is unexpressed whether Christ were carried to the
Passover till he were twelve years old: Some Children forwarder then others:
At twelve years of age Christ ascended.

5. Diverse reasons that Christ at twelve years of age took the passover: he
was a strict observer of the Law: They came to the Passover principally for
devotion: None was ever so well prepared to receive, as our Savior.

6. The second Passover, which the new Testament records Christ to have
honored with his Passover, was eighteen years after: Then Christ cast out
buyers and sellers out of the Temple, and did many miracles, which Nicodemus
believed, and the Galileans: Christ then received the Passover, though so much
be not expressed: the confession of the Jews, that Christ strictly observed
their Passeovers.

7. The next years Passover is pointed at, Ioh. 5.1. after this there was a
Feast of the Jews: Melchior Canus reproved: Zeppers distinction of Feasts
amended.

8. Holy days appointed by the Church are sanctified by God, to God: the Feast
of Purim, from Hamons magical Lots, allowed: Queen Hesters decree confirming
the ordinance of the Jews: the Feast of the dedication was of man's
appointment: our most heavenly Savior honored it with his presence, words,
and works: What, and of what this Dedication was: Zepper does ill confound
encaenia with Renovalia.

9. He is too strict against encaenia, or Feasts of Dedication.

All dancing is not forbidden: encaeniare known to be all one with novam
vestem induere: Revells or Feasts for the Dedication of our Churches lawful,
and ancient: The royal praescriptions for this point wise and holy.

10. Maldonat his insolency taxed: Canus and Cajetan confuted by Pererius.

11. The Feast of the Jews mentioned, Ioh. 5.1. was not the Pentecost, nor the
Feast of Tabernacles, but the Passover.

12. Pererius is too vehement, and confuted.

13. The next Passover Christ went not to Jerusalem: The lawful reason
thereof: The Jews come to him, because he came not to them.

14. Sacraments, upon exigents, may be deferred.

PAR. 1.
THe Passeovers in the new Testament, honored by divine remembrance, are
these: the first Passover was, when Christ was about twelve years of age,
unto which I make these my approaches: That there were yearly passeovers both
before, and after the birth of our Savior, I doubt not: that Joseph the foster
father, and the most holy Virgin, yearly, and duly at the set time, received
the passover unless there were just, and legal impediments, I willingly
grant: certain it is, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the
Feast, a Luke 2.42. which custom was Annual, on the foureteenth day of the
first month: yea, it is not only (...), according to the custom of the
Feast. but more distinctly, and plainly, v. 41. they went unto Jerusalem,
unto the Feast, (...), yearly, per annum, annuatim: the vulgar of Hentenius,
and Sa^tandr^anus has it per omnes annos; whether our Savior was yearly
carried, when he could not go, or went himself, so soon as he was able to
go, is not expressed: some think yes, because they imagine his gracious
mother (who loved him so tenderly) would not go to the Feast without him:
others think, she left him sometimes behind her, with some especial friends,
which caused the good old man, and the sacred Virgin, to seek him among their
kinsefolkes and acquaintance. Luke 2.44.
Luke 2.44. rather then among others when he was wanting: clear it is, Exodus
23.17.
Exodus 23.17. Tribus vicibus in anno, conspicietur omnis masculus tuus, ad
facies dominatoris domini: three times in the year all the males shall appear
before the Lord God, which is repeated, Exodus 34.23.
Exodus 34.23. all this seems to make for Christ's often, and yearly ascent.

PAR. 2.
YEt if we may believe Maimonides, in Chagigah, cap. 2. little children might
stay at home, though every Child which could hold his father by the hand, and
go up from the entrance of the City unto the high place of the Temple (which
was a steep ascent) not to be performed by very young children, must appear
before the Lord: also besides little children, and women, the deaf, dumb,
blind, lame, the fool, the defiled, the uncircumcised, the old, and the sick,
the Hermaphrodite, and the servant, were excused if they ascended not; to this
effect says the Jewish professor.

PAR. 3.
BUt he is awry in diverse points: first, the women near to Jerusalem, were
not exempted from coming, nor they in Jerusalem, from partaking of the Feast:
secondly, their son, daughter, man servant and maid servant, the Itenerant
Levite and stranger, the fatherless and widow were to ascend, and rejoice at
the Feast of weeks, Deuteronomy. 16.11.
Deuteronomy. 16.11. and so at the great passover in all likelihood. Thirdly, their
Hebrew servants certainly every one that could, did celebrate the passover;
for if they were circumcised, they were bound to keep the whole Law, as Saint
Paul divinely expounds it, Gal. 5.3.
Gal. 5.3. though their bought, and uncircumcised servants might not come.

PAR. 4.
CAlvin, and his numerous Soldurii, or devoted men unto him, think none
ascended to Jerusalem, under twenty years old, viz. only those, qui
transibant sub censum, who paid tribute, or were taxed, yet Christ went up at
twelve years of age, and the Jewish professor who knew better then Calvin
what the Jews practiced, vary from him: Tostatus thinks that the males, when
they came to years of discretion then they all ascended; though it cannot be
defined what year punctually children come to the years of discretion,
because some are both riper witted then others, and better bred, and of
stronger complexions, and so forwarder by far then others: Caesaribus virtus
contigit ante diem: yet I hold more probable, that as soon as children had
strength to go so far, and were instructed, and knew what belonged to those
Solemnities, then commonly they did first celebrate those Typical Festivities
so, (that I may wind up all, to my purpose) I conclude that if our heavenly
Savior ascended, or was carried up to Jerusalem, after the first year of his
age, till he was twelve years old, it was more then was expressly by the Law
enjoined: but because then he did ascend, I resolve it was most convenient for
him, then to ascend, if not necessary, infallible consequences prove his
ascent, Luke 2.43.
Luke 2.43. The child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem (therefore he ascended
up hither) and ver. 46. they found him in the Temple, therefore he went up to
Jerusalem, and was in the Temple.

PAR, 5.
BUt whether he kept that passover, which is made so glorious by the recorded
presence of him, is made quaestionable: for the Negative, I see nothing but his
duodecennall age (which yet is above answered) and the not mentioning of his
receiving it, when less matters are mentioned, which is also of no great
weight, sithence both omissions are of great matters, as of the Angels in the
creation, when smaller things are insisted on, and besides are very frequent,
see Ioh. 20.30. and 21.25.
Ioh. 20 30. Joh. 21.25. for the affirmative, thus I argue, first, from
authority, Theophilact in Luc. 2.
Theophilact on Luke 2. Simul venit Christus cum parentibus in Jerusalem, ut
per omnia ostendat se non adversarium Deo, neque repugnantem his, quae a lege
posita fuerant; Christ came to Jerusalem fully to manifest that he was no
adversary, either to God, or the established rules of the Law: Servavit ipse
legem, quam dedit, says B^da, he oserved the law which himself gave, ascendit
tanquam homo cum hominibus ad offerenda Deo sacrificia, as a man, he went up
with other men to offer sacrifices unto God: Ludolphus the Carthosian,
Laboranit puer Jesus itineribus longis, and vadit, ut honoret patrem coelestem,
in Festis suis observans humiliter legem, Dominus legis; Christ when he was yet
but a child underwent long journeyes, to honor his heavenly father; and being
Lord of the Law humbly kept the Law in his own feasts: of our late adversaries
Barradius says, Paschale agebat Festum, he kept the Feast of the passover:
and Franciscus Lucas Brugensis, in Christ's Itinerary, Celebrat Pascha cum
Parentibus. Secondly, from reason, many were the civil and politic causes why
the people went to Jerusalem, and there might be mixed causes, consisting both
of religious and worldly thoughts, or actions, whilst many a man labored to
improve his journey, but iter hoc Festi celebrandi causa tanti susceptum est,
says Beda; and so much is intimated by the words of Scripture: they went up to
Jerusalem yearly, at the feast of the passover, ver. 41. after the custom of
the feast, they went up to Jerusalem, ver. 42. and when they had fulfilled the
days ( viz. of the Feast) they returned, ver, 43. which all laid together,
fairly imply, that they came to Jerusalem for devotion sake principally, if
not only, and were at the eating of the Paschall Lamb, in the appointed
season, to wit, in the night of the foureteenth day of the month Abib, and
stayed there duly, till all the rest of the days of that Festival solemnity
were expired, and so soon as their holy duties were performed, presently they
repaired homeward. Neither did our Saviors extraordinary stay in the holy
Temple savor of ought, but Religion, which he expressly calls his Fathers
business, verse. 49. briefly thus, Christ came purposely to Jerusalem to offer
up, and be partaker of the Passover, and other offerings; therefore he would
not frustrate his own ends; see a parallel of the last point, ver. 39. they
brought Christ first to Jerusalem, and presented him to the Lord, verse. 22.
and it is said verse. 39. When they had performed all things, according to the
Law of the Lord, they returned; nothing was left undone.

The second reason is thus shaped, none ever was so well prepared to eat the
passover as Christ was; therefore I rather resolve, that he did take it; the
antecedent is thus evinced, first, his bodily health and strength was
proportionable to his age, if not above it, in his infancy, the child grew,
Luke 2.40.
Luke 2.40. in his adolescency, or juvenilitie, Jesus increased in stature,
verse. 52. no bodily imperfection, or weakness put an obex to the receiving of
the passover; concerning the qualification, disposition, and state of his
soul (even in his childhood) he was not only come to the years of
discretion, knowing good from evil, but was capable of the greatest mysteries,
he waxed strong in Spirit, was filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was
upon him; and a little after the time of this passover, Jesus increased in
wisdom, and in favor with God and man, verse. 52. increased in wisdom
(though he was filled with it before) increased in favor with God (though
before he was strong in Spirit, though before the grace of God was on him)
Lastly, he increased in favor with men both before, and at, and after the
Passover (there is nothing to hinder this exposition) lest you may think,
that men's perverseness might have put him back, or been exceptive against
him, e. say now who can, that ever and one was so perfectly prepated as he, or
that being so divinely adapted for it, he took it not.

PAR. 6.
THe second passover that Christ is recorded, in special, to have sanctified
by his presence, was, about the beginning of miracles, which Jesus did, and
about the first year of his public ministry; and about eighteen years
after, the last mentioned passover: for from Cana of Galilee Christ went down
to Capernaum, and continued not there many days, Ioh. 2.12.
John. 2.12. For the Jews Passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem, ver. 13. There cast he out buyers and sellers out of the Temple,
ver. 14. And did diverse miracles, which when they saw, many believed on him at
the Passover, in the feast day, ver. 23. About which time Nicodemus seeing his
Miracles, confessed Christ to be a Teacher come from God; and by reason of the
greatness of Christ's miracles, that God was with him, Ioh. 3.2.
Ioh. 3.2. Yea, the very Galilaeans having seen all the things, which he had
done at Jerusalem at the Feast received him, Ioh. 4 45.
Ioh. 4.45. But it is not specialized, no not in this passover neither, that
Christ received it; yet I have read none, who deny, that Christ now received:
And this shall make me content with this only proof, that he did receive,
Christ came not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law, Math. 5.17.
Mat. 5.17. Therefore he being at Jerusalem at that time, when that branch of
the Law was to be fulfilled, he omitted it not, he brake it not, he fulfilled
it, and received the passover. A most observable passage is in Sebastian
Munst. Annot. in Mat. 12.
Sebastian Munster, (as that Gospel is in Hebrew, and by him set forth, and
dedicated to Henry the eight) where Nizabon of the Jews fiercely objecteth
against us Christians, Si Christus odivit Sabbata, solennitates, and Neomenias,
quare suscepit super se legem Iudaicam, circumcisionem, Sabbatum, and Vniversam
legem Israel, cunctis Diebus suis? If Christ hated our Sabbaths, solemn
Feasts, and New Moons, why did he undergo, or fulfill all the Law of the
Jews? Circumcision, the Sabbath, and the Universal Law of Israel, all the
days of his life? Munster excellently retorteth it, if Christ observed their
whole law (as is here confessed) why do they, why did their forefathers accuse
him of Sabbath breaking, and condemn him as a transgressour of the Law? their
present confession is ground enough to conclude, he strictly solemnized this
passover; and was unjustly both accused and condemned. Whosoever prefers
not the searching out and finding of a truth, before a little pains in
reading, may pass over the next argument, and many other in this Book.

PAR. 7.
THe next year, the next passover that Christ was present at, is poynted at,
in these words, Ioh. 5.1.
John 5.1. After this there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem: If any object that here is no mention of the passover? I answer,
there is none expressly, and further add, both that there were many other
Feasts of the Jews; and that the diversity of expositors, and expositions
seem to make the point more full of scruple, than I conceive it to be,
Melchior Caenus, loc. com. 11 c. 5. ad 5.
Melchior Canus approoveth Cajetan for holding that this Feast of the Jews was
a Winter Feast, and so could not be the Feast of Easter, Canus himself adds,
Nihil interest, sive dicas fuisse Festum dedicationis Templi secundi sub
Zorobabele, quod celebrabatur, tertia die mensis Adar, hoc est, Februarii, sive
potius Festum sortium, quod Iudaeis solenne erat, 14 and 15. die ejusdem
postremi mensis: That is, It mattereth not, whether it was the Feast of the
dedication of the second Temple, under Zorobabel, which was kept on the third
day of February, or the Feast of Lots, which was observed by them, on the 14.
and 15. days of the same February, so he may cross the torrent, and invent a
new crochet, he can be content to leave it in a certain uncertainety. It must
be acknowledged that it is said a feast of the Jews. and that the Jews had
many feasts, some Stata, some Conceptiva, says Zepper, but, say I, their
Conceptiva, were Stata also: therefore thus they may be better divided: Some
were of primitive divine institution, as besides other, the three famous feasts
of the passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles, to which there was due a most
strict obedience yearly: Thrice in a year shall all your male children
appear before the Lord God, Exodus 34.23.
Exo. 34.23. viz. Once at each of these feasts: And there were some other
posthumous feasts afterward, casually, and incidentally appointed, as the
Feasts of the dedication, and of Lots, etc. made by men, pro re nata, as
occasion served, yet no way against Gods Law divine.

PAR. 8.
ANd howsoever some frothy-mouth'd ignorants rail against holy days, and say,
none can make holy days save God only, who is holy: I say, when the Church of
God makes holy days, it is never done against God, or besides his will, but
they are lawfully made, and are holy to God, and God may be said, mediately, to
make them holy. Concerning the Feast of Lots, thus. When the Jews were
wonderfully delivered from the cursed plots of Haman; and evil fell on him who
evil thought, they called those days Purim, Esth. 9.26.
Esth. 9.26. By reason of the Magical Lots, which Haman used, calling in the
great Abaddon, to help the Jews destruction; And the Jews ordained, and
took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves to
them, so as it should not fail, that they would keep those two days yearly,
ver. 27. This was the decree of Esther, confirming the ordinance of the Jews,
ver. 32. Will you say, this was profane, or unlawful? So concerning the feast
of Dedication, 1 Mac. 4.59.
1 Mac. 4.59 Judas and his Brethren, with the whole Congregation of Israel
ordained, that the days of the dedication of the Altar should be kept in their
season, from year to year, by the space of eight days Was the dedication of
the Altar profane? were no days holy but Sabbaths? what was his feast of eight
days, wherein one Sabbath at least was included? Though they esteem not of
the Churches power, in making holy days, yet Christ in his time did observe
those holy days, and sanctified them with the presence of his own words,
works, and person, Ioh. 10.22.
Ioh. 10 22. It was at Jerusalem the Feast of dedication, and it was Winter;
there Christ did miracles, there did he plainly avouch himself to be God: To
that feast of the Maccabees, do our late translators apply the words of Saint
John, and with them agree Maldonat, and some others; yet if it were at the
dedication of the whole City of Jerusalem, when the decayed Walls were
repaired, as Theodorus Mopsuestiensis opineth (though the dedication of the
City Walls is not so holy a thing) or if it were the dedication of Salomons
Temple, which was in this place aimed at, Cyril. in Graeca Catena.
Cyril rather imbraceth; though it will be hardly proved, that the day of
Salomons dedication was kept holy, and festival, after his Temple was
destroyed, and after the new building of another Temple, and new dedication:
Lastly, if it were the dedication of Zorobabel, when the Israelites came from
Babylon, and Persia 1 Esd. 7.7.
1 Esd. 7.7. (Where they off^red to the dedication of the Temple, 100.
Bullockes, 200. Rams, 400. Lambs) I say, which soever of all these
dedications it was, it is all one to our purpose; sithence Christ did honor
the feast of the dedication, with his own presence, and with wonderful both
words, and deeds; and that feast of dedication was at Jerusalem, and it was
Winter, as I said before, from Ioh. 10.22.
Ioh. 10.22. Encaenia facta sunt, I cannot but tax Zepper, lib. 9 c. 9. Who
makes encaenia, and Renovalia to be Synonoma's, whereas Renovations must
differ from dedications: and all feasts were often renovated; yea, some
annually, some, often in a year, as the New-Moones, or the Feasts of the
Calends.

PAR. 9.
THe same Zepper, faults those meetings of people, at the feasts of dedication
of Temples, and especially the dancing at those times, as provocations to
venery. How temptations may arise from the Dutch dances, I know not, they may
be like those ungracious ones, Exodus 32.6.
Exodus 32.6. Or like the Herodian dances, though I was never any dancer; I know
a harmless use may be made of dancing; himself confesses Antiquitus
saltationes illae sacris populi veteris adhibitae sunt, nullaque fere olim
sacra, sine his, peracta fuerunt: the ancient Jews used those dancings, and
there were scarce any holy times, or duties, performed without them; and he
brings these instances, Judge. 11.34. 1 Samuel 18.6. 2 Samuel 6.16. Iudeth 15.14.
Since Christ he cites Theodor hist. Ec^le. 4.27. and Tripartit. hist. 6.48.
Theodoret, and the Tripartite history, and I am sure God turned David's
mourning into dancing) Psalm. 30.11.
Psalm. 30.11. And the good Father and prodigal penitent had dancing, Luk 15.25.
Luk 15.25. And that churlish Euclio, the elder brother faulted it, and that
the rather commends it, especially sithence the pitiful old man represented
God our merciful Father; and Christ found not fault with dancing, when he
said, We have piped, and ye have not danced Math. 11.17.
Math. 11.17. But rather commends it, so 1 Cor 4.17.
1 Cor. 4.17. When the Apostle speaks of piping and harping, giving a
distinction in sounds, whereby it may be known what is piped, or harped; it is
very probable, that he alludeth unto the piping, and harping unto dancers,
whose tunes guide the measures: But, to be brief, it is not dancing, that we
so much strive for, in our Revels, or Feasts of dedication; as all other
lawful Recreations, post sacra peracta, with friendly neighborhood, and
harmless good fellowship, and wise modest moderate feastings, to the
refreshing of the poor, and indigent; to the cutting off all needless, and
litigious Law-sutes, when so many friends do meet to be merry, with putting
on of their best apparel; insomuch, that encaeniare says August. ^ract. 48.
in Johan.
Augustine, was vulgarly known to he all one with Novam vestem induere, to
deck themselves in their best apparel, which the Country man calls the
putting on of the Apostle-day clothes: which Feasts in both Testaments were
kept with joy, and the Lord made them joyful, that I may speak in the
Scripture phrase Ezr. 6.16.22
Ezra 6 16.22. Without sin; if we follow the prescribed rules of our most
sacred Sovereign King Charles (who is Inter primos primus, the glory, and
chief of Princes) and of his most learned Father, King James of happy memory,
who did holily what they did, to keep the Iudaizing Reformers from further
madness. Even in Constantines time the Encaenia were every where celebrated:
Dedicationum Festivitates per urbes singulas, templorum nuper exaedificatorum
consecrationes, frequentes Episcoporum in unum conventus, peregrinorum long ab
exteris regionibus accedentium concursus, mutuae populi in populum
benevolentiae: And all holy exercises are particularly recounted by Eusebius.
Histo. Eccle. 10.3.
Eusebius,: So on the Anniversary Feasts in remembrance of the dedication of
our Churches, after sacred exercises performed; Festivity, mirth, and jollity
may be used: Rhenanus, on Tertullian, de Corona militis, thus; Mos commessandi
in dedicationibus Templorum, and Natalibus Divorum diebus, antiquus esse
cognoscitur; the custom of feasting on the days, when Churches were
dedicated, and on the birth-dayes of Saints, is known to be ancient: but in
all the Scriptures, no holy men ever feasted on their birth days; Pharaoh, and
Herod did, of all the Feasts in the year, only the birth of our Lord, and of
his forerunner, are kept holy, the rest are the Feast days of their obit's.
Rhenanus is justly taxed by Pamelius, for applying that to their birth-dayes
(for such was indeed the custom of the heathen) which ought to be said of
their death-dayes, for they were anniversarily observed; and both those good
customs we may, and do keep without sin, etc.

PAR. 10.
I Come to the Jesuit Maldonate, and nearer to the point in hand: Magna nos
Johannes molestia, contentioneque liberasset (says he) si vel unum adjecisset
verbum, quo, quis ille Iudaeorum dies fuisset Festus declarasset, that is,
Saint John might have rid us of much trouble, and strife, if he had added but
one word declarative, what that Feast day was: sawcily, boldly, malapertly
written, Plus quam pro censura, satis pro imperio, over-censorious, and
imperiously enough. Will the Jesuit prescribe to the Almighty a better course
then he has taken? will he grudge if the divine Scripture has left some
points dubious, enveloped, and fit to be enquired after? will he tax the holy
writ of deficiency? when as Nature (which is nothing but the right hand of God)
does neither abound in superfluities, nor is wanting in necessaries? Or is it a
molestation to dive into the harder places of the word of God? or if it be a
strife, is it not an holy strife, to overcome error, to trace after the truth?
The Jesuits impudency being reproved, I approach to the matter. I will not
touch at all the Jewish feasts, either primary or secundary; but such only as
have Patrones, and defenders, that they are meant by these words, Ioh. 5.1.
Ioh. 5.1. There was a Feast of the Jews: you heard before the opinion of
Cajetan, and Canus, see them excellently confuted by the learned Perer. disput.
1 in Ioh. 5.1.
Pererius.

^AR. 11.
SOme of the late Writers held, it was the Feast of Tabernacles, says
Maldonat; but levi conjectura, as he professes his judgment; and there indeed
he is in the right: Many have held that it was the Feast of Pentecost, so
Cyril. 2.123. Chrysostom, Hom. 35. Euthymius, Author Historiae scholasticae,
Aquinas, Lyranus, Hugo Cardinalis, Carthusian, thus, Communiter dicitur, quod
erat solennitas Pentecostes: Pentecoste, opinor, says Theophylact; but Tolet
proves at large by the series rerum, and ordo historiae, by the passages of
those times, it could not be Pentecost, which is strongly confuted also by the
Itinerary, in Franciscus Lucas Brugensis: Canus also; and Cajetan hold it not
likely, that it was Pentecost: Pererius refuteth it thus: after the other
precedent Passover, Christ both stayed in Iudaea, and thence after went into
Galilee, and in his passage conferred with the woman of Samaria, four months
before the Harvest, Ioh. 4.35.
Ioh. 4.35. But the Harvest in Iudaea was before Pentecost, Levit. 23.10. and
16.
Levit. 23.10, To the end of the 16. verse. So this Feast of the Jews could
not be Pentecost: Jrenaeus thinks the Passover was meant in this place; so
Rupertus, Barradius, Tolet, and many others.

PAR. 12.
PErerius in his vehemence for the Passover, mightily overlasheth, and (
disput. 1.) he is peremptory; Nusquam, sive inveteris, sive in novi Testamenti
Scriptura reperire est aliud Festum, nisi Pascha, appellari Festum simpliciter,
and precise; that is, in no place of the Old, or New Testament, is any other
Feast: But the passover called precisely, singly, and simply a Feast: but the
great scholar is certainly in a great error, for the Feast of Tabernacles is
called simply, and precisely a Feast Ioh 7.8.10.11.14.
Ioh. 7.8.10, 11.14. verses: But I remember not that ever the Feast of
Pentecost was called a Feast singly, and directly: And I am sure the Passover
is called so diverse times, more then any other Feast: View these proofs, Luke
2 42.
Luke 2.42. They went up to Jerusalem, according to the custom of the Feast;
and that feast was the Passover, as is proved by the precedent verse: Again,
The Jews would take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him, but not on the Feast day,
Math. 26.5.
Mat. 26.5. And by that word Feast is the Passover meant, as appears ver. 2.
Lastly, if you look for the use of the same word, in Saint John, you shall
find in Ioh. 13.29.
Ioh. 13.29. Buy those things we have need of against the feast, but by the
word [Feast] only the Passover is meant in that place, as is evident ver. 1.
Briefly, sum it thus; Pentecost is never called by it self, a Feast: the
Passover is diverse times, above other feasts solely, and simply called a
Feast; therefore by these words of the Evangelist, Ioh. 5.1. There was a feast
of the Jews, and Jesus want up to Jerusalem; Pentecost was not understood;
but the Passover, in the fairest way of argumentation, must be meant: It is
prefixed, After this there was a Feast of the Jews, that is, after all things
before recorded in the 2, 3. and 4. Chapters, Christ ascended again into the
Holy City, healed him who lay at the poole of Bethesda thirty and eight years,
ver. 9. And did livers other things.

PAR. 13.
THe next passover being the third, after Christ's public ministry, Christ
went not to Jerusalem, nor did take the Passover, at least, in its appointed
usual time, and place: nor was he at the following feast of Pentecost; being
seven weeks after: A reason was this; The Jews sought to kill him, John 7.1.
Ioh. 7.1.
And therefore he walked in Galilee; and therefore he would not walk in Jury,
ibid. But certainly the Scribes came to him from Jerusalem, to Galilee
(because he did not at these feasts, come to them) and he disputed with them
about keeping the Tradition of the Elders, Math. 15.1. Mar. 7.1.
Math, 15.1. Mar. 7.1. See the many admirable things done by Christ, in the
space of six months, namely, from the Passover, till the Feast of
Tabernacles, in the excellent Itinerary of Christ, made by Franciscus Lucas
Brugensis: When the murtherous rage of the Jews was somewhat cooled (though
still the Jews hated Christ John 7.7.
Ioh. 7.7.) About the midst of the feast of Tabernacles, Jesus went up into
the Temple, and taught, ver. 14.

PAR. 14.
THe exact keeping of the Passover was not so strictly appointed, but many
occasions might cause it to be differred; Christ was not bound to cast himself
into the mouth of danger, whilst they ravenously thirsted for his blood; but,
as sometimes he withdrew himself, by disappearing, and passed through the
midst of them, so here he thought fit, not so much as to come among them. Nor
is our spiritual passover so merely necessary, or so absolutely commanded,
but it may be omitted sometimes, though never neglected, much less contemned;
Sickness, local distance, danger, and the astonishing, or stupifying
consideration of sins unrepented of, may excuse one from receiving, for a
while: I dare not pronounce that profound humility to be sin, When Peter fell
down at Jesus knees, saying, depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord,
Luke 5.8.
Luke 5.8, I suppose Christ was seldom nearer joined to him in love: And I
have known him, who in holy thoughts of his own unworthiness sinlesly (as I
conceive) abstained. Want of Charity is a sin; not receiving, when men want
Charity, is not sin; to receive then, were a double sin: Math. 8.8.
Math. 8.8. The Centurion said, Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should come
under my roof; yet none in Israel had so much faith, as he: To the woman of
Canaan, who accounted her self as a dog (unworthy to eat bread at the
Table) content with the crummes which fell from the Masters Table, Math. 15.27.
Mat. 15.27. Christ said, her faith was great, and, be it unto thee as thou will, ver. 28. Subjecting his power to her desires. And thus much of the third
passover, during Christ's public manifestation, by our blessed Savior, or
omitted, or privately kept.

The Prayer.
MOst gracious God, and blessed Savior, who have commanded all those who are
heavy laden, to come unto thee, and have promised to refresh them, and have
appointed thy blood of the Testament to be shed for many, for the remission of
sins, be merciful unto the sins of us all; make us walk strongly, and
Christianly, by the strength of thy Sacraments, all the days of our lives; and
let us so feed on the holy consecrated signs, that we may never be separated
from the thing signified, even holiness it self, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. VI. The Contents of the sixth Chapter.
1. In what manner Christ kept his last passover with its particular rites,
cannot be sooner found then by the Jewish observation of the Sabbath, in those
times.

2. The Jews had a liberty at the first to choose a Lamb or a Goat for the
proper roasted Paschall Sacrifice.

3. A Lamb and a Kid are not all one, against Paulus Brugensis.

4. The difference between the Pascha, and the Chagigah.

5. The reason of some Jews, and some late good Christians confuted.

6. Rupertus his over-nice observation.

7. The Lambs or Kids, in the Egyptian Passover, were called out four days
before.

8. This was also a temporary rite, diverse reasons, why they then chose the
Lamb, or Kid so long before hand in their first Passover.

9. Hunnius erreth in this point.

10. The striking or sprinkling of the blood on the two side-postes, and upper
doore-post was not any of the durable rites, but appropriated to the first
Passover.

11. Sprinkling of blood much used of old.

12. Empty houses in Goshen, needed not be sprinkled.

13. The Angelus exterminator could not hurt, when the blood was sprinkled.

14. Such a sprinkling as this was used in no other sacrifice.

15. The Jews general consent, that such sprinkling was never after in use.

16. A true reason, why this ceremony ceased.

17. Christ was the door thus besprinkled.

18. Hannibal his imitation.

19. The first Passover was eaten in great haste.

20. The succeeding Passeovers were not eaten in such haste.

21. Fair means, and foul were used to hasten the Israelites out of Egypt.

22. Vatablus his opinion of the four Ensigns, under which the Israelites
marched.

23. They went out rather been cincti, then quintati.

24. Reasons why they went not only five by five in a rank.

25. Yet some went well armed, and some were unarmed.

26. The most probable manner of their departure out of Egypt described at
large.

27. The Israelites had abundance of lesser standards, but four chief ones in
several quarters.

28. They ate the Passover in great haste, with their loins girt.

29. Loose hanging vestments used ordinarily by the Jews: Close, well-girt
apparel, on special occasions.

30. Their haste is proved from their being shod, the Hypallage of Calceamenta
in pedibus, instead of pedes in Calceamentis, paralleled.

31. Going barefoote, was a sign of sorrow.

32. Wearing of shoes, or sandals betokened haste.

33. The staff in their hand, did argue their haste.

34. (In their hand) these words do not signify that their staves were never
out of their hands.

35. Jacobs staff passing over Jordane.

36. The usefulness of a staff.

37. The Talmudists say, it was not eaten in such haste ever after.

38. Nor was there any need of such haste.

39. A two fold haste, simple and comparative.

40. The words, Exodus 12.25. Ye shall keep this service, denote rather the
substantialls, then the Accidentalls of the Passover.

41. A specious objection, that all the precepts of the Passover were to be
kept; the answer thereunto, from a known distinction; from the authority of
Maimonides; from other learned Christians, Skilled in Hebrew Criticisme; from
the sacred Text.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
THe last Passover which Christ kept comes now to be handled; what our most
blessed Savior did six days before the passover, see most exactly, and
curiously set down in each particular, in Christ's Itinerary, made by Franc.
Lucas Brugens, in Itinera. p. 16. 17
Franciscus Lucas Brugensis, page 16. and 17. and Selneccer. fol. 440. etc.
Christian Padagog.
Selneccerus, in his Christian Paedagogy, fol. 440. etc. The absolute full
manner, how he received that last Jewish Passover, cannot be perfectly
understood; many, many things are omitted; I doubt not, but more is omitted
then written, or infallibly deducible from things written: we have no surer
rule then the Jewish observation of eating the Passover, in the days of our
Savior; for, as I said before, certainly he transgressed not the Law: here
Reader, siste gradum, stay and consider, because inopina are graviora; I give
thee warning, I will not go the nigher way into Canaan, which I could in a
short time, but with the Israelites, by the conduct of a pillar of smoke, and
a pillar of fire, I intend God willing, to lead thee to, and thorough Jordan;
yea, thorough the deep Seas on dry foot; thorough the thorny, and troublesome
Wilderness, up hill and down hill, adversaries on every side: if thou will
walk along with me, I doubt not, but God will vouchsafe unto us, both Manna
and Quayles, which shall fit thy taste, being most heavenly food, in comparison
of the Garlic, Onyons and Fleshpots of Egypt: if thou faintest, give over,
return; leave me to God my guide, and to my industrious companions: neither
shall we ever contentedly find out, what the Jews of our Saviors time did
observe in the eating of the Passover, till we have handled these two points.
First, what they were to do expressly. Secondly, what they did voluntarily
perform, without particular precept. In the first point, let us weigh these
two parts. First, what was temporary and peculiar to the first Passover.
Secondly, what was eternally observable, during the Law Mosaicall. In the first
Section of the first part, these were the particular ceremonies annexed to the
first Mosaicall Passover.

1. They had a liberty to choose a Lamb, or Goat. 2. They praepared it four
days before hand. 3. They struck the blood upon the doors, and posts of
their houses. 4. They ate the Passover in haste, which was only in Egypt,
says Maimonides: At other times, they had not so great cause to eat it
speedily; and other Ceremonies depend on this. 5. They went not out of doors.
6. They who had small families were to fill the company from the next house.
PARA. 2.
THe first Section, in the first part of the first point is this, the Jews had
a liberty to choose either Lamb or Goat, for the Egyptian or Mosaicall
first passover.

PAR, 3.
TO say, as Paulus Brugensis does, that a Lamb, and a Kid are all one, or they
might not offer a Kid, as others impute unto him, is ridiculous; for the
disjunctive is observable, Exodus 12.5.
Exodus 12.5. ye shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats: Two
distinct words in the original; both might be, either might be; neither is
excluded. There are two memorable places often to be used in this treatise,
proving that diverse sorts of Cattle, and beasts, were offered at the passover,
Deuteronomy. 16.2.
Deuteronomy. 16.2. Thou shall sacrifice the Passover unto the Lord thy God of the
flock and of the herd; more apparently and distinctly, Number. 28.19.
Number. 28.19. And two young Bullockes and one Ram, seven Lambs of the first
year without blemish, and one Goat, besides the burnt offerings in the
morning, verse. 23.

PAR. 4.
SO, 2 Chro. 35.13.
2 Chronicles, 35.13. other diverse holy offerings they had at the passover, but
they differed much from the Paschall Lamb.

For first, they roasted the passover with fire; but other holy offerings they
sod, ibidem.

Secondly the Paschall Lamb was killed the even or night before, and eaten, or
burnt with fire e're morning, but the other feast offerings continued diverse
days usque ad finem septemdialis Festi.

3. None of the other Sacrifices, Bullockes, Heyfers, Goats, or Kids, etc. no
nor other Lamb, or Lambs themselves, which were offered, and eaten, after the
first night (though offered on the Feast of passover) was the Paschall Lamb,
but rather Paschall Sacrifices, and the matter of feasting with much joy; and
not celebrated with so ardent devotion as the Paschall Lamb: insomuch, that
the whole Feast seems to have the denomination from the Paschall Lamb, the
first dish of that Feast, the especial type of Christ, and forerunner, and
type of our Sacrament. Likewise one Kid of the Goats was commanded to be
offered, for a Sinne-offering in the beginning of their months Number. 28.15.
Number. 28.15. in Festo Calendarum, Noviluniis, or new Moons, or Neomenian
Festivities; therefore against Brugensis it is most apparent, a Lamb, and a
Kid were not all one, one was offered at one time, and another at another time,
and both sometimes in one Feast, and a Kid might be the peculiar passover, in
Egypt: the Jews themselves generally agree, that not a Goat, but a Lamb,
was ever after their Paschall oblation, in token of their great delivery.

PAR. 5.
THough a most specious objection to the contrary arises, 2 Chro. 35.7
2 Chronicles. 35.7. where the holy King Josiah gave to the people thirty thousand
Lambs, Ob.
and Kids, all for the passover offerings? yet it is thus fairly allayed. Sol.
He says not expressly, neither can deduction lead that Kids were then the
proper passover; but both Lambs, Kids, and Bullocks are for the universal
paschall offerings of that Feast, as is in the same verse reckoned all
together, as the magnificent donary of that good King; though the Lambs only
might be at that time, the roasted passover, spoken of verse. 13. the
Sacramental passover, so Deuteronomy. 16.2.
Deuteronomy. 16.2. immolabis Domino Phase de ovibus, and bobus, where we must not
conclude, that Oxen, and Calves there and then, were to be offered as the
peculiar passover; the holiest of holy offerings; the sacred Sacramental
passover: but Oxen and Calves were to be esteemed passover offerings, in a
large sense, as conducing to the Feast of the Chagigah, and as general
Sacrifices, whose way was to be prepared by the true and proper offering of the
Paschall Lamb.

Yet say some, both Jews and late Christians, that in those tumultuary times,
Ob.
at their going out of Egypt, when all things were hudled up in haste, when
fear, doubt, danger, and amazement encompassed them, they might serve their
readiest turn, with either Kid or Lamb, at that time?

But this is non causa pro causa, Sol.
and they bring a shallow reason to confirm an apparent truth: the Scripture
voucheth expressly, that at the first passover they might take out of the
Sheep or from the Goats, Exodus 12.5.
Exodus 12.5. But against their reason it is observable, that they were not
confined to any short time, but might take leisure enough with mature
deliberation, before they chose their passover, and at the choice of it:
Besides, the Sacrifice was to be chosen, on the tenth day of the first Month,
Exodus 12 3.
Exodus 12.3. and slain on the foureteenth day, between the two Evenings,
verse. 6. four whole days they were to keep it by them; and therefore they
preferred not the Kid to be the passover for want of time; nor made they their
choice in the confused hurry; for the great hurli-burly was in the night of
their Exodus, and not till the destroying Angel had passed over their houses,
and their choice of the passover was four days before: I rather take this to
be the cause, the Israelites were under the most heavy persecution of the
domineering Egyptians, and mercilessely as it were condemned to the
Brick-kills, which bondage is called the Iron Furnace, Deuteronomy. 4 20.
Deuteronomy. 4.20. the midst of the Furnace of Iron, 1 King. 8.51
1 King. 8.51. which is the hottest place; and every Shepherd being an
abomination to the Egyptians, Gen 46.34.
Genesis 46.34. though the Israelites had some Flocks, Exodus 10.9.
Exodus 10.9. and the Egyptians themselves had some Flocks, Genesis 47.17.
Genesis 47.17. yet it is not likely that the Israelites had Lambs enough of
their own, no nor of the Egyptians borrowed Lambs (if they borrowed any) for
this great passover; but the sacrifice in this scarcity of Lambs, was
supplied by Kids, even by Gods own allotment, or appointment; which afterward
might not be so, when they had sufficient Lambs.

PAR. 6.
RVpert's observation is too nice, that a Lamb, or a Kid might be the
Passover, to signify Christ, qui in se est Agnus, sed nobis est Hoedus, quia
nostra peccata in se luenda suscepit, that is Christ in himself is a Lamb,
but to us a Kid, because he took upon him the punishment of our sins, as if
agnus dei non tollit peccata mundi, Ioh. 1.29.
Ioh. 1.29. as if he were not brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, Esa. 53.7
Isa. 53.7. and his soul made an offering for sin, verse. 10. for the
transgression of my people was be smitten, verse. 8. As for Hazael (...), caper
emissarius, or scape-Goate, the holy writ is express, Levit. 16.22
Levit. 16.22. the Goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities: It was a
Goat, not a Kid, aries not hoedus, and if it had been hoedus it took not the
punishment of their sins (for it was a scape-Goate, and lived) but their
sins were laid on the head of it, but Christ his own self bare our sins
in his own body, (...), (to) the Tree, or (on) the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24.
1 Pet. 2.24. and Christ dyed for our sins, 1 Cor. 15.3.
1 Cor. 15.3.

PAR. 7.
THe second ceremony peculiar to the first Pesach, was this; The Lamb or Kid
was prepared, and in a readiness four days before.

PAR. 8.
THis circumstance is wholly omitted, at the repeating of the Law, Levit. 23.
Levit. 23. nor is any such ceremony mentioned (though many others are) Deuteronomy.
16. Number. 28. Ezra 6. 2 Chro. 30. and 35.
Deu. 16. Number. 28. Ezra. 6. 2 Chronicles. 30. 2 Chronicles. 35. The passover was
prepared for our Savior, by his disciples, but the day, in the night whereof
it was eaten, Matthew. 26.17
Matthew. 26.17. etc.

Many were the reasons why they took so much time, for this Egyptian
passover, and not ever after: First, that by beholding the Lamb, they might
be put in mind, to prepare themselves, and all other things also, for their
journey, and not quoties agnus balatum emittebat, toties quasi Tubae sonitus,
exitur as castrorum acies excitabat, that is, as often as the Lamb bleated
(says Rupert) it served in stead of a Trumpet, to stir them up, to the
raising of their armies, at least in affection. Secondly, to show to the
Egyptians, that they feared them not, nor cared to displease them, by setting
aside, so long before hand, those Kids, and especially Lambs, for to be
sacrificed and eaten, which the Egyptians could not abide to be slain, much
less to be eaten; for this was abomination to them, because they worshipped
them as Gods, there being no such occasion in future times, they needed not to
store up their Lambs Egypt. Sixthly, what the Jews wanted, they were
permitted by God to borrow Egyptians: Now if they wanted Lambs or Kids as is
likely they must needs provide them four days before hand, because in the
three days antecedent among the Egyptians, was continual darkness. And
though the Israelites had light, where they dwelt, yet the Egyptians saw not
one another, neither rose any from his place for three days Exodus 10.23
Exodus 10.23. neither do I think, that the Israelites had been able to see
to choose Lambs or Kids, if they had gone into the Egyptian Territories,
where one might feel darkness, or darkness might be felt, Exodus 10.21.
Exodus 10.21. Therefore they must needs, and did provide the Lambs and Kids
four days before hand. Seventhly, to put them in mind, that as they provided
themselves for a departure, so it was to an holy departure, Canaan must be
sacred, and their first footing not to be moved, till God had been devoutly
served, which cannot be done suddenly, nor hastily, nor was here done, without
four days preparation, and diligent circumspection. Jerusalem before the
passion; and so he did when they cried Hosanna, as if they had found the
perfect Sacrifice; their redeemer being in sight, and welcomed with the
extraordinary applause of the multitude, that went before, and that followed
after, Matthew. 21.9.
Matthew. 21.9. from the mount of Olives to the City, and through a good part of
it, from the City into the Temple, even in which temple the children tontinued
crying, and said, Hosanna to the Son of David, verse. 25. Now the most of
those reasons saying in future times (for they were gone out from among the
Egyptians) and they needing no such testimonies of the faith, they had no such
stinging threate, as the death of their firstborn, nor wanted such a spur
to quicken their preparation, for a speedy journey) as they were not commanded,
so neither did they practice in future times, to gather up the Lambs four
days before hand.

PAR. 9.
AEGidius Aegid. Hunnius comment. in Matthew, 26.
Hunnius has it thus, Apostoliparant agnum, masculum, anniculum, immaculatum,
and per quatriduum a reliquo grege separatum, mactantes juxta legem, that is,
the Apostles prepare a Lamb, a male of a year old, without spot, separated
four days from the rest of the flock, slaying it, according to the Law, in
which opinion, he is both singular and singularly false, and did not
distinguish the temporary rites from the perpetual.

PAR. 10.
THe third ceremony peculiar to the first passover was, the striking or the
sprinkling of the blood on the two side-posts, and upper doore-post of the
house, Exodus 12.7.
Exodus 12.7.

PAR. 11.
THe sprinkling of blood was an ordinary ceremony, in the Leviticall Law, and
sometimes it was done with the finger alone, Number. 19.4.
Number. 19.4. Eleazar shall take of the blood with his singer, and shall sprinkle
the blood of the red Heifer, directly before the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, seven times: Sometimes sprinkling was used by other mediate
things, Heb. 9.19.
Heb. 9.19. Moses took the blood of Calves and goats with water and scarlet
Wool, and Hysope, saying, this is the blood of the Testament, which God has
enjoined unto you, and he sprinkled with blood both the Tabernacle, and all the
vessels of the Ministry. In the old Testament it was enjoined unto the people
as a part of their Covenant, to be sprinkled with blood, to which words of
Moses our Savior alludeth in his consecration, 1 Cor. 11.25
1 Cor. 11.25. This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for
you, or as it is varied, Matthew. 26.28
Matthew. 26.28. This is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for
the remission of sins.

PAR. 12.
ANd in this third ceremony these things are farther observable as most
probable: first that those houses in Goshen needed not to be sprinkled where no
people were, where no Lamb was killed, where all the inhabitants entered into
other houses, to make up the full number in Communicants.

PAR. 13.
SEcondly, in the houses that were sprinkled with blood, according to the Law,
(whether the doors were open or shut, it was all one) the destroyer was not to
do harm but was to pass by it, and to enter no other way, or open whatsoever,
though the entrances might be many, and questionless were many, by the
chimneyes, by the windows, and other in-lets of air.

PAR. 14.
THirdly, that the striking of the blood on the two side-posts, and upper
doorepost of the houses was used in no other Sacrifice.

PAR. 15.
FOurthly this puncto is most certain, that this ceremony was only peculiar
to this Passover and to no succeeding Passeovers, for they had not the same
cause. The general consent of the Jewish Rabbis is, that it was never used
after: Beza, ad Matthew. 26.20.
Beza says, Summo consensu, Doctores omnes Hebraurum testantur, that is, the
Jewish professors, with an universal agreement, witness that the sprinkling
of the dooreposts, and lintell, and superliminary belonged only to that night
when they were to go out of Egypt.

PAR. 16.
THe reason following makes it apparent, this was commanded to prevent the
destroying Angel, and to keep the firstborn of the Israelites from being
slain, as the firstborn of the Egyptians were slain, which is most firmly
grounded, on Exodus 12.13.
Exodus 12.13. The blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where you
are, and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the Plague shall not
be upon you to destroy you, and it is also confirmed Heb. 11.28.
Heb. 11.28. Thorough faith Moses kept the Passover, and the sprinkling of
blood, lest he that destroyed the firstborn, should touch them.

When this occasion was removed, and no such cause of fear, they omitted ever
after that ceremony, and Sublata causa totali, tollitur effectus, nor was ever
mention made afterward of this ceremony, as practiced from that time, but the
words to the Hebrews seem to restrain it to the first passover by Moses
rather then by others.

PAR. 17.
I Dare not say, that the sprinkling of the side-posts, and upper doore-post,
had no reference unto Christ, who says of himself Ioh 10.7.
Ioh. 10.7. Verily, verily, I am the door of the Sheep; and, without that
addition, ver. 9. I am the door, I am sure this door was be sprinkled with
blood, on all sides, before, and behind; his head, and his arms, as the
superliminary, both sides of him, as the side-posts, and his feet as the
threshold; Mundans aerem, terramque suo sanguine, cleansing both air, and
earth with his blood, and all mankind in them, of such as believe in him;
which was a more perfect smell, or unction, then the precious ointment of Aaron
was, that run down upon his beard, and went down to the skirts of his
garments, Psalm. 133.2. Psalm. 133.2.
For this trickled from his bloodyed head, crowned with sharp thorns, his
indented, and as it were furrowed back, by the tearing whips, and rods, his
broad-wounded side, so broad that Thomas the Apostle put his hand into it, Ioh
20.27.
Joh. 20.27. his pierced or rather dug hands and feet for so the Hebrew
will bear it, Psalm. 22.16. I saw trickled even to the ground, this is a better
sprinkling, then all the Leviticall sprinklings, for by it our hearts are now
sprinkled from an evil conscience. In the old Law all parts of their doors
were sprinkled with blood, to turn away the Apolyon, or Abaddon, the
destroying Angel, but the thresholds of their doors were not bloodied, Heb.
10.22.
by which omission perhaps was signified, that no sacred or holy thing should
be cast on the ground, or trodden under feet; which truth our Savior divinely
ratifieth, Matthew 7.6.
Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before Swine, lest they trample them under their feet: neither do I
remember any where that the Threshold or the ground were sprinkled in any of
the Leviticall Services, but men and all the people, Heb 9.13. and 19.
Heb. 9.13. and 19. and the book in the same verse, and the Tabernacle, and
all the vessels of the Ministry, verse. 21. but Christ ( spirituale illud
ostium, that spiritual door) was sprinkled all over with blood, and by the
blood sprinkling of him we are saved from the exterminator, or destroying
Angel.

Two things more let me observe e^re I shake hands with this point: first, that
only one door they did strike with blood, on the two side-posts, and on the
upper doore-post of the houses, Exodus 12.7.
Exodus 12.7. (the door in the [singular) throughout all the Chapter, yet door
of [houses] and verse. 13. posternes, backe-doores, or other out-lets needed not
to be stricken with blood, but as I guess, only the great street door, or
fore door, or the door in the high way of the death inflicting Angel.
Secondly, this type must be cast into the number of those types, which were
soon to fade away, and were never performed but once, as the offering up of
Isaac, as Jonah's resemblance, as Sampsons carrying away the gates of Gazah,
and the figure of the Lion, and the Bees, out of the eater came meat, out of
the strong came sweetness, other Types of our Savior were yearly, monthly,
weekly, daily to be performed, as sacrifices and the like.

PAR. 18.
IT may be the witty Hannibal had heard how the destroying Angel was to pass
over the houses, marked with blood, and in part imitated it; for he commanded
the Tarentines to keep within doors, and write their names on the doors; all
houses whose doors were not written upon he pillaged, and gave over to
direption, so Livius, lib. 25
Livius, and Polybius specializeth the incription [Tarentini] that was the
ward-word. I am sure Master George Sandys in the relation of his travailes
begun, Anno 1610. says thus, during our abode at Cairo in Egypt fell out the
feast of their Byram, when in their private houses they slaughter a number of
sheep, which cut in gobbets they distribute unto their slaves and poorer sort
of people, besmearing their doors with their blood, perhaps in imitation of
the Passover, so far he.

PAR. 19.
THe fourth ceremony peculiar to the first Paschatizing was, They ate their
Passover in haste; I shall proceed too hastily if I do not distinguish on
the word [haste] haste is twofold, simple; comparative: they ate the first
Passover simply, in all haste possible, God commanded it; time, place, and the
occasions so required it; and accordingly they performed it: And in this first
Passover, (...) [in haste] does involve, tremulous, fearful, sudden, and
confused motions, upon the apprehension of some solid, great danger;
Mephibosheth's nurse fled in haste, and in the flight lamed him, 2 Samuel 4.4.
2 Samuel 4.4. The Syrians fled in haste, and cast away their vessels, and their
garments, 2 King. 7.15.
2 King. 7.15. Concerning the second kind of haste, I say, they are the
Passover ever after in haste, yet not absolutely, but only referentially, in
respect of their slower eating of their common meals; or in respect of their
continued feasting, at other Sacrifices, which were eaten with grave majesty,
and devour, during solemnities: In Egypt they ate that passover in confused
haste, caused through danger, and fear; the same radix is used, Deuteronomy. 20.3.
Deuteronomy. 20.3. do not tremble, or do not haste which words are Synonyma's, in
the judgment of our last translatours, and the immediate consequents prove,
that terrors we^re annexed to such haste.

PAR. 20.
IN the like haste was it never eaten afterward; for they had not the same
cause of terror, or spur to hasten them; yet for ever after they might eat
it in more haste then their ordinary food, and that first in remembrance of
their prime praesident: Secondly as it was a Sacrifice or a Sacrament, not to
be retarded, or demurred upon too long: thirdly, because it was as a
preparatory, or antipast to a second supper: A sacred mess beginning with
sower herbs, their Paschall Festivalls, which in Deuteronomy God enjoined: of
which (volente Deo) more hereafter: where, I say, the eating of the Passover,
in the fore-described haste, was peculiar to the first passover, in that one
proposition two are involved, one affirmative, the other negative, the
affirmative, that it was eaten speedily then, and very speedily: the negative,
it was never after eaten in such haste, as the first was, for then it would be
of peculiar, more common, and indeed, not peculiar, Gratia quae datur omnibus,
non est gratia, a courtesy done to all, is no especial favor done to any
one. Concerning the positive, or assertive part, thus; that it was commanded to
be eaten in haste, is notified, Exodus 12.11.
Exodus 12.11. ye shall eat it, in Festinatione or Festinanter, in haste, or
hastily, that the things commanded were sutably performed, is also evidenced,
ver. 28. the Israelites did as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron, which is
most remarkeably repeated, so did they; certainly Moses forepropecied to
Pharaoh, and it came to pass Exodus 11.8.
Exodus 11.8. All these thy servants shall bow down themselves unto me, saying,
get thee out, and all the people that follow thee, therefore the Egyptians did
humbly beg them to go forth in haste.

PAR. 21.
Josephus says, Josephus lib. 2. cap. 5.
the Egyptians went by troops to the Kings palace, crying out that the
Israelites might be suffered to depart; and as certain it is, the Egyptians
were urgent upon the people, that they might send them out of the Land in
haste, Exodus 12.33.
Exodus 12.33. And the Israelites were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry,
neither had they prepared for themselves any victuals, verse. 39. so all things
were done in great haste, greater haste with any convenience could not be made,
the Israelites longing to be gone, some Egyptians using fair means, some
violence, to thrust them out of Egypt in haste.

PAR. 22.
A Maine objection against the speedy departure of Israel out of Egypt, Ob.
Exodus 13.18.
in a confused manner, may be taken from Exodus 13.18. where it is said the
children of Israel went up harnessed (or by five in a rank, as it is in the
margent) out of the Land of Egypt, quintati, say some, armati ascenderunt,
says the vulgar, Militari ordine, Vatablus in Number. 2.2.
in battle array, as Tremellius varieth it, Vatablus from a learned Jew
adds, they marched under four ensigns: the first was Reubens, whose banner
was a Man, signifying Religion, and reason: The second standard was Judah's,
and it was a Lion, denoteing power, as in after times, Pompey the great his
arms was Leo ensifer, engraven on his fignet: The third distinct colors were
Ephraim's of an Ox, intimating patience, and toylesome labor: The fourth was
Dan's, bearing an Eagle, betokening wisdom, agilitie, and sublimity from
whence it is likely, the Towering Romans had taken after diverse descents, their
Eagle, their pares aquilas (each side having their pares aquilas in their
civil wars) and their spread-eagles, under Constantine, and since.

PAR. 23.
But for men to be first marshalled, in such military order, and to march in
such equipage, will take up too much time, to be said to be done in confused
haste: therefore there was no such disorderly speed, as I before established?

PAR. 24.
I Answer, first, though the same Hebrew word may signify (armed) as Josh.
1.14. ye shall pass (armed) or marshalled by five, Sol. Ioh. 1.14.
as it is in our margent: likewise Phinees came to the outside of the (armed)
men, or the men ranked by five that were in the host of the Midianites, and
Amalekites, Judge. 7 11.
Judge 7.11. etc. Yet the Chaldee turns it (girded) and the word may also well
denote the girding under the fifth rib, in all three places: The 70. do render
the same word, Josh. 1.14. (...), well-girt: nor am I the first, who observed
this double interpretation; Aben Ezra, said of old, Hebraeos praecessisse
accinctos, per Quinos, that the Hebrews took their journey by Fives, and
girded also under the fifth rib: or thus, their loins being girded (which
declares the haste, that they were appointed to make) for the girding of
loins, is to make way for haste; of which more hereafter. Secondly, if they
had gone in single ranks, only by Five and Five (as many do opine) the first
five had come to the bank of the red sea, long before any one of the last
threescore thousand had stirred, one foot; for as they traveled, they went
from Rameses, and pitched in Succoth, which is but eight miles from Succoth, to
the edge of the Wilderness of Etham, Number. 33.6.
Number. 33.6. And that was about eight miles more; from Etham to Pihahiroth
(which is about 16. miles) where they emcamped by the Sea, as it is, Exodus 14.1.
Exodus 14.1. between the Wilderness and the red Sea; so they had but three
(...), or (...), Mansions, or Stations, and they were in all, about 32. miles,
till they pitched by the Seashore; And fifty hundred thousand men, marching
along in their single files by five and five, will take up more length then
thirty and two miles.

Therefore it cannot be rightly understood, that they marched only five, or by
fives abrest, or in front, and no more, but they might all, and did all go
more abroad, and took up a larger breadth, with their loins girt, as they
were commanded, and commanded as a token of haste: Certain it is, the Land of
Goshen is not (in the shortest cut, and the nearest way) above two hundred
miles from Jerusalem, toward the South-west: and if all, and every one of
them, and their young ones, beasts, and carriages had gone the directest way
from Goshen to Jerusalem, Five only by five, without multiplied files, or
ranks, the first five perhaps might have been in the sight of Jerusalem,
before the last five had been out of Egypt.

PAR. 25.
YEt I do not deny, but that some of them did go armed, yea, and in military
form; for God himself mentions the armies of Israel, before the eating of
the Passover, Exodus 6.26. and 12.17.
Exodus 6.26. and 12.17. Therefore some such thing there was, resembling
martial discipline: Again, in the beginning of their march, they are called
the Hosts of the Lord; All the Hosts of the Lord went out from Egypt, Exodus
12 41.
Exodus 12.41. Moreover, that the Jews had weapons, and fought with them, when
they slew the Amalekites, is demonstrated, Exodus 17.13.
Exodus 17.13. Ioshuah discomfited Amaleke, and his people, with the edge of the
sword; and it is probable, they had these their weapons, either of their own
in Egypt, or else borrowed them of the Egyptians; For the Egyptians lent unto
them such things, as they required, Exodus 12.36.
Exodus 12, 36. And in common sense and wisdom, if they had wanted weapons, and
armor, they would have required them, and might have had them.

That the red sea cast up the heavy armor, and weapons of iron of the
Egyptians, was a miracle, if true it were; but it seems rather to smell of a
Jewish fable, or a dream of Josephus the Historian: Indeed Israel saw the
Egyptians dead upon the Sea shore, Exodus 14.30.
Exodus 14.30. Or lip of the sea, in the Hebrew phrase, and might take some
spoils from some of them; even such as the Egyptians could not put off, and
such as were not over massy, or weighty, to sink down their bodies; (they
sanke into the bottom, as a stone, Exodus 15.5.
Exodus 15.5. As lead in the mighty waters, ver. 10. Wherefore, as it is
ridiculous for some to say, they were all unarmed, and unarmed went up out of
Egypt, so it is vain to imagine, that all were armed.

PAR. 26.
IN mine opinion, we may describe their Exodus, or departure most probably,
thus: God gives a charge to Moses, and Aaron, Exodus 6.13.
Exodus 6.13. And these are that Aaron, and Moses, to whom the Lord said, Bring
out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt, according to their armies,
Exodus 6.26.
Ezod. 6.26. And in the following verse, it is (not needlessly) repeated. These
are that Moses, and Aaron, called Princes, Judges, and Rulers of the people,
both the civil, and the Ecclesiastical governors, as Saint Paul applies the
Scripture Act. 23.5.
Act, 23.5. Called gods; Exodus 22.28.
Exodus 22.28 So Moses and Aaron, were their two Princes; Nothing was done, but
by their conduct: The divine Writ phraseth it thus; The children of Israel went
forth with their armies, under the hand of Moses and Aaron, Number. 33.1.
Number. 33.1. The united hand of them, or, the hand of Moses upheld by Aaron, or,
the hand of Moses, and Aaron, upheld by God.

These two Princes did not like Alexander the great, and the greater Swede, put
themselves in jeopardy, and fight, like common soldiers; but they chose a
gallant young general, even Joshua, who led the battle, with some chosen men,
and fought with Amalecke, whilst Moses and Aaron, and Hur, stood on the top
of the hill (a place of sufficient safety, and security) with the rod of God,
in the hand of Moses, Exodus 17.9.
Exodus 17.9. etc. And though this were done, after they were out of Egypt, yet
we may guess at the order of things precedent, by things consequent. Suppose
therefore Ioshuah leading the vanguard with armed men, Princes of the Tribes,
heads of thousands in Israel, Number. 1.16.
Numb. 1.16. Preparing the way to their followers; And these went more then
five in a rank, with doubled, trebled, retrebled files, and more, and broader,
as occasion advised them to dilate, or contract their forefront; sometimes
like a Moon crescent, sometimes perhaps like a wedge, or in other several
forms and shapes, wider, or narrower, more open, or closer, as the reason of
war directed. In the midst of their army, we may conjecture, were placed
their weaker ones, their children, and women, and the mixed unarmed multitude
(which some do equal in number to all the men of war) with their carriages,
and beasts, flocks, and herds, and very much cattle, Exodus 12.37.
Exodus 12.37. Not an hoof was to be left behind, Exodus 10.26.
Exodus 10.26. For though it be said, Psalm. 105.37.
Psalm. 105 37. There was not one feeble person among their Tribes (which
excluded sickness) yet none can deny, but children and women were weaker then
men; and the unarmed are weak, being compared with the armed; and though in
their first setting out not one was feeble, yet afterward, with marching,
diverse were faint, feeble, and weary, and became hindmost, and being in the
Reere, and feeble behind them, were cut off, Deuteronomy. 25.18.
Deuteronomy. 25.18. Among which weaker, and affrighted sort, might be Miriam, and
Zipporah, and other famous heroinae, who, to hearten the fearful multitude
might sing joyful songs of deliverance, and administer prophetical comfort;
sure I am, that the people he brought forth with joy, and his chosen with
gladness, or singing, Psalm. 105 43
Psalm. 105 43. Thus, as some of the Egyptians were glad at their departure,
ver. 38. So, out of doubt, were some of the Israelites also; In cantu electos
suos (as Cajetan reads it) cum jubilo, says Vatablus: And yet, before this
came to pass, there might be, and was an hurrying haste, and confusion; for
the words of the Psalmist, have more especial reference, to what was done,
when they had safely passed over the red sea, Exodus 15.1.
Exodus 15.1. Where Moses and the Israelites sang unto the Lord, and Miriam, the
prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrell in her hand, and all the
women went out after with timbrels, and dances, Miriam, and the women answering
Moses, and the men, ver. 20. Now as Miriam performed a joyful part, when the
danger was past: So, since God himself, Mic. 6.4.
Mic. 6.4. says, He sent Moses, and Aaron, and Miriam before the Israelites,
recording her joining in commission (as it were) with those two great Princes
and Leaders; I hope I have not much erred, to place this prophetess Miriam, as
a consorter in the beginning of the uprising of their army; Indeed, God
afterward appointed the Tabernacle, to be in the midst of the camp of the
Levites, Number. 2.17.
Numb. 2.17. And the unclean were put out of the Camp, Number. 5.2.
Numb. 5.2. etc. And Amaleke smote the hindmost of Israel; all that were feeble
behind thee, when thou wast faint and weary, Deuteronomy. 25.18.
Deuteronomy. 25.18. Lastly, I opine, that the other part of armed men, and warriors
under other Princes of the Tribes of their Fathers, Number. 1.16.
Numb. 1.16. led the rereward, securing (as far as in them lay) the unarmed,
casting themselves betwixt the mixed multitude, and danger; supplying the room
of a Port-cullis to a gate of a City; the mighty men of war opposing
themselves as a flood-gate, to keep the waters from over-flowings; and the
perilous, from doing perilous things; which part of warte to act, that is, to
secure a flight, or retreat, requires most skill, incurreth most
difficulties, makes, as it were, a Parthian fight, and is reserved as a glory,
for the ablest men.

PAR. 27.
AS for Vatablus, and his Jews, their relation is of the Muster, when God
commanded Moses to set the army in order: Every man of the children of Israel
shall pitch by his own Standard, with the ensign of his Fathers house, Number. 2
2..
Numb. 2.2, So, besides the particular four eminent Standards; First, of Judah
on the East (for he is first in place, ver. 3 Whatsoever the Jew, or Vatablus
hold) under whom were quartered the other two Tribes of Issachar, and Zabulon;
Then the Standard of Ruben on the South, under which the Tribes of Simeon and
Gad did march; Then followed the Tabernacle of the Testimony, and the Levites
were in the midst of the Camp, under their own Standards, ver. 17. In the
third eminent chief place, was the Standard of Ephraim, to the West, and by it
were the Tribes of Manasseb and Benjamin governed. In the fourth quarter, was
the Standard of Dan, to the North, and under it were ranged the Tribes of Asher
and Naphth^li. So they pitched by their Standards, and so they set forward,
every one after their Families, ver. 34. They had of the lesser sort, Innumera
pene vexilla, abundance of Ensigns; every Colonel, perhaps every Captain, and
other inferior officers: That this was the order, at their first departure
from Egypt cannot be prooved: Some imperfect resemblance might there be; but
now at the Muster, was the march made exquisite, and perfect.

PAR. 28.
MOre punctually, concerning the nimble eating of the Passover, remember in
general, both the general reason immediately subjoyned. It is the Lords
Passover; and the special reason; For, I will pass through the Land of Egypt
this night, and will smite all the first borne: So, if you will avoid the death
of your firstborn, kill the Passover speedily, roast it quickly, eat it
nimbly, come not out of the house. Lastly, forget not the unusual Ceremonies,
proving the speedy dispatch; Thus you shall eat it, ver. 11. with your loins
girded, your shoes on your feet, your staff in your hand.

PAR. 29.
COncerning the girding of the loins in the first place. That the Jews used
to wear ordinarily loose hanging vestments, is evinced, because on
extraordinary occasions, they girded their clothes to them; for pendent, and
discinct clothes are more offensive to travailers. When Eliah was to run
before Ahab, He girded up his loins. 1 Kin. 18.46
1 Kin. 18.46. Gird up thy loins, said Elisha to his servant, 2 King. 4.29.
2 King. 4.29. when he sent him in haste. When Peter was commanded, Act. 12.7.
Act. 12.7. To arise up quickly, he was also then commanded, First, to gird
himself, then to bind on his sandalls, ver. 8. Which is another preparative to
travail; and the second hastening ceremony, enjoined to the way-fareing
Israelites.

PAR. 30.
THey were also to eat this Passover with shoes on their feet, as our last
Translators well expound their meaning: indeed, if you weigh the words in the
original, there is an Hypallage, they seem to cross and contrary the sense,
Habebitis calceamenta in pedibus, ye shall have shoes on your feet, instead
of this, habebitis pedes in Calceamentis, ye shall have your feet in your
shoes; but this is cleared by the Hebrew Idiotisme otherwhere, Judge. 20.48.
Judge. 20.48, Miserant civitates omnes in ignem, where the Scripture intends
only this, miserant ignem in omnes civitates, they fired all the Cities. I
will not nicely stand on the difference between Calceamenta, and Sandalia,
Shoes, and Sandales; A shoe was more complete than a sandall, and of more
defense for the foot

PAR. 31.
GOing bare-foote (that I may press to the point) was a sign of much sorrow,
assumed by David, when (out of question) he might have had shoes or Sandales)
to express his woeful expulsion, from his own Country, by his rebellious
son, 2 Samuel 15.30 Isa. 20.2, 3, 4.
2 Samuel 15.30. And distressed captives used it in their bondage, in another
Country, Isay 20.2, 3, 4. verses.

PAR. 32.
BUt wearing shoes or Sandals, betokened also a readiness to be walking, Isa
5.27. and Mar. 6.9.
Isay 5.27. Mar. 6 9. The Apostles in visiting the places of their
jurisdiction, were allowed by Christ to be shod with sandals, as the Israelites
here were to have shoes on their feet, as a token of their preparation for
their speedy Exodus, or forth-going: Neither had the twelve Apostles only at
their Mission, a kind of conformity for their feet, with the twelve Tribes, at
their setting forth for Canaan from Egypt, but both sorts were commanded to
have a staff; the Apostles had so, Mar. 6.8.
Mar. 6.8. And the Israelites. Exodus 12.11.
Exodus 12.11.

PAR. 33.
THe third ceremony of their preparedness, to their journey was, that they
were also to have a staff in their hand; and that, not to set up in a corner;
not out of sight, safely kept; not lying by them, or among their carriages, but
in their hand.

PAR. 34.
YEt by these words (in their hand) I would have none to think, that they
never left holding their staff in one hand, or other, during the eating of
that Passover; for then they must have eaten it very unhandsomely; and both
cut and eat with one hand only, at one time, which would have hindered, and
prolonged their supper, rather then shortened it: But here, this is reckoned, as
a speed-making ceremony; and therefore, if now and then, or for the most while,
they held the staff in their hands; and yet now and then let it rest, or lean
on it, for the nimbler dispatch of their supper, the intent of the Law was
fulfilled.

PAR. 35.
A Staff in their hand: perhaps to put them in mind, that as Jacob passed
over Jordan with his staff, Genesis 32.10.
Genesis 32.10. So should they with their staves; the Israelites doing as their
Father Israel did.

PAR. 36.
BEsides, a staff in a man's hand secureth his footing, preventeth sliding, or
falling; It is an ornament to youth, a crutch, yea, a very third leg to age;
it is a stay to the whole body; it helps natural infirmities, and
accidental occurrences, Zach. 8.4.
Zach. 8.4. Every man with his staff in his hand for very age. And so much for
the first assertive part, That the first Passover was eaten in haste, in great
haste, absolutely.

PAR. 37.
THat it was not eaten in such have ever after, the Talmudists strongly aver:
Beza, ad Mat. 26.20.
Beza says, that the sprinkling of the blood upon the door posts, the eating
the passover in haste, with shoes on, the men being girded, with staves in
their hands, were practiced only this one night of the first passover, and in
this, says he, all the Jewish Doctors do fully agree.

PAR. 38.
ANd indeed, what needed the sprinkling of the posts with blood, when no Angel
was to destroy; and when they had no doore-posts in the Wilderness to be
sprinkle? What needed their loins to be girded, when they were at rest? What
needed shoes on their feet when they moved not, nor needed to move? What
needed a staff in their hand, when no journey was toward? What needed eating
in extraordinary haste, when there was no danger, nor trouble, nor discontent,
nor offense, growing by the stay, or by the eating leisurely, or, cum decenti
pausa? The prime reason why they were commanded to eat in haste, with those
un-retarding ceremonies, being to prevent imminent mischiefs, arising from
delays (which was not so, nor likely, nor scarce possible to be so, in
succeeding ages) we may fairly conclude they did not in any future times,
commonly use these posting ceremonies, but they were proper to their first
Paschatizing. This is undeniable, the quickening ceremonies were neither
repeated, nor commanded, at the reviving of the Law, Levit. 23. Nor can be
showed to be precepted, or practiced, at any other Passover, in any other
place, of the Old, or New Testament.

PAR. 39.
ANd so much suffices to have spoken of eating the first passover in haste,
in great haste simply: with its running, moving ceremonies, appropriated to it;
and never after, in such perplexed speech performed: though ever after, the
passover was eaten in more haste, then common food, or the food sacred, at
other Festivities; in haste, not absolute, but referentiall.

PAR. 40.
THough it be said, Exodus 12.25.
Exodus 12.25. When ye be come to the Land which the Lord shall give you, ye
shall keep this service; yet the words have no alliance with the immediately
preceding transeunt ceremonies of sprinkling of blood (which is of all men
confessed to have ended for ever, in the night of their departure) and
therefore, by parity of reason, the words comprehend not the other temporary
ceremonies, but only extend to the maine business; to the substantialls,
rather then the Accidentals; to the durable, and not to the vanishing, short,
occasional observances: To the Real Sacrifice, to the Lords passover, as it
is called, ver. 27. and not to the partly Semi-diarian, partly Vespernall,
fading rites of one night: All which were begotten, borne living, dying, dead,
and buried, within twelve hours: which rituall shadows comparatively deserve
not the great name of Gods worship: the word is in the Original, [Hagnabadah]
translated by the 70. (...), and Latria is the highest part of Gods service:
Santandreanus, and Hentenius, do ill to render it, Ceremonies: the more
learned and wise Montanus, in his Interlineary, expounded it, opus a work;
opus hoc this Work; which is very well expressed by our last translators, ye
shall keep this service; And the service is to be denominated, from the major,
or better part, from the chief work, rather then from the appendant rites.

PAR. 41.
AN objection more, and that seemingly a strong one against mine opinion, is,
Number. 9.3.12
Number. 9.3.12. Where we read, Ob.
Ye shall keep the Passover, according to all the rites of it; and according
to all the ceremonies thereof shall ye keep it, and according to all the
ordinances of the Passover, ver. 12. Now though the Words (Rites, and
Ordinances) are diverse translations of one reading, in the places above cited,
yet there are also two distinct words, in the Hebrew; one, for the Rites,
another for the Ceremonies; the Interlineary renders them, Statuta, and
Iudicia, Statutes and Judgments, the vulgar of Hentenius, and Santandreanus,
Ceremonias, and Iustificationes, Ceremonies, and Iustifications, Statuta, and
rations, as Tremellius: the 70. have (...), and in the 14. verse. (...): from
which diversity and extent of words may seem to be inferred, that not only
the lasting, and more necessary Rites of the Passover, were re-appointed, but
the minutest Ceremonies, the least tittle of them must be still observed; and
therefore the eating with loins girded, with staff in hand, with shoes on
their feet, were not peculiar to the first passover, but were re-observed, at
this second passover, the year following.

I answer, Sol.
the Scripture full often restrains the word (all) to all, of some one kind;
to all, that are necessary; to all, that were to endure; to all, that were
convenient; Iuxta omne, quod convenit ei, as the Chaldee Paraphrase has it.

Secondly, look over the whole Chapter, and you shall find none of the
Ceremonies before mentioned, of being, shod, girt, and having staves once
mentioned; but there is express mention of the month, the day of the month,
and the time of the day, toward even, also, they were appointed to use
unleavened cakes, and bitter herbs; and nothing was to remain, nor a bone to
be broken. And these were of the lasting ceremonies; all other, I say, all
other of the same kind, that were to continue, as, that it must be a male
Lamb; not above a year; roasted, and with a competent company of receivers,
and the like, are involved, and included, in the diversity of words, in the
seeming universality, cited in the objection: But it cannot sink into my head,
that by these varyed words, and repeated (all) Number. 9.3.
Number. 9.3. Was ever intended, they should choose their offering four days
before; and sprinkle the doore-posts with blood; when they had few or no
doore-posts, perhaps, scarce Tents some of them; or, that they must eat it
girt, shod, with staves in their hands, or the like hastening ceremonies.

Maimonides having used this very objection, Maimonides, in Korhan Pesach c.
10. Sect. 15.
in the end resolves, that the choosing of the Lamb on the tenth day, the
sprinkling of blood with a branch of Hyssope: and the eating in haste (to which
the three forecited Ceremonies concur) were not necessary in future times,
but were drowned, before they had passed the red Sea, and that the
Commandments, Number. 9.3. and 12.
Number. 9.3. and 12. concern the body, and substance of the passover: not the
minuter Circumstances.

In the learned Annotations, on the Pentateuch, Imprinted by Robert Stephen at
Paris, 1541. the words ( Iuxta ritus suos, and omnes ceremonias suas,
celebrabitis illud. i. according to its Rites, and all its Ceremonies shall ye
observe it, are thus expounded, Celebrabitis illud, observando ritus and
Ceremonias peculiares illi, i. Ye shall celebrate it, by observing the Rites
and Ceremonies peculiar to it.) Some were peculiar to the first passover,
which were not to the second; and the second had some difference from the
following ones.

Lastly, the words of Number. 9.3. etc. may be thought to distinguish the Law
Rites and Ceremonies of both first, and second passover, from the rites due to
other Sacrifices; so that the Rites, Customs, or Statutes, or other Offerings,
should not be intermingled with the Passover; but the Paschall Ceremonies are
to be exactly kept; kept a part, and peculiarly severed from the other, rather
than that they do enjoyne an exact parity, and equality in every degree, of
the second Passover with the first, when the causes did differ, (...), as
far as the East is from the West.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesus, our only true Passover, sacrificed for the sins of the
whole world, who by abolishing all Leviticall Rites, Types, and Shadows, have
declared, that thy self art the fore-signified substance, grant us, we beseech
thee, so to eat thy flesh, and so to drink thy blood, that we, leaving the
meaner rudiments, and all now-unnecessary Ceremonies, may in all pureness of
heart, heartiest devotion, and in the devoutest way, and manner, approach to
thee, worship thee, and enjoy thee, our food spiritual, our never-fading joy,
our Celestial happiness. Amen. Amen.

CH^P. VII. The Contents of the seventh Chapter.
1. Some think the Jews in the Egyptian Passover did Discumbere in signum
libertatis: not so.

2. Josephus misunder stood, and misapplyed.

3. Christ was to keep it in things necessary, not in the vanishing Rites:
Christ did something at his last Passover, which cannot be evinced to be done
at the first Passover.

4. The Jews borrowed the fashion of Discumbing from the Romans, says
Josephus; but that was of later times.

5. Julius Caesar feasted the Romans on twenty two thousand Triclinia.

6. The Indians beds: Discumbing was used in India by the Brachmans;
Philostratus proves it: the armies of the Romans never pierced into the heart
of India: the Indian Discumbing mentioned but as of yesterday, in comparison
with the first Passover: and rather a resemblance of the Roman fashion, then
the same.

7. The Romans imitated the Grecians, and the Grecians the Asiatiques: most
anciently the Romans did eat Sitting; so Alexander ab Alexandro, and
Isidorus: afterward women did sit, though men lay down. says Varro.

8. Annarus King of Babylon, and Nero Discumbed with their harlots; this was,
Labentibus moribus.

9. Discumbing practiced by the Primitive Christians: even women discumbed, as
Tertullian professes: Tertullian ad Nationes enlightened an obscure place of
his Apologetique.

10. The Grecians did also sit at Feasts first of all.

11. Accubation was in free prosperous times.

12. Curious Manlius first brought in triumph from Asia the Triclinia.

13. Banqueting beds in Ahashuerus his days.

14. Discumbing was not in use with any Nation, before, at, or along while
after the first Mosaicall Passover.

15. The lying down of Angels in men's shapes, Genesis 19.4. was not upon
feasting, but upon sleeping beds.

16. Mr. Broughton censured. It is more probable that the Israelites did sit,
than lie down at the eating of their first Passover, for diverse Reasons.

17. Yet it is not expressly, either set down, or to be determined.

18. No place of the old Testament enjoined them to stand at the eating of the
Passover: No place of the Old or New Testament testifies that they did stand:
no necessary consequence can produce so much.

19. Yet it is most probable, that they did stand: diverse Reasons for it; yet
none of these Reason for it; yet none of these Reasons demonstrative, but
probable.

20. At the succeeding Passeovers, they did not Discumbere: Philo and Josephus
are to be interpreted of later times.

21. No particular posture can be proved from any of the great Passeovers.

22. They might not go out of doors in the first Passover, till the Angel
had examined their doors: After, they went forth: this Ceremony of not going
out of doors, was only tomporary: Abroad they might go, home they might not
go.

23. Christ, and his Disciples went forth.

24. The Master of a scant Family, and the next neighbor to his house, were to
join together, and to enter Commons.

25. If they had strayed far, the danger had been greater.

26. There being no such danger of an Abaddon in future Times; they chose any
of the Vertuosi, whether they were friends, or kindred, though their dwellings
were further off.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
I Cannot pass to the other points, without doing the maine scope and chief
intended work great wrong, till I have handled these Questions.

1. Whether at the first Passover, the Jews did lie down on their
Discubitory beds, or couches, or sit, or stand. 2. What was practiced at all
other the succeeding passeovers?
Some hold, Discumbere, or lie down at the great passover in Egypt: and one
Argument is drawn from the Rabbis saying, that they were wont, Discumbere, in
signum libertatis, to lie down, in token of Liberty.

I Answer, Israelites, at their first Pasach, were not freed from their
Masters, and therefore could not use that gesture, in token that they were
actually manumitted; but they were then servants, and, within a short while, to
be set at liberty; this Argument (if unquestioned in its chief ground) may
prove their discubation, at the succeeding passeovers; but whilst they were
bond slaves (as at the first passover they were) it evinceth nothing against
us.

PAR. 2.
THe second Argument is from Josephus, saying, Discumbebant, non sedebant, they
lay down, and did not sit? I answer, Josephus restrayneth not his words, to
the first passover, nor extends them to it; but that is our present inquiry.

PAR. 3.
THe third Argument is this; Christ kept the Law exactly; but Christ, and his
Apostles did lie down at the eating of the passover, in the night of his
betraying; and therefore the Law of the first passover was, that the Jews
should eat it, lying on their beds? I Answer, that the first proposition must
be distinguished upon; namely, in things necessary, absolute; in Ceremonies
durable, Christ did keep the Law; but the antiquated Rites of providing the
Lamb, four days before the slaying of it, etc. he brake, he was not bound to
keep; Secondly, we may not conclude, whatsoever Christ did, at the eating of
the last passover, was commanded at the first passover of all; for his was
eaten in an higher Chamber; and just thirteen was their number; which no man
can prove, or probablize, was so done, in the first passover: thirdly, I say
to the assumption; what gesture, what vesture Christ, and his Apostles used
most, at the eating of his fatal passover, cannot be fully determined; the
adversary proves Ignotum per ig^otius, obscurum per obscurius; both this
Assumption, and the manner, and form of their supping on beds, with its
several Ceremonies, must be more fully explained in its proper place.

PAR. 4.
I Now enquire only the Original of that Custom; and thus I search after it:
The Jews borrowed the fashion from the Romans, says Josephus 6.6.
Josephus, Sane, ex quo Iudaei a Romany subjugati sunt more Romano coenare
didicerunt: from the time that the Jews drew under the Roman yoke, they
supped as the Romans were wont, says a most credible Author, Petrus
Ciacconius, cited by his very friend Baronius, ad An. Christi. 34. Para. 37.
Baronius; It is true, that the Victi do oftentimes, trans^re in mores
Victoris, the Vanquished do learn the manners of the Vanquisher; and receive
not only Laws, but Vsances and Customs from them: but the Romans meddled not
with the Asiatique affairs, for a thousand years after the first passover,
not so much as began the subjugation of the Jews, till a good start of time
after it: and supposing it so, the Jews were scarce warm on their feasting
beds, in the days of our Savior, according to the Roman fashion.

PAR. 5.
NOr was the fashion common at first, but to the better sort; though before our
Saviors Incarnation, Julius Caesar, one day, feasted the people, on
twentie-two thousand Triclinia as Alexand. ab Alexand. genesis dier. 6.6.
Alexander, ab Alexandro reports; and Suetonius relates, that in the
Augustan age, Tiberius feasted the people at a thousand Tables: But it will be
cleared hereafter, that the Romans in this point, rather imitated the Syrians,
than the Syrians them.

PAR. 6.
THe Indians certainly used to take their repast on their beds; and, some say,
they also imitated the Romans, whose power was far spread and formidable to
all the world; Potos terra excipit in lectis, quos ipsamet substraverat,
Philostracus, lib. 3. postn.ed.
says Philostratus of the Indians, that is, the drunkards lay down to sleep
upon the bare ground: but these were not lecti convivales, Banqueting beds, on
which they feasted, but Somniferi, their Repositories for sleep: yet two or
three leaves before, he speaks, of a Feast made by the Wise men to the King
thus; Terra her bis substrata erat, long etiam mollioribus, quam sunt nostri
lecti, -- discubuer unt velut in coenaculo; that is, the earth was spread over
with herbs far more soft than our beds are; they (lay down) as it were, in
a supping parlour: So Discumbing was then used in India among the Brachman's:
yet this withal must be considered, that the Roman armies never pierced into
the heart of India, but stuck about the banks of Euphrates: but if they had
over-runne India, and if the Indians had imitated the Romans, in their
refreshments (which cannot be proved) yet both Appollonius, and those Indians
were not borne, till the Emperor of Rome began; and those Emperors were but
of yesterday, in Comparison of the Egyptian first passover.

PAR. 7.
LAstly, the Words of Philostratus do not evince the Tricliniary accubation;
but only earthen beds, with some show of resemblance, rather than the true
form: I rather think the Romans followed the Grecians; and the Grecians
imitated the effeminate Asiatiques: the Romans took most of their Laws, and
most of their Customs from the Greeks. 1. Concerning this particular posture
of Discumbing, Alexander ab A^exan. genesis dier. l. 5. c. 21.
Alexander ab Alexandro, thus, a principia, Majores nostri (sedentes)
epulabantur, Laconum more; that is, in the beginning, our Ancestors feasted
(sitting) as the Lacedaemonians used: apud veteres Romanos, non crat usus
accumbendi, says Isidorus; the Ancient Romans were not wont to (lie down) at
meals: Afterward, when the men did lie down, the women sat, says the Great
Varro; Quia turpit vis^is est in muliere accubitus, because it was a filthy
unseemely sight for a woman to lie down, says he; afterward none but the next
kindred of women-kinde, might Accumbere neither among the greater men.

PAR. 8.
YEt Annarus Babylonia Rex cum 150. psaltrile (accubans) coenitabat, says
Alexander ab Alexandro, Annarus King of Babylon supped with 150. Psalterists or
Minstrellests (lying down) with them: even among the Romans, Suetonius says
of Caligula, pleno convivio, sorores singulas infra se vicissim collocabat,
uxore supra cubante; that is, at a great feast, he placed every one of his
sisters, one after another, below himself; and his wife (lay) above him: Nero
mixed himself with Harlots, on their Feasting Beds; in ipsis lectis, cum viris
cubantibus, foeminae sedentes, coenitabant; men and women supped together, the
women (sat) the men (lay) on their beds, says the same Alexander ab Alex. but
this was labentibus moribus, when the Empire was increased and good Discipline
was corrupted.

PAR. 9.
YEa Tertullian himself acknowledges, that discumbing was practiced by the
good Primitive Christians; and (cap. 39. Apologet.) mentions, Triclinia
Christianor um, the parlours of Christians, and otherwhere he confesses, that
even women did accumbere (lie down) at meals by the men: And to the carping
objection of the Heathens, Tertall Apologet. cap. 7.
he answers fully, holily and truly: the words of Tertullian are these;
Vescere libenter, intere a discumbens, dinumera loca, ubi matter, ubi soror,
(supple torum presserit) nota diligenter, ut cum tenebrae ceciderint Canine,
non erres; piaculum enim admiseris nisi incestum feceris: the supply has firm
ground from his own words, in another Tertul. ad Nationes. 1 7.
place, dinumera loca, ubimater, aut soror, torum presserit: Which words of
Tertullian may bethus translated; eat willingly (the flesh of an Infant) in
the mean time, as thou (lie down) observe the especial places, where thy
mother, or thy sister reposeth her self on the bed; mark it diligently, that
when the dogs have tumbled down, and put out the Candles, thou may be sure
to constuprate thy Mother, or thy sister; It is an heinous offense, not to be
Incestuous: lest these words of Tertullian should be mistaken, or misapplyed;
you are to be informed, that in that part of the Chapter, Tertullian, to the
confusion of the Heathen, most wittily, and divinely frames his discourse, by
way, not of truth, or granting, but by way of supposall; as if a Christian
Prelate should say these words to an Heathen newly Christianized; eat the
flesh of Infants, drink their blood, commit Incest, do such horrid, and
dismal sins, and live for ever: you would not buy, says Tertullian,
eternal life at so dear a rate; nor would you believe him: therefore, you are
to think, we Christians neither do such evil, nor believe such words, not
say them Tertul. ad uxorem, v. 5.
Tertullian again (ad uxorem) discumbit cum marito in sodalitiis, saepe in
popinis. I return to the old Romans, who were wont to (sit) at meals, so
Virgil. Aeneid. 8.
Virgill, Perpetuis soliti patres (considere) mensis, that is, It was their
guise in Ancient time,
To sit at board when they did dine.


And again, Vivoque (sedilia) saxo, The rocks did sometimes afford them
refreshing places, at their meat: and yet Virgill says of Aenem, before Rome,
or Romans were, Inde toro pater Aeneas sic orsus ab alto,
Then old Aeneas, Virgil. Aeneid. 2.
from his lofty bed,
Thus began his tale; when first be had well fed.


PAR. 10.
THe Graciant also, at first, did fit, and not lie down onbeds; I observed
before, that in the beginning, the Lacedamonians fashion was to sit: they of
Crete held it a horrible thing to lie down at meat, says Alexander ab Alex.
ibid. King Alexander ate his ^eate sitting, says he, and yet within three
leaves after, (even in the same forecited Chapter) he says, fertur Alexander
Macedo, appetente nocte, coenasse, and primo diluculo, prandio accubuisse:
Alexander of Macedon supped at early night, and lay down to dinner, at the
first shine of morning.

PAR. 11
ACcubation was in free prosperous Times, if not delicate, and luxurious:
Terentius, Varro, and Hanniball, in their Misery, supped (standing) and Cato,
after Pompey's death, in the Civil wars, did not discumbere, as he was wont,
but sat: The Romans made their way to Asia through Greece, partaking of the
Grecian fashions, as the Greeks did, of the Asiatique effaeminatenes; Antiqui
torum ex palustri ulva, and ex stramento, vel ex cespite fuisse, says the
often cited Alexand. ab Alex. l. 5. cap. 25. initio.
Alexander ab Alex. their beds were made of reeds, or of Sea-grasse, straw,
stubble, or turfe, then they left those homely Country fashions; and had first
square, then round Tables, to dine, and suppe on; which fashion, says he, I
believe, they borrowed from the Lacedaemonians.

PAR. 12.
AFter this, Cneius Manlius carried in Triumph, upon the Asian Conquest,
amongst other things, aeratos lectos, and Triclinia, bedsteads of Brass, and
Feasting beds; and then did voluptuousness increase among the Romans, of which
hereafter; but the Asiatiques used it, long before the Romans.

PAR. 13.
BEsides what before I related of Annarus, King of Babylon (which story. I hold
to be uncertain) sure I am, that in the days of Ahashuerus, they used
accubation of bed-repasting; for Hest 1.6. the very banqueting beds with their
furniture, are described, and Hest. 7.8. Haman was fallen on the bed whereon
Ester was; Est. 1.6. and 7.8.
and at the banquet of wine, it was a feasting bed; Est. 3.15. the King, and
Haman sat down to drink, (Iasheba) sat in likelihood, on their feasting
beds: yea, an hundred years before the reign of Abashuerus, and Ester;
Ezekiel prophesied; (...)
and he so describes a wicked woman, that in her you may conjecture at the
custom of the Jews, and that the Jews did not take up that custom of
feasting beds from the Romans, (for this was within a while after Romulus) but
the Romans, or Graecians might take it from the Jews; howsoever Pererius, in
Ioh 13.^.
Pererius is confident, that herein the Jews followed the Roman usance; the
words of Ezekiel are these, cap. 23. verse. 40. etc. They came, for whom thou
did wash thy self, painted thy eyes, and deckedst thy self with Ornaments;
and satest upon a stately bed, and a table prepared before it, Ezekiel. 25.40. etc.
whereupon thou bast set mine incense, and mine oil: all which ceremonies were
after used in the Roman feasting; if you except painting of their eyes; higher
than this, I cannot bring the Custom.

PAR. 14.
BUt this was long after the Egyptian Passover; and therefore let them, who
imagine the Israelites lay on beds, at the first Passover, produce one Author
or other, sacred or profane, that at that time, any Nation under heaven used
to lie or lean on beds, at their feasting; and then they shall say something,
though not fully Conclusive.

PAR. 15.
Indeed it is said of Angels, in the shape of men, Genesis 19.4.
Genesis 19.4. before they (lay down) but it is plain that it is not meant of
lying down on feast-beds (for their supper preceeded) but of their beds, to
rest on, all night: and I never found any expositour otherwise interpreting it;
the intention of the Sodomites may prove, that their villainies were ordained,
not at supper-time, but at bedtime: But indeed the manner of Accubation, or
discubation at meat was not in use any where for many centuries of years
after.

PAR. 16.
THe second part of the first question was, whether the Israelites did sit at
the first Passover? M. Broughton in his General view of the holy Scriptures,
concerning the Ceremony of sitting, and standing at the Passover, Page 120.
thus distinguishes. This is the consent of the Jews, they of fit years did
fit, those that were young did stand, unless they were bid to sit; if all this
be granted (for he takes it up on trust, and specializeth no authority) yet
his following discourse savoureth of madness, not of truth, or sobriety, Page
121. he says, Christ sat with his Apostles after the manner of the wild
Irish, on the ground: did they so Hugh? Where is thy proof? Where is any
likelihood? First, they are it in an upper Chamber, the word ((...)) signifying
a large upper room furnished, and prepared, Mar. 14.15.) and so it was above
ground: Secondly, lying all along on the ground affords liberty, and ease for
one to lie on another breast; whilst they sat on the ground, their posture
must be upright, and is not so well accommoded for leaning; but S. John did
lean on Christ's breast, therefore then he sat not on the ground. Christ
washed the Apostles feet; and he (arose) to do so; did they then sit on the
(ground?) and did he kneel to wash and wipe them? Another perhaps would find
fault with M. Broughtons improprietie of language, for saying Christ, and his
Apostles sat, after the manner of the wild Irish; when he might better have
said (if he could have said it verifially) the wild Irish fit after the manner
of Christ, and his Apostles; ye cannot be partakers of the Lords (Table) and of
the Table of Devils, 1 Cor. 10.21. where he intimates, that they are their
Sacred morsells on Tables, or as they were taken from the Consecrated Tables.
Have the wild Irish (tables) to eat on, when they sit on the ground? The hand
of him who betrayeth me, is with me on the Table, says Christ, Luk 22.21. Was
a guest-chamber sought? Was a large upper room furnished, and yielded up to
make ready there, as is to be gathered from, Luke, 22.11.12. and in the end,
shall they sit on the ground, and eat the Passover? Has M. Broughton been
so drenched in his Heathen Greek, that he forgets that all the Greek words
(used in the New Testament) describing their posture, at the eating of the
Paschall Lamb, do in their Native signification, imply rather lying along,
and recumbing, than sitting? Was the Passover ever eaten by such, as sat on
the ground? Did ever any Jew, any ancient Grecian or Roman, yield authority to
M. Broughton, for his so wild Irish a conceit? Though Ludolphus the
Carthusian went too far that way; yet does he not fully agree with him: but
of this God willing in the third book, more at large; indeed Clem. Alexan.
paedagog. 2.3.
Clemens Alexandrinus speaking against costly Utensills, and excess, says,
(...), Rich drink brings danger with it; polished glass teaches us both to
fear, and to drink; the costly beds were insolentium deliciarum argumenta,
invidiae, mollisque ignaviae insidiosa commoda, signs of excessive pleasure,
insnaring benefits of Envy, and soft sloth, -- sed vide, but behold, Christus
in vili catino cibum sumpsit, and fecit discipulos super herham accumbere, and
pedes eorum lavit linteo accinctus; Christ did eat his meat in a poor
platter; and made his Disciples lie along on the grass, and washed their
feet, he being bound with a Towell; some have had so little wit, as to apply
all this to his last supper, and it may be Hugh Broughton, and Ludolphus
drank of this cup of intoxication: but whosoever reads Clemens himself in
the place, will find that he speaks not of Christ's last supper only, or any
one supper only, but of the continued course of Christ's life, and that by an
induction, or enumeration of particulars, he proves Christ to be (...), and
evinceth his being a stranger to pride. As for the first Passover there cited
in the Margin, Mat. 14.19. where it is said that he bad the multitude to sit
down on the grass; and Mar. 6 39. where we read the Apostles made all to sit
down upon the green grass; these passages have no reference to Christ's last
supper, and therefore are nothing to the purpose, though the words following
do reflect on the second supper, immediately after the Paschall. I hope they
had no grass growing in an upper Chamber. I hope there is a difference
between the thousands of Disciples, and his twelve Legates a latere, his most
holy Apostles: diverse actions are fitted to diverse places: and Clemens adds,
Christ asked water out of the Samaritans earthen water-pot, John 4.7. distinct
people, distinct places; distinct occasions must not be indistinctly huddled
together, and falsely applied only to Christ's last Supper. And yet I must
needs declare for my part: I judge it far more probable that they did sit,
than that they did lie down at this first Passover. First, for that the
Passover was to be eaten in haste; but sitting is a gesture more accommoded
for haste, than the manner of discumbing was, or could be: Secondly, sitting at
Feasts was before this time in use; the brethren of Joseph (sat) before him,
at a feast, Genesis 43.33. which custom of sitting we must not think was
introductory, but explanatory, it was not only then used because only then
expressed; but this posture or gesture, did declare the Common practice of
them, in those times. Thirdly, sitting was in use by the same Individual
people, who are the Passover; For the Israelites, even almost as soon as they
were gone out of Egypt, at the Feast of the golden Calfe; I say, the people
(sat down) to eat, and to drink, Exodus 32.6. Which the New Testament
alsorelateth, (...), the people (sat down) to eat, and to drink, 1 Cor.
10.7. where the word ((...)) differenceth the gesture from discumbing.
Fourthly, the fashion of (sitting) at meat, was in use afterward: Saul being
a private man (sat) with Samuel, at a feast and Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 9.22. Yea,
Saul's servant also: we will not (sit down) says Samuel, till David comes, 1 Samuel 16.11. David might (sit) with Saul at meare, 1 Samuel 20.5. and Abner did,
ver. 25. So it is more than likely the Jewish people did (sit) at other feasts,
and meals, rather than (lie down) Ier. 16.8. Thou shall not go into the
house of feasting, to (sit) with them, to eat, and to drink.

PAR. 17.
BUt I will not determine, that they did (sit) at the Passover; first, because
it is no where so expressed: Secondly, because they were to have their staff
in their hand; and this was (as I may so call it) a running banquet; a speedy
sacrifice; where delay was dangerous, and haste commanded. To the truer
observation whereof, as fitting was more commodious, than discumbing; so
(standing) was more proper than fitting. And thus I am devolved on the third
branch of the first question.

PAR. 18.
WHether the Jews did (stand) at the eating of the first Passover? Both the
affirmative, and Negative have many Noble Authors. It is an hinge, on which
great matters do hang; and yet I hope to clear all difficulties, by these
Theses following: First, it is no where in the old Testament, expressly
commanded, that the Israelites should (stand) at the eating of the first
Passover. Secondly, is no where in old, or New Testament directly said, that
they did stand; who thinks otherwise, let him produce his proofs, and
places. Thirdly, there can be no necessary consequence framed, to prove, they
did stand; make trial who will.

PAR. 19.
YEt I hold it most probable, that they did (stand) at the eating of their
first Passover; and these be my reasons. First, Ephesians. 6.11.13.14. verses, there
is mentioned of (standing) and a command to (stand) with loins girt, etc. but
all this was in allusion to the eating of the Passover; as by diverse other
particulars beside standing, it appears, though it may be answered: first,
that there is no allusion to the Israelites, in some particulars there
expressed; nor is it likely, that the Jews had Brest-plates, shield, helmet,
and sword; at least, not all of these; which the Apostle wishes in the
spiritual panoplia, generally. 2. If the Apostle had his Principal allusion
to that place, or custom; yet Symbolica Theologia non est argumentativa, an
argument from a simile is no good Divinity, but says Cornelius Cornelii a
lapide, Apostolus sane huc ( i. to the Israelites gesture) allusisse, velpotius
Allegoricum bujus loci sensum dedisse videtur: Surely, the Apostle seems to
have alluded hither; or rather, to have given the Allegorical meaning of this
place. 3. It seems that S. Paul puts the Christian Soldier, into the
posture, not of a Traveller, or a moving, journying, wayfaring man; as the
eaters of the Lamb were to be, and were: but of an armed, prepared, Centinell,
watchman, or Soldier, or combatant, bound to keep his place, and not to go
away, or show his back (as the Israelites did) for there is no Armor for the
back in all that spiritual Armorie: but all is as for a Combatant, or
warrior, who is to be spiritually as well furnished as the defendant is in
the lists, bodily.
My second reason is because their staves were in their hands; what needed
fitting men have staves in their hands? and they were to go forth in haste;
but men are readier to go, when they stand, than when they sit: and they were
to eat it in haste, but hasty meals are commonly made by people standing,
rather than sitting: sitting imployeth some continuance, therefore in all
likelihood, they sat not but stood: and yet who peremptorily concludes, that
the Israelites (stood), because they were shod, girded, and had a staff, do
not enough consider that our gallants in times of peace, in the midst of
ease, and Court-glory, do sit at meat, booted, and spurred, some perhaps girt
with a sword, when they intend no journying. Barradius thinks it credible that
the Israelites did (sit) at the Passover in Egypt, with staves in their
hands; which I hold not so credible. The third reason is this the Master sits
down to meat, the Servant makes ready supper, girdeth himself and serves,
Luk 17.7.8. but the Israelites were now servants, and made ready the Passover,
and waited for a signal of departure, and therefore sat not in ease, but
(stood) in expectancie. Fourthly, they had packed up their housholdstuffe, and
perhaps that housholdstuffe, on which they would otherwise have sat, even
their kneading-troughs, being bound up in their clothes, upon their shoulders,
Exodus 12.34. and the Aegypcians were urgent upon the people, that they might
send them out of the Land in haste, ver. 38. and the Israelites were thrust out
of Egypt, and could not tarry, ver. 39. these places prove a busy stirring,
and removal, rather than a reposed sitting, either at or after meat. Fifthly,
some say Christ (stood) at the eating of the Paschall lamb, and therefore at
the first, the Israelites are it (standing:) but a man may answer, argumentum
claudicat utroque poplite, is lame in both knees, is diverse ways awry; neither
will any be able to prove that Christ and his Apostles are it (standing;)
neither, if they did (stand) will it follow that such was the gesture of the
praecedent Passeovers; but rather of the Passover, at that time. Besides, as
at the Egyptian Passover, it is more likely that they did (sit) than (lie
down,) and stood rather than sit: so, at our Saviors last Passover, when we
come to it, it will appear that it is least probable, that he and his Apostles
did (stand;) probable, that they did (lie down) more probable, that they did
(sit) most probable, that Christ did stand administering; and both he and they
(kneel) at the receiving of the Sacred Eucharist. Nor was our Savior tied to
the entire conformity, with the first Passover: none of these Arguments (we
see) are demonstrative; but must be cast into the number of the probable ones.

PAR. 20.
NOw Idesoend to the second Question; what gesture the Jews used, at the
succeeding Passeovers? Some Rabbis say they did discumbere, in signum
libertatis adeptae, lie on beds, to signify their freedom from Captivity;
but Authori mendaci, vera dicenti caute credendum est; we must beware of a
liar, even when he speaks Truth, says Adam Contzen; that they were at
liberty, I confess, when they were over the red Sea; but that they used any
Accubation, in token thereof, cannot be proved: That they (sat) at feasts, in
their profane deifying of the golden Calfe, I proved before; and feasting-beds
were not used, long after: Philo, and Josephus are recited for their
Accubation; but that their testimony reaches to the Eremiticall passover, or
their passover into the holy land, I deny.

PAR. 21.
IN the forecited seven Passeovers of note, there is no mention of standing,
sitting or lying down, nor consequence of infallible deduction for either of
them: so nothing is de fide, in this point: Humane relations, and probabilities
must sway all; my opinion is this; that they varryed their gestures, pro re
nata, as time, and occasion prompted to them: Since no particular gesture was
precepted, it seems all was left at large: Innius says, the Jews observed
all the succeding passeovers (except the first) Sitting. And so much of the
fourth Ceremony, peculiar to the first Paschatizing, viz. the eating of the
passover, in (haste) with a declaration of its annexed appendances, and
questions, and distinctions elucidarie.

PAR. 22.
THe fifth Ceremony appropriated to the first Passover, was this; They went
no, out of doors; None of you shall go forth of the doors of his house,
until the morningt Exodus 12.22. This is coupled, or linked with the other
Ceremonies beforementioned; of taking a bunch of Hysope, and dipping it in the
blood which is in the Basin, and striking the Lintell, and the side-postes; all
which belonged necessarily, only to the first passover; and so the reason,
why it was peculiar to the first passover, is this viz. The exterminator
Angelus, was ready to destroy them, and had power to slay them, if they stirred
abroad; when this cause was taken away; when the evil Spirit was, at the
succeeding passeovers restrained, or wanted his Commission to destroy, they
might, and did go forth of the door of their houses, and each man, who was in
another house, might go home to his own house.

Yea, but it is said, verse. 24. Ye shall observe this thing for an Ordinance
unto thee, and to thy sons for ever.

I answer, the words are to be interpreted of the maine substantial slaying of
the passover; not of this particular Ceremony, as follows, in the 25. verse.
Yea, but it is said, Deuteronomy. 16.7. Thou shall roste, and eat in the place, which
the Lord thy God shall choose, and thou shall turn in the morning, and go into
thy Tents? First, I answer, it is confessed, the Greeks, and Chaldee expound
it, unto thy dwellings; yea, when the Israelites had fair houses, they were
called Tents, 2 Chronicles. 7.10. Solomon sent the people away into their Tents: and
2 Chronicles. 10.16. Israel said unto Israel; every man to his Tents, O Israel; and
they went to their Tents accordingly, that is, to their own houses, Cities,
and Tribes: God slyleth the Church, the Tents of Jacob, Mal. 2.12. and the
Tents of Judah, Zech. 12.7. But to the point; this verse demonstrateth not the
proper Paschall Lamb, but some other Paschall Offering is here interserted,
which was usual at their second supper; for the paschall Lamb was to be
roasted; but that which our Translators turn here (roast) is in the Hebrew
(sees) not assabis, roast, but coques, sees; so is it in the Hebrew: So
Montanus interlineary has it; and Pagnines Margin, and the Greek, thou shall
boil, or sees: yet nearer to the point; This precept howsever extends not
to the second, and third passeovers; but to the Hierosolymitan passeovers, viz.
And the place which thy Lord thy God shall choose. Again, they are not strictly
forbidden to stir out of their doors (which was the Type, in the first
passover) but only, thou shall turn in the morning, and go into thy Tents;
abroad they might go, home they might not go; and this may be a reason: This
passover might be eaten any part of the night; and till it were eaten, or
consumed by fire, they might not go home but upon just occasions, they might
go abroad: If any one reply, that the words of the first passover are very
strict; None of you shall go forth of door of the his house, until the
morning: and we must not stretch, or torture the sacred Text, let him but
consider, for all the seeming strictness of words; that all, and every one of
the Israelites went out of their doors, that very night, in the first
passover: Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron by night, Exodus 12.31. and verse.
42. It is a night of observations unto the Lord, from bringing them out of the
land of Egypt; this is that night of the Lord, to wit, to wit, to be observed
for ever, for the slaying, and eating of the passover, and the going out, a
little after mightnight; but not to be observed for ever, for not going out of
their houses by night, after the eating of the passover.

PARA. 23.
FOr in the great passover, which our Savior at his passing out of this
world, observed; not only Judas went out of the house, before day, Ioh. 13.30.
Judas having received the Sop, went immediately out, and it was night; but all
Christ's Apostles went our, the same night; and Christ himself went out; and,
in that night, before the dayspring, he was betrayed: In respect of which
darkness, Judas came to seek him with Lanthernes, and Torches, Ioh. 18.3.
and in that night, all of them were offended, because of him, Mar. 14.27. I
conclude the keeping within doors till the morning, was none of the durable
Ceremonies of the passover, necessarily observeable; neither was the exact
strictness, according to the Letter, performed, in the first passover it
self; and therefore both the words, and the matter must be limited according
to the practice; and it may be thought to be fitliest placed, in the number of
temporary Ceremonies, appropriated to the first passover.

PAR. 42.
THe sixth transient Cere^mony of the passover, was, Exodus 12.4. Let him and
his neighbor next unto his house, take it, according to the number of souls;
an holy order, as the case stood.

PAR. 25.
FOr if they had rangled, and rambled far off, the evil Angel, who watches
such opportunities, might have taken them straggling, and whilst they sought to
join themselves to remoter Company, they might have been lost, and destroyed;
aliquod bonum, propter vicinum bonum; the next neighbor in this case, was the
great good; hence neighbors are taught not to be over-thwart neighbors;
communicating neighborhood is the best; agreement amongst next neighbors is
commended, especially in things concerning the Service of God; I was glad, when
they said unto me, we will go into the House of the Lord, Psalm. 122.1. Oh
come, let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker,
Psalm. 95.6. Innocentius ( Epist. 97. ad Augustinum) Communibus, and alternis
plus agimus orationibus, quam singularibus, out privatis: vis unita fortior;
Sacred exercises seek not corners, but delight in public meeting; private
Corner-Conventicles, in a gracious time of peace, argue distempered, factious
brains; and Conventicles, are places of Repitition forsooth, for diverse
families, were never in use, or allowed, but in times of persecution; and now
are both scandalous, and hurtful: God commanded next neighbors to join in
piety, Vique alior alii de religione docerent,
Contiguas piet as jussit habere domos.
Says Stigelius, that is, And that of points religious they might the better
tell,
By piety they charged were like neighbors near to dwell.


PAR. 26.
YEt this could not be a durable, and fixed Ceremony, but was appropriated to
the Egyptian Passover; for how could the master of the family, and his next
neighbor, or neighbors take it together, when all they, who dwelt far off,
went to Jerusalem; and most had no houses there; but went to their several
friends or kindred, or hired houses, perhaps far distant, one from another;
so that they, who were next neighbors, in the several Tribes, Cities, Towns,
or Villages, might sojourne far asunder, whilst they were Commorant, for that
week, at Jerusalem, to observe the passover: Besides, no Angel of
destruction having the like commission to slay them, they might, in after
times, seek out kindred, or friends more remote, leaving the like liberty to
their next neighbors.

The Prayer.
ALmighty God, with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of change, whilst all
sublunary things are alterable; yea the Sun and the Moon, and the Stars,
and the whole host of heaven, are subject to dissolution; God who do cloth
Religions, for several people, with diverse rites, as with interchangeable
garments, of many colored needle-worke; guide us, we humbly entreat thee, so
to make use of them, which concern us, that we may look through the
transitory trash of this world, unto the never-fading joys, which thou have
prepared for them which sit at thy right hand, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. The Contents of the eight Chapter.
1. The perpetual Rites of the Passover were instituted at several times.

2. The general perpetuity excluded not just Dispensations.

3. In what Cases Dispensations were permitted.

4. Our blessed Sacraments may be deferred.

5. Change of Rites might not be.

6. Even included permission is Logall.

7. Some Rites of the passover unordained in Egypt, and prescribed in their
journyings

8. In extremities a Kid might serve for the passover.

9. A Kid does not so exactly typifie our blessed Savior, as a Lamb does.

10. The Paschall Lamb must be unspotted.

11. Party-colored things in high esteem.

12. Most sheep spotted about Iewry.

13. The Heathen vilifying their own gods.

14. The perfectness of the offering to be made to God; the imperfections
signed out.

15. The bodily perfection of Aaronicall Priest.

16. Diversifying in color, no blemish, but an ornament.

17. There may be spots without blemishes.

18. Blemishes without deformity.

19. Christ was blemished, but most unjustly.

20. Blemishes of birds: a little reputed blemish hindered not the Lamb to be
the Passover: an ill-blemished spotted Lamb might not be the Passover.

21. A difference between spotted, and party-colored.

22. The Paschall Lamb must not be a female one, but a male: a male implies
perfection.

23. The Lamb must be under a year old; the Lamb of one hour above a year
old was to be refused, the Son of a year.

24. The impurity of Creatures, till seven days be passed over them: The
strange effects co-incident to the number of seven.

25. The Jews think a Lamb of nine days might be the Passover.

26. It might be a burnt offering.

27. Reasons why it might not be a Paschall Lamb.

28. A proportionable number was to be chosen to the eating of the Paschall
Lamb.

29. The exact number is not, cannot be set down.

30. Maimonides says, they ought to agree of the number, before they chose
their Lamb.

31. The fellow-communicants were called the sons of the Society.

32. It is more probable, that at the first Passover, they chose their Lamb
first, and company afterward. At the first Passover, the next neighbor, or
neighbors were brothers of the Society, or members of that brotherhood. At
the after-passeovers they were not so strict, not was it a durable rite to have
the next neighbors.

33. Sometimes ten, sometimes twenty made up the full number, says Josephus:
most commonly ten: Cestius the Roman President his Policy.

34. Thirteen were at Christ's last Passeovers eating, even Christ and his
twelve Apostles.

35. The Romans imitation of these Ceremony- sodalitates.

36. Rex convivii, in Macrobius; dominus Convivii, in Gellius; modimperator, in
Varto.

37. The number no where fixed, and certain; but ad libitum; varried, as it
pleased the chief Ruler of the Feast, etc.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
NOw do we come to the Paschatizing Ceremonies, which were ever observeable,
during the Law Mosaicall. Before I speak of the Rites of lasting observation
in particular; I think fit to observe these things of them more generally:
First, some of these were instituted, Exodus 12. Some Number. 9. Some, Deuteronomy. 16.

PAR. 2.
SEcondly, Some of these durable Rites were dispensed withal, by God himself;
and yet the Rites are perpetual, when there are no just causes to the
contrary, the perpetual Law is, Exodus 12.6. Thou shall kill the Passover, on
the fourteenth day of the first month.

PAR, 3.
THe dispensation on the same, or like regards, is likewise perpetual, Number.
9.10. If any of you, or your posterity shall be unclean, by reason of a dead
body, or be in a journey, afar off; he shall keep the passover to the Lord,
on the fourteenth day of the second month, ver. 11. And I think also, if any
had had any great sickness, or were bedridden, though within four miles of
Jerusalem; or had dangerous wounds, bruises, fractures, dislocations of joints,
where taking fresh air, or traveling might call into adventure a man's life,
or health; or if a man stood in fear of his life, or were threatened, or sought
to be destroyed (which was our Saviors case) they might differ,, and omit
the passover that month; for those reasons also are equi-pondiall with the
Causes specialized, and dispensed withal; Parium par ratio est, the same
reason, the same favor.

PAR. 4.
SO now, upon inextricable perplexities, even our most sacred mysteries, and
Sacraments, may be likewise, adjourned, or put over.

PAR. 5.
INdulgence is granted of time in Cases of necessity; but there is no license
to exchange Rites, or to introduce new matters momentuall; much less was a
total omission, or neglective disrespect, permitted; for, the standing Law,
and its intention was for the eating of a Lamb; and so the general practice
was, ever after; but in case of necessity, at the first Passover, either a
Kid, or a Lamb was accepted, as I proved before; and no doubt, in exigents it
might be, it was done afterward: a particular reasonable dispensation,
especially by him, who made the Law, hindered not, but the Law may be esteemed,
and be called, intentionally, perpetual, whiles the Law of Moses was in fore.

PAR 6.
THirdly, permission is either express, or involved, an instance of the
included permission is this: the passover was to be eaten in their houses,
Exodus 12.7. but they had no houses in the Wilderness; the best had but Tents;
perhaps, some lay sub dio; and had only the Canopy of Heaven, to cover them;
yet under the name of houses, observation of the passover in their Tents, was
inclusively allowed, commanded.

PAR. 7.
SOme of the perpetual Rites began sooner, some later; the Major part by far
were instituted in Egypt; and there were first practiced: the eating of the
passover, in the second month, was first permitted in the Wilderness, and
practiced: but the perpetual Ceremony of eating that Jewish Sacrament at
Jerusalem, was only precepted in their journey thitherward, Deuteronomy. 12.5. Deuteronomy.
16.2.7. but not performed, till they came to Jerusalem; for, as they were
commanded, before they came thither, they were legally to offer it at the
Tabernacle, at the door of it (as before they sprinkled the blood, on their
doors) Levit. 17.3. Whosoever kills an Ox, or Lamb, in the Camp, or out
of it; and brings it not to the door of the Congregation, that man shall be
cut off from among Gods people, verse. 4. But this also was of later ordinance;
for in Egypt, they had no Tabernacle erected, but had liberty to slay them, in
their own houses; Moreover, the eating of their common Supper was appointed*
as they were journying; (of which hereafter) and not practiced, in the
tumultuary haste of the Egyptian passover. And now, I must proceed to the
particular durable Ceremonies, which were not to expire, till the expiration of
the Jewish Commonwealth.

PAR. 8.
ANd thus, I do reckon them up in order, as they were used, though not
exactly, in the order prescribed. 1. They were to choose a Lamb for that
Sacrifice: I determined before, that at the first Passover, it might be either
Lamb, or Kid; and I hold it probable, that in cases of necessity, when there
were not Lambs sufficient, they might follow the first precedent; and rather
than they should want a Sacrifice, the Kid should be ( uccedaneall, and supply
the Lambs stead; a Lamb rather than a Kid; a Kid rather than none: Again,
when there were store of Lambs, yet Kids also might be offered; offered, I say,
as other Paschall offerings to make up the sacred Festival, which continued
seven days; not as the proper paschall offerings, being the substance of their
great Sacrament, and the Type of ours; the Kids might be the boiled offerings,
not the roasted; or, if roasted, not roasted in the beginning of the Feast, on the
fourteenth day of the first month; or if then they were roasted; they might not
be, they were not, the Paschall offerings; whose bones must not be broken,
whose remainder must be burnt with fire before morning: for, as I before, from
the Jewish consent, and practice, declared, generally, and in the intent of the
Law; though Kids might be used in necessity, and want of Lambs, yet only the
flock, not any of the herds, must send forth that burnt offering; and among
the flocks a Lamb, not a Kid must be the proper Paschall Sacrifice.

PAR. 9.
THis being a confessed Truth, shall need no more proof but this; that a Kid
does not so punctually typifie our Savior, as a Lamb does; in many
particularities, Christ is called a Lamb of God, John 1.29. and our Passover,
1 Cor. 5.7. there is no mention before or in his life; nor since his death of a
Kid, as the Resemblance of him dying; but often, of a Lamb; and though in the
old Testament, all Sacrifices did figure out him; some, more evidently, others,
more obscurely, and among the rest, the Kids; yet nor Kid, nor any other
Sacrifice, did so lively adumbrate our Savior, in so many near specialties as
the Lamb did.

PAR. 10.
SEcondly, it must be an unspotted Lamb; your Lamb shall be without blemish,
Exodus 12.5.

PAR. 11.
THe Jews say, a Lamb that is spotted in Wool, or skin only, without other
Blemish, is to be accepted; and this reason is for them, the best things are to
be offered to God; but the spotted, speckled, or parti-colored sheep were
most set by, in the land of Canaan; and it is plain, Judge. 5.30. 1 Chro. 29.2.
diverscoloured things were so high esteemed; Iacoh made for his beloved Joseph,
vestem polymitam, a Coat of many colors, Genesis 37.3. and though the Hebrew
read it, in exposition, particularum; yet even those particulae might be
polymitae, that is, particolouted. More especially concerning sheep, Mercer
thinks, the shepherds were called, Nochedim, or Nokedim, Amos 1.1. that is,
keepers of spotted Cattle; and though Drusius judges rather, they were called
Nochedim from the Artificial marks, with which they were wont (as now they
are) to sign, and distinguish both sheep and beasts; deriving the word from
the Hebrew radix, Nacad, which is rendered, signare; yet he confesses, others
think, they were called Nochedim, from keeping of such Cattle, as had
natural spots.

PAR. 12.
HE cites also David Camius thus; punctis, and notis pleraeque pecudes
aspersae sunt, most of their sheep were speckled: and these spots were not
artificial marks, or signations, but Natural; because Camius refers us to
Jacobs, and Labans sheep, Genesis 30.32. Where certainly, the sheep were not
signed by men, or in wool, or fell, (as the Countryman speaks) but were as
they were yeaned, of distinct, natural Marks; and most were spotted;
therefore more apt for such sacrifices, then others. This I am sure of,
advantageous Laban chose out for himself, and his sons, both the spotted,
and all the parti-colored at one time, and at another time, or times, left not
one to Jacob, Genesis 30 which he would not have done, if he had not thought that
way profitablest: and I am sure also, Jacob desired the spotted ones, for his
hire, ver. 32. which he would not have covenanted; but that he hoped; it would
turn to his gain; as it did by the approbation of the Almighty, who only
knows what is best.

PAR. 13.
TErtullian, Tertul. ad Nation. 1.10.
as Rigaltius has it, better than Gothofredus, Enecta, and tabida quaeque,
mactatis; de opimis autem, and integris supervacua esui capitula ( Gothofredus
has it, without sense, supervacua sui capitula) and ungulas, and plumarum,
setarumque praevulsa, and si quid demi quoque, habitu^i non fuissetis: he
varieth in his Apologet. Tabida, and scabiosa, mactatis; sacrificatis, quae
domi quoque pueris, vel canibus destinassetis. He justly taxes the heathen,
for not giving to Hercules the third part of the tenth; and for sacrificing the
worst things, to the gods; even those offalls, which the Emperors forbad to be
given to their Soldiers, says Gothofredus; and which they would at home have
given to the boys, or to the dogs; even the rotten, cothed, pining, scabbed,
felon-stricken, and infected Creatures.

PAR. 14.
THree objections there are against this opinion: First, that the Paschall must
indeed be free from any manner of imperfection whatsoever: Thou shall do no
work with the first-ling of thy bullockes; (it might make him weak, or weary)
nor sheare the firstlings of thy sheep (which being shorn is of less price)
if there be any blemish therein; if it be lame, or blind, or have any ill
blemish, thou shall not sacrifice it, Deuteronomy. 15.19, etc. And thou shall not
sacrifice unto the Lord thy God, any bullock, or sheep (or goat) wherein is
blemish, or any ill-favourednesse; for it is an abomination, Deuteronomy. 17.1.
Whatsoever has a blemish, ye shall not offer: -- it shall be perfect, to be
accepted, -- blind, broken, or maimed, having a Wenne, or skurvie, or scabbed,
-- a bullock, lamb, or kid, that has any thing superfluous, or lacking, in
his parts, or bruized, or crushed, or broken, or cut, you may not offer, Levit.
22.20. etc. The red heifer, Number. 19.2. was to be, without spot; wherein is no
blemish, upon which never yoke came.

PAR. 15.
SEcondly, the Sacrifice must be like the Sacrificer, without Blemish, Levit.
21.17. etc. Whosoever he be, of Aarons seed, in their generations, that has a
blemish, he shall not approach to offer the bread, or food of his God; not
blind, lame, flat-nosed, or blowne-up, or having any thing superfluous, not
broken-footed, or broken-handed, or crooke-back'd, or a dwarf, or that has a
blemish in his eye, or be scurvie, or scabbed, or has his stones broken.

PAR. 16.
TO the first, I answer; a little change, or diversifying in color is no
imperfection; nor ill-blemish, or ill-favourednesse, which are both the words,
and intention of the Law; deformity inward or outward, was to be removed: But
many have most delight in speckled, parti-colored creatures: Is not the
Peacocke proud of his Tail? and most variously feathered birds most glorious
in show? has not Spain, of late, solicited, and obtained some of our pyde or
speckled Bulls, and sparked, or splatted Kine? what if I say, this diversity is
no blemish at all, but an Ornament?

PAR. 17.
THere is a spot, with a blemish; and some blemishes are greater, some less;
sinful things are called bespotted, the wicked are in the abstract, spots, 1
Pet. 2 13. Iud. verse. 12. On the contrary the Virgin Saints in heaven, were
sine macula. Rev. 14.5. without fault; yea, in the Church, on earth, non est
macula, Cant. 4.7, There is no spot, and yet I may say also, there are spots,
without ill-blemishes; and there are blemishes in comparison, with exactest
perfections which yet are graces, in Relation to deformities, or full
imperfections.

PAR. 18.
TO the second objection, I answer; a little mole in the face, or, a little
redmarke in hand, or body, excluded not a Priest from Sacrificing: in corpore
quantum velis puro, aut integro, naevus aliquis effruticat, verruncula exurgit,
aut lentigo sordescit, says Tertul. contra Nation. 1.5.
Tertullian, caelum ipsum, nulla serenit as tam colata purgat, ut non alicujus
nubecule flocculo resignetur; as he adds the perfectest body in the world,
has some little frecke, wart, or pimple, or wan leotell; in the clearest sky,
is some little clowd: The speckle, or mole, in the face of Venus, was esteemed
as a grace unto her; as a foil, adding more luster to a precious stone, and
not a blemish: the blemishes forbidden, in the Priests, or offerings, were
blemishes tending to deformity: the Roman nose; the Austrian lip, are highly
honored; unspottednesse argues freedom from any ill-blemishes, excludes not
change of colors; spottednesse implies a (remarkable) imperfection; damneth
not a graceful decorum: yea, nor things of a middle Nature, or indifferent
middesses, between deformity, and fairness; perfection and imperfection. A
Lamb (broken) in any part, a weak, sickely, poor, or shorn Lamb, was the
spotted or blemished Lamb, in the eye of the Law, though the color of it were
all white: and the perfect Lamb both inwardly, and outwardly was the
unblemished Passover, according to the strict Law, though the wool and skin
were parti-colored.

PAR. 19.
THe third objection is; our Savior was adumbrated by the Paschall Lamb most
significantly? What of that? But Christ was without all shadow of imperfection?
True, nothing truer; therefore the Pascall Lamb must be likewise? I answer,
the most significant ceremonies were not in all, and every puncto like;
likeness in every minutest Re, aut Recula, differs not much from
selfe-samenesse; it was enough for the Type to be without any real deformity,
or ill-blemish; but such a blemish as seems a blemish to some, and not so to
others, is not to be required in the Lamb, or Paschall offering, for even the
substance it self, the perfectly immaculate Lamb of God, was thus blemished,
and many ways blemished; his eating with Publicans, and sinners was (esteemed)
as a blemish or fault, Mar. 2.16. He was worse blemished, when they said, Mar.
11.19. he was a glutton, and a wine-bibber: and yet none of those, were true
blemishes; but divine condescents heavenly favors, and most fair fruits of
unspotted humility, and communicated charity: So, in an under degree of
comparison, (without disparagement to our most glorious Savior) the
parti-colored Lamb, for the Paschall offering, might be thought blemished, by
some; and yet indeed not truly blemished; Christ are such an unspotted Lamb;
offered himself, an unspotted Sacrificer, an unspotted Sacrifice.

PAR. 20.
THe Rabbis make the offering of Birds, answerable to the offerings of
Beasts, in this point; and more particularly avetre, that small blemishes in
Turtles, or Doves, exclude them not from being holy Sacrifices; as if they lost
by casualty, some of their feathers; but if they were blemished by the loss of
a wing, leg, or eye, this very offering (though of the poor themselves) was
to be rejected from Gods Altar, as a forbidden Sacrifice. So much be said to
distinguish what blemishes, or spots, were accepted, what rejected; and that a
Lamb with a petite, or reputed blemish, might be; and an ill-blemished,
spotted Lamb, might not be the roasted Paschall offering.

PAR. 21.
THere is an apparent difference, Genesis 31.8. between the spotted, and
parti-colored; though all the spotted were parti-colored, yet all the
parti-colored were not spotted; for one half of them might be white, the
other half black: likewise, of spots, some might be ornamentall, and lovely,
some ill-favored and ougly; deformity excluded the Lamb, from being the
Passe-over; a little, shallow, putative blemish, admitted it.

PAR. 22.
SOme think an Ew-lambe might be the great Paschall offering; perhaps, in
necessity, such a matter was dispensed withal; not in ordinary, and usual
practice: But the word signifies, and so it is translated, a Male-lambe, and
Hee-kid: an Ew-lambe had but imperfect reference unto Christ, who was not Agna,
or Agnella, but immaculatus Agnus, qui tollit peecata mundi; though he came of
a woman, without man; yet was he not to be a woman, but a man: costlyer things
were to be offered still; and the best, if they were to be had; but the male is
stronger, worthier, costlier; and without necessity, (which dispenses with
great matters) was one of the durable Rites of Paschatizing: if the Lamb had
been a Fee-Martyn, (as my Neighbors call it) that is, of both sexes; it must
not be offered; nor one, that is of neither sex, discernable; nor yet one,
that is cut, or a weather-Lambe: Indeed (...) ((...) seh) does comprehend both
sexes, in Grammatical construction; and tam Agnam, quam Agnum significat,
says Cornelius a Lapide; it signifies as well the Eew, as the Ram-Lambe, yet
the perpetual silence, in the Scripture, that ever an Eew-lambe was the
eminent Paschall-Lambe; though there was manifold occasion, to utter so much;
and though on less occasions, in another sacrifice, mention is mude of an
Eew-lambe; and the usual practice, in the general opinion, probablizeth, a
Male-Lambe was to be that offering; a Ram-Lambe was to be the Paschall Lamb;
perhaps, in extreme Neces-sity; and perhaps not. Mal. 1.14. Cursed he
deceiver, who has in bis flock (...) Male, and voweth, and Sacrifices unto
the Lord a corrupt thing; where ((...) Male) implies perfection, and is
opposed to corruption; as unfit for sacrifice, especially in this chiefest
offering.

PAR. 23.
A Gain, the Paschall-lambe must be under a year, the Rabbines say well, and
truly; if the Lamb had been, but one day (I say, but one hour) above a
year old; it might have been used amongst the subsequent Paschall-offerings;
but it was super-annuated, for a Paschall Lamb: I add, it was, and was to be,
under a year old, somewhat: viz. Anno currente, non completo; the full year,
not fully expired. Exodus 12.5. It runs thus, in the Hebrew; a Male-lambe,
the Son of a year, that is, not entering into the second year; so, Levit.
14.10. There is mention of an Eew-lambe, the daughter of her year, that is,
before the entering into, or the inchoation of the second year: which words,
you are to take exclusively; and inclusively: exclusive, that the offertory be
not above a year old; and inclusively; that it might be, any reasonable Time,
within the year.

PAR. 24.
YEa, but what is that reasonable Time? Man, under seven days was counted
unclean, and was to be circumcised; beasts, for a whole week, were esteemed
unclean, and as it were in their blood; but in the beginning of the second
week, when one entire Sabbath had also, in a sort, sanctified them; they might
offer them without sin, Exodus 22.30. Seven days it shall be with his mother;
on the eight day, thou shall give it me; also, Levit. 22.27. It shall be seven
days, under the dawne; from the eight day, and thence-forth it shall be
accepted, as an offering made by fire unto the Lord: see admirable mysteries
concerning man, and other things, Macrobius, Saturnal. 1.7.
in Macrobius, accomplished by seavens.

PAR. 25.
THe Jewish Doctors have delivered, that a Lamb, from the ninth day,
inclusively, to a whole, full years age, exclusive of the last day, may be the
great Paschall offering.

PAR. 26.
BUt mine opinion is, although God accepted Lambs for burnt-offerings by fire;
after they began to be nine days old; yet a Lamb of nine days old, was not
to be admitted, for the eminent Paschall-offering; nor does the Scripture any
where evince, or intimate so much.

PAR. 27.
MY reasons are; First, a Lamb, at nine days old, is no good meat; it is
like a Chicke in the Egge-shell; the flesh is rather slime, and uncocted gelly,
than substantial food; and the bones rather tender gristles, than firm, hard,
bones; but God would not prescribe unwholesome green meat in his most solemn
feasts; yea, did not: again a Lamb but of nine days old, when it is roasted,
is but a poor roast: Two men may easily eat that up; yea, one man with a good
stomach; if the unsavorinesse of the food do not turn his stomach; but the
Passover was to be provided to serve a whole household, Exodus 12.13. and if the
household be too little for the Lamb; it was to be food for two households, ver.
4. And in the intention of God, it was to be so great, even for two households,
that a consuming fire was appointed to burn the remainder, when any was left.
Tradition has delivered, that ten in number, were chosen out, for the eating
of the chosen Lamb: thirteen were at the eating of Christ's last Passover: A
Novendiall Lamb could not suffice so many, as the Law in general intended; so
that there could be a remainder even of the flesh, with the bones, combustible:
therefore, the Paschall-Lambe must be somewhat under a year; somewhat above
nine days old.

PAR. 28.
MOreover, there was to be a proportionable number, so nigh as could be
guessed at; yea, and according to the good, or bad stomachs of the receivers;
if they were great eaters, there might be fewer, if the assembly in one house
had tender weak appetites, they were to be more in number.

PAR. 29.
NO certainety of number was of institution Divine, but accidental, and
occasional; the express words notify so much, Exodus 12.3. etc. They shall
take to them every man, according to the house of their Fathers, a Lamb for an
house; and if the household be too little for the Lamb; let him and his
neighbor next to his house take it, according to the number of the Souls;
every man according to his eating, shall make your count for the Lamb.

PAR. 30.
IF any enquire whether they chose the Lamb first, and the number after; or
the number first, and then the Lamb proportionable: Mamonides relates, that
they might not choose the living Lamb, till they were agreed on the number of
the communicants; much less might they kill it till then; but when the
receivers, and the set number of them were known, and resolved on; then they
chose a Lamb, proportionable to their Company; a greater Lamb for the
greatest assembly, and a lesser, for the less.

PAR. 31.
ANd those fellow-eaters they termed, brotherly participants, the sons of the
society; they might call them filiot contuberniorum (for they did sort
themselves, per contubernia, (...), per sodalitia, (says Iesephus) amongst
which was, (as Demosthenes said of the Grecians in another kind) (...),
princeps fratriae.

PAR. 32.
BUt by the words of Scripture, before recited, it is more than probable, that
in the first Passover, the Lamb was first chosen, and then the company sought
out, conjecturally-adaequate, for the entire eating up of that sacrifice; and
four days after, they had time to make choice of more, or less of the next
neighboring Communicants: yet, for all this, if the traditionary consent of
the Jews be true, we may reckon the selected (I say not, always a certain)
number of the (...), or sacred feast, to be one of the durable Rites of the
Passover; though afterward, they did not always admit into their society,
their next neighbors only not ante-elect the Lamb.

PAR. 33.
IF any yet be more inquisitive, what was the exact number of the Communicants,
in the common practices, at the Passover? I answer that neither by Divine nor
humane Laws, was there always a stinted number: Joseph. de Bello Iudaico,
6.31.
Josephus says, there went not less than ten, and sometimes twenty people
concurred to the eating of one Paschall Lamb: yet the same Josephus Id. ib.
7.17.
elsewhere seems to restrain the number to ten, and this is his relation;
Cestius the governor of the Jews, (who was Caesar's Register, Auditor, or
Secretary, or accountant.
Rationalis Caesaris, as other Praesidents of Provinces were, and gave account
to the Emperor of all their public proceedings of note) was willing to
certify Nero the Emperor, the number of all the Jews; to which purpose he
dealt politickely with the High Priest, and compassed his desires by him; and
so by the number of Paschall-Lambes, which were slain at one Feast; the
Certificate of the High Priest being, that there were two hundred fifty six
thousand, and reckoning ten to every Lamb he found, that the number of the
Jews by poll, arose to three thousand thousand, and seventy thousand of them
who celebrated the Passover.

PAR. 34.
MOst certain it is, our most blessed Lord, and Savior ate his last
Passover, with his twelve Disciples, Mat. 26.20. He sat down with the
twelve; the twelve Apostles, with him, Luke 22.14.

PAR. 35.
AMong the Romans, they had some resemblance of this custom; Cato Censorinus
(in Cicero, de Senectute) says, Sodalitates were instituted, when he was
Quaestor, that is, the companies of a Corporation, or brotherhood; adding,
epulabar cum sodalibus, modice, I ate a bit with the Company. Quintilian,
Tempestiva convivia, and pervigiles jecos, advocata sodalium turba, solutus,
and effluens agebam, that is, I was at times extraordinarily merry, with a
company of good fellows: Macrobius ( Saturnal. 1.7.) Convivarum numerus neque
minor quam Gratiarum sit, neque quam Musarum numerosior, that is, a knot of
good fellows must not be less than three, nor above nine: Gellius (13.11.)
Nec loquaces convivas, nec mutos legere oportet, that is, at a feast, you must
not make choice of such guests, which are either as prating as parrets; or as
mute as fishes; incipe a Gratiarum, and progredere ad numerum Musarum, ibid.
from Varro, that is, begin with the number of the Graces, which were but three;
and exceed not the number of the Muses, which were nine: discumbit cum marito
in sodalitiis; says Tertullian, ( ad uxorem, 2.6.) speaking of a Christian
wife, and Gentile husband; discumbit, cum marito, in sodalitiis, saepe in
popinis; she went with her husband, sometimes to Feasts; often to the Tavernes:
Plautus, ( in Sti. Act. 3. Scen. 2.) when the parasite handsomely had begged a
Supper; Epignomus had no better way to put him off, then by saying, here with
me, nine other stranger sup; the parasite replyeth, he desired not to be in the
chiefest bed, scis tu me esse imi subsellii virum, you know me sir very well, a
seat, or a low stool will be good enough for me, and serve my turn: these
sodalitates were broken off, Lege Licinia, Arator ( l. 1. Hist.) says, the
twelve Apostles, are venerabilis orbicuti^s, a company, which the whole world
should reverence; Eusebius ( de vita Constantini, 4.12.) calls the meetings
of Saints, (...), a Catalogue of Christians; and Constantine himself, (...), a
Council or College.

PAR. 36.
THe Master, or chief of their Feasts was called, Rex Convivii, by Macrobius,
Locis supra citatis. Dominus Convivii, by Gellius, Locis supra citatis.
Modimperator, in Varro, Locis supra citatis.


PAR. 37.
IN their common Feasts, the Jews tied themselves to no strict number; Joseph
feasting had the number of eleven, or more, at one Table: besides the
Egyptians, who fed by themselves, belike at a second Table, Esters banquet
held but three, the King, her self, and Haman: If we consider Jobs childrens
banquet, there were ten, besides their wives, and their fisters husbands; which
in likelihood, they had; and Origin ( lib. 1. in Job) affirms it; In orbem
transibant dies convivii, they feasted one another round, that is, contigui,
non interrupti, says Bolducus, (in Job 1.) but Ahashuerus his royalls Feast;
first, to the Nobility, for 180. days, Ester 1.4. and after, unto all the
people, in the palace of Shushan, ver. 5. was in wonderful numbers: to the
Sodalitates, or Sodalitia; it seems our blessed Savior alluded, when he said,
Luke 9.14. (...), facite illos discumbere discubitus, per Quinquagenos, make
them sit down, by fifties in a company, as is rendered faithfully to the sense,
by our last Translators; for Christ could have fed them, if so he had pleased,
without sorting them to their Tithings, or Divisions, or half hundreds.

Aulus A. Gellius, Noct Attic. 13.11.
Gellius requiring four things to a perfect feast; sets this in the first
place; Si belli homunculi collecti sunt; If jolly good fellows be gathered
together; Homer allowed ten: Plato more.

PAR. 38.
AVgustus his Supper is famous; Sueton. ( p. 127. post. medium secundi libri)
It was called (...), where six men were at the Table, in the habit of six
gods; and six women, in the habit of six Goddesses, Dum nova divorum coenat
adulteria,
as the Satyriall Poet galled him, Whilst the old Heathen gods adulteries
He imitates, supping with new supplies,
Of feigned, yet known whoring deities.
Lucius Verus Imperator, praeter exempla majorum, cum duodecim, solenni
convivio, primus accubuit, says Alexander ab Alex. (5.21.) yet, what did
Augustus, as is cited immediately before? Convivium majores nostri solenne
instituerunt, idque Charistia appellaverunt, cui praeter cognatos, and affines,
nemo interponebatur; ut si qua, inter necessarias personas querela esset orta,
apud Sacra mensae, and hilaritatem animorum fautoribus Concordiae adhibitis,
tolleretur, says Valerius Maximus (2.1) that is, they were wont in old time,
to keep a solemn Feast, which they called Charistia, at which none but
children and kinsfolks were present; to the intent, that if there were any
quarrel between any friends, the matter might be taken up by some Referees,
and Vmpires in the midst of their Feasting and merriment. It may be from
hence sprang the Custom, in our Western parts on little-wiving Sunday (such
are the terms) for all married children to bring Cakes to their Parents, and
to be merry, and feast with them: Cum paucissimi convivae erant, non minores
tribus; cum plurimi, non ultranovem, in eadem mensa, eisdemque lectis
coenitabant, says he, there crossing himself; unless you interpret him
favorably, by distinguishing of common, and extraordinary Feasts: saying,
(that I may English his words, when the guests were fewest, there were not
less then three; and at the most, not above nine did sup at the same Table,
and on the same beds: the Grecians used to sup, four or five together: It is
an old proverb; Six make a Feast; seven a brawle; Turba plerunque turbnlenta
est, says Gellius (13.11) from Varro, that is, a route most commonly turns
into a riot. I would choose always, if I might, the number of the four
Evangelists, at an ordinary repast; I cannot abide to eat my morsells alone:
at a great solemn Feast, the number of the twelve Apostles, seems fit to me.

The Primitive Christians continued their course of meeting Per sodalitia, by
fraternities, even at the time, that Rome was arrived to its highest pitch of
glory: Pliny (10.97.) wrote to Trajan, that the Christians confessed, they were
wont to meet before day, to adore, worship, and sing praises to Christ, as
God, then to receive the Sacrament, binding them, as it were, from all evil,
and to all manner of goodness; when these things were ended, they departed,
and met customarily again, to eat meat together promiscuously, but
innocently. This was at their Love Feasts, which then were taken, after the
blessed Eucharist. The same truth is also confirmed by Tertullian, in Apologet.
( cap. 2.) Belike Trajan had heard of such meetings; for says Plinius to him,
secundum mandata tua hetaerias esse vetui; betaeriae, hoc est, ipsa sodalitita
vetia erant, says Baron. ad An. Christi. 104. Number. 4.
Baronius; when Pliny had forbid them, according to the mandate of the
Emperor; the Christians did forbear such meetings. To this effect, Caius
Plinius secundus: But I fully believe, that after Trajan his favorable Edict,
Conquirendi non sunt, that Christians should not be enquired after: and much
more, after that Persecution wholly failed, and Peace was restored to the
Churches of God, the Christians met again, as they were wont, and more boldly,
more publicly, celebrated both Divine, and Humane Offices, and renewed their
sodalitates or fraternities.

The Prayer.
O Lord, our good God, a little does content our natural bodies, yet
superabundance of provision thou have prepared for us; yea, thy mercy has
permitted us; to recreate our selves sometimes, even with Feasting; and holy
thanks be ascribed to thy name therefore; yet we meekely beseech thee, O
gracious God, that we never so eat, or drink, to sustain our weak nature,
but we may always keep our selves in appetite, and strong desire, to feed on
the Divine food at thy heavenly Table, with all the most blessed society, of
our beatified Predecessors, the Participants, and Communicants with Jesus
Christ our Lord in his Kingdom. Amen.

CH^P. IX. The Contents of the ninth Chapter.
1. Non-admittance of strangers to the Passover: diverse sorts of servants, and
strangers: servants of the seed of Israel, their estates, and privileges:
servants of foreign Nations; their hard condition: hired servants; and their
differences from others: the hired servant might not he forced to be
circumcised.

2. Maimonides falsely opineth, that the seed of Abraham were only to be
circumcised.

3. There were three sorts of strangers in Israel: two sorts of Aliens: Adam's
six Preceps to all the world: Noah's additionall inhibition: the Law of Moses
is a branch of the Law of Nature: Bishop Andrews commended; and excellent
passages of his Work, transcribed: The Roman Laws borrowed from the Jews,
in Tertullian's judgment; The twelve Tables, and their supposed perfection:
their imperfection, in precept: The fragments only remain of them: some
semblance between the four first Commandments of the first Table in Gods
Law, and between the Roman Laws: Rigalitius rejected: Gothofredus preferred:
Comparisons beeweene the Gentiles keeping the Saturday; and Christians, the
Sunday: Saturday was the Sabbath of the Romans; kept with joy, and feasting,
as our Lords day: A large Treatise concerning the Lords day: the Christians
pray toward the East; the Reasons thereof: The holy Communion Table justly
placed at the East end of the Chancell, ignorant, and irreligious Censurers
taxed; and objections answered: the promiscuous use of the words, Altar, and
the Lords Table: The Commandments of the second Table of Moses followed by the
Papyrian Law, and twelve Roman Tables; except the tenth Commandment only: a
forraigner unfixed might not eat of the Passover: a sojourner, or stranger,
whose males were circumcised, might eat thereof, and so might their sons:
only Circumcised ones might eat the Passover: all others were forbidden:
women were held as circumcised in the circumcision of the Jewish males.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
ANother Paschatizing Ceremony of durabilitie, which is the sixth, was, the
non-admittance of strangers; or the admittance of the Jewish Church only: the
express Laws concerning this point are some inhibitory, some mandatory. The
negative precepts are; first of all, Exodus 12.43. This is the Ordinance of the
Passover, there shall no stranger eat thereof: Secondly, ver. 45. A
forraigner shall not eat thereof; an hired servant shall not eat thereof. The
preceps affirmative are these; Exodus 12.44. Every man servant that is bought for
money, when thou have circumcised him, then shall be eat thereof: and ver. 48.
When a stranger shall sojourne with the, and will keep the Passover to the
Lord, let all his males be circumcised; and then let him come near, and keep
it, and he shall be as one borne in the Land -- One Law shall be to him that is
home-borne, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you, ver. 49. The same,
in effect, is repeated, to show it is a lasting Rite of the passover, Number.
9.14. If we deeply consider the occurrent, and emergent particularities,
comprised in the affirmative, and negative precepts; I dare say, we cannot
open, nor understand the businsse, as it ought to be understood; unless we
take notice, both of the diverse sorts of servants, and diverse sorts of
strangers, in the Jewish Law. Servants were thus to be distinguished; first,
such as were of the seed of Jacob: secondly, servants of other Nations. The
first kind of servants were in a far better estate, than the latter, and had
diverse privileges above other servants: a powerful man might take some true,
or supposed offenders, for bondmen; otherwise, the brethren of Joseph had
needless, and false suppositions, in their heads; for they feared, lest they
should be taken for bondmen, Genesis 43.18. Any man might make himself a bondsman,
We will be my Lords bondmen, Genesis 44.9. If a Jew did sell himself to a
stranger, or sojourner; he himself, if he grew able, or any of his kindred
might redeem him; if not, he was to be, as a yearely-hired servant, he shall
not be ruled with rigor; he, and his children shall go out, in the year of
Iubilee: the reasons of these privileges follows, Levit. 25.55. For unto me,
says God, the children of Israel are servants, they are my servants; as if he
had said, the Israelites indeed were Pharoahs bondmen, Exodus 6.21. Thou wast a
bondsman, Deuteronomy. 15.15. But I have redeemed you, out of the house of bondmen,
from the hand of Pharaoh, Deuteronomy. 7.8. therefore they shall be no longer bondmen.
Gods service is perfect freedom; and now, (says God) Exodus 4.22. Israel is my
Son, even my first borne; let my Son go, that he may serve me, ver. 23.
If a Jew did sell himself to any of his brethren, the Jews; he was not to be
compelled to serve as a bond servant, Levit. 25.39. He shall be with thee (not
only as an hired servant, but) as a sojourner, he shall be with thee, ver. 40.
which was higher in Privilege, then the servant-Iew, which was sold to a
stranger: and no doubt, they used their brethren-servants the Jews, better
that they did servants of other Nations; or than Masters of other Nations did
use their servants. The Jews; even to this day, the hard-hearted Jews are
more compassionate on distressed Jews, than Christians are on Christians. As
concerning the servants of foreign Nations, they were of four sorts. 1.
Bondmen, or bought-servants. 2. Bondmens children. 3. Captives. 4. Hired
servants.
The three former were almost, of one condition. 1. They might be used with
rigor; they were kept hard at work, most times, in the more uncomfortable
places, of their houses, or outhouses; many, in one house; God redeemed you
out of the house of bondmen, Deuteronomy. 7.8. which, for extremity of hard usage, is
called the iron furnace, Deuteronomy. 4.20. Solomon says of himself, Eccles. 2.7. I
got me servants, and maidens; and had sons of mine house, etc. that is,
children of my bondmen and bond-women; in a sort distinguishing them from
sons of the bed; or rather from the children of free-women. 2. They were not
to be dismissed, at the year of Iubilee, Levit. 25 44. etc. Thy bondmen, and
thy bond-maydes shall be of the Heathen, that are round about thee; and of the
childrdn of sojourning strangers begot in your Land; ye shall take them as an
inheritance, for your children after you, to inherit for a possession: they
shall be your bondmen for ever: Such were the Gibeonites. Josh. 9.23. Ye are
cursed, and there shall none of you be freed from being bondmen: yet none will
deny,
but Captives, and other bondmen might be sold, and redeemed; if so it pleased
the owners, and Masters of them. Aristotle ( Ethic. 5.) Servus est Possessio
Domini; a servant is the Masters possession; vobis erunt in possessionem, they
shall be to you for a possession; as it is according to the Hebrew, in the
place of Leviticus last cited: and servants were reckoned among Salomons
possessions, as is in Eccles. 2.7. Now upon valuable considerations, such
possessions might be sold; yea, he might (if so it pleased him) manumize any of
his servants; and was not hindered, from giving freely freedom, and liberty
to either male, or female, if he would be so gracious unto them: the words are
rather Permissive, then Coactive, that is, thou may keep him for ever, for
thy vassal, if thou will, him, and his; but it is left to thy choice, to make
him a freeman, if thou please, him or his: The last sort of servants; were
the hired servants; and they were hired as they are with us, by the day, or by
the year: these were in a better estate than bondmen; God had a more especial
care of them; the impoverished Jew was to be, as an hired servant, Levit.
19.13. The wages of him that is hired, shall not abide with thee all night,
until the morning. You may understand this of the day-labourer. Thou shall not
oppress an hired servant that is poor, and needy, brother, or stranger; at
his day, thou shall give him his hire; neither shall the Sun go down upon
it, for he is poor, Deuteronomy. 24.14. etc. This you may understand of the Covenant
servant, hired a year; who was to be paid quarterly, or yearly, as was
conditioned: Tob. 4.14. Let not the wages of any man which has wrought for
thee, tarry with thee, but give it him out of hand; the hired servants had
bread enough, and to spare, Luke 15.17. Bread, that is all things sufficient,
and competent; in which regard, the Prodigal son resolved within himself,
to bespeake his father thus; Make me as one of thy hired servants, ver. 19. The
faithful and wise Steward, Ruler of the household, was to give them their
portion of meat, in due season, Luke 12.42. and blessed he was for doing so,
ver. 43. he was not to beat the Menservants, and Maidens, ver. 45. the
Steward was to call the Laborers to give them their hire; even, in the Evening
of the same day, Matthew. 20.8. and among hired servants, some had more favor,
than others, ver. 14. One difference more there was, between the hired
servants, and the bondmen: Bondmens children or Captives: the hired servants
might not be compelled, or enforced, to be circumcised. Maymoinides says, if a
Jew bought a manservant of the Heathen, he might retain his servant, a whole
year, though he were uncircumcised then if he would not be circumcised he must
sell him again to his Heathen-Master; but if the servant, whilst he was with
the Heathen conditioned, and articled with the Jew; that he should not force
him to be circumcised; then the Master might keep his new servant still, in the
uncricumcision; but if the servant bought with money, had these privileges,
the hired servant was much more free; Religion in people of full years, and
discretion, and of a degree approaching to liberty, was not to be enforced; but
their souls were left free, and they were to have it by election, and choice,
without violence, or coaction. But the Jewish gloss of Maymonides, in my
opinion, corrupts the Text; sure I am, God said to Abraham, Genesis 17.13. He
that is borne in thine house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs
be circumcised (...) Himmol, Immol, Circumcidedo, circumcidentur, ver. 12. Why
the children of Abraham should prefer the Covenant, between Master and Man,
before the Covenant between God and Abraham, I see no reason: As sure it is,
Abraham circumcised Ishmael, and all his servants, as God commanded, ver. 23.:
Wherefore, not only they, that were bought with money, and the Captives (whose
condition was all one) were to be circumcised; but Omnis servus, dominatus;
every son of the bondsman, or of the Captives, all their children, and
childrens children, that were Masculine, were to be circumcised, and were
circumcised, Genesis 17.12. these Vernae or Vernaculi, household slaves, commonly
with us called Villains; whose tenure is said to be in villenage, had no wrong
to be circumcised, on the eight day: for if Abraham did circumcise his own
children; should he spare his bond children? If he circumcised himself, should
his servants escape? If he were content, should they complain? The children
were young, and it was a deed of charity, to bring them within the Covenant;
the men were of age sufficient; and it was honor to them, to be of the family
of Abraham, and to have the seal of God: All were to be circumcised, except
the hired servant, whom they used for their need; but had little, or no
propriety in him, or to his person, but rather to his labor.

PAR. 2.
MAymonides again is awry, and wringeth blood from the Text, whilst he
voucheth, that Circumcision was appointed to Abraham, and his seed only; Thou
and thy seed after thee, Genesis 17.9. The seed of Ishmael was not bound, says
he, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, Genesis 21.12. Esau also, says he,
was excepted from Circumcision; for Isaac said to Jacob, Genesis 28.4. God give
thee the blessing of Abraham, even to thee, and thy seed with thee: but the
Jewish Doctor did forget, that Abraham circumcised Ishmael, and that the
succeeding seed of Ishmael were circumcised; he forgot also, that Abraham did
circumcise all bought with his money, Genesis 17.23. and yet the Jew dares not
say, all they were of the seed of Abraham: He forgot thirdly, that Abraham
circumcised all; all the men in the house, borne in the house, ver. 29. Were
those home-borne slaves of the seed of Abraham? Fourthly, he forgot, that Esau
was cicumcised; concluding Isaac to be a breaker of Gods Law, by omitting his
young son Esau his Circumcision. Epiphanius, de mensur a, and ponderibus,
about the middle of the book (as I proved in my Sermon, at the readmission of
a relapsed Christian, into our Church from Turcisme, and is entitled, A
return from Argier) Epiphanius, I say, acknowledges Esaus Circumcision and
says, the Jews themselves do father the invention of that Attractory
instrument, whereby circumcision was made, in effect, uncircumcision, upon the
wicked Esau, and his first practice on himself. Lastly, the Jewish Rabbi forgot
that the Esauites, or: Edomites were circumcised, and therein imitated their
father. As for the places of Scripture tortured by Maymonides; this may be said
of them, concerning that place, Thou and thy seed; I say no Jew shall ever be
able to prove them spoken, Quoad externas omnes ceremonias, exclusive, and
absolute for many Proselytes came into the Jewish Church, and were circumcised:
Secondly, if you take the word naturally, for the seed, and generation, which
flowed from Abraham, Ishmael was of the seed, and Ishmael was circumcised; and
the Jew should prove, which he cannot, that no Ishmaelite was circumcised. The
next objection is; in Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is, called to be
more blessed, more holy, more preferred, more prosperous in this world, more
beneficial to others, for the world to come; from Isaac, and his seed shall
Christ come; yet Christ came of Ruth the Moabitesse, who was of the seed of
Lot; I know not that ever he came from any Ishmaelite; the Apostle, Gal. 3.16.
interprets thus; he says not, unto seeds as of many, but as of one; and to thy
seed, which is Christ. Lastly, Isaac said to Iacch (as in the Jews objection)
God give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and thy seed with thee? I
answer, Gal. 3.14. S. Paul applies the Blessing of Abraham Thus; That the
blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentles through Jesus Christ; and so it
did; for Christ came not from Esau, but Jacob: Secondly, the blessing of
Abraham was, the promise that he should be the heir of the world, Romans 4.13.
This indeed befell not Ishmael, or Esau; but Isaac, and Jacob, and their seed,
yea the Apostle says expressly, Romans 4.9.10.11. Blessedness came not upon
the circumcision only, but upon the uncircumcision also. So much for answer
to Maymonides his crotchet; whereof, the one part may satisfy any Jew; and the
other part any Christian.

PAR. 3.
I Must now proceed to distinguish of strangers also; for strangers, in the
beginning of this point seem to be; both rejected from the Passover; and
admitted to the Passover; which some reconcile thus. In civil things was one
Law both for Jews, and strangers; but say I, these were matters of Religion;
and so we have but slippery footing: secondly, Exodus 12.48. concerning not a
civil business, but about taking of the Passover it self; it is said, One
Law shall be to him that is home-borne, and unto the stranger that sojourneth
among you. Wherefore, I hold it best, to fetch the beginning of mine answer a
far off, that it may be more fit: there were three sorts of strangers, in the
Jewish government; 1. the mere Alien. 2. the Concerning this sojourning or
Forrenour, strangers in the business of eating the Passover: see Chap. 9.
Pargra. 10.
Forraigner. 3. the Sojournour, or the Profeselyte.
The mere Alien was also of two sorts: first, such an one, who would make no
manner of profession of holiness; no conformity, either with the Jew or other
holy Patriarchs doctrine, before the days of Abraham: and such the Jews might
not converse withal; but slew them every one, as unworthy to breath, or live,
so soon as he was descryed, or known. The second sort of mere Aliens, were
such as acknowledged the Law of Nature; and kept the tradition of Adam, and
Noah; and lived in a fair way of Religion, though discrepant from the Jew.

The Jews say, Adam gave these six Precepts to be kept for ever. 1. The first
against Idolatry, against the adoring of Sun, Moon, and Stars; and against
Images; To this the two first Commandments may be reduced. 2. The second was,
against the blaspheming of the Name of God; our third Commandment contains
this; for if we may not take the name of God in vain; much less may we
blaspheme the Name of God; and the blasphemer of the Name of the Lord, was
stoned, Levit. 24.11.14. 3. The third Precept, say the Jews, of Adam was
against bloodshedding: it may be this was given, upon the murder of Abel; if
sooner, Cain had the greater sin: to this accords our sixth Commandment,
Thou shall do no murder. 4. The fourth Precept of Adam was opposed to unjust,
carnal copulations; our seventh Commandment is correspondent to this. 5. The
fifth traditionaty mandate of Adam was against stealing; and to that our eighth
Commandment answers exactly. 6. The last supposed Precept of Adam, was a
charge to punish male-factors.
But what needs this Precept, say I, when the breach of any Commandment, had
intentionally the punishment annexed to it, to be inflicted on the malefactor?
Noah gave a seventh Commandment, say the Jews, and it was this, not to eat
the blood. It is true that God commanded Noah, Genesis 9.4. Flesh with the life
thereof which is the blood thereof shall ye not eat; but every precept which
was given to a Patriarch, was not commanded by the Patriarch to others; much
less to all others, for to be observed for ever: if the heathen should not
yield to observe all these Laws, the Jews did interdict them; yea, flew them
outright, as hated Atheists, and professed enemies of God; the murder of whom
was a pleasing sacrifice of God Almighty. If the heathen were content to make a
profession to these points of Religion, though they kept a loofe off, from the
other parts of the Jewish Credo; yet they dwelt among the Jews, and sojourned
in their land; and were the Aliens, or mere strangers, who were not yet
admitted to the Jews Passover: I have made the best of these Jewish subtle
speculations: but in truth the Law of Moses is but a branch of the Law of
Nature; and both Gentiles and Jews had all the Law of Nature, written in their
hearts, though some more plainly, others more obscurely.

PAR. 4.
THe Author of that excellent work, whosoever he was, called a Pattern of
Catechisticall Doctrine, Page 122. etc. shows, first, that the Jews had the
effect of every Commandment in them, before the Law, as 1. Genesis 35.2. Put away
the strange gods. 2. Genesis 31.34. Idols; Genesis 35.5. Earerings. 3. Genesis 25.3.
Swear by the Lord God of Heaven. 4. Genesis 2.3. And Exodus 16.23. Rest of the
Sabbath. 5. Genesis 27 41. Days of mourning for my Father. 6. Genesis 4.9. Cain
hides his killing of Abel. 7. Genesis 38.24. The whore Thamar to be burnt, and
34.3. 8. Genesis 44.7. God forbid we should steal. 9. Genesis 38.20. Judah kept
promise, not lying, or deceiving by untruth's. 10. Genesis 12.17. and 20.3. It was
sin to look on a woman, with lust after her. Vide (si libet) plura hac de Re,
apud Nicolaum Hemmingium, in libro de lege Naturae. Secondly, not only the
Jews, but the Gentiles also had the same law by Nature in their hearts; though
some of the Commandments, more manifestly, than other some, Manifestly six,
namely, the 3.5.6.7.8.9. Somewhat obscurely, four, as 1.2.4.10.



For the most manifest Commandments; the third was a Law of the Egyptians, as
Diodorus Siculus faith, (...), swear not, nisi morieris, lest thou dye; let me
add, (...), He who swears, and names, Eccles. 23.11. for Reverence to the
Name of God; this word [God] is not in the Greek, but wholly forborne; nor in
Hentenius, and Santandreanus; though the Bishops Bible, and our late
Translation have expressed it, according to the sense, without difference of
Character; and though the precedent verse does necessarily cause it to be
understood of God. Drusius on the place thus; the Jews do so scrupulously, if
not superstitiously observe the precept, that they do not write in their
letters, the name of Elohim, which name yet is communicated to the Creatures;
but the proper Name of God, they called Jehovah, which they call (...), or the
word of four Letters; they are so far from naming; that they know not this
day, how it is to be read, or pronounced. Furthermore, it is very likely, that
the Heathen imitated the Jews; for the Religious among them did forbear to
speclalize, (...) but contented themselves with the reserved sense and
understanding, saying only, (...) so Suidas. The fifth, Homer says of one,
that had a misfortune, it was Quia parents non honoravit, because he honored
not his Parents: the fixed is a Rule even in Nature, Homicida, quod fecit,
expectet, let the murderer expect murder: the seventh Stephanas, out of
Nicostratus, Fuge nomen moechi, si mortem fugies; avoid Adultery, as thou
would death: the eighth Demosthenes against Timocrates, repeateth it as
Solons Law, in the very words; Thou shall not steal. The ninth in the twelve
tables, Tarpeio saxo dejieatur, cast him down from a high rock, who gives
false testimony. For those they had somewhat obscurely. For the first,
Pythagoras said; if a man come and say, I am God, let him create another world,
and we will believe him. For the second they agreed, that every god should be
worshipped, as he himself thought good; and this is the very foundation of the
second Commandment. For the fourth, little can be found; but sufficient for
their condemnation; they know that numerus septenarius est Deo gratissimus, the
number of seven is most pleasing unto God, and it was numerus quietis, a
number of rest; and thence they might have gathered, that God would have his
rest that day: and so says the Doctor the seventh day after birth, they kept
exequiae; and the seventh day after death, the funeral; which words were
mistaken, or mis-printed: the tenth their Laws never touched, yet the scope of
them was, (...), non concupiscere, Thou shall not covet; and Menander says,
they should not covet so much as a button; so he most deeply and divinely.

PAR. 5.
ANd yet because the Author brings but one instance, and specially out of the
Roman Laws; I hope mine ensuing discourse will not be ill accepted, by the
intelligent Critic; but he will taste of my gleanings; and thank God, and
pray for me, Tacitus ( Annal. 3.) says the twelve Tables were compounded, and
made ac citis quae usquam egregia fuerunt, from Greece and other parts. Indeed
there were at first but ten tables of the Roman, answerable to the number of
Gods Laws, being only ten: afterward, the Decem-viri added two tables more,
quae leges Romanorum proprias continebant, which contained the proper Laws of
the Romans; the ten Tables being taken from other Cities, and Lawmakers; and
as by the sequel will appear, principally from the laws of God: that the
Sibyllae were well acquainted with the Jewish affairs, is most apparent; that
the Romans esteemed the Sibylline books, as the Oracles of God; the Romans
themselves do confess; and the keeping of them Tarquinnius Superbus committed
Duo-viris, sive Duumviris Sacrorum, who were the most eminent Patricians; but
because Marcus Tullius gave Petronius Sabinus leave to transcribe that book,
which contained Secreta civilium sacrorum, the Mysteries of the civil Laws;
Tarquinius caused Marcus Tullius to be so wed up in a sack, and cast into the
Sea. To conclude, by what streams soever, the Romans had their Laws,
conveyed, or derived unto them; most certain it is, the fountains, and
heads of their Laws, they had from the Law of God; Phocylides writes so many
divine passages, that you may imagine, he was acquainted with Moses, or his
Law; and so did diverse of the Greek Poets, in whom the Romans were well
versed.

PAR. 6.
TErtullian ( Apologet. cap. 45.) Scitis ipsas leges quoque vestras, quae
videntur ad innocentiam pergere, de divinalege, ut antiquiore, formam mutuatas;
which words of Tertullian, since neither Rhenanus, Pamelius, Cerda, Iunius,
Albaspinaeus, Regaltius, nor any other, ever explaned in particular; suffer me
to exercise my Tyrociny, that way; in amplifying this unperformed, this
unattempted passage: Cicero ( lib. 1. de Oratore) brings in Crassus strongly
thus avouching; fremant omnes licet, dicant quodsentio; Bibleothecas mehercule
omnium Philosophorum, unus mihi videtur 12. Tabularum libellus, si quis legum
fontes, and capita viderit, and authoritatis pondere, and utilitatis ubertate,
superare: Take exception, who will, I will speak what I think, assuredly,
that one little book of the 12. Tables, if a man have recourse to the
headsprings of the Laws, is to be preferred before the Libraries of all the
Philosophers, both by the strength of its authority; and abundance of benefit.
Well Rhetorized Tully; you knew some would chafe at your Hyberbolicall strain;
and labored to prevent it, by fathering it on Crassus: Tully knew what
belonged to an Orator, Rhetori concessum est, sententiis utifalsis, audacibus,
subdolis, captiosis, simodo verisimiles sint, and possint ad movendos animos
hominum, qualicunque astuirrepere, says Aulus Gellius (1.6.) A Rhetorician may
lawfully use any false presumptuous, subtle, captious passages, so long as
they carry with them some color of truth, and can cunningly wimble themselves
into men's minds, by way of persuasion: now, not only -- pictoribus, atque
Poetis, but even to Rhetoricians, quidlibet audendi semper datur aequa potestas;

Paynters in paynting, Poets in Poetry,
Have always had an equal liberty.
It must needs be acknowledged that the Romans had a very high esteem of
them; and even till Cicero his time, the Roman youth did learn them by heart;
discebamus pueri duodecim Tabulas, ut carmen necessarium (not as our children
do, idlesongs) yet presently after, Cicero (2. de legibus) confesses, Nemo
eas jam discit, so that that custom ceased in Cicero his age: other learned
men do differ from Tully, and Crassus: Yet Alexander ab Alexandro ( Genesis dier.
6.10.) says, some of them are made parumconsulte, and nimis severe; quaedam
duriter, and inhumane; multa velut immitia, and agrestia refellenda sunt; multa
incuriose, and subrustice, partim insolenter, nonprobabili, nec recto judicio,
eademlege decreta videntur, and constituta; that is, some of them are made
inconsiderately, and too too severely; some are to harsh, and inhumane; many
things are to be repealed, as savouring of too much cruelty, and barbarity;
many things in the same law, seem to be decreed, and established carelessly,
and rudely; and partly, in an unusual strain, without probability, without a
rectifyed judgment. This was a ridiculous Law of the 12. Tables, si injuriam
alterifaxit, viginti quinque aeris, poenae sunto, that is, if one man do offer
an injury to anorher, let him be ammerced 25. pieces of money: an impudent
fellow on L. Nerutius delighted to strike men in the faces, and presently his
man had in readiness 25. pieces of brass to satisfy them; which was in all
about a groate: and Phavorinus, in Gellius ( Noct. Attic. 20.1)) finds fault
with diverse other: I must confess that I am sorry, that all the world cannot
produce the whole and entire twelve Tables, that we might the better judge of
them; or the coppies of them; though some say, the writings of Hermodorus the
Ephesian, the first interpreter of the Decemvirall Laws, are extant; yet these
threescore and ten years, since Alexander ab Alexandro related this; we cannot
find them, not in these searching and most learned days. The points which
concerned public Religion are almost wholly lost; it may be the latter Romans
dealt with the Laws of their devout Numa; and with part of the Ius Papirianum;
as the former Romans did, with those books of Numa; which they found buried
by himself; and being taken up, diverse hundred years after his death; when
they were informed that they were discordant from the then professed Religion,
they burned them. If they had been kept transcribed and published; I confess,
I had rather have seen them, then all the Triumphall monuments, that ever were
brought into the Capitol. It may be they perished, when Rome was sacked;
wherefore you may not expect a Total conformity to the first Table of Moses
his Law; yet observe some remnants tending that way: Cicero ( de devinat. lib.
1.) Romulus made a Law, that noe man should be ushered into the throne either
of Kings, or Magistrates, but by Heavenly approbation. Cicero (2. de leg.) has
diverse Laws touching Religion (it is likely from Numa) separatim nemo habessit
Deos, neve novos, sive advenas, nisi public ad-scitos, privatim colunto; let
not any man deify new gods, or strange gods; nor privately worship any, but
those publicly received. How little do these differ from the first
Commandment, Exodus 20.3. Non habebis Ders alienos coram me, Thou shall have
none other gods but me: and these words of the second Commandment, Exodus 20.5.
Non adorabis, neque coals ea; Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship
them; nor had they Images, in Numa his time (if my memory fail me not) Carmeli
Deus colebatur, cui nec Templum erat, nec simulachum; sed aratantum, et divinus
cultus; that is, the God of mount Carmel had neither Temple, nor Image; but
only an Altar erected unto him, and was Worshipped with divine worship, as
Alexander ab Alex. (4.17.) That on the by. And whereas the letter of the Law
ran, Sacra privata perpetuo manento, Cicero ( ibid, interprets that the Fathers
should teach their Children, and derive unto them their received Religion.
Franciscus Baldwinus Iurisconsultus (In lib. de legibus Romuli) cites this as
the fixth; deorum fabulas, necredunto, let them not believe the Poets fables,
concerning the Gods: and as the seventh, Dees peregrines, praeter Faunum ne
colunto, let them worship no strange gods, but Faunus. Romulus did think, the
Fables which the Ancients reported of the gods, containing their sins, and
shame, to be filthy, unprofitable, mis-beseeming good men; much more the gods:
suffering nothing to be ascribed unto them, but what was agreeable to their
happy Nature, (...): Si dii vitiosa faciunt, non sunt dii. Answerably
Euripides, in Bellerophonte: how greeable is this to our third Commandment?
Non assumes nomen domini tui in vanum, Exodus 20.7. Thou shall not take the Name
of the Lord thy God in vain: did not they take their gods Names in vain, who
told of their adulteries, incests, rapes, murders, and the like odious and
shameful things, which Romulus forbad? Which rectified Nature abhorrerh, the
very mention of, and corrupted Nature delights in, as a provocative of sin,
and a defense of it; what is to take their gods name in vain, if this be not?

PAR. 8.
A Gain, concerning the Sabbath days Service, they had a resemblance of it:
the great Rigaltius has these words from Tertullians first book ad Nationes,
cap. 13. Vos certe estis, qui etiam in laterculum septem dierum, solemn
recepistis, and ex diebus ipsum praelegistis, quo die, lavacrum subtrabatis,
aut in vesperam differatis, aut otium, and prandium curetis, quod quidem
facitis, exorbitantes and ipsi a vestris ad alienas religiones; that is, you
certainly are they, who have received Sunday into your register; and
fore-chose that day especially; on which day you bath not, or bath late, you
give your selves to ease, and eating; which you do, wheeling off from your
own, to other men's Religions. But sure Rigaltius is amiss; for the learned
Jacobus Gothofredus, from whom Rigaltius had Agobardus his manuscript of
Tertullion, in stead of ipsum has it ipsorum: and the true sense is this; you
assuredly are they, who have received Sunday into your Calender, or Registry;
for, one of the Seven days of the week; and out of those days have chosen
one; on which day ye bath not you selves, or defer bathing till night; or
give your selves to rest and good cheer, which ye do in imitation of other
Religions: the sum of the controversy is; Rigaltius intimates, that the
Roman Sunday was to them, as the Jewish Sabbath: Gothofredus accounts their
Saturday, called Dies Saturni, to be, as their Sabbath; which is the truest
opinion: Gothofredus, in his notes on that Chapter, among many other excellent
things, observes; that Tertullian compares the Gentiles keeping of their
Saturday; as the Christians keep the Lords day. First, by their not coming at
all to their bath, that day. Secondly, or coming late, (some Colonies
anniversarily clothed with sacke-cloth, sprinkled with ashes, pray to their
Idolles; their shops, and Bathes shut up, till near nine, says he ( adversus
Psychicos, cap. 16.) their nine is all one, with our three of the clock, in
the afternoon: Thirdly, he compares the rest, and the banqueting of the
Gentiles on their dies Sabbathi or Saturday, with the rest and banqueting of
the Christians, on our Lords day; quare ut ab excessu revertar; qui solemn, and
diem ejus nobis exprobratis, agnoscite vicunitatem, non long a Saturno, and
Sabbatis vestris sumas; wherefore, that I may return from my diversion; you
Gentiles, who cast into the teeth of Christians, the adoring of the sun, from
their strict observation of the Sunday; confess that you, and we disagree very
little; we keep our Sabbath's, on Sundays; ye, on Saturnes-dayes, or
Saturdayes: the day of the Lord, or Sunday is (...), says Isidorus Pelusiota,
in his Epistles; a day of rest, and remission; the word [(...)] is sometime
taken, in an ill sense; here it is not; the Apostle complains he had no
(rest) in his spirit, (...), 2 Cor. 2.13. or it may be taken for bodily Rest,
and repose; 2 Cor. 7.5. (...), our flesh had no rest; or it may be taken for
liberty, opposed to durance, so S. Paul, Act. 24.23. had (liberty) that his
friends might come unto him, was permitted (...). Gothofredus might have
observed another parallel, in the beginning of the chapter; alii solemn
Christianum Deum aestimant; quod innotuerit ad orientis partem, facere nos
precationem; vel, die solis laetitiam curare; quid vos minus facitis? nonne
plerique affectione adorandi, aliquando etiam coelestia, ad solis initium,
labra vibratis? some others say, the Sun is the God of the Christians, because
it is commonly known; we pray toward the East; and are merry, and refresh our
selves on Sundays; you are like to us; you do little less; most of you
affecting the adoration, sometimes of heavenly things, at Sun rising, do
mutter, or pray; he says not, in die solis; but, ad solis initium; or (as it
is varied in cap. 16. Apologet.) ad solis ortum; and this they practiced as
well on any other day, as Sunday; for Sunday was not their holyday, or Sabbath
day, but Saturday which I marvel that the great Rigaltius erred in, for these
considerations. First, that the same Chapter affords diverse passages, that
Saturnes day was, as it were the Gentiles Sabbath; therefore their Sunday was
not so. Secondly, that Gothofredus from Josephus ( lib. 2. contra Appione^) and
from Clem. Alexandrinus (5. Strom.) had before hand published, Saturni Diem,
seu Sabbatum, otio, and quieti ubique Gentium, Iudaeorum imitatione assignatum
fuisse; that Saturnes day or Saturday was the Sabbath, or resting day of the
Gentiles in all places, which they borrowed from the Jewish custom. Thirdly,
Tertullian in his Apologeticke, (which is an elucidary to the books, ad
Nationes; and the amplified, and refined comment on them) cap. 16. has it;
Aeque si diem solis laetitiae indulgemus, alia long ratione, quam religione
solis, secundo loco ab iis sumus, qui diem Saturni otio, and victui decernunt;
if we indulge and be merry, on Sunday; we do it not in any religion to the
Sun; or its day, as the day of the sun, but as the Lords day; and we are
alike, or next to those, who consecrate aturnes day to repast, and rest.
Fourthly, Sidonius like wise ( Epist. 2. l. 1.) acknowledges so much; that the
Gentiles kept Festival the day of Saturn, and terms their profuseness,
luxum Sabbatarium. I am sure, the Noble and holy Lady Paula (in S. Hieromes
time) and her company, even on the Lords day; after Sacred services were ended;
vel sibi, vel caeteris indumenta faciebant; as reformed Churches abroad do
seem to confine the Sabbaticall day to the Sabbaticall exercises; as
witnesses Hierome ( ad Eustochium, Epist. 27.) and esteem us little better
than Jews, for our strict sabbatizing: Also her (feasts) were turned into
mourning, and her Sabbaths into reproach, for Antiochus Epiphanes had by
letters commanded, that they should profane the Sabbaths, and Festival days,
1 Mac. 1.39. etc. Yea, many Israelites profaned the Sabbath, ver. 43. Augustine
( de Civitate Dei, 6.11.) usque eo sceleratissimae gentis consuetudo convaluit,
ut per omnes jam terras recepta sit, victi victoribus leges dederunt, that is,
the custom of that most wicked Nation has been so prevalent, that it is now
generally received almost by all Nations, the vanquished have given Laws to
the vanquisher: these words does S. Austin cite out of Seneca, of the general
observation of the Jewish Sabbath. Fifthly, Philo (in his book, de vita Mosis)
glories, that all the Eastern people kept their Sabbath, forgetting that the
Chaldaeans did mock at the Sabbaths of Jerusalem, in the days of Jeremy the
Prophet, Lam. 1.7. Sixthly, Macrobius ( Saturnal. 1.7.) at the end affirms,
that the Saturnalia were more ancient, than the City of Rome: that Macrobius
speaks not of the weekly sacrifices, I confess, but his Authors words may
mean more, than he did: Lucius Accius, in his Poetical Annalls, thus, Maxima
Pars Graium Saturno, and maximae Athenae
Conficiunt sacra, --
that is, The Greatest part of Greece, yea Athens hight,
To Saturn on his day, their incense light.
Cumque diem celebrant, per agros, urbesque fere omnes,
Exercent epulis laeti. --
that is, And when both town and Country, their holiday do keep,
They most an end do feast it, until they go to sleep.


Every Saturday, their Servants might rejoice with them. He farther relates
from Cicero, Septenarium numerum rerum omnium fere modum esse, that the number
of seven is the measure almost of all things. The very vast Ocean observes this
number, the first day of the Moons tining, the Ocean is more full, than
usual, it decreaseth somewhat on the second day, the third day leaves it
less, and daily it diminishes, to the seventh day, the eighth day is like the
seventh, the ninth equalleth the sixth, the tenth day answers to the fifth,
the eleventh to the fourth, the twelfth to the third, the thirteenth to the
second, the fourteenth day is as the first day. So much for the two first
weeks; till the full of the Moon: the third week the Ocean keeps his course,
according to the first week, and the fourth week does as the second did: and
so the weeks and months run round with the Ocean. Seventhly Seneca ( Epist.
95. somewhat past the middle) confesses they did accendere lucernam Sabbatis,
light their Tapers on the Sabbath days, and faulting them, for so doing;
because nor God wants light, nor men take pleasure in the steame, or stench of
Lamps, or Candles; confesses withal, their Religious observation of the
Sabbaths, by the Romans, for the point was, quo modo d^ sint colendi? How God
ought to be worshipped? Tibullus, ( lib. 1. Eleg. 3. page 84.) is firm proof,
that he observed Saturnes day, as the holy day; whether we read it, as it is,
in the body of his works. Saturni, aut sacram me tenuisse diem,
that is, Or that unto Saturnus old,
I used his holy day to hold.


Or, whether it be, as Joseph Scaliger the Prince of Critickes, in his
Castigations on the place, says, it is better -- Omnia dira Saturni Sacrame
tenuisse die,
that is, Or that to Saturn, on his day,
I used to feast, to pray, to play.


Thus much with Gothofredus, and the most learned Cerda, against Rigaltius his
needless alteration of Tertullian, by which the day of the Sun, or Sunday,
is unjustly made to be the Gentles day of rest, or Sabbath, which indeed was on
their Saturday: and yet, if Rigaltius his reading, be supposed to be the best,
it affords Testimony; that the Gentiles had some knowledge of the weekly
honor, due to God, one day or other; in that they observed a Sabbath The
return to this Point, after the ensuing digressions, you shall find below,
Paragraph the 9. Chap. 9
which reaches proof enough to my maine intention.

I cannot yet end the business of the Lords Day, but have diverse of mine own
observations to set down, and come nearer to the purpose: the controversy
against the Sabbatarians; concerning both the day, and the Recreations then
lawful; has been so unanswerably handled, by Bishop White, and other most
learned Doctors, that much cannot be added; somewhat shall, in a mixed way; nor
will I blot out mine own observations, though others also have lighted on some
of them. First then, I say, the Sabbatarians do grossly, and infantiliter,
childishly expound S. Austin; whilst they would violently hale him to their
sides, against all manner of Recreations; and nothing is more common, than S.
Augustines authority produced against any Recreation, on the Lords Day: I
profess his authority moved me much; till I read him himself, and saw him
misunderstood, even by great ones, and chief among the Sabbatarians.

The first place is on the enarration of the 91. Psalm, on the Preface of the
Psalm, Melius est arare (in Sabbato) quam saltare; It Is better to go to Plow,
than dance on the Sabbath Day; but S. Augustine speaks of the Jewish Sabbath,
or Saturnes day, of the first day after the creation, when God is said to rest:
Let me add unto him; To Plow on that Sabbath, the Jewish Sabbath was not
amiss in a Christian, but to Dance on the Jewish Sabbath, was an approving of
the old first Sabbath, and as it were a renouncing of the Christian Sabbath.
See the place who will, and he shall find that S. Augustine spoke not of the
Lords Day, or Dies solis, Sunday, nor of the Christians day of rest, properly;
but of the Metaphorical spiritual Sabbath of the daily Sabbath, or rest of a
good conscience; view his words, In cord est Sabbathum nostrum, multi enim
vacant membris, and tumultuantur conscientia, Omnis homo malus Sabbatum habere
non potest, ipsa tranquillitas, Sabbatum est cordis; our Sabbath is kept in our
heart; for many have bodily rest, who are troubled in conscience; an evil man
has no Sabbath; Inward tranquillity is the Sabbath of our heart. What is this
to the question of the Lords day? His words there are these; Ecce, and
hodiernus dies Sabbati est, hune in praesenti tempore, ot^ quodom corporaliter
languido, and fluxo, and luxarioso celebrant Iudai, Behold, even this day is
the Sabbath day: The Jews keep this day, at this present time, idly,
lazily, and luxuriously, so he: But our question is concerning the Lords Day,
the memorial not of the Creation, but of Christ's Resurrection, which S.
Augustine does not name, nor mean, not so much as point at, nor the least way
censure, for fair Recreations in this place.

The second place extorted from S. Augustine, is in his Book, De december chordis,
cap. 3. almost at the beginning, It is in his tenth Tome, and is thus cited by
Zepper, Legum Mosaicarum Forenstum, 4.9. Satius est operari, quam spectaculis
interesse, mulieres nere, quam tota die, impidice saltare? I answer,

First, I find not those words, in that Book, Satius est operari, quam
spectaculis interesse: Secondly, if Augustine has said so, the beholding of
bloody spectacles (which were in viridi observantia, in greatest request, and
permitted most even by some Christian Emperors) was sinful in it self, and
condemned by many Fathers, and reaches not against fair recreations, post
sacra peracta, after Service is ended. Thirdly, the words indeed are thus
truly translated. It is said to thee, that thou spiritually observe the
Sabbath, not as the Jews; who observe the Sabbath, by being carnally idle,
applying their minds, to trifling toys, and luxury; a Jew should do better,
to go about his profit, in his ground, then (inthesauro) in the Exchequer, or
perhaps in his Counting House, to be seditious, and their women, on the Sabbath
day (or the women on the Sabbath day) the words will bear it, were better
card, and spinne, than impudently to dance, the whole day, in their new Moons:
but thou art spiritually to keep the Sabbath, in hope of future rest; which
God has promised thee, who does what he can, to obtain that rest, though it
seem laborious what he does; yet if he refer it to the faith of the promised
rest, he has not truly the Sabbath, in re, but in spe, not in possession, but
in hope: but thou will rest, that thou may labor, when thou ought to
labor, that thou may rest. So far he. The like he has toward the later
end of the first Chapter. Observe, First, he speaks of the Christians
spiritual Sabbath, with an eye looking forward, to the eternal promised
Sabbath of Sabbaths, as he phrazeth it in his first Chapter. Secondly, he
speaks of the Jewish carnal Sabbath, he speaks not one word, of the Lords
Day, or Sunday, neither does he fault any recreations of Christians on that
day. Thirdly, he tells not, what a Christian, but what a Jew should do, not
simply, but comparatively, rather be busy, and profitable in his ground; than
seditious; and their women, rather card and spinne, than the whole day in their
Festivals, and Feastings to dance immodestly, but what are their new Moons,
and solemn Iewes-feasts to us Christians? They shamefully wrong S. Augustine,
and wrong the unlearned Readers, who produce this testimony, to confute
seemly recreations, of Christians, on the Lords Day, after the holy Service is
ended. Fourthly, let the indifferent judge, whether S. Augustines later
passages, in this testimony, do not rather afford a patrociny for labor, than
the former words did condemn fit refreshings.

Lastly, good Reader, when thou read in the Fathers, or from the Fathers,
ought concerning the Sabbath, I pray thee search, and examine, whether they
speak of the Jewish Sabbath, or of the Christian Quiet; very seldom do they
call the day of Christian rest properly to be Sabbatum: They do often say it
is (...), dies dominicus, our Lords Day, or Sunday. So much be said to
vindicate S. Augustine, from diverse too Iewishly addicted, in our days against
our lawful Sports.

Secondly, that most learned Prelate, the last Lord Bishop of Ely, cites
Theodoret on Ezechiel the 20. as saying, that no other Nations, but only the
Jews observed the Sabbath Day. He meant, no Nation kept the Sabbath, to the
same end, and with the same strictness that Jews did.

2. Indeed no Nation, but the Jews only kept the Sabbath at that time, which
Ezechiel speaks of, viz. at their coming out of Egypt, Ezech. 20.10. etc.
yet many Nations did afterward keep the Sabbath day.

3. No Nation kept it as a particular Law, and as a sign of a distinct
republique; as Israel did, Vt sit signum inter me, and ipsos, to be a sign
between me and them, says Theodoret in the very words of the text, ver. 12.
yet is he, Totius historiae ignarus, blind in all history, who denies, that
other Nations imitated the Jews, in observation of a Sabbath; In which regard,
the most reverend Prelate, (the Eye of our Times; and one, who for all
religious learning, may be called, Arca Foederis) In the same page 156. says,
If any Heathen did observe the Jewish Sabbath, they did it not, by the light of
natural reason, but by imitation of Gods people.

But because the living Library, in his Margin, in the same place, quoteth
Josephus, contra Appionem lib. 2. and Clemens Alexandrinus, ( stromat. 5.) as
denying Vrbem ullam Graecorum, sive Barbarorum ex Judaico ritu, adiei septini
cessatione ab opere suo, in suos mores suscepisse. That any city of the
Grecians, or Barbarians, did use the fashion of resting from their work on the
seventh day; from the custom of the Jews; I thus answer them, If they said,
and meaned, that the Jewish Sabbath, with all its circumstance, and severe
strictness (which the words, ex Iudaico titu, will well permit) was never
received by any Heathen cities, or by the immediate delivery of God, as the
Jews had it; then they are in the right; but particularly Josephus, in the
same Book, against Appion, declares the clean contrary, avouching that every
Nation, Greek or Barbarous, observed the Sabbath in imitation of the Jews;
and Clemens, Alexandrinus in the same cited book says expressly, (...).
Septimum diem esse, sacrum non solum sicut Hebraei, verum etiam Graci: Not
only the Jews, but the Gentiles also know, that the seventh day, is the holy
day, and he proves it by diverse reasons and authorities; but Clemens ibidem,
exceeds, when from Plato his tenth Book, de Repub. he would prove, that
Plato did fore-divine of the Lords day, page 437.

Again, though that Mundus eruditionis, that world of learning, says; the
Grecians and the Romans observed for resting days, the one, the eight day;
and the other, the ninth day, and says it well enough, to oppose the simple
Sabbatarians, who horribly incline to Iudaisme of late, and will not remember,
that the Jews, shall be turned to be Christians, but that the Christians
should be converted Proselytes of the Jews, was never foretold nor expected;
yet the most learned Lord Bishops words, if they be rightly printed, must be
interpreted of some of the Romans, and some of the Grecians; and not of the
greater part: Or secondly, of the extraordinary days of rest, and not of the
ordinary, and continued weekly Sabbath. Plutarch in the later end of Theseus
life, says indeed, the Athenians did make the solemnest, and chiefest
sacrifices unto Theseus, on the eight of October: and do further honor him,
every eight day of every month; but first, this was Athens alone: Secondly,
this honoring of Theseus, on the eight day, hindered not their other
observations of the seventh day, which they constantly, also kept, as I have
demonstated.

Thirdly, in the same place of Plutarch, it is said, they worshipped Neptune,
or did sacrifice to him on the eight day of every month, because the number of
eight is the first Cube, made of the even number, and the double of the first
squared, which reasons are ridiculous.

Lastly, as we have holy days, besides our Lords Day: so had they multitudes
of extraordinary Festivals, which were not properly, such days, of sacred
rest, as the Jews observed: Romish Pestivalls, on the Ides of their months:
See at large set down by Alexander ab Alexandro ( Genialium dierum, 3.18.)
singulis Idibus, says he) ibidem, which Ides jumpe not exactly, with every
eight day: a Gracis, singuli^ Calendis dii vener antur. The gods are worshipped
by the Grecians, every Calends. Macrobius in the like place, makes not the
ninth day a general rest; Indeed, says he, Nundina est Romanorum Dea, a nono
die nusceritium nuncupata: qui lustric^^ dicitur quo die infantes lustrantur,
and nomen accipiunt. Sed is maribus nonus: Octavus est faeminis; Nundina is a
goddess of the Romans, so called from the ninth day that infants were borne,
which day was called Lustricus, because on it children were purged, and first
named; but in men children it was the ninth day, in women children the eight
day; it may now be used for the Christning day, Idem Macrob. 1.11. Nonis Iuliis
diem festu^m esse ancillarum, vulgo notum est; it is commonly known, that the
Nones of July is maids holiday: Dio Cassius placing the weekly Sabbath among
the special observances of that Nation, does not say, that no other Nations
kept their Sabbath day, but rather points at this, the Sabbaths were given
more especially to the Jews; that they were the first Nation that kept the
Sabbaths, and generally and strictly observed them.

Secondly, the Sabbatarians, unto their forced expositions, invent lies that
they may further their seeming devotions; but God needs not man's lie to uphold
his truth. Who but the Father of lies suggested those horrid untruths, which
are published concerning the evils that befell upon Glastonbury, for
profaning the Sabbath, which the Inhabitants thereof, and we the neighbors
do know to be false, almost in every point.

Thirdly, is it not known generally, how dangerously many fell into Iudaisme,
and turned Traskites, the most ignorant of all Heretics? and would bury in the
Dunghill, chines of porke or puddings, or any swines flesh, which their
neighbors courteously bestowed upon them; they further bragged, they would
know the saved from the damned by their looks, the Lords day they regarded
not, and were as obstinate as the Jews, laughing at imprisonment, and
punishment, as a good poor man complained of his wife to me; and was it not
time, that the supreme Magistrate should look to them? If we consider the
Scripture of the new Testament, which must first be heard, we shall find that
Christ does not diminish, but rather augment the weight, force, and power of
diverse other commandments, concerning Murder, see the strictness, Matthew.
5.21. etc. and concerning Adultery, Matthew. 5.28. etc. and Matthew. 5.24. are
choice Rules for swearing; and for other matters in that Chapter; but he no
where commanded a more rigorous keeping of the Sabbath: Indeed he said, Matthew.
24.20. Pray, that your flight be not on the Sabbath; this evinceth not, that he
intended a stricter observation of the Sabbath, than the Jews admitted; but
sensu primo, his well-wishings were, that they might meet in their flight,
(which was to be both sudden, and remote, even out of Judea with no impediment)
either from their opinion of the Sabbath, who (then) thought, they might not
travel on that day, above two miles; which they accounted a Sabbaths days
journey, Act. 1.12. or from any other Crosses whatsoever; and that Christ
meaned not, in that place, to improve the strict Religion of the Sabbath,
fairly resulteth from the other words, in the first place; Pray that your
flight be not in the Winter, that is, cold, wet, stormy weather, or short
days; nor on the Sabbath, when ye are unprovided to fly, by reason of your
full bellies, and store of clothes, or your over-strict opinion; for in these
Cases, many more will dye, than if the flight were at other times. Mark 13.18.
He wholly leaves out the mentioning of the Sabbath; and only says, Pray ye,
that your flight be not in the Winter: when he mentions an impediment from
the Sabbath; himself means not, that it is unlawful, to fly farther than
two miles, to save ones life; but argues from their opinion, at (that) time:
but in all other places of Scripture, where he speaks of the Sabbath, though
the Mosaicall Law was then of force, and the Sabbath strictly to be observed;
he inveieth against the Jewish rigor, and reduces it to an (...): our Church
of England runs the same way, and is not Iewishly zealous. In a book of
Canons, Printed 1571, by John Day, page 15. It is said, Every Sunday and
holiday; the Parsons, Vicars, and Curates shall come to Church, so timely, and
conveniently, in due season; that the Parishioners, having done their
businesses, may come together, etc. Lo, a permittance of doing worldly
business, before they come to Church; and obiter, page 13. on other times, the
Parsons are to use their Bows, and shafts only: more to the former point; in
the advertisement made upon Queen Elizabeth's command, 1584. among the Articles
for administration of Sacraments, it is said; in all Faires and common Markets
falling upon Sundays, there shall be no showing of wares, before the service
be done. Lo, here also is no disallowing of showing wares, after service is
done; but rather an involved indulgence, and permittance. Besides, Christ
defended his Disciples, for plucking, and eating some ears of corn, which the
Pharisees condemned, Matthew. 12.1. but Christ proved the lawfulness thereof, by
David's eating the shewbread, in an exigent, which otherwise was unlawful,
ver. 3.4. Secondly, by the Priests, who profane the Sabbath, and yet are
blameless, ver. 5. by reason that Christ was greater, than the Temple, and
Lord even of the Sabhath day; which Lord accepts more of mercy, than of
Sacrifices, ver. 6.7.8. and not fearing their accusation, he both miraculously
healed the man's withered hand, on the Sabbath day; and since every one of them,
who should have a sheep fallen into a pit, on the Sabbath day, would lay hold
of it, and lift it out; how much better is a man, than a sheep? wherefore
says Christ, it is lawful to do well, on the Sabbath day, ver. 11.12. S.
Mark 2.27. adds remarkeably, The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for
the Sabbath: and S. Luke speaking of the same Story, says, Christ propounded
to them, this quick question; Is it lawful on the Sabbath day, to do good or
to do evil, Luke 6.9. apparently implying, that not to do a good work on
the Sabbath day, was to do evil. Again, when the Ruler of the Synagogue
answered with indignation, because Christ healed one, on the Sabbath day,
Christ called him hypocrite, Luke 13.25. confuting him, by his own, and their
general practice; Does not each one of you on the Sabbath, loose his Ox, or
his Ass from the Stall, and lead him away to watering? Observe first, nor Ox,
nor Ass can take much hurt, if they be not wrought, though they drink not,
from Sunrising. to Sunset; yet for covetousness, or for pity, they did
loose them: Secondly, they might have loosed them, though themselves had not
led them away, to the watering places; for Nature teaches beasts to know their
drinking places; but they would (lead) them away thither, which they needed
not; and being done for lucre, was certainly a breach of the Sabbath. And John
7.22. The Jews did on the Sabbath day, circumcise a man, about which they used
many Ceremonies, of preparation, of abscission, of washing, of stopping the
blood, and applying of salves to heal the would; though it were but one little
part, to be wounded, and made whole; and are ye angry with me, says Christ,
because I have made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath day? Every member of
his body; and I doubt not also, but he healed the ulcers of every ones (soul)
whose (bodily) parts he healed. In 1 Cor. 16.2. (...), is well translated, On
the first day of the week; on the Sabbath day, Christ did not take up already
made, but newly made clay, and healed the blind, Joh. 9.14. so that, not only
the main work of healing, or doing good; but all necessary, or convenient
helps, conducing thereto may be used, on the Sabbath day, without profanation
thereof; for Christ anointed his eyes, and sent him to the Poole Siloam, and
there he washed. Again, it is said, Matthew. 28.1. In the end of the Sabbath, as
it began to dawne, toward the first day of the week, and Mark 16.1. When the
Sabbath was passed; the words are most observeable, and may involve within
themselves; not only, that the Sabbath of that week, was at an end, and
passed; which was true, and no man questioneth; but even this deeper sense;
when Christ's rest in the grave had supplied, and substantiated the Typical
Sabbath, adumbrating his rest; for the Sabbaths were shadows of things to
come, but the body was Christ, Col. 2.17. and his Resurrection from the dead,
on the beginning of the first day, in the week, had given life to an holy rest
on the Lords day; then ended, and passed, not only the Sabbath of that week;
but all, and every Sabbath for ever, of the Mosaicall Law was abolished: Men
were no more obliged to them; when Christ arose, the Sabbaths lay down, and
began to taste of their eternal periods: as it was sin, not to have observed
the legal Sabbaths before; so after Christ's Resurrection; it had been a
greater sin, to observe it: the Ceremonial Law was languishing all Christ's
life; was dead, at Christ's death, in most things; but after his Resurrection,
and the promulgation of the Gospel was deadly. The next Sabbath day of the
Jewish Church, not after Christ's death immediately; yet after the Lords day was
consecrated, by Christ's Resurrection; was the first Sabbath, that was
needlessely kept, and continued: and now the Apostle, in the same place to the
Colossians, is bold to infer, that no man should judge them, in respect of an
holy day, or Newmoones, or of the Sabbath days, ver. 16. And if any had judged
of them amiss, they need not to esteem it: and in all the Apostolical
Writings, is no incitement to observe the Sabbaths any longer, but the Lords
day; which Christ himself chalked out unto us, by his oftener appearing on that
day, than on the Jewish Sabbaths: yea, but S. Paul, Romans 9.29. called God the
Lord of Sabbath; it should be read Sabbath, and the Apostle quoteth it, from
Esaias 1.9. Where it is Jehovah Tsebaoth, in the Original; in the Greek, as it
is in S. Paul; in the Latin, Dominus exercituum; and Jehovah exercituum, in
our English, The Lord of hosts, and so should be read, in Rom 9.29. for the
same words truly transtated, Iam. 5.4. The Lord of Sabbath, or the Lord of
Hosts; yea but, Act. 13.14. the Apostle went into the Synagogue, on the Sabbath
day and preached? and S. Panl, Act. 17.2. reasoned with them, three Sabbath
days? And again, Act. 14, 4. He reasoned in the Synagogue every Sabbath day?
I answer, the Apostles relapsed not to Iudaisme, but labored to convert the
Jews to Christianity, and reasoned, out of the Scriptures, to convert both
Jews and Gentiles unto Christ. Secondly, no (place) is excepted, but one may
(any where) endeavor the salvation of souls; and what place is fitter, than
the Church? or, where are men better prepared to receive instruction, than
there? Paul kept not the Jews Sabbath. These were my thoughts, when I read our
last, and best English Translation; but when I consulted with the Original,
Greek Text, Luke 18.12. I was more confirmed in mine opinion, (...), that is,
I fast twice in the week; there cannot be two fasts in one Sabbath, but in a
week, they might fast twice or more; and therefore Sabbatum, is there taken
for a week. (...)
Know then, the Hebrew Schabbath, and Schabbathon, have produced, with a milder
pronunciation, the Greek word (...). so used every where, both in the
Translation of the 70. and in the new Testament; thence issued the Latin
Sabbatum, and never Sabbathum, and does sometime signify a Week, according to
the Hebrew Idiotisme; and sometimes (...), is used for one Sabbath, Matthew.
12.1. and this Sabbatum is properly called the Sabbath of days. But
otherwhere, there is mention, of the (day) of the Sabbath, Luke 13.16. and Luke
14.4. yet (...), and (...), are all one, Luke 13.14. The Sabbath day is the
primary expression from the fourth Commandment; or the same day was the
Sabbath, Luk, 5.9. Much more may be said of the Sabbath, viz. as that the
Primitive Church, and holy Fathers, did seldom, or never call the Lords day,
the Sabbath day; and I could wish, we would follow their example. S. Augustine
(ad Ianuarium) says thus; in one place, men receive the Sacrament, on the
Sabbath, and on the Lords day; in another place, they take it only, on the
Lords day: Behold a maine difference between the Sabbath and the Lords day;
the Sabbath was not the Lords day; nor the Lords day the Sabbath; but they were
two distinct names, and things. Likewise, though (Morale) natural points out
only (a) set day, for the service of God; yet Morale disciplinae guides us to
do, as God our Teacher did prescribe, that is, on the seventh day to worship
him, rather than on any other day, though the Jewish Sabbath expired, at
Christ's death, yet one day in the week was the Lords. But I hasten to the
words, Matt. 28.1. (...), which is translated by most learned men; In the end
of the Sabbath, as it began to dawne, toward the first day of the week; but
the interlineary has it excellently, and properly, Vespere autem Sabbatorum,
in the Plural, Lucescenti in unam Sabbatorum; and this agrees with my
Interpretation; that not only that Hebdomal Sabbath was passed over, but all
the Jewish Sabbaths were now ended, and passed; none ever more needing to
observe them; when one of the Christian Sabbaths (as, in a good sense, they may
be called) or Holy Days began to dawne; which in other places is called the
Lords day, ( Drusius on that place) says, that a late Interpreter has turned
it, extremo Sabbato, or extremo Sabbatorum, as Illyricus has it, that is, as I
conceive, the last Jewish Sabbath, that ever was; though perhaps they
understood it not so In Mark 16.1. it is, (...), not only peracta die Sabati;
but peracto Sabbato; or, cum peractum Sabbatum transiret, says the
Interlineary. The end of one kind of Sabbath was the beginning of another; or
rather, the beginning of the Lords day, was the consummate end of all other
Sabbaths: If the publishing, the abrogation of the Mosaicall Sabbath, was not
intended by the Holy Ghost, by those words; I am much deceived; and yet herein
I submit my self to my Superiors. It might have been said, and would in all
likelihood; if it had been spoken only of the weekly Sabbath, viz. In the
end of the Sabbath, or, of the, or that Sabbath day; but, in the end of the
Sabbath, cannot but have reference, as the case stood, to the expiration of the
Moisaicall Sabbaths; the Latin Translations have it, Vespere Sabbathi: observe
the natural day, in the Jewish account, began at the Vespers; The (Evening)
and the morning were the first day, Genesis 1.5. and the Paschall day was both to
begin at Even, Exodus 12.18. and the Sabbath day among the rest, began at
Eventide; for it is said, from Even to Even, you shall celebrate your
Sabbath's, Levit. 23.32. And that was the reason, why the Jews besought Pilate
to have the legs of the Crucified broken, and that they might be taken away,
that the bodies might not remain, on the Cross, on the Sabbath day, Ioh.
19.31. Which it must have done, if they had not taken them down, before the
beginning of their Sabbath, by the Vespers: observe further, though (...) may
be truly, and literally interpreted, and is by some in un^m Sabbatorum; which
accords with, Genesis 1.5. Where it is said, and fuit Vespera, and fuit Mane,
Dies unus, as it is in the interlineary; yet I think, it may be better
interpreted, the first day, for indeed it was the first day of the world; and
the evening and the morning made the first day, says our last and best
Translation ( unum and primum often concur in one, and adhere together)
Vatablus agrees, ex Vespera, and Mane completus fuit Primus Dies; or, as
others have it, fuit Vespera, and fuit Mane diei primae; for instead of the
word (first) the Hebrew usurp the word (one,) Cardinalem numerum pro ordinali,
the principal for the initiall; the chief, for the first, in number, or
order; as if he had said, the (first day) was passed, so far Vatablus: If
therefore you read it, according to the letter, in the end of the Sabbath's,
as it began to dawne: in the first of the Sabbaths, (then you have the end of
the Jewish Sabbath, and the beginning of the Christian Sabbath) the last of the
old Sabbath's, and the first of the New Sabbath's, the Christian Sabbath
beginning in the Morning, the Jewish, at the Evening: observe in the third
place, that as every other Jewish Sabbath had one Vesper, and but one: so, this
last Sabbath that ever ought to be among them, had two Vespers, the first of
them ordinary, and usual, to make up a natural day; their Sabbath day
beginning with one Vesper, the other subsequent Vesper was ordained, to bury
their last Sabbath, that ever the Jews should have; their Sabbath was begun
with darkness, and ended with darkness, our Christian Sabbath began with
the dawning of the day, and with light; and cannot have two Vespers, their
latter Vespers being but half of a Natural day without light, and ending in
darkness: as their Law it self was obscure, and transitory, fuller of
pleights, and vayles than the Gospel: the Scripture being cleared that not the
Mosaicall Sabbath, with its strictness, and rigor, is now in force; but the
Lords Day in remembrance of Christ's Resurrection: what then was the Church to
do, but to abolish Judaisme, punish Traskisme, and animate the godly in good
courses?

PAR. 8.
AFter this long divagation; or extravagancie; that I may return with some
effect: I must cross two by-pathes, and therefore, I pray you suffer two
digressions more: one from the words of Tertullian, which shall not be
impertinent for these times; another in defense of Authority, for placing our
holy Tables at the East: Tertullian is so plain ( ad Nationes, 1.13.) quod
innotuerit, ad Orientis partem, facere nos precationem; or (as he after varied
it) quod innotuerit, nos ad Orientis regionem, precari ( Apologet. cap. 16.)
that is, It is commonly or certainly known, that we pray toward the East;
that Gothofredus justly refers: Some need not doubt any longer of that
point: Junius was much awry to think Tertullian spoke Ironically; and Gretzer
did well to reprehend, him for it: for not Tertullian alone but many other holy
learned Fathers, give in their verdict with Tertullian, that the Primitive
Church (to which we ought to conform even reformation it self) used to pray
toward the East, or bending that way. First therefore let us prove that they
did so. Secondly, let us show the reasons why they did so: Origin sideth with
Tertullian in giving no reason why they did so; yet says, they did so; and we
must needs do so, ( in lib. Number. Hom. 5.) In Ecclesiasticis observationibus
sunt nonnulla hujusmodi, quae omnibus quidem facere necesse est, nec tamen
Ratio eorum omnibus patet; nam quod genua flectimus, orantes; and quod ex
omnibus caeli plagis, ad solam Orientis partem conversi, orationem fundimus,
non facile cuiquam puto ratione compertum, that is, there are many things, in
the Ecclesiastical constitutions, which all indeed must needs do, and yet
the reason of them is not manifest unto all; for why we do bend our knees in
time of prayers: and why of all the coasts of heaven, we turn our faces duly
toward the Eastern part, while we do pray: I suppose no man can readily
render a reason: what Origin ascribes to Ecclesiastical observations, we
find written in the Apostolical Constitutions, (2.61.) Nor do I agree with
Origin, saying, ibid. that they who know the reasons, must also know, sibi
velanda haec, and operienda, that these things are covered unto them, as it
were with a veil: other Fathers have revealed the reasons; and we may, and
(God willing) will pluck away the Curraine: Epiphanius, adversus Ossen, haere
sin, inter Elxai errores posuit, quod ad Orientem orare, suos sectatores
prohibuit, that is, it was Elxai his error to forbid his followers, to pray
toward the East. Prochorus ( cap. 5.) in the life of S. John the Evangelist,
says that the holy Apostle, at his praying, sighing, or sobbing turned toward
the East; the like he says of Linus; and of S. Paul.

I close up this first point briefly, because all the proofs, for the second
point, viz. why they prayed toward the East, do infallibly demonstrate the
precedent, namely, that that they did pray toward the East; every (...) proves
the (...), a cause cannot be given why a matter is so, if the matter be not so.
S. Basil. ( de S. sancto, cap. 27.) refers to make us think of the
Creation, we all look to the East, when we pray, but few of us know that in so
doing we wish, and desire our old Country namely Paradise; which God did frame
in Eden, to the East: if S. Basil had thought that Christians inhabit in the
East, beyond Eden; by his reason they should turn their faces Westward; if
his words may be restrained only to us of the Westeme Church, the words may
pass for current: Damascene ( de side Orthodoxa, 4.12.) uses Basils reason
amongst others: the like I answer to the full, Cerda who alleges this
reason; when Christ was on the Cross his face was toward the West; therefore
the Churches converting themselves, as it were to Christ hanging on the Cross;
did look Eastward: but the Eastern Christians, which lived beyond Jerusalem,
could not look toward the East, as it were to see Christ's face; unless their
imagination either framed a Cross, and a Christ, on the East of them; or else
supposed themselves to be, on the West of Jerusalem: Caelius Rodiginus (
antiquar. Lection. 12.9.) says, the Jews worshipped toward the West; and
therefore the Christians did, toward the East: Pamelius doubts of the Jewish
posture: Indocus Clichtovaeus, on Damascene ( de fide Orthodoxa 4.13. who might
lead the way to Caelius Rodiginus) thus; the Jews by Gods appointment
worshipped God to the West, and he prooveth it fully by Ezekiel, 8.16. Where it
is counted the greatest of many abominations, in that Chapter: their backs
were toward the Temple of the Lord and their faces toward the East, and they
worshipped the Sun toward the East: and Clitchtovaeus holds it probable that
the Jews were commanded to worship toward the West, to recall them from the
Idolatry of the Gentiles, who in their adoration bended toward the East: But
Idolatry being rooted out by Christianity, and there being no occasion to fear
the imitation of Ethnickes; as the Jewish Circumcision was turned into the more
convenient Baptism, the Paschall Lamb into the thrice blessed Sacrament; the
Sabbath into the Lords day, so the praying toward the West, by the Jews was
more aptly changed to the praying Eastward by the Christians: Clemens Alex
indrinus ( Stromat. 7. ante medium page 520.) (...), Diei Natalis Imago, est
Oriens, that is, the East is, as it were the birth day of the day, and from
thence the light springs; therefore (...), ad ortum matutinum, habentur
preces, we pray toward the East: Justin Martyr (quaest. ad Orthodox.) with us,
the most excellent things are destinated to the honor of God; it were better
for all, (if it were so in our times) but in the opinion of men, the East is
better than the other parts, and therefore in the time of prayer, do we all
turn toward the East: this reason was taken from the Apostles (says Justin
Martyr) not because they thought the Climate of the sun, to be the Habitacle
of God; but for the reasons now specialize. Hyginus (de limitibus) the Ancients
builded their Temples toward the West; afterward they changed all Religion, to
that place, from which place of heaven, the earth is enlightened: surely Hyginus
borrowed the first part of his words, from Clemen Alexandrinus, in the place
above cited, (...), etc. The most ancient Churches, looked toward the West. S.
Hierame ( ad cap. 6. Amos in flne) from the 67. Psalm thus reads it, Psallire
Domino, qua ascendit super Caelum caeli, ad orientem; unde (says he) in
mysteriis, primum renunciamus ei, qui in occidente est, nobisque moritur cum
peccatis; and sic versi ad orientem, pactum inimus cum sole Iustitiae, and ei
servituros nos esse promittimus, that is, Sing unto the Lord, who ascended
above the Heaven of Heavens, at, or in the East, whence in our Sacraments, we
first renounce Satan in the West; and then turning to the East we covenant
with Christ and promise to serve him; but this is not done, without prayers:
Ambrose likewise, Ad Orientem converteris, qui enim renunciat Diabolo, ad
Christum convertitur; illum directo cernit obtutu; the initiate is turned
toward the East, for he who renounceth the Devil, turns to Christ, and sees
Christ directly: Dionyfins Areopagtia ( de Hierarch. Eccles. cap. 2.) Turning
to the West thou shall abjure Satan; then turning to the East, thou shall
praise God. These three last Authorities evince; that the turning to the East,
was not casual or indifferent, or done without special Reason; but that it
proceeded from a Religious observation of those holy times, even in the height
of Divine Mysteries, I will close up the point, with the learned Father
Damascene ( de fide Orthod. 4.13. Non simpliciter, and fortuito ad Orientem
adoramus, that is, we do not simply, ignorantly, or casually adore God, toward
the East; but upon good Motives, did they so: First, because God is an
intelligible Light; and our Savior is the Son of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. and
Christ is called Oriens, The dayspring from on high has visited us, Luke
1.78. Therefore, the East is to be dedicated unto him, in our Adoration. 2.
Secondly, he who bestows every good gift largely, willingly, lovingly on us,
is to receive from us omne praestantius, every thing that was most excellent;
such was the Adoration, toward the East, supposed to be; see the most learned
Commentary of Iudocus Clitchtovaeus, on this passage. 3. Thirdly, God placed
Eden in the East, and cast out man to the West; therefore desiring our old
habitation, and sighing for it, toward it we worship. 4. Moses his Tabernacle
had the veil, and propitiatory on the East; and the Tribe of Judah as the most
honorable Tribe, encamped on the East; and in the most famous Temple of
Solomon, the Porch was toward the East. 5. Christ being Crucified looked
toward the West; and we in fervent desire, sighing after him, worship toward
him; Christ in his assumption ascended toward the East; and so his Apostles
worshipped him; and so shall he descend to the last judgment, at his second
coming; for Act. 1.11. This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall so come (in like manner) as you have seen him going into Heaven;
say the blessed Angels; and this they learned from Christ himself, Mat. 24.27.
As the lightning comes out of the East, and shines even unto the West; (so)
shall also the coming of the son of man be: If it be objected speciously,
that it is to be understood, de modo, non de situ, and positione corporis?
First, I answer, I only cited Damascen's argument. Secondly, in mode, situs,
and positio Corporis potest intelligi. Thirdly, the unusual, doubled phrases,
shall so come, and in like manner, point out variety of matter, in the manner,
for I think not fit, to exclude the manner, nor his ascent to the East. 4.
Situs corporis may be understood two ways; either, pro positione corporis
quiescentis; this the Text does not mean; or, propositionis corporis moti, vel
moventis sese; and of this posture is the Text to be interpreted; for Christ,
in his body shall come from the East, toward the West. 6. Damascen
acknowledges, there is no express command in Scripture, to pray or worship
toward the East; by saying it is an Apostolical tradition: and an unwritten
Apostolical Tradition (if it be so certainly) binds us as well, as if it were
written: see most of these pointsamplified by the learned Clitchtovaeus, upon
Damascene: Concerning the two last arguments of Damascene, which Clitchtovaeus
wholly omitteth, I will only say this, omitting many things: that our dead are
buried with their feere toward the East, that at the Resurrection their faces
may be that way prepared, as it were to behold the glorious second coming of
our Savior, so much expected, so much desired: Thus much be spoken in defense
of Christians praying toward the East; which may be done at many fit times; and
fitly though we officiate the Liturgy, at the Northside of the Communion Table.

From whence likewise the Canonical appointment of the Commandments, to be
set on the East End of every Church, and Chapel; and the placing of our
Communion Table, (our wooden Altars) our Sacred boords toward the East exactly
(as the Propitiatory was, in the old Law) is justly defended; and found
answerable to the Primitive usance; Henceforth let that blaspheunous Gentile,
stock, or stone, who seeing a most reverend, holy, and learned Bishop, at his
entrance into the Church, decently to bend, stoop, and do reverence to God
alone, toward the East, where the memorial is, of the holiest of holies; and
where Christ is really spiritually, most ineffably present at, and in our
Sacrament: I say, let him (who said in a mock, that he could find in his
heart, to go to leape-frogge, over that devout Prelate) know his abominable
pride, confess his blasphemy, and repent for his Atheistical in devotions:
likewise that idle busie-body, that irreformable reformer, who not only pryeth
too boldly into the Arc; but has sucked in most venomous hatred, and mightily
labored to spread his poison against our Church, and Church-Prelates, the
upholders under our gracious King of our Arc, yea and against his Sacred
Majesty. I say, Naviget Anticyres, let him take Hellebore, and purge himself
thoroughly first; and recant his wicked errors; his greasy and unmannerly
comparison; that the standing of our holy Table, close to the inside of the
East, of our Chancell, is like a Butchers board, or a dreffer in the Kitchen:
Jeasting, and jeering at the best, is but the froth, and some of a scurrilous
wit; of an irreligious shallow brain, which never was acquainted with the true
inward comfort, and joy of the holy Ghost; and therefore breaks out like scabs
from a corrupt body, into outward, uncomely, and scandalous making of sport;
whilst the mocker is mocked at, many times, most bitterly, and fiercely.
Lastly, let those super-nice people, who because we are commanded to stand at
the north-side of Table, do take exception at the placing of the East Side of
the Lords Table, close to the East-wall, within the Chancell; I say, let them
go to school, and be better catechized, and know what reverence, in the most
holy days, next to the times Apostolical, was used toward the East: oh
consider, say they, by the Rubricke of our Liturgy established by Act of
Parliament we are appointed to stand, on the North side; but as our late
directions run; we cannot stand on the North-(side) but on the North-(end) of
the board; if the East Side of it do touch the East-wall of the Chancell: such
is their opposition. I answer, to the point thus.

1. We, the Obedient sons of the Church of England, do no ways infringe
that Divine Liturgy, which our Churchmen did frame; and they our Martyrs
sealed with their blood; which Royal authority directed and established; which
Parliaments yielded unto and confirmed.

2. In how many other points, the giddy-seeming-precise ones, do little
esteem of Princes, Parliaments, or Church; let their omission of prayers
appointed; their jeering contempt at the holy Liturgy, and their writing
against it declare.

3. The Churchmen in appointing, and the civil Authority in ratifying these
words, The Priest standing on the Northside of the Table shall say, etc. cannot
so much as probably be evinced, to have intended, either that the Priest might
not bend sometimes toward the East, or that they meant only a long Table,
excluding a square Table; or that a Table a little more long than broad, may
not be said to have four sides: a decent Table is indeed appointed: but is
not a square, Table a decent Table? yea, most decent, in a very small square
Chancell? If Ecclesiastical Authority had commanded the use of a square Table,
(as nothing hinders it) all their frivolous exception, and distinction
between the (sides) and the (ends) of the Table had vanished: But irregular
curiosity will now speak by rule, and measure (though otherwise it abhor both
reason, rule, and measure) a Communion Table not fully square, must be said to
have not four sides; but two sides, and two ends: grant we it so, in a long
table, much longer than broad; and confess we that properly enough one may be
said to sit, or stand at one end; and another at the other end; and others to
be on both sides of the table; yet are we not bound to such strictness of
terms, in tables almost as broad as long: a trencher is called Quadra; whether
the trencher be perfect square, or somewhat more uneven, be equilaterall, or
different: Mensa also does signify a square table, as well as a long one:
Mensae primi saeculi, the tables of the first age, were first quadratae,
foure-square; then orbiculatae, round, says Alexamder ab Alexandro ( genial.
dier. 5.21.) yea even in round tables, as we now call them, the fayrer they
are, the more squares they have; and these small squares are, and well may be
called (sides) If one of these curious ones had before his house, a court as
long again as it is broad; he would call the two longer spaces, the (sides) of
his Court; and the two narrower the two (ends,) he would be loath to say the
court had four (sides,) yet in Scripture phrase, Exodus 27.9, etc. The (holy)
Court is said to be placed, or made, on diverse (sides,) the South Side, and
North-side, each an hundred cubits, the West Side and the East Side each fifty
cubits, they are called (sides) not (ends;) though two sides were shorter by
half, than the other two sides: briefly, that may be called square, which
(approaches) to squareneffe; and those things to be Quadrangular, which have
not four equal Angles (exactly:) and none but refractary spirits would find
a knot in a Bul-rush; by falsely imagining, that to place the Lords Table at
the East Side of the Chancell, does contradict the Rubricke in our Liturgy,
established by Religion; though it call the two ends, (sides:) If it be (...),
truly observed, out of our 82. Canon, that at the time of celebration, the
Communion Table is appointed to be placed in Church or Chancell; where may be
most convenient for the Minister, and the people: I answer (...), boldly yet
humbly; that now with us it is judged by our Ordinary, that the decent
Communion Table shall be placed at the East End of the Chancell; and being so,
is held to be placed in so good sort, as thereby the Minister may be more
conveniently heard of the Communicants, in his prayer, and administration, and
the Communicants also more conveniently, and more in number may Communicate
with the said Minister; as I have found lately by experience; and it may be
better judged whether people do sit, or lean, or kneel. Secondly, I, for my
part do abhor singularity, as well as those who would break or cloy the
Canon; let me live and dye an obedient son of the Church of England my holy
Mother, and I shall be sure to find God my Father.

Fourthly, I doubt not, but all the Altars erected by holy men in Scripture,
were foure-square: I am sure, there were but two standing lasting Altars
allowed; either in the time of the Tabernacle or of the Temple; and both of
them were to be, and were exactly foure-square: The Altar of the burnt-offering
shall be five Cubits long and five Cubits broad; the Altar shall be
foure-square, Exodus 27.1. And a Cubit shall be the length of the Altar of
Incense; and a Cubit, the breadth thereof, foure-square shall it be; Exodus
30.2. If our Sacred board be not called the Altar, yet is the Altar called the
Table: Augustine, ( Sermon. 113. de Diversis) says, Cyprian's Tombe-stone was
termed his table, and Cyprian's Table, Gods Table; In eodem loco mensa Deo
constructa-est; tamen mensa dicitur Cypriani, non quia ibi est unquam Cyprianus
epulatus, sed quia immolatus est, that is, In the same place, there is a table
erected to God: nevertheless, the same Table is called Cyprians Table, not
that ever Cyprian did eat there, but because he was sacrificed, or Martyred
thereon: yet nearer to our purpose, Isa. 65.11. They prepare a Table, by the
word Table, is not only meant; that they furnished tables with meat and
drink to refresh themselves in the Idols Temple; but by the Table, the Altar,
on which they sacrificed, is also understood: which Sacrifices on the Altar
always preceded their feasting; and part of their feastings were relickes of
their offering: Nearer yet than so, 1 Cor. 10.21. There is mention of the Table
of the Lord, and the Table of Devils: Consider, that the Apostle speaks, de
immolatis, of things offered, whether by the Jews to God; or by the Gentiles
unto Devils, and it resulteth well enough, the Altar of the Lord may be as
well understood, as the Altar of Devils: And yet more near than so, Ezekiel.
41.22. The Altar of wood is called, the Table that is before the Lord. But most
plainly and nearest of all, Mal. 1.7. The Altar of the Lord, and the Table of
the Lord, are all one, what is termed Altar, in the first place, is termed, the
Table of the Lord in the same verse: Contrarily, what is directly the Table of
the Lord, verse. 12. is, in the words following, truly interpreted to be the
Altar of the Lord, whose fruit and meat was contemptible; whose offering was
torn, lame, and sick, whilst they vowed, and sacrificed a corrupt thing, nor
does Haymo, Remigius, or S. Hierome dissent: shall this Table now have but two
sides, and two ends? shall not this Altar have four sides? So may our (...),
(as Chrysostom calls it) our sacred Table, be truly enough said to have
four sides; though some peevish ones will difference the ends, from the sides,
it is truly called a Triangle, though the latera be inaequalia: and yet, if
the sincerely-weake Brethren, (and not those false-brethren, who, in their own
conceit, are the most intelligent, pure, Apostolical, and strongest
Christians, censoriously judging all things, and yet call themselves, and their
fellows, the weak Brethren) if any truely-tender-conscienced Ministers do
take up a scandal at the reasonable reformation in this point; I see nothing,
but they may remove their scruple of Conscience; either, by making the longer
sacred Table foure-square; or, by setting one end (as they call it) of their
narrower Communion Table, toward the East; and to officiate Sacred duties, on
the North-side, as our Church did order; and Parliaments, with Royal consent,
above all, did establish: yet let me be bold, to advise any good man, to avoyde
the imputation of self love, and selfe-conceite; by requesting the leave of
his reverend Diocesan, before he attempt any public Reformation: If any
faithful, and learned friend, doubt, or fear; that this passage will not be
well-allowed? I answer; I speak but my private opinion, with all subjection;
if the Diocesan, allow it not; much less do I; leave is first to be obtained,
or if they dislike it, let them blot it out: and thus much also of this
Digression.

PAR. 9.
I Return from the fourth Commandment kept, as well by the Gentiles, on
Saturday; in imitation of the Jewish Religion, (though perhaps the most part of
them knew not so much) as by the Christians, on Sunday: I now come to the
precepts, and observation of the Romans, concerning the fifth Commandment,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, in which point, let me say truly, they were
as strict, yea, more strict, then the Law of God: the seventh Law of Romulus,
as Balwinus records from a most old table, was this, viz. Parentum liberos
omne Jus esto relegandi, vendendi, and occidendi, that is, let Parents have
absolute power over their children, either to banish, sell, or kill them, at
their pleasure: Halicarnassaeus ( lib. 2.) more particularly amplifyeth it: the
Roman Lawgiver granted, (as I may so say) all power unto the Father over the
child, even whilst the child lived, either to imprison him, or whip him, or
make him work like a clownish husbandman, or kill him; yea, though he were
grown up to the chief Magistracy: or three times, to make sale of him for
gain; which is repeated, and inserted into the twelve Tables: which great
power no people under heaven, except Roman Citizens exercised, or practiced
upon their Children; and which in truth was greater, than the power they had
over bondslaves, for, if (they) were once freed, they were ever freed: Festus
recites this only Law of Romulus: If a youth, or maid beat their Father, and
there be an outcry, let them have no protection of the Laws. The Patria
Potestas, the power of Fathers over their Children, given by the 12. Tables,
was excessive; and was, in after times, moderated: Cum a prisca severitate
descivissent, secuti interpretes jus naturae, caverunt, ut liberi Parents
alant, aut vinciantur, that is; when they began to leave off their ancient
severitie, the expounders of the Law following the Law of Nature; provided,
that Children should maintain their (impotent) parent; or else, should suffer
durance for it; says Alexander ab Alexandro, ( Genial. dier. 6.10.) Faciendum
id nobis, quod Parents imperant, says Panegyris to her sister, in Plautus his
Stichus ( Act. 1. Scen. 1.) We must do that which our Parents command:
Further, the children were to hold the persons of their Parents (sacred)
according to their latter Law, as the Tribunes were of old. The Romans were
strict against Murder, and after that horrible sin committed, they would not
have the offender to be killed, till he were condemned publickely; for the
Antecedent private Revenge was held another murder: Thou shall do no murder.

Parricidas omnes capite puniunto, let all Parricides be beheaded or hanged.
Plutarch has an odd crochet; viz. That Romulus made no Law, against such, as
killed their Fathers; as thinking none would be so wicked: but you heard, even
now, from Festus, of a Law, against such as did but (strike) their Parents: and
M. Maleolus was the first Roman condemned, for killing of his Mother, and
sewed in a sack, and cast into the Sea: and L. Hostius was so served, for
killing of his father. To these days says Alexander ab Alexandro ( Genial.
dier. 3.5.) this is the Punishment of Parricides; a Cock, an Ape, a Viper, and
a Man, are altogether sewed up, in one sack, and cast into the waters: Lege
Pompeia, a Dog was also sewed up with them; so Modestinus (de Parricidiis)
But, it may be well observed, that Romulus esteemed omne Homicidium to be
Parricidium; all murderers are accounted Parricides; all murderers were to
dye the death. Another branch against murder is from Pandulphus Prateius (in
veteri jurisprudentia) deprehensi in Homicidio statim puniuntor, the Murderers
must be put to a speedy death. Lex Numae de Parricidiis; si quis hominem
liberum dolo sciens morti duit (aut det) parricida esto, that is, Numas law of
Parricides, says, if any one felloniously kill a free Denison, let him be
accounted a Paricide: A Paricide (with r) differs from a Parricide (with rr)
a Parricide is he, that kills father or mother; a Paricide he that flayeth
any man: Ius Regium was, Ne mulier, quae praegnans mortua esset, humaretur,
antequam partus ei excideretur; qui contra faceret, spem animantis cum gravida
peremisse videretur, that is, the Kings Law was, No woman that dies great with
child, shall be buried before her child be cut out of her, he that shall
presume to do the contrary to this Law; shall be found guilty of the death,
both of the Mother, and the child.

The Seventh Commandment: Thou shall not commit Adultery. Lex Numae, Pellex
Innonis aram ne tangito; Numa's law, let not a strumpet presume to come near
the Altar of Juno: Ius Regium, thus; Adulterii convictam vir, and cognati,
utivolent, necanto; the Kings law thus, Let the husband and Cousins of a woman
convicted of Adultery, kill her, at their pleasure: Lex Julia ranked Adultery
with Treason, says Alexander ab Alexandro ( Genial. dier. 4.1.) Plerique
Philosophi prodidere, adulterium perjurio gravius esse Crimen, ibid. that is,
the Philosophers, most an end, have accounted Adultery to be a more heinous
sin than perjury: Sempronius Musca C. Gallum flagellis cecidit, that is,
Sempronius Musca caused C. Gallus the Adulterer, to be beaten with rods:
Opilius Macrinus Adulteros tam perniciali odio prosecutus suit, ut deprehensos
ignibus cremaret, ib d. that is, Opilius Macrinus prosecuted Adulterers with
such deadly hatred, that he caused all those, that were taken in the fact, to
be burnt with fire: Aulus Gellius (10.23.) cites the Law from Cato* In
adulterio uxores deprehensas, jus fuisse Maritis necare, that is, the husband
might lawfully kill his wife, that was taken in Adultery: But the Romans Laws
(as made by partial men) favored men too much, Cato ibid. In Adulterio uxorem
tuam, si deprehendisses, sine judicio, impune necares; Illa te, si Adulterares,
digito non auderet contingere, neque jus est, that is, If thou chance to catch
thy wife in the Act of Adultery thou may lawfully kill her, without any
farther judgment; but if thou should chance to play the Adulterer, she shall
not dare, neither shall it be lawful for her, so much as to touch thee with
one of her fingers: This was the old Law; and the Julian Law was also too
indulgent to men in this sin: Romulus thought adultery sprange from
drunkenesse; therefore a Matrone, who did but open a bag, in which were the
keys of the Wine-Cellar, was starved to death; as Fabius Pictor has it, in
his Annals; and Cato reports, that kindred, neighbors or friends, were wont
to kiss the Women, that they might know whether the women smelled of wine, for
wine enrageth lust, perhaps that pretense was a fence, cloak, or color, for
their often kissing.

The eight Commandment. Thou shall not steal. If any stole, or cut Come by
night, the man must dye; the boy be whipped, or pay double damage: this Law
was mitigated afterward: It was Cato his complaint, Fures privatorum furtorum,
in nervo, and compedibus aetatem agunt; fures publici, in auro, and purpura,
Gell. that is, poor thieves who have committed private thefts, do spend their
days in ginnes and fetters, whilst public thieves do swish it up, and down
in gold and Scarlet. The Decemvirall Laws permitted the (known) thief to be
killed; who either stole by night, or by day, defended himself with a weapon,
at his apprehension, Gell. (11.18.) And very strict were they to other thieves;
though now, says Gellius, (ibid.) a lege illa Decemvirali discessum est, that
Decemvirall Law is now antiquated, and out of date, the apparent thief must
pay fourefold, what he stole; the theevery not fully manifested, paid but
double: Sabinus resolves that the Master is to be condemned as a thief, who
only (bids) his servant steal; Servos manifesti furti prehensos verberibus
affici, ac de saxo praecipitari, Decemviri jusserunt, Aulus Gellius ( noct.
Attic. 11.18.) that is, the Decemviri commanded notorious thieves to be
scourged, and cast down headlong from a high Rock: Furtum, says the same
Gellius, (ibid.) sine ulla attrectatione fieri potest; sola mente, atque animo,
ut furtum fiat, annitente, that is, theft may be committed without taking
away any thing; if a man do but only assent or consent unto the committing
of theft: Incujus open, consiliove furtum factum erit, duplici action ^ene^ur,
says, from the old Law, Antonius Conteus a Lawyer. ( Lection. subcisivarum
juris Civilis, 1.14.) He that shall assist, or advise a thief in his theevery
is liable to a double action. Alexander ab Alexandro ( Genial. dier. 6.10,)
Furta lex Romanorum usque adeo aversata est, and tam severacorrectione plectit,
ut furem manifestum in servitutem tradat illi, cui furto quid surreptum foret,
this the Law of the Romans did so deadly detest, and so severely correct, and
punish theft, that it compelled the notorious thief, to become (his)
bondslave, who had any thing stolen away from him. Thieves disturb, Ius
gentium, by turning men out of their own possession; and are enemies to humane
Society; breakers of Laws Divine and Humane: Cicero, pro Caecinna, qui per
tutelam pupillum fraudasse, ejusque rem furatus esse convinceretur, infania
notatus duplionis poenam subiret, that is, If any Guardian shall be convicted
of any cosenage, or theft committed against his ward, let him be branded for an
infamous person; and let him undergo the penalty of restoring him two for
one. Admirable was that their Law, Rei furtivae aeterna authorit as esto; at
any time, from any man, I may challenge, and take, what was stolen from me;
yea, though the possessor had lawfully, and for good consideration, bought it
from the thief. The manner of searching after things stolen, was better, and
more rational, than any practice, we use; which as some malicious villain
has been found, to bring secretly into his enemies house, the thing reported
to be stolen, and sought for; and himself to drop it down slily in some
corner there, that others might find it; and so the suspected one might be
found guilty. Dioxippus, that noble Champion, or Fencer, was little better used
by the the envious Macedones, in Curtius (9. page 303. for, purposely they
stole away a golden Cup from a Feast, and accused him to the King; Dioxippus
could not abide to be held, by Alexander, or his envious enemies, as a thief,
and killed himself. It was one of the worst deeds, that ever Alexander, or
did, or countenanced. But the Roman Laws, which they took from the Grecians,
in the days of the Decemviri, appointed; that the searcher should make oath by
the gods (the keepers of the Laws) that he did search, in hope to find the
things feloniously stolen from him; and then, he should come naked into the
house, of the party suspected, covered only to preserve modesty; whereupon,
the suspected party, or parties were to permit him, to seek in all suspicious
places of theirs, locked, or unlocked, within doors or without. The ninth
Commandment, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor: Qui
falsum Testimonium dixisset, e Saxo Tarpeio dejiceretur, that is, if any one
shall bear false witness against his neighbor, let him be cast down
headlong, from the Tarpeian rock; the rock was of an huge height: Dejectio e
rupe, sive a Saxo Tarpeio, per carnificem facta est, praegressa verberatione,
jussu Magistratus; this hurling, or tumbling down from the Tarpeian rock, or
stone; was done by the Executioner, when first he had whipped the malefactor,
at the command of the Magistrate; Freemen were so served, says Appian; ( De
Bello civil 3.) Cicero, ( lib. 4. de Republ.) Siquis actitaverit, sive carmen
condiderit, quod infamiam, flagitiumve alteri precetur, capite punitor, that
is, If any one shall compose, or rehearse a Libell, which may redound to the
disparagement of a man's fame, or good name, let him be beheaded, let him die
the death: Metius Suffetius Albanus, pactum, atque condictum, cum Rege populi
Romani perfide rupit; and binis quadrigis vinctus in diversa nitentibus
Laceratus est, Gell. (20.1.) Metius Suffetius Captain of the Albanes, did
perfidiously violate his promise, and agreement which he made, with the King of
the people of Rome; wherefore being tied, by the arms and legs, to two
Chariots, each drawn with four horses, that were driven two clean contrary
ways, he was rent-asunder, for his labor: Coelius (ad Favorinum ibid.)
testifies, that the Law of casting Liars from the Tarpeian rock, was
abolished; and if it had continued, they had had few false witnesses: acerbitas
plerumque ulciscendi males^cii, been, and caute vivendi, disciplina est, that
is, vehement, sharp punishment of offenders teaches people to live well; --
At tu dictis Albane maneres, Virgil Aeneid. 8.

Perhaps it might be better thus; -- At tu pactis Albane stetisses,
But Duke of Alba, you should have observed,
Your own compacts, from which you falsely swerved;
For it was Metius Suffetius, Dux Albanus, to whom he spoke: Patronus si
clienti fraudem fecerit, sacer esto; if the Patron falsify the trust, which
the client puts in him, he is outlawed; the Patrones esteemed their Clients
above kindred, says Gellius; Afterward, Lege Cornelia, a false witness was
confined to some Island, and all his goods forfeited; to this Commandment may
this be reduced; Qui terminum exarassit, ipsus, and boves sacri sunto, He was
to die, who brake the old boundaries, making false bounds; he, and his innocent
Oxen, for ploughing of a lie, yea, the abstainers from witnessing what they
knew, were to be Intestabiles; might neither be witnesses, in any ensuing
cases, nor might any witness for them: briefly, Polybius ( lib. 6.) so great
Religion did the Romans place in an oath; that they therein exceeded, and
excelled all other Nations; Polybius himself condemning his own Countrymen,
and administering occasion to the world, that Graeca fides might be taxed, and
run into a Proverb. Concerning the tenth Commandment, no Laws of man ever
established it; for no Law of man could ever punish it; an inward unlawful
thought unrevealed, is above man's judgment; Cogitationis poenam in foro nostro
nemo luat; let no man be punished, by our Law, for thoughts only, say the
Civilians; a transient ill imagination, strangled, ere his birth, is subject
only to Gods Tribunal. Heathens might, and did counsel well; but they were
never able to strain so high; this is a Commandment, which subjecteth all the
world to guiltiness. Heaven were not so hard to be obtained but for this; Non
concupisces, Thou shall not lust, or covet. The Apostle, who knew not sin
otherwise, knew it by this Law, Romans 7.7. In other Commandments, the (Act) in
this, the (Intention) of the Act, though the purpose fail, is forbidden: In
this Commandment, the Primitive, transient ebullition; the thought, though
corrected presently, is condemned; yea, the very suggestion entertained (though
speedily rejected) is condemnable here; not as a suggestion, not as resisted;
but as entertained, and too [late] resisted: of thoughts there be diverse sorts;
In morosa cogitatione, there is delight; this is condemned in every law; in
volatili, or volatica cogitatione, where there is no rest, no complacency; yet
because, we permitted a noxious thought to supervolitare, it is sinful. If any
one should prudently, cautelously, and lovingly advise me to examine; whether,
in every of the other Commandments, the (Intention) of breaking them, be not a
violation? I answer, the (Intention) does; the intention to the contrary, is a
breaking of any Commandment; for Intention implies a consent; there is the
(thought) of the heart, Act. 8.22. the lodging of vain thoughts within us, is
not only disliked, Jer. 4.14. but their very first approach, or salutation is
forbid, in the tenth Commandment; and not only the expulsion of them, is
precepted, but a quelling of them, at the motus primo-primi, whether arising
inwardly, or contorted by Satan. To be (tempted) of Satan, is no sin; else
Christ had sinned; but it is a sin, if we take not the shield of faith,
whereby we may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked one, Ephesians.
6.16. we are not only bound to resist; and that always; but if we so
carelessly resist, that he give us a veni; or, our soul receives never so
little a spot; if any of his darts do but, as it were, raze our skin; then
this imperfect resistance is a sin, not as it is a resistance; but as it is
imperfect: there is a thought, without voice; even this is condemned, in the
tenth Commandment, though it make no impression on the body, and there is a
thought with a voice, Eccles. 10.20. this is a violation, if it be evil, of
(any) of the Commandments; there is morosa cogitatio mali, which nestleth in a
man; and there is transvolans cogitatio; this later is condemned, by the last
Commandment; there is a (thought) of evil, and there is an (Imagination of a
thought, 1 Chronicles. 29.9. Genesis 6.5. the very (imagination) of an ill thought,
breaks the last precept: but Cogitation is only as an abortion of the
consent, or intention; and is forbid only in the tenth Commandment; In the
other Commandments, is forbid intentio, etsi non consequaris; in the tenth,
cogitatio, etsi non sequaris; says a great Divine of our Church, and he cites
S. Augustine thus; Magnum fecit, qui non sequitur malum, sed non sic perfecit;
nam cogitare probibetur; we are bound, by this Commandment, to keep the
tablet of our hearts, and souls, from being dirted or soyled though never so
little; the very listening to Satan's temptations; and the first thought of evil
is sin, and here interdicted; for God accounts that to be voluntary, not
only what is committed, but what is intended; yea, the very cogitation, which
is not hindered by the Will; when it is bound to hinder it; the thought
halfe-received, half rejected: the very seed, as is were, of sin, and the
first degree of entertainment thereof, subjecteth a man to this Commandment,
and not to the breach of others. And thus much concerning the Roman Laws
correspondence with the Laws Divine; from whence the Egyptians took them;
and the Grecians from them; for Clemens Alexandrinus ( Stromat. 6. page 457.
says well of the Grecians, that they were, (...), they did (steal) from all
sorts of Writers, and the Romans had most from the Grecians.

PAR. 10.
MIne old task is not yet ended; after the businesses concerning the mere
Alien, are thus done off; I am, by my proposed Method, to treat of the
stranger, or See above in this Chapter, Parag. 2.
forraigner; were he a professed Travellour, were he a Tradsman, or Merchant,
rather errant than fixed; he might not be forced to Circumcision; he might not
partake of the Passover, Exodus 12.45. A forreiner shall not eat thereof. The
thing that dyed of it self, was to be given to the stranger, that is in thy
gates, that he may eat it; or thou may sell it unto an Alien, Deuteronomy. 14.21.
these two sorts of strangers might be so served; but not the third sort, as I
think: the third sort of strangers; the Sojourners, were such, as also
continued, and dwelt among them, within their gates; these if they, and their
Males were circumcised, and desirous to eat the Passover, were not excluded
from those sacred benefits: Let him come near, and keep the Passover, and he
shall be, as one borne in the Land, Exodus 12.48. and when they dyed, they were
not buried, in the burial place of strangers; which was a distinct
coemiterium, Matthew. 27.7. but were buried among the Jews; Where thou die, I
will die, and there will I be buried, Ruth. 1.17. Yea, if a stranger, or one
borne in the Land, should have eaten leavened bread, any of the seven days of
the Paschall Festivity, even that soul shall be cut off from the Congregation
of Israel, Exodus 12.19. These so journing strangers, in later times, were
called Proselytes* and had many privileges, Number. 15.14, 15, 16. One Law, and
one manner shall be for you, and for the stranger, that sojourneth with you.
See also, Number. 9.14. The Jews called strangers, Sojourners, or Proselytes,
within their Covenant; and obedient to the Jewish Law, Righteous strangers: of
holy strangers, and converts was our Christian Church also compounded; the
Jews did compass sea and land to make one Proselyte; and yet (that people may
fear without good causes, to change the Religion, in which they were bred)
what says Christ? Matthew. 23.15. Ye make him twofold more the child of hell
than your selves. Devoute Proselytes came and dweit at Jerusalem, Act. 2.5.
and 10. verses, Act. 13.43. Religious Proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas:
this is confirmed, Esaias 14.1. The strangers shall be joined with Israel, and
they shall cleave to the house of Israel; yea the very sons of strangers have
Gods gracious promise, Esaias 56.3. Let not the son of the stranger, that has
joined himself to the Lord, say, the Lord has utterly separated us from his
people: the devoute sons of the stranger within the Covenant, God will bring to
his holy mountains, and make them joyful, in his house of prayer; the burnt
offerings, and sacrifices shall be accepted upon Gods Altar, verse. 7. Thus do
I pass from the described several sorts of servants, as likewise of
strangers, and close up all for the reconciling of these seeming contradictions
mustered up in the front of this Chapter, by observing two points of moment.

1. First, what indulgence soever is granted, what grace offered, what favor
permitted, it is only to such, as were circumcised; the proof reaches home,
No uncircumcised person shall eat thereof, Exodus 12.48. And the very
approbatory precepts contain so much; the servant bought with money may eat
the Passover, when he is circumcised; and the sojourning stranger, when all
his Males be circumcised, he may keep it, as is above cited. Thus the negative
Precepts; No stranger shall eat thereof; a forraigner, an hired servant shall
not eat thereof; all these, and if there be more, must be understood of such
as are uncircumcised: for if any of these had been admitted into the bosom of
the Jewish Church; and write their Covenant with the blood of their
Circumcision, and sealed it with the seal of Gods people, then had they an
interest in the Passover.

2. The second thing promised to be premised, is this; How strict soever the
Letter of the Law seems to carry it; that not one, but circumcised people
might eat thereof, yet neither were women circumcised, nor yet were they
excluded from eating the Passover: that the men Idaealiter represented the
women; and the women were (as I may so say) circumcised in the men; see proved
in my Miscellanies: concerning the second part of the disjunction, it is true;
the Passover might be eaten by men alone without women; so was that most holy
Passover, celebrated by our most blessed Savior, and nor women, nor disciple
at large, but the Apostles, the 12. Apostles only ate it with him: of which,
God willing hereafter: that only women by themselves ever observed it, I have
not read, I do not believe; though the Master of the family supplied the room
of the firstborn; yet the privilege of the firstborn, or of the Priest, to
sacrifice the Passover, was never permitted to women. If it be objected, that
Zipporah, Exodus 4.25. circumcised her soon, and might she not, as well slay
the Passover? I answer, the difference is great; for, first, Moses was at the
point of death, and could not circumcise him: secondly, it was fit, that she,
who in likelihood, had hindered Moses from circumcising him, should now do it
her self: thirdly, no Expositor ever doubted, but all this business was
translated, by the power, and direction of God, or of the Angel, both showing
the cause of Gods wrath against Moses; because he, who was to give the Law to
others, was a breaker of the Law, given to him by Abraham, for the
circumcision; which though God forbear, whilst Moses continued a private man,
among the Heathen; yet now, that he was governor Elect, going as it were, to
be installed, with the rod of God, in his hand, Cum baculo Pastorali; lest he
should give exemplary scandal by his sinful omission; God sent upon him, in
the Inn, and by the way exemplary punishment; and said, in effect, Zipporah,
thine husband shall die, if thou circumcise not his son; whereupon of two
evils, she choose the less, as she apprehended: fourthly, Again,
extraordinary actions are ill precedents for a common course; yet give me God
so directing, I will allow a woman sacrificing; give me a good Angel so
advising, and I will commend a layman; as Manoah a Danite, the father of
Samson, offering a burnt-offering to the Lord, and acting the Priests part,
Jud. 13.6. fifthly, and lastly, there were many, who were circumcised, that are
not the Posseover; as the seed of Esau, but none might eat the Passover,
except the circumcised: therefore, I am (persuaded) he should not heretically
err, that says, as in our Sacrament of Entrance into the Church, upon great
exigents, the Laity may Baptize, though Regularly it belong to the Priests
office: so the Jewish Sacrament of Circumcision, in extremity, might be
performed by others, though the administration thereof properly appertained to
the firstborn, head of the family, or Priest. If any think I presume too
far? I answer; first, I speak but my own persuasion, and that humbly with
subjection: secondly, not only the laymen, but Christian women have often in
extreme necessity baptized with us, and not been hindered, nor punished:
thirdly, Vorstius on Bellarmine (De ministro Baptismi) confesses; Inter ipsos
Evangelicos been multos^esse adhuc, qui^etiam laici^, ac feminis (non tamen
inc^dulis) in casu necessitatis, officium baptizandi concedunt; that is, among
the professors of the Gospel, there are very many, even to this day; who, in
a case of necessity, do grant the office of Baptizing, even to laymen, and to
women themselves; so that they be not Infidels; though indeed withal, he
says, the greater, and better part dissent: fourthly, Tertullian (De
Baptismo;) Hierom (contra Luciferianot) and allipassim; lead the way to my
persuasion; insomuch, that Vorstius says to their authority; Nimia patrum
solicitudo pro Regula perperam hic affertur, that is, the Fathers too much care
for Baptism, is not to be pressed upon us, as a Rule to follow: yet, nor may
the extraordinary Baptizer consecrate the Body, and Blood of our Lord; nor the
extraordinary Circumciser (without express Revelation Divine) sacrifice the
Beasts offered at the Altar; a nullity follows in both, joined with horrible
presumption, and intrusion upon the Sacerdotall dignity: that most commonly an
household, or households, mixed of men, and women together, did celebrate the
Passover together, was the confessed practice; Domatim, and the next family,
domatim, do evince so much; the thrice-blessed Virgin went up, with Joseph to
celebrate the Passover; did they do it, in several houses, or, not together?
The Aethiopians to this day, use to circumcise their very women; I had rather,
you should read the words, and manner; in Dancianus a Goes ( de Aethiopum
moribus, page 69) than in me: Johannes Leo verifieth as much, of the African
women, that the Turks Circumcise them; It is in his eight book, of the
African History: but I never read, that either God Commanded; or the Jews used
female-Circumcision, or Circumcision of females. The men of the Hebrews, who
had many other Privileges above the women, in this bore the brunt, both for
their Redemption, and Circumcision, and not their women; and the men
represented the women. To conclude; as any one, truly, and justly admitted a
Proselyte into the Jewish Congregation, might be partaker of the holy
Passover; and might be part of that selected number of people, who were
prerequired to consummate, or consume that solemn Passover; whether they were
he, or she-Proselyte: so no man uncircumcised in the flesh; no man or woman, as
I think, who had plainly revolted from the Jewish Religion (though their males
were circumcised) were to be numbered among the Society of Communicants, at the
Passover. This I am sure of, Ezech. 44.9. No stranger uncircumcised in heart,
nor uncircumcised in the flesh, shall enter into my Sanctuary, says God, of
any stranger, that is among the children of Israel; the bringing in of such,
was an abomination, verse the 7. Most summarily thus; Servants or strangers of
any kind; if they were true members of the Jewish Synagogue; might be
partakers of their Sacraments; or strangers of any kind, if they were
uncircumcised in heart, or flesh, and separated from Isreal's God, might not
partake; nor be part of this sacred number, at the eating of the Passover. Now
it is high time for me, after so many points, and so many digressions, handled
in this Chapter; to begin a new matter, and Chapter; but not, till I have
ended with a Prayer.

The Prayer.
HOly, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts; blessed be thy glorious name, for guiding
me, through briars, thorns, and obscure thickets of the Wilderness, in a day
by a pillar of Cloud; and in the night, by a pillar of fire; it has been thy
good Spirit, O God, which has lead me, and inspired into me, thoughts above my
self: good Lord, I humbly beg, for a continuance of thy favor; yea, and
increase of thy grace; lead me, O Lord, from knowledge to knowledge, from
virtue to virtue; illuminate my dull understanding, sanctify my perverse
affections, and give me a Progress in all good courses, from grace to grace;
and by thy effectual multiplied graces, guide me, good Lord, unto thy glory,
for the merits of Jesus Christ. Amen, Amen.

CH^P. X. The Contents of the tenth Chapter.
1. The year of the world, in which the Passover was first instituted.

2. The month of that year. The old Jewish account of the years, and the
new. Annus sacer, and vulgaris. The year preceding the seventh Sabbaticall
year, viz. the 48. year, after the old Jubilee, and the second year before
the new Iubilee; brought forth sufficient fruits for three years.

3. The Magnalia performed, in the month of Abib.

4. The Passover, upon some other occasions extraordinary, might be kept, on
another month.

5. The proclaiming of Festival days commanded, both by Moses, and some
Heathen.

6. The appointed day for the Passover.

7. It was the fourteenth day of the month, not alterable, or dispensable with.

8. The full Moon.

9. The Jews hope that the Messiah shall deliver Israel, the same day that
Moses did, and that the Passover was kept.

10. Tertullian explained.

11. The Jews unlawfully altered the day of the Passover.

12. Christ ate the Passover on the fourteenth day of the month, the Jews on
the day following.

13. The strict observation of the Jewish Festivals: a trappe laid for Christ:
and broken taxations are paiable to Princes, against the opinion of
Pharisaicall-zelot Galilaeans. The misunderstood story of the Galilaeans slain
by Pilot, explained.

14. Before the Jewish Passover, our blessed Savior was crucified.

15. Christ kept the Law exactly.

16. The hour of the day that the Jewish Passover was kept in: the several
beginnings of the day by several Nations. The Jews began, from the Evening.

17. In the new Testament, thereckoning was from the morning.

18. The hour of the day, was a lasting, fixed Ceremony: It was to be slain
between the two evenings: The diverse meaning of the word, Evening: Maymonides
reproved.

19. It was to be eaten between Sunset, and any time, till toward the
morning; against the opinion of Scaliger: It was usually eaten, after the
beginning of the second Evening, and not long, after Sunset.

20. The fixed hour more explained.

PARAGRAPH. I.
THe seventh durable Rite of Paschatizing, was, it must be killed on a set
month, in the first month of the Jewish year: but first, let us touch at the
year of the world, when these great matters came to pass: In those remoter
ages, which truly may be called (...), fabulous, for multa confingifabulosa
coeperunt, says S. Augustine ( De Civit. Dei, 18.8.) We have little beside
Scripture, but only uncertain conjecture; yea, too many uncertain
conjectures upon Scriptures; even they which would seem to have rocked the
Cradle at the Creation, to have taken off the swaddling clothes of time, and to
have nursed the world in her infancy, and registered year by year, all
forepassed affairs, with incredible exactness, do yet incredibly differ,
concerning the year of the first great Passover: Sure I am, it was 430.
years, after the Hebrews beginning to so journe, Exodus 12.40. Even just so
long, after the preaching of the Gospel to Abraham, Gal. 3.8. After the
Promise made to him, and his seed, that is, Christ, Gal. 3.16. I say, the Law
was given full 430. years, after the Covenant confirmed, Gal. 3.17. even the
selfsame day 430. years, was the eating of the Paschall Lamb, and their
arising to go out of Egypt; and the selfsame year, (within fifty days of
their Paschall solemnity) was the Law given on mount Sinai; for, though God
reckoned unto Abraham no more than 400. years, Genesis 15.13. with which number
the new Testament exactly accords, Act. 7.6. (so that we may not so much as
imagine an error, or mistaking) yet God accounted not to him, the thirty
years of Abraham's fore-journying, or current troubles, both in Egypt, and in
the rest of his travells, or peregrenation (as he did by Moses, and S. Paul)
but points out the time, when the mocking of Ishmael, the ^oune of the
Egyptian Hagar, was to be so apparent, that Sarab her self saw it, Genesis 21.9.
Which mocking the holy writ esteemed as a persecution, (He that was borne,
after the flesh persecuted him, that was borne after the spirit Gal. 4.29.)
from this scourge of the tongue, or vexation by other mis-behaviour no more,
nor less, than 400 years were expired to the departure of Israel, out of the
house of bondage.

And yet there were in an undeniable account, full 430: years, to a day, from
Abraham's first arrival into Canaan; till his seed began to journey, toward
their promised Patrimony, in the Land of Canaan: distingue Tempora, and
concordabit Scriptura, distinguish the times, and the Scriptures will easily
accord: God began one aeri or account, from Abraham's first footing in Canaan,
at his being 75. years old; and thence to the first Passover, were 430.
years: God also took a second Epoch or ground of an account, from the time
of Ishmaels notorious abuse of Isaac; from which time, 400. years were to flow
before the seed of Abraham were freed from the Egyptian servitude: I am sure
also it was about the foure-score, and first year of Moses his age; and about
the 84. of Aarons life, Exodus 7.7. Concerning Moses his co-equalls, and
contemporaries, S. Augustine has planted a dainty discourse ( de Civit. Dei,
18.8) Ludevicus Vives of old, and the most learned Leonardus Coquaeus, have
watered it of late; and though much may be graffed on, or super-added, to make
it more fruitful, or tastefull, yet because this falls in only, in transitu,
on the Bye, I pass it by, and refer you to them, and their records of
antiquity: in fair computation the Passover was, in the 54 year of Ioshuah,
after the Universal undage, in Noabs time, 797. years, in the days of Alman,
who was the Hercules of the Germans, (for Varro reckons up 44. Herculesses)
and from whom the Almans, at this day, took their name; about the times of the
Trojan Teucer, and Greek Amphictyon, before Christ's incarnation 1536. years;
and in the year of the worlds Creation. 2453. So much be said concerning the
year of the world, which passed away: let us now fall downward, and enlarge
our selves upon the first month, of the year; which was indeed the lasting
Ceremony of the following Passover.

PAR. 2.
YEt let me, on the Bye, observe a fault in the great emendator of times: I
will not determine at large, that quaestion, which has exercised so many great
Wits; whether the world was created in the Spring, or in the Autumn; yet I
cannot but gently censure the error, of that great Censor of times, Josephus
Scaliger, who in his fifth book, de emendatione Temporum, ( page 368.)
discourses, to this effect: the more ancient opinion was, that the world was
created in Autumn; but, by a later opinion, it was made in the Vernal
aequinox, or spring, because all things did then grow, bud, and increase, which
in the Autumn decrease, and wither: otherwise, say they, why was the earth
commanded to spring, branch, and bud forth; that with the first frosts of
Autumn it should be nipped, and leave growing? But, this is a vain, fond, and
foolish argument, says Scaliger; though I was sometime of that opinion;
hearken to his reason, for if this be true, says he, when God bad the trees
produce their fruit; there must needs have been grapes, and other fruits
(which are not ripe, but in Autumn) even then in the Vernall aequinox, which
is most absurd. I answer. First, a man must not lightly change his opinion, if
he do, let him not censure it for an idle, babbling, or uncomely opinion; but
part with it fairly, without laying an aspersion of folly, on the argument,
which before was prevalent with him, lest it reflect folly on himself, to be
so simply misled. 2. Secondly, Scaliger might have considered, Adam was
created, not a child, but a perfect man. 3. Thirdly, that God, out of the
ground formed every beast of the field, and every foul of the air Genesis 2.19.
And that God could easily create ripe fruit, as trees at any time whatsoever;
that on every tree in Eden fruit did grow, and of every tree in the garden,
man might freely eat except of the tree of knowledge of good and evil; Genesis
2.16. therefore there was fruit on that tree also, otherwise there needed no
inhibition, and if Adam had not eaten of that forbidden fruit, we had not
fallen. 4. Fourthly, God gave man every herb bearing seed, or seeding seed,
Genesis 1.29. and every green herb was for meat, Genesis 1.30. but because
Scaliger instanceth in (grapes) he might have considered, Genesis 1.11.12. God
said let the earth bring forth grass; the herb yielding seed, and the fruit
tree yielding fruit, after his kind; whose seed is in it self on the earth,
and so it was: are not Grapes fruit? is not the Vine a Tree? Judge. 9.8. The
trees went forth to anoint a King over them, and the trees said to the Vine
come thou and rule over us, ver. 12. and the Vine refused to be promoted over
the Trees, verse, 13. see Ezekiel. 15.2. and 6. 5. Fifthly, the powerful will of
the infinite Creator, was as the Father; and the earth like a fruitful womb
of a Mother, which brought forth full-growne creatures; why were not ripe
Grapes created as well as other Autumnall fruits, ripe also? 6. Sixthly, if
Adam had not fallen, it is more probable, that trees should have borne fruit
all the year; some ripe, some halfe-ripe: some blossoming, some budding; as
diverse trees do now, in diverse parts of the world: as Aarons rod, Number. 17.8.
was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded Almonds:
Ver erat aeternum, placidique tepentibus auris,
Mulcebant Zephyrinatos sine semine flores,
says Ovid, ( Metamorph. 107. and 108. verses,) that is, The lovely Ver kept
still in lively luster,
The fragrant valleys, smiling meades, and pasture,
And Zephyre did sweet muskie sighs afford;
Which breathing through the Garden of the Lord,
To seeds gave vigor; verdure to the field,
That verdure, flowers; those flowers, sweet savor yield.
As Ioshuah Sylvester, our English Du Bartas, in his Eden, Fol. 219. has
excellently translated him: I am sure, the tree of life in the Celestial
Jerusalem, bare twelve manner of fruits; and yields her fruit every
Month, Rev. 22.2. And the earthly Paradise was a type of the heavenly. 7.
Seventhly, if it should be absurd to say that our Autumnall fruits, were ripe
and perfect, at the Creation; as the contray is most probable; yet, it is not
absurdissimum; thousands of matters are more absurd; I am sorry to see
Scaliger, in the superlative of Censure, for little or nothing; so that I
cannot forbear to say of him, as he said ( page 568.) of Aben Ezra, En jecur
Criticum, see how a Critic may err.
Lastly, S. Ambrose ( Hexam. 1.4.) says expressly to the maine question; In
hoc principio mensium, quo Pascha, jussu Dei, celebrabant Iudaei, calum and
terram fecit Deus, that is, in this beginning of Months, at what time the
Jews did celebrate the Passover, according to Gods Commandment, God created
the heaven, and the earth also, Athanasius ( quaest. 17.) Eodem Die, quo
Christus in utero virginis conceptus est, in mundi principio, Deus creavit
Adam, that is, the same day on which Christ was conceived in the womb of the
Virgin, God, in the beginning of the world created Adam. Again, Damascene ( de
fide Orthod. 2.7.) in the spring, Deus fecit universa, God created the whole
Universe. Briefly, (for I remember my promise at the beginning) of the same
opinion, are Leo, ( de Possi. domini. Ser. 5. and 9.) Beda, ( de ratione
Temporum, cap. 40.) Cyrill Hierosol. ( Catech. 14.) Gaudentius, ( tractat. 1.
de Paschae observatime) and Iacobus Salianus; ( in his apparatus, ad Annals
Ecclesiasticos veteris Testamenti cap. 4.) cites forty Authors, or thereabout,
that the world was created at the Spring; and yet in my opinion, very simply,
and superficially confuteth Joseph Scaliger, viderit Lector. Now to return to
the former point; of the variety of the years, and their several beginnings
and endings, with the diverse accounts of diverse Nations: see Alexander ab
Alexandro ( Genesis dier. 3.24.) and how many occasions, and some foolish trivial
ones, caused some to begin their year, from such a Day; but I must apply my
self to the Israelitish computation: that the Jewish account of beginning the
year, and month, was different from that before established, appears by the
express words, Exodus 12.2. This month shall be unto you the beginning of
months, it shall be the first month of the year to you; as if he had said;
it has not been so heretofore, it shall be so hereafter. But, whether the
Israelites in their Egyptian captivity, reckoned according to the old Hebrew
account, or according to the Egyptian account, may be doubted; howsoever an
alteration is estabished by God himself. And now by this means, you may know
which is the first month, when Paschatizing was to be kept: that month whose
fourteenth day or full moon, falls, either upon the Vernall aequinox, or after
it, the same is the first Paschall Month; and hence it comes to pass, says
Cornelius a Lapide; that the New-Moone of the first month, can neither be,
before the eighth day of March; nor after the fifth day of April: So that if
it fall out that two full Moons are equally distant from the Aequinoctiall, as
may be, though very seldom, not the praecedent full Moon, but the subsequent,
designeth out the first Month: Indeed the year began before that time, in
September, and that Month did run out into our October: that month is
called (Tisri) which signifies in the Chaldee, the Beginning; and the
beginning of their year it was. It is remarkeably said Exodus 28.16. Of the
feast of Tabernacles, that it is the feast of in-gathering, which is in the end
of the year. It was said of old, Supremum inferioris tangit infimum
superioris, the top of the inferior thing touches the bottom of the
superior; 2. Esdr as 68. Jacob's hand held from the beginning the heel of
Esau; Esau is the end of the old world, and Jacob the beginning of it, that
follows ver. 9. and the end of one year past, touches the beginning of the
year following: two minutes are not far a sunder, the first determines the
preceding year, the second gives life, motion, and account to the succeeding
year: Vbi desimit Philosophus, incipit med cus; the Physician begins where the
Philosopher ends, where one year ends, the other year begins; that part of
time which determines the old year, initiateth the new; The same feast of
Tabernacles, which is said to be, Exodus 23.16 in exeundo annum, in the going
out of the year, as the Hebrew runs, (...), (...).
Beizeth Hasshanab, is said also to be (as it is in the Interlineary) in
revolutione anni, Exodus 34.22. (...); Tekuphath Hasshanah, at the Revolution of
the year, as it is in the Margin of our last Translation: And though it be
said in the body of our Bible, At the years end: yet the years end is the
Revolution of the years beginning: the words differ more than the sense: That
is, when all things are buried at the return of the year.
Quando redeunte anni tempore cuncta conduntur, says Hentenius in his Vulgar;
and Santandreanus; which sign out not the past, but present renewed year:
Where it is said, Exodus 23.16. In the end of the year; you must not understand
the words of the Jewish year, which God has newly established, but of their
old computation. September which was termed anciently the first month, is now
the seventh month, says the Chaldee Paraphrase, on 1 King. 8.2. Where the
seventh month is called also Ethanim; though the usual name was Tisri; as now
the first month here instituted is called by the Hebrews, Abib, and in the
Chaldee tongue, Nisan; and ordinarily consists part of March, part of April;
the New-moone begins the first day of the Month, as the Month did of the
year. The Sacred things most of them were accounted from the Annus Sacer; and
the Scripture most times accounts by this Sacred year, and yet we may not
deny, but the year is truly distinguished, in vulgare^, a^t Civilem; into the
vulgar or civil year: and Sacru^ vel Ecclesiasticu^, the sacred or
Ecclesiastical year: Some holy things were accounted even according to the
common year, as the Jubilee by Gods own appointment, Levit. 25.9. and it is
generally agreed; the Common year, Quantum adpublica negotia, and res
saeculares pertinet, Moses, ut prius erat, reliquit, says Ribera, on Hag.
2.1.) That is, so far as it concerned public businesses, and secular affa^res,
Moses left it, as he found it.
and he proves it by Josephus, ( Ant. 1.4.) The Jubilee was a sacred, most
sacred feast: For though Civil things, diverse great Civil affairs were
transacted in it: yet they were in ordine ad Religionem, and in respect of the
Jubilee, which was as it were, a Sabbath of Sabbaths: and after 7 Sabbaticall
years fully complete, the fiftieth year was the great Jubilee, which was
blessed of God, with extraordinary favors: for though the year precedent,
being the 49. year, and the last of the 7. Sabbaticall years, they did not
sow, nor reap: yet the corn growing in the 48. served both the remainder of
the same year, and the whole Sabbaticall year of the 49. year; and for the
year of Jubilee: Nor let any man wonder at the great increase of the 48 year;
God is able to raise up children of stones unto Abraham, Mat. 3.9. much more
super-abundancie of Corn out of the earth. But who doubts of Gods power? Let
us see what he has promised; let us see, what he has done, Levit. 25.21. I
will command my blessing on you, in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth
fruit, for three years; was he not able to perform his promise? or, was he
not as good as his word? He spoke the (Word,) and it was made, He commanded,
and it was created; as is divinely said in another case; He who made all things
of nothing could easily crown the sixth year, with an increase for three
years, and without doubt, performed it. Let us now see, what he did at another
time, 2 King. 19.29. Ye shall eat, this year, of such things as grow of
themselves, and in the second year, that which springs of the same; in the
third year, sow ye, and reap. In the first of these years, they gathered in
(as I think) the cadiva, or, that which grew from the fallings of the
precedent harvest, the selfe-sowen corn, self grown corn, as my Neighbors
call it: the year also following, and the earth without tillage, manurance, or
sowing, of its own accord, brought forth sufficient corn for them; the Hebrew
verily has it, Germinatum sponte; which words may signify, either the Cadiva
of the second year, or corn miraculously springing up the second year, which
I hold to be more likely. The English is somewhat uncertain, ye shall eat
this year such things, as grow of themselves, and in the second year, that
which springs of the same; (...) [the same] has not reference to the year;
for then it must be said, in the same; not, of it, certain it is, all plowing
and sowed corn is excluded.

PAR. 3.
THis month of Abib, was the chiefest month of the year, wherein the
Magnalia, the wondrous things of God were vouchsafed to the Jews; therefore
worthy to be the first of months; for the Israelites this Month escaped many
of the Plagues, inflicted on Pharaoh, and his people; and ate the Passover;
and came, though hastily, yet safely out of Egypt; miraculously passed the
Red Sea, on foot, the waters being, as two fir me walls on the right hand, and
on the left. This month, they found the comfortable safe conduct, of the
Pillar of cloud, by day, and of fire, by night. In this month they first
passed over Jordan, and came into the Land of Canaan, Josh. 4.19. In this
month was Christ conceived, and suffered and arose; and that even in the Jewish
70. Jubilee, as a great Hebraizer resolves; which was the last Jubilee, that
ever that Nation, or land joyfully observed: Ambrose (de Paschae mysteriis,
cap. 2.) thinks, the Passover is the beginning of the year, in the Spring;
that gives first Being, to the first month; the renewing of buds, flowers,
and herbs, the overcommer of winterly night, and darkness; the recoverer of
our Vernall Iubilation, or joy in the spring: On this time, God made heaven and
earth, (as is before touched at) inlightening the day, with the suns heat;
In this month, the corn in those parts, began to be eared; and therefore the
month, and the word Abib, do signify an care of Corn.

PAR. 4.
NOw, though this were a perpetual durable Ceremony, that the Passover should
be eaten, on the first month of the year; yet, upon extraordinary occasion,
both the Passover was kept, and to be kept, on the second month, Number. 9.11.
(the people being unclean) and this we may truly call, a second, Succedaneall
Passover; when the Israelites were indisposed, for the receiving of it, in the
first appointed season: Hezekiah also kept his great Passover, in the second
month; whereof two other Reasons are given; First, because the Priests had not
sanctified themselves sufficiently, 2 Cor. 30.3. Secondly, the people had not
gathered themselves together in Jerusalem, duly as they ought, in the first
month. These things adjourned the Passover over to the second Month. 1. The
Peoples uncleanness. 2. The insufficient sanctification of the Priests. 3. The
paucity and absence of people from the due place of offering: observably it is
said, Deuteronomy. 16.1.
Observe the month; Abib, and keep the Passover unto the Lord thy God; for
in the month Abib the Lord brought thee forth out of Egypt. So much be
spoken of the month of the year, which was to be the first month: Now, let
us consider the day of the month, when the Paschall Lamb was to be offered;
which is another of the durable rites, generally to be observed.

PAR. 5.
THere were feasts of the Lord, even holy Congregations, which they were to
proclaim to be holy, Levit. 23.2. Yea, which ye shall proclaim in their
seasons, verse. 4. Among the Graecians Plato (11. de Legibus) and Plutarch, (in
the life of Solon; mention such a custom, as proclaiming by a praeco, or
crier; of holy times, and Sacred Feasts: among the Romans Cicero (2. de
Legibus) mentions the same; Date linguam praeconi, is grown to an adage,
that is, give a tongue to the Crier, or make the Crier proclaim: the Crier bad
them abstain from strife and brawling, and to separate from their lips all
obscaene speeches, Job cap. 1. verse. 5. Mittebat ad filios, Job sent to his
sons; Mittebat quoque, as the Hebrew bear^th it, Misso nuntio, eos
accersebat, says Vatablus; He sent a Messenger to call them: Psalm. 81.3. Blow
up the Trumpet, in the New-Moone, in the time appointed, on our solemn
Feast Day: more punctually, Exodus, 23.6. Aaron made Proclamation, and said, To
morrow is a feast to the Lord, Praeconis voce clamavit, he made the crier
proclaim, as the Vulgar has it. This Proclamation might well be made by an
under-Officer, or Crier; though the Hebrew ascribes the Proclamation to Aaron,
as being appointed by his authority, as our King proclaims, what his Officers
proclaim in his Name; and it is his Proclamation, though others read it, and
proclaim, and Preach it. The very name of their holy days (...), mogned, (...)
comes of the radix (...), jagnad, to appoint a fixed time; likewise (...),
Michea, from their being called together; nor were they summoned only, before
the feasts, (...)
that they might know the appointed times, but even at, and in their feasts
they did blow with Trumpets over their burnt-offerings, and over the Sacrifices
of their Peace Offerings, that they might be to them, a memorial, before the
Lord, Numb. 10.10.

PAR. 6.
AS the first month of the year is called the appointed season for the eating
of the Passover, Number. 9.2. So in the 14. day of the month, at Even, ye shall
keep it, in his appointed season, ver. 3. Month, day, evening of the day, are
styled by God, the appointed seasons: things out of season are less regarded:
Beneficia moment is valent, a courtesy is more acceptable at one time, than at
another; the hitting of the punctum, and articulus Temporis, the point and
minute of time; and the striking sweetly upon (...), a seasonable hint, or fit
oppertunity, is very gracious.

PAR. 7.
IF any desire a proof, that the Jews were commanded to keep, and did keep
the Passover, on the 14. day of the first month, he shall find the words
expressly, Exodus 12.6. Ye shall keep it, (to wit, the Paschall-offering)
until the 14. day of the month, and the whole assembly shall keep it,
between the two Evenings; Number. 28.16. In the 14. day of the first month, is
the Passover of the Lord; and in the 15. day of this month, is the feast,
ver. 17. And this Ceremony was so durable, that they, who were dispensed
withal not to keep the Passover, in the first month; were not yet dispensed
withal, but they did keep the Passover, on the 14. day of the next month.
One reason may seem to be touched at; Exodus 12.40. etc. just that day, 430.
years, that they came into Egypt, to sojourne, even the selfsame day it
came to pass that all the hosts of the Lord went out of the Land of Egypt;
but they were not to go forth, till they had ended their Paschall solemnity.

PAR. 8.
ANother reason might be, it was plenilunium; and both Naturally, they had more
light, in the night, to go forth, with that confused mixed multitude: the full
bright-moone-light being almost of the sun-light: God brought the Israelites
out by night, Deuteronomy. 16.1. And it is probable, the Moon might, that night,
supply the room, and office of the Pillar of fire, which is spoken of in the
next Chapter; and though it be said, Exodus 13.4. This day ye came out, in the
month, Abib, yet Deuteronomie touches at the beginning of their going forth,
and Exodus, of the end of it; the first in fieri, the second in facto esse: and
mistically Plenilunium, says Rupertus, indicabat illam Temporis Plenitudinem;
the full moon did point at the fullness of Time, spoken of, Gal. 4.4. When the
(Fullness) of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made
under the Law; to redeem them that were under the Law, (to a better
redemption, than the Israelites were now redeemed unto) that we might receive
the Adoption of sons, whereby we are now no more servants, as it follows
ver. 7. This also by some, will be thought a good reason, or a strong
confirmation of the Praecedent.

PAR. 9.
MAsius on Ioshuah, 5.10. Hoc unum addam memorabile sane quod in Thalmude
scriptum reperi, ubi de anni principio disputatur, celebrem fuisse, and veterem
opinionem apud priscos Iudaeos; qui Dies vertentis anni Israelites fuisset
libertatis Aegyptiacae initum, eundem olim ip sit fore initium quoque
libertatis, quam essent a Messiah recepturi, that is, I will add this one
thing, and that verily is a memorable one; which I found written in the Jewish
Talmud, where the beginning of the year is handled; that it was a famous, and
common received opinion, among the Ancient Jews; that Messiah should begin to
deliver them, on the selfsame day of the year; that God, by Moses, delivered
them out of Egypt. How excellently it accords with the truth of our
Religion, every man sees; says he; since within 24. hours of the killing of
the Paschall-Lambe, our most blessed redeemer was crucified, and by the
sprinckling of his blood, saved us. Yea, Eugubinus (on the 12. of Exodus.)
assures us, that the Jews of these Times do fully believe, that the Messiah
shall come exactly, on that day, on which the Passover was offered, when they
fled out of Egypt; which most exactly is squared to our blessed Savior,
though the Jews, who have yet a veil before their faces, do not, or will not
see this clear light.

PAR. 10.
TErtullian cast it in their teeth, (in his book, Adversus Iudaeos, post
medium) thus: Hoc Moses initio primi mensis novorum facturos nos prophetavit,
cum omne vulgus filiorum Israel advesperum, agnum esset immolaturum -- etc
adjecit, Pascha esse Domini, i. passionem Christi, quod it a quoque adimpletum
est, ut prima die azimorum interficeretis Christum; and ut prophetiae
implerentur, properavit dies vesper am facere, i. Tenebras eff^ce^^^, quae
media die fastae sunt, that is, Moses did prophecy, that we should do this,
in the beginning of the first month of new things, when all the children of
Israel, pell-mell, or the whole assembly of the Congregation (as our last
Translation has it) were commanded to kill the Paschall-Lambe, in the Evening;
and be added, It is the Lords Passover (that is to say) the Passion of Christ;
which was even so fulfilled, in that ye crucified Christ, on the first day of
unleavened bread; and that the Prophesies might be fulfilled, the day hasted to
make the Evening (that is to say) to cause darkness, which came to pass, at
Midday: and before, he says, In passione Christi, at the Passion of Christ
(as Rigaltius, and Pamelius, read it better, than it was in Rhenanus) Primis
men sis novorum, is plain enough; and, as needing none explication, is
omitted, and unexplained, by all those three learned men; and it shows the
new occurrences and strange effects begun, near about their going out of
Egypt. But why Tertullian should say, Initio primi mensis novorum, which were
not done, till the tenth, and fourteenth day, I see not; unless Tertullian
thinks, it was foretold by God to Moses, by Moses, to Israel, on the first day
of the month, what was to be done, and was done afterward, in the tenth and
fourteenth day. The sum of Tertullians meaning is, that Christ was slain, as
the Passover was, in the first day of unleavened bread, toward the Evening;
the day hasting to make the Evening, by the mid-dayes turning dark, to adapt
the substance to the figure, and fulfill the prophecy; and therefore, the
sacrifice was called the Passover of the Lord, Exodus 12.11. that is, the
Passion of Christ, which was accomplished, above all other Evenings, between
the two Evenings; the one miraculous, Cum media dies tenebresceret, says
Tertullian, when the midday waxed dark; and lasted so a long time. The other
natural, toward the shutting of the day, Exodus 12.14. This day ( viz. the
fourteenth) shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a Feast to
the Lord, throughout your generations; and doubling the precept, ingeminateth,
you shall keep it a feast, by an ordinance for ever; therefore were the Jews
to blame, to shift off the day, and to translate the Feast, which was nailed to
the Jewish policy, for ever. Though this fourteenth day of themoneth, was
never dispensed withal by God Almighty (for ought that we can learn) and
therefore was one of the rites of perpetual durabilitie; yet the Jews
presumed to change it as is now to be explained.

PAR. 11.
MOst holily did our Savior say to them, Matthew. 15.3. Ye transgress the
Commandments of God, by your traditions; and verse 6. Ye make the Commandment
of God, of none effect by your tradition; and ver. 9. In vain do they worship
me, teaching for doctrines, the Commandments of men: what the Jews before,
and in our Saviors life did practice; their Successors followed to an hair.
Sebastian Munster (in his Tractat. called, Translationes anni, fixioner, page
141.) brings in a Jew, giving a reason, why they varied from Gods
appointment, thus; Sapientes roboraverunt verba sua, plus qua ea, quae sunt
legis; our Rabbis, and Wise men have more regarded their own Interpretations,
than the letter of the Law. So I expound. In sensis favorabili; they trod in
the steps of their Fathers, preferring their own Traditions before the preceps
of God. More particulatly, the said Munster, in his Book, where he handles
the Hebrew Calendar, thus; Patet, apud Judaeos duplicem haberi Paschae
rationem, unam ^egitimam, qua juxta legem Mosaicam, etc. It is apparent that
the Jews kept a double account of their Passover; one lawful, by which,
according to the Mosaicall Law, it was appointed to be killed, toward the end
of the fourteenth day, and to be eaten toward the Evening, which began the
fifteenth day. The other account was (full of Law) invented by the Lawyers; and
for foolish causes erected against the Law of God; by which they put over, for
one or two days, their New-Moones, or Calendar of their months: other where,
in the same book, he promises to show, with what frivolous reasons they
endeavored to palliate, or varnish over this changing of Feasts; and to excuse
the Transgression of the Divine Law.

PAR. 12.
MOst specially to our purpose, Munster, ibid. thus. It is plain, that Christ
did eat the Passover, the lawful Passover, with his Disciples, on the fifth
day of the week, at even; and he annexeth his Reason; because Christ fulfilled
the Law, which established that time; but the Jews abstained from entering into
the Judgment Hall, on the sixth day of the week, Joh. 18.28. that they might
eat the Passover, that day at even, according to the decrees of their
fathers; for the Jews, says he, tooth and nail, hold fast the traditions of
the Elders, eating the Passover, on the sixth day of the week; or on the
preparation of the Passover, Luke 23.54. but translating the Feast of the
passover, from the sixth day, to the Sabbath day; which, by reason of the
concurrence of two feasts, is called an High Sabbath day, Joh. 19.31. I will a
little enlarge the arguments of Munster. The Jews led Christ, from Caiphas,
unto the Hall of Judgment, and it was early, and they themselves went not
into the Judgment Hall, lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat
the passover, Joh. 18.28. therefore, they had not then eaten it, though
Christ, and his Disciples had eaten the passover, the night precedent; for,
after the threefold Supper of Christ, Judicial, Ordinary, and Eucharisticall,
Christ passed the brook Cedron, entered into a Garden, was apprehended late at
night; and the next morning, lead early into the Iudgement-Hall, or Pilates
House. Secondly, Ioh. 19.14. It was the preparation of the Passover, and about
the sixth hour, when Pilat sat down on the Iudgement-seate, and when he
delivered Christ unto them, to be crucified, ver. 16. The preparation of the
passover, differs from the eating of the passover, and precedeth it;
wherefore, the Jews had not eaten the passover before; and none can think
with reason, that the Jews, after they had once apprehended him, would, or did
dismiss him, that he might eat the passover; but they kept him, in
safe-custody, after Judas had once betrayed him; and Judas betrayed him not,
till Christ, and his Apostles, and Judas among them, had celebrated the
passover, which the Jews had not.

PAR. 13.
A Third Argument may be this; when they consulted to take Jesus, and kill him,
they said, Matthew. 26.5. Not on the Feast Day, lest there be an uproare among
the people; they were so superstitiously addicted to their seeming-strict
observation of their Feasts; that if they had taken, or killed any man, in such
a solemnity, it would have made an uproare, or mutiny; therefore it was told to
Christ, as an unusual, and offensive matter, that Pilat had mingled the
Galilaeans blood with their Sacrifices, Luke 13.1. as I conceive, these
Relators intended to have made this bloody deed of Pilat, an occasion of a new
commotion, and consulted with Christ, to that end: Judas Galilaeus, Act. 5.37.
rose up, in the days of Taxing; and the days of taxing were about the birth
of our Savior, Luke 2.1. etc. Then Judas Galilaeus stood up, and he would
have the freeborn of the Jews, the sons of God forsooth, to pay no
tribute; though he perished, and all, as many as obeyed him, were dispersed, as
it there follows; yet those scattered ones continued, and propagated their
Heretical opinions, after Judas Galilaeus, his death; and most especially,
they prevailed in Galilee: In the time of Christ's public teaching, the
Pharisees laid a double trappe for Christ, about this point, Is it lawful to
give tribute to Caesar, or not, Matthew. 22.17. They fully supposed, he would
have answered, yea, or no; and if he answered, yea; their emissary-Disciples
would have taken advantage, as if Christ had favored the Romans, not the
Jews; the Prince, and not the people; and so might have stirred up the giddy
people against him; if Christ had denied it, to be lawful, to give tribute;
the Herodians (whom also they sent) would have seized on him, as an author of
rebellion, as a follower of Judas the Galilaean: but Christ did then most
divinely break their net in pieces, and established the lawfulness of paying
Tribute; so soon as he was borne. Joseph, and the thrice-blessed Virgin did,
in all likelihood, pay Taxation-money for him, as well as for themselves; that
Joseph was taxed, no man may doubt; that Mary also was taxed, is proved from
the words, Luke 2.5. Joseph went up, to be taxed with Mary; for that holy
Virgin was the only daughter, which had nor brother, nor yet sister, says
Aeuthymius on John; and heir of her father, and had land by him, says
Lyranus, (on Luke 19.25.) and Eusebius Emissenus at large, in his Homily, of
the Nativity of Mary. The Tax was to be done, Capitatim, by poll; and so our
Savior not excluded. I am sure, as by precepts, he upheld the Magistrates
authority, Matthew. 22.17. so, he paid tribute for himself, and for Peter, the
then Representative body of the Church; and rather wrought a miracle, than he
would not pay Tribute, a Fish, after a wonderful manner bringing money in his
mouth: nor did he appeal from the judgment seat of Caesar; his Apostle
appealed unto it, and both S. Paul, and Peter called for obedience of the
people to their Magistrates, both Civil, and Ecclesiastical; but, after
Christ, and his Apostles were dead, who signed this obedient Truth, with their
blood, and opposed the denyers of tribute: then the Galilaean opinion of
Zelotes prevayled amain, as witnesses Josephus ( Antiq. 18.2.) and again (
antiq. 20.3.) and once more ( De Bello Iudaico. 7.29.) insomuch, as to that one
particular amongst others, both Jews, and Gentiles do ascribe the besieging
of Jerusalem: Now the remnant of those scattered Mutiners, who sometimes
followed Judas Galilaeus, in likelihood, came up to Jerusalem, to worship
(with intentions too-high swollen, and revolting) whom Pilat prevented, by
mingling their own blood, with their own sacrifices. Pilates act indeed had
been a most ungodly act, if he had not had most certain intelligence of their
resolved rebellion: but Christ found no fault at all with Pilat, but confessing
that the Galilaeans were sinners, and great sinners ( Tertullian, ad Nationes,
1.17.) calls Commotions, and conspirations against Princes, Crimina
Vaesaniae, frantique sins) yet adds, other Galilaeans (understand it, of
the same factions) were as great sinners; and even of themselves, who related
this prodigious act (for he knew their thoughts marching along, in all
likelihood, with those rebellious ones) he says, Except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish, Luke 13.1. etc. So much for the explanation of that
misunderstood story, and the third Argument. That the Jews apprehended not
Christ, on their Feast Day, for fear of an uproare; but, after he, with his
Disciples had received the Passover; and before themselves received it; they
took him, they crucified him.

PAR. 14.
Again, Ioh, 13.1. Before the Feast of the Passover, Jesus knew that his
hour was come, that he should depart out of this world. These words (before
the feast of the Passover) cannot be meant of that Passover, which Christ and
his Disciples were to take: for, they had celebrated their Passover before,
and Supper was ended, ver. 2. (at least, the Paschall Supper, if not the common
supper also) And Christ arose from Supper, and laid aside his garments, and
took a Towell, and girded himself, and afterward powers water into a Basin,
and began to wash the Disciples feet, and to wipe them, ver. 4.5. Therefore
the words (before the Feast of the Passover) must of necessity point out the
Jewish Passover, then drawing on, before the feast of the Passover (the other
words are but a parenthesis) he loved his own unto the end, ver. 1. For
indeed, before the Jewish passover, he was apprehended, condemned, crucified,
and cried, Consummatum est, It is finished; He prowred out his life for them;
He loved his own unto the end, before the feast of the passover. So, there
were two distinct passeovers, on two distinct days. To this purpose, the
words, Luke 22.7. Go, and prepare us the passover; and Mark. 14.2. Where
will thou, that we go, and prepare, that thou may eat the Passover? and
Matthew. 26.18. (...), My time is at hand; I say, the words (having the Emphasis
fixed to the Pronoune) declare that Christ took not the passover, when the
other Jews did; that his time was so marked out from their time; and, in their
first Native sense, and intention, imply Christ's passover, not the Jewish
passover.

PAR. 15.
AS, on the contrary, it is said of this passover, in the year, when Christ
was put to death, Joh. 11.35. The Jews Passover was nigh at hand; for though
Christ's passover was a day nearer; yet the words, Pascha Iudaeorum, was nigh
also, and might punctually sign out the lewish passover, as diverse from
Christ's passover; diverse from the true-right passover; contrary to the Law,
contrary to Christ's practice, Pascha Iudaeorum, justly to be taxed for being
out of order, and opposed to Pascha Legale, or Pascha Mosaicum; for Christ kept
the Law exactly, ad unguem, says one. And Beza, on Matthew. 26 17. Thus, Impium
est, existimare, Christum a legis praescrip to vel tantillum discessisse; It is
impiety to think, that Christ erred one jot, from the prescript Law. Again,
Stet illud, legem prorsus a Christo fuisse observatam; let it never be
questioned, but Christ did exactly observe the Law, with all the durable
Ceremonies thereof, and this rite, among the rest, that he celebrated the
passover, on the fourteenth day of the month; though the Nation of the Jews,
following the Commandments of men, rather than the letter of the Law, observed
it, on the fifteenth day, presently after Christ was buried. I will not meddle
with that controversy of the Christians, which perplexed the East, and West
Churches, till, from almost the Apostles days, even till the time of
Constantine; whilst, in mine opinion, Polycarpus, and Irenaeus were more
moderate; as leaving all Churches to their former practice, than such as made
more garboyles, and contentions, than the matter was worth. I would the Church
had never known those differences, while the orientalls kept their Easter, in
die (...), on the day of his Passion; but the Western Churches, in die (...),
on the day of his Resurrection. See the Epistle of Cummianus (de Controversia
Paschali) set out, by the most learned Bishop Usher, in his Sylloge of old
Irish Epistles, page 24. You have heard the discourse of the year of the
world, that the Egyptian passover was first kept, on the first month of the
year; and on the fourteenth day of the first month, being the only Legal
day. Let us now descend, to speak somewhat, of the hour of the day.

PAR. 16.
THe division of the day is into 1. Natural, consisting of 24. hours; and 2.
Ardificiall, distinguished by four watches, and consisting of 12. hours;
Are there not twelve hours in the day, Joh. 11.9. says Christ (which he
accounts not from Sunrising to Sunset; or, from light, to darkness, which
varied; but from the set watches, the four known watches) as is known to
all. The Persians, and Babylonians began their day, from Sunrising, ending it
at Sunset: the Umbrians, and Hetu^ians began the day, at six of the clock,
and ended it at six of the next day: the Romans, from midnight to midnight
following; beginning at the last part of the first night; and ending with the
end of the first part of the night succeeding. The Egyptians, and Athenians
reckoned the day, from one Sunset, to the other: the common people from the
morning light to darkness; so Alexander ab Alexandro, ( Genial. Dier. 4.20.)
I marvel that he says nothing of the Jewish or sacred account; which was
this: in the old Testament, they accounted the Evening, from the beginning of
the day natural; God himself began so to account it, Genesis 1.5. The Evening and
the morning were the first day; not only were so (called) but (were) so, for
darkness was upon the face of the deep, ver 2. before God said, let there be
light, and there was light, ver. 3. likewise ver. 8. God called the Firmament,
Heaven, and the Evening and the Morning, were the second day. The French, and
the Grecians, preferred the nights before the days; and held, that the nights
were before the days, says Alexanderibid. According to the former sacred
account, the Festival days were appointed, to be kept; from Evening to
Evening, Levit. 23.32. Ye shall afflict your souls, at Even; from Even, to
Even, shall ye celebrate your Sabbath.

PAR. 17.
But in the new Testament, after, or rather at Christ's Resurrection, began a
new reckoning; the day was reckoned from the morning, or, toward the beginning
of light, Ioh. 20.1. The first day of the week, Early, when it was yet dark,
Mary came to the Sepulcher: and Mar. 16.1. etc. When the Sabbath was past --
very early in the morning, the first day of the week, they came to the
sepulcher, at the rising of the Sun; which is thus varied, Matthew. 28.1. In
the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawne from which three places, compared
together, resulteth, that the Sabbath endeed; as the day began to dawne; and
the days are reckoned, from the breaking of the morning, about, or a litttle
before Sunrising: but let us draw nearer.

PAR. 18.
THe hour of the day, was another of the durable observations, belonging to
the Passover. It is a general rule, Number. 9.3. Ye shall keep the Passover,
in the appointed Season: which words extend to the month of the year, to the
day of the month, and to the hour of the day, what hour of the day, it was
to be killed and eaten, is now inquirable. Concerning the first point, it is
most apparent, that the Passover was to be slain, between the two Evenings,
Exodus 12.6. The whole Congregation shall kill it in the Evening, according to
the Original, it is to be read, between the two Evenings, in the duall
number: for the clearing of which intricasie; know, that the word (Evening) is
not here taken, as it is, in the first of Genesis for the whole night, or the
half of the natural day, consisting of twelve hours, because some distinct
things are appointed to be done, in this evening, as the eating it, and some
distinct things appointed to be done in the night, as the burning of the
remainder, before the morning: so that, the Evening here comprehends not the
whole night; yea, the two Evenings involve part of the precedent day, and
therefore cannot be interpreted, for the darke-halfe of the natural day,
opposed to the other lightsome half thereof: but the first Evening is here
taken for the time (toward) the Evening, when the Sun was yet in their
Horizon, though past its middle declination; the day being far spent, and the
Sun hastening to its lodging; any time between three of the clock, and six,
might the Lamb be slain. Thus are our afternoone-devotions called Vespers,
or, preces vespertinae: Evening prayers, though begun, and ended sometimes,
diverse hours, before Sunset; so Suppers are called Vespernae, by Tertullian,
though ended, in Summer Evenings, long before Sunset; this, I say, was the
first of those two Evenings, Exodus 12.6. being used for late day, or early
night; somewhat improperly so called, beginning, at the end of three of the
clock, and ending, at the end of six of the clock. I cannot agree to
Maymonides; that immediately, so soon as it was Noone, began the Evening; or,
that they might kill the Passover any time, after twelve of the clock till
six; for he may be confuted by this; that the daily Evening Sacrifice, was
always slain before the Passover, and that sacrifice in all took up about
one hours time; and in their greatest haste, or businesses, the daily Evening
Sacrifice, was never offered near high-noone; in exigents perhaps; about two
of the clock, and then, how could the subsequent Passover be sacrificed,
within a while of Midday? Secondly, the word [Evening] or the second of the two
Evenings, before mentioned, is used more properly, for that space of time,
which we call Twilight. In Scripture phrase, it is termed, the lodging of the
day, Jud. 19.9. and is a mingled compound, or partaker, both of some light of
the day departing, and of some darkness of the night incroaching; which
Twilight dured somewhat more, than an hour. Observeable is the place, where
the Evening, and Sunset are Synonyma's and of the same signification, Josh
10.26.27. They were hanged on the trees until the (Evening) and at the time of
the (going down of the Sun) they took them down off the trees; and Deuteronomy.
16.6. Thou shall sacrifice the Passover at Even, at the going down of the
Sun; at the season, that thou came forth out of Egypt, or, begannest to
comforth out of Egypt, inchoate, non complete; (...), say the 70. thou shall
sacrifice the Passover of the Evening; the Original has it, Sacrificabis
Pesach in Vespera circa ingredi solemn; Thou shall sacrifice the Passover, in
the Evening, about the Suns entering in at Sunsetting; Occumbente sole, as it
is in the Interlineary, How then was it lawful to slay the Passover (as
Maymonides says) any time after midday was passed? The words, Occumbente
sole, may signify the last quarter, the last watch of the day; from three,
till fix: and the Septuagents, Pascha (...), may well denote the (approach) of
the Evening, from that time. Lastly, the Hebrew phrase, Circa ingredi solemn,
does intimate; in my judgment, the descending of the Sun; almost out of our
sight; or, rather the Time, about which he is entering, as it were, toward, or,
into his lodging; which may well be reckoned, from the second quarter of the
Suns declination, but cannot without violence, be extended to the beginning
of the first quarters declining, immediately after Noone-tide, as the Jew would
have it, Luke 9.12. when the day began to wear away. Briefly, the slaying of
the Passover, was to be, between these two Evenings; not on the fourteenth
day before the first Evening, that is, not before three in the afternoon
(that had been a breach of the Law) not after the beginning of the second
Evening; no, nor after six of the clock; for then they should have had no
time sufficient to kill it; flay it, wash it, disembowell, or paunch it, dress
it, and roast it, that they might have eaten it, in the appointed season. In
other terms conceive the matter thus; these words (between the two Evenings)
may be taken, either Divifim, or Conjunctim, disjoyntly, or jointly;
disjoyntly, for the two Evenings of one day, distant far asunder: the first
Evening beginning from the Sunset of the precedent day; and ending in the
first hour of the night succeeding (which evening begun the day, with the
Jews) the second Evening of the same day beginning, about three of the clock,
in the afternoon, ending in Sunset; which Sunset closed up the preceding
day, and opened the Evening of the day following. These words (between the two
Evenings) are not thus meant, in this place; nor used for the two divided, and
separated Evenings of one day; but, the two Evenings are to be taken,
Conjunctim, jointly; namely, as the end of the last Evening of one day, is the
beginning of the first Even of the next day; one Evening almost, if not
immediately touching the other. Between these two Evenings of two several
days, was the Passover to be slain, and prepared. This is the Reason, why
the Passover is said to be kept, sometimes on the fourteenth day of the
month, sometimes, on the Feast of unleavened bread; which feast was, in the
beginning of the fifteenth day of the month, and not before; because, the
first Evening partaked of the fourteenth day; the second Evening of the
fifteenth day; like as our Evangelist says, Christ was crucified, on the third
hour, Mark 15.25. which Matthew, and Luke imply, was about the sixth hour,
because he was crucified, and hung on the Cross, about both those two times;
so, the Passover is said to be kept, both in the fourteenth, and fifteenth
days, because, between the last Evening of the fourteenth day, and the first
Evening of the fifteenth day, it was to be killed, and prepared.

PAR. 19.
THe next inquiry is, what hour it was to be eaten? Some say, it was to be
eaten in the night; and that therefore, it is called* Exodus 12.42. a (night) of
Observations; or, a night to be much observed unto the Lord, of all the
children of Isael, in their generations. If they mean that they might eat
(some) of it, in the night, none will oppose them; for clear it is, they might
eat, any time of the night, any part of it, conditionally, that all might be
eaten, or consumed with fire, before morning. But if they speak, exclusively,
as if it might not be eaten till the dark night was in, or say, it might not
be eaten about Sunne-set; nor in the first Evening of the fifteenth day, I
cannot subscribe unto them. The Angel did do the great mischief to the
Egyptians, in the night: no time is unseasonable to do good-service, when
that hand of Heaven pusheth as on, or ministers deliverance; God will be
served, both night and day. The Christian Agapa, or feasts of Charity were at
night: quis solennibus Paschae abnoctantem securus sustinebit? who without
jealousy can endure his wife to be absent all night at the solemnity of the
Passover? says Tertullian of an Heathen, concerning his Christian wife.
Pervigilium Paschae celebrari putat Hieronymus, quia Iudaeorum traditio est,
Christum in media nocte venturum, in similitudinem Aegyptii temporis, unde reor
(ai^ Hieronymus traditionem Apostolicom permansisse, ut in die vigiliarum
Paschae, ante noctis dimidium, populos dimittere non liceat, expectantes
adventum Christi; and postquam illud tempus transierit, securitate praesumpta,
Festum cunctis agentibus diem; says Rhenanus, ( in argumento, lib. 1. Tertul.
aduxorem) that is, (...). Hierome thinks that therefore the vigile of Easter
was kept, because the Jews had an ancient Tradition, that Christ should come
again at midnight, as the destroying Angel did in Egypt; whence I suppose,
says S. Hierome, the tradition of the Apostles has still continued, that on
the vigiles of the Passover, or on Easter Eve, it is not lawful to dismiss
the people before midnight, who then expect the coming of Christ; but when
that time is once past, they all then securely, without any fear keep Holy Day.

PAR. 20.
THat the Passover was to be eaten, at a set fixed hour, needs no more
proof than thus, Luke 22.14. When the hour was come, he sat down and the
12. Apostles with him, to eat the Passover, (for indeed he did eat it with
them) as the precedents, and consequents do demonstrate: Hora was constitutum
Tempus esui agni; when it is said, Job. 13.1. Christ knew that his hour was
come, that he should depart out of this world: significantly he alludeth to the
set hour of the eating of the Passover, ut transeat ex hoc mundo, as the
Vulgar has it: A Transitus, or departure there was in the two Passeovers, both
Typical, and substantial, and at a determined hour also; what that hour of
eating the Passover was in precise terms, I think is, Mat. 26.20.
determined; When the (Even) was come; Horam manducandi Paschae designat, he
means the hour, of eating the Passover, says Beda. The time of (killing)
it, was in the Duall, inter Duas vesperas, exactly; between the two Evenings:
the (eating) was, ad vesperam, in that night, Bagnereb, in the singular number:
they might not (eat) till the sun was set, and the second evening entered;
which was within a while of the sunsetting, or vanishing out of their Horizon;
and toward the beginning of the night. Some conclude they were not to eat the
Passover till the beginning of the first hour of the night, because till then
they might not eat unleavened bread: but they must eat unleavened bread with
the Passover. Edit agnum hora Noctis prima, he ate the Passover the first
hour of the night, says Maldonat, (on Matthew. 26.2.) and nothing forbad but it
might be eaten, after the first hour; though not before the evening say I,
most properly, sub vesperam, in the twilight, as Hunnius stemmeth the time,
Tempus constitutum esui agni, fuit crepusculum vespertinum, inter sextam and
septimam horas vespertinas, nostro more numerandi; the set time for eating the
Passover, was the Evening-twilight, between six and seven of the clock at
night, according to our manner of computation, says Franciscus Lucas
Brugensis, comedere agnum post solis occasum, est legem ignorare, to eat the
Passover, after sunset, is to be ignorant of the Law, says Scaliger; ( de
emendat. Temp. 6. page 568.) yet was it eaten in vespera, post solis occubitum,
in the evening, after sunset, says Hugo Cardinalis, Cum coepisset noctescere,
when it began to be night, says Faber Stapulensis, Oecolampadius, the
translator of Theophylact (on Mat. 26.) thus, Cum esset Tempestivum, accubuit;
When the season was come, he sat down: so it was not only the time, but the
seasonable time, the prefixed time: It was not only opus diei in die sui, the
work of the day in its day, but opus illius horae, in hora sua, the work of
that hour in its hour. Dionysius Carthusianus, cum facta esset hora
vespertina feriae quintae, in qua hora agnus Pascholis secundum legem
manducabatur, when the evening hour of the fifth Festival was come, in which
hour the Paschall Lamb was eaten according to the Law, directly against
Scaliger it is said, They shall eat the flesh in that (Night) rested with
fire, Exodus 12.8. It is not et adem vespera, in the same evening, but Nocte, in
the same night, according to the Hebrew and Greek; which I marvel Scaliger
observed not, and ver. 10. Ye shall let nothing of it remain till the morning;
therefore they might at any time of the night eat of it; and that which
remains of it till the morning you shall burn with fire, if they might not
eat of the Paschall-Lambe any time of the night when they pleased, they would
have been commanded presently upon the eating of the Lamb, to have burnt the
remainders: But the precept unto them, to keep the remainders till toward the
morning, includes permission, that they might eat of it, any part of the
(night) before the morning to save the burning thereof. The eating of it, at
the (beginning) of night, or in the Evening, was repeated after the first
Passe-over; and the (...), or practice was by the Jews accordingly performed.
They who might in uncleanenesse exchange the month, repriving the Lamb for a
whole month; they who did put off and translate the day; even they always
observed the hour of the night, and ate it in the evening; nor might they eat
one bit of it, either before sunset, or after Sunrising; the beginning to
eat of it, must be in the Evening, Exodus 12.8. They shall eat the flesh in
that night roasted with fire.

The Prayer.
O Good, and gracious, my Lord God; when I consider and recount within my
self, that of the Ceremonies, belonging to the Passover of the Jews, there
was not any one idle, unnecessary or unsignificant, I admire thy wisdom; but
when I weigh, what an happy change of Sacraments, thou, O God, have made for
us Christians; fewer in Number, easier to be performed, fuller of Divine
energie, I am astonished and ravished with the riches of thy love, exceeding to
us, and most humbly beg at thy mercy-seate, that Jesus Christ our Passover,
who was once slain for us, may be my daily food, remitting my sins,
replenishing me with goodness; so perfecting all my courses, in this life,
that I may be thought worthy, and accepted through him, to be a Communicant, at
his Table in the world to come, for his All-sufficient merits sake. Amen, and
Amen.

CHP. XI. The Contents of the eleventh Chapter.
1. It was a lasting Ceremony, to keep the Passover at Jerusalem, and not as
any man fansied: yet this praecept, binded them not, till they came to
Jerusalem; and notwithstanding, under good distinctions, may truly be said,
to be no fading, but fixed Ceremony.

2. A most memorable passage from Munster, concerning the late great fast of
the Jews. The Jews keep no Passover now; because they are outed from
Jerusalem.

3. The Jews were to root out the Names, and places, where Idolatry had
been: Cities were sometimes so called, from the Idols, in that place
worshipped.

4. Not till David's Time, was the particular place known, where the Temple
should be.

5. David's great care for the Temple so soon as he was enthronized.

6. That hard place explained, ( We have heard of it at Ephrata, we found it,
in the fields of the wood.)

7. The Psalm 132. not made by Solomon, but David.

8. Solomon kept the first Passover, at Jerusalem.

9. The Israelites lef^ all their Cities, even almost empty, to go to
Jerusalem, and eat the Passover, God kept them: when they forsook him, all
mischief fill upon the City, the Temple, the People.

10. Five things in the first Temple, which were not in the second: the fire
from heaven which lighted on the Altar: the Urim and Thummin was not in the
second Temple: Bathcol, and its signification: the Arc was not in the second
Temple: In this third the Arc, Ribera includes the two other of those famous
five things.

11. Diverse reckonings, and estimates, what those five things were: Ribera
censured: the Jews confuted.

12. The last Temple had more glory than the first, by the Praesence of Christ,
our Messiah, and it is cleared by diverse memorable particularities.

13. The Passover from the restoration of the second Temple by Zorobabel,
till Vespasian and Titus destroyed it.

14. The miseries at the Passover, when the second Temple was destroyed, and
the ensuing calamities of the captive Jews.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
BEfore that prefixed time (whereof in the 10. Chapter) they might come; after
it, they might not come; and they must come, dwell they far, or dwell they
near; after God had fixed his Temple at Jerusalem, to See this (after some
intervenient digressions) specialized, Chap. 11. Parag. 8.
Jerusalem must they come; which is the next point. For another fixed and
durable Ceremony was, they were commanded to keep the Passover at Jerusalem:
the month, day, and hour was duly to be observed; and that not every where,
or any where, as every man, or Master of a family did fancy: they had no
liberty to choose their place; but it was to be performed at Jerusalem, Deuteronomy.
12.8. Ye shall not do, after all the things which ye do here this day, that
is, every man whatsoever seems good in his own eyes. Indeed, it was not so
commanded, at the first institution of the Passover, nor could it be kept
there, till they came thither: but they celebrated it first in Egypt, then in
the wilderness of Sinai, Number. 9 5. In Ioshuahs time they are the Passover in
the plains of Jericho, Josh. 5.10. For they were not yet arrived at
Jerusalem: It is also confessed that Jerusalem was not particularly named to
be the only place, where the Passover was to be eaten, till after and a good
while after they were seated in Jerusalem; but by the general indetermining
words, (the place which the Lord thy God shall choose) Jerusalem was
undoubtedly meant, and intended by God, and therefore I am not afraid to place
this Ceremony among the fixed ones, and say, it was eternal, a part post,
not a part ante, in intention, not in execution; eternal from the first
convenient, and possible observation there; not to be performed, till the
Israelites possessed Jerusalem, nor to be performed other-where, after they
were thoroughly settled in Jerusalem; and this is the only Reason why the Jews
of these times observe not the Passover, because they cannot do it in the
Temple at Jerusalem.

PAR. 2.
Munster ( de fide Christian. and Iudaeor. page 26. in fine) which voctate is
placed before S. Matthews Gospel in Hebrew) has a memorable story, and thus
trippeth up the Jews; quid quaeso, juvat vos magna illa poenitentia, quam
fecistis, Anno Christi, 1502, quando vos Iehudaei omnes, in cunctis
habitationibus vestris, and in cunctis terris vestris, and in universa
Captivitate poenitentiam fecistis, quatenus veniret Messiah, fere integro anno;
Puer and senex; parvuli and mulieres; qualis nunquam facta est poenitentia,
sicut fecistis, in diebus illis, etc. what did your great penance profit you,
which you showed in the year of our Lord, 1502, when all you Jews in all your
habitations and Lands, and in your universal Captivity dolefully behaved your
selves, that the Messiah might come, tepenting almost a whole year; young and
old, men and women, with so great a repentance, in those days, as there was
never the like; yet nothing was revealed unto you, you were nothing the nearer,
insomuch as it was a wonder, an hissing, and clapping of the hands to all that
heard, that neither your Law, nor repentance, nor prayer, nor alms, that you
daily do, do profit you: but it is a plain and evident sign that the
Messiah is come. I might easily instance in diverse other things, which the
Jews of these days, do keep as exactly as did any of their forefathers;
but the Passe-over they omit, and profess they omit it, because it is to be
observed in no place, but in Jerusalem. Deuteronomy. 16.2 Thou shall Sacrifice the
Passover in the place, which the Lord shall choose to place his Name there; and
ver. 5. thou may not Sacrifice the Passover within any of thy gates; but,
ver. 6. At the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to put his Name in
(the reduplication is not needless, but intimates a stricter observation)
There shall thou Sacrifice the Passover; and thou shall roast it, and eat it
in the place, which the Lord thy God shall choose, as it follows. See this
point (and not only the Passover, but for many other great matters,
concerning the Service of God, to be performed, where God should choose his
place) strictly commanded, and largely explained, Deuteronomy. 12. from ver. 5. to the
14. inclusive.

PAR. 3.
OBserve also that the Israelites were not only to destroy the Altars of other
Nations, break down their Images, cut down their groves, and burn their
graven Images with fire, Deuteronomy. 7.5. But they were further commanded utterly to
destroy all the places wherein the Nations served their gods, upon the high
mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree, Deuteronomy. 12.2. Yea,
to destroy the names of them out of that place, ver. 3. which the Rubenites
performed, Numb. 32.38. Nebo and Baalmeon (their names being changed) they
(that is the Rubenites) called their names by the names of their Cities, which
they builded; for so it may be read, though the sense of diverse translations be
but one. Here is a sure, fair, and easy answer to the first part of the most
learned M. Seldom his question, de diis Syris ( syntagm. 2. cap. 11.) ab urbe,
an a monte, cognomine dictus Nebo? was the reputed god Nebo so called from the
City, or from the mountain called also Nebo? I answer, the Idol was not so
called from the City Nebo, but the City was so called from the Idol; the
names of Nebo, and Baalmeon, (being Cities so named from Nebo, and Baal) were
changed, as was said before; and therefore changed, because the names of Idols
were not to be mentioned, but they were to destroy the names of them out of
that place, Deuteronomy. 12.3. and Exodus 23.13. Make no mention of the Names of other
gods, nor let it be heard out of thy mouth. Gaspar Sanctius (on Ier. 48.1.)
handles the point thus: An Nebo, Babylonicus Deus, nomen Civitati dederit,
Nominis ipsius communit as nihil affert conjecturae, sed quicquid est, obscurum
est; whether Nebo the god of the Babylonians gave the name of the City or no,
the commonesse of the name proves nothing, it is an obscure point; but I think
I have cleared it; that the Idol gave the name to the City. If the Israelites
had lived on mount Nebo; I doubt not but they would have changed the name of
that Mountain also. As for the second part of his question, in likelihood that
great hill was so denominated, from the reputed Deity of Nebo, there
worshipped: Nabo or Nebo, was an Idol, says S. Hierome: Numen etiam erat
Nebo, seu Nabo, Nebo, or Nabo, was also an Idol, says my honored friend
(that living Library) Mr. Seldom. Mountains might partake of their Deities
Names; Princes did, Daniel was called Belteshazzar, according to the Name of my
God, (which was called Bell) says that great Tyrant, Dan. 4.8. as the beginning
of his own name, Nebuchadnezzar was derived from Nebo, the god of the
Babylonians; S. Hierome makes autem, and ipsum Idolum est, Nabo is the same
Idol; whence I think, the full-read Mr. Seldom said, Certe haud alium Nebo a
Chamos, and Belo Phegorio jure forsan putes; verily you may suppose and that
not amiss, that Nebo was none other but Chamos, and Bell, the Idol of the
Phegorians. Chamos is out of my road at this instant, I pass by him; but
Baal, Bell, or Belus, was one supposed god, and Nebo another: Baal signifies
Dominus, a Lord, and intimates Bell, or Belus his domineering. Belus is called
Nimbrotus in ancient Histories, says Montanus (on Isa. 46.2.) and Nimbrotus is
but the corruption of Nimrodus, Genesis 10.8. Nimrod began to be a mighty one, on
earth, a mighty hunter before the Lord: For he chased the Nations, and subdued
many countries, a famous warrior he was. But Nebo was the first inventer, and
teacher of Chaldee Discipline, and Astrologicall praedictions. Nebo or Nabo, is
rendered Vaticinator, a Prophecyer; the verb Naba is interpreted, to speak or
speak out; the sign of the Noune Nabo, shows some great Majesticall thing:
namely, the very faculty, and virtue of divining, as native and proper to Nebo,
which he imparted to the followers of the Chaldaean Discipline, says Montanus,
ib. Bell was renowned for a Captain, Nebo for a Scholar, both of them
afterward esteemed to be gods, and diverse deities, Isa. 46.1. Bell boweth
down, Nebo stoopeth, and ver. 2. They stoop, they bow down, even Bell, and
Nebo, even those two: their Images (we have it, Idols) the vulgar, simulacra,
so Vatablus; their (...), their graven Images) were on the beasts. S. Hierome
interprets Nebo, to be Prophecy, or divination, in the abstract; but I follow
Montanus, who was the greater Hebrician; and he who makes Nebo, to signify a
diviner; a god esteemed to have the spirit of foretelling, and prophesying of
things to come. It is said remarkeably, Esa. 15.2. He is gone up to the high
places to weep, Moab shall bowl, over Nebo; that there was an Altar on Nebo
the 70. say; that there was mourning for Nebo, the judicious Mr. Seldom
confesses, expounding the Hebrew word (...) commonly rendered, super by
propter, that they mourned for the City or Country, I will not deny; and I
think they wept also, over their bowed Bell, and stouped Nebo, their Captive
Images, as People weep over their dead; they bowed and stouped before Bell, and
Nebo, but now Bell bowed, and Nebo stouped before them.

PAR. 4.
SO much, if not too much, to evince, that no places, where the heathen gods,
or Idols were worshipped, nor any other place which man or men should choose,
was to be the place of the true Gods great worship, but that place only which
reserved as secret, within the closet of his own breast, for a long time after
they were gone out of Egypt, even until the days of David: then the Lord
revealed himself more plainly, that the place so often before spoken of, was
to be in the Temple; and the Temple in Jerusalem, unto which God appropriated
most of his Service, and among the rest, the observing of the Passover there,
and no where but there, when once they had began there.

PAR. 5.
FOr the Iebusities inhabited Jerusalem diverse years, after David was King in
Hebron, 2 Samuel 5.6. in which City of Jerusalem when David was once quietly
settled, I am fully persuaded that the thought of nothing more than of fixing
that individuum vagum, that wandering Arc; and reducing those often
fore-prophecyed general words (the place that God would choose) to the
choosing of some such determined place, as God should particularly design, and
mark out: See 2 Samuel 7.1. etc. At that time God did thus far proceed by the
Prophetical mouth of Nathan, and revealed unto David, 2 Samuel 7.10. etc. that
God would appoint a place, and David's son should build an house for Gods
Name; and Solomon by Name* 1 Chronicles. 22.9. Yet David rested not, but was very
inquisitive, and most eager, to know the special place, that he might provide
Materials for the future building of it, Psalm. 132.1. Lord remember David and
all his afflictions, by which he means not all the Troubles, and crosses,
that David had, in all his life, but all his holy-afflicting cares, that he had
about things Sacred, and the worship of God; or his unresting griefs, prayers,
and alms, after he had made a vow, till God had declared, where the Temple
should be. They enquired not at the Ark of God in the days of Saul, 1 Chr.
13.3. but there was an hearsay that Jerusalem was to be that place, says
Cajetan; and therefore so soon as ever David was made King by all the Tribes
of Israel, the first thing that ever he is recorded to have done, after he was
thus chosen, was to recover Jerusalem from the Jebusites, 2 Samuel 5.3. and 6.
verses. In the fixed Chapter, see his great care to bring the Arc into the City
of David: yet when God had smitten Vzzah, David was afraid of the Lord, and
said, How shall the Ark of the Lord come to me? So he carried it aside into
the house of Obed Edom; but when he discerned, that the Lord blessed Obed Edom,
and all his household; then David went and brought up the Ark of God, from the
house of Obed Edom, into the City of David with gladness; then David danced
before the Lord, with all his might, and Michal despised David in her heart.
When it was thither brought, and set in the midst of the Tent which David had
pitched for it, 1 Chro. 16.1. and the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord remained
under Curtains, 1 Chro. 17.1. David did not like those slack, covetous ones,
of whom God complains, Hag. 1.4. Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your
sieled houses, and this house lie waste? But he said Lo I dwell in a house of
Cedar, but the Ark of the Lord dwells within Curtains, 2 Samuel 7.2 Whereupon
he intended to build the Lord an house, but was forbid, 1 Chro. 17.4. Yet David
rested not here, but having only a promise, I will ordain a place for my
people, ver. 9. and desirous to know the particular place, now, as is most
likely, did he make that binding vow and oath to the mighty God of Jacob; that
he would not come into the Tabernacle of his (Newbuilded) house, nor climb up
to his bed, nor sleep, nor slumber, till he knew the Vbi or settled place of
the Temple. If you ask why he named (Jacobs) God, rather than the God of
Abraham? Cajetan says, it was for the likeness of the oath that Jacob made
when he saw the Ladder reaching from earth to heaven, Genesis 28.21. The Lord
shall be my God; and this stone which I have set for a Pillar, shall be Gods
house; this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven,
says he, ver. 17. Cajetan adds, that David believed the tradition of the
Elders; that the Temple should be built in the place where Jacob saw the
Ladder; but Cajetan; and the tradition (if so it were) are both deceived: for
Bethel, or Luz was not nigh the place of the temple, at Jerusalem, he should
rather by this laft reason, have called on the God of Abraham, who sacrificed
on mount Moriah, where certainly the Temple afterward stood. They are much
awry, who think David made this oath and vow to find out the Arc at Shilo,
or Cariathiearim, or Abinadab's, or Obed Edom's house, or the threshing-floore
of Araunah; David's prayer was, says the Margin in Vatablus, Vt Deus institutum
suum de Templo perficiat, that God should once be pleased to bring to pass
what he had purposed concerning the Temple: all other places wheresoever the
Arc had been, were sufficiently, known to David before, and needed not to be
sought for, or enquired after, anxia animi solicitudine, with such carking and
caring, as David did now; in Tremellius his phrase: but to find out the exact
place, within which the Temple should be circumscribed, Hic labor, hoc opus
est, this David so strugled for, that he might prepare things necessary for the
Temple.

PAR. 6.
THe issue follows. Lo, We heard of it, at Ephrata, we found it, is the
fields of the woods, ver. 6. An Ephramite is all one with an Ephrathite, as the
Interlineary reads it. Judge. 12.5. (should it not rather be an Ephrathite?) I
am sure Iesse the father of David, is as well called an Ephrathite of Bethleem
Judah, 1 Samuel 17.12. to signify he was not of the Tribe of Ephraim, as a
Bethleemite, 1 Samuel 16.1. Aneestors of David, Boaz, Obed, Iesse got riches and
power in Ephrata, and were famous in Bethleem, Ruth. 4.11. as is most probable.
In Ephrata was David borne, and ibi unctus in Regem, and there he was anointed
King says Mollerus. At Ephrata had he this Revelation, where the Temple should
be; Lo! we heard of it at Ephrata, and according as we heard we found; we
found it in the fields of the Wood; in the fields of the woody places, about
Jerusalem: Campos Sylvae nominat Hierosolymam, quae cincta erat montibus
Sylvosis, and olivetis: He calls Jerusalem, the fields of the wood,, which was
environed with woody mountains, and groves of Olive trees, says Mollerus, on
mount Moriah, was the Ram caught in a thicket, by his horns, Genesis 22.13. yet
there might be fields by the wood. The place; which God so long, so often,
promised to choose, is now revealed to be found; and found to be, in the fields
of the wood; upon one of the mountains of Jerusalem, was the Temple to be
founded, and accordingly was founded. So soon, as God heard the petition of
David, and satisfied his desire, by revealing the particular place, it stands
with fair Reason, that David then brake out into these words, 1 Chronicles. 22.1.
This is the house of the Lord God; this is the Altar of the burnt-offerings of
Israel; which words, though they may well be appplied to the Altar spoken of, 1 Chronicles. 21.26. yet they may be extended to the place of the Temple, also. David
foreknowing the place of the Temple, prepares abundance for the building of
it, as it is in the Contents, before the 22. Chapter. That it was David's prayer
to find out, the especially-designed place of the Temple. None will deny, that
David did imprecate unto himself some mischief, if he did lie down on his
bed, or sleep, before he knew that place, is proved by the form of the words,
oath, and vow, in Hebrew, viz. si introjero, si ascendero, si dedero; If I go
in; if I shall climb up; If I shall give; which being imperfect sentences, you
must understand, this or the like sense; then may some evil come unto me; thus
David swear, and ratified his oath by his vow also.

PAR. 7.
But whether David himself recorded these things of himself, or his Son
Solomon related them of his Father David, and from him, is more questioned,
then necessary to be known, or resolved. The Jewish Doctors ascribe this
Psalm to Solomon; so does the late learned Musculus; I will help them to some
Arguments. First, the immediately, and subsequent Psalms have this
inscription, Canticum graduum, ipsi David; a Song of degrees of David; this
Psalm has only this Canticum graduum, a Song of degrees. Secondly, David was
wont to say of himself; Why have thou forsaken me? My help comes of the
Lord. He does not say, Why have thou forsaken David? or, David's help comes
of the Lord. Thirdly, Says Musculus, the later words of the Psalm are wholly
Salomons; and therefore he fathereth this Psalm on Solomon. To the first
Argument, I answer; many, yea most Psalms were made by David, and yet do not
bear the Image, or Superscription of his name. The 125.126.128.129.130. and
others, have only his Frontispeece, Conticum graduum, a Song of degrees; as
this, the 132. has, and yet were not Salomons. Again, when Solomon builded so
glorious things, and made the 127. Psalm; it is written, in the forefront,
Canticum graduum ipsi Selomon; which word, if it had been added in this verse,
should have had force, to make me think, Solomon had indicted this Psalm. To
the second, I answer; the Argument is only probable, for Psalm. 18.50. It is
said, God shows to his anointed, to David, and to his seed; yet David made
that Psalm. So David was the Author of the 144. Psalm; as appears also by
that inscription; and yet, it is said, in a manner, as of a third person, ver.
10. God delivers David his servant from the hurtful sword. To the Argument
of Musculus, I answer, though Solomon use the like form, 2 Chronicles. 6.41. etc.
yet he might do it, imitating the holy words of his Father David, as David in
some part, and a loose off, imitated the prayer of Moses, Number. 10.35. and
admirably enlarged it, Psalm. 68.1. etc. My opinion is, that David was the
Author of this Psalm; and God revealed unto him, that the especial place,
which God so often promised to choose, was his Temple; and his Temple was to be,
at Jerusalem, and, in such a part of Jerusalem. I have not dwelt in any
house, since I brought Israel out of Egypt; but have walked in a Tent, and in
a Tabernacle, 2 Samuel 7.6. If he did dwell he dwelt mobiliter, still ready to
remove, says Cajetan. Spoke I. says God, a word to any of the Judges of
Israel, why have ye not built me an house with Ceders? 1 Chronicles. 17.6. or,
spoke I a word, to that effect, with any of the Tribes of Israel? 2 Samuel 7.7.
But he promised David to apppoint the place; and David knew certainly the
very Vbi of the Temple, at Jerusalem, Psalm. 68.29. David mentions by name,
The Temple at Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. 28, 11. David gave to Solomon the pattern
of the Porch, etc. and the Pattern of all that he had, by the Spirit, ver. 12.
etc. All this ( said David) the Lord made me to understand, in writing, by his
band upon me, even all the works of his pattern, ver. 19. And by the same
Spirit, he did foresee, not only several positures, of the parts of the
Material Temple, but also, the formal parts, even the particulars of Gods
Service. See, 1 Chro. 23.6. and 27. verses, 1 Chro. 24.3. 1 Chronicles. 25.1. etc. 2 Chronicles. 8.14. 2. Chron. 25.27. and 30. verses. Yea, by the same Spirit, did he
foresee the removing of the Arc, out of the City of David, into the Temple,
and rejoiced at it, as Abraham did, to see Christ's days, a far off. We will
go into his Tabernacle, we will worship at, or, toward his footestoole, Psalm.
132.2. Incurvabimus nos scabell^ pedum ejus. We will bend our selveslow before
his footstool, as Vatablus reads it.

PAR. 8.
AFter these profitable, and not unpleasing discourses, not wholly upon the By;
but trenching along upon the maine point, I return, reassuming, that though
the Passover was not to be kept at Jerusalem, till the Israelites quietly
enjoyed it; yet that was the place so often foretold of. David had it revealed
unto him, and prepared for the building of the Temple; and David did, in
spirit, foresee the particular, both form, and matter of the Temple, with the
service of God, though David lived not, to see a Passover kept there; but
Solomon made his dedication, in the seventh month, and in the first month of
the year succeeding, the fourteenth day of the month, he kept the first
Passover at Jerusalem: as he also observed the daily offerings, and the
Sabbaticall offerings, and offerings on the new-Moones, and on their solemn
Feasts, three times in a year; even in the Feast of unleavened bread (which
was the feast belonging unto the Passover) 2 Chronicles. 8.13. for, though it be no
where expressly said, that Solomon kept the Passover at Jerusalem: yet it is
not to be questioned, but he, who was so strict, to provide the daily
Sacrifice, and other things according to the Commandment of Moses (as is
ibid!) did also himself observe it yearly, according to the Law. Neither do
I remember, that Solomon is said to have kept ever, after the Dedication, or
the Feast of Tabernacles, or the Feast of weeks, or any other of the Jewish
Feasts observeable at Jerusalem; but rather, he is truly presupposed, to have
so done, then punctually specialized; for, why did he build the Temple, if not,
that the appointed Sacrifices should be performed? and they were appointed, to
be performed yearly; and therefore certainly were observed, whilst the Jewish
policy lasted; whereupon, I have reckoned the sacrificing, and eating of the
Passover, at Jerusalem, to be one of the durable Rites thereof; which
Paschall offering (as I said before) the Jews, since the destruction of the
Temple, even to this day, have not observed; because, that the Passover was to
be kept only in Jerusalem.

PAR. 9.
ONe objection seeming very strong, is against the continual observation of
the Passover, at Jerusalem; and this it is. Did all the Israelites, in all
the twelve Tribes, leave their several houses, in their several Villages,
Towns, and Cities; and all the men, and some women ascend up to Jerusalem, as
it were inviting their enemies to their undefended habitations, and for a whole
week, besides their dies exitus, and redbitus (their days of going and
coming) expose their young ones, and their cattle, and wealth, to danger? I
will answer, in the words of holy writ, Exodus 34, 24. No man shall desire thy
land, when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord, thy God thrice in the
year. Vult intelligi, ut securus, quisque ascendat, nee de terra sua
sollicitus sit, deo promittente custodiam: God would have them understand, that
every one might safely go up to Jerusalem; nor need care for their lands;
God having promised to keep them, says S. Augustine, ( quaest. 161, in Exodus.)
Again, it is thus promised, Levit. 25.8. Keep, and do my judgments, and ye
shall dwell in the land, in safety; which is repeated, ver. 19. the Land shall
yield her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill, and dwell therein in safety;
absque ullo pavore, without any fear (as the vulgar of Santandreanus has it,
in the first place) nullius impetum formid intes, fearing no man's forces, as it
is in the 19. verse; so likewise Huntenius. The Interlinearie varieth it thus;
ad fiduciam, and ad confidentiam, even to trust, and confidence. A mutual
Covenant, as it were, was between God, and the Israelites; if they regarded
God, and things divine, God kept, and cared for them, and their humane
affairs. Oh let not us neglect things sacred, and spiritual, and God will
watch over our Temporalls, for our good. If it were said to the Jew, Exodus
23.15. None shall appear before me empty: much more is it said to us, says
Chrysostom, ( Homil. 1. in 2. Epist. ad Timoth.) yet alas, who thinks of this
to practice it? Another use also may be made of this. When thou come into
the Church, if the poor lie not at the porch of the Temple; but be absent, yet
the poor man's box is present. That thou may obtain mercy, show mercy; woe
worth the times; the voluntary offertories are ceased; prescription, and
custom, even against the Almighty, are commonly esteemed the only guides of
Devotions; but when the children of Israel did break the Covenant of their
God; when their will worship, was preferred before the prescript of Gods Law;
when the tradition of men, carried it, above the Commandments divine, when the
Isrelites made, as it were, the salt of the Covenant unsavory, then God held
himself discharged from the Covenant of salt. Then did the Nations trample
over them, and lead Israel captive; and there was none left, but the Tribe of
Judah only, 2 King. 17.2.6 18. verses. After Senacherib took all the fenced
cities of Judah, 2 King. 18.13. And Hezekiah, became Tributary to him, ver. 14.
but in Zedekiah his days ( who did evil in the sight of the Lord, 2 King.
24.19) Nabuzaradan burnt the house of the Lord, and the Kings house, and the
houses of Jerusalem, and every great man's house, and brake down the walls of
Jerusalem, round about, 2 King. 25.9.10. And now could no more Passover be
kept in Jerusalem, till the restoration of the Temple, by Zorobabel. No
sooner was the Feast of the Dedication of the house of God, kept for the
Service of God which is at Jerusalem, but they kept the Passover, Ezr,
6.16.18.19 verses; which holy duty they continued all the time of the second
Temple; till the destruction of it, by Vespasian, and Titus. 'Some indeed
would have three Temples; Salomons, Zerubabels, and Herod's; but these know not
what the ancienter Jews acknowledged, that Herod's work was but an enlargement
of the second Temple; which second Temple being made, not without much
opposition, as it is to be seen in Ezra, and Nehemiah, and perhaps by a form
prescribed, and limited by the Heathen Monarch's: was not so large, as the
first Temple; but was, at the last, gloriously ampliated by Herod.

PAR 10.
AGainst the learned, and accute opinion of Genebrard (on whose side, are Elias
Levita, David Kimchi, and Rabbi Jacob) the Jesuit Ribera struggleth hard (on
Hag. 1. and 2. Chapters) canvasing this point; whether the five things were
wanting, in the second Temple, which were in the first Temple? Genebrard, and
many others, of great note, say, that the fire from heaven, which lighted on
the Altar, Levit. 9.24. was not in the second Temple. Ribera affirms it, from
the authority of, 2 Macc. 1, 19. but say I, that was rather water than fire. No
fire, but thick water, ver. 20. and, if at the shining of the Sun; a great
fire was kindled, either the Suns heat might naturally burn the subjacent
combustible things, as it does the Phoenix and her deathbed of Spices; or, if
it were an heavenly fire extraordinary, it was a new fire, like that of Elijabs
(whose fire did kindle, at the end of Eliah his short prayer, whether the Sun
shined or no, 1 Kin. 18.38.) or like those descending fires (which expected not
the shining, heating, or kindling from the Sun) 2 King. 1.10. and 12. verses;
the old sacred fire of the Altar, it was not. And herein Ribera was foulely
deceived (that I may not now question the authority of the second Book of
Macchabecs) How apt Naptha is to conceive fire, every Scholar knows; even as
apt as Pitch, Brimstone, or Powder; it being a kind of liquid bitumen; but
Nehemiah himself called this thing Napthan, 2 Macc. 1.36. which little
differs from (...) in Greek, or Naptha in Latin; and out of doubt, poynted
plainly, that Art, and Nature concurred without miracle, to kindle that fire,
though the King of Persia understood not so much.

2. The Vrim, and Thummim was not in the second Temple; say the whole streams,
with Genebrand. Ribera opposes it, grounding only on Josephus. But the great
vaunter of his own Nation, is not a fit man to cross the current; and yet
Josephus himself ( Antiq. 3.9.) confesses, that 200* years before he writ
so; the virtue of them failed; God being angry for the prevarication of his
Laws; as if they angered not God, above 200. years. And yet, if it were so,
there is no mention of them, near the days of our Savior; nor were they in
the Temple, with him; and, after bis death, at the destruction of the Temple,
other Monuments, and sacred reposites being found, the Ark was not found. Some,
as polluted, were put from the Priesthood; and the Governor told them, they
should not eat of the most holy, till there stood up a Priest, with Vrim, and
with Thummim, Ezra. 2.69. which is repeated, Nehe. 7.65. Now, though the
Governor did hope, that the Lord would give the same privileges to the
intended second Temple, as he had to the first: yet, fince we know no such
thing, we need not believe it; but may firmly conclude, that at the building
of the second Temple, they then had them not; though they stood, in expectancy
thereof; and if they had them, in likelihood; we should have heard of it. Some
write, says Vatablus, on this last place; that this must needs be understood
of Christ; for the Vrim, and the Thummim, which Moses put in the breast plate,
were not in the second Temple. Montanus thinks, Tempore Iremiae desiisse, that
they ended, in the days of Jeremy the Prophet; and the reason of not finding
them again, he ascribes to this; Id agente Deo, ut hominum genus sanctiorum,
etiam, rerum quae novi Testamenti tempore oblata sunt, desiderio, and
expectatione afficerentur: It was Gods good will, and pleasure so to have it,
that men might be affected with the desire, and expectation of more holy
things, which were offered, in the time of the new Testament; you shall find
the decay of the Vrim, and Thummim, confirmed by the Tractat Jomah, Rabbi
Salomoh; Joseph Ben-Gorion; Abrabureb in his Commentary on Pirke Aboth; and
Rab. Aben-Ezra. Against single Josephus, the Jews themselves administer an
unanswerable argument, viz. that in the room of Vrim and Thummim, succeeded
another kind of Oracle; which the Commentator of the Talmud Text, from the
Sanhedrim, thus describes. The voice from heaven was not heard, but the Echo
thereof, and therefore they called it Bath-col, the daughter of the voice. This
voice showed, what was to be done, or omitted, foretold future things, and
revealed what was to be thought of things passed. Happy, most happy was that
time, when that voice was heard, says Rabbi Solomon. Most of this I had from
Balthazar Bambach, in the third of his four most profitable Tractates. I hope,
I shall be charitable enough, though I suspect this reflecting voice, the
juggling of the Priests, in the old Law; I am sure, Ben Syra, when he tells of
the voice, that came from heaven to David; let Rhehoboam, and Jeroboam, divide
the Kingdom; when David seeing the truth of Mephibosheths cause, did right him
but by halves, and said, Thou, and Ziba divide the land, 2 Samuel 19.29. I am
sure, I say, he does not establish Bath-col, but speaks of an unreflected
voice, upon that peremptory injustice of David, who did rather, in part, uphold
his own errors, than right Mephibosheth; Thou, and Ziba divide the land; let
Rehoboam and Jeroboam divide the Kingdom. To which let me add, that the
Prophets also did, in a sort, supply the decay of the Breast Plate.

3. The Arc was not in the second Temple. So Genebrard, Lyra, Carthusian,
Dorothous Martyr, cited by Ribera. By the Arc is meant, both the body of the
Arc it self, and the Pedestall, or Subpedaneall being a chariot on which the
Cherubims stood, 1 Chronicles. 28.13. beside, and the Propitiatory, which was over
the Arc; and the Cherubims, and the voice of God which came from over the
Propitiatory. The Arc was not all of pure gold; the cover, or Propitiatory
was all of pure gold, called by the 70. (...), placamen, operculum, by the
Vulgat, oraculum. Ribera thinks it not improbable, for one to say, that it was
a while kept in the second Temple, His only ground is the second Book of
Macchabees. But himself says, perhaps the controversy is sooner ended, if we
remember, the same Jeremy foretold, that in the time of the New Testament, the
Jews should not remember the Arc, Ier. 3.16. In those days, they shall say
no more the Arc of the Convenant of the Lord; neither shall it come to mind,
neither shall they remember it, etc. But, by his leave, this ends the
controversy little the sooner; for it might be in the second Temple, and yet
not, in the time of the New Testament: Just, as Josephus said before of the
Vrim, and Thummim, if he said true. In secundo Templo (says Gaspar Sanctius,
on the place of Jeremy.) Arca Domini non fuit, in the second Temple, there was
not the Ark of the Lord. Porchetus ( part. 1. victoriae contra Hebraeos, cap.
4. fol. 19.) thus; In libro Talmud, qui dicitur [Ioma] dicitur, in Sanctuario
secundo non fuit Arca; in the Book of the Talmud, which is called [Ioma] it is
written: In the second Temple, there was no Arc. And Tradition says, that
with it was taken away the pot of Manna, the Chrismatory, or vessel of oil;
the rod of Aaron, with the Almonds, and Buds, the golden Emrods, which the
Philistims offered, 1 Samuel 6.17. With the golden Mice, ver. 18. and Coffer
holding them. Comestor, said, that the Arc was carried in triumph of Titus,
and is now kept at Rome, in the Church of S. John of Lateran. Ribera himself
(on the fabric of the Temple, 2.2.) says, this is false, and disproves it by
Josephus. Christopher Castrus (on Jeremy 3.) proves, Satis, superque, very
abundantly, that the Arc was not in the second Temple. Chrysostom. oratione.
3.3. adversus Iudaeos denies the heavenly fire, the Vrim, and Thummim, and the
Oracle from the Propitiatory to be in the second Temple. Now the Propitiatory
was a part of the Arc; and the Divine presence gave answers from the Oracle;
and therefore, some needed not to make distinct things of the presence of God,
in shining, or in a cloud; in the oracle of the Propitiatory, and in the Spirit
of Prophecy; for, the divine Presence answering from the Propitiatory, was the
Prophetical Spirit; and when the Arc, and propitiatory were not in the Temple
restored, no more was the presence of God, or the Oracle, following from the
Spirit of Prophecy. Ribera made the Arc comprise these three last things.

PAR. 11.
A Man might weary himself, and the Reader, in the several reckonings of the
five things wanting. Galatinus running one way, the later Jesuits another way.
Porchetus ( prima part victoriae contra Hebraeos, cap. 7. fol. 19.) has
accounts diverse, all from the Talmud, saying, these five things were wanting;
Vrim, Thummim, Archa, Ignis, Deitas, and S. Sanctus: the Vrim, and Thummim, the
Arc, the holy Fire, the Presence of God, and the Holy Ghost. Again, he
recknoneth these from the Talmud; Archas Cherub, Ignis, Sechina, or Dietas, S.
Sanctus; Vrim and Thummim, the Arc, the Cherub, the Fire, the Sechina, or
Presence of God, the Holy Ghost, the Vrim and Thummim; from the gloss of the
Talmud he reckons, Ignis, Oleum, Vnctionis, Archa, S. Sanctus, Vrim and
Thummim; the Fire, the Holy anointing Oil, the Arc, the Holy Ghost, the
Vrim, and the Thummim. Ribera does not amiss, by answering three, to esteem
that all five be answered; but he does ill, to call it a fable of the Jews;
and is not able to prove, that the heavenly fire, Vrim, and Thummim, and the
Arc, were in the second Temple. These things I have purposely enlarged, to
confound the obstinate Jew; the first Temple had these glorious things; which
the second Temple wanted, till Christ came. The first exceeded the second, in
all outward glory; for, Ezra. 3.12. Many of the Priests, and Levites, and
chief of the fathers, who were ancient men, and had seen the first house when
the foundation of the second house was laid before their eyes, wepts with a
loud voice: for, the Temple lay destroyed, not sixty years, says Tremell;
and these ancients wept only, because they saw the second Temple could not be
equal to the first. Augustine ( De Civit. Dei, 18.28.) Ex quo instauratum est,
nunquam ostenditur habuisse tantam, gloriam quantam habuit tempore Salomonis:
Since the time, that the Temple was renewed, it could never be proved, that it
had so great glory, as it had, in the days of Solomon: No, say I, though you
add Herod's structures, and so S. Augustine means. See this confirmed by
Galatinus (4.3.) Blame not me, if I oppose the learned Ribera; since his
brother Jesuit Christopher Castrensis, on the place, maintains the contrary
to him; and refutes him by name. Likewise, I have seldom observed the wary
Leonardus Coquaeus, humani aliquid pati, to have erred like a man; yet his
lukewarm fort ass, peradventure, that Herod's Temple exceeded Salomons, is
unseasonable, too hard of digestion, and to be spued out. Though Ribera (on
Hag. 2. number. 45. etc. from the two Josephus, prefers Herod's Temple, and
great charges; yet David gave more, than ever Herod was worth. See 1 Chro.
29.3.4. 1 Chro. 18.11. especially, 1 Chro. 22.14. and 16. verses, an 100000.
talents of gold; and a 1000000. talents of silver; besides, what Solomon, and
the Princes, and people offered. Hag. 2.9. The Prophet says, the glory of this
later house shall be greater than the former, and the desire of all Nations
shall come, and I will fill this house with glory. This all Jews confess; yet
they deny the Messiah is come, of whom principally those words must be
understood; though they may be applied, Sensusecundario, in a second sense, to
the Chruch, the body of Christ; as the 70. and Augustine sense it. But,
Rupertus, Lyranus, Burgensis, Vatablus, Galatinus, Rabbi Abiba, misprinted
Aniba, and Beda cited by Leonardus Coquaeus, Ambrose ( lib. 3. epist. 12. and
Cyrill. ( in Genesis lib. 15.) expound these words of the Messiah. So Adrianus
Finus ( in flagello Judaeorum, 5.2. Johannes Eckius, and Paulus Palacius; these
are cited by Ribera. Aquinas (on 29. of Esaias) Hugo, Dionysius, Isidorus, are
also cited by the consenting Christopher Castrensis to this purpose, Leonardus
Coquaeus excellently illustrateth this point; and, above all, the Prophet
Malachy 3.1. correspondently, Statim venit ad Templum suus dominator, quem vos
quaeritis; and angelous Testamenti, quem vos vultis; The Lord whom ye seek,
shall suddenly come to his Temple; even the messenger of his Covenant, whom ye
delight in. And now, let me say, in honor of my dear Savior, that he was a
Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of Gods people Israel, Luke. 2.32.
that the glory of the second Temple in him, and by him, was far greater, than
the glory of Salomons time, Judge by these comparisons.

PAR. 12.
1. THE Jews had the presence of God in a cloud, or in the brightness, Christ
was Emmanuel, God with us; we had the presence of God in Christ. Gods presence
to them was separable, and separated; Gods presence to Christ, by Hypostaticall
Union, was inseparable; if Gods presence, in Nube, or nubecula Iudaeorum, in
the (Cloud) of the Jews, was such a Prerogative, much greater was the
presence, in the flesh of Christ, with which he was clouded, Christopher
Caster: Sicut in Templo Salomonis, Praesentia dei nebula aliqua, aut fulgore
declarata, dicebatur gloria dei, Templum illustrans, and inhabitans: ita,
dispensatio Carnis assumptae cum patibulo triumphantis ( ut ait Hieronymus,
epist. 150. ad Hedibiam, Quaest. 9.) quae est nubecula, qua tectus est sol
Iustitiae, filius dei, gloria vere dicitur, and illustriorem reddit posteriorem
hanc domum, quam illam priorem, suo in eam adventis; that is, As in Salomons
Temple, the presence of God, appearing in a cloud, or brightness, was
accounted the glory of God, inhabiting the Temple: So, the Incarnation, and
Triumph on the Cross (as Hierome phrazeth it) which is the Cloud, wherewith
the Sun of Righteousness, the Son of God was covered, is truly called
glory; and makes the glory of the second house, by his coming into it, more
glorious, than ever was the glory of the first house. It is not more old than
true, Quod Sol in Nube, Deus in Carne; God in the flesh, was like the Sun in
a cloud. When Christ was first brought into the Temple, the Prophetical Spirit
came upon Simeon, Luke 2.27. and of extraordinary thanks giving upon Anna, ver.
38. Was the presence of God in a Cloud, glorious in the first Temple? Much more
was the presence of God in Christ, of Christ in a Cloud, superabundantly
glorious, Mat. 17.5. A cloud over-shadowed them; and a voice out of the cloud
said, this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased: this voice came to
him from the excellent glory, 2 Pet. 1.17. Was it not a glorious cloud received
him out of their sight? Act. 1.9. Again, was the presence of God in fulgore,
in brightness, such a great Privilege of the first Temple? Certainly, the
presence of God in Christ, who was the brightness of Gods glory, and the
express Image of his person, upholding all things by the Word of his power,
Heb. 1.3. was much more illustrious and glorious; and the presence of Christ,
in the bright cloud, when his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was
white as the light, Mat. 17.2. was more resplendent.

2. The fire falling from heaven upon the Altar, made the people shout and fall
on their faces, Levit. 9.24. But when God brings in his first-begotten into
the world, he commanded all the Angels of God to worship him, Heb. 1.6. Was it
ever so said or done in the first Temple? was the heavenly fire in Salomons
Temple? Did not also both a sound from heaven, fill all the house where the
Apostles were sitting? and did there not appear cloven tongues, as of fire,
and sat on each of them? Act. 2.2. etc. which of these Miracles was greatest?
The fire of the Altar was to be kept in by humane help, and Art: this Sacred
fire of tongues or grace, needed no Art.

3. But the Jews had their Vrim and their Thummim, in Salomons Temple; God
indeed spoke to our Fathers, at sundry times, and in diverse manners; but he
has spoken to us by his Son, the heir of all things, by whom he made the
world, Heb. 1.1. etc. By his Son, whose Name is called wonderful,
Counselor, the Mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Isa.
9.6. Was the Vrim and the Thummim on the breast plate of the High Priest? True,
but Christ was in the bosom of the Father, Joh. 1.18. Were they to harken to
the Vrim, and the Thummim? much more were they to hearken to the words, which
came from heaven, concerning Christ, and concerning the Apostles, Hear ye him,
Mat. 17.5. The Vrim and the Thummim by its resplendencie, guided only some
causes, some people; Christ was the true light, and lightneth every man that
comes into the world, Ioh. 1.9. Whose light was greater, whose glory more
firm, or lasting? Though it did prophecy, yet we have a more (sure) word of
Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shines in dark places, 2 Pet. 1.19.

Fourthly, the first Temple had the Arc and propitiatory; what did that Arc
figure out, but our Savior? the keeper of our Sacred things; before whom the
Cherubines do cover their faces; and in whom are hid all the Treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. And in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, ver. 9. As for the Propitiatory of the Leviticall Law, we have
a better in the Law Evangelicall, Christ forgiving us all our Trespasses, Col.
2.3. etc. He is our Peace, Ephesians. 2.14. We are accepted in Christ the beloved,
in him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace, Ephesians. 1.6. See our privilege preferred
before the Jewish, in many Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Gods Son
is our propitiation, 1 Ioh. 4.10. 1 Ioh. 2.2.

Fifthly, Had they an ointment? We have an Unction from the holy one, 1 Ioh.
2.20.

6. Had they the Pot of Manna? Moses gave not that bread from heaven, but my
Father gives you the true bread from heaven; the bread of God is he which
comes down from heaven; I am the bread of life, says Christ. He that
comes to me, shall never hunger, Ioh. 6.32. Had the Jews their Altars, one
of Incense, the other, of burnt sacrifice? had their Altar of burnt-offerings,
diverse Privileges, strange, and wonderful? Fire from heaven, fire, which
never went out and yet consumed not the wood, of which the Altar was made?
grant also that their Altar never stanke, nor the place about it, nor the holy
meate-offerings, and that never was fly there abouts, nor did women ever
suffer a plunge, or abortion, by the smell of the sacred offerings; nor did
Scorption or Serpent approach the place: nor ever wind so boisterous, but that
a Constant Pillar of smoke, was Pyramidally ascending; grant also the
traditionary miracle of the second Temple, upon Herod's enlarging of it that it
never rained in the day time, till all the work was ended, least the laborers
should be hindered, but shewred down sufficiently, in the Night season; grant
all this, say I, and whatsoever more the factious Jews invent, or believe for
the glory of their adored Sanctuary, yet, for all this, our Privileges go
beyond theirs, and weight more than theirs, though they were tried in the
balance of their own Sanctuaries. For we also, (...), Heb. 13.10. and this
Altar is Christ, say Ambrose, and Bernard, from those words, Revel. 6.9. I saw
under the Altar. Again, Moses, and Aaron's Altar was made of Shittim wood, and
this wood was over-layd with Cedar, by Solomon; Altar vestivit Cedro, the
Altar he clothed with Cedar, and the Cedar he covered with gold; we likewise
have a golden Altar, on which the prayers of all Saints were offered, Rev. 8.3.
And this Altar signifies Christ, says Dr. Estius, and we must offer living
Sacrifices, Romans 12.1. Medullata sacrificia, Sacrifices that have no marow;
better than those which had horns, and hoofes. Nor was Christ only an Altar,
but on this Altar, did he offer the most blessed incense, and the most blessed
Sacrifice, that ever was offered; himself was both (...), an offering on the
Altar of Incense, and (...), Ephesians. 5.2. A bloody Sacrifice, on the Altar of the
Cross; in both a sweete-smelling Savor unto God; an expiatory sufficient
offering for the sins of the whole world. Nor, was he only the holy Altar, and
the holy offering: but he was also the most holy Priest, and has an
unchangeable Priesthood, Heb. 7.14. He was made not after the Law of a Carnal
Commandment, but after the power of an endless lise, ver. 16. We are
sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all,
Heb. 10.10. He offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever, ver. 12. By one
offering, he has perfected, for ever, them that are Sanctified, ver. 14. He
has obtained a more excellent Ministry than Moses, Heb. 8.6. (yea, or Aaron
either) and is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established, on
better promises, ibid. the same Savior being Priest, offering, and Altar which
was in no other Law. Now, would I ask any indifferent man, which Testament had
the better privileges? Or, what was there in their first, that we have not by
Christ, in more ample manner fully accomplished in the second Temple?

Seventhly, to conclude, as they had their Passover, so Christ our Passover
is slain, 1 Cor. 5.7. If they had Prophets, we have had Prophets, if they had
a voice from heaven, we had many; if they raised some dead, many more were
raised in the New Testament; for one miracle that they had, we have had
hundreds; and the Gospel of Christ has lasted longer, than both their
Temples, with all their Jewish Policy: yea for Numbers of each side, we have,
and yet do exceed them by millions.

PAR. 13.
ONce more, I return from my By-pathes, and Diversions. The Passover
continued all the days of the prosperity, during the second Temple; nor did
the Annual sacrifice cease at Jerusalem, whilst the Temple was purified, yet
must you not think, that the proper Passover was tied and fastened to the
Temple, but rather the Sacrifices of the feast, belonging to the Passover. It
is a confessed and yet proved truth, that the Passover was not bound to be
slain, and eaten in the Temple, but might be, must be performed in their
private houses at Jerusalem; but the rest of all the Sacrifices which were to
be offered, during the feast of unleavened bread, which endured seven days,
all those were commanded as well as other Sacrifices, to be killed in the
Temple, at Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 12.13. Take heed to thy self that thou offer not
thine offerings in every place that thou see, but in the place which thy Lord
shall choose, in one of thy Tribes: There thou shall offer thy burnt offerings,
and there shall thou do all that I command thee, ver. 14. I will not deny but
sometimes upon some extraordinary occasions, the Passover might be slain in
the Temple: but, that was not often, or necessary-legall; nor might ever, or,
was it ever eaten there, but in any other part of the City.

PAR. 14.
Mark the judgments of God, in these two points, (though many are most
observable.) First, he who undertook, and performed, to keep their Cities,
during their absence at Jerusalem, whilst they truly served him: the same
Almighty God caused the Romans, to fall upon their Cities, and to besiege
Jerusalem, whilst they were there, when once their sins were come to
maturity. Josephus ( de Bello Iudaico, 6.4.) is either wronged by transcribers;
or wrong in his account (which is not likely) when he says that the day of
unleavened bread fell on the 14. of April. The City was full of people
observant of the Passover: and Titus besieged them, and they valiantly beat
him off. One of the 3. Factions, viz. the Zelotes were slain, upon the day of
unleavened bread, every one of them, by Iochanan, the head of other mutiners,
who closely sent armed men into the Temple and filled it with blood. They broke
the Covenant, and therefore the bond between God and them, was now of none
effect. Nor was the siege ended, till toward the end of September; the Temple
being fired, and the people in it, on the tenth day of August; even the same
day, that it had been burnt once before, by the King of Babylon, as Baronius
collecteth from Josephus, the City was burned after; and mount Sion forced on
the Sabbath day, being the 8. of September, A stone was not left upon a stone,
in Jerusalem. The second point, which I observe is this; that whereas the
Jews cried fiercely, when they would have Christ crucified, His blood be on
us, and on our Children, Mat. 27.25. Titus, as the Jews were taken, even five
hundred a day and more, caused them all to be crucified: Ita ut jam spatium
Crucibus deesset, and corporibus Cruces; so that there was not room for
crosses, nor crosses enough for their bodies, as Josephus an eyewitness
relates it, ( de Bello Iudaico, 6.12.) Lastly, I have either credibly heard or
read, that whereas Christ was sold for 30. pieces of silver, the Captive Jews
were sold, 30. of them for one piece of silver; and more particularly, for
Judas Rupertus observes, that for the 30 pieces of silver; which Judas took
to betray Christ, he had just as many Curses Prophetically denounced against
him, Psalm. 109.6 etc. though I will not avouch, that Rupertus hitteth the exact
number, or that every curse in that Psalm is appropriated to Judas only,
excluding all other of David's enemies. Yet, I dare say, most of them, fully
reflect upon Judas. So much concerning this sixth Ceremony, this durable Rite:
that the Passover was to be kept in Jerusalem only, after the Temple was
once erected.

The Prayer.
MOst infinite and incomprehensible God; sometimes, above all the rest of the
world, in Jury were thou known, thy Name was great in Israel, in Salem was thy
Tahernacle, and thy dwelling place in Syon, Salvation was of the Jews, unto
the Jews were committed the Oracles of God, and the Sacraments of the old Law,
but blessed be the glory of thy mercy to us, the partition wall is now broken
down; and thou, O blessed Savior, did dye, (out) of the gates of
Jerusalem, with thy face to usward, and the hour now is, when the true
worshipper shall worship the father in Spirit and in Truth; and that not in
Jerusalem alone, or in any other especial mountain, or valley, but every
where art thou called upon, and every where art praised. The heathen adore thee
O God; and the Islands rebound thanks unto thee, for enlarging thy Kingdom,
for spreading thy arms of mercy, to embrace them, and for bringing them unto
thy fold: O blessed Savior, the only shepherd of our Souls; O Jesus Christ
the Righteous, who did give thy life for thy sheep, and who by tasting death
for all men, do bring us to life again. All praise, honor, and glory, be
ascribed unto thee, the most holy, indivisible Trinity, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

CHP. XII. The Contents of the twelfth Chapter.
1. The Paschall Lamb was to be eaten in one house, and slain not in the
Temple, but in the house commonly. More Lambs might be eaten in one great
house. It might not be eaten without doors. No Salvation without the Church:
Schism is forbidden.

2. Not only the Priests, but the people of Israel might kill the
Paschall-Lambe: the people might not slay any other Sacrifice: Nor the Levites
ordinarily, but the Priest only. Every one in the Congregation of Israel, did
not slay the Passover; but the Chief, in one household. Maymonides rejected.
Bellarmine truly avoucheth this duty of offering the Paschall-Lambe, to belong
to the privileges of the firstborn, before Aaron, or his sons were chosen
to be Priests.

3. The Levites might offer the Sacrifice of the Passover for the Priests, if
the Priests were not sanctified: and the Priests might slay the Paschall-Lambe,
for the people, if the people were not sanctified.

4. Whether the head of the family himself must of Necessity slay the
Passe-over; or whether he might depute another in his place; Barradius
rejected, for saying Christ himself slew the Passover.

5. A strange story out of Suidas.

6. The Apostles prepared the Passover before Christ came.

7. The Passover was not slain, at the Altar near the Temple.

8. The roasting of it whole, is another fixed Ceremony.

9. They were to eat it roasted with fire.

10. They were not to eat it raw.

11. Not sodden at all with water.

12. The head was to be roasted with the legs.

13. They were to roast the Purtenance also.

14. The Jews came not empty, but offered according to their abilities: and
Christians are, to equalize, if not to exceed them.

PAR. 1.
THe next Ceremony of continuance was, In one house it shall be eaten, Exodus
12.48. etc. That there were some houses in which no Lamb was eaten is
apparent. Indeed it is said, Exodus 12.3. They shall take every man a Lamb,
according to the house of their fathers, a Lamb for an house; yet there is
added, ver. 14. If the house be too little for the Lamb, let him and his
neighbor next to his house, take it according to the Number of the souls:
Whence, I justly infer, that, that house stood either empty, or at least some
few weak people might be in it, which were unfit to be Communicants, in the
Egyptian Passover. I am persuaded that the posts of that door were
be-sprinckled with some blood, for fear of the destroying Angel; which was
not performed afterward; and the non-Communicants might stay in them, and by
the blood be freed from danger. Secondly, I infer where the family was too
little, or small in number, the Passover was not eaten in that house; but they
are it in another house where there was a competent number together. Cornelius
a Lapide, the Jesuit, concludes hence, Agnum non in Templo, sed in domo
immolatum esse; that the Lamb was not slain, in the Temple, but in the house,
both now and ever after; but I answer, if he restrain himself to the most
common, usual custom, I hold with him; if he exclude extraordinary occasions,
and think it was never otherwise; he shall give me leave to dissent. That
these words, [a Lamb for an house] does necessarily include this meaning,
either that no house was without the slaying and eating of a Lamb; or that two
Lambs might not be slain, and eaten in one house, I cannot believe: there
were not more, than one Lamb killed or eaten in one house, some say. Dr.
Willet, (on Genesis 12. quest. 7.) is peremptory; there was not more than one
lamb killed in one house; and elsewhere (on Exodus 12. quest. 12.) in his third
answer to an opinion, which he otherwise justly confuteth, lets fall these
words, though the household were never so great, one Lamb might suffice to
have every one a part, it was not provided to fill their bellies, it was
lawful for them afterward, to eat other meat, it was prescribed to be used
as a Sacramental commemoration of their deliverance; and so to be a food,
rather for their souls, than their bodies. The first two sentences only give
matter of exception. I say then, the company in one house, might be so great
that one Lamb only could not afford to every person one bit. Salomons daily
provision was; 1 King. 4.22. etc. 30. measures of fine flower, and 60. measures
of meal, 10. fat Oxen, 20. Oxen out of the Pastures, 100. sheep besides Hearts,
Roe-Buckes, Fallow-Deere, and fatted Foul. Could one Lamb afford one morsel
a piece, for a Paschall Sacrifice to every one of this household, and daily
eaters? a Wheate-cornes weight of the Lamb could not have been sufficient for
every one, but some would have wanted. Again we never read, that if the
family were overgreat, and super-numerous, they were commanded to divide their
companies and go to other houses; but if they were too few, they went to the
next house. So one Lamb was not killed in some house or houses; but for all
this, two or more Lambs might be eaten in one house, in another house.
Besides, God appointed rather of the two, that they should have too much,
rather than too little, and took order for the burning of the remainder;
whence fairly resulteth he intended every one should have some, and a
competencie, yet some might be left. If the Sacred Morsels had been scant, and
some had wanted to eat, it had been a great sin, the un-eating souls shall
be cut off, Number. 9.13. The man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and
forbeareth to keep the Passover, the same soul shall be cut off from Gods
people. In other Sacrifices, the Primitive appointment was that some parts of
them were to be burned, and others eaten; the Priest being to have his share,
Levit. 7.30. etc. But in the Passover all of it was to be eaten, if they could
eat all, and the remainder was to be burned; not only the bones but the flesh
also. Maymonides (on Corban Pesach, cap 9. sect. 1.) says, two companies might
eat two Lambs, in one house; but they must not be mingled; nor look one
company upon, or to another. By the same reason, say I, in several rooms
there may be several companies,, and several Lambs according to the numbers
of the family; proportioning the Lambs to the fraternity, or the fraternity to
the Lambs; from five, six, or more, both companies, and Passeovers. Christ
and his College of Apostles are the Paschall Lamb in an upper-chamber; yet
the Master of the family, and some other with him, might eat their Passover
other-where, in the same house: In one house it must be eaten, therefore it
might not be eaten without doors, sub Dio, in aprico, not in Bowers, not in
Tents purposely erected, but in their standing houses. No eating without the
house, figureth this proposition; no Salvation is without the Church. Non habet
Deum patrem, qui non habet ecclesiam matrem. He has not God for his father,
that has not the Church for his mother. I could wish those factionists, to
whom the very name of the Church is odious, that they would remember this
lesson, God is not their Father, if the Church be not their mother: they that
are cut off from the Church by excommunication, are in a most fearful estate,
and are excluded from this sacred Supper. The beasts, and beastly men which
were not in the Arc, were all drowned. In (one) house it must be eaten;
Schism, and separations are herein forbidden. In one house or room as some
interpret it: the Chaldee interpreter has it most significantly, In one
company; as if there might be diverse rooms, and diverse Lambs, and diverse
societies; but only one Paschall-Lambe, in one room, and one company. More
Lambs, in populous families, might be eaten in one house, upon no occasion
might one Lamb be eaten in two houses. There was Vnus in una domo agnus, one
Lamb in one house says Adam Contzen the Jesuit: not unicus, one only say I;
yes, says he; and he proves it by Exodus 12.3. and infers that the Lamb
was provided, four days before. What of that? the provision of the Lamb,
four days before, was none of the durable Rites; but served them then,
against the present exigent, the place in Exodus, does not evince, that every
house must have a Lamb, but rather the contrary. For if the household be too
little for the Lamb, let him and his Neighbor next to his house take it, ver.
4. So that one of their houses must be empty, and have no Lamb in it. Nor do
the words contain, that some populous full families, and supernumery, might
not have more Lambs, as I said before. It must be (eaten) it had been a mock
if some had been present and not eaten. It was ordained for use, not for show.
At what age the young Jews began to eat the Paschall-Lambe, cannot exactly be
defined: this I hold, to be most certain. They that were of sufficient
discretion, to judge of so holy Mysteries, and fitted to receive, those did
eat it; but because some come to ripeness, and understanding before others:
there was no fixed time of their age appointed. I also conclude, upon
probability, that the young children that unclean persons, that the
over-oppressed with grievous pains or sickness, being unable to receive, and
eat it, I say, none of these were present in the room or place where the
Passover was eaten. In other rooms of the same house, they might be; there is
no likelihood that they were shut out of doors. The next durable Circumstance
was this. The people might kill the Lamb; the immolation of the Passover was
not appropriated to the Priesthood.

PAR. 2.
THat the people might not presume, themselves to sacrifice, but that they were
to bring their offerings unto the Priests, and they to offer and slay them, is
confessed by all; and apparent in many places, both of Exodus, and Leviticus,
Heb. 7.27. The High Priest did offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins,
and then for the peoples: Heb. 10.11. Every Priest stands ministering, and
offering many times the same sacrifice. It was the sin of Corah, that being
but a Levite, he would usurp the office of Aaron and his sons. much less
might the people dare, to slay their Sacrifices. The Levites might not come
nigh the vessels of the Sanctuary, and the Altar, that neither they nor you
also dye, Number. 18.3. Aaron and his Sons shall keep the Priests Office, for
every thing of the Altar, ver. 7. Yet either Priest or Levite, or any Layman,
the head of a family, might officiate the slaying of the Passe-over. As the
former is true, for the general; so for this their Jewish Sacrament, for the
Passover in especial; no Israelite (caeteris paribus) who had competencie of
means, and company, and other requisites, was excluded, but might slay it.
Every master of the household, either slayed, or appointed others to slay the
Passover, Iubente Lege, by the letter of the Law, says Josephus (Antiq. 2.6.)
Omne vulgus filiorum Israel, all the whole assembly of the Congregation of
Israel, as before I cited out of Tertullian, against the Jews. Philo (in vita
Mosis) Vniverso populo celebrante laetas epulas, quisque se gerit pro
Sacerdote; when the whole assembly does celebrate the Passover, every one does
execute the Priests Office: again, ( lib. 3. de vita Mosis) Non (ut alias)
plebeii homines victimas adducunt ad Altar, mactandas a Sacerdotibus, sed Tota
gens sacrificat; the Laics do not (as at other times) bring their Sacrifices,
to the Altar, to be slain by the Priests, but the whole Nation does offer
sacrifice. Idem, (in lib. de Decalogo) populariter singuli sacrificant, non
expectatis sacerdotibus; ipsipermissu legis fungentes sacerdotio, quotannis,
per unum diem. The same Philo, in his book of the Decalogue says, every one
do offer Sacrifice not expecting their Priests; but they themselves, by the
permission of the Law, do execute the Priests office, one day, every year. By
which, or the like words, neither Josephus, nor Philo, do mean, that
universally all, and every Jew killed the passover. But every Master of a
Family, sufficiently complete in number for the eating of the Paschall-Lambe,
he was the Priests in that business, unless sickness, or some other casualty
of moment, caused him to depute another to that office; Agnus Paschalis non a
Sacerdotibus, sed a multitudine immolabatur; the Paschall-Lambe was slain, not
by the Priests, but by the multitude, says Kemnitius. He might have expressed
the matter, handsomer: for, there is a double apparent untruth in his words, as
they present themselves, to the first apprehension. No doubt, some Priests
killed some Paschall Lambs, namely, such as were to serve their own houses,
and the Master of each house, was selectus e multitudine, Chosen out of the
multitude; and represented the Priest, on the one side; and the multitude,
under him, on the other side. Indeed the Scripture phrase does afford him some
Patrocinie; for, Exodus 12.6. Its said, The whole assembly of the Congregation
shall kill it; where, the whole assemly, and Congregation, has reference to
the particular assemblies, in every private house, where the Lamb was to be
slain; where, one man stood, Idaealiter, by way of representation, for the
rest; for, it is most incredible, that all, and every one, of the assembly of
the Congregation, could actually slay the Lamb. Shall we think there were ten
slayers to every Lamb? Ten or more, even as many, as were to be eaters of it?
Was every Lamb, a Julius Caesar, stabbed by multitudes? no, no; one in each
family, sufficed for that business. Now as we have avoided the one extreme
of such as do think, that every one indeed, of the whole Nation, did
actually sacrifice (though I will readily confess, that every of that Nation
might sacrifice, and not one was excluded; but any one, who had a covenient
house, and company under him, might then act the Priest) for himself, and
perhaps; any man deputed, might do it for his Master, or, at his appointment.
So, we must avoid the other extreme of Maymonides, who avoucheth, that the
Priests killed the Lambs, and flayed them; and the provider of the Lamb
brought it dead to his house, and roasted it, and are it. But this is a gross
error of the Jewish Doctor. The Priests might kill for their own families, who
will deny it? and they only might kill other Sacrifices (for that is our of
question) but he wants proof to conclude, that the Priests only did slay
the Passover, for all the people; and if some few Priests, at some
extraordinary time, or occasions, had perchance done so: yet the Priests did in
trude, and usurp the more common right, and did ill, to monopolize, that
office. Bellarmin ( de missa, 1.7.) Pascha non offerebatur a solis
sacerdotibus, sed a multis, non sacerdotibus; many that were not Priests (I
say, nor Levites neither) slew the Paschall Lamb; and he gives an excellent
reason; Hoc sacrificium institutum fuit, antequam familia Aaron determinabatur
ad sacerdotum; and ideo quantum ad hoc sacrificium, mansit antiquum
privilegium, ut omnes patres familias sacerdotio fungerentur; Before the
Aronicall Priesthood was appointed, and chosen, after the Egyptian passover,
and before the Priesthood of Aaron, the chief of the family, the firstborn,
the fathers of the households had the right, and exercise of the Priesthood
annexed unto the privileges of their Primogeniture; which ancient Custom they
observed in this point, not only at the first Passover, but ever after; even
when the Priesthood was settled on Aaron, and his sons, or families, unless
they were defiled, as 2 Chro. 30.17. or else, some other great occasion
interceded.

PAR. 3.
THe first objection to the contrary. Yea, but it is said, 1 Esdr as 7.12. The
Levites offered the Passover, for all them of the Captivity, and for their
brethren the Priests, and for themselves? I answer, as it is in the precedent
verses. They that were of the Captivity, were not all sanctified together: but
the Levites were all sanctified together. Want of sanctification might make
them unfit, who otherwise had right enough to have discharged the duty. The
second Objection, Ezra. 6.20. The Priests, and the Levites were purified
together; all of them were pure, and killed the Passover, for all the children
of the Captivity, and for their brethren the Priests, and for themselves? I
answer, the Priests, and Levites extraordinary sanctification in the pollution
of the multitude, reached them out an handle, on just opportunity to do that,
which others might have done, if they had been truly sanctified. This answer
is confirmed, 2 Chr. 30.17. Many in the Congregation were not sanctified;
therefore the Levites had the charge of killing of the Passover, for every one
that was not clean; and the unclean did eat it, but not kill it. And God
heard the voice of Hezekiah praying; the good Lord pardon every one, that
prepares his heart, to seek God, though he be not cleansed, according to the
purification of the Sanctuary, ver. 18. and 19. Observe, I pray you, the force
of the illative, Therefore, Therefore the Priests had the charge of killing the
Passover. Why? first, because many in the Congregation were not sanctified.
Secondly, They killed the Passover for every one, who was not there; it is not
said the Levites or Priests killed the Passover, for all, and every one of the
Congregation (the clean might sacrifice for themselves, and their families)
but for every one; that was not clean, did the Priests and Levites kill the
Passover. Lastly, some interpret the immolation by the Priests, and Levites
only, of the Paschalia sacrificia, the Paschall Sacrifices (so Barradius
terms them) and not of the great passover: Sacrificium Pascha, the sacrifice
of the passover; but because, there may seem little difference, in this
distinction: I rather diversifie it thus. They slew, and flayed the sacrifices
of the Chagigah: not of the Sacramental Pascha; of the Herd, not of the
flock: or, if they did sacrifice any of the flock, Lambs Weathers, or Rams,
these were not for the first dish of the first Course, the first night of the
Paschall solemnity (which was to be an unspotted Male; under a year old, etc.)
but for the other second dishes of the second course; or, for other days, of
their great Septemdiale Festum, Festivity of seven days.

PAR. 4.
BEllarmin ( de missa, 1.7.) Paterfamilias per se immolabat, reliqui per patrem
familias; paterfamilias proprie, and per se immolante; reliquis per illum
immolantibus, and voluntate, and participatione in sacrificium consentientibus:
The Master of the Family, killed the passover, by himself; others, by him,
and in him; he properly, they, as Consentients, and Co-parthers: yet Bellarmin
determines not, whether the eldest, or chiefest of the Family, were bound
personally to do it himself; so bound, that he could not depute another in
his room. I, for my part think, that, as the Primogenitus, or Firstborn did
willingly, and most ordinarily perform the duty, in his own person: So, there
were diverse dispensable occasions, which might permit him, to consigne over
that office, of preparing the passover, for some times, to another, in his
place, and, as his substitute, with vicariall power. Barradius (more peremptory
than Belarmin) says, Christ himself slew the passover. Where is his proof?
That Christ himself [might] have slain the passover, I deny not: he had a
double right unto it; first, as Paterfamilias, or Master of the Family:
secondly, as he was a Priest spiritually, of the order of Melchizedek, and had
the fountain of all authority, and Priesthood in him, as he was the eternal
Priest; but, a posse ad esse non valet consequentia; from what he (might) have
done, to what he actually did do, is no good consequence; or, he might have
done it; Ergo, he did do it, is no good Argument: and the question is not, de
jure, of the right; but, de facto, of the deed. This perhaps might be one
reason, why he designed others to slay the passover; lest, if he had slain it
himself; some mis-judging people might have been deceived, and perhaps
thought him to be a Priest lineally descended from Levi, or Aaron (who were not
excluded from slaying the passover, in their own houses) but Christ's pedigree
is not counted from Levi, or his sons, Heb. 7.6. nor is he to be called
Priest, after the order of Aaron, ver. 11. but appertains to another Tribe,
of which no man gave attendance at the Altar, ver. 13. For it is evident, the
Lord sprang out of Judah, of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning
Priesthood, ver. 14. Aquinas ( part. 3. quast. 22. Art. 1. ad secundum) thus;
Quia sacerdotium veteris Legis erat figura sacerdotii Christi, noluit Christus
nasci, de stirpe figuralium sacerdotum, ut ostenderetur, non esse omnino idem
sacerdotium, sed differ, sicut verum a figurali; that is, Because the
Priesthood of the old Law, was a figure of the Priesthood of Christ: Christ
would not be borne of the stock of the Leviticall Priests, that it might
appear, that his Priesthood, and theirs was not all one; but that they did
differ, as the truth from the shadow.

PAR. 5.
SVidas, on the word Jesus, says; the Jews kept among their Archiva, or
Registries, that Christ, about thirty years of age, was chosen a Priest of
their Law, and thence taught in their Synagogues. It is truth, they delivered
him the Scripture to interpret it, Luke 4. but, whether to entrap him; or else,
in admiration of his learning, or, indesire to hear Novelties; none knows.
Certainly, Priests were Hereditary, not Elective; and Interpretation of
Scripture belonged not to the Tribe of Levi only; for, Act. 13.15. Paul, who
was of the Tribe of Benjamin, was requested to exhort.

PAR 6.
HE, who diligently reads the divine story, shall find, how: First, the
Disciples were careful to have the passover provided, Matthew. 26.17. Mar.
14.12. Secondly, our Savior hearkened to their request, as there it follows.
Thirdly, Christ made an exempt of his Disciples, retaining some with himself,
and he sent others, to make ready the passover. Fourthly, those two, whom he
sent, were none of the meanest, but rather the chiefest of his Apostles, S.
Peter. and S. John, as it is, Luke 22.8. Fifthly, in the sacrificing of the
passover, you may observe these distinct gradations; in terms unconfused and
propriety of Language. 1. The preparing of the passover may imply, the
choosing of a fit legal Lamb. 2. Then succeeding the slaying of it. 3. There
was the making of it ready, that is, flaying, paunching, washing, dressing, and
roasting it. 4. Lastly, followed eating of it. Sixthly, when the Disciples had
made ready the Passover, it is likely that S. Peter, and S. John went out to
meet him; for he comes in the Evening with the 12. Mark 14.17. and the
Preparers went from him forth before, as it is, verse. 16.7. Most certain it
is, Christ appointed his Disciples to prepare, and make ready the Passover,
(in which is necessarily included the immolation) and himself came not, till
the Evening, that is, till the exact hour; when all things were made ready;
and when it was to be eaten.

PAR. 7.
IT is a great misprision of M. John Weemse of Lathoker, that the Lambs of the
passover were killed, at the Altar, and brought home to their houses; and his
proof is lame, from Luke 22.7.8. that the Master of the house caused them to
bring back the Lamb to his house; for, what intimation is in that place (yea,
or in any place of Scripture) that it was so generally either precepted, or
practiced? there is no mention of Altar, or bringing back of the passover,
but rather the contrary. The Apostles were to prepare it; the place inquired,
and resolved upon, was an house: the preparation was in an house; the
manducation in a guest Chamber, ver. 11. One Altar (for there was but one)
could not receive so many thousand Paschall Lambs, as was killed, within a few
houses. But, in their houses was the passover slain, and in their houses
flayne; there was it eaten. In all the Evangelists, the preparation, even from
before the slaying, to the eating, seems to be included, within the compass
of the House, and the Jewish professors run with might, and maine, for the
democraticall immolation; but the people never slew any sacrifices, on the
Altar.

PAR. 8.
THe next durable ceremony, is the rosting of it whole, Exodus 12.8. They shall
eat the flesh roasted with fire, and ver. 9. eat it not raw nor sodden at all
with water, but roast with fire, his head, with the legs, and with the
purtenance thereof. In which divine words, five precepts are comprehended. 1.
Thou shall eat the flesh roasted with fire. I omit the natural reasons; that
roast meat has less crudities, than boiled meat; that it is wholesome
feeding, that it is best for supper-meate, and more hearty food, and more
pleasant to taste: I omit Reasons congruentiall; that some might have wood
nearer, than they could have water; the waters might be troubled by accident.

PAR. 9.
Mine opi^ion is, the mystery lay in these things. Principally to signify, the
extremity of heat, pain, and affliction, and as it were the torrid Zone,
under which Christ labored, sweat, and languished, upon the Cross. 2. To put
them in mind, how the Israelites themselves were, as I may so say, tosted and
roasted in the Brickilnes of Egypt; and in the Lime-kilnes thereof. Here, the
difference is to be observed, between the Primary Paschall-dish, and the other
Paschall-Solemnities; between the passover, and the feast of the passover;
between the Sacrament, and Sacrifice. The offerings might be either sod, or
baked, or roasted, or otherwise dressed; the passover, the Lamb must be
roasted: 2 Chronicles. 35.13. At the great Passover of Josiah, they roasted the
Passover with fire, according to the ordinance.

PAR. 10.
SEcondly, this was the next precept. Eat it not raw, Exodus 12.9. In this
point, you may not think, that the Israelites would have eaten raw gobbets of
beasts slain; if they had not been forbidden; they needed no inhibition, to
abstain from raw flesh; or, that God esteemed them, as Canibals, or, as
dogs, to gnaw on raw-undressed flesh; but, by raw, halfe-rosted, or
raw-rosted is meant; and by not raw, is meant not green, as we use to call it;
not, in his blood; the blood, or bloody-gravy may not swim in the dish, or
besmeare the mouth of the Eaters; as is practiced at the Tables of many wanton
stomachs. The spiritual meaning might be against luke warmenesse in Religion;
against halfe-services in holy things. God will not have body alone, or soul
alone, he will not have half thy prayers, whilst the great Compasser of the
earth, and wanderer of the world, has the other part of thy straying
conceptions, Thy devotions must be entire, Matthew. 22.37. Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul: and with all thy mind.
It is added, Luke. 10.27. With all thy strength; To walk in all Gods ways,
Deuteronomy. 10.12. God finds fault with the Angel of the Church of Sardis, that
his works were not perfect before God. Rev. 3.2. God likes not the Laodicaean
temper, Rev. 3.15. Thou art neither hot, nor cold; I would, thou were cold, or
hot; so then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold; I will spew
thee out of my mouth. Raw meat is undigestible, and commonly spewed up again.
To these things used among men, God alludeth, and therefore, forbids
raw-meate. Hither you may refer those precepts, Levit. 19.19. and apply it,
against the Hypocrites of our days, who are, forsooth, all for the first
Table; Gods Religion is their only care; but they esteem not the duties of
the second Table, these cleanse the outside, but not the inside,

PAR. 11.
THe third precept was this. Not sodden at all with water; the Hebrew runs,
Not sodden sod in water; washed it must be in water (perhaps hot water) and
rinsed it might be, to cleanse it from filth; or blood; soked also it might be,
for the better defecation; parboyled it might not be, much less sodden.
Maymonides says, it might not be so much as basted, or dripped with water;
yet, in his opinion, it might be basted, or smeered with wine, oil, or any
other liquor. Butter was permitted, in all likelihood to keep it from burning,
they were to eat roasted flesh, not scorched, or burnt Lamb; especially in
the Land that flowed with milk, and afforded much butter. He is distempered,
who thinks that God prescribed distempering food; meat parched like coals,
rather then well-ordered, well-cooked meat, in so extraordinary a sacrifice,
and Sacrament. In the great Passover of the good Iasiah, other Sacrifices
indeed were boiled in several instruments: but the Passover, the proper
Passover was roasted, 2 Chro. 35.13. The virtue in sod meat is extracted, in
roast meat contracted. Sod meat spends its strength in the pottage, or some
part of it, in bettering the broth, more than the roast does. (I have heard of
some, who have spoiled their meat, to make good pottage,) If any one ask,
what was the substance of this shadow? and why water was forbid, and fire
permitted? I am loath to give this reason; that the great inundation by waters
was passed, but the fire of conflagration was pointed at; or, that Moses his
taking out of the water was here remembered, as past; and the fiery Pillar,
fiery Serpents, and fiery trial of them, was prefigured; or, that Christ did
baptize with the holy Ghost, and with fire, Mat. 3.11. or, that the cloven
tongues, as of fire, Act. 2.3. were secretly resembled. This I am sure of; an
ancient Divine makes this Divine application, Justinus contra Tryphonem
Iudaeum) Christus in Cruce nihil habuit aquae, idost, nihil mitigationis, nihil
solatii in poenis; sed tam dolor, quam amore nostrifuit assus, and tostus;
Christ on his Cross had no water, that is to say, no mitigation, no comfort in
his torments; but he was tosted, and roasted, as well with the grief, as for
the love of us. No marvel, he thirsted, and said, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? At his agony in the garden, Christ was so inwardly fired, and
roasted, as Justinius phrazeth it, that he sweat great drops of blood: nor were
those grumi sanguinis, sine guttis aquae, those drops of blood, without drops
of water, in all likelihood; so when he was as on the spit of the Cross, and
when they dug his hands, and his feet, did not both water, and blood gush
forth? I am sure, when his side was pierced, there flowed out, both blood, and
water, Ioh. 19.34.

PAR. 12.
THe fourth precept involved, in this Ceremony is, the head must he roasted with
the legs. I shall noterre from the matter, though I miss the maine
intention, if I say; the whole roasted Passover on the spit, did some way
resemble our Savior, on the Cross; the spit being a shadow of the lignum
arrectarium; and both the fore-legges and hinder legs bored through, and
strained; or otherwise it had been an unhandsome sight. Each part of his was
to endure affliction. [Rosted] Judgment must begin at the house of God, I Pet.
4.17. If they have done these things in a green tree, what will they do in
the dry? Luke 23.31. Ioh. 13.16. The servant is not greater, than his Lord;
neither he that is sent, greater than he that sent him. If they have persecuted
me, they will also persecute you, Ioh. 15.20. Matthew. 10.24. The Disciple is not
above his Master, nor the Servant above the Lord; and ver. 25. It is enough for
the Disciple, that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord; if they
have called the Master of the house Beel-zebub, how much more shall they call
them of the household? Luke 6.40. (...), perfectus omnis erit; every one shall
be perfected, as his Master. God had only one son without sin, none
without punishment, Revel. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke, Heb. 12.6. Whom
the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son, whom he receives;
answerable to that, Pro. 3.12. Whom the Lord loves he corrects; even as a
Father, the son, in whom he delights: and in our Savior roasted whole, was
God well pleased; no rent in his coat; no schism in his body: no separating
Button-maker, no leader of such obstinate ignorants, to the all-permitting
Amsterdam; no Buchanan, no Knox; the whole in^^re body, without partiary
divisions, must be roasted together.

PAR. 13.
THe fifth, and last appendant precept, to this Ceremony, was; they were to roast
the Purtenance also. This may also touch at the whole Service of God; and
signify their Total delivery; so that no good thing should be left behind, no
quarter sacrifices; no halfe-sacrifices please our God; (...), either all or
not at all: whether in the Lamb, or by it self; or one side of the Lamb, I
will not determine: the purtenance; not the guts, and garbage; not the gall,
not any thing unsavorie, uncleanely, or unwholesome: I will, for my part, not
envy the feasts of those dainty ones, who use to eat the guts of Larkes, and
Wood cocks new-killed, young chickens in the shells, not yet, or newly
pipient; and raw-bacon: Ingeniosa gula est, --
Bello crudelior omni Luxuria incumbit --
that is, The gut for dainties, witty is; hence far
More Cruel Luxury does flow, than war.


The Lights are good food, easy of digestion: some love them above all other
inwards; the Liver, and Heart, are principal parts, healthy, and strong: no
good thing was to be cast away: one part might please one, another part might
be desired by another; here was variety; the head of the company, the Mr. of
the society might eat the choycer-bits: the meaner people might eat the
courser, and more refused, or lesse-desired morsells. This sacrifice was like
nature; it neither abounded in things superfluous; nor was wanting in things
necessary. So much for the 13. preparatory Ceremony, of continuance, before the
eating of the Passover.

PAR. 14.
THe 14. and in my Method though not in Nature, the last durable Rite
preparatory was; that every one, was to bring an offering, according to his
ability, the proofs are these: Deuteronomy. 16.16. Three times shall all thy Males
appear before the Lord, in the feast of unleavened bread, and they shall not
appear before the Lord, empty; 17. Every man shall give as he is able;
according to the blessing of the Lord thy God, which he shall give thee. The
like precept for the gift at the Passover, is, Exodus 34.18.20. and Exodus
23.15. which is thus enlarged, Eccles. 35.1. He that keeps the Law, brings
offerings enough, and so on to these words, ver. 6. The offering of the
Righteous makes the Altar fat, and the sweet savor thereof is before the
most high; and so forward to the 10. ver. Give unto the most high, according as
he has enriched thee, and ^s thou have gotten; give with a cheerful eye: a
reason of strong consequence is annexed, in the words following; for the Lord
recompenseth, and will give thee seven times as much. In this point, two things
are observable from the Jewish professor. First, that every man of ability
came into the Temple; the great first day of the Feast; and there, and then,
was to make his offering, a burnt-offering, either of foul, or beast; yet if
sickness hindered him by the way; so that of necessity, he came tardy at the
beginning, yet his first day of appearing in the Temple, (what day soever it
were) was to him, the day of his offering; and as the first day of the feast,
to others. Secondly, no man was bound to bring his offertory, on the other
days of the feast, though he appeared often in the Court, and holy
Convocation, yet if any man would, it was accepted; and the more Religious the
people were, the more they gave, proportionable to their worth: remember the
royal gifts of Hezekiah, for offering day by day, during their great
Passeovers, 2 Chro. 30.24. and of Josiah, 2 Chro. 35.7. and the most munificent
offerings of Josiahs Princes, ver. 8. Tea, to the people Hezekiah said; Come
near, and bring Sacrifices, and thankesgivings; into the house of the Lord;
and the Congregation brought in sacrifices, and thanksgivings; and as many as
were of a free heart, burnt offerings, 2 Chro. 29.31. And the offerings were
more, than the Priests could kill, ver. 34. It is most remarkable, what even
the most learned Mr. Seldom confesses, and what is a known truth; that one
way, or other, the Jews did pay, by Gods appointment, the fifth part of their
whole estate unto the Lord, and his Priests, annually. Let the Sacrilegious
tithe-robbers, seriously weigh that point: we have too many so devout forsooth,
that they give to God their ears; yet so profane and covetous, that they will
afford God nothing but their ears. A single scute, or farthing, they will not
offer, (how rich soever they be) unless the Law compel them; unless their
Priests be at their beckes; dues, duties, or Revenewes, they cannot abide to
near of; yet God has done more for us Christians than he did for the Jews;
and therefore out return unto the Lord ought to exceed theirs. It was a
well-weighed collection of Chrysostom's, that a good Christian, when he
considers what the Jews paid to their Priests, and Levites, will think
more is due from him: even Horace condemned himself, for having been, Parcus
deorum cultor, and infrequent, a spare, and seldom worshipper of God: David
would not offer to the Lord, but, that which cost him enough for it; nor would
the Father of the faithful, consecrate his Churchyard, or Abrahemium, for a
burying place, till he had paid for it. But, we have a late generation of
Religion-framers, who; as I said before, give nothing willingly unto God, but
their ears, which cost them nothing; and have found (as they think) the
cheapest way to heaven, that ever was thought of by any unless Atheists; by
keeping all to themselves; as if no Recognition, by goods, were due to God, for
his Creation, Universal Dominion, general preservation, and particular
blessings upon men. The Jews gave God of his own, as much as they were able,
let Christians look to it; and that they may the better look to it; (at
least, for the payment of their tyth's) let them consider, what Augustine
writes ( Sermon. 219. de Tempore) let us give thanks to God therefore, because
he gave us good Corn; and let us think of offering, or rather restoring back
the tithes to God; he who pays no tithes, invadeth another goods. St.
Hierome (on the third of Malachi) what I said of tithes, which were wont of
old, to be paid by the people, to the Priests, and Levites; is commanded also
to the people of (our) Church; viz. not only, to pay tithes; but to sell all,
and follow Christ; All in affection, and habit; not always all actually; yet
must the taught man communicate unto him, that teaches in all good things.
While thou with-holdest thy due, thou deceivest thy brother, thou defraudest
God of his due; yea, do mock with him, thou deceivest thy self. But, be
not deceived, God is not mocked, Gal. 6.6. if thou payest not God, God will pay
thee; as we have opportunity, we must do good to all men, especially to them,
who are of the household of faith, Gal. 6.10. Lastly, Origin ( Homil. 11. on
Number. 18. Tom. 1. page 209. etc.) how does our justice exceed the justice of
the Scribes and Pharisees? (as it must, or else in no case shall we enter into
the kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.20.) if (they) dared not to taste of their
fruits before the Tenths were separated for the Levites: and we do no such
things, but so abuse the fruits of the earth, that nor Priest, nor Levite, nor
Altar partake of it: It is convenient, and profitable, that first-fruites
should be paid, to the Priests of the Gospel; for the Lord has so ordained,
that they who Preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: Contrarily, it is
unconvenient, unworthy, and impious; that he, who worshippeth God, and goes
into his Church, and knows that the Priests, and Ministers wait at the
Altar; does not give the first-fruites to the Priests, of those fruits of the
ground, which God gives by his sun, and his rain; I think such a soul has
no memory or mind of God; nor thinks nor believes; that God gave those
fruits, which he so hides, as strange from God: For, if he believed them, to
be given of God; he would also know, to honor God, by rewarding his Priests:
what Christ would have done by the Pharisees; more, and more abundantly, would
he have his Disciples to perform; and very earnest he is, for the first
f^uites of Corn, and beasts; and not for the tithes only: so far Origin.

The Prayer.
Whether it were thy will, O heavenly Father; that thy precept to the Jews,
of rosting the Lamb whole, who did secretly insinuate unto us; that
halfe-Services please not thee; that the Sacrifices of our souls, without the
body, or the body alone, without the soul, are disliked; or, whether by it,
thou did typifie that thou hate division, schism, partialities, and
delightest in perfect, entire unity; or, whether thou did intimate both
these: I humbly beseech the for Jesus Christ his sake, that I may please thee,
both with my soul, and with my body; and that I may ever be defended, and
preserved from any singularity, defection, and obstinacy, and may by thee be
strengthened to keep the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace. Amen.

CHAP. XIII. The Contents of the thirteenth Chapter.
1. Bread and water imply all Necessary food; and sometimes, full store.

2. Unleavened Bread was to be eaten with the Passover, and the flesh of the
Passover, not to be eaten, with any other, save unleavened bread.

3. Maymonides confuted.

4. Sour Herbs must of necessity, be also eaten with the Passover.

5. When leaven was permitted; when the use of it forbidden.

6. The Israelites ate no leavened bread; from their coming out of Egypt,
till they trod on the borders of the Land of Canaan.

7. Leaven betokens, either good or evil.

8. Illyricus his triplex fermentum.

9. How unleavened bread is called bread of affliction.

10. What are the best Monuments.

11. The pracept of bitter herbs is a durable Rite.

12. Why bitter herbs were to be eaten.

13. Christ ate the Passover with bitter Herbs, and the Mystical
signification.

14. The bitter Herbs mentioned in the Law.

15. The Jews used herbs for meat, as well as for sauce.

16. Salt, and Vinegar were not only the Jewish sauces.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
I Come now to the Ceremonies properly Sacramental, they were three. 1. The
Eating it. 2. With unleavened bread. 3. With sour herbs. I refer the
discourse concerning the eating of the flesh of the Passover, until I handle
the first of the 3 suppers; or it may be, I may touch it on the By, in the
interim. Bread and water imply all necessary food; and sometime full store:
Elisha said unto the King of Israel, set bread and water before them, 2 King
6.22. and he prepared great provision for them, ver. 23. Not against the intent
of the Prophet. But here bread is taken properly, as the two other things.
Cyprianus (in Sermon. de Caena Dom. pene in principio Parag. 2. p. 500.) Christus
finem legalibus Ceremoniis impositur us, parari sibivoluit Pascha; and ex
consuetudine Legis, ea quari, quae solennitas exigebat, assum agnu^^, panes
ezymos, lactucas agrestes; that is, Cyprian (in his Sermon, of the Supper of
the Lord, almost in the beginning) Christ being about to put an end to the
Legal Ceremonies, would have the Passover prepared for him; and those things
to be provided, according to the Custom of the Law, which the solemnity of
that feast did require, namely, a roasted Lamb, unleavened bread, sour ^erbes.

PAR. 2.
WE may not imagine, they ate the flesh of the Paschall, without unleavened
bread; nor yet unleavened bread alone, in that supper, without the
Paschall-Lambe: but were to be both served in, and eaten together; the end of
rosting was for eating; and the manner of eating the Lamb, was with unleavened
bread; Exodus 12.8. They shall eat the flesh roasted with fire, with unleavened
bread; and this precept is repeated, Levit. 23.6. Numb. 28.17. At the Even, the
14. day, was the Passover of the Lord (to be slain) and to be eaten, the
other Evening (which began the 15. day) with unleavened bread.

PAR. 3.
MAymonides says, the Passover may be eaten; if they cannot get unleavened
bread, nor sour herbs? I answer, it is not then truly, and perfectly the
Passover; the infinite wisdom of divine providence, so sweetly ordained
this Sacrament, that where Ewes and Lambs were fed, there must needs be
grass, and other herbs; and naturally, some wild herbs sprout up, rather
than the choycer herbs; and may be sooner gathered, picked, washed, and
minced, then a Lamb could be roasted: In less time, also might the flower be
made unleavened, either bread, or cakes, or wafers: likewise, the leavened
Mass presupposes the unleavened, for if any flower be to be had at all, it is
unleavened, before it is leavened. So that the Jew need not suppose the want
of unleavened bread, if they had any corn at all; ye shall eat the Passover
with unleavened Bread, and with bitter herbs; therefore, whatseover the Jew
says, they might not eat it, without either of these.

PAR. 4.
BOth unleavened bread, and bitter herbs, must not only be present; but
eaten, and eaten with it; else it was but an adulterate Passover; and a great
spot, or maime was in that Sacrifice; was the flesh of the Passover to be,
without bread, especially in a Land of Corn, Deuteronomy. 33.28. They may as well
remove bread, from being one of the materials, in our Sacrament of the
Eucharist.

PAR. 5.
IN the Sacrifice of thankesgiving, they were to offer unleavened cakes, or
wafers, Levit. 7.12. and yet, besides the cakes, he shall offer for his
offering, leavened bread, with the sacrifice of thankesgiving of his peace
offerings, ver. 13. And in the new meat offering, or the first fruits unto
the Lord, they were to bring two wave-loaves, of fine flower, baken with
leaven, Levit. 23.16, 17. And yet Leaven was wholly forbidden, in diverse
things, Levit. 2.11. No meate-offering, which ye shall bring unto the Lord,
shall be made with Leaven, for ye shall burn no leaven, in any offering of the
Lord made by fire? I answer, these words, and they immediately following do
evince; leaven is not excluded from all offerings, but only in
burnt-offerings, on the Altar: As for the oblation of the first fruits; ye
shall offer them unto the Lord, but they shall not be burnt on the Altar, for a
sweet savor; why so? because the two wave-loaves of the first fruits were to
be baken with Leaven, Levit. 23.17. Briefly, thus with Origin: leaven was
forbidden, ad sacrificium, non ad sacrificii ministerium; ad sacrificium, non
ad esum, that is, it was forbidden in the Principal sacrifice, not to the
subservient ministers: again, Levit. 23.18. Thou shall not offer the blood of
my sacrifice with leavened bread; which is varied thus, Levit. 34.25. Thou
shall not offer the blood of my Sacrifice with leaven: Lastly, in the Passover
offerings, unleavened bread was excluded even from their houses, and coasts, in
the feast of seven days, which feast was called the feast of unleavened Bread,
Exodus 12.17.

PAR. 6.
THat the Israelites used any at all, from their going out of Egypt, till they
came into the Land of Canaan, I do not see prooved; sure I am, God says,
Levit. 23.10. When ye be come into the Land, which I shall give you, leavened
bread was permitted to be offered, ver. 17. So, the Law of meat offering, and
drinke-offering was prescribed; When ye be come into the Land of habitations,
Numb. 15.2. and ver. 18. And when you come into the Land whether I bring you,
then it shall be, etc. Likewise for the leavened wave-loaves of their first
fruits; this was not fulfilled in the wilderness where they had no corn
growing, but the Law was to take force when they came into the borders of
Canaan, where corn was. They carried no Leaven out of Aegupt, and within 33.
days, they were fed with Manna, till they tasted of the old corn of the land
of Canaan, Josh. 5.12.40. years did they eat Manna, Exodus 16, 35. In this
journey, from Ramesis to Succoth, or, at their resting places there, they baked
unleavened cakes of Dough, Exodus 12.39. Josephus says, the Israelites lived on
unleavened bread, till they had Manna: It appears not, that they are leavened
Manna; nay rather, it is probable that they did never leaven it; For no Manna
was kept above two days, none above one day except the Sabbaticall Manna,
which was a wonder; and (except the re-memorative and miraculous Manna,
reserved in the pot for future times) besides the taste of Manna, was like
wafers, made with honey, Exodus 16.31. If it had been leavened it would have
been bitter or sour: clean contrary to the taste of honeyed things: again,
Manna needed no preserving by leaven: it was steadfastly good, till the time by
God appointed; corruption could not seize on it: on the other side, all the
leaven in the world could not keep it from stinking, and worms, and
putrefaction, if they spent it not, by its appointed time: to put leaven into
Manna, was to mingle things profane with sacred: Dr. Willet (on Exodus 12.
quest. 15.) has these words; it is to be considered, that in this first
Passover, they were not commanded to eat unleavened bread seven days:
neither did they intend so much; but they carried their dough forth unleavened,
not for any Religion but for haste, therefore that prescription, to abstain
from leavened bread seven days, ver. 14. belonged to the perpetual
observation of the Paschall, but the other Rites prescribed unto the 14. v.
appertained to the first Passover: If Dr. Willet, do mean only, that the
Israelites did eat unleavened bread the night of the Passover; but were not
necessarily bound to keep the feast of 7. days, of unleavened bread, till
they came into Canaan: I will not much oppose him, both because it is so
appointed, Exodus 13.5.6. and because they had no leisure till they were past
the Red Sea, to keep much feasting: but withal, he does well to acknowledge
it very likely; that from the hour of their departure, they are no leavened
bread, for the next 7. days, and after: for they baked unleavened cakes of the
dough, ver. 39. That the Israelites ate the roasted Passover, with unleaved
bread; I find generally confessed; this durable ceremony bound them, even in
Egypt, and in the wilderness, Numb. 9.11. and ever after.

PAR. 7.
LEaven may very well signify two things; yea, two disparate, if not contrary
things: briefly it may shadow out both good and evil: you shall find it
taken in the good sense, Matthew. 13.33. The kingdom of heaven is like unto
leaven; so Luke 13.20.21. The Kingdom of God is like a Leaven, which a woman
took, and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened: thus
leaven implies an effectual good, unseene operation, and communication of its
proper virtue, continuance in things mingled with it; a spreading or growing
from a small matter, to a great; a diffusive grace. Again, leaven does
shadow-out, a godly affection, mingled with some grief, as the Psalmists heart
was leavened, Psalm. 73.21. For so the word signifies; the Radix is all one
with that of Levit. 7.13. Indeed, our Translation reads, Thus my heart was
grieved; acescit cor meum, says the Interlineary, My heart waned sour; and
perhaps, this may be the reason, why, after deliverance from grief, and
sorrow, the devout and godly duty of thanksgiving, was appointed to be offered
with leavened bread, Levit. 7.13. As leaven may be taken, and is taken in an
ill sense; so, our bread, in our Paschatizing must be unleavened. Leaven is
taken for malice, and froward affections, 1 Cor. 5.8. Leaven is taken for
erroneous opinions; Take heed and beware (both are specialized) of the leaven
of the Pharisees, and Sadducees, Matt. 16 6. And the leaven of Herod, Marks
8.15. Leaven is taken both for a corrupting, infectious disposition; and for a
pronenesse, and inclination of the subject corruptible; for corrupted nature;
for the whole mass of us deformed, and soured; Purge out therefore the old
leaven (not, that we may be newly-leavened, but) that ye may be a new lump,
as ye are unleavened, 1 Cor. 5.7. Unleavened bread, is more pure, more
natural, more free from art, and humane devices; and though Tostatus say,
Leavened bread is Saporosior, and stomacho salubrior, more savoury, and more
wholesome for the stomach; yet I say, dainty, tender natures prove it
otherwise; and unleavened bread does signify incorruption; Let us keep the
feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice, and wickedness,
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity, and truth. 1 Cor. 5.8.

PAR. 8.
I Llyricus, upon the word, Fermentum, or leaven, thus, There is a threefold
kind of leaven found in holy writ. 1. Pharisaicum, quod significat corruptelas
doctrinae, Pharisaicall, which signifies corrupt doctrines, or opinions. 2.
Apostolicum, quod est regnum coelorum, Apostolic, which increases to the
Kingdom of God. 3. Malitiae, and versutiae, quod est morum perversitas, of
malice, and craftiness, which perverteth good manners.


PAR. 9.
BEsides all this, you shall find, Deuteronomy. 16.3. Unleavened bread, is called,
even the bread of affliction, (...). Some are headstrong in belief, that the
meaner sort of men, and the poor common people were wont to eat unleavened
bread among the Jews; wherefore Cajetan calls it, Panem paupertatis, the
bread of Poverty; but proof hereof is wanting; Pauperum est carere commoditate
fermentandi panem, poor men most commonly do want the benefit of leaven for
their bread, says Cornelius a Lapide: but I know the poor use leavened bread
for their own use more than the rich: Pauperum est, says he, uti pane
subcineritio qui azymus est, statimque fit, and coquitur; It is for poor men,
says he, to eat unleavened cakes, baked on the coals, which are made, and
baked, on a sudden: but, if he had kept a great house, he might easily have
known, that as well (though perhaps, not so often) leavened cakes, as
unleavened, are baked on the hearth, or under embers, or set up against the
sides of the Oven; and are often baked, before the oven be stopped. Amongst us,
the most of our poor, and rusticks eat leavened bread; weak stomachs, and
rich men, eat unleavened bread; but is not unleavened bread called here, Bread
of Affliction? Yes, yet by these words you are not to think, that unleavened
bread is undervalued, or held to be naughty, bad bread, or worse tasted; but it
is called Panis afflictionis, bread of affliction, per appositionem; as
unleavened bread was appointed by God, to be the record, and monument of their
affliction in Egypt: This reason is expressly added, ibid. Thou shall eat
unleavened bread, with the Passover, even the bread of affliction; for thou
came forth of the land of Egypt (in pavere, in fear; as some read it; cum
trepidatione, with Trembling; as others read it) in ( haste, say we) That thou
may remember the day when thou came forth, -- all the days of thy life:
the bread of it self was not bad; but was only to be a remembrance of their
affliction passed, rather than leavened bread; because they had not time to
leaven their bread; for it was not leavened, because they were thrust out of
Egypt.

PAR. 10.
THe same things are the best monuments of themselves; thus, the pot of Manna,
and Aarons rod, Heb. 9.4. Next unto these, not things unlike; but semblable,
proportionable, and like are fittest to be remembrancers; who has a dear
child, or friend, that is absent, if he see a thousand that have no lively
resemblance of him, he does not so readily think on him; but if he see one,
who is very like unto him, yea, but his lively picture, he quickly calls his
absent beloved, to his present remembrance. Leavened bread they had none, in
that burly-burly; unleavened they had; therefore unleavened bread was the
apter, and fitter, than leavened bread, to call to mind the great affliction
in Egypt; when they had the like unleavened bread before them. So much for the
second Sacrametall Ceremony; unleavened bread.

PAR. 11.
THe next Sacramental, and durable ceremony; was, The passover was to be
eaten with bi^ter herbs, Exodus 12.8 With unleavened bread, and bitter herbs
they shall eat it: though there be no mention of this precept reiterated,
Deuteronomy. 16. yet there is no doubt but it was of stable continuance; and perhaps
is so presupposed, and therefore omitted in Deuteronomy: you shall find it
particularly commanded, Number. 9.11. Eat it with unleavened bread, and bitter
herbs; indeed in the Hebrew, it runs thus, Super infermentatis, and
amaritudinibus comedent illud; yet the general Exposition runs to our purpose;
Cum lactucis agrestibus, say some; Cum herbis amaris, say others; and among the
rest, the learned Hebrew Observations, Printed at Paris, by Robert Stephen,
1541.

PARA. 12.
LActucae agrestes valde amarae sunt, says Rabanus Maurus (in his second Book
of Numbers, Chap. 2.) Carnes agni cum Lactucis agrestibus sunt edendae, ut cum
corpus redemptoris aceipimus, nos pro peccatis nostis in fletibus affligamus,
quatenus ipsa amaritudo poenitentiae abstergat a mentis stomacho perversae
amorem vitae; Id. ibid. Wild Lettuces are very bitter; and the passover must
be eaten with them, to that end, that we afflict our selves, with sorrow and
weeping, when we receive the blessed Sacrament of our Lords body; and that the
bitterness of Repentance may wipe off perverse desires: furthermore, by the
bitterness of these herbs, the Jews were wont to retain, as it were, a taste
of their sharp torments, in the time of their pressures in Egypt; of which
these bitter herbs were a proper, adapted, re-memorative monument.

PAR. 13.
THus did Christ himself (for our good, and his Disciples) eat the Paschall
Lamb, both literally with bitter herbs, and Mystically, in bitterness,
compounded of desire and sorrow, Luke 22.15. With desire, I have desired to
eat this Passover with you, before I suffer; and yet, not only Christ
himself was troubled in Spirit, and testified, and said; Verily, verily, I say
unto you, that one of you shall betray me, Ioh. 19.21. but his Disciples also,
as they were at the board with him, were exceeding sorrowful, and began every
one of them, to say; Lord, is it I? Matthew. 26.22. Likewise, he was offered up,
and slain; in amaritudinibus; what had he else tendered unto him, on the
Cross, by his enemies, but bitter things? Vinum myrrhatum, wine mingled with
myrrh, was amarissimum, most bitter, says S. Augustine; he was served with
sour, sharp Vinegar, more than once; gall likewise was presented unto him;
what is more bitter? Lam. 1.12. Behold, and see, if there be any sorrow like
unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in
the day of his fierce anger; Lam. 3.15. He has filled me with bitternesses,
and made me drunken with Wormwood; it is Merorim, in the Hebrew, which, I
presume, I may well render, implevit me moeretibus, implevit me amaritudinibus,
says the Vulgar; by which phrases, a sorrowful soul, in fear, pain, and
anguish is described; and so were the Jews, at their Exodus in true
bitterness, between Hope, and Doubt; between present danger, and future
liberty; or, if you please so to call it; between the affected, present
liberty, and the likelihood of being over-taken, if Pharaoh should pursue them.

PAR. 14.
THe bitter herbs mentioned in the Law, are Cazareth, Gnolshen, Tameah,
Charcabinah, and Meror; any one, or all of them together, says Maymonides. If
you wish to know, the English words, infallibly answering to the Hebrew, I
think, it cannot be done: It is most likely that Sorrel, Cichory,
wilde-Lettuce, Tansie, Endive, or the like, were ingredients of that bitter
sallet. Beza, (on Matthew. 26.) makes these herbs to be a kind of sour sallet;
and says, the Jews had a pleasant Condiment to eat with them; but, say I,
even by his own authority, the Condiment was at the (second) supper; and
there, the sauce might be more artificially tempered for the palate: and yet the
herbs prescribed to the first supper, that is, to the eating of the roasted
Passover, must needs be bitter, and eaten (quatenus amarae) as they were
bitter, being memorialls of their bitterness in affliction (though, after they
were passed the red sea, their sorrows were sweetened with much joy) their
lives were made bitter with hard bondage, in mortar, and brick, and, in all
manner of service in the field; all their service, wherein they made them
serve, was with rigor, Exodus 1.14. a more exact, and adaequate record, or
resemblance of their bitterness, could not be invented, then these bitter
herbs; being to be eaten, at the first supper, and service of the Lamb; which,
neither Baronius, nor Beza, sufficiently distinguished, though they acknowledge
a second Supper likewise at the same time.

PAR. 15.
IN that hot Country of Iudaea, they had herbs for cooling sauce; yea for,
meat also; Hence is mention of a dinner of herbs, Pro. 15.17. yea, even some
weak ones did eat herbs, Romans 14.2. the tithe Mint, and Rue, and all manner
of herbs, which the Jews paid, and were bound to pay, Luke 11.42. were not
for sauce only, but for food.

PAR. 16.
THat they used salt, as their sauce, no man doubts; can that, which is
unsavory be eaten without salt? Job 6.6. To this the Apostle alludeth, Col.
4.6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt. Bernard (ad
Nep.) prudenter sobrieque conversanti satis ad omne condimentum sal, cum fame,
that is, salt, and hunger is sauce enough for a wise, and sober man: likewise,
for Vinegar, Boaz said to Ruth, Dip thy morsel in the Vinegar, Ruth. 2.14. Our
blessed Savior, on the Cross, had Vinegar, more than once tendered unto him;
and you may marvel at the abundance of Vinegar, which they had on Mount
Calvary; as shall be manifested (God willing) when I have ended my Tractat, of
Christ's descending into hell: Nec cibus ipse juvat, morsu fraudatus acceti;
said the Poet, Nor does the meat good unto me,
Which from the taste of Vinegar is free.


The Prayer.
GRant, gracious God, I meekely beseech thee, that I may purge-out the old
leaven; that I may be a new Lump, and unleavened; and that I may keep every
day holy, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice, and
wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity, and truth; that so I
may be accepted of thee, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

CH^P. XIV. The Contents of the fourteenth Chapter.
1. The not breaking of a bone, was a perpetual Ceremony: Not a bone of Christ
was broken.

2. The marrow of the Pascall Lambs bones, might not be taken forth: the
Mysteries thereof; and of not breaking of a bone.

3. No part of the flesh of the Lamb, was to be carried out of the house.

4. The Reasons, and the mysteries thereof.

5. The Table-talke was another Concomitant, fixed rite; and what it was in
particular.

6. Gods great care of keeping memorialls.

7. Whether they sang at the Passover, or no; and what they did sing.

8. Instructing of youth, in the principles of Religion, necessary.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
THat Salt, and Vinegar only, were the Jewish sauces, Mr. Weemse cannot prove:
that they had other sauces, will be proved from the Scripture, from the Jewish
Rituall, from learned men (God willing) when I handle Christ's second Supper. So
much for the rites properly, and substantially Sacramental. The first
subsequent fixed Ceremony (you may, if you please, call it Concomitant) was
this; Ye shall not break a bone thereof, Exodus 12.46. which is confirmed to be
perpetual, by Number. 9.12. You shall not break any bone of it: and it had most
apparent reference unto our Savior; the bones might be picked, and scraped,
broken, not any one must be, Psalm. 22.14. All my bones are out of joint, says
the sweet Singer, in relation to our Saviors Passion; and ver. 17. I may tell
all my bones; and, they pierced, or rather, dug my hands and my feet, ver.
16. and yet for all this, not one bone was broken; the Soldiers break not the
legs of our Savior (as they did of the Malefactors) Ioh. 19.33. One of the
Soldiers indeed pierced his side, and forthwith there came out blood, and
water, ver. 35. For these things were done that the Scriptures should be
fulfilled; a bone of him shall not be broken: and Psalm. 34.20. He keeps all
his bones, not one of them is broken.

PAR. 2.
THe marrow might not be taken forth; perhaps to intimate, that man may not be
too-busie, with Gods secret counsels, with pearls wrapped up, and enclosed in
his own breast: for, as in the breaking of the bones, some marrow is
diminished; so, in the determining of hidden things, Gods wisdom is too-much
entrenched upon, undervalved, and by humane reason, or conjecture, broken in
pieces: wherefore, God will have some, and the daintiest, and chiefest things,
as the marrow in the bone, reserved from man's curiosity, which man must not
seek after: other hard matters there are, that he may exercise his wit upon,
and pick upon; see Deuteronomy. 29.29. though it had been a young Lamb, whose bones
are little, and no harder, than some sinews; yet they must forbear, from the
eating of them; for they were bones, though tender. In the slaying of the
passover, they were to take heed of breaking a bone; at the taking out of the
entralls, at the cutting out of the heart, liver, and lungs (for they were to
be washed, and cleansed) they were to take heed, lest they brake a bone; they
were so to spit it, and fasten it on the Spit, and take it from the Spit, that
no bone of it was to be broken: Lastly, they were neither so to eat of the
flesh, nor so to carry and to burn the remainder, that any bone at all was to
be broken: In a mystery, this might signify, that not one Article of our
belief; not one main point, which upholdeth Christianity (as the bones do the
body) may be broken; but must be preserved entire; yea, it might imply, that no
one Commandment of God is to be broken, I am. 3.10. Whosoever shall keep the
whole Law, and yet offend in one point (if he break but one bone) he is guilty
of all: how can those words be reconciled? To keep the whole Law, and yet to
offend in one point? I answer, to keep the whole Law, except one point only.
In like sort, our blessed Savior says, Matthew. 12.31. All manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall
not be forgiven; you may say, Is not the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, a
sin, and blasphemy? I answer, it is, but the native proper sense of the
words, implies only this; that all blasphemy shall be forgiven, except the
blasphemy against the holy Ghost. Lastly, the not breaking of the bone might
typifie; that, till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one title shall in no
wise pass from the Law (no, not from the law of the Passover) till all be
fulfilled, Matthew. 5.18. The Jews do constantly avouch, that the Almighty has
more care of every word, syllable, and letters of the old Testament, than he
has of the stars in heaven: and the Jews themselves have been so
excessively, even to a prodigy, careful and diligent, that they have reckned,
how many times every several letter in their Alphabet, is to be found in all
the old Testament. Again, I will not say, but that, by the not breaking off a
bone, may be meant, either a hard place of Scripture, is not too-much to be
forced, 2 Pet. 3.16. or else, that no words of Christ were superfluous, or
vain; no promise of his should be broken, but remain firm, Matthew. 24.35.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.

PAR. 3.
ANother durable Rite of the passover subsequent, was; Thou shall not carry
forth ought of the flesh abroad out of the houses, ver. 46. This the Rabbis
expound thus; not only, they may not carry forth, ought of the flesh, to
another house; or to others, without any house, in the open fields, or streets;
but they must not carry that, from one company, which belonged to another
company; nor might they carry it from the whole, that were present, to the
absent, that were sick; nor might they carry it out of the Passeover-Chamber.

PAR. 4.
ANd these may seem to be the Reasons. 1. If ought of the flesh might have
been carried forth, some unclean body might have touched it, or met with it.
2. Or Legally unclean might have employed it, to profane uses. 3. Or,
notoriously professed enemies of the Church, might have vitiated it. 4. It had
not need, to have been brought in, if it might have been carried out. 5. The
remainder of the flesh needed not to have been burnt, if it might have been
exported: The mysteries may be these: Secretior a non divulganda, von
communicanda in vulgus; the mysteries of Gods Word, are not to be divulged, nor
made known unto the rascall-many; Cast not pearls before swine, nor bread
unto dogs: unfit recipients must not be dispensed withal, through any
favor, to take it; no not at the second or third hand, or bound; No communion
of light with darkness: Concord and Communion are to be found, within the
pale of the Church: Christ made an exempt of Disciples from the Jews; of the
Apostles, from the Disciples; of three, viz. Peter, James, and John, from the
rest; and yet revealed not all things to them; because they were, for a while,
unfit.
At night commonly, both Coelestiall-ill-influences, and infernal Spirits do
more hurt; this passover was in the night; To go away, Sacris non peractis,
before service was ended; (from the first word, (...), silence; till the last
word, (...), ye may depart in peace) was a sin; A sin censured, in the
Primitive Church, by Excommunication, as appears, in the fourth Council of
Carthage; this Sacrifice was not ended, till all was consumed; To eat part,
and carry away part, is but half a sacrifice: Let them look to this, who
carry abroad the consecrated Host, till it incline to rottenness, or come to
an ill favor: (...), vocat Menander; the Poet Menander calls the night, The
Mother of all Mischief; Amor illicitus, is called ovum noctis, Lust is called,
the nights Egg; Post solis occasum, Noctem esse 12. Tabulae decernebant; the
twelve Tables decreed, that, after Sunsetting, it should be accounted night,
as Alexand. ab Alex. Genial. dier. 6.10.

PAR. 5.
THe Table-talke was the next fixed subsequent Ceremony: Maymonides says, the
religious Table-talke began not, till the cloth was removed from the Master of
the Feast, at the end of the first Supper: And after blessing, then, the
younger fort enquired; why, the preceding Supper was so discordant, and diverse
from all other Suppers, with double washings, without baked, boiled, or stewed
meats, without any herbs, save bitter ones: As the youth enquired (according
to that, Exodus 12.26.) So the head of that society; (you may say, he was Rex,
sacrorum Architriclinus, King of the Ceremonies, Sewer, or Master of the feast;
Gentleman-usher, Chaplain in Ordinary, or, Marshall of the Hall; or
Symposiast, pater discubitus, Initiator, (...), who placed the guests,
according to their worth; Nomarcha Coenae, the Ruler of the Feast, according to
that of Exodus 13.8. made remonstrance, of what God had done, to deliver them,
from the house of bondage: nor might any of their Table-talke, be irreligious,
or vain, or carpingly censorious, or provoking to wrath; nor was it, as at
other times, with Riddles, or other delightful good discourses; nor roved they
at large, at all sacred conferences; but was empaled in, and confined, to the
well-seasoned Relations, as the Memorial then lead them; of the plagues in
Egypt; of the destroying Angel; inhibited to destroy their Firstborn; of
the Seas retiring; and the Two walls of water (forgetting their natural
Fluidity) on the right hand and on the left; of their haste, and fear, and of
Pharaohs hardened heart, mollified by his drowning; and Gods carrying them, on
Eagles wings. Aulus Gellius ( Noct. Attic. 13.11.) Nec loquaces Convivas, nec
multos legere oportet; guests must not be tatling like Geese, nor mute, as
Fishes; and the discourses must be jucunde, and invitabiles, delightful, and
profitable; not perplexing, or troublesome; the Master, or Lord of the Feast,
must be, Non tam lautus, quam sive sordibus; neat, and cleanely: Macrobius (
Saturnal. 7.1.) handles the point, more at large; as a few, mute letters
dispersed among many vowells, in societatem vocis facile mansuescunt, do make
an easy pronounciation; so, some few unlearned, delighting in the company of
more learned, either accord with them, if they can; or, are delighted, with
their discourse: Timotheum, clarum hominom Athenis, and principem Civitatis,
ferunt, cum coenuvisset apua Platonem, eoqui convivio, admodum delectat ^s
esses, videssetque eum postridie, dixisse, vestrae quidem Coenae, non solum in
praesentia, sed etiam postero die jucundae sunt; that is, It is storied of
Timothy, a famous man of Athens, and one of the chief of that City; that
having, on a time supped with Plato, he was wonderously delighted with that
Feast; and meeting him, by chance, the next day; he told him, that his Supper
did relish a long time after; a Philosophers banquet; as Cicero ( lib. 5.
Tusquaest.

PAR. 6.
HOw great a care God had of continuing the Memorialls of his favor to the
Israelites, appears, by appointing the pot of Manna to be kept; and Aarons
rod, which budded likewise, Josh. 4.5. etc. Twelve men took up twelve stones,
every man, a stone upon his shoulder; that this may be a sign among you; that
when your children ask their fathers, in time to come, saying, what mean you
by these stones? Then ye shall answer them, that the waters of Jordan were cut
off, before the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, when it passed over Jordan;
the waters of Jordan were cut off, as it is pithily repeated ver. 7. See to the
same purpose, Josh. 4.20. etc. Quoties Christiani agapis vescebant, fidem
Psalmis pascebant, ait Tertullianus; that is, as often as Christian did fill
their bellies together, with good cheer, they fed their faith with finging of
Psalms: Cyprianus ( lib. 2. epist. 2.) Nec sit velhora convivii gratia
coelestis immunis; Sonet Psalmis sobrium convivium, that is, at all your sober
Christian Feasts, let Grace be Salt, and Psalms the Music: what Joshua did,
was, in immitation of what God commanded, Exodus 12.35. When ye be come to the
land, which the Lord will give you, you shall keep the Passover; and when
your children shall say unto you, what mean you by this Service? that ye
shall say, It is the Sacrifice of the Lords Passover, who passed over the
houses of Israel, in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our
houses. ver. 27. Though such discourse was not directly appointed, at the first
Egyptian passover, because of their affrighted haste; yet I doubt not, but
both they, and their children knew, why this Feast was thus kept; and ever
after, it was to them, a speaking memorial of their deliverance; concerning
which, their children were taught to enquire of their parents, and their
parents were used to relate unto them all their passed seares, sorrows, and
deliverances, with their enemies destructions, Exodus 13.8. Thou shall show thy
son, in that day; and 14. When thy son asks thee, Thou shall say, etc. So
Deuteronomy. 6.20. etc. When thy son asks thee, in time to come, -- Thou shall say
to thy son, we were Pharaohs bondmen in Egypt; and ver. 7. Thou shall teach
them diligently to thy children, and shall talk of them, when thou sit in
the house, when thou walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up. The Spouse, Cant. 2.9. says of Christ, My beloved is like a Roe, or
a young Heart, behold, he stands behind our walls, he looks forth at a
window, showing himself through the Lattesse; Which words the Targum thus
Paraphraseth, to our purpose, as it is set forth, by the learned Edmund Rivius;
The Congregation of Israel, said, in the time, when the glory of God was
revealed in Egypt, in the night of the passover; and when he slew all their
firstborn; God ascended upon swiftest lightning, and ran like ae Roe, or
young Goat, and protected, and defended the houses in which we were, and stood
behind our wall, and looked through the Lattesses, and saw the blood of the
Passover, and of the Circumcision imprinted, as it were, on our portalls; and
behold from the highest heavens, and saw his people eating the passover,
roasted with fire, with wild Lettuce, and unleavened bread; and spared us, and
gave no power to Apollyon, to destroy us. These are the declarative sayings of
the Church, as the Targum imagines; in answer (forsooth) to the question, like
enough to be propounded, at the eating of the passover: but in truth, Delrio
most divinely (on the place) adapteth the words to our Saviors Incarnation;
which the obstinate Jew, will not believe to be accomplished.

PAR. 7.
IF any Psalm were sung, at their passover, after David's time, or in it; I
presume, it was the 78. Psalm; in which was a full relation of Gods wonders in
Egypt; and he teaches them, what he had learned of others, ver. 3.4. as God
commanded them, ver, 5.6. though God commanded them, in other places, to teach
their children; yet this place, of Exodus 12.25. may be also aimed ar. Till
David's time, I suppose; they at the passover, did recite Moses his song, Exodus
15.1. I will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously; the horse,
and his rider has he thrown into the sea, etc. Then follows Miriams
Amaboeum, ver. 21. Miriam answered them; sing ye to the Lord, for he has
triumphed gloriously; the horse, and the rider has he thrown into the sea;
as in our Cathedrialls, some excellent voice cheerfully begins some
heavenly ditty, and then the whole quire repeateth, and resoundeth the same;
not without a joyful quickening, and reviving of devout affections.

PAR. 8.
FRom this place, of children questioning, and Fathers teaching, what belonged
to sacred duties; we may learn that instructing of youth, in principles of
Religion, is very ancient; God acknowlegeth it, in Abraham, Genesis 18.19. Nor was
Adam negligent in that duty, as may be probablized, from Genesis 4.3.4. and 26.
verse. Die thy wool well, and it will never change color: Quo semel est imbuta
recens servabit odorem
Testa diu. --
says the Poet, that is, The barrel long does keep her primer sent,
Of that same liquor which it first did vent.


Timothy learned the holy Scriptures from a child, 2 Timothy 3.25. It is the
relation of the Jews, that they did instruct their children, in the
commandments, so soon as they could eat bread: They shall give me leave to
doubt of that: but this of Maymonides seems more true; that they, at the
first, gave them but a little quantity of the passover; and so trained them up
by degrees: and certainly, at the passover, they had the whole discourse of
their Case, at the first passover; each Ceremony affording variety of talk,
some more, than others; and this they did yearly; using fewer words, when all
were before well instructed; but discoursing more at large, where people were
more ignorant; the Master of the family being the Speaker in that Parliament.
So much be spoken, concerning their Tabletalke.

The Prayer.
MOst merciful, and gracious God, who stintest the punishments of thy
servants, and say unto the devourer, hitherto thou shall proceed, but shall
go no further; thou shall bruize, and wound, but shall not break one bone: I
bow the knees of my soul unto thee, and humbly do supplicate unto thee; that,
since I have offended, and deserved punishment; thou will be pleased, to
remember mercy, in the midst of punishing; and to restrain the fury of
Abaddon: and good Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake, commute the eternal
torments, which I have merited into the temporal chastisements, which thou
inflictest on me; and then, gracious God; whatsoever I shall suffer; I shall
joy, that thy wrath will end, in loving kindness, pity, and compassion, most
holy mediator, say; so be it; and my soul, do thou answer. Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XV. The Contents of the fifteenth Chapter.
1. The Ceremonies after their Table-talke.

2. They continued to eat unleavened bread, seven days.

3. But, it seems, the Israelites were not bound, to keep the Festival, at
their first Passover, or Exodus, though they did eat unleavened bread.

4. Nothing was to be left till the morning.

5. They burned the remainder of the Passover, if any remainder were: Reasons
thereof: Holy Sacramental Relics not to be profaned: The Romans Protervia,
or Feast of frowardness.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
WHen that sacred Conference, and Supper was ended, or almost ended, I judge,
other lasting, subsequent Ceremonies of the Passover, to be these. 1. That
they continued their eating of unleavened bread, for seven days after. 2. That
no part of the Passover, was to be left till the morning. 3. That they burned
with fire the remainder thereof, if there were any remainder.


PAR. 2.
THe next fixed, subsequent rite, was, the continuing to eat unleavened bread,
seven days, Exodus 12.15. Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the
first day shall ye put away leaven out of your houses; for, whosoever eats
leavened bread, from the first day, till the seventh day, that soul shall be
cut off from Israel: most effectually is it precepted, and ingeminated, ver.
17. Ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this selfsame
day, have I brought your Armies out of the Land of Egypt, therefore ye shall
observe this day, in your generations, by an ordinance for ever, Exodus 12.17.
In the first month on the 14. day of the month at Even, ye shall eat
unleavened bread, until the 21. day of the month at Even, ver. 18. see it
further ratified, the 19. and 20. verses; No precept whatsoever concerning the
Passover, is so largely and fully precepted: Levit. 23.5. On the 14. day, is
the Lords Passover, and on the 15. is the feast of unleavened bread: But how
comes it to pass, that there is a memorial for the 15. day; and in Exodus,
for the 14. day? I answer this place of Leviticus discriminateth the
Sacramental Passover, from the festival solemnities of the Passover: the
Passover was indeed to be slain, on the 14. day toward night: so both Exodus
and Leviticus, speaks of the immolation, and of the preparation; yet was not
the Passover eaten or to be eaten, till the even; or between the two
evenings, when the 15. day began; and then did they eat both the Passover,
and unleavened bread, as both Exodus and Leviticus accord; nor might they eat
the Passover, without unleavened bread, nor unleavened bread, in reference to
that feast, without the Passover; nor either till the beginning of the 15.
day; and though the Sacramental Passover was ended that night; and the
analecta, or remains (if any) were burned, ere the morning; yet the
Paschall-festivity continued with unleavened bread, and other sacrifices, full
7. days inclusive, including the Sacramental Passover: Likewise Numb. 28.16.
is exactly the same distinction; In the 14. day of the first month is the
Passover of the Lord; in the 15. day of this month, is the feast: seven days
shall unleavened bread be eaten: killed on the 14. eaten the beginning of the
Evening of the 15. day: for on the first minute of the second evening, began
the first minute of the 15. day.

PAR. 3.
NOw though it be generally confessed; the eating of unleavened bread seven
days, was one of the lasting Ceremonies; yet some question; whether this was
commanded, to begin at the first Egyptian Passover? That much feasting was
then commanded, I cannot think; that they went out only with unleavened
bread, is apparent; that they are only unleavened bread, till Manna did fall,
Josephus says: But they are not unleavened bread, with a religious intent, but
for want of other bread, says Dr. Willet: if he speak of the last 23. days;
I confess they had no religious respect, in the eating of unleavened bread:
for they had no precept to eat unleavened beyond 7. days, in any sacred
relation: yet consider, that the observation of 7. days eating unleavened
bread, was enjoined, before they went out of Egypt; and so they undoubtedly
observed them. Oh, but says Dr. Willet, they went out in haste? I answer,
haste and Religion may stand together; yea, they had been irreligious, in that
point, if they had not hasted; they had haste, and were in all haste, till the
Armies of Egypt were drowned; Now this being 7. days, from the eating of the
Paschall-Lambe; the inhibition of leavened bread conduced more, to hasten their
haste: For unleavened bread, or manchets, or cakes are sooner made, than any
flower or bread can be leavened; make ready quickly three measures of fine
meal says Abraham, to Sarah, Genesis 18.6. She could not so soon have leavened,
and made it ready, for eating: Moreover the eating of bread, of unleavened
bread, of unleavened bread for want of other, or for necessity, excludes not
devout intents, or performances; if a Religious observation was appointed, a
natural duty may concur with an holy end: At all their feasts, they
satisfied nature, either wholly or in part; these civil or natural respects
did join hand in hand, with devout and Sacred intentions. Lastly, the Divine
Scriptures are to be understood literally, as they offer themselves, in their
first sense to the hearer, or reader, (if there follow no inconvenience, or
absurdity) therefore in the commandment to eat unleavened bread 7. days, is
included a sacred duty; and an holy observation might be performed, though they
had no other bread to eat, though they were in want, and necessity, and
haste: See this precept of eating unleavened bread 7. days, recommanded, Deuteronomy.
16.2. etc. that you may not doubt, but it was eternal, pro statu illius
politiae; not absolutely, but periodically aeternall.

PAR. 4.
ANother subsequent, fixed ceremony was this; Exodus 12.10. Yet shall let
nothing of it remain until the morning. This precept was not absolute, and
irrespective, even at the first Passover, if it had been exactly necessary,
there needed no second annexed command in default thereof, viz. that which
remains of it till the morning ye shall burn with fire, ibid. In this sixth
precept, the first of these two observe; that the Israelites might eat of the
Passover often, if their stomach served them, till almost the very morning:
and I have read it as a tradition that the last meal, which they ate, that
night was a bit, or morcell of the Passover; as, the last draught they drank
that night, was of Sanctified wine. Certainly, great reason there was, that
nothing should be left until the morning; for the Egyptians might have
profaned it; dogs might have torn it; and if there were any part left, some
perhaps might have worshipped it. As it was to be roasted whole, so they might
eat it wholly, if they could conveniently without gluttony, excess, or any
other intemperancie; and if the number of Communicants had been great, and the
Lamb but little, and adaequate for them. Voluntary offerings might be eaten,
on the first day, and if any remained, it might be eaten, on the second day;
but on the third day; the remainder of the flesh was to be burnt with fire,
Levit. 7.16. etc. If any flesh of the Sacrifice of Peace Offerings be eaten at
all, on the third day -- it shall be an abomination, Levit. 7.18. The flesh of
the Sacrifice of Peace Offerings for thankesgiving, shall be eaten the same day
that it is offered; he shall not leave any of it until the morning, Levit.
7.15. he might eat of it any part of the day, or any part of the night: the
strictest Law of all was for the speedy consuming of the Passover; of all
other, that must not be kept, lest it be dis-religionized, or adored: let them
consider this precept, who long keep the blessed Sacrament, never without some
possible danger; sometimes likely, sometimes apparent, from worms, thieves,
mice, nastinesse, mouldinesse, stink, etc. And yet, because God never liked
intemperance, rather than they should play the gluttons, and cramme their guts
too full; he commanded them to burn that, which was left; and this was an
unchangeable, closing, and parting ceremony.

PAR. 5.
THe next subsequent, fixed ceremonic was this; they burned the remainder of
the Passover, if any remainder were; no sin it was to burn it; a sin it
had been not to burn it. Flesh, if any were left, and bones were certainly
to be burned; no Passover was exempted from this conclusive Ceremony, and
binding precept; not fading by time, till the death of the Messiah. Iunius
questioneth whether the skin were burnt with fire? and resolves for the
affirmative: I think the skin and entralls, with its ordure were removed, a
good while before the eating of the flesh; and if they were burnt, (as doubt
may be made of the wool and of the skin) they were burnt either before the
manducation of the Sacrament, or in another fire, after the end of all: for if
they were burnt after the full end, of their Paschatizing banquet; no shadow of
reason evinceth, or probabilizeth, that the Sacrae reliquae, sacred relics of
the flesh, (if any were) or of the bones, (for whose not breaking such strict
order was given) were consumed, in the same fire, which the retrimenta, and
excrementa Naturae, the retriments, and excrements of nature, or ordure, were:
Reverend opinion, or estimate of things, once sacred, persuades the contrary.
Heathens would say, such a mixture were an abomination. Divinis rebus suus
constet honos intemeratus, let holy things be attended with reverence: as the
whole Lamb was roasted with fire, so the residue or remainder, was to be burnt
with fire; they burned the remainder thereof with fire, if any remainder were,
Exodus 12.10. Ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and that
which remains of it, till the morning, shall ye burn with fire; it is
repeated thus, Numb. 9.12. They shall leave none of it unto the morning; nor
break any bone of it; the coupling of these together, does show, it was an
eternal ceremony; though Iunius opineth, this ceremony seems to be
peculiar unto this first celebration of the Passover. This excellent reason
about this point may be given, Levit. 7.15. The flesh of the Sacrifice of the
Peace Offerings for thankesgiving, shall be eaten the same day, that it is
offered; he shall not leave any of it till the morning; but the Passover was
an Eucharisticall Sacrifice: Cornelius Cornelii a lapide, makes this ceremony
to be perpetual: for it seems not consonant to so great a devout Sacrament,
that the dogs might gnaw the bones thereof; nor other profanation to be used
to any part of it: its an old Proverb used by Aulus Gellius (13.16.) Inter os,
and offam, between the mouth and the morsel, many mischances may come; which
is all one with that, Multa cadunt inter calicem, supremaque labra, that is,
Between the cup, and upper lip,
Many times the Wine does drip.
or, Full many dangers quickly slip.

But how many sort of abuses, or prophanations might be used, to the relics
of that Sacred banquet, if they had not been burnt who knows? therefore God
who only did foreknow, did also provide an antidote to such horrid abuses, by
burning what was left: the Romans had one kind of Sacrifice which was called
Protervia, Frowardness, in that feast it was the fashion; that if any thing
had been left of the banquet, or feast, it should be consumed with fire; this
made Cato (who was no common jeaster) when Albidius had wasted his goods, and
at last had his house burnt, to scoff, saying, that he did Proterviam facere,
offer the Sacrifice Protervia, and what he could not eat, he did burn;
Macrobius ( Saturnal. 2.2.) This also amongst other parts of devotion among the
Romans, it seemed, they borrowed from the Paschall-Lambes remainders burned. So
much for the prescribed ceremonies of the Passover, whether temporary or
perpetual.

The Prayer.
LOrd, thy Law was the guide of performance unto the Jews for the ceremonies,
and Service of their Passover; thy Prescriptions, their directions, give me
grace, good Lord, still to look up to thy Commandments, and to regulate my
thoughts, words, and works, thereby; through the mediation of my blessed Lord,
and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

CHAP. XVI. The Contents of the sixeteenth Chapter.
1. The Jewish custom to wash their feet, especially at feasts.

2. The Jews did not stink more, than other men; against Cardinal Baronius;
Mr. Fuller taxed also.

3. If the Emperor Marcus said so, probable reasons, for his imaginations at
that time.

4. Of Judas his stink, when he was dead, out of Cedrenus; and the Jewish
Nation defended. The great number of the Jews long ago and now: from whom the
Americans descended: the Tartars came not, from the Israelites.

5. The Pharisees marvelling at Christ's not washing before meat: the double
sin of Pharisees, in washing.

6. Women in the Primitive Church washed the feet of Saints.

7. In the old Testament they only presented water, but washed not the feet
of their guests.

8. The great sinner is the first recorded, to have washed another feet, even
Christ's; and the great Savior is the first recorded to have washed many men's
feet.

9. They sometimes washed and bathed their whole bodies, and anointed them also.

10. The Jews used more than ordinary blessings at the Passover: a particular
explication thereof.

11. The reasons, why I handle at large the Jewish Passover.

12. Christ kept all the fixed rites preparatory, and the Sacramental
Ceremonies; and the subsequent perpetual Customs.

13. Christ a perfect observer of the Law; yet not bound to the Jewish
voluntary undertakings, or will worship.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
ANd now am I fallen upon those rites, and ceremonies of the Passover, which
were not of expesse command; either fading or fixed, but of voluntary
undertakings; and those have I mustred up from Josephus, Philo, the ancient
Rituall; from Fagius, Beza, and Baronius; and especially from that Rabbi of
Rabbis, Moses Ben-Maymon, and I reduce them, to these two heads. 1. Their
washings, and anointings. 2. Their reiterated blessings: these two belong
partly to the first, and partly to the second Supper.
First concerning their washings, they are well known to have been in much
request; pedibus de more lotis, says Josephus ( de bello Iud. 6.31. This was
an ordinary usance, at times unsacred; Nor may we think, they omitted washing,
at hours of greater devotion; for the Jews placed much Religion in manifold
washings: at common meals, they were cleanely-fowle, even to superstition:
Baronius ( ad An. Christi, 57. Number. 107. etc.) proves that Jews, Gentiles,
and holy Primitive Christians were wont to wash before they prayed.

PAR. 2.
BUt it is an incredible report, that above others, gravis foetor corporibus
eorum inhaeret, their bodies did stincke above ground, which he avoucheth, ( ad
An. Christi, 72. Number. 31.) It may be, some called them foetentes Iudaeos,
stinking Jews: as our English calls those stinking companions, who are
wicked and offensive: Besides, some uncleanly might be so called properly; that
the Nation were, so, all, or most I deny; though we apply it to those, since
the great (...), or dispersion of them: I knew but two Jews, in all my life;
both Teachers of Hebrew in Cambridge; with one of them, I was well acquainted,
but never did I smell any ill smell from them, more than from other men; though
I was one of their Auditors, and very familiar with one of them.

PAR. 3.
IF Ammianus Marcellinus say true, that the Emperor Marcus passing through
Palestine to Egypt, complained that the Jews did stink; and were worse then
the Marcomanni, Quadi, Sarmatae; yet this is no proof, that the Jews were
natural stinkards; or inwardly had noisome, mal-odorous bodies; but many other
accidental occasions might cause the Emperor to say so; he might pass
through Iudaea, in a very hot season, when a little ill smell disperseth it
self, 2. He spoke comparatively, preferring the cold Germans, Bohemians, and
Scythians, before the sweaty-open-pored Jews. 3. He might dislike the Jews
more then those other, for their unruly tumultuating, and pressing upon him,
with so much company, that the steame of them was offensive, as is often done
amongst us, in narrow rooms. 4. It may be some poorer petitioners of them
might be noisome, (as those of the Jayle are amongst us) and their smell might
be, by that means unhealthy, yea infections; was not the like at our Assizes
in England? namely at Exeter in Devon, under the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
Anno 1586, vide Stowes Annalls, fol. 1218. 5. The rebellious Jews were often
slain by thousands, and by thousands crucified; and they might lie unburied,
and so corrupt the very air, as he passed by: If any pious soul shall fear
an inconvenience, and shall either from report or likelihood, or desire,
persuade it self; that it is generally observed to be thus, in the places,
where the Jews dwell; and if we hold it, as one brand of the curse, that lies
upon them, since their crucifying, and rejecting the Lord of Life, it makes
much for the honor of our Savior?
I answer, I know no such general observation, nor ever heard of it, till
now: nor was there ever any threatening of such matters denounced against them;
if they left their stinking when they were washed in the laver of regeneration,
and turned Christians, (which the accusers of them will not grant) I would
confess both the matter, and the cause; nor would any argument prevail so
much with them, (if stinking Jews were never changed to savorie Christians) to
turn inoffensive converts. Johannes Baptista Montanus, in his Consilia ( page
331.) says indeed, Totum genus Hebraeorum est fere melancholicum, quia
sanguinem habet crassum, and hepar calidum; the whole Nation of the Jews is
for the most part melancholy, because they have gross blood, and hot livers;
yet these distempers make not, in my opinion, os olidum, a rammish smell, or a
stinking breath, foetidum anhelitum: Moreover, if the Jews the now out casts
of the world live in homely places; and through covetousness, be not cleanely,
but sordid, nasty, and stinking, this is not their nature nor yet general:
again, diverse who have lived among the Jews, smell no such matter, or make no
such complaint; I would hold it, (if it were true) as one brand of the curse,
that lies upon them, since their crucifying the Lord of life, and say, it made
much for the honor of our Savior; if it were sure or probable that when they
shall be turned to Christ, their breaths shall stink no more, than they did
before Christ's death: Lastly, nor Martial, nor Tacitus, nor any other, that I
have read, though they hated the Jews, taxed them for this matter; and God
needs not the lie of men, to uphold his Honor, or Cause.

PAR. 4.
CEdrenus reports from Papias; and Papias from others relations, that when
Judas dyed, in his own ground, praefoetore, illud desertum remansit, and
inhabitatum, usque ad hodiernum diem, by reason of his stink, that field
continued desert, and not inhabited to this day. If thus it were (as there is
no likelihood of it) and if people could not pass by, without stopping their
noses (as they say) shall we judge the worse, or the like, of the whole Nation?
Other reasons might move Marcus to say so, if he did say so, as Ammianus
Marcellinus, no friend to Jews, but great enemy to Christians, has
perchance, in spleen, related: Yet me thinks, the great Baronius, who lived
at the same time in Rome, with so many thousand Jews, who are allowed to have,
in that famous City, four Churches; might have sought some better grounds, ere
he had proclaimed; Judaei etiam foetoris signo infames, Natura ipsa in eos
inclamante; the Jews are infamous, for their ill-smelling bodies, naturally;
the whole Nation (and though the now accursed seed, yet still the carnal seed
of Abraham) should not be so charged, without better grounds; give the Devil
his due, and let us rather pray, for their conversion, (for converted they must
and shall be, ere the worlds end) yea, howsoever Mr. Fuller (in his sacred
Miscellanies, 3.13.) passes a presumptuous and uncharitable verdict upon the
Jewish Nation; that as it does live now in vastatione, and horrenda in Terras
omnes dissipatione, so, vivet perpetuo, sine ulla reditus spe; yet others have
proved, and I do second them; that before the end of the world, the dispersed
Jews shall be gathered together, and become one flock with us under Christ;
and have their polity, and government, perhaps even in the holy Land; see, and
deeply ponder, Romans 11.25. etc. and more especially, Luke 21.24. and among
humane Authors, Barradius (tom 3. page 576.) Aretius, and Estius, on Romans 11.
and Dionysius Carthusianus, on Luke 21. Let us, I say, rather pray for their
conversion, than load the Nation with unjust aspersions; for the fault perhaps
of some few, whose abhorred Covetousness persuades them, to exchange
sweetness and cleanelinesse, which is not unexpensive, for that cheap,
sordid, nastinesse, and fulsome-accidentall-ill-breathing smells; which would
be alike disliked, in any of any nation, that would be so basely penurious.
Purchase in his Pilgrimage of Africa (8.8. Paragr. 4) relates, from Mt. George
Sandys, that the Jewish men are of indifferent statures, and of the best
complexions (page 1306.) that the Jewish women (about Constantinople) are
generally fat, and rank of the savours, which attend upon sluttish
corpulencie, (as it is, in the next page) here, not nature but idleness
causes the stink, I must add that a very learned man a great traveller, who
was inwardly and familiarly acquainted with many of the Jews, (as himself
seriously professed to me) could never discern any such odious smells, or
rank nastinesse by them: Sir Edward, the Bishop Sandys, his elder son, (who
loved not our Clergy as a Bishops son should) toward the end of his
relation, could not have passed over the remarkable difference of the Jews,
(if such it were) above other nations; when he highly commends some of them,
with whom he was well acquainted, as seeming to want no grace, but the faith of
a Christian: Indeed their dispersion is most just, which they called for, and
more upon themselves; when they cried, Christ's blood be upon us, and on our
children, Mat. 27.25. Yet who so shall consider their number and power, will
say, it is not so ill with them as the world imagines: Benjamin of Tudela, in
Navarr, ended his journey, (1173.) and relates huge numbers of them at that
time; he makes first mention of the Jews residing at Barcelona; then, he
proceeds to this effect; at Gerundam he found a small congregation of Jews;
at Narbona almost 300. Jews. at the town of Baetiras, a company of students;
at Mount-peslier, the most famous Disciples of the wise men of that age: at
Lunel, an holy assembly of about 300. Jews; at Bea^caire, 40. Jews, and a
famous University of them; at Nogres about an 100. of their wise men; upon the
bank of the river Rhone, diverse Rabbis, Jews; at Arelatum, 200. Jews, at
Marseillis, two Colleges of almost 300. Jews; at Genoa, about 20. Jews; at
Luca almost 40. Jews; at Rome almost 200. Jews; at Capua, almost 300. Jews;
at Naples almost 500. Jews; at Salernum, almost 600. at Malti, about 20.
Jews; at Benevent, almost 200. Jews; at Malchi, 200. Jews; at Aesculum,
almost 40. Jews; at Trone, almost 200. Israelites; at Tarentum, almost 300.
Jews; at Barnedis, about 10. Jews, dyers of scarlet; at Otranto, almost 500.
Jews; at Corfu, one only Jew, at Larta, about 100. Jews; at Achilon, about
10. Jews; at Patra, almost 50. Jews; at Lepantum, almost an 100. Jews, at
the mountain of Parnassus, almost 200. Jews; at Corinth, almost 300. Jews;
at Thebes about 2000. Jews; at Aegriphon, about 200. Jews; at Iabusteria,
almost an 100. Jews, at Robinica almost an 100. Jews; at Kuxopotamos, about
50. Jews; at Gardegis, a few Jews inhabit; at Armilon, about 400. Jews; at
Bissina, almost an hundred Jews; at Seleucia, almost 500. Jews; at Melrisi,
almost 20. Jews; at Darnea, almost an 140. at Canistolin, almost 20.200.
Jews, at Pera, and thereabouts; at Rodoston, almost 400. at Gallipoli, almost
200; at Calas, almost 50. at Mitilene, in 10. places the Jews have their
Synagogues; at Chios, almost 400. at Samos, almost 300. at Rhodos, almost 400.
at Cyprus (as it were a College) diverse Jews; at Antioch, some glasse-makers;
at Laodicea, almost 200. Jews; at Gebal, almost 150. Jews; at the Temple of
Ammon, almost 200. at Biroth, almost 50. Jews; at Tsidon, almost 20. at Tyrus,
almost 400. at Akadi, almost 200. at Schizeria, or Caesarea, almost 10. Jews
besides 200. Cathaei, or Samaritine Jews; at Lux, one Jew a Dyer, between the
mountains of Gerizzim, and Ebal, about an 100. Samaritans; under the Tower of
David, 200. Jews, or thereabout; at Bethleem 12. Jews, at Beth-Gabarim, 3.
Jews; at Shunem, 300. at Nob, 2 Jews, Dyers; at Ramas, 3. Jews; at Ioppa, 1.
Jew, a Dyer; at Askalon, almost 200. Jews; 40. Karites, who stickt closely,
only to the Scriptures; and almost three hundred Samaritans; at Jisreel, one
Dyer; at Tiberias, are about 50 Jews; at Aschath almost 20. Jews; at Alma 50.
Jews; at Damascus, almost 3000. Israelites; almost 200. Karaites; Samaritan
Jews 400. at Gilead, almost 60. Jews; at Tadmor, in the Wilderness, almost
2000. Jews; at Kiriathaiim, one only Jew, a Dyer; at Aram Tsobae, almost
1500. Israelites; at Balits, a competent number of Jews; at Kalagaber, almost
2000. Jews; at Rakia, about 700. at Hanane, about 20. Jews; at Gozen, almost
200. at Netsibi, about 1000. Jews inhabit; at, or in the Isle of Omar, the
son of Alcitab, almost 4000. at Ashture, 7000. Jews, and three Synagogues;
at Rohoboth, 2000. Jews inhabit; at Charthemis, almost 500. at Aliobar,
almost 2000. at Harda, almost 15000. Jews; at Okbera almost 10000. Jews; at
Bagdad, almost 1000 Jews live; and there, they have ten Synedria, or
Consistories; and at Bagdad, 28. Synagogues of the Jews: at Resen, almost
5000. Israelites: twenty miles from Nebuchodonozars Palaces, are 20000. Jews;
at Hila, almost 10000. Israelites, with four Synagogues; at Naphan, almst 200.
Jews, and a Synagogue; at Alkotsonath, about 300. Jews; at the village of the
Wilderness, five Doctors; at Kupha, almost 7000; at Elnebarum, almost 3000.
with a Synagogue. The Rhechabite Jews dwell at Thema, having cities well
fenced, and a Territory toward the Northern Mountains, of sixteen days
journey, and are under no governors of the Gentiles; there have they almost 40.
Cities, 200. Villages, Castles an 100. in these places, 300000. Jews, or
thereabout do dwell, and Thanai is their Metropolis, being fifteen miles
long, and fifteen miles broad; at Tilimas, are about 100000. Jews; at Cebar
are almost 50000. at the river Vira almost 3000. Jews; at Nasetum, about
20000. at Botsra, almost 2000. at Samura, almost 1500. at Susan, 7000. Jews,
and 14. Synagogues; at Rebadbar, were about 20000; at Vanah, almost 4000. at
Molhath, are four Companies of the Jews; at Aria almost 25000. at Haphton,
more than an 100. Companies of the Jews are, which were of the first
Captivity, by Salmanaser.

Here, the Jews called David, Al-roi, their Messiah, and under took to
conquer Ierusaelem, and was a notorious Witch, or Necromancer, working false
miracles, and wonders; at Hemdane, almost 50000. at Tabreztaan, almost 4000. at
Ispahaan, almost 15000. at Shiphaa, almost 10000. at Gina, almost 8000. at
Samarcant, almost 50000. in the Cities of Nesbor, four Tribes are said to
reside; the Tribe of Dan, Zebulon, Asher, and Naphthali, which Salmaneser
carried away; and at Nisbor, the Jews professed to the King of Persia, Nec
regem, nec principem ullum e gentibus nobis praefectum habemus, but one Prince
who is a Jew; at Nikokris, almost 500. at Ratipha, 5000. at Haonla, almost an
100. at Dugbijim, 23000. at Gingaba, almost 1000. at Zebid, a few Jews; at
Adan most Israelites, and many of those of Adan, came into Persia, and Egypt;
at Halava, almost 300. Jews. In the city Konts, at the beginning of Egypt,
about 30000. Jews; at Pithon almost 20. Jews, at Misraim, almost 2000. at
Goshen, almost 3000. at Albubijgh about 200. at Munziphta, almost 300. at
Rimerae, almost about 700. at Lambala, almost 500. at Alexandria, almost 3000.
at Damiata 200. at Tunis, 40. at Messana, almost 200. at Palermo, almost 1500.
He does not particularly specialize any in Germany, or France, as he returned;
the whole sum, being in probability above a Million; concerning which
Itinerarie, observe; I have followed the names of mine Author, though the
places be not all so called, at this day: again in the single sums, I have
not included the Jews, whom he aims at, in the words, Justus Caetus
Iudaeorum; or, Sacer Coetus; virique sapientes; or, exiguus Coetus; or, most
Israelites, which are indefinite, and may be many thousands; or the like;
though I wonder, that he would specialize some places, where there was only,
one Jew, a Dyer, as, at Kiriath-jearim, and at Ioppa, and two Jews Dyers of
Scarlet, or Purple, as, at Nob; and three Jews, as at Ramas; and yet seldom
sets down an exact number, by almost, or about, or somewhat above; It had
been, but a little more absurd, to have said; at Ioppa, were almost two Dyers;
at Nob, almost three; at Rama, almost four; whereas there was but one, at
Ioppa; but two, at Nob; but three at Ramas. Moreover, how could he know the
set number of 7000. Jews, at Susar; and 5000. at Kaliba; at Tunis, 40. at
Damiata, 200. and yet otherwhere be ignorant, of the certain number of some
few, who lived together? As at Biroth, he accounts almost 50. Jews; at
Zidon, almost 20. at Ashtha, almost 20. at Schizeria, almost 10. By the same
way, and means, by the which he came, to the certain knowledge of some
greater number, as 7000. he might have sooner come, to the exact knowledge of
20. but, it seems, he affected obscurity, and concealed somewhat, what he
might have revealed, for a Superfuge, if need were: certainly, he endeavored
to increase, rather than decrease the number of the Jews; as the putting into
the account of only one, in one city, does prove; and that, in most of his
reckonings, he sets more, than the perfect number, and then minceth it, with
the word (almost;) Therefore, when he says, almost, or about, or more than
such a sum; I do of such uncertainties, one with another, make a certain
stint.

Constantine l' Empereur ab Oppicke, judiciously finds fault with Benjamin for
many things; for his Metachronismes, and fables; for saying, that Romulus stood
in fear of David, and Ioah, and made vast underground Caves, to lie hidden
in; for faining, or increasing the number, or power of the Jews, in remote
places; where lies are not so easily found out; because, he would answer
Christians, who count them, as vassals, and vagabonds, and would persuade us,
they have Kingdoms, and free power over them, in the East; consult with him.
Let me add; Benjamin little thought, that we should search throughout all the
East, as it were by a Candle, and know every corner of it, even far further,
then Benjamen traveled; for, he came, but to the Western borders of China;
whereas the Countries, and Islands, on the East of China, are known to many
Christians now. Moreover, he erreth grossly; saying ( page 39.) The
Samaritans want these three Letters, (...), in the name of Abraham, (...), in
the name of Isaac, (...), in the name of Jacob, and use (...), for them; and
make this to be, as it were the Shibboleth, to try who were the true
Israelites; but Scaliger, against Serarius, has vouched; that the Samaritans
them selves, under their own hands, have described unto us, the whole
Alphabet, and have sent unto us, the names of the Patriarchs, with the same
letters (which Benjamin says, they want.) So Constantine l' Empereur ( page
170.) Again, in the Samaritan Pentateuch, purchased at a dear rate, by that
holy, and learned Archbishop Usher, to be seen (through his kindness) by any
learned Linguist; all those three letters, are to be seen: in Prologo Galiato,
cited in the beginning of Hentenius his Edition of the vulgar, S. Hirome, thus;
Samaritani etiam Pentateuchum Moysis totidem literis scriptitant, figuris
tantum, and apicibus differentes; the Samaritans write the Pentateuch of Moses,
with twenty two letters, as the Hebrews do; differing only in figures,
notes, and accents; and afterward, unto Esdras his time, the Hebrew and
Samaritan Characters were the same; so he, also ( Tom. 3. page 6.) in the
beginning of his Preface to the Book of the Kings; but the Patriarchs names
were written long before Esdras; therefore they had the same letters with the
Hebrew, and were writ with them: many Kings and Princes, through the mediation
of great friends, or, for the gainefull considerations, or for the particular
worth of some eminent deserving Jew, have given them sometimes power, and
authority, to rule over their fellow- Jews, in such, and such places; as, one
of our Kings gave unto a Jew power, in our own land, to govern, and reigle
all the Jews here; for, to that effect, I read the Kings Patent, as it was
drawn, out of darkness, and published by M. Seldom; who like the Sun, has
enlightened many obscure places, both in divine, and humane literature, and is
indeed Mundus eruditionis; so Amurath gave Tiberias, a city in Palaestine, to
Alvarez Mendez, a Jew, as our Brerewood, in his Enquiries ( cap. 13.) proves
from Boterus; but such authoritle is far from an absolute Monarchy, not
having Crown, Scepter, Sword, Chair of Estate, or any great solemn ceremony
annexed unto it. My Pen having traveled, with Benjamin, over most parts of the
world, is not yet so weary, but it means to describe unto you, very briefly
the present estate of the Jews, who are multiplied to such numbers, that our
great Geographer, M. Brerewood (as a reverend Divine Master Rogers, has
vouched, ( page 31.) of the Protestant Church) says; there are now so many of
them, that they are able to people all Europe; but there is no such thing, in
M. Brerewood, nor any such thing deducible from him; and if so it were written,
it had been awry; for the peopling of Europe, as it ought conveniently to be
peopled, is more of moment, than is imagined; and requires greater numbers,
than are in the world of Jews; and yet, it must be acknowledged, they abound
in numbers, and, like bad weeds sprout up apace, and, if they should come
safely, from the four parts of the world, from the four corners of the earth,
to its Center, the midst of the world, about Jerusalem: I say, their
promised Canaan might very well bereplenished, by their recollected multitudes;
I should not do my duty, to the omniscient, true, and only God, if I laid not
open the ignorance, and folly of their false god Jupiter. Among Divines, it is
known by some, and taken as granted by others, that about Jerusalem, is the
midst of the earth: Jupiter was so stupid, and ignorant, that he knew not so
much; but as Strabo says: Jupiter willing to find the perfect middle of the
earth, let fly two Eagles, one from the East, another from the West: and these
Eagles meeting at Pythya, a town in Greece, taught thereby their Jupiter, that
Pythya was the middle of the world. But might not one Eagle fly swifter than
another? Might not one find more, and better prey, and be longer a feeding on
it than another? For, they were not able to fly over half the world, without
bayting; and one Eagle might wander, from the right way, or line, and fetch
compasses, more than another; and could not he, who is said to let go the
Eagles, one from the East; another from the West, have easier measured it
himself, than trust two unreasonable creatures with that discovery? You, say
the Scythians, to Alexander, in Curtius ( lib. 7 pap. 212.) would, if you
could, hold the East in one hand, and the West in another: did you so, Jupiter,
by the two Eagles? And, did you let them fly, both at the same time? Did they
fly both night, and day, and make their way, through darkness? If the
Eastern Eagle were cast off, at their Sunrising; our Western Eagle was then
cast off, about our midnight; oh wise Eagles, and foolish Jupiter! oh mad
people, to believe in such lies, in such gods! And if this former opinion
should be true; I dare say, there are more Jews now living, than ever were, at
any one time of the Nation, since it was a Nation; the whole land of Canaan,
the promised Land, the holy Land, being leffe than England; and being but two
hundred miles long; or (as M. George Sandys says ( lib. 3. fol. 141.) not
more, than an 140. and, where broadest, not fifty, as he says: Indeed, if
the Tartarians be the seed of Israel; as Postellus, Genebard, and others hold;
they, and the other Jews, might thoroughly inhabit, and people all Europe; for
the Tartarians by themselves, have a long time, and do yet hold, at this day,
a great part of Asia, in subjection, says M. Brerewood ( page 94. and 95.)
they overspread half the vast continent of Asia, or there about: all the great
Nations, from the rivers Wolgba, and Oby, Eastward; and from the Caspian sea,
the river Oxus, the countries of India, and China, Northwards, are contained,
under the appellation of Tartars (though Lipsius calls them Scythians) and
yet, without those bounds, many Tartars there are, both toward the West, and
South: see the Epitome of Ortelius. fol. 99. and Doctor Heylin. page 649.)
Campanella ( de sensu rerum, 4.19.) says, perchance Nature may temper and make
fit, such powers, in some places, as may, or shall frame a perfect animal; and
God can presently infuse a soul, into that fair Fabric, as he does into the
womb; this he writes, as if America perhaps were so peopled; but he
corrects himself, saying, we have no certain History, but of Adam; and the
Art: to make perfect animals, is not yet found out, says he, Avicenna judged,
that America was peopled, from our Hemisphaere; but, I think it impossible,
says Campanella; yet he recounteth from Plato, that the Atlanticke Island, in
the Ocean, did join together both Hemisphaeres; yet had the inhabitants of
that Island (if any such were) two Hemisphaeres: they did sail over the seas,
in the days of Noah, to America; and the memorial of it is lost, says
Campanella; how then, good Friar, came you to know it? Or, how date you so
peremptorily assert it, when it is unknown? From Island to Estotilant, is, a
short, but by-Sea; and shorter, form Estolilant, to the maine Continent of
America; and so, from China, to Iapan; and there is a nearer passage, to sail,
from Iapan, to Quevera; intimating that from these parts, they embarked, and
peopled America; but Newfound Land, which is Estotiland, is not so near a
cut, as Campanella phancieth from Island: but our deeper, and better
Geographer, M. Brerewood, says, it is very likely, that America received her
first inhabitants, from the East-border of Asia: concerning Island, he
mentions not a word: and it is confessed, Quevira is not much distant from
Tartaria: and though both Ererewood, and Campanella confess, that some of the
new world are circumcised; yet Circumcision came not from Isl^nd, or
Greeneland, to Estotilant, but the Tartarians (since they received Turcisme,
and not before) have been, and are circumcised; they be no remaynders of the
old Israelites, as he proves at large. If the Tartars had descended from the
true Israelitos, questionless they, with the other Jews, were able to people
far more, than all Europe: but M. Brerewood wholly explodeth that fable,
though upon powerful reasons, be opineth, the Americans descended from those,
who are now Tartarians; especially because Scythia was held, of old, to be
Officina hominum, and never were overcome, but abound in men; the mother of
inundations, through their infinite multitudes; Curtius (7. page 216.) says,
the Asiatickes believed, that the Scythians were invincible, but they were
overcome by Alexander; and though they were held Invicti, yet their armies did
not always prosper; they tried contrary fortunes with Cyrus: in may be better
said; Scythia was never overcome, or over-runne, nor they expelled their
Habitations, others possessing them; but they increased to incredible numbers,
and might send forth thousands, when both Frisland, and Greeneland could not
set forth hundreds. And it is certain, says Brerewood ( page 97.) and,
without all doubt, that the Tartarians coasts of Asia, are continent with
America, or, at most, disjoined, but by some narrow channel of the Ocean; but
a main, wild salt sea is between Greeneland, and Estotilant, say I: I could
wish all you consult with M. Brerewood himself, whosoever do think, that the
Tartarians are the seed of Israel; for he learnedly disproves it: and you, who
imagine the Americans are non-Adami; for he strongly probabilizeth, if not
evinceth, they descended from the now- Tartarians in old time called Scythians;
for the name of Tartarians was not heard of in Europe, till 1212. says
Ortelius his Epitome. I will end this myb digression, as Benjamin ends his
Itinerary; Deus misericordia sua maxima nostri, and illorum misereatur; atque
cum in nobis, tum in illis, istan^ impleat Scripturam, Deuteronomy. 30. si
convertaris, iterum colliget te ex omnibus populis, quo disperserat te Deus
dominus tuns: God, of his great mercy, take compassion, both on us, and them;
and let him fulfill, both in us, and them, that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 13.2.3. If
thou shall return unto the Lord thy God, and shall obey his voice, according
to all, that I command thee this day, thou, and thy children, with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul -- Then the Lord thy God, will turn thy
Captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return, and gather thee;
from all the Nations, whether the Lord thy God, has scattered thee: There is
only this diversity of Intention, in our prayer; I pray, that the veil upon
their heart, may be taken away, 2 Cor. 3.15. I pray for their conversion unto
Christ; and then, if it be Gods will; for their glorious return unto
Jerusalem (which is likely enough) he prays for their temporary Messiah, and
consequently, for obstinacy in Iudaisme, and yet prosperity in Judea; which
will never come to pass. So much, in pity of the wronged Jews, and
commiserable, against Baronius: Our Saviors saying, that the Scribes, and
Pharisees were like unto white Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful
outward, but are within, full of all uncleanchesse, Matthew. 23.27. did not aim,
at their bodily uncleanenesse, inward, or outward, but within are full of
hypocrisy, and iniquity, says he, ver. 28. they had unclean souls, fair
pretensions, soul intentions: but indeed, before fore they crucified our
Savior, they delighted in manifold washings, as other Nations did, and in our
Saviors days, they were over-nice: They found fault with Christ's Disciples,
for not washing their hands, when they eat bread, Matthew. 15.2, but Christ
excusing his Disciples, reproved them, ver. 11. Not 'that, which goes into a
man, defiles a man; but that which goes out of the month, defiles. To the
Jews hands unwashed and defiled, were all one, Mar. 7.2. The Pharisees, and
all the Jews, except they wash their hands often, or diligently, and that, up to
the elbowes, says Theophylact (on Mar. 7.3.) do not eat; yet, as Theophylact
argues, It was not written in the Law, Lavandum Cubitaliter, hoc est, usque ad
cubitum; no command enjoined washing, from the elbow, to the end of their
fingers; but it was a Tradition of the Elders, and that they followed: They
eat not; when they came from the Market, except they wash: many other things
they have received to hold; as the washing of cups, and pots, brazen vessels,
and tables, Mar. 7.4. and many other such like things do ye, says Christ to
them, ver. 8. Note the words, They have received to hold; they were not bound
to it; the tie is from themselves; they needed not but they have (received) to
hold; both to hold, and to practice; I have seen Oxen, to draw up upon the
Cart their own great load; and an Ass will stand till he has his full
burden; the Law was such a yoke, as neither they, nor their fathers were able
to bear; and yet the Jews were worse yoaked with Traditions.

PAR. 5.
When a Pharisee besought Christ to dine with him, and Christ wen^ in, (...),
recubuit, he sat down to meat; the Pharisee, when he saw it marvelled, that
he had not first washed before dinner, Luk 11.37. etc. and Christ himself
could not escape some inward dislike, even to the admiration, or, rather
astonishment of such a Pharisee, as seemed to be a quarter-disciple of Christ:
the Pharisees themselves made clean the outside of the cup, and platter, Luke
11.39. which they performed not for civil, or moral cleanliness, which is
comely, and commendable; but for a traditionary purification; and therefore,
Christ replyeth, ibid. Your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness;
but from Matthew. 23.25 etc. it may be more, than probabilized, that the Jews
washed not so much the insides, as the outsides; sure I am, Christ says in the
same place, They, within are full of extortion, and excess: not ye, but they;
(...), plena sunt, they are full; no man will doubt, but these words were
spoken obliquely, and referentially of the Pharisees; but it is most
significantly spoken, and expressly of the pots, and platters themselves; not
in the second, but in the third person; They within are full of extortion, and
injustice; as if their pots, and platters receiving bribes, and filled with the
effects of wrong and rapines, might be produced, as evident witnesses of their
oppression: If they had cleansed the inside of the cup sufficiently, our
Savior would not have said unto them, ver. 26. Thou blind Pharisee (blind in
not seeing the double foulness, of the insides of your platters, or cups;
neither the natural, nor accidental foulness opposed to neatness, or
cleanelinesse; nor the moral foulness, which is contradistinct, or opposite
to cups, and platters, lawfully acquired, or possessed) Thou blind Pharisee,
cleanse that which is within the cup, and platter; cleanse that first; whether
(bodily filth, or soule-spots) that the outside of them may be clean also. If
Christ had not meant at all, that the cups within were full of extortion, when
his speech was to the Pharisees; he would have said; ye, and not they: but he
spoke in the third person plural, not in the second; therefore, the very pots,
and platters, were dumb, deaf, and finlesse accessories, or attestates to the
oppression, and wrong committed by their owners, and masters the Pharisees; I
am not ascended very high, Pedibus de more lotis, says Josephus They were wont
to wash their feere.

PAR. 6.
SAint Paul approved those widows, which lodged strangers, and washed the
feet of the Saints, 1 Timothy 1.5. Tertullian, ( ad uxorem, 2.4.) testifies that
the Christian women did, and that their Gentile husbands disliked them, because
they did, aquam sanctorum pedibus offerre: Hierome (in his Apologet. against
Ruffinus) propositum nobis est, pedes luvare veneratione, non merita
dissentire; we are resolved, to wash our feet, with worshipping; not to boast
of our merits. Christ himself gently did chide Simon the Pharisee, for
administering no water for his feet, Luke 7.44. the rather, I think, for that
he was a water-foule Pharisee; which sect was overscrupulous, in manifold
washings: feet commonly are less white, than men's hands, especially in hot
countries, or with laboring, or wayfaring men, and smell worse than their
hands do; Thou, O Pharisee, have been so far from washing, and wiping of my
feet, that thou have not afforded me water. cold water, the cheapest of all
dishes, to wash; or linen to wipe them; but this woman has drawn water, hot
water, from the fountain of her eyes; and has washed my feet with tears,
and wiped them, with the hairs of her head; using her tresses, in stead of a
Napkin.

PAR. 7.
ABraham, and Lot only afforded water, but washed not the feet of their
guests: Let a little water, I pray thee be fetched, and wash your feet Genesis
18.4. even ye your own selves; and I will fetch a morsel of bread: so Genesis
19.2. Lot wishes the Angels, in men's shapes, to wash their feet; the Levite,
and his wife washed their own feet, Judge. 19.21. The washing of our feet
conduces to health, cleanelinesse, and recovery of strength, and was next in
goodness to a Bathe, says Montanus: Joseph's Brethren had water given them,
but they washed their own feet, Genesis 43.24. Abraham's servant, and the men
that were with them, had water given them to wash their feet: Aaron, and his
sons were to wash their own feet, Exodus 30.19. So did both they, and Moses,
Exodus 40.31. It was a dainty complement of her (who complemented once, before
her betters, when so cunningly she bespake a reversion, 1 Samuel 25.31.) even of
Abigail, the Super-witted- Abigail, upon the pleasing message, to be David's
wife; to bow her self, on her face, to the earth; and to say, ver. 41. Let
thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord: It
was a Courtly air, and blew sweet from Carmel, and the humblest temptation,
that I have heard of; but for all that fair semblance; I remember not that
ever any, in the old Testament, were wont to wash their guests feet, or of
travelers: that the Apostles had washed, before their beginning to eat the
Paschall-Lambe, some parts, or others of their bodies, is probable enough, from
Christ's saying to Peter, Ioh. 13.10. He that is washed, need not save to wash
his feet: these words were spoke at the second Supper; and it seems, they
were washed before; and if reference be not had to their Baptismall
Regeneration, the words ran fairest, for their first washing ordinarily
practiced, before the passover was eaten; though commonly the Jews washed
again, at the beginning of their second Supper; of which, God willing,
hereafter.

PAR. 8.
THe great sinner, I think, began this kind of humility, and was the first
recorded in holy Writ, that washed another feet: the Savior, the only
Savior of the world, first fully accomplished that Ceremony, by washing the
feet of many, even of all his Disciples, and even of awicked Judas among the
rest. Heliodorus (being the Greek Sir Philip Sidney) or, that noble knight,
the English Heliodorus, lib. 2. Aethiop. Hist. Haec lavabat pedes, and p^lverem
abstergebat; she washed my feet, and wiped away the dust: Eusebius (3.15.)
Calceamenta quoque pedibus tentabat educere, quae nunquam, nisi a religiosis
resolvi consueverunt; non solum pedibus de more lotis, sed totis etiam
nonnullis corporibus: that is, they did not only wash their feet, as the
usance was, but some of them did also wash their whole bodies, says Josephus.

PAR 9.
THat bathing was used for cleanelinesse, none but slovens will deny; you shall
find it used to that end, 2 Samuel 11.2. and Neh. 4.23. But, of this hereafter,
against the much-erring Peterius: that it was appointed to Naaman, by an
especial command, to a religious purpose, is apparent, 2 King. 5 10. Wash in
Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shall be
clean, clean from the inherent and cutaneall harm: that there were also
diverse Legal or Leviticall Purtfications, by water, is evidenced, Heb. 9.10.
but, that bathing of their whole bodies was used by the Jews, before the
beginning of their feasts, or at them; I cannot find, though it be probable,
that some superstltious precise ones, might voluntarily take up such a fashion,
which Josephus seems to point at, or, it might be done by some, in the
latter times of the Emperors, for the Romans were wont to bathe ere they
feasted: but this custom sprang up, after Jewish Bathings: In Plantus his
days, they washed both their hands and feet. Plautus ( in Persa, Act. 5.
scena. 1.) Hoc age, accumbe -- date aquam manibus, apponite mensam, go to, sit
down -- give us some water some body, for our hands, set dinner on the Table,
and ( scen. 2.) Locus hie Tuus est, hic accumbe, ferte aquam pedibus: praebe
It Is, puer, this is your place, sit you here, bring some water for our feet,
you sir, boy: as Baronius well amends it: the Graecians did so with more
cost: Plutarch, in Phocions life relates, that Phocion found in his friends
house, choice bathes of wine, and odoriferous spices, to wash the feet of
their fellow-feasters, and taxes it for prodigality: They did not only wash
but anoint themselves at feasts: Athenaeus ( lib. 15.) says, the Athenians
were wont to anoint the feet of delicate Persons: the Romans had to most
parts of their bodies appropriate, especial and curious ointments, Baccarimum
Aegyptium, Phoenicium, Nardinum: Nar do vina merebere, says Horace, in his
invitation of Virgill, to a feast, ( Garm. lib. 4. od. 12.) that is, I will
requite thy Nard so fine,
With a whole tearse of Campaigne wine.


Never do we read, that Christ, in his life, used natural or artificial,
sweet odours, but at feasts that ointment of pure or liquid nard, which was
powered on Christ's head. Mar 14.4. Was very precious and costly: and that Nard
also, with which Mary anointed the feet of Jesus, was so rich that the odor
of the ointment filled the house, John 12.3. who pleases to read learned, and
worthy curiosities, on this point, let him have recourse, to Fulvius Vrsinus,
in his Appendix, to Petrus Ciacconius his Triclinium; nor shall I pass by it,
but discourse at large of anointings, when I wrestle with Pererius.

PAR. 10.
SEcondly, concerning their blessings; at the eating of the Paschall-Lambe, the
Jews used much blessing: blessings were in ordinary use: therefore, at
extraordinary feasts, and especially at this feast of feasts, they were not
wanting, 1 Samuel 9.13. The people will not eat, till Samuel be come, because he
does bless the Sacrifice; afterward they eat that are bidden: Maymonides
says, all communicants at the Passover, were to take off 4. consecrated cups
of wine; rich or poor; men or women; they might take 5. if they would, but
then they must say, Psalm. 136. O give thanks unto the Lord, etc. each cup
contained above a quarter of a pint, as I guess: the blessing of the wine was
none other than that which was used in ordinary form; blessed art thou O Lord,
which drawest wine out of the Vine: a fourth part of an Hin of wine, was
exactly proportioned, for a drinke-offering, with the burnt offering or
Sacrifice of one Lamb, Numb. 15.5. The Sacred Paschall-flesh, and bread was
not eaten without drink: The consecration of the bread was thus, at the
Passover; Blessed art thou O Lord our God, King of the Universe, in the eating
of this unleavened bread, this is the bread of affliction, which our fathers
ate in the Land of Egypt; quisquis esurit, accedat, and Paschatizet; whosoever
is hungry let him eat of this Passover; Cuicunque opus est, accedat, and
Paschatizet: whosoever ought or must take it, let him approach, and take this
Passover: when the Table was furnished with the Paschall-Lambe, with
unleavened bread, and sour herbs, and wine; then did they eat and drink,
and properly keep the Passover, and fell to holy discourses: That our most
blessed Lord, both washed when need was; and blessed all things as he ought,
let no Christian doubt; that he strictly observed these agraphall traditions of
men, according to the Jewish form, comes not into my Credo.

PAR. 11.
BUt Reader, thou will perhaps say; here is much ado, about an antiquated
ceremony? but what is the Jewish Passover, or the knowledge of the Rite of it
now to us? I remember a story of the old Poet, who made an unpleasant
beginning, when he saw the people offended; started up, and desired them to
hearken patiently unto the end; and the end should declare, that the beginning
was not to be disliked: the like say I now concerning my Tractate, which may
be thought a (...) or needelesse piece of work, let them attend the issue,
and application, and what resulteth from this discourse, and then they will not
so readily misjudge it: besides, if I never made any digression; but to clear
some questioned difficult, or unusual point; let thy delight or benefit (good
Reader) make thee remember the old proverb, that the farthest way about, is
the nearest way home; and the old verse of Ennius, Vnus homo nobis cunctando
restituit rem, that is, One man to us, by long delays,
Did all our fortunes strangely raise.


Again, S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 5.7. Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for us;
and there is no small resemblance between the Type and substance; to inhere so
long on the Jewish customs, were impertinencie, if our blessed Savior had
followed none of them; but as they hold out a Lantern, and alight to make
Christ's actions better known; so is the disquisition necessary, and the
dwelling so long on them, pertinent to many purposes? But, I answer, without
the knowledge of what belonged to the Jewish Passover; without distinguishing
what were the temporary; and what were the fixed and lasting Rites of this
Passover; thou shall never be able to know what our Savior did practice, when
he ate the Paschall Lamb, with his Disciples, immediately before his death,
Luke 9.31. Moses spoke of Christ's decease, which he should accomplish at
Jerusalem, Moses was the schoolmasters to bring unto Christ, Gal. 3.24. The
ignorance of Moses his Law, draws on with it, the ignorance of Christ's
actions: And by the exact discerning of the intention of the Law; what Rites
were to continue; thou may be sure, that Christ observed all, and every one
of them; whether praeparatory, Sacramental, or subsequent.

PAR. 12.
FIrst Praeparatory; he sent his Disciples, for the choosing of a Lamb. 2. It
was an unspotted one. 3. It was a Male-Lambe. 4. It was under a year old. 5.
He had chosen before hand a fir number, to eat it. 6. None excluded out of the
Jewish Church; none uncircumcised did eat of it. 7. He kept it on the first
month of the year. 8. He kept it, on the 14. day; for then it was killed. 9.
At the Even; that in the beginning of the 15. day it was all ready. 10. This
was to be and was at Jerusalem. 11. It was in one house to be eaten with
well-fitted, religious Table-talke, concerning the Passover. 12. Not the
Priests Leviticall, but by Christ's appointment, the Apostles killed and
prepared, or caused the Passover to be killed, and prepared. 13. They did
dress the Passover whole; roasted with fire: thoroughly roasted; not sodden at
all, with water: the head with the legs, the quarters with the purtenance.
So, for the two Sacramental Ceremonies. 1. Christ and his Apostles did eat
the Passover with unleavened bread. 2. Neither were the bitter herbs wanting.
Lastly, for the subsequent Rites perpetual; not any one was omitted.
1. A bone was not broken. 2. No part of the Sacrifice was carried out, of that
private Sacrary. 3. The table-talke was most holy. 4. They continued the feast
of unleavened bread; and if Christ had lived longer, he would have performed
the Hebdomadall observation of that Paschall-feast, with unleavened bread. 5.
They left none of the flesh, till the morning. 6. What was left, was burnt with
fire.


PAR. 13.
ALL these points of fixed duration, were exactly observed, in Christ's last
Passover: For otherwise he had been a breaker of the Law: but as I proved
before, by undeniable arguments, in diverse passages and places; Christ followed
the Law of God, (...), answering number of precepts, with a like number of
performances: he could not have helped us law-breakers but by keeping all of
it: Christ was the only true observer of the Law, Gal. 4.4. God sent forth his
son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to the intent that he might fulfill
the Law. Gal. 5.3. And when Christ was circumcised, he was made a debtor to
fulfill the whole Law; I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that
he is a debtor, to keep the whole Law: Chrysostom ( Homil. 16. in Mat.) thus;
Christus implevit legem; primb quidem, Nibit Transgrediendo legalium. 2.
Justificando, per fidem, quod lex per literam facere non valebat, that is,
Christ fulfilled the Law, first of all, in that he transgressed none of the
Rites of the Law. 2. in that he justifies us by faith, which the Law according
to the letter, could not do: As for the other fading, and vanishing
ceremonies, he was not bound to them; what is likely he did, shall (God
willing) appear better hereafter: To this liberty was every man left; and
shall we now have Christ tied? Christ was not tied: likewise for the
ceremonies, which the Jewish Church voluntarily assumed unto themselves to
perform; we cannot think that our blessed Savior was bound to obey, and
keep them: he who so often chid them for will worship, in preferring humane
traditions, before the precepts of God, would not be an observer of any, but
such as best pleased him, and were sorted to times, and occasions. So much for
the first Supper; the Passover of the Jews; wherein you may see, what Christ
observed, and what not; so far, as the Old Testament affords us any light.

The Prayer.
O Thou immaculate cleanser of the world, and purifier of mankind, without
whom nothing is holy, nothing clean; wash not my feet only, but also my
hands, and head, and heart; and purge, and mundifie my besported soul, that I
may faithfully love, and please thee here, and when I shall hence depart; I
meekely beseech thee, to array me in the fine linen, clear, and white, which
is ordained for thy Saints, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. XVII. The Contents of the seventeenth Chapter.
1. A just Tractate, against Pererius the Jesuit, concerning the
correspondencit, between the Jews, and the Romans in their feastings.

2. The Romans imitated the Jews, not the Jews the Romans, in their
suppings, feastings, against Pererius.

3. The Jews not infected with the manners, or supperstitions of other Nations.

4. Pererius enterferes, Jewish, Roman customs, in Festivalls Cousin-Germanes.

5. Conquerours condescend to the fashions of the conquered; diverse
particularites instanced in.

6. Pererius his 13. specialties; wherein the Jews (as he says) imitated the
Romans: The place a Parlour, an upper Chamber, a supping chamber.

7. Christ and his 12. Apostles lay on 3. beds at his last Supper: Judas the
traitor signed out, at Supper.

8. The ancient Romans supped in the open air, without any Tables.

9. Christ, and his 12. Apostles supped in a guest-chamber: houses in ancient
times builded with flat roofes.

PARA. 1.
ANd now having handled the Rites of the Jewish Paschall Lamb; and showed what
were transient; what were permanent; what selfely undergone by a traditionall
sumpsimus; having also showed, that Christ observed all the durable ceremonies
of the Passover, and every of them; and that he conformed himself to the
free, and voluntary observations of the Passover, no further than he thought
fit; as not being bound to them, on the one side; nor bent against them on the
other side; when they were not against reason, or conveniencie: my proposed
method calls me to other matters, of mayner intendments, and consequences,
viz. what was said or done, (so far as is revealed in the New Testament)
particularly (in) and (at) Christ's last Paschall supper; which was the first of
those three Suppers, at which he was present, in the same night that he was
betrayed: but even this point also cannot have its perfect explanation; unless
as we have manifested how, and when Christ followed the Jewish Rites of
Paschatizing; so we also search, and determine wherein Christ did symbolize,
with the Roman fashions, in feasting; since in many specialities, the Jews
and Romans accorded in their feastings; and our blessed Savior abhorred
singularity, and did swim with the Current of those times, for outward Civil
usage, deportment and behavior, in things decent. But lo! here am I to enter
into the Lists, against Benedictus Pererius, that most learned and famous
Jesuit; who is as a Giant, and one of the sons of Anak; in Comparison of
whom I may seem as a grasse-hopper, Number. 13.33. he is a very Goliath, a man of
war from his youth, 1 Samuel 17.33 which Pererius, in his labors on S. John,
and in that work of his, of which Vere dici queat, fuisse hoc opus nostrum,
quod nunc Typis mandatur, Trigenario studio, and cura elaboratum, atque
confectum; (that I may translate his own words, in his Preface, to the fourth
Tome) I say, in that work of his; of which it may be truly said, that he was
30. years studying, making, mending, polishing, and perfecting it.

PAR. 2.
IN the fifth Tome of those his select disputations, ( disput. 39. Page 266.)
on John the 13. he determines in the Contents of the Chapter, thus; Judaeos
Christi Tempore, more Romanorum suas egisse Coenas, and Convivia; that the
fashions, customs and usances of feastings in those times, were borrowed by
the Jews of the Romans; and then he begins thus; Ante omnia illud nos
quasi fundamentum supponentes iis, quae dicenda sunt, affirmamus; Iudaeos, quo
tempore Christus Dominus vixit in Terris, in suis Coenis, and conviviis
agendis, servasse morem Romanorum: above all things, laying this as a
foundation; we affirm, that the Jews, in Christ's time, kept the manner of the
Roman supping, and feasting: But this very foundation is laid upon the sands,
say I; or is like to a foundation, which mouldreth away, of its own self: a
better foundation had been this; and better than this no man can lay, that the
Romans borrowed most of those customs from the Jews; and not the Jews from
the Romans, as will appear in the particularities, mentioned by Pererius, when
we shall fall upon them: in the mean while let us take a survey of the
reasons, which induced him to supposit, or suppone that foundation: Is mos
jampridem (quacunque Romanum patebat imperium) praesertim autem apud Genter
orientis (inter quos Iudaei numerabantur) invaluit; wheresoever the Romans
ruled especially among the Eastern Nations, (among whom the Jews were
reckoned) this custom of supping (like the Romans) was in force [jampridem]
if by ((...) jampridem) he mean (...), long since; I answer, not very long
before the Jews stood upon equal terms, in their capitulations, with the
Romans; see 1 Maccab. 8.22. etc. again on the 62. year before Christ's birth,
did the Jews first lose their liberty, as appears by Salianus; and that time
was not long before, to induce a general custom. 3. He cannot prove that all
the Nations overcome by the Romans, feasted or supped, as they feasted and
supped. 4. I stand forth, to justify, that the Jews used most of the
festival and vespernall ceremonies, before the Romans did: Gens Hebraeorum
(says Pererius) jam inde a Pompeio Magno; Romanorum imperio subjecta, little
mores, and instituta, quae patriis legibus minime repugnabant, vel adulationis
vitio, vel ambitiosa aemulatione libenter suscepit; that is, the Hebrews
either to flatter the Romans, or ambitiously to imitate them, followed their
fashions, where they were not against the Jewish Laws? I answer this is most
likely to be true in some things; yet cannot be verified, in such things, as
the Jews had in Practice, before they knew the Romans: Besides Pompeius his
victory over Jerusalem, was but in the same year, that Augustus Caesar was
borne, as their own Salianus chronologizeth; and therefore, there was time,
little enough, to introduce new, and general customs.

PAR. 3.
IVdai^ solenne fuit, Gentium, quibuscum versarentur, vel quarum dominatu
regerentur, moribus, and superstitionibus infici, that is, the Jews were wont
to be infected, with the manners, and superstitions of oher Nations, with whom
they conversed or by whom they were ruled, says Pererius; not more than most
other Nations were, say I; yea, the Jews in the Captivity of Babylon, were
taught by God, Ier. 10.11. in the Chaldaean language, to confute the Chaldaeans
themselves; and if some were infected, yet many remained most holy, pure and
undefiled, as Daniel, etc. The Jews who lived at Rome, in the days of the
Emperors, so far prevayled with the heathen Rulers, that they forbad them to
be troubled or called into question of Law, on the Jewish Sabbaths; So eager
were they, not to degenerate in that matter: Pererius adds Christi tempore,
Rex Herodes, in the days of our Savior Christ, King Herod, (who first, of the
Aliens, reigned over the Jews) was wholly addicted to obey, and gratify the
Romans, who made him King; and introduced many, many things into custom
according to the Roman guize; and so did his Successors? I answer, violent
and sudden alterations, are either never, or rashly attempted by New-made
Princes, especially intruders, -- Mitissima sors est
Regnorum, sub Rege novo, --
that is, Most gentle is the peoples state,
Under a King that is crowned but late.


Especially if there be a crack, or flaw in the new-crowne. 2. Insensible, and
slow changes are guarded with safety. 3. Herod could not, in favor of the
Romans induct any customs, which the Jews before observed, though his heart
was never so much set to gratify the Romans: yea, but there were in Iudaea,
(says Pererius) a great number of garrison Soldiers, and after Archelaus his
removal, Indaea was governed by Roman procurators? I answer, the Roman
Praesidiary Soldiers, of all, were most unfit to bring in new customs of
civil behavior, into other Countries: one Legion was called Rapax from its
unjust preying on all, that came to hand; they were fleshed in blood and
cruelty; and many times did outrage the Countries; and mounted up, even to
those Crimina vesani^, frantic sins; as Tertullian aptly terms Rebellion,
and murder. Lastly, the procurators, which followed Archelaus, were (as I may
so say) but Hesterni, of yesterday; and these customs were introduced, before
Archelaus was removed.

PAR. 4.
HAec itaque, cum vera sint, (sunt certe vero admodum similia) plane consequens
est, quae Romaniservabant in Coenis, and conviviis, eadem servare Iudaeos, id
temporis, fuisse solitos; that is, since therefore these things are true, (as
indeed they are very like to be true) it plainly follows, that the Jews at
that time, were wont to keep the usance, of the Roman supping, and feasting:
here Pererius Humani nonnihil passus est, speaks like a man; these two
propositions do enterfere, Hac vera sunt; eadem sunt vero admodum similia;
these things are true; and the same things are likely to be true; if they were
true undoubtedly true, what need he care for the (likelihood) to truth? Nullum
simile est idem, nothing that is (like) another thing is the very (same) thing;
if it be only (like) to truth; it is no (absolute) truth: again; if the
things were only probable, or likely; he could not safely say, as follows;
plane consequens est, etc. probabiliter consequens est, it is a plain
consequent, etc, It is a probable consequent, had been enough; plane
consequens est, must of necessity proceed, from unquestioned, and
unquestionable verities; the certain sequel is at odds with an uncertain
ground. Lastly, I will willingly confess, the Jewish, and the Roman customs
were Cousin germans, and almost the same in the festivalls, and suppers: But
against Pererius, I am now to prove; that the Romans borrowed those customs
from the Eastern Nations, among which the Jews were numbered; and the Jews
were not imitators, or Apes of the Romans.

PAR. 5.
HOw large a field I have to expatiate in; if I should take a full liberty to
show that Conquerours have condescended to the fashions of the conquered, who
sees not? I will be brief: Justinus ( Hist. lib. 12. pene in Initio)
Alexander habitum Regum Persarum, and diadema (insolitum antea in regibus
Macedonicis) velut in leges eorum, quos vicerat, transiret, assumit; quae, ne
invidiosius in se uno conspicerentur, amicos quoque suos, longam vestem auream,
purpurea;mque sumere jubet, ut luxum quoque, sicuti cultum, imitarensur: that
is, Iustine, almost at the beginning of the 12. book of his history, thus:
Alexander that he might as it were subject himself to the Laws of the Persian
Sophies, (whom he had Conquered) took on him their garb and Crown, (an
unusual thing among the former Kings of Macedon) and lest he might chance to
be envyed by his Nobility, and Courtiers, for so doing; he commanded them also
to wear long robes of gold, and purple; that so they might imitate, and follow
the Persians, as well in their luxury, as in their bravery. Q. Curtius (6. page
153.) Alexander a victoris insignibus, in devicti transivit habitum, and ille
se quidem spolia Persarum gestare dicebat, sed cum illis quoque mores (eorum)
induit; that is, Alexander leaving his accustomed ornaments, went habited like
the conquered; and indeed, he said, he wore the spoils of the Persians, but
with them he also assumed, and put on their manners, and all the Camp
believed; and reported, that more was lost by the victory, than gotten by the
war; ( Page 154.) and Alexander was always, bello, quam post victoriam,
clarior, more famous in War than after his victories, says Curtius, (8. page
253.) again, Alexander mores Persarum assumpsit, quos propter mores tales,
vicerat; sed ne solus vitiis eorum, quos armit subegerat, succubuisse
videretur, militibus suis permisit uxores ducere; that is, Alexander imitated
the manners of the Persians, whom by reason of such manners, he had overcome;
and because he would not be thought, to be the only man, who would yield to
their vices, whom he had overcome by Arms; he gave his Soldiers leave to
marry any of the Captive women, whom they lust: Thus Asia corrupted Greece,
Greece also being conquered, corrupted Rome; even old Crones, did wantonize
with their Graecisme, (...), My life, my soul; -- -- Non possum forre,
quirites,
Graecam urbem --
says Iuvenal, very tartly, that is, I cannot I, O Romans sure,
The Grecian Language well endure:


And Horace before him, most truly, Graecia victa suum victorem cepit --
Greece overcome her Conqueror overcame: Macrobius, ( Saturnal. 3.13.)
Triumphales viros, victores gentium, Luxuria vicit, that is, Luxury has
conquered and triumphed over the triumphant Conquerours of Nations, Let us
briefly touch, how the Asiatickes corrupted the very Romans; for almost the
first six hundred years, ab urbe condita, from the foundation of the city;
the forth-right; and plain Romans had no Bakers, nor Milles; nec pane
sedpulte victitabant, they fed not on bread, but on beans or barley, mingled
with water, sometimes with honey. It is not a thousand years since Sugar was
first found, by the Arabian Philosophers, or Physicians; none of the four
Empires, no not the Roman it self, till its declining ever knew the use, or
heard of the name of Sugar, (though now it be Temperamentum omnium
medicamentorum, the sauce of Physic) honey was their prime, if not only
sweetner: Martial ( lib. 14. Epigr. 222. ad pistorem Dulciarium) Mill tibi
dulces operum manus ista figur as,
Extruit; huic uni parea laborat apis.
that is; That curious hand of thine a thousand shapes, in paste
Hathrais'd; for that thy hand the sparing Be does haste.


I come now roundly up to the point: Florus ( rerum a Romany gestarum, 3.12.)
Syria prima nos victa corrupit; mox Asiatica, Pergameni regis haereditas; Illae
opes, atque divitiae afflixere saculi mores, mersamque vitiis suis, quasi
sentina, rempubl. pessum dedere; famem luxus fecerat, hinc seditio; that is,
Florus says, Syria, after it was vanquished, did first of all corrupt us; then
the Asiatickes, the offspring of the Trojans; their wealth and riches
afflicted the manners of the world, and have utterly ruinated, and drowned our
Commonwealth, in her own vices, as it were in a kennell, or sink of all
filthiness; Luxury brought forth famine, and famine was the mother of
sedition; who now corrupted one the other first? Rome Syria? or Syria Rome?
Iustine ( Lib. 36.) says, Licinius Crassus was attentior Attalicae praedae,
quam bello; Licinius Crassus was more attent to the wealth of Attalus, then to
the wars with Aristonicus: and in the end of that book; sic Asiafacta
Romanorum, cum opibus suis, vitia quoque Romam transmisit; that is, when Asia
was become a Province to Rome, it sent thither its vices, together with its
riches: Alexander ab Alex. ( Genial. Dier. 3.11.) Luxuriae peregrinae (invictum
malum ad effoeminandos animos) ab Asiatico exercitu in Romam primum invectae;
mores infecerunt; Foreign Luxury (an invincible evil, to effoeminate men's
minds) being first brought to Rome, by the Asiatick Armies, infected the sound
manners of the Romans; from this servile imitation of the Conquered, and
against it issued forth all those excellent Laws; by which the Romans were
forbid to have such sumptuous suppers, and clothing: The Fannian, Orchian,
Didian, Oppian, Cornelian, Ancian, and Junian Laws; Tiberius Caesar would have
repressed the immoderate spending by a new Law; but when he saw, he could not
well compass it, he held it better to omit that, he could not handsomely bring
to pass, then vainly to attempt it: Lastly, the Romish imitation of the
Jews, caused the Poet justly to complain, O utinam nunquam Iudaea subacta
fuisset,
Pompeii bellis, imperiove Titi!
Latius excisae gentis contagia serpunt,
Victoresque suos Natio victa peremit:
that is, O that Judaea never bad been wanne,
By Pompey's sword, nor yet by Titus Ram:
Then had not sins of Jews been Romans bane,
Nor Nations Conquered been the Conquerours want.


Now let the Reader judge, between diverse the recited passages of Pererius;
and me, whether the Romans borrowed these customs, of the Jews, or the Jews
of the Romans. Lastly, more particularly, concerning the gesture of
(discumbing) at their feasts, and Suppers; Rosinus ( Antiquit. Romans 5.28.)
Manavit hie mos accumbendi, ad Romanos, ut verifimile est, post Asiam devictam,
Graciamque cognitam: that is, this custom of (accumbing) was in all
probability derived to the Romans, after the conquest of Asia, and their
acquaintance with the Graecians; and the Graecians had it from the Asiatickes,
as they had most of their superfluities; what said Alexander to his Soldiers?
Curtius (7. Page 251.) view my whole Army; He, who a little while since, had
nothing besides his Armor, now lies on silver beds, and they load their
Tables, with gold: But of this more hereafter.

PAR. 6.
I Am to follow, foot by foot, inquest after Pererius, in 13. specialties;
which he determines, were derived from the Romans, to the Jews, or other
Asiaticks; but both of us agree that the same customs were in use, among the
Nations: which consent serves both our turns for our maine intentions, to
prove the particulars used by our Savior, and the Jews then living; yet the
Reader, I hope will not judge the disquisition, unlearned, vain, or
unprofitable; because it shall give light, to many passages in this book:
Primo, says Pererius, Locus, in quo caen^s, and convivia agebant Romani,
appellatur coenatio, coenaculum, conclave, and Triclinium, that is, the place
in which the Romans were wont to feast, and sup, is called a Parlour, or
upper-roome, a closer, a supping-Chamber? I answer, this was true in the later
times of the Romans; but at their beginning, before all Italy was subdued; the
plain, military, homespun Romans, did use to dine and sup in their Kitchins,
or near them; and the place was called Atrium, from its blackenesse, and sooty
smoakinesse; others made their refections, sub Dio, in the open air; in the
end they came to sup in Apollo; and had goodly, large, costly dining-Roomes,
and supping-chambers, even in one house, with the proportionable rates, to be
spent, in the several Halls, or Chambers of that house; see Plutarch, in
Lucullo: but grant we all this; what is his inference?

PAR. 7.
THe place also in which Christ, with his Disciples, kept his last Super: S.
Luke calls, Coenaculum grande, stratum, stratum tribus lectis; unde,
(Triclinii) nomen ductum est; Tribus autem lectis, discubuisse Christum, and
Apostolos, illud indicio est, quod cum essent Tredecim, omnes tamen in caudem
patinam, cibum sumentes, manum inferebant; ut ex illis domini verbis licet
intelligere; qui intingit mecum manum in paropside hic me tradet; id autem est,
unus ex vobis tradet me; omnes enimex eadem patina cibum capiebant: non itaque
illis verbis Dominus, unum aliquem certum discumbentiam designavit: Tredecem
porro ex una, and eadem paetina cibum omnes capere, si mensae fuissent
perpetuae, nequaquam potuissent: This proves that Christ, and his Apostles lay
on 3 beds; because though they were 13. all are out of the same platter, as
appears in Christ's words: Who dippeth his hand with me in the Platter, he
shall betray me, that is, one of you shall betray me: for all are meat, out of
the same platter: besides thirteen could not eat, out of one, and the same
platter, if the Tables had been longsided: First, I say, if all this were
granted; mine undertakings are no way praejudiced; but how lamely do his
proofs creep? Christ and his Apostles lay, on three Beds; because thirteen
put their hands into one platter; which they could not do, if it had been a
long Table: For all this, they might have lain on four, or five beds; yea, or
on two beds; yea, or on one; if it had been of compass, and large: For their
Tables were fitted to their beds, (and some fitted their beds to their Tables)
and some of them were round enough, like an halfe-moone; some like a S sigma;
and might have been capacious enough. Secondly, the Platters were very large,
and were sometimes removed from one place of the Table, to another; and yet
Judas might so lie, that both Christ, and the Traitor, might, at the same time,
dippe into the platter. Thirdly, why does Pererius say, that Christ did not
sign out, any certain one of the Discumbents? When he said; He, who dippeth
the hand, with me, in the platter, shall betray me, Matthew. 26.23. Did ever any
other Interpreter deny, but he signed out Judas particularly? Though after,
^here was a more manifest (...), when Christ took a Soppe, and said, he would
give it to the Traitor, and did give it, Ioh. 13.26. Yet the former words, in
the Paschall-Supper, Matthew. 26.23, made such an impression on the heart of
Judas, that he said, Master, is it I? ver. 25. Theophylact, on the place;
Manifest proditorem reprebendit, quoniam cum reprehenderetur, non emendabatur;
propterea manifestat illum, dicens, qui intinxerit mecum; that is, He does
manifestly reprove the Traitor, because when he was reprehended, he was nothing
amended; and therefore, he does manifest him, saying, He that dippeth his hands
with me. A man may therefore justly marvel at Pererius, denying, that Christ
by these words, did sign out one certain Traitor.

PAR. 8.
But I come to the (...), to the Point, matter in question, between Pererius,
and me: How homely, and poor the Roman people were, at first, has been, in
part, touched at: I will further say; Prandium, and Coena, in propatulo fiebat,
quia palam coenitare, dedecus non erat; secreto vero coenitasse probro, and
ignominiae fuit; They dined, and supped, in the open air, under the Canopy of
heaven; because; it was no disgrace, to sup openly; but it was ignominious, to
sup secretly. Then say I, they ate their meat, by the fires, in their
Kitchins; Hyeme ad focum, aestivo vero anni tempore, in aprico coenitabant, in
Winter, they supped by the fires side; in Summer, in the open air: sometimes
they supped in other rooms, close by their Kitchings; which received smoke,
and blackness from their fires, and from those fuliginous noy somnesses both
smelt, and seen: those places were first called Atria; though afterward, such
inward reserved rooms were called Atria which nor smelt of soote, nor were
blacke-coloured: that the ruder, and first Roman people did eat, without any
tables at all, may well be collected from Alexander ab Alex. ( Genial. Dier.
5.21.) in the beginning. I will not deny afterward, the dainty fitting of
their rooms, and chambers; who knows not Lucullus his Summer House, and his
Apollo? and the horrible excess of later times.

PAR. 9.
IT is true, what Pererius says, that the place, where our blessed Lord supped
last of all, with his Apostles, is called Coenaculum grade, stratum, a large
upper-roome, furnished, by the vulgar; and if he had consulted with the Greek,
he should have found, that the word (...), does signify more, than Coenaculu^
grande stratum tribus lectis; more than a large, upper-roome furnished with
three beds; that is, to say, a room so furnished; ut nihil deesset, sive ad
usum, sive adornatum, that nothing was wanting, either for use, or ornament;
some Greek Coppies, after ((...)) furnished, have also annexed (...),
prepared; this the Syriacke follows; and Origin has it, paratum, prepared;
Hierome, Mundatum, made clean: It was also, (...), an upper Chamber, Luke
22.12. In the Syriake Helitho; so called, from the ascending up the stayres;
which higher rooms they usually let, and set out, keeping the lower rooms for
themselves: you may call it, if you please (...), quod subductum sit a solo;
because it was above-ground, above stairs; and is properly opposed to an
under-roome, or a room placed on the earth: I am sure it is, in the vulgar of
Hentenius, and S. Andreanus, 1 Samuel 9.21. Assumens Samuel Saulum, and puerum
ejus, introduxit eos in Triclinium, and dedit eis locum, in capite eorum, qui
fuerant invitati; that is, And Samuel took Saul, and his servant, and brought
them into the Parlour, and made them sit in the chiefest place, among them that
were bidden; Vatablus has it better, in Coenaculum: Triclinia were not then
heard of: the 70. have it, (...), which word is likewise, Mark 14.14. and is
well interpreted, a guest-chamber: the Hebrew has it, Liscatab, Cubiculum, a
Chamber, as the Interlineary turns it, though the Margin supplieth,
Coenaculum, a Supping-roome, with Vatablus. Some may think, that this Feast,
or Sacrifice of Samuel, and Saul, was, Sub dio, in the open air; but they are
much deceived; for though the houses, in those times, and places were made
plain, that people might walk securely on the top of them, because they were
appointed to make battlements for their roof, lest they brought blood upon
their house, if any man fall from thence, Deuteronomy. 22.8. and though the house tops
were places to walk in, and refresh themselves, as David did, 2 Samuel 11.2. and
places for private Prayer, as S. Peter used them, Act. 10.9. and a place of
secret conference, as Samuel used it; who communed with Saul, upon the top of
the house, 1 Samuel 9.25. when Samuel would not suffer so much as Saul's own
youth, to hear what passed between them, ver. 27. Christ commanded his
Disciples, Mat. 10.27. What ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the
house-tops: Aegidius Hunnius (on the place) says, the Jewish house-tops were
plainer, than ours, senced, suis peribolis, with battlements, ut iis commode
inambulari possit: I say, if the house top, bad not been a convenient place,
for such a matter, Christ would not have bid them preach it there; yet, I no
where can find, a footestep, or sign of proof, that Samuel and Saul feasted,
in solario, in the face of the Sun; but rather went into the house, or into
the Parlour, as our best Translations excellently render it: That the house,
where Samuel then rested, was on an Hill, is apparent, 1 Samuel 911. and whereas
it is said, ver. 25. When they were come down from the high place into the
city; the Bishops Bible does as sensibly expound it, When they were come down
from the H^ll: but, for the manner of eating, it is no sooner said, Samuel
brought them into the Parlour; but it is added immediately; He made them sit,
in the chiefest place, among them that were bidden; as if the Palour, the
Parlour only had been the place of refreshment, and feasting; and their
places, the chief places in the Parlour, yea the chiefest places. Now in this
first point, it is plainly demonstrated, that the Jews had their Coenacula,
Parlours, or Supping-roomes, before ever Rome was heard of, or Romulus borne:
The later Nation of the Romans, might indeed follow in this point; other
people, or these very Jews; or by the dictate of Nature, might concur with
others, in fitting themselves, with decent Supping-places; but that the Jews
did imitate the Romans herein; or took up this Custom; either to flatter the
Romans, or ambitiously to be like unto them; Portrius affirms; I deny: let
the Reader judge.

The Prayer.
GRant, good Lord, that I am not high-minded, that I have no proud looks; but
weane my soul from losty thoughts, and let my utmost ambition be, that I may
be a doore-keeper, in thy house; and lie down, at the feet of the meanest of
thy Saints, whilst they sit, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, at thy Table, in
the kingdom of Heaven; grant this, most merciful God, for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen. Amen.

CHAP. XVIII. The Contents of the eighteenth Chapter.
1. Pererius, his second Particular: the Romans feasted not, till they had
washed.

2. Washing among the Heathen twofold; sacred, unsacred.

3. Reasons, why the ancient Romans often washed: first, because they used not
much linuen: secondly, to remove their sweat.

4. The diverse manners, places, times of hathing among the Romans: bathings
used among the Romans, most commonly before meals: the sign of the Cross
much used in the Primitive Church: diverse hours of Bathing; stately Bathes
among the ancient Romans.

5. The Jews used to wash, and bathe themselves, long before Rome was founded:
Apocryphal Scripture is to be preferred, before any Humane authority
whatsoever: diverse costly kinds of Bathings: white Doves among the Jews,
sacred, and inviolable.

6. The Jewish traditions not derived from the Roman ^^sance; but expositions
of Moses Law: commanded many kinds of washings: Maymonides his Exposition of
the Law of washing.

7. The difference between the Jewish, and the Roman washings.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
SEcondly, says Pererius; the Romans feasted not, till they had washed; and
often, from their Baths, went to their victuals: and some do guess from
those words of Joh. 13.10. He that is washed, needs not, save to wash his
feet, but is clean every whit: that the Apostles before the last Supper, had
washed their faces, heads, and hands: Certainly, Mar. 7.3. It is said, all the
Jews eat not except they wash their hands often? I answer, what Pererius has
(Crebro) is, diligently, or, as it is in the Greek, (...), with their fist,
which implies hard rubbing, scouring, and neat cleansing: Pererius
proceeds; the Pharisee did marvel, that Christ washed not, before dinner;
and it was a solemn thing, with the Jews, before meat, to wash their faces,
hands, and feet? I answer, the words of Saint John do as well signify, that
the Apostles washed their whole bodies; yea, more properly, before that great
Feast; then that they washed only their faces, heads, and hands, as some
conjectures, in Pererius, hold: If any stand up, and reply: Why did Christ then
wash their feet, which were clean, and but newly washed before? I answer;
first, would they think fit, that Christ should wash rather dirty, and
stinking feet, than clean? Secondly, we cannot properly imagine, that the
Apostles came, with unwashed feet, to that great Festival, because it was
contrary to the Custom of those times. Thirdly, Christ, for this end, more
chiefly washed their feet, to give them an example of Humility. Ioh. 13.14.
etc. and therefore, it was not a needless work, to wash them, though they
were clean before.

PAR. 2.
I Will but point at the washings (esteemed sacred) in Aeneas his time, I may
not touch such things, -- Donec me flumine vivo, Abluero --
Until in living River,
I make my members shiver.
As himself says, of the Sacrifice, to the Supernall Deities; but when they
sacrificed to the infernal Deities; sprincklling with water was sufficient;
Dic, corpus properet fluviali Spargere lympha, says Dido, Go, bid him hasten
to the river side,
Let water 'ore his body lightly glide.
And Virgil relates, when Misenus was upon burial, -- Spargeus rore levi,
-- He does with water new,
His body all-bedew.
And in another place of Aeneas, being in hell, as he faineth: -- Corpusque
recenti
Spargit aqua --


These things you shall find, in Macrobius, ( Saturnal. 3.1.) Concerning the
Romans, and their unsacred washings, or bathings; somewhat, to good purpose,
may be said, which Pererius omitted. See, what I said before, of their washing;
for the first, they only washed their hands; Virgil ( Aeneid. 1.) Dant famuli
manibus lymphas --
The servant with a Basin stands,
Of water pure, to wash our hands.


In after times, they washed their feet also; Scaliger says, some washed
their whole bodies.

PAR. 3.
THe Roman Communalty, at first, used not much linen; Lini usus, apud
Romanos, erat rarior, says Rosinus ( Antiq. 1.14.) And therefore, they had
need to wash away oftener, the sweat, and filth of their bodies; (Breeches they
had not, till about Christ's time) and it is confessed, that, at first, they had
no Table-cloaths of linen; but brushed away the analecta, scraps, or
fragments; or, with a Sponge, wiped their Tables; afterward* they used course
woollen clothes: It was long, ere the common people came to use choice linen
Table-cloathes, and napkins; even, in Martialls time, some of those
abovenamed, homely, and home-spunne furniture was used; before the Capitol
was so called: the Jewish whore, in Salomons time, Pro. 7.16. Had decked her
bed, with coverings of Tapistry, with carved works, with fine-linnen of
Egypt; and the good wife, makes fine linen, Prove. 31.24. A second Reason,
why the Romans were wont to wash and bathe themselves, was, to cleanse, and
remove a way their sweat, after their morning walkings, after their rough
exercises; and this they esteemed (and that deservedly) very wholesome: Seneca
( Epist. 86.) says, Scipio Africanus, had balneolum angustum, tenebricosum, ex
consuetudine antiqua non videhatur majoribus nostris calidum, nisi obscurum;
abluebat corpus laboribus rusticis fessum; terram ipse subigebat; nunc pauper
sibi videtur, ac sordidus -- nisi aquam argentea epistomia fuderunt: that is,
Scipio Africanus had a little dark bath, according to their ancient Custom;
our Ancestors accounted it not hot, except it were obscure; he washed his body,
being wearied with country-labour; be himself held the Plough; but now
(forsooth) every one thinks meanly, and basely of himself, who has not his
silver Basin, and Eure, to wash in: even Bathes of the common people; but in
the bathes of free men, or their sons called Libertini, eo deliciarum venimus
ut nisi gemmas calcare nolumus; olim (says he) ibid. and paue^ erant balnea,
nec ullo cultu exornata -- qui priscos mores urbis tradiderunt, brachia, and
crura quotidie abluebant: caeterum toti nundinis lavabantur -- Hoc loco, dicet
aliquis, liquet immundissimos fuisse; quid put as illos oluisse? says Seneca;
militiam, laborem, virum; postquam munda balnea inventa sunt spurciores sunt;
that is, we are come, to that height of niceness (forsooth) that we must have
them paved with precious stones; In time of yore (says he) in the same place,
there were, but a few Baths, and those but homely neither. They which write, of
the ancient manners of the Romans, say, that they were wont to wash their
arms, and legs daily, but Market-dayes, they washed their whole bodies. But
here, perhaps, some one will say, It should seem, that those ancient Romans
were very nasty; but what, think you, did they smell of? I Will tell you, says
Seneca; they smelled of warfare, they smelled of labor, they smelled of
manhood; but after that the Baths began to be more cleanely; men themselves
became more filthy. Plautus (in Sticho) posteaivilavatum, apila: the Poet
Plautus (in his Comedy, entitled Sicibus) says, after I came from
Tennis-play, I went to wash the sweat away. Artemidorus, speaking of the
Romans, says, (...): after labor, or warlike exercitations, the Romans
bathed themselves. You are further to observe, that the Romans, a primis
originibus, cum pauca essent balnea, and nullius cultus, raro lavabant: that
is, in the first beginning, where there were but a few bathes, and those, God
wot, but homely ones neither; they used to wash themselves, but seldom; and,
being weary, washed only their arms, and thighs: all their bodies they washed
only, in Nundinis; at faires, markets, or times of leisure: see Alexander ab
Alex. Genial Dier. 4.20.) which he borrowed from Seneca. In the later times,
they rung a Bell, when the fit hour was to come to the Baths: Lucian, (...),
Campana sonat, the Bell ringes: Martial ( lib. 14. Epigr. 163.) Read pilam,
Sonat aes Thermarum, ludere pergis? Restore the Ball, to the Keeper of the
Tennis-court; the Bell rings in, to call us to the bath; do thou offer to
play longer? or thus, Leave off your play, give me the Ball,
The Bell unto the Bathes does call.


See to this purpose, Adrianus Iunius, ( animadvers 3 11. Martial his words
evince punctually, their exercising, before bathing, and their being called to
the Bath, by the sound of a Bell; then did they first go, into the hot-bath;
and from the hot, into the coole-bath: Petronius thus; Intravimus balneum, and
sudore calefacti, momento temporis, ad frigidum exiimies; after sweating, we
passed speedily, from the hot bath, to the cold. Though Apollonius Tianaeus
called hot baths, Senectum hominum, man's old age; yet were they, in great use:
and so may our natural baths be very useful, and healthful, for many
diseases, if people would be guided by good, and learned Physicians, and
prepare their bodies fittingly; but, if ignorant people will drop into the
baths, so soon as they come into that City; and, without advise, physique
themselves; no marvel, if many are rather worse, than better, partly, through
the ill airs, which arise from those mineral waters; partly through their
bodies imbibing, by the opened pores, more ill humors, than they can sweat
out. Seneca indeed reproves hot baths; in a strain, as hot, as the baths,
that he finds fault withal, as if they were, almost as boiling cauldrons, to
cast condemned bondmen into; I deny not some excess that way; yet the better
sort had their diverse partitions, or cells, Caldaria, for their hot-water;
Tepidaria, for their lukewarm Bath; Frigidaria, for their last cooling Bath,
and cleansing water: Martial (11.3.) A Sinvessanis conviva Philostratus undis,
etc. Philostratus came from the Bath, and Supper, where he was invited at
Sinvessa, a city of Campania. That they were wont to bathe about dinnertime,
is proof enough. Tertulian ( in Apologet. cap. 40.) statim pransuri, balneis
operamini; ye go into the Bath, a little before dinner. I marvel, that the
accurate Rigaltius leaves out the words (Statim pransuri) which Rhenanus,
Pamelius, and Cerds have; and I almost as much marvel; why Pamelius (in his
Annotations) renders it thus, Pransuri, pro, pransi; before dinner, for, after
dinner; Since the more wise, and temperate, went not into the Baths, upon full
stomachs; to use violent exercises, or speedy bathings, upon liberal meals,
and crammed guts, is very unwholesome.

PAR. 4.
I Vven^l (Satyra prima) justly faulteth him -- qui deponit amictus Turgidus,
and crudum pavonem in balnea portat; who, having first crammed full guts, does
forthwith doffe his clothes, with undigested Peacocke then into the Bath, he
goes, adding, Hinc subitae martes, atque inteslata senectus, --

Hence early, hasty, unprovided deaths: Spartianus ( in vita Severi, and
Lampridius, testifies, that the Romans used to bathe, before meals; you may
well interpret it before dinner, or supper-times. Tertullian ( de poenit. cap.
11. exquirit^ balne^^ latiores, hortulani, maritimive secessus, -- conquirito
altilium enormem sagin^m, defacato senectutem vini; that is, seek out the more
private-retired-choyce-garden-Baths, or baths, by the seaside; provide for thy
self, the extraordinary unkindely-fat of frank, and crammed creatures etc.
drink a cup of good old Sack; hence you see, Bathing preceded Eating; Martial
(3.44.) In Thermas fugio, Sonas ad aurem,
Piscinam peto, non licet natare,
Ad coenam propero; tenes euntem, etc.
that is, I wash in the bath, thou buzzest in mine care,
I Swim in the ponds, thou do me pester there,
I haste to sup, thou stopp'st me like a Bear.


Thus you see the approaches to their Suppers also: Vsitato more, ante Caenam,
balneis utebantur; item, post ambulationes, exercitationes, oper as, says
Rosinus ( Antiq. 1.14.) according to the usual fashion, before Supper, they
went into the bath: so did they in like manner, after their walkings,
exercises, and labors: none conversant in Roman history, will deny, but that
diverse places of diverse exercises, were near to several Baths: Tertullian (
cap. 3. de corona Misitis) ad lavaera, ad mensas, ad lumina, ad cubilia, ad
sedilia, quaecunque nos conversatio exercet, frontem crucis signaculo terimus;
that is, when we go into the Bath; when we go to Supper; when candles are
brought into the room; when we go to bed; when we sit down, in our chaires;
what exercise soever, almost, we go about, we wear our foreheads with the
sign of the Cross, from whence, (omitting the Lawful use of the Cross, by
the Christians of those times, almost upon every occasion) I collect Bathing
was, before Eating; Eating before Candlelight; Candlelight before bed (and
yet I cannot but add, against Puritanes of our Times; that the Cross was so
honored, in the days of the best Christianity, after the Apostles; that the
Heathen termed those holy Christians, commonly, Crucicolas, as well, as
Christicolas:) Martial (11.53.) Coenabis belle, Iuli Cerealis, apud me,
Octavam poteris servare, lavabimur una.
Scis, quam sunt Stephani balnea juncta mibi;
that is, Pray (Julie Cerealis) sup with me,
And welcome shall you be;
At eight a clock, into the Bath we will go,
How near to Stephens Bath, I dwell, you know.
Rich men had their Baths in their houses; and meaner sort, hired Baths for
their guests; as Martial did here, of Stephanus; then follows Julius Cerealis
his Supper, better set forth by Martials Pen, then it was served in, by his
servants: the same Martial ( lib. 10. ep. 41.) speaks, of the seasonable
hours of Bathing in Nero his Bath, Temperat Hora Scil. octava.
haec Thermas; nimios prior hora vapores,
Halat, and immodico sexta Nerone calet.
The Bathes at 8. a clock are mild, at 7. the vapors toil,
And Nero's Bathe, with fervent heat, at 6. a clock, do boil.


Alexander ab Alex. Hora Balnei, hyeme, nona; aestate, octava fuit; at winter
they used to go into the Bathe at 9. a clock; in the summer at 8. The
Emperors changed the hours; no bathing was allowed in the night, but in
corrupter times: In days of devotion, among some Roman Colonies: Balnea, and
tabernacula, in nonam usque eluduntur for clauduntur says Rigaltius; the
bathes and Tavernes were shut, until 9. a clock; and Tabernacula are taken
for Taberna; the testimony is in Tertullian ( contra Psychicos, cap. 16.) and
again, ( in Apolog. cap. 42.) Non lavo sub noctem Saturnalibus, ne noctem, and
diem perdam; attamen lavo, debita, hora and salubri, quae mihi colorem, and
sanguinem servet; that is, I use not to bathe my self in the Evenings during
the Saturnalls; lest I should lose both the day and the night; nevertheless I
go into the Bathe at a seasonable, and healthy hour; which will preserve my
color, and my blood: in the first passage, he implies, that the Romans bathe
about twilight, in their Saturnals, Marcus Agrippa made 170. baths, for the
Romans. In the eighth of the Roman Empire, were made most costly, and Princely
bathes; Thermae Agrippinae, Neronianae, Domitianae, Alexandrinae, Gordianae,
Severianae, Aurelianae, Constantinianae, etc. a great number of Thermae, does
Rosinus recount ( page 35.) yet all, after our Saviors time; Publius Victor
reckoned above 800. so great was the later luxury, and prodigality; Statius
(5. Sylvar.) -- Argento felix propellitur unda,
Argentoque cadit, labris nitentibus instat,
Delicias mirata suas, --
that is, The spont of silver was, the pavement silver;
Silver the brimmes, all the bath over silver
Except the waters, wondering at their silver.


Plinius (3.12. and 13.3. witnesses, the bathes were paved with silver.

PAR. 5.
GRant we therefore that the Romans exceeded the Jews, in number, and
sumptuousness of bathes, in the Augustane times, and after; yet the Jews in
Christ's time, or before, took not their custom of washing or bathing from the
Romans, nor intended any flattery or imitation of them, since the Jews
observed such things long before, from the tradition of the Elders: and the
tradition of the Elders had some shadow of practice from times long precedent,
and from some precepts in the Law, which they extended too much, at their
pleasure: In the Babylonish Captivity, the example of Susanna may give us some
light: For, grant it be not Canonical: yet God forbid we should think every
passage in the Apocryphal to be untrue, or without ground of practice, in
those days: for my part, ^professe, I ascribe to the Apocryphal more than to
any mere humane authority: Susanna as it is, ver. 15. was desirous to (wash)
her self in the garden, for it was hot, and she said to her maids, ver. 17.
Bring me Oil and washing balls, that I may wash me: It seems this was the
practice of those times, (yea, though they were in bondage) and good women
used, both Oil, and washing Balls: Poppaea, in the Roman story, used milk,
which by its fatness has a cleansing power: the Romans used diverse sorts of
Oils, and I find there was such an Officer, as was called (Olearius) from his
performing the duty of anointing; as well, as from buying or selling of Oil:
the matter was not strange to any; the word and the name as of a peculiar
Minister in their vocation, is rare; but to the Oil, in the story of Susanna,
are added washing-balls, not used by the Romans near those times, for the
washing of their bodies, so far as I remember: the whore, in Ezekiel, did
wash her self for her adulterers, and painted her eyes, Ezekiel. 23.40. and sat
upon a stately, or honorable bed, and a Table prepared before it, whereon was
set Gods Incense, and his Oil, ver. 41. And the Adulterers or drunkards, put
bracelets on their hands, and beautiful Crowns upon their heads, ver. 42.
This was also in the Nonage of the Romans, when their name was scarce known
throughout Italy: The holy Spouse said, Cant. 5.3. I have (washed) my feet,
how shall I defile them? the Bridegroomes eyes, were as the eyes of Doves, by
the Rivers of waters, washed with milk, ver. 12. Lest some may perhaps think
that Solomon washed his eyes, or face, with milk, (which our Translation will
not bear) let it be observed; the Original applies it, to the Doves
themselves, and to white Doves, whose wings are said to be covered with
silver, Psalm. 68.13. and which were highly esteemed; so that no man out-raged
them, or killed them: Tibullus ( Lib. 1. Eleg. 8.) Quid referam, ut volitet
crebras intacta per Vrbes,
Alba Palaestino sancta columba suo?
that is, Through many Cities the white Dove divine,
Does fly securely to her Palaestine.


Joseph Scaliger, forsaking his own Coppie, varyeth it thus; Alba Palaestino
sancta columba Syro, making Palaestinus Syrus, to be as Psyllus Paenus, the
sense is all one: The Jews hold their white Doves inviolable, and Sacred: upon
what ground, the white Doves were so privileged by the Jews, I see not,
unless they had reference unto the Holy Ghost, appearing in the likeness of a
Dove: or, some Eulogie of the Doves in Scripture, or that Noah his Dove, or
other Doves mentioned in Scripture, were white: Bathshebah, in David's time
washed her self, 2 Samuel 11.2. Not her face, and her hands only, but bathed
her body; the Chaldee interpreter (in 2. Eccles.) holds that Solomon had
costly bathes, and fit for so great a King: before this the daughter of Pharaoh
came down, to wash her self at the River, and the maidens walked along by the
River side, Exodus 2.5. By how much the Countries of Babylon, Egypt, and Iudaea
were hotter than the City of Rome, by so much more need had they, of oftener
washings. And these causes continuing, from the beginning of the world: I
determine, though the latter Romans in the Casarean Principality, or Augustan
days, and afterward; as far exceeded the Jews in sumptuousness, and
magnificence of bathes: as the Mistress of the world might out-goe her
servant, in attire: yet the Jews took not their first bathings, or washings,
either of their bodies or of some parts from the Romans; as Pererius
groundlesly supposes.

PAR. 6.
Consider what before I said, of the Jewish often washings, and of Christ's
ascribing those Customs, not to the Romans, but to the tradition of the
Elders. For not one of all the traditions of the Elders, was derived from the
Roman usance, but was peculiar to their own Jewish Nation, and opposed to all
other Countries, being expositions, though farre-fetched, and violent, of the
Mosaicall Law, and the Mosaicall Law commanded very many Purifications, and
washings, Exodus 30.21. Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands, and their
feet, at the Laver of brass, whenever they go into the Tabernacle of the
whole Congregation: they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they dye
not: it shall be a statue for ever, to them. Levit. 15.5. Whosoever touches
the bed (of any man, having a running issue) shall (wash) his Clothes, and
bath himself in water, and be unclean until the Even: and the like is
commanded in diverse verses following: and when a man is cleansed from his
issue, he shall bath his flesh in running water, ver. 13. The like precepts
follow concerning the uncleanness of women: Levit. 16.26. He that let go the
Goat for the scape-Goate, shall wash his Clothes, and bath his flesh in
water. Levit. 17.15. Every soul, that eats that which dyed of it self, or
that which is torn of beasts, shall both wash his clothes, and bathe himself
in water, Numb. 19.17. For an unclean person, they shall take of the ashes of
the burnt-Heifer of Purification for sin, and running water shall be put
thereto, in a vessel: and the Clean shall sprinckle on the unclean: and on
the 7 day he shall purify himself, and wash his clothes, and bathe himself
in water, ver. 19. In which washings and bathings of their bodies: the
tradition of the Elders was so strict, that the bathing was of none effect; if
any part or the least particle of the body, but so much as the top of his
little finger, were not washed: yea, he must wash not only his head, but all
his hair, and every lock of his head, which the tradition of the Elders
esteemed as his body: Maymonides expounds Moses his Law thus: In every place
where is mention made of bathing the flesh, and washing the garments of the
unclean; you must understand it of laving the whole body in water: when they
washed themselves in their clothes, the Law was not satisfied, unless the
water did sink through their clothes, to wet their whole bodies: or if any
part were kept by the clothes, from being washed. So, the clothes were rather
loose, then girt, or so girded, that the water, for all that had free passage.

PAR. 7.
THe Jewish washings looked up higher, than the Roman, these respected only
bodily neatenesse, and cleanelinesse, and strength, but the Jews purifications
or washings lead them up to sanctification, and betokened their being cleansed
from sin, Exodus 19.10. and 14. verses: sin is of a defiling nature,
repentance is a cleanser, not only our clothes are made white in the blood of
the Lamb, Revel. 7.14. But our hearts are washed from an evil Conscience, and
bodies washed with pure water, Heb. 10.22. Christ cleansing his Church in the
Laver, or washing of regeneration. Ephesians. 5.26. alludeth to the Priestly
washing and clensing in the brazen Laver; and to their bathing, is reference
made, 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit; much Niter, Camphire, and Soap, are not so cleansing, as a contrite
and a repenting heart: and now, if Pererius were living, would I refer it to
his own judgment; whether the Jews did imitate the Romans, or the Romans
the Jews; since long before there was any Roman, the Jewish Nation used such
frequent bathings; and by the appointment of God, their Lawgiver, upon more
occasions, than all the Lawgivers else, of all Nations, enjoined to their
people.

The Prayer.
MOst gracious Lord Jesu, I meekely implore thy divine goodness, thoroughly to
bathe my soul in thy blood, and by thy self to purge my sins; that I may be
presented by thee, unto God, without spot, or blot, and so partake of thy rich
blessedness, in the world to come. Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XIX. The Contents of the nineteenth Chapter.
1. Pererius his third Ceremony: Romans anointed themselves before feasts: So^
might the Jews but not ordinarily: the Pharisee reprooved for not anointing
Christ: Mary's anointing Christ, was of Devotion, not fashion.

2. Romans used unction before feasts.

3. True joy rests in virtue, not in vice.

4. The Graecians used anointings at their Feasts.

5. Several ointments for several parts and uses: Alexidemus, and
Cleopatra's, and Aesop his son, excessive prodigality.

6. Olyes were of diverse sorts; and for diverse uses: Oil Olive commended.

7. Jews used anointing, before the siege of Troy: Jews, Syrians, anciently
abounded with Oils: Oil good for outward, inward uses: Oil, some Sacred,
some of common use: The diverse uses of Sacred oil: Kings, Priests, Sacred
things anointed with it: The composition of it: David anointed King, with Gods
Oil. David anointed King twice.

8. The Jews commonly anointed only Head, and feet, the Babylonians anointed
all their body:

9. The Jews used anointing, after washing: Ashers dipping of his feet in
Oil.

10. Mary Magdalen washed Christ's feet with tears.

11. Jews anointed their heads, before ever the head of Tolus was found.

12. Women among the Jews in Spain the best perfumers.

13. Anointing the head ordinary among the Jews.

14. Myrrh and Nard, precious ointments: Nard taken sometimes for an Herb,
sometimes for an Ointment.

15. Anointing Corporal, Spiritual.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
THe third Ceremony, which both Jews and Romans used; and in which (as in
all the 13.) says Pererius, the Jews did imitate the Romans, and followed
their Praesidents, was this; the Romans being well anointed lay, or sat down
to feasts; that the same was practiced by the Jews, we may judge; because
Christ said to the Pharisee, who had invited him, Luke 7.46. Mine head with
Oil thou did not anoint: and the Lord says, Mat. 6.17. When thou fastest
(anoint) thine head, and wash thy face, that thou may seem not to have
fasted but dined: therefore Mary the sister of Lazarus, powered ointment on the
head of Christ, as he sat at Supper; which unless it had been the fashion in
banquets, Mary Magdalen durst not have done: so far Pererius. I answer, Quid
hoc ad Parmenonis suem? What is this to the purpose? If all be yielded how does
this evince, that the Jews herein followed the Romans? which is the maine
Quaere of mine, and the groundwork laid by Pererius. To his arguments I thus
answer. 1. If it had been usual at every meal, and at every invitation, to
anoint the head of guests; the Pharisee would not have omitted that Ceremony
toward Christ: At their more solemn feasts; the custom of the wealthier
sort, may be granted to be such; not at their daily repasts; and to guests of
prime note, of upper-most rooms, at feasts, Mat. 23.6. of the chiefest seats,
not to the men imi subjellii, as the Parasite, in Plautus, phraseth it. 2.
Christ found fault with his omission accidentally; and as he reproved him not,
at the first sitting to meal, so we may think, he would have wholly passed by
that point, of the Pharisees incivility, if the Religious act of that devout
woman had not ministered a fair occasion of fault finding. 3. Our Savior was
to be reputed, above any ordinary guest; and his entertainment to be above any
feasting; for he never ate with any, but he fed their souls, more with grace
and goodness: then they fed him, or his Apostles with bodily food: therefore
justly was the Pharisee reprooved, because on so momentuall occasions, and
times, and persons, fit for the best entertainment; both for the matter, and
the manner of their well-come, both Real, and Complementall; he neglected that
Ceremony, of anointing our Lord. 4. The penitent woman's act had not been so
glorious, if the fashion had been ordinary or daily, at every meal: To the
second instance of Pererius, I say; the Lord commands the Faster to anoint
his head) as if he were very merry, cheerful, or going to a feast indeed) as
if he feasted; not as if he dined only, as Pererius has it: for they had many
dinners, and many suppers, in which they used none anoyntings; and where joy
and mirth were not always seen attendant, at the Table, nor to be discerned
by their looks, as Christ would have it seen in him who fasted before God;
and seemed not to fast before men: to the third instance, I say, the fact of
Mary pouring ointment on the head of Christ, was rather heroically devout and
divine, than a matter of fashion; she durst have done that holy deed, if
anointing had never been used, in feastings; for, her end was heavenly;
Against the day of my burying has she kept this says Christ, Ioh. 12.7. and I
doubt not but she had supernall inspirations, directing her to do so; if we
shall argue from a singular fact, to a general usance, (as Pererius does) then
one might as well conclude, that washing ones feere with tears, and wiping
them with the hairs of a woman's head, without ceasing, was the custom of
those times, because the himbled penitent did so, Luke 7.44.


PAR. 2.
BEsides, let the difference be observed: according to Peterius, the anointings
of the Romans, preceded their feasts; but the anoyntment of Christ was in
Supper-time, by his own confession; and so, no imitation was taken up, by the
Jews, from the Romans in that point; which recoyleth on Pererius his maine
ground: that Unction, and anointing before feasts, was usual among the
Romans, is a confessed truth; less proof will serve: Martial. 8.77.) --
Assyrio semper tibi crinis amomo
Splende at, and cing ant florea seri a caput;
Candida nigrescant vetulo Chrystalla Falerno,
Et caleat blando mollis amore torus:
Qui sic vel medio fivitus vixit in aevo,
Longior huic facta est, quam data vit a fuit.
that is, With choice Assyrian gunune, let thy locks always shine.
Let flowrie garlands eke compass that head of thine:
Let thy clear Venice glasses be crowned with Bacchus brown,
Whilst wanton Venus tosses upon thy beds of Down;
Who thus shall live and dye, though in the flower of's age,
Has run a pleasant race, beyond dame Natures stage.


So held the Epigrammaticall Epicure.

PAR. 3.
BUt the sober Orator Tully (5. Tuscul. quaest.) says divinely, Vnus dies
been, and ex praeceptis Philosophiae actus, (understand him of true Philosophy,
which differs not from our Theology) peccanti immortalitate est
anteponendus; that is, one day spent well, and according to the Rules of
Philosophy, is to be preferred before a world of wickedness: Omnis iniquit as
est stultitia, all iniquity is folly, say I; Et omnis stultitia laborat
fastidio sui, says Seneca; and every folly is a burden to its self:
continual joy is found commorant among the actions of goodness, and wisdom;
( Rejoice always, and again I say rejoice in the Lord, Phil. 4.4.) the greek
Philosopher Musonius has a dainty quaint sentence; (...). which cannot be
better translated than by the words of Cato; in his Oration to the Knights, and
Horsemen, at Numantia, about Biscai in Spain, (from whom Musonius, as it
seems borrowed the matter) si quid vos per laborem recte feceritis, labor
ille a vobis cito recedit; benefactum a vobis, dum vivitis, non abscedit; si
qua per voluptatem, nequiter feceritis, volupt as cito abibit; nequiter factum
illud, apud vos, semper manebit; you shall find this in Aulus Gellius, (16.1.)
If by labor you do any thing well; the (labor) shortly vanishes from you;
but whilst you live, the (good (deed) departs not from you; if you do any
thing unlawful, though pleasure; the pleasure soon fades; but the foul fact
will still remain with you. Thus much on the By, against that loose voluptuous
Poet, Martial, and his fellow-hog-Epicures: Seneca ( Epist. 86.) Parum est
sumere unguentum, in his die, terque renovetur, ne evanesecat in corpore; quid
quod odore, tanquam suo, gloriantur? Horace (2. Sermon. satyr. 3.) describes a
fordid Clown, from him not anointing himself; Quantulum enim summae curtabit
quisque dierum,
Vngere si cauleis olco meliore, caput que
Caeperis, impaexa faedum porrigine? --
that is, Tell me, I prithee, how much from thy sum
Well each day shave, if that with sweeter butter
Thou baste thy meat; and with more costly gum
Thou dawbe thy pate, which Dandraff-scurfe does utter.


PAR. 4.
THe Graecians also used anoyntings at their feastings; Thyestes ( Versu. 944.
etc. in Seneca's Tragoedie, Act. 5. Scaen. 2.) Verne capiti fluxererosae,
Pingui madidus crinis amomo,
Inter subitos stetit horrores,
that is, My rosy Vernall Crown dropped from my head,
My bayre with fattest ointments moystened,
Through suddayne horror, upright startled.


Martial ( lib. 5 Epigr. 65.) Pinguescat nimio madidus mihi crinis amomo; let
my moist hair be far, with store of Oil or Gum.

PAR. 5.
ANtyphon witnesses, that the ancient had several Ointments, appropriated to
several uses, of each several part; you shall find it in Athenaeus ( lib.
15.) -- Vnguento
Aegyptio, pedes livit, and crura:
Phaenicio, buccas, and ubera:
Sisymbrino, utrumque brachium;
Amaracino, supercilium, and comam:
Serpellino, cervicem, atque genna:
that is, -- He does Anoint
His feet and legs, with Oil Egyptian;
His cheeks, and breasts with Oil Phoenician,
And both his Arms, with ointment Sisymbrine, Water-mint.

His brow, and hair, with Oil Amaracine, Marjerome.

His neck and knees, with ointment Serpilline. Savorie.



Who also there affirms, that Oleum Nardinum, was Oleum pretiosissimum; oil
of Nard was the most precious ointment: the like says Theodoret (on Canticles
1.) That they were wont to anoint their heads with Nard, every one that has
read Horace and Tibullus, can well witness: Plinius (13.3.) most bitterly
inveigheth against the women of those times, who mingled ointments with their
drink; etiam in potu unguenta addunt; tantaque amaritudo est, ut odore prodigo
fruantur, ex utraque part corporis; that is, they temper even their drink
with ointments; in so much, that they stink with it, both before and behind:
(...), says Aelian (12.31.) they mingle their wine with Myrrh, before they
drink it: Juvenal ( Satyr. 6.) Cum perfusa mero spument unguenta Falerno, that
is, Their ointments mingled with Falernian wine,
Do make it froth, and brisk, neat, sweet, and fine.


Plutarch, (toward the beginning of his Symposia) relates; that Alexidemus
being but a youth, powered an excellent ointment, which was brought to
Thrasibulus, into a great cup, or platter, and mixing it with wine, drank it
up; and is there censured for it; yea, they were grown to that height, that
not only Cleopatra drank a precious pearl called an Union, of great esteem,
and rated at Centies Hs: which is, of our money, about fifty thousand pound,
and would at the same meal, have dissolved, and supped up such another, if
she had not been hindered; (see Macrobius, Satur. 3.17. in fine) but afterward
their more ordinary men, and women, did swallow down dissolved pearls; some
for Physic, and some for Luxury; Filius Aesopi, detractam ex aure Metellae,
Scilicet ut decies solidum exsorberet aceto,
Diluit insignem baccam, -- says Horace,
that is, Aesope, the Tragic stage player, had a son,
Who for to swallow one most costly draught,
Took from Metella's ear, a precious stone,
And it, dissolved in Vinegar, off quaft.


Lastly, Martial taxed one, (and no great one, no doubt, more did so) Ventris
onus puro, nec te pudet, excipis auro, that is, Fie, fie, for shame, thou
make of gold,
A pot, thine excrements to hold.


As for their Massy cups of gold; they inlayed, and inset them, with gemmes,
and shining-glister of diamonds, plucked off from Sardonychata manus, their
fingers full of gold-rings; Behold a cup mixed of Pearls and gold,
Inlayd with Schythian, precious, shining mold,
Which made bare many fingers, young and old,
at that, Epigramme, in Martial (14.109.) may be rendered, viz. Gemmatum
Scythicis, ut luceat ignibus aurum
Aspice, quot digitos exuit iste calix!


This is also confirmed by the testimony of Plinius (37.2.) Juvenal ( Satyr. 5.
vers^^ 42.) Nam Virro, ut multi, gemmas ad pocula transfert, that is, with many
more to embosse their cups, unjewell all their fingers. -- A digitis -- and (
Satyr. 10.) -- pocula sumis. Gemmata. --

The Jews had spiced wines, of the juice of the Pomegranate; Cant. 8.2. and
Prove. 9.2. Wisdom her self had her mingled wine; but so excessive
prodigality, I read not, that they had: their very meat being carved up, made
a sweet perfume in the whole room: So says Plutarch (in Antonio.) Athenaeus
( lib. 15.) advises, unguenta in compotationibus deligenda, quae caeput minime
gravent, a stringant nonnihil, and refrigerent; that is, to make choice of such
ointments, at their merry-meetings, which might not make the head heavy; but
might be somewhat astringent and cooling.

PAR. 6.
Oils were for diverse uses, and of diverse sorts; the ground of all, was the
Oyle-Olive; and this was in great plenty, amongst all Eastern Nations: all
Ointments, of sweet composition had this, for their chief temperament, or
prime ingredient: the manifold additions of other juyces, or fat simples, which
Dionysius ( de Coelesti Hierarchia, cap. 4.) calls, Collationem spirantium
suaviter materiarum, habentem in se affatim odoratus qualitates, a composition
of most sweet, and odoriferous simples, might truly be called the anointing
Oil: but the simple Oyle-Olive is of that nature; that I never knew any; who
at the first taste liked it; and I never knew any, but after a little use much
commended it: and I have read, that as Sugar is heating, being mixed with cold
things, and cooling amongst hot things; so the Oyle-Olive also heateth cool
bodies, and cools hot bodies; Calx fervet in aqua, in oleo, frigida est, Lime
burns in water, but is quenched with Oil, says Augustinus ( de Civit. Dei,
21.7.) It is good inwardly; its glibbery, unctuous quality remooveth poison,
and is a present remedy, if presently taken; it refreshes the spirits, both
Natural, Vital, and Animal; it conduces to health, as above all other
things, best agreeing to our humidum radicale: it is also a good nourishment;
Alexander Aphrodisiensis says, Nulla in oleo exuperat qualit as; sed medio
potius constat Temperamento; in Oil there is no superfluity of any quality,
but is of a middle kind of temper; it is called, Oleum laetitiae, the oil of
gladness; because it exhilarateth men, and makes them look pleasantly, and
merrily; it is good outwardly; it asswageth swellings, eases pain, suppleth
ill-affected humors; and is a greater healer in the true use of it: Splendet,
and nitet supra reliquos colores; semper ad superficiem emergit: In oleo
optimum est, quod supernatat; in melle, quod in imo est: optimum Vinum in dolii
medietate consistit; Macrobius ( Saturnal. 7.12.) that is, it shines, and is
bright, above any other color; it always swimmes, at the top of all other
liquors: In oil, the best is at the Top; in honey, the best is, in the bottom;
and in wine, the best is in the middle: it congealeth sooner than wine, which
is of an hotter nature, or vinegar which is of a cooler nature: see Aulus
Gellius (17.8.) and was much used for sauce, as Gellius, ibid. If wine stand
long, in an half empty vessel, it grows worse; but oil when it is half
spent, is best, sweetest, and savourest; Macrobius ( Saturn. 7.12.) P. Licinius
Crassus, and Julius Caesar being Censors, forbad any to sell unguenta exotica,
foreign or outlandish ointments, as the Lacedaemonians banished such out of
their City: Alexander ab Alex. (3.11.) Plutarch (in Alexandro) (...), God gave
Oils to mankind, to refresh them, after their labors, Oil was ordained ad
nitorem, alacritatem, and agilitatem corporis, for the neatenesse, alacrity,
and agility of the body: Plinius (13.1.) Hactenus in odoribus habent pretia
sylvae; erantque per se, mira singula, juvitque luxuriam ea omnia miscere, and
e cunctis, unum odorem facere; ita reperta sunt unguenta, that is, hitherto
woods have been in request, for the making of perfumes; but, whereas every
several thing, by its self, was admirable; it much increased their Luxury, to
have a sweet perfume, made by the composition of them all together; and by
this means, ointments were first found; after in the same book, he confesses
the Romans had their Anoyntings, from the Graecians, and the Graecians, from
the Persians. So much concerning the anoyntings of other Nations, and
especially of the Romans, at their feasts.

PAR. 7.
BUt, that the Jews did take their forms, or fashions of anoyntings, from the
Romans; that against Pererius, I stiffely deny: it was Patrius Mos Iudaeorum,
ut qui laetitiae vacare, aut comptiores, gratioresque vellent prodire aliquo,
lavarent faciem, caputque ungerent, says Franciscus Lucas Brugensis; that is,
it was the countrey-fashion of the Jews to wash their faces, and to anoint
their heads, when they intended to be merry, or to make themselves neat and
handsome, to go among their friends; and he brings instances, before the
burning of Troy; and therefore the Jews took not up this custom of anointing
to ingratiate themselves, with the Romans: that the Jews, and Syrians
abounded with store of Oils, in very ancient times is apparent; the blessing
of Ashur was to dip his foot in Oil, Deuteronomy. 33.24: that is, he was to have
abundance of Oil, as Jacob before in another point blessed him: That his bread
should be fat, Genesis 49.20. The Land of Canaan is called a Land of Oyle-Olive,
Deuteronomy. 8.8. Israel sucked honey out of the rock, (where the Bees had built
their Honi-combes) and Oil, out of the flinty-rocke, Deuteronomy. 32.13. the rock
powered me out Rivers of Oil, Job. 29.6. Not, as if honey or Oil did
Naturally, but Miraculously spring, and flow out of the rocks, as waters did
sometimes, in the Israelites necessity, Exodus 17.6. When God turned the hard
rock into a standing-water; and the flint-stone into a fountain of waters,
Psalm. 114.8. Numb. 20.10. etc. But stones and rocks being naturally barren,
were made by Gods extraordinary blessing, fruitful; to bear Olive, and
Palmetrees, and they to send forth their fruits: Nor can we reasonably
imagine, that this superabundance of Oil was only for outward or only for
inward use, but rather for both: questionless, the Widows little Oil in the
Cruse, 1 King. 17.12. Was to be eaten; not to anoint; as the case then stood,
in the great famine; and the other Widow (the relict of a son of the
Prophets, who was a good man, yet dyed indebted) who had nothing in the house
save a pot of Oil, 2 King. 4.2: kept not that Oil by her, for anointing, but
for eating; and so the pot of multiplied Oil, which filled many vessels, may
well be thought to be used in or for food: for there are very few things in
the world; if any so agreeing to the primigenium humidum, or the radical
moisture in mankind; so corresponding in nature with it, so naturally
cherishing it, as Oyle-Olive, Isa. 1.6. In the Lamentation, that extraordinary
wounds, bruises, and putrefying sores, were not mollified with ointment, is a
confession involved, that Oil or ointment is a mollifier and healer; the good
Samaritane powered in Oil into the wounds of him who fell among thieves, Luke
10.34. Of Oils also among the Jews, some were Sacred, some of common use:
Jacob powered Oil on the top of a Pillar, Genesis 28.18. As it were consecrating
the place to Gods worship, and he re-iterated this Ceremony, Genesis 35.14.
Though, when the Law was given by Moses; no Religious Pillars (without Gods
especial Command, for Solomon erected many) might be erected, Levit. 26.1. And
the Pillars made by heathen, were to be destroyed, Deuteronomy. 12.3. break their
Pillars, other Sacred Oil was to anoint the High Priest, and his sons, and
things Sacred as the Laver, Exodus 30.23. is the receipt of sweet Myrrh 500.
sheckels; sweet Cynamon 250. sheckles; sweet Calamus, 250. sheckles; Cassia,
500. sheckles; Oyle-Olive an Hin; it shall be an holy anointing Oil unto me,
throughout all your generations, ver. 31. Upon man's flesh shall it not be
powered; neither shall ye make any other like it, after the composition of it,
whosoever compoundeth any like it; or whosoever puts any of it upon a
stranger, shall be cut off, ver. 32. Nota.
Yet this inhibition hinders not, but their Kings might be anointed with this
Holy Oil; though Saul and Iehu were anointed out of a brittle Vessel; which
might denote the short continuance of their Reign: and David and Solomon were
anointed out of an Horn, which implies both abundance, and lastingnesse; yet
the Jews cannot thence fairly infer, that the Oils also did differ, in
specie in kind: perhaps not in Individuo, in the particular, since the
consecrated Oil was made in great quantity, and was of a lasting strength,
and might be renewed by Samuel; if so there were not 120. years, between Saul
and Iehu, their several unction; when David bemoaned Saul's death in these
words, 2 Samuel 1.21. As though Saul had not been anointed with Oil; he
acknowledged his Unction, and signified, it was with more than common or
profane Oil; all being done by Samuel, at Gods especial Commandment: For the
service of God, see cakes tempered with Oil, and wafers anointed with Oil,
Exodus 29.2. and oyled bread, ver. 23. The morning, and the evening Sacrifice of
a Lamb, were to have a tenth deal of flower, mingled with the fourth part of
an Hin of beaten Oil, Exodus 29.40. This holy quaternion, of fine wheat, salt,
wine, oil, were of much use in the service of God, Ezra, 6.9.7.22. and if I
mistake not, the chiefest of these was Oils: pure Oyle-Olive was beaten for
the Lamps, Levit. 24.2. Will the Lord be pleased, with ten thousand of Rivers
of Oil? Mic. 6.7. The Vulgat and 70. do ill to read it, in ten 1000. of fat
Goats, when the Hebrew has it, In myriadibus torrentium Olei; the best or fat
of Oil was given to holy uses, Numb. 18.12. In this matter I should find none
end, if I make it not up my self: Psalm. 89.20. With holy Oil have I anointed
David; in Oleo sanctitatis meae uuxi eum, I have anointed him with the Oil of
my holiness, as the Interlin. turns it; In Oleo Sanctitatis meae, as
Vatablus his Margin has it, Ritu solenni, adhibito Oleo Sancto, quo Reges, and
sacerdotes inungi solent; after a solemn manner, with holy Oils such as Kings
and Priests do use to be anointed with all; so Mollerus on the place; who also
well observes that it is called both holy Oil, and Gods holy Oil, and that
God did do what Samuel did; neither was Samuels action only accounted Gods
action; but when David was twice anointed, after Samuel his death: First in the
2 Samuel 2.4. The men of Judah anointed David King over the house of Judah. 2 Samuel 5.3. All the Tribes of Israel anointed David King over Israel, yet this
was done not by mere motion of men only; but by known inspiration Divine,
and directions before prophesied of; they anointed David King over Israel,
according to the word of the Lord by Samuel, 1 Chro. 11.3. Or by the hand and
appointment of Samuel; for Samuel was dead diverse years before; nor could it
be done by all the Tribes; save only by vote, and consent; but David was
anointed personally, by some Priest, Prophet, or Seer; who had a lawful
authority so to do: Nor do I doubt but as the precious ointment which was
powered on Aarons head was so plentiful, that it ran down upon the beard,
and went down to the skirts of his clothing, Psalm. 133.2. So the Royal
anointing was in like plenty; the Kings themselves kneeling or bowing down
before the Priests or Prophets, who anointed them; as by picture is described,
in our old Bishop's Bible, on 1 Samuel 10. So much for the Sacred use of Oils,
by the Jewish people.

PAR. 8.
COncerning the Oil for common Unction, whether simple or compound. I read not
in Scripture, that the Jews did ordinarily anoint any other parts of their
bodies, but their heads, and feet: indeed Ester (according to the Custom, of
those times, and such Virgins) was purified six months, with oil of Myrrh,
and six months, with sweet odours, and with other things, for the purifying
of women, Est. 2.12. which Vatablus, thus expresses, (on the third verse) Det
mundatoria earum (i.) quibus sordes corporis detergere solent, and cutem suam
ungere, etc. Let him give them their Mundatories, that is, those things for
their Purification, wherewith they are wont to scour off the filth of their
bodies, and to anoint their skin; and on the 12. verse; twelve months were to
pass, ere they came in to the King; in the mean time, dabant oper am ungendae
cuti, prioribus sex mensibus, oleo myrteo; posteriori semestri, aromatibus ungi
solebant; they took great care, in anointing their bodies, the first fix
months, with the oil of myrtles; the last half year, with oils of Spices;
and with other Purificatories, which women used; which use cannot well be
restrained to head, and face, and hands, and feet; but was applied to other
parts of their bodies also; but, here you may truly say; This belonged to the
Babylonish, rather than to the Jewish fashions. Also, Wisd. 2.7. Let us fill
our selves with costly wine, and ointments; let no flower of the spring pass
by us; let us crown our selves with Rose-buds, before they be withered: In
these words, Let us fill our selves with costly wine, and ointments, I say,
these Jews preceded the Romans, in drinking ointments mingled with wine.
Secondly, I doubt not also, but they anointed themselves, more, than head, and
feet; the vastness of their intentions, going beyond the common practice,
probabilizeth as much; Impleamus, Let us fill our selves; Holcot, on the place,
thus; Ad vinum addunt unguenta, id est, electuaria, ad jucunde bibendum, and
secundum hoc unguentum pertinet, tam ad gustum, quam. Tactum; aliter exponitur
de unguentis ad ungendum corpora, and facies, ut magis resplendeant, and
suavius redoleant, and mollius tangi possint; and sic pertinent ad delicias,
tam visus, quam tactus; that is, to their wine they add ointments; that is to
say, electuaries, that they may take the more delight in drinking, and in this
respect unguent belongs, as well to the taste as to the touch: In another
respect it is to be understood of ointment, to anoint the body and the face;
that they may glister the better and brighter, and smell the sweeter and in
palpation, feel the softer, and so it belongs to the delight, as well of the
sight, as of the touch.

PAR. 9.
THeirvery being crowned, at their festivalls, did argue their anointing of
their hands, as appeared before in the feast of Thyestes; and I hope shall
playner appear by and by: that holy Susanna at her bathing, used also
anointing, is proved before; Wash thy self and anoint thee, as Naomi
instructed Ruth, Ruth 3.3. So David arose from the earth and washed, and
anointed; but whether the whole body in both these places, be to be understood;
or some especial parts, may justly be questioned. Theophylact, (on Mat. 6.17.)
Prisci in gaudii signum, habebant ungi post lotionem: our Ancestors in token of
joy did use to anoint themselves, after their bathing: Ezekiel. 16.9. God alludeth
to the fashions of the Jews, who anointed after washing. I conclude, some few
upon some extraordinary occasions, might anoint their whole bodies; but I find
it not written of the general practice: the Jews questionless used the
medicata unguenta, and the compounded ointments, Nard, and other: And the house
was filled with the odor of the Ointment, Job. 12.3. again Ier. 8.22. Is
there no Balm in Gilead? and Ier. 46.11. Go up into Gilead and take Balm:
directly inferring, that there was a great medicinal virtue, in the Balm,
especially of Gilead: that the washing of feet was usual among the Jews, is
proved before: I read not of the anointing of their feet practiced in
special, throughout the whole Testament: Ashurs dipping of his foot in Oil,
implies not (...), principally, in the Native sense, the anointing of his
feet with Oil above other parts; but fore-prophecyeth the abundance, in which
he should as it were swim.

PAR. 10.
THe woman indeed in the Gospel, Luke 7.37. used a most civil, decent,
heavenly method in her devotion; she began to wash Christ's feet with tears;
she did wipe them, with the hairs of her head; she kissed his feet and
anointed them, with the ointment? I answer, this fact was extraordinary; she
making ointments which were before, the instruments of sinning, now to be
effects of devotion: nor does Christ find fault with Simon, the Pharisee, that
he afforded not ointment, for Christ's feet, (which, if it had been common, it
is likely he would have done) but Christ says only, ver. 46. Mine (head) with
Oil, thou did not anoint, Irenaeus, (3.14) among the peculiaria (...), or
peculiar passages, which S. Luke alone has recorded, reckoned this; Quomodo
apud Pharisaeum, recumbente Christo, peccatrix mulier osculabatur pedes ejus,
and unguento ungebat; that is, how when our Savior went into a Pharisees
house; to eat with him, A woman that was a sinner kissed his feet, and
anointed them with ointment; and it may be therefore peculiarly insisted, on
the anointing of Christ's feet; who because it was not an usual thing, which
was now done in Galilee; and differed from the other latter anoyntings, near
Jerusalem, toward his death, (where is no mention of the anointing, especially
of his feet) and because this woman, contrary to the common custom, durst
not presume to anoint Christ's head; but began her religious humiliation, with
anointing of his feet, as if she were then unworthy, to come nigh his head.

PAR. 11.
BUt the anointing of the Head, among the Jewish Nation, was long in
frequencie, before ever the Capitol was heard of, or the head of Tolus found:
So, the Romans might imitate the Jews, but the Jews could not be, the Apes of
the Romans, which Pererius in a sort says: when our Savior said to Simon the
Pharisee; Mine head with oil thou did not anoint, thence is fairly deduced,
that at festivalls guests of the better sort, were wont to have their heads
anointed, (as we have aquam manualem, water to wash our hands tendered unto us)
if no such thing had been in use, upon such occasions, Christ would not have
challenged him, for the neglect of that courteous duty, Luke 7.46. Also from
Christ's advising or commanding the true penitent, in the usual hours, and
times to anoint his head, Mat. 6.17. that he may seem rather to be merry, than
in the sight of men to fast, is involved, and included; that in the days of
mirth and festivitie, (when there was no cause of mourning, fasting, or
humbling of their souls) in such joviall, and geniall days, they did anoint
their heads, expressing thereby their inward rejoicing: Hierome (on the place)
thus: Iuxta Ritum provinciae Palaestinae loquitur, ubifestis diebus solent
ungere capita; he speaks according to the usance of the Land of Palaestine,
where upon festival days, they were wont to anoint their heads; and indeed
so did all the Eastern Nations, before the Romans were a People.

PAR. 12.
IN Samuels days, he foretelling that a King would take their daughters to be
Confectionaries, 1 Samuel 8.13. (as now in Spain the women are the best
perfumers, or Milleners) is proof enough, of the use of anointing, even in
those days, which custom of women's preparing perfumes, and sweet Ointments,
continued even in Christ's time; yea even of applying them: for we read not of
any man, that at feasts anointed any, or any whilst they lived; diverse women
anointed Christ; nor did Simon the Pharisee grudge at the woman, for anointing
him, (for that, as it should seem, was usual and lawful, and an Office
reserved rather for women than men) but because she being a sinner, presumed to
anoint him, a sinner (...), a notorious sinner which he disliked, and Christ
defended 1 Samuel 8.14. when he threatens that the King will take away their
Olive-yards, no man can deny, but the use of Oil, was in esteem; for the King
would not seize, on the worst things.

PAR. 13.
IN David's time, the use of anointing their heads, was usual, Psalm. 23.5. Thou
have anointed mine head with oil: Inpinguafli in olio caput meum; he speaks
not here of the Regal, sacred Unction; but of a Festival anointing; for these
words precede, Thou have prepared a Table before me; and these words follow, my
cup runs over; because they were wont to drink liberally, and plentifully
at their feasts; Judai quoties excipiebant convivas bonoratiores, quos
splendide tractare volebant; eos perfundebant, vel balsamo, vel aliis unguentis
fragrantibus, ut ita exhilerarentur; nam cerebrum, and spiritus suavi odore,
mirabiliter reficiuntur; and excitantur says Mollerus; that is, the Jews, as
often as they entertained their best friends, to whom they desired to give the
royallest welcome, did use to cast balm, or some other fragrant ointment, upon
their heads, to make them the more merry; for, the brain, and spirits of men
are wonderfully refreshed, quickened, and stirred up, by sweet ointments.
Again, Psalm. 92.10. I shall be anointed with fresh oil; where he speaks de
futuro, and not, de praeterito, of the time to come, and not of the time past;
of the holy oil (as the Scripture phrazeth it, Psalm. 89 20.) where with David
had been anointed, Psalm. 141.5. Whether you read it; Let the righteous smite
me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent
oil, which shall not break mine head; or thus; Let the righteous smite me
kindly, or reprove me, let not their precious oil break my head; I am sure,
the anointing of their heads in those times, is proved in the Interlineary, it
is thus rendered, Percutiat me malleo justus in misericordia, and increpet me;
oleum capitis ne frangat caput meum; that is, Let the righteous smite me, with
a Mallet, in mercy, and let him reprove me; let not the oil of the head break
my head. The best, and principal oil, with which they anointed their heads
is there poynted at, Psalm. 104.15. Ad nitere faciendum sacies ab oleo, oil
does make man's face to shine; oil of joy is opposite to mourning: Esaias 61.3.
In the same David's time, Anoint not thy self with oil, says Joab to the
wise woman of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 13.2. which inhibition, in a case extraordinary,
argues; that anointing of the (head) at least; was ordinary; The anointing of
the (head) might be, without the Unction of the whole body; but, they never
anointed their bodies, unless they anointed their heads also: semblably, Mic.
6.15. Thou shall tread the Olive, but thou shall not anoint thee, with oil;
which menace argues, they should not do; as they were wont to do; for, they
were wont to tread out the Olives, and to anoint themselves. S. Hierome, on
the place, thus; Prodest tibi, errore cognito, ne habeas discipulos, ne caput
tuum oleo ungas peccat^rum, etc. 'Twere good for thee, since thou once know
thine error, to shake off thy followers, lest thou anoint thine head, with
the oil of sinners; when grief, and sorrow was passed, when David's first
child by Bathshebah was dead, David arose from the earth, and washed, and
annoited himself, and changed his apparel, and went into the house of the
Lord, and worshipped God; then, he came to his own house, and did eat, 2 Samuel
12.20. In the days of Solomon, it was part of his Divine Proverbs; ointment,
and perfume rejoice the heart, Prove. 27.9. more punctually, Eccles. 9.8. Let
thine head lack none ointment; where, an ordinary, if not a daily use thereof
is advised: Athenaeus reports, Possidonius his History; Apud Syros in epulis
Regum, ubi datae coronae sunt convivis ingredi quosdam cum utriculis unguenti
Babylonii, qui mensam circum-euntes, accumbentium coronas eo errorant, aliud
praeterea nihil conspergentes, that is, Among the Syrians, at the banquets of
their Kings, they use to crown their guests with crowns; certain Servitors
came in, with little bottles of Babylonian ointment, who going round about the
Table, do besprinkle the crowns of their guests, with that, and with nothing
else; but sure, the guise of those times, was to anoint their hair, and their
heads: you heard what Thyestes said, as is before cited; and, the whore, in
Ezekiel, prepared beautiful crowns, for her lovers, at her Festivalls, Ezekiel.
23.42, nor was oil wanting, or Incense, in the precedent verse; and we may
well think, they were there for use, and not for sight only.

PAR. 14.
Mine hands drop with myrrh, and my fingers with sweete-smelling myrrh,
Cant. 5.5. says the Spouse; The Bridegromes lips, like Lillyes, dropping
sweet smelling Myrrh, verse. 13. Because of the savor of thy good ointments,
thy name is ointment powered forth; therefore, do the Virgins love thee, said
the Spouse to Solomon, Cant. 1.3. Ointment, even in the abstract; oil powered
out, not enclosed; not unlike the Poet, who said Fluere, excusso Cinnamafusa,
vitro; While the King sits at the Table, my Spikenard sends forth, the
smell thereof, Cant. 1.12. says the Spouse; out of question, fore-signifying
what in aftertimes, was to be done, when Christ was to be anointed: Nard, may
be taken, as well for an ointment, so called, -- Nardo vina merebere, says
Horace, to Virgil; as for an herb, Pliny (12.12.) describes it: S. Bernard
takes it, as an herb, whose lownes causes him, to discourse of humility:
Philo Iudaens, thus; Nardus medicus est fructus Syriae, and Indiae
praestantissimus; eolore rufo, comosus, odoratis simus, saporis amari,
snavitatem odoris diutissime retinens, calefacit, exiccat, viretque perpetuo,
miscetur antidotis, and efficacissimas vires, ad quam phorimos morbos babet;
that is, spikenard is a most excellent Plant, growing in Syria, and India; of a
red color; full of branches, and leaves; most odoriferous, bitter in taste,
and continues fragrant in smell, a very long time; it is hot and dry in
operation, it continues always green; is an excellent ingredient in your
dosies; and is a Sovereign Medicine against most diseases: of its use, in
Compositions, or unguents he speaks not here, though some were more thick,
some more thin, all appliable to Unctions.

PAR 15.
ASI will not deny, in these places, abundance of choice metaphors, and
spiritual meanings; so, I will not wholly abolish the litterall sense; but
freely confess. 1. That both Solomon, and his Spouse, were gloriously attyred,
so gloriously, that our Savior thought not fitter of any Art, or Artsman, to
approach, in borrowed beauty, to the Natural beauty of the Lilly, the work of
Gods own hand, I say unto you, that even Solomon, in all his glory, was not
arraied like one of these, Mat. 6.29. 2. Immediately after, the Holy Ghost had
said literally, of Solomon, Psalm. 45.7. God thy God has anointed thee, with
the Oil of gladness, above thy fellows; the spirit adds, ver. 8. All thy
garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia; so, for the Church, her clothing
was of wrought gold; she shall be brought unto the King, in raiment of
Needle-worke, Psalm. 45.13. etc. And the smell of the Spouses Ointments, was
better than all spices, Cant. 4.10. And, as Aaron's sweet perfumes descended
upon his garments, as it is in the Hebrew; So the very clothes of those
greatones were not untouched, but sweetened with those spreading sweet
Ointments, Who is this that comes out of the wilderness, like Pillars of
smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the
Merchant, says our last Transl^tion, Cant. 3.6. All manner of Spices of the
Apothecary, as it is, in the Bishops Bible* pigmentarii, of the perfumer, says
the Vulgat, good part thereof was, about their vestments, some purposely, some
casually, all with comfort, decency, and sweete-smelling. But, the (head)
above all, did they anoint. So much be said, for the anointing of the Head, in
Salomons time, before Rome was out of the shell, or pipient. Let, who will now
take up the bucklers, in defense of Pererius, for this third ceremony: I am
ready to mainetaine the Jews that custom, long before the Romans; and did
not so, to flatter or imitate the Romans; and the Romans might imitate the
Jews; or other Syrians, or the anointed Graecians: Yet, what needed all this
stir, by Peretius, about anoyntings, at the feasts of Romans, and Jews?
when no Evangelist, no Apostle, no holy father, (so far as my memory bears)
ever said that Christ and his Apostles, were anointed, at the eating of the
Paschall-Lambe; either a little before, or whilst they were earing, or
presently after? since no Ceremony of Pascharizing, either transient, or
permanent, or voluntary; so far as is to be proved implies such a business:
and no Precept, no example of Scripture, no tradition of Elders, invited them
thereunto: besides if I should not be too great a digressour I could quaere
whether at any great sacred feasts and festivals, the Jews were wont to be
anointed? since the prime end of them was devotion; and this festival was of
this sort: though I am ready to acknowledge, at the lesse-sacred festivities,
and solemnities, at solemn invitations of their better friends, and kindred,
they were accustomed to Unctions; especially, the able, sufficient-rich-ones;
who used that exercise more frequently, and some perhaps daily; without some
intervenient occasion to the contrary.

The Prayer.
BLessed Savior, the ve^ry Christ and Messiah anointed, anointed of the Lord,
with the Oil of gladness, super-eminently above any, or all other Creatures,
in the lower or higher world; I beseech thee of thine infinite mercy, to power
thy healing Oil, into the wounds of my soul; and so anoint me with Oil, that
I may have a cheerful countenance; and smell sweet, and be pleasing to thee;
O Lord my God, through Christ who is a sweet savor for us all: So be it, O
Lord; so be it. Amen, and Amen.

CHAP. XX. The Contents of the twentieth Chapter.
1. Pererius his fourth Ceremony.

2. Romans and Jews at their feasts, changed their clothes.

3. The Romans Tricliniary Ornaments; wearing apparel; Larding, and cramming,
purple; Scarlet, cloth of gold, silver; Lex vestiaria.

4. The Bed-Ornaments of the Jews.

5. Ornaments of Idols; Levites, Priests, High Priest; Tabernacle.

6. Wearing apparel of the Jews; variety thereof for diverse occasions; for,
1. Gifts. 2. Appearance. 3. Disguise. 4. Sorrow, or Mortification;
Sacke-cloath: feasting, white apparel: extraordinary apparel approved, at
feasts; comely always: new-fanglednesse taxed, in French, English, Spanish;
English, in part defended: diversity of apparel, for several ages, degrees:
abundance of apparel, a blessing: the excess taxed.


7. Changing of apparel at feasts, practiced by the Jews before the Romans;
Romans had more than one garment on at feasts: the wedding garment not the
only garment: fashions at sacred civil feasts, different.

8. Wedding garment, What.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
THe fourth ceremony, on which Pererius insisteth, now follows: Quarto, says
he, Romani accubituri mutabant vestes, quomundiores, viz. and hilariores
convivarentur; in antiquis marmoribus Romany, accumbentes in Tricliniariis
lectis, magna ex part, vest duntaxat una, super nudo tecti conspiciuntur;
that is, fourthly, the Romans before they went to dinner, or supper, did
change their garments; to the intent they might be the more cleanely, and
merry, at their feastings: In the ancient, marble statues, among the Romans,
they that lie on their Tricliniary beds, are for the most part, seen to have
but one only garment upon their bare skin: These points he insisted on; they
changed their clothes; the ends were two, to be cleanlier; to be merrier:
Lastly, great part of the ancient Statues, represent the discumbents, with one
only vestment, to cover their bare skins: that this was observed in the
feasts of the Jews, is plainly signified in that parable in the Gospel, Mat.
22. Who came in to the feast not having a wedding garment, and therefore was
cast out into outer darkness: thus far Pererius? I answer, (supposing,
though not granting all this to be true) it is more probable that the Jews,
long before did the like; let us come to the proof by these degrees.

PARA. 2.
FIrst, let us consider the costly hangings, in the room, where the Romans
feasted, and their tricliniary ornaments, as the Mediastinus, the Scullion, or
varlet of the house attended his Office in the Kitchen; so the (...), the
Lectisterniator, or Chamberlain, decked their neater Chambers, and beds, with
hangings, curtains, carpets, tapestry, and coverlets, according to the estate
of their masters; stragula vest, auro, and murice Tyrio depicta probe
consternunt, says Apuleius ( lib. 10.) they deck their beds with coverlets,
and their hangings of Arras, or tapestry, their aulaea, were of Babylonian
painted work; many of the Egyptian fashioning; and the Egyptian hangings
were more curious; Martial. (14.150.) Haec tibi Memphitis tellus dat munera,
victa est
Pectine Niliaco jam Babylonis acus:
that is, The Land of Memphis sends these robes to thee,
Babylon's needle now is blind, I see.
-- Spartana chlamys, conchylia Coa,


Your Greek Mandilion, and your Coos purple, are reckoned by Juvenal, ( Satyr.
8) as their choice household stuff: Martial (14.135.) Hic opus est pictis
accubuisse toris;
Here they need to sit on tapestry:


Acu pictis, Pavoninis; coverlets wrought with needles shadowed like Peacockes
feathers: Quid Tyrio recubare toro? says Tibullus ( Eleg. 1.) their very beds
were covered with purple; scarlet tapestry did overspread them: Plantus ( in
Stycho, act. 5. Scena 3.) says, the Merchant Epignomus brought Lectos
eburatos, auratos, decked with ^vorie and gold, tum Babylonica peristromata,
sella, and tapetia, also Babylonian hangings, or Curtains, seats, and
tapestry: Lucian in the banquet of the Lapithae, (...), let us spread the
purple Coverlets, and lie down upon them: purpura quis non jam Tricliniaria
facit? who hangs not his supping room or Parlour with purple or Scarlet?
says Pliny (9.39.) Romulus did wear scarlet or purple, says Pomponius
Laetus; and so other both Kings and Consuls: but Pliny (in the place last
cited) says, Lectulus Spinther was the first who used dibapha Tyria in
praetexta the double-ingrayned-throughly-dyed purple, in his gown or robe, yet
prodigality did sprout*up apace; for Lucullus his discubitory beds were adorned
with purple; and himself served in dishes of gold and silver, set with rich
precious stones, the spoils of barbarous Nations, as you may find in Plutarch
(in Lucullus his life) Cajus Vrbinus and others knowing Metellus Pi^^ his will,
when they invited him to Supper, Vltra Romanorum, ac mortalium usque morem,
they did beyond example, adorn their houses, with Arras, Tapestry, and costly
hangings, and built stages for Players; the ground was sprinkled with saffron;
and other things done, as in a most stately Temple of the Gods; more
particularly, a painted gown for the most part, was his garment, when he lay
down feasting, says Macrobius, ( Saturnal. 3.13.) from the authority of
Salustius: about the same time they did conquirere altilium enormem saginam, as
Tertullian phrazeth excellently that excess ( de Poenit. cap. 11.) or rather I
will speak more to the purpose in the words of Tertullian ( lib. de Pallio
cap. 5.) Aufidius Lurco primus sagina corpora vitiavit, (it may be, he speaks
of their larding of meats) and coactis alimentis in adulterinum provexit
saporem; which later words can be understood of nothing else but the enforced
cramming; which is not so kindly wholesome or pleasing a taste, as when
naturally they feed themselves fat, as God taught them to eat; rather than as
man compels them; Aufidius Lurco was the first, who by larding, and
cramming, gave the flesh of creatures a new, but more adulterate savor.

PAR. 3.
ANd thus we cast our eyes on their wearing apparel, which is the second
point inquireable. Seneca ( in Thyeste, ver. 953.) Libet and Tyrio saturas ostro
Rumpere vestes;
that is, It pleases me, in sunder for to pull
My robes, with Tyrian dye drencht to the full.


What the Roman Court used, Seneca imputes to the Grecian: and perhaps
justly: Martial (14.154.) says, Ebria Sydoniae fuerat de sanguine conchae,
Their woollen robes were drencht, as in a flood,
With the Sydonian shell-fish-purple blood.


And their Wool, which was dyed in Tyrian, or Sydonian color, was drunk with
the liquour of the shellfish; as Seneca, before, said, they were glutted with
it: behold the excessive gluttony, and drunkenness, even in their
Scarlet-colours: Plinius (4.48.) says of old, they were wont to dye their
wool, and clothes, with so diverse and sweet colors, that the cloth did
equal the best of flowers, or herbs: purple, and scarlet, was the robe of
their Senators, that extraordinary robe, distinguishing the Patricians, from
the Plebeians: optatus ( lib. 5.) cum pretiosus inficitur color, Natura saepe
convertitur; dum continctione vellus candidum purpurassit; sic alba lana
Regalem transit in purpuram; that is, the nature of wool seems to be
changed, when it is richly dyed; the candide fleece is impurpled by the
intinction; and the white wool is turned into the Royal scarlet. So, scarlet
was the peculiar ornament of Kings, in other Countries. Seneca ( de
tranquilitate, cap. 1.) non spendeat toga, nec sordeat quidem; let not thy
garments be too rich, nor base neither: it may be he gave advice to the time
for moderation, and repressing excessivenesse: I am sure Nero forbad the use
Amethystini, ac Tyrii coloris, of violet and purple-colour, says Suetonius (
lib. 6.) and vestes auratae, cloth of gold was forbid to any, except to
Emperors, Princes, or great ones; when before the use was over-common: cloth
of silver was called vestis Attalica, as invented in Attalus his dominions; and
cloth of silver; yea, cloth of gold was worn by the Roman Knights: Tibullus (
Eleg. 1.) speaks of a victorious soldier, and horseman, Totus and argento
contextus; totus and auro,
Insideat celeri conspiciendus equo:
that is, Him on a swift Steed placed, you might behold,
Clad whole in cloth of silver, and of gold.


After the Empire was settled in the Caesarean Line, riot did overflow, but the
more sober behavior of the Ancients, disliked such intemperance, and curbed
them, decreeing Leges Vestiareas.

PAR. 4.
THe third, and next step is, to consider the Bed-ornaments of the Jews, the
good housewife so much commended, cloatheth all her household with scarlet,
Prove. 31.32. she makes her self coverings of tapestry: Solomon his bed, (on
which he did discumbere) was covered with purple, Cant. 3.9. though it be read
in our last translation; Solomon made him a Chariot (a bed, as it is in the
Margin) yet the precedent words of the seventh verse, Behold, his bed, and the
subsequent words, ver. 10. The midst thereof, being paved with love, for the
daughters of Jerusalem; enforce me to think it was not meant of his Chariot;
but is meant of his bed: the Hebrew word (Aphirion) being no where else in
Scripture, affords conjecture to many interpretations: Kimchi, and Jarchi, S.
Ambrose, with others, expound it, per Thalamum, aut lectulum, a bed; others
read Conopaeum, or conopium, of (...), a Canopie: most certain it is, that
Solomon had most choice, costly, and curious Bed-ornaments; in so much, that
the comeliest, and fairest among women, Cant. 7.8. was compared to the
Curtains of Solomon, Cant. 1.5. After this Abasuerus perhaps imitated Solomon:
for at his feast were white green, and blew hangings, fastened with cords of
fine linen, and purple, to silver rings, and pillars of marble; the beds were
of gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue, and white, and black
marble, Est. 1.6, The representative whore in Ezekiel, sat upon a stately (or
honorable) bed, Ezekiel. 23.41. (...). sedisti in lecto pulcherrimo, as Vatablus
renders the 70. sedisti super lectum honorabilem, as he renders the Hebrew;
and expounds all thus: In thoro egregio, vel pulchro, been ornato, and
inclyto; which the common whore interprets, Prove. 7.16. saying of her self,
I have decked my bed, with coverings of tapestry, with carved works, with fine
linen of Egypt, and she perfumed also her bed, ver. 17. This was long before
Romulus was borne; and therefore if the Jews, in our blessed Saviors time,
were so excessive in their chamber, and bed-ornaments; they borrowed not those
fashions, of the Romans which themselves used long before; but the Romans
imitated the luxury, and prodigality of the Jews, and other Eastern Nations.

PAR. 5.
I Might spend much time, if I reckoned up all that may be said, either of the
women's abundant cost, in adorning their Idols; or, of the sacred attire of
the Levites, Priests, and especially the High Priest, and the Tabernacle;
briefly thus, 2 King. 23.7. In the house of the Sodomites, women wove hangings
for the grove, Ezekiel. 16.16. Of thy garments thou did take, and deck the high
places, with diverse colors; Thou takedst thy broydered garments, and coveredst
Images; Ezekiel. 16.8. The Idolaters clothed their Images, with blew, and purple,
Ier. 10.9. yea silver spread into plates, is brought from Tarshish, and gold
from Vphaz, the work of the workman, and hands of the founder: Tenues, and
subtiles bracteae, seu crustae inducurtur ligneo simulacro, quibus
imbracteatur; that is, their wooden Images are curiously over-laid, and
embellished with gold foil: that I may speak in the phraize of Ammianus
Marcellinus: concerning sacred ornaments: Aarons holy garments, were for glory,
and beauty Exodus 28 2. so were the garments of his sons, verse 40. made, and
wrought, by all that were wise-hearted, whom God had filled with the spirit of
wisdom, verse. 3. At the making of the Tabernacle, they offered gold, silver,
and brass, blew, purple, and scarlet, Exodus 25.3. etc. see Exodus 39, 2. etc.
and they made the tabernacle, with ten curtains of fine twined linen, and
blew, and purple, and scarlet; with Cherubims, of cunning work; Exodus 26.1.
And not only the door but the very Court of the Tabernacle, was enclosed with
rich, broad, and long hangings, Exodus 27.9. etc. And for the very gate of the
Court shall be an hanging of 20. Cubits of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine twined linen, wrought with needle-worke: Moses used purple, and scarlet
wool, to besprinkle things sacred, or to make them sacred, Heb. 9.19.

PAR. 6.
BUt I descend to the wearing apparel of the Jews: the Jews had variety of
apparel, (I think I may say above other Nations) fitted to all occasions. 1.
For gifts. 2. For appearance in public. 3. For disguise. 4. For
Mortification. 5. For feasting. 6. For several ages and degrees in wonderful
plenty.
1. Joseph gave Benjamin, five changes of rayments, Genesis 45.22. Naaman brought
with him as a present, ten changes of rayments, 2 King. 5.5. 2. Joseph's garment
was changed, and he shaved himself when he appeared before Pharaoh, Genesis
41.14. And Pharaoh arrayed Joseph in vestments of fine linen, or silk, ver.
42. So Daniel was clothed with Scarlet, by Belshazzar his Command, Dan. 5, 29.
and Mordecai was clothed with the royal apparel which the King did wear,
Est. 6.11. 3. Saul had raiment for disguise, 1 Samuel 28.8. and Ieroboams wife in
all likehood 1 King. 24.2. the widow of Tekoah put on a new mourning apparel,
2 Samuel 14.2. when she undertook to be a curious Masker. 4. In sorrow, squalid
apparel was used; Zech. 3.3. Ioshuah the high priest was clothed with filthy
garments, and God promised him, saying, I will cloth thee with change of
raiment: David lay, all night upon the earth, 2 Samuel 12.16. and afterward
changed his apparel, and came into the house of the Lord, and worshipped,
ver. 20. In adversity also many lay in sacke-cloath, and ashes, Est. 4.3. etc.
Cloth of sackcloath was worn in days of tribulation, Revel. 11.3. Yea, it
was next their very skin, Job 16.15. I have sowed sackecloath upon my skin;
penitents sat in sacke-cloath and ashes, Luke 10.13. Jacob rent his clothes
and put sackecloath upon his loins, Genesis 37.34. Hierome ( Epist. ad Lucinium;
fol. 69. litera, (...).) says, ego insignia paupertatis, and quotidiana
symbola, id est, signa poenitentiae tibi, and sorori tuae, nisi, quatuor
Ciliciola apta proposito, and usibus vestris; that is, I have sent thee, and
thy sister 4. hayre-cloathes, or Sacke-cloathes, the ensigns of poverty, and
liveries of daily penance, fit for your use, and purpose: for hayre-cloth, or
sacke-cloath was the induments of penitents. 5. Eccles. 9.8. Let thy garments
be always white, says Solomon; where he speaks of times of joy, and
feasting, as appears both by the precedent, and subsequent verses: be always
neat, handsome, cleanely; but especially, at mirth, and feasting; always
white; not always white; as whiteness is opposed to blackenesse; but as white
is taken for well-colored, shining, exquisite; and is contra-distinguished to
base, beggarly, sordid, or foul; Solomon had linen yarne, brought out of
Egypt; the Kings Merchants received the linen yarne, at a price, 2 Chro.
1.16. So that they might frame the cloth, according to their own desires:
other phrases are used, Iam. 2.2. etc, goodly apparel, and gay-clothing, is
contra-opposed, to vile raiment: Philo lib. 2. de vit a Contemplativa) says,
the Jews are wont to feast in white apparel, which in likelihood they
practiced, from the cited place of Solomon; yea, says Philo, the very
attendant waiting-boyes, at those their feasts, were tenuissimas and
candidissimas praecincti tunicas, clad in very thin and white garments;
anteriore part, ad genua demissas; posteriore ad poplites; the fore part
reaching to the knees, the hinder part to their hammes: The Lord threatens in
the day of his Sacrifice, (which was commonly a day of feasting) to punish such
as are clothed with strange apparel, Zeph. 1.8.) which may be well
interpreted of such as wear not apparel appropriated to the Sacrifice,
answerable to that of him, who was punished for not having a wedding garment;
unto this place of the Prophet Zephanie, might our Savior allude, in that
parable, Revel. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me white raiment that thou
may be clothed; the wicked woman, Ezekiel. 23.40. decked her self with
ornaments, against the feast of her lovers: Pelagius was wont to say; Gloriam
vestium, and Ornamentorum Deo esse contrarium; the glory of vestments and
ornaments, is contrary to God. S. Hierome (in his first book against him)
poseth him thus; quae sunt rogo, inimicitiae apud Deum, si tunicam habuero
mundiorem? I prithee what offense is it to God, if I wear, on my back an
handsome garment? The linen of the Spouse was fine, clean, white, Revel.
19.8. Was not Solomon, being clothed in his royal apparel, heard of God, and
accepted at the Dedication of the Temple; both publickely, by day, 2 Chro.
7.10. and secretly by night, ver. 12. as well, if not more than any other, who
wore meaner apparel? Was not our blessed Savor, his coat of an extraordinary
texture, or working? yet, none ever so accepted, as He: for in him was God well
pleased, supereminenter: Hierome (ad Eustochium) vestis nec satis munda, nec
sordida, and nulla diversitate nobilis sit; that is, let not thy garments be
over-nice, nor yet sluttish, nor variegated like a Peacocke, with diverse
colors. I judge this passage mis-printed: It ought rather, as I guess to be
read; Vestis nec nimis munda; since, non satis munda, does signify little
else; but sordida, and maculata; and mundities, or cleanelinesse, was always
allowed for good; though niceness, and over-neatnesse be, in excess, and
faulty: a foul imputation has been cast, by the seeming grave Spanish, on
the French; and on the English especially, for new-fanglednesse, and
dayly-varyed shapes, and fashions of their apparel: But Ribera, (on Zephan.
1.8) says the Spaniards are Hujus vanitatis supra modum studiosi, qui suis
relictis, aliarum Nationum vestibus utuntur; the Spaniards are exceedingly
vain, to follow the fashions of other Nations, and leave their own guise: his
fellow Jesuit Christopher Castrus, on the same place, taxes the same Nation
of the Spaniards, for the same point, of following the humors of other
Nations, in their apparel: In quo vitio maxim sunt Hispani, qui vestibus, and
idiomate gentium, quibuscum agunt, delectantur, that is, the Spaniards, of all
other are most to blame to delight in the like apparel of other Nations, and
to use their language: This I observed that I may wipe off part of the blot,
from the English, for their imputed affection of newfangled apparel. 6.
Concerning the diversity of garments, for several ages, and degrees, among the
Jews; I may truly say, Versicolores vestes, and acu-pictae; Raiment of
needle-worke, with diverse colors, were in great use, with the Jews, before
Rome was ever heard of: the very youth of Jerusalem were brought up in scarlet;
Lam. 4.5. Phrygionicae vestes, the Phrygian needle-worke wrought about, with
diverse colors, was worn as is mentioned Psalm. 45.13.14. The Kings daughter is
described as adorned with them: So Tamar, David's own Daughter, being a Virgin
had a garment of diverse colors upon her: for with such robes were the Kings
daughters, that were Virgins apparelled; 1 Samuel 13.18. The good hous-wifes
clothing is of silk, and purple, Pro. 31.22. Ezekiel. 27.20. They had precious
clothes for Charets: likewise more especially the valiant men did wear
Scarlet, Nah. 2.3. Sisera his mother expected, that he should have spolium
tincturarum, spolium tincturarum acu intertextum; tinctum his intertexta, as it
is, in the Hebrew, Judge. 5.30. A prey of diverse colors, of diverse Colors of
needleworke; a prey of diverse Colors, of needle-worke on both sides, meet for
the neck of them, that take the spoil; as our last translation rendered it: So
then, about their necks, they wore those glorious Ornaments, like Collars of
SSSS esses: soft raiment was the clothing of delicate persons, in Kings houses,
Matthew. 11.8. Purple-rayment was on the Kings of Midian, Judge. 8.26. Captains
and rulers were clothed, in blue, Ezekiel. 23.6. Gabriel Palaeotus (de sacris
Consistorii Consultationibus, page 369.) maintains from Augustine his
authority; quod deceteos, qui aliis praesunt, gloriosos, in conspectu populi
apparere, ne, si nimiae dejectionis servaretur humilitas, regendi frangeretur
authoritas; that is, it behooves them, who are set over other, to appear
glorious, before the People; lest by overmuch humility, the authority of
government be broken in pieces; but part of that gloriousness consisted in
gorgeous apparel, as besides what is above written, may be seen, by Isaiah
his description of Christ, Isa. 63.1. and Act. 2.21. Herod was arrayed in
royal apparel, Jam. 2.2. A rich man is described by being in goodly apparel;
and Mordecai went in Royal apparel; Est. 8.15, Compendiously thus: the
several uses, and employments of manifold garments, among the Jews, and
others of former times, pro re nata, as occasion guided them, may be imagined
by the infinite store of them, then heaped up; and this store may be found in
the wicked man's wardrobe, Job. 27.16. Though he beape up silver as the dust,
and prepare raiment as the Clay; he may prepare it, but the just shall put it
on, ver. 17. God promises apparel in great abundance, to the Israelites,
Zech. 14.14. and yet, upon abuse, the women are taxed for their excess herein,
Isa. 3.22. are reckoned up changeable suites of Apparells, and Mantles, and
wimples, and fine linen, and hoods, and vailes, ver. 23. Ezekiel. 27.24. They
were rich, in broydered work, and in chests of rich apparel.

PAR. 7.
NOw, let us closely grapple with Pererius, in these 3 points. 1. First, who
changed their clothes, at their feastings, first, the Jews, or the Romans?
Pererius says, the Jews took up this fashion from the Romans; yet he has
not one shadow of proof: But I have manifested that the Jews did at such
times of feasting, change their apparel, long before ever the first stone of
Rome was laid; and that the Romans did imitate the fashions of the Jews, and
other Eastern Nations, in apparel and feasting. 2. The second point from
Pererius his words is questionable, whether the Romans had on them, one only
vestment, when they feasted? I answer, if Pererius mean; they had only, one
feasting vestment, I will not dislike him; but since he says from the
authority of the statues, that for the most part, that only vestment was upon
their bare, or next to their skin; he shall give me leave, to dissent: and
to conclude from his own words, since the statues were only so, magna ex
part, for a great part; it is probable, from a great part of, and other
statues; they might have more clothes, to cover their naked bodies: again as
they might have but only one feasting garment, and that only on their bodies,
in excessive hot weather, so it is likely they had more than one garment, to
keep away the cold; their evenings being naturally cool; and their suppers
being taken late, in the Evening. 3. The 3 point disputable, from the opinion
of Pererius is, whether that place in the parable, Mat. 22.1. 1. A man had not
on a wedding garment, does prove; that the Jews had only one garment, on their
bodies, when they feasted; he says, this is plainly signified, in that
parable: I distinguish, the feasting garment was only one, for every one; yet
is there no sign, or footesteppe of proof, that the Jews had only one
vestment a piece, on their bodies at their feastings. 2. Though the intruder
were most justly punished; because he had not on the Nuptial indument, yet it
is a sound proof (and he is not condemned for it) that he came to feast in his
own clothes (as others were wont.) 3. Suppose the Jews had on them only one
garment, at their Nuptial feasts; yet, it is not to be evidenced, that they
had it in their other sacred, or civil feasts; for their ceremonies varied,
Ezekiel. 16.7. etc.

God speaks to Jerusalem, and alludeth even to their marriage ceremonies; yet
intimates more garments, then one on them; thou art come to Ornament of
Ornaiments, or, excellent ornaments; I clothed thee with broydered work; I
girded thee about with fine linen; I covered thee with silk; I decked thee
also with ornaments; thy raiment was of fine linnea, and silk, and broydered
work; of thy garments, thou did take, and deck the high places; and tookest
thy broydered garments, and coverest them: Christ's practice is most plain
against it, Ioh. 13.4. Christ rose from supper, and laid aside his garments,
and took a towell, and girded himself; and ver. 12. After he had washed their
feet, and had taken his garments, he sat down again; it is, (...),
garments, in the plural number, in both verses: again, here at this great
sacred feast: there is no mention of any especial feasting indument: I
acknowledge that both the Jews, and after them, the Romans after their
purifications, Pedilavians, or bathings, did put on clean clothes, oftimes:
but there were both some bathings, without feastings, and many feastings,
without bathings; and neither feastings, nor bathings, were always accoutred,
with change of vestments; and different were the fashions, at Sacred feasts,
from those, at civil feasts: we read indeed, Mark. 14.51. There followed
Christ, a young man; having a linnen-cloath cast about his naked body; and he
left his linen cloth, and fled from them naked: Yet this was not a feasting or
Nuptial garment; but seems to be a bed-syndon, caught-up, on the sudden; When
the putting on of his other apparel, would have bred more delay, than the
young man would endure; in that whirlwind of state, against our blessed
Savior.

PAR. 8.
BUt concerning the Nuptial garment instanced upon, by Pererius; and the
inference thereon; let us hear the testimonies of our adversaries, and his
friends: Barradius ( Tom. 3. page 483.) thus; solebant Convivae vestibus indui
coenatoriis; quibus induti sumebant cibum linteati; that is, the guests were
wont to be clad, with supping or feasting garments; and these being on, they
took their meat, in another linnen-indument; which garment is here called the
wedding garment; because at marriage feasts, all discumbed, clad in syndons;
and in the end, (though somewhat enterfering, with his own former words) I
doubt says Barradius, whether this custom were among the Jews, for we are
not to ascribe the Roman customs to the Jewish Nation: and herein, as also in
the plurality of vestments, he crosses Penerius; who will have this Roman
custom to be imitated by the Jews: Franciscus Lucas Brugensis, speaking of
the young man, who ran away naked; and holding it very unlikely, it should be
S. John the Evangelist; who using this syndon, for a supping garment, forgot
for grief, to put on his daily garment, holds it incredible (to say no more)
Apostolis fuisse vestis coenatorias, alias, a quotidianis, aut ^o^ c^nasse
amictes syndons, super nado, ut nibil amplius dicam, says he, that is, that
the Apostles had supping garments, different from their usual apparel; or,
that they did sup, with only a linen garment, upon their bate skin: if
Pererius his best friends forsake him, and leave him naked; it is no matter of
censure; if I manifest his manifold mistakings: Mine own opinion is this;
Concerning that Nuptiall-garment, it was not all, and wholly alike, on every
one; nor exactly of the same cloth, stuff, linen, color, cost, length, or
breadth; the poor and little short people could not have it, or have it
sitting, as the rich and taller people had: what if I should think? that the
nuptial garment was some choycer garment of any kind, linen, stuff or
woollen, silk or velver; or any other chief indument; opposed to daily or
sordid, bare, ragged, or cheap apparel; different from the ordinary wearing;
set apart, for sacred or civil feasting? whereby, they might testify, their
unusual, good respects; and credit both the bridegroom, bride, and
themselves: And so the delinquent instanced in, by Pererius, might justly be
cast into outer darkness; for coming in sordid, torn, or common apparel;
when he had costlyer and better: for there were few but had some clothes
better, than other: arguit impudentiae, (says Hierome) quod vestis sordida
munditias polluerit nuptiales; that is, he does check him for sauciness, that
would presume to disgrace; the nuptial cleanelinesse, with his slovenly
garments: and yet the guests were taken, de sepibus, angulis, and plateis, and
from the very highways, whose poverty might not excuse them, from having a
wedding garment. So much if not too much of the fourth Parallel, or
comparison; which Pererius idly, and groundlefly; even in this his most
elaborate work maintains, that the Jews borrowed from the Romans the
custom of feasting-apparell; whereas the Jews did wear
white-feasting-garments; before the head of Tolus was found; or Romulus borne
into the world. Pardon (good Reader) my former prolixity; and I promise, to be
more brief, with Pererius; in the subsequent points.

The Prayer.
INfinite, and incomprehensible God; thou art clothed with light, as with a
vestment; and with immortality, as with an everlasting garment; I do not
desire to be clothed in soft raiment, nor precious attires; to cover my
nakedness, my uncleanness: Let my humble desire be heard, at thy mercy seat,
that I may be clothed with the wool of the immaculate Lamb of God; and be
arrayed in the clothes of Christ; that I may partake of his blessing, and be
accepted for his sake; and not reprooved for wanting of the wedding garment, at
the feast of the Lamb with his Spouse: say Amen, O blessed Savior; and let
all the Children of the Bride-chamber (whom it concerns) redouble, Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XXI. The Contents of the one and twentieth Chapter.
1. Pererius his sift Ceremony; Bodily posture: the ancient Jews, and Romans
sat at feasts.

2. Discumbing at feasts.

3. Pererius his 6. Ceremony omitted.

4. Pererius his 7. Ceremony; supping, on high-beds: The woman standing behind
Christ.

5. Pererius his 8. Ceremony; feasting barefooted: washing of feet
practiced, in Abraham's days.

6. Pererius his 9 Ceremony, lying in the bosom: Abraham's bosom.

7. Pererius his 10. Ceremony; highest rooms, at feasts; the Chiefest guests,
sat in the cheif^st and highest rooms: which place, in discumbing was the
highest? whether Christ, in the Supper, at Bethanie, sat in the highest-roome?
Christ had the middle-place; and is said, most commonly, to be in the midst:
highest in situation, not always highest, in dignity.

8. Pererius his 11. Ceremony; three on a bed: Triclinium, whence so called:
How many beds, at feasts: S, sigma, what it was: Biclinium: How many guests, on
a bed.

9. Whether Christ and his 12. Apostles, at his last Supper, discumbed, on
three beds.

10. Order of discumbing: Jesuits, in this point, dissent among themselves;
Fair collections from the Scriptures, lawful.

11. How far the Apostles discumbed, the one from the other.

12. The words, dividite inter vos; not to be understood, of the Eucharist:
edentibus illis, interpreted: Eucharist instituted, after the Paschall Supper:
Christ gave the bread, and wine to his Disciples severally.

13. Pererius his 12. Ceremony; the Romans and Jews ate in Common: the
Romans huge Platters, Aesop's, Vitellius Platters: Trojan Boar.

14. Romans, and Jews, in their feastings, had diverse dishes: the Roman
carving of fowls: Egyptians, and Jews great Platters: M. Anthonies immania
pocula: Vessels of the Sanctuary, vessels of desire.

15. Romans did lie, not sit on beds: discumbing, Pererius affirms, deuyeth
it: Romans Suppers at times, continued, from night till Morning: Romans
changed their Posture, in discumbing: Rosinus his description of the Romans
discumbing: ancient Romans temperance, at feasts: Roman fashion, in drinking
at feasts.

16. Pererius his 13. Ceremony: the Romans, in their feasts appointed;
Magistrum potandi; Regem vini; modimperatorem: the manner of the Grecian, and
Latin jolly drinking.

17. The Epitome of all Pererius his twofold mistaking: the Conclusion
directly, against Pererius.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
THe sift point singled out, by Pererius, wherein he says, the Jews observed
the custom of the Romans, concerning their bodily Posture, in their feasting.
1. Pererius acknowledges that the ancient Jews at supper, and feasts did sit:
Eccles 31.12. If thou (sit) at a bountiful Table; Prove. 23.1. if thou (sit) to
eat with a Ruler: Judge. 19.6. The Levite and his Concubine (sat) down, and
did eat and drink both of them together, 1 King. 13.20. They (sat) at the
table; Genesis 43.33. the brethren of Joseph (sat) before him, 1 Samuel 20.5. To
morrow is the new moon or Kalends, and I should not fail to (sit) with the
King, at meat; Exodus 22.6. The people (sat) down, to eat and to drink; and
rose up to play; so far Pererius. Let me add, the Apostle citing that place
of Exodus, reads it (...), they sat down, which shakes off tricliniary
accubation, and properly signifies Session. 2. The ancient Romans were wont
to (sit) at feasting, says he, Perpetuis soliti Patres considere mensis, says
Virgil. that is, It was their guise, in ancient Time,
To sit at boords, when they did dine.
And Pererius grounds himself on Philander, and Mercurialis: Marcus Varro
indeed and Servius affirm, that both men and women among the Romans,
anciently supped (sitting) in process of time, the men did (lie) along, at
their feasting, and the women (sat) still, at last both men and women, lay
along on beds, when they supped, and feasted: he adds, Virgil, at the latter
end of his first book of Aeneids, -- Pictis discumbere lectis, -- To lie along
on painted beds; This last authority adds no force to the point of (sitting)
at feasts, but rather weakeneth it: Secondly let me add, in all those places
of Canonical Scripture, the Radix Jashah is used, which seldom, very seldom,
by it self, proves discumbing, but sitting. Thirdly, more places may be
added, Prove. 9.14. She (sits) at the door of her house, on a seat, in the
high places of the City: Ier. 3.2. In the ways have thou (sat) for them,
which two places cannot possibly be interpreted, of tricliniary accubation:
Lastly, in 1 Samuel 20.5. it is doubled Iashab, Esheb, sedendo sedebo, by sitting
I will sit.

PAR. 2:
THirdly Pererius says, the Jews in Christ's time, did not feast (sitting) but
(discumbing) praeter morem Romanorum, quem ipsi tum imitabantur, contrary to
the usance of the Romans, whom they did imitate: the mis-printing of (Praeter)
is the least fault, it should be, juxta, propter, or secundum morem Romanorum,
quem ipsi tunc imitabantur, according to the usance, etc. as the sense
convinces, and his subsequent proofs declare: fourthly, the Romans feasted
and supped, Non sendentes inscamnis, vel sellulis, sed accumbentes in lectis,
not sitting upon benches, forms, stools, or chaires; but lying along on beds,
says he, as he proves by many authors, and by the Marble Statues to be seen
in diverse Palaces of Italy, sternantur lecti, Caeciliane, sede, says Martial.
(8.67.) The discumbing-beds are fit,
Pray good Caecilian sit.
Not only (out) of Supper-time, as here, but even (at) supper, sometimes was
Session, even in the midst of accubation, upon the beds, as the woman in
Ezekiel, Veiashabt, (...), sedisti in lecto pulcherrimo, she sat even on a
stately bed, Ezekiel. 23.41. yet the stately bed on which she sat with a table
prepared before it, as there follows in sign of a feasting bed, is also
called ver. 17. the bed of love, into which the Babylonians came to her: So
Hest. 3.15. the King and Haman, Iashbee, (sat) down, that they might drink:
As I easily grant this manner of Jewish and Roman feasting, so, nor he, nor
any of his, shall ever be able to prove, that the Jews did take up that
custom from the Romans; though perhaps, in some few or small Ceremonies, of
their feasting, some few who had been at Rome, or were inwardly acquainted
with the Romans, might conform themselves to the Romans: For not only other
Asiatickes, but the very Jews used that custom, before ever Rome was thought
of: much less will it ever be evicted, that the Jews in their Sacred
Paschalls, had any resemblance, with the profane feastings of the Romans,
which is the maine point now in question. See the first book, (7. Chap.) what
there I prove or disprove.

PAR. 3.
THe sixth point, wherein Pererius intended to show, the assimilation or
correspondence of the Jews, unto the Romans, either he quire forgot; and so I
must let it dye with him; or he did not mark it, or mis-marked it; and then it
has its answer under one of the other points.

PAR. 4.
SEptimo, says he, the Romans were wont to sup, and feast; and accumbere in
altis lectis, seu thoris, to lye-downe, on high-beds, Inde thoro Pater Aeneas
sicorsus ab alio: Christ also did sup, at the Pharisees house, on an high bed:
for the great sinner, Luke 7.38. Stood at his feet behind him, weeping, and
began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her
head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the Ointment: Id autem fecit
(says Pererius) non procumbens, necgenibus nixa, sed (ut dixit Lucas) stans
retro, secus pedes ejus; quo evidenter ostenditur altitudo lecti, in quo
discumbebat Dominus, that is, she did not that falling down, or kneeling on
her knees; but (as S. Luke says) standing behind Jesus, at his feet, by which
word, the height of the bed, on which our Savior lay, is plainly shown:
First, to the word of S. Luke, in which the pith, and marrow of his Argument
consists: I say, with Lucas Brugensis on the place: the participle (...),
stans, or standing; is not necessarily to be taken, as opposite to lying down,
or sitting: It may be taken, for any Posture; ut sit idem quod existens, and
manens, and may signify, being, or remaining; as it often used: See Psalm.
34.3. Who shall stand in his holy place? Yea (says he) we may not doubt, but
that she cast her self down, on the ground, to the feet of Jesus; which did
either touch the earth; vel non perinde alte distabant; or were not very high
above it; which kills Pererius his opinion, in the eye: Cyprian (in Sermon, de
ablut: pedum) goes further, saying; suum etiam caput sternebat calcandum
pedibus Jesus,, pro suppedaneo; she laid down her head under Christ's feet
instead of a footestoole, for him to tread upon; though the scripture
mentions not, either her falling down to the ground, or her offering her
head as a footestoole, to be trod or trampled on, by our blessed Savior; yet,
that holy ecstasy of Repentance, might carry her, so far, or farther:
Maldonat, fellow Jesuit with Pererius, says of her, Non dicitur stetisse,
quod recta in pedes steterit; stetisse, id est, constitisse dicitur; she is not
said to have stood, because she stood upright, on her feet; but she is said to
have stood; that is to say, to have been there; the discumbing bed was not so
high, that the woman standing upright, did kiss his feet, and wiped them with
the hairs of her head: Mine own opinion is, she used the humblest gesture,
that a contrite soul could suggest unto her; if she did cast her self down
to the ground, as was usual, in adoration, if she rose on her knees, and wept,
and prayed; yet because the principal posture, was, her standing, (though even
standing, she might stoop, and weep, over the feet of our blessed Savior,
and wash, and wipe, and anoint them) it is said she was (standing) and stand
she might in that sort, though the bed were very high: again, that Christ
lay, on an high-bed; and that the custom of feasting, on high beds, was taken
from the Romans, by the Jews: Pererius will never be able to demonstrate.
Lipsius says, Mensa collocabatur rotunda, humilis; there was placed, a low
round Table; how then were the Toralia, alia? or the Torus, altus? how was the
bed high: since the beds were not higher than the Tables? That the Romans used
at first round Tables; I will confess with Lipsius, but that then, they had
their fair discumbing beds, and from them did eat the meat, on those Tables;
I will not believe; if the Table were round; or (which is less) of an ovall
form; the beds must be framed, in such sort, that the conveniencie of
eating, at those roundish tables, might not be hindered; but they must all come
to their meat, at a fair proportionable distance; and so one side of a bed,
at least made some what round, and orbicular, to come near to the round table;
or else one who was farther off, must reach, and stretch himself, more than
others did; to take hold of his meat: but I have not read in profane History,
of the sides of their beds, made hollow and concave; or proportionate in
roundnesse to their tables; nor does Roman antiquity mention, that or Table,
or beds were so inequally framed, that it were pain and trouble for some to
come to their victuals, and easiness, and pleasure to others; such feasting
was never generally observed; it would have bred strife for the easier places;
whereas their maine endeavors aimed at content, and all were fellows at
feasting: again, one Swallow makes not a summer; one proof evinceth not a
custom, or fashion; and it yet remains, to be evinced by Pererius, that the
Romans had higher discumbing beds, than the ancient Jews: Lastly, though I
cannot directly evince the Negative, that Virgil had no ground, but his
imagination, for high-beds, in those ancient times; yet I held it probablest,
he Poetized in that point, rather than historified; writing (...), at large;
rather than (...), verity, in exactness: but supposing all perfect truth:
Pererius his collection is not sound: for if Aeneas, a great governor, did lie
down and discourse from an high-bed; it follows not that others then did so:
and as I said, if other Latins, Trojanes, or Romans, or Jews in Christ's
time, did so; or (if they did) that they did so in imitation of the Romans.

PAR. 5.
Eighthly, says Pererius, solebant Romani coenaturi, and convivia inituri prius
detrahere sibi sole as; and nudis pedibus accumbere: the Romans when they were
about to go to Supper, or to feast; were wont first of all, to pluck off
their patens, and to lie down barefooted; Christus etiam in ultima Coena,
nudos Apostolorum pedes lavasse creditur; and Magdalena nudos coenantis Christi
pedes lavis, and unxit; Christ also at his last Supper, is supposed, to have
washed his Apostles bare feet; and Mary Magdalen did wash and anoint the bare
feet of her Savior Christ, as he was at Supper? I answer to the phrase; why
not rather, Lavit, than Lavasse creditur? especially, since it is expressly
said, Ioh. 13.12. that Christ washed their feet, (...), Lavit pedes eorum,
says their own Vulgar; Mary Magdalen washed not his feet, so properly, as
Christ washed the Apostles: but to the maine; though both Jews, and Romans
were wont to feast barefooted, yet Pererius makes it not good, that the Jews
borrowed the Custom of the Romans; which ought, chiefly to be handled: poor
Cotta, to prevent farther stealing of his shoes (as he pretended) and yet to
be like others at, or in, their Suppers; Excalceatus ire coepit ad coenam;
Martial. (12.89.) He'gan to go unshod to Sup. And Martial. (3 49.) Deposui
sole as, -- I doffe my sandalls; at a feast of Ligurinus: Servi soccos
detrabunt -- Lectos sternunt, coenam apparent; my Servants pluck off my
Pinsens; they make the bedds, and provide Supper; says Menedemus ( in
Heautontimor. Act. 1. Scen. 1.) Nor can we fairly suppose, but both Mary
Magdalen washed Christ's naked feet; and Christ washed the bare-feete of his
Apostles; nor was the pedilavium of the Romans so ancient, as the Custom of
the Jews: In Abraham's time, was there use of it.

PAR. 6.
NInthly, the Romans were wont at their feasts, to place below them, near
their bosom; their Children, or dear friends: So did Christ to John, the
chiefe-disciple, whom Christ loved; Ambrose, Nonne tibi videtur Christus
incidisse in collum Ioannis, quando Ioannes erat in sinu, cervice recumbens
reflexa? Do not you think, that Christ leaned on John's neck, when John lay,
in his bosom, looking backward? So far Pererius: I answer, that granting
all this to be true; yet Pererius his maine intendment proceeds lamely, that
the Jews did so, in imitation of the Romans; yet, is it likely that from the
custom of discumbing on the breast of their friend, in their Suppers; was the
phrase, borrowed of being in Abraham's bosom; yea even that divine speech, in
which it is said, that the Son came out of the bosom of his Father, Ioh.
1.18.

PAR. 7.
Decime, Rex Sacrorum, who was chiefest among the Roman Bishops, in, their
Episcopal Suppers, which were most stately, and excessively profuse, possessed
the highest of the middle bed, none lying above him: Likewise, the Jews, as
places of great honor, amant primos recubitus in coenis, Matthew. 23.6. the
uppermost rooms, at feasts; as our Translation renders it; and therefore they
were much desired, by Pharisees: and truly, Christ, in the Supper, made to
him, at Bethanic, lay down in the first, and highest place of the bed; for
Mary Magdalen could not have powered the Alabaster box of Ointment, on his
head, if Christ had lain in the middle-place; nor would John have lain in his
bosom, if Christ had been in the lowest place of the bed. So far Pererius:
I answer, what he says besides; that Christ persuaded the guests, who chose
out the chiefest rooms, not to sit down, in the highest rooms, Luke. 14.7.8.
But to sit down in the lowest room, ver. 10. seems to prove that Christ
himself did not affect the highest rooms (and perchance possessed it not) for
he would not go against his own advizoes, nor practice that which he faulted
in the Pharisees. Indeed, it is a well-weighed argument of Pererius, that the
resting of S. John upon the breast of our Savior, both show that our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ did lie above S. John: But that Mary Magdalen could not
power the Ointment on his head, if Christ had sat in the middle part of the
bed; I see no reason to persuade it: Sure I am, one sinner stood at his feet
behind him; and began to wash his feet with tears; and did wipe them with
the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them, with the
ointment, Luke 7.38. And it is as sure, that a woman, having an Alabaster box
of very precious Ointment, powered it on his head, as he sat at meat, Math.
26.7. and it was her intention to anoint his body, Mark 14.8. and it is most
likely she did so; for she came aforehand to anoint his body to the burial:
but at their burialls, they were anointed all over; and she anointed the Lord
with Ointment, Job. 11.2. Nor see I any thing to the contrary, but wheresoever
any one lay in any bed, or any place of any bed, their heads, bodies, and
feet, might be anointed by them, who stood behind them, if they would be at
the cost and labor, and if the discumbent would permit it, the beds were not
so broad, but they might reach over them: that some place was higher and some
lower, on those beds, or, that some were chief, some mean, is confessed. They
chose out the chief rooms, Luke 14.7, there was a lowest room, verse. 9. and
an higher, above the lowest, ver. 10. and an highest room, ver. 8. which was
above the higher, and the comparative degree might be manifold in its latitude.
That the chiefest place was due to Christ, in very many regards, wheresoever
Christ supped, none will deny, that the prime place was offered unto him (for
the most part) if not always, I verily believe: But some assume it as a truth,
that the middle place was the chiefest in dignity: Cicero ( lib. 9. Epist. ad
Familiares in the last Epistle) tells of a merry supper, that he was at, in
Voluminous Eutrapelus his house, that Atticus lay above Cicero, and Verrius
below him; yet Cicero was in dignity above Atticus: and in the luxurious Supper
of Metellus, pontificis maximi, the Archbishop so called by Macrobius (
Saturnal. 3.13.) though the Triclinia lectis eburneis strata fuerant; the
Parlours were adorned with beds of Ivorie, and both the Antipast and supper are
set down, with almost incredible particulars; yet which is the highest place,
or chiefest room, is not described: Nine were on two beds, it is likely, four
on the one; Quintus Catulus, Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, D. Syllanus, Cajus
Caesar, Rex Sacrorum: and on the second were five men, Pub. Scaevola Sextus,
Quinius Cornelius; Pub. Volumnis: Pub. Albinovanus; and Lucius Julius Caesar
Augur: In tertio Triclinio, were six women: four Vestall Virgins; Popilia,
Perpennia, Licinia, Aruntia; and the wife of the Archpriest, and Sempronia,
one of their mother-in-lawes; yet, who sat highest or chiefest in either of
these tricliniary beds, is, rather to be guessed-at, then determined: But, I
stand not much on these things: and yet it stands with fair likelihood, that
Christ took not the highest place for the reasons, beforementioned, and for
his great humility: for as he would be baptized of John, though John had need
to be baptized of him, Matthew. 3.14. And as he said unto John, suffer it to be
so now, for thus it becomes us, to fulfill all righteousness; whereupon,
John suffered him, ver. 15. Likewise, he might do in giving the upper-place to
one of his Disciples or friends; and might allege the same reason, and then
who durst deny him? especially consider the Son of man came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, Matthew. 20.28. in which regard also he
condescended to wash all his Apostles feet; even Judas his also, and subjected
himself, and witnessed a good confession, under Pontius Pilate, 1 Timothy 6.13.
For Christ was rich, yet for your sake, he became poor, that ye through his
poverty might be rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. Luke 22.27. I am among you as he that
serves; all this, and more than this did Christ do, to give his Disciples
examples of humility, and to take them off, from that ambitious humor, which
so often he found fault withal in them, even that very night, Luke 22.24.
Barradius says expressly, Christ had the (middle place) of the bed, which was
the chiefest place; Peter was above, John beneath in Christ's breast, yet me
thinks, somewhat more might be said, not altogether improbably for Christ's
being in the middle place, at Supper, as he was in other things, at other
times: I omit, that he was the second person in the Trinity; that he was the
great (...), or Mediator between God and man; nor stand I upon this point that
he says; where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in
the (midst) of them, Matthew. 18.20. For it is not spoken (...), bodily, or
locally, but Metaphorically, and by a figure: More appropriately, Christ sat
in the (midst) of the Doctors, Luke 2.46. After his Resurrection Jesus stood
in the (midst) of his Apostles, Ioh. 20.19. So, the doors being shut, Jesus
came, and stood, in the (midst) Ioh. 20.26. After his Ascension Christ was in
the (midst) of the 7. golden Candlestickes, Rev. 1.13. and walked in the
(midst of the 7. golden Candlestickes, Rev. 2.1. and in the (midst) of the
throne, and of the 4. beasts; and in the midst of the Elders, there stood a
Lamb, Revel. 5.6. To conclude, I see no proof; that the highest in situation,
was the highest in dignity: For Salomons mother was not above him, though she
was on his right hand, 1 King. 2.19. and Zebedees children were to have been
below Christ, if Christ had granted one to be on the right hand, and another on
the left. Secondly, I see no proof that Christ was the highest or uppermost on
the discumbing bed. Thirdly, I see no proof that this was the Jewish custom,
that the chiefest man should have the highest place: Pererius his own words
are, Judas discubuit in primo loco extremi lecti, qui proximus erat Christo, ad
sinistram ejus; that is, Judas lay in the highest place of the lowest bed,
which was next to Christ, on his left hand; yet who dare say Judas Iscariot was
any way above the 4. Apostles, who are presupposed to lie under him? Lastly, if
so it were, I see no proof, that the Jews borrowed that fashion from the
Romans: I must be brief and pass over to another matter.

PAR. 8.
THe eleventh point insisted on by Pererius, stands on these diverse
branches. 1. The Romans feasting, lay 3. on every bed; and all the guests were
a triple-trine, for the honor of the nine Muses; yet, Non raro, often (says
Pererius) 4. or 5. did lie on one bed; concerning four on one bed; Horace
says, Saepe tribus Lectis videas coenare quaternos, that is, Often times you may
see 12. on 3. beds sit,
On each bed 4. and 4. themselves they fit.
Again, though the Romans were wont to make 3. beds, at a feast; from whence
the place of the feast had the name of Triclinium; yet sometimes 4. sometimes
5. beds were made, even to 10, yea, to 30. as Philander: so far he. I
answer, all this discourse is full of generality, ambiguity, and if not total
impertinencie, yet nothing to his maine purpose; that the Jews imitated the
feastings of the Romans: let me rove a little after the Rover: about
Vespasianus his time, they had but one bed called sigma, S, from the form
thereof: the Greeks, and after them the Latins named it, (...), stibadium; so
Pliny, and this encompassed three sides of the feasting Table: Martial.
(10.48.) Stella, Nepos, Cani, Cerealis, Flacce, venite,
Septem sigma capit, --
that is, Come to my house, you five be bold,
My Table well will seven hold.
Idem. (14.87.) Accipe lunata scriptum testudine sigma,
Octo capit, veniat, quisquis amicus erit.
that is, Accept this Table sent from me,
Like a New-moone, it is shaped you see;
Eight guests, I know, it well will hold,
Let every friend come and be bold.


Concerning the correspondence of guests to the Muses, it held sometimes, but
the old adage cited by Alexander ab Alexandro (5.21. crosses it; Septem
Convivium; novem Convicium facere; that is, seven make a feast; nine, a frey;
when they had the fewest guests, they had not under three; when they were the
most at their ordinary repast there were not above 9 at the same board, on the
same beds; yet extraordinarily, and at great feasts they had more discumbents,
often they had but two beds: Plautus mentions, Biclinium, a Room, wherein
two beds, or two Tables stood: Julius Caesar had his Biclinium, as he passed
the Provinces; yet Suetonius, ( page 35.) in Iulio Caesare, says; he feasted
daily, Duobus Tricliniis; one, on which Cassocked Soldiers, with Philosophers,
or Cloake-men did lie; on the other lay gowne-men and the chiefest of the
Provinces: sometimes but one only lay on one bed, says Cicero (in Pisonem)
only Voluminous Eutrapelus, and his Cytheris lay on one bed, when Atticus,
Cicero, Verrius, lay on a second bed; sometimes 4. sometimes 5. lay on one bed;
the most usual course was indeed, for three beds; see Alexander ab Alexandro
( Genial. dier. 5.21.) Macrobius, at that great feast of Metellus, placed four
men on one bed, five on another, six women on the third bed: Lucius Verus
Imperator, praeter exempla majorum, cum duodecem, solenni Convivio, primus
accubuit; that is, Lucius Verus the Emperor, was the first, that contrary to
the custom of his Predecessors, sat at a great feast, with twelve in his
company, says Alexander, ibidem: I think I should puzzle any of Pererius his
friends, to bring me a Patteme (if that of the Emperor Verus be not one) that
five lay on one bed, five on another; and but three on a third bed, as Pererius
says, Christ and his Apostles did.

PAR. 9.
THe second branch of Pererius his eleventh point, in Christ's last Supper, it
is believed, that Christ and his Apostles did lie, on 3 beds. I answer, it is
well, he ascribes it to belief; no proof infallible can be made; the most
probable may be signed out, to be so: Secondly, when he says, in Christ's last
Supper, as the words may be spoken, or written; if fairly interpreted, for the
last night of refreshing, that ever he had, before his death, or, for the last
meal, that he are meat, with his Apostles: So Pererius had done more
Schollar-like, more properly, more truly, to have distinguished between the
3. Suppers; the Paschall, the Common Supper; and the blessed Eucharist, which
indeed was the last Supper only; though also it may be styled, the close of
the great Supper, or the like, in the opinion of his own friends.

PAR 10.
A Third branch is this; concerning the order of discumbing: in the middle-bed
lay three: Christ in the first place; John in the middle; Peter, in the third
place: and therefore might fitly signify to John, that he might question
Christ, concerning the traitor; So Pererius: Aquinas more soundly reasons,
that Petrus was remotus a Domino, Peter sat remote from his Master; and the
Scripture is full, that Simon Peter beckoned to John, that he should ask, who
it should be, of whom he spoke, Joh. 13.24. Such beckoning needed not, if
Peter had layen close by John, and touched him; and if Peter's head had reached
to John's breast, as John's did to Christ's breast, for such was their manner of
discumbing, even in Pererius his own judgment: but (beckoning) signifies a
local distance, where speech cannot be so conveniently had, as might have
been, if Peter lay on the same bed, with S. John, and under him. Barradius is
express, that Peter lay above Christ, and John below him; Peter had the
highest place, in that place, or bed, says Maldonat; and Christ might lie, on
Peter's lap; as John did on Christ's, who can reconcile these discordant
Jesuits? for the highest place of the lowest bed; which was nearest to Christ's
left hand, lay Judas: for so could Christ easily give him, the dipped sop,
says Pererius. Conjectures, when will ye leave off your vastness of
conjecturing? I doubt not but they were so placed, that Christ might have given
to any one of his Apostles bread; yea, or meat, if he would: nor was the
distance so far, but they might have reached one to another, if they had
resolved, and stirred to do so; especially they, who lay on the middle-table.
It is most true, what the Divine Saint Austin says ( Contra Maximinum Arianum,
3.3.) In the Scriptures, ex eo, quod Scriptum est debemus etiam colligere, quod
non est Scriptum; from that, which is written, we may collect that, which is
not written; yet, we must not look for Figs on the Vine; nor Grapes, upon
the Olive Tree: the Genuine fruit, the unforced collection, the fair
resultance, is highly commendable: Te^tullian (de pudicitia) satius est sapere,
in Scripturis sanctis, quod minus, quam contra; Humanae sapientiae pars magna
est, velle quaedam nescire; that is, it is better, in the Scriptures, to be
wise, a little too little, than too much; It is a high point of wisdom, in
men; to be willingly ignorant of some things; or, to that effect, says Julius
Scaliger: Basilius ( in Regulis brevioribus, regula 235. and 261.) Ne nos
ingeramus ad ea, quae ad nos non spectant; let us not meddle, with those
things, with which we have nothing to do.

PAR. 11.
THe last branch of the eleventh Point, is more crooked, and out of the way,
than the rest: Quoniam Apostoli (says Pererius) diversis and dissitis locis
discumbebant; propterea, non potuit Christus, manu sua omnibus, and singulis,
eucharistiam exhibere, sed dixit, accipite, and dividite inter vos: that is,
because the Apostles lay in diverse, and several places; therefore Christ could
not deliver the blessed Eucharist, with his hand, to all, and every of the
Apostles; but said; Take this, and divide it among you? I answer, they were not
so far divided one from another, but that, by Pererius his own Confession
(in the twelfth point) the Apostles are, out of the same platter with Christ,
as is not obscurely signified, by those words, Matthew. 26.33. and his parallel,
with the Roman fashion, implies so much. Secondly, though the Romans had
great dishes, very great; yet had they, at their Tables, more, than one dish;
and ate of such meat, as they fancied, and not always all, out of one dish;
and, though the whole Paschall-lambe were placed in one dish (and that had need
be a great dish; especially, if it were a great Lamb, and almost a year old
(for they might choose such an one) as I said before:) yet, I doubt not, but the
sour herbs were in another; and that, in the common and second Supper, there
were more, than one dish.

PAR. 12.
LAstly, how supinely does this great Scholar confound these Suppers!
Supposing the blessed Sacrament, to be, whilst they were eating; either the
paschall Lamb; or, of the second Supper, whilst they were discumbing, at the
second board together; of which, at large, hereafter. I think the Reverence;
yea, the adoration due to Christ present; and by his opinion, due to the
Sacrament, at the elevation; should have made him distinguish the several
Suppers; or, is it likely, that Christ would change, the old Sacrament of the
Paschall-Lambe, into the more blessed Sacrament, of his body and blood,
disannulling the former; and, till the worlds end, establishing the latter; and
cause his Apostles, to show no more devotion, then they did, at their usual
repast? Or, did Christ say, Accipite, and dividite inter vos, take this, and
divide it among you, as it is, Luke 22.17. because, Christ would not give to
all, and every one of his Apostles, the Eucharist with his own hand, as
discumbing aloofe-off, from him: must this great Rabby Pererius, be put to his
A. B. C? Must he be new catechized, in the Principles of Religion? What S. Luke
says; Dividite inter vos; was not any part of the Eucharist, which, Nota.
in the same Saint Luke, is afterward consecrated; both the Bread, ver. 19.
and the Wine, ver. 20. but, it was part of the Wine, at the Paschall-Supper;
which they were bid to take, and divide, between themselves, as appears from
the 15. verse, to the 19. Indeed, both Saint Matthew, and Saint Mark, have
it; edentibus illis, as they did eat; but, what says that learned Franciscus
Lucas Brugensts, on the words, Matthew. 26.21. Edentibus illis? Non tam de
comestione ipsa, hoc est, actu comedendi, quam de convivio, hi^ sermo est; The
Evangelist here speaks; not so much of the eating it self; that is to say,
of the very act of eating, as of the Feast: and, on the same words, ver. 26.
(...), as they did eat; Quod non de actu coenandi, aut comedendi,
intelligendum est; sed de coena, sive convivio ipso; quasi diceret, Coena adhuc
durante, mensa nondum ablata; non est verisimile, quod novum, and sacrosanctum
corporis sui cibum, miscuerit Jesus, cum cibo profano. So he: which words are
not to be understood, of the act of Supping, or of eating; but of the Supper,
or Feast it self; as if he should say; whilst Supper did yet last; or, before
the Table was removed: It is not likely, that Christ mingled the new, and
thrice-holy meat, of his most blessed body, with profane meat: but, of this,
again, hereafter: I rather interprer, edentibus ipsis, before they were
parted, from the feast, or, before they removed, out of that room. Maldonate,
on the words; they are not to be understood, Quasi durante adhuc Coena id
fecerit, statim perana est, antequa^ surgerent, antequam mensurae, and ciborum
reliquiae removerenter; that is, as if Christ spoke those words, whilst the
Supper lasted; but presently, after Supper was ended; before they rose from the
Table; before bread, and salt, and the fragments were removed: Beza dislikes
not this Interpretation, quum autem cibum sumpsissent, when they had done
eating: for, it is clear, that the blessed Sacrament was administered, after
Supper; post agnum typicum, expletis epulis, corpus dominicum datum discipulis,
says the Ecclesiastical Hymn; Ergo, post Coenam, and epulas omnes; therefore
after Supper, and all Feasting, says Barradius, ( Tom. 4. page 64.) Luke
22.20. Likewise also, he took the Cup, after Supper; the word (likewise)
implying; that after Supper also he took the Bread; Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11.25.
After the same manner, he took the Cup when he had supped. Lastly, to me it
seems most probable; that Christ gave to every one of his Apostles present, a
piece of that bread, which he brake into several parcells, and gave the
Sacramental bread to them himself, with his own hand; and said, Take, Eat:
but the wine was all, in one cup, and undivided, and all the rest might take
it, one after another; after he did perhaps give to one alone the Cup; as was
the fashion among the Jews; where, the master of the Family began, and every
man did not take it particularly, from the hand of the Governor of the Feast;
but, it went round, and one received it, in order, after another, and from
another, in Orbem: and yet, perhaps, the word (likewise) may import, that he
did in like manner, by the Cup; as he did, by the Bread; for, he might reach
it, to every one of them; thereby distinguishing it, from all other Cups, and
drinkings, as taken from his most sacred hands immediately; and, by the same
hands, given to every one of his disciples, that were present; wholly
abrogating the old Sacrament; wholly superinducing, and establishing the most
blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist: but of these things, more at large; if it
please God, in the third Book.

PAR. 13.
THe twelfth point instanced by Pererius; the Romans ate all of the same
platters, and in common, which seemed more civil, and friendly, says,
Pererius; and to that purpose, used great platters; Pliny (15.01.) mentions
the vast charges of Aesop, the Tragedian; he paid for one platter, sestertium
centies; and Aesop, the Tragedian his son, was so prodigal, ut uniones ace^o
liquefactos coenis apponeret; he would have pearls dissolved in Vinegar, set
before him, at Supper; as Pliny observes. Tertullian (de Pallio) relates of
the same Aesops; the father, with costly, melodious, prating-chirping birds;
sexcentorum millium patinam conflavit; the meaning is, one dish of birds, cost
him, six hundred thousand sesterties; whereupon. Saint Hirome, (ad Salvinam)
gives his seasonable Counsel; procul sint a conviviis tuis, aves; quibus
amplissima patrimonia avolant; let not such birds be, at thy feastings, on
whose wings most large patrimonies fly-away, and come to nothing: the son, to
out-vye the father, Margarita vel ipso nomine pretiosa dehausit, ciedo ne
mendicius patre coenasset; Drank dissolved precious stones, lest he should
suppe more poorly, and more beggarly, than his father; and because, he was
most admirably pleased with the taste, he gave to every one of the guests, one
dissolved pearl, Margarite, or union, says Pliny, (9.35. and 35.12.) and the
foresaid Pliny mentions the capatious platters of Vitellius; which, for the
immense, and huge greatness, Mutianus called Paludes, Fennes, Marshes, Mores,
or Ponds: I answer, if those Tablevessells had broth in them, or spoone meat,
Mutianus fitly styled them. Pooles; if dry meats did stuff them up; he might
have rather called them. Cookes-stalles, or Butchers-dressers. Certain it is,
the Ramanes used great platters, or rathercauldrons, than platters: Martial
(13.81.) makes mention of lata patella (though a broade-little-platter, is not
so proper) Quamvis lata gerat patella Rhombum,
Rhombus latior est tamen patella.
When Martial invited Julius Cerealis to Supper ( lib. 11.53.) one dish could
not hold, the poor Poets meat; and the same Martial (10.48.) reckons up, at
his feast, more variety, then could well be comprehended, in one dish: Martial
(4.46.) Sabellus, at his Saturnalia, had store of diversities to eat, and
Septenariam Synthesin, a neast of seven Cups, and had he but one platter?
Plutarch (in Antonio) says, not only whole Boares were brought in, to their
Tables, but all that was boiled, or roasted, was served in whole; therefore,
they must needs have monstrous great dishes, to carry them in; yea Cincius, who
persuaded the Fannian Law, objected as a fault, to that age, that they were
served, at their Tables, porco Trojano; not with a whole Boar only, at one
time roasted and served in; but with a Boar stuffed inwardly, with other
beasts; by pudding, or other delicates; and therefore called the Trojane Boar;
because the Trojan Horse was so stuffed, lined, and great, and ready to burst,
with armed men, says Macrobius ( Saturnial. 3.13.) and there, he reckons,
among many other things, before Supper, patinam ostrearum peloridum, a platter
full of monstrous-great-huge Oysters; and at Supper, patinam pisicum, patinam
suminis, a dish of fish, and a dish of tripes, with abundance of other meats;
which, of necessity, were to be in several dishes: Pliny ( lib. 33.11.)
says, there were in Rome, in his time, above five-hundred chargers, e centenis
libris argenti; weighing an hundred pound weight apiece, of silver; and
Drusellanus had so great a Charger, that, before it was framed, they first
built a shop of purpose, to work on it; the old former shop was too little;
and yet, this Drusellanus was but a servant of Glaudius; which vast platters
began, about the days of Sylla: Gellius (Noct. Attict. 15.8.) thus, praefecti
popinae, atque luxuriae negant coenam lautam esse, nisi cum libentissime edis,
auferatur, and alia esca melior, and amplior succenturietur; that is, the
Masters of Ordinaries, or Tavernes, and guides of luxury, say, it is no choice
supper; unless, even then, when you eat hartiest, that dish be took away,
and other meat be brought, in the room of it, and that meat be, both better
and greater; and this, among them, was accounted, Flos coenae; the chief grace
of a full supper: the same Gutnals maintained, that no bird might be wholly
eaten, but such, as a Lark, or Nightingale; and, unless, there were such
plenty of other birds, and crammed foul, that the guests might be fully
satisfied, with their very rumps, and thighs, they held it but a poor feast;
and that they had no palate, who did, or do eat, any part of the wings,
breast, or body: So much, out of Gellius from Phavorinus: Aureus immodicis
Turtur te clunibus implet; Martial, (3.59. that is, The golden-feathered Turtle
does thee fill;
With her fat-swelling buttockes (fed with skill:)


Iuvenal, (Satyr. 5. ver,. 166.) speaks, as of a choice favor, that one
should give -- Aliquid de clunibus apri, a taste of his gammons; when as, to
others, Veniet minor altilis; others should be served, with courser fare:
Seneca ( Epist. 47. Cum ad coenandum discumbimus, alius sput a detergit, alius
reliquias temulentorum subtus colligit; alius, pretiosas aves scindit, pectus,
and Clunes, certis ductibus, circumferens eruditam manum, in frusta excutit;
Infelix, qui huic uni rei vivit, ut altilia dicenter secet, nisi quod miserior
est qui hoc voluptatis causa docet; quam quinecessitatis discit; that is, when
we lie down to Supper, one servant wipeth away the spittle; another stoopeth
down, and gathers up the offalls, or remains of such, as are drunk; a
third carves up the costly birds; and guiding, here and there, round about, his
skillful hand (and crooked little finger) after a set, and constant form of
cutting, divides into several pieces, the breast, and buttocks, that is, their
thighs, and rumps; unhappy man! who lives only, to carve up fowls
hansomely, and decently; but, he is more miserable, who (teaches) it, for
voluptuousness; than he, who (learneth) it, for necessity sake: I will only
glance at that beastly monster of men, that (...), that unclean spirit,
Tiberius Caesar; who created a Magistrate, called, forsooth, a voluptatibus; an
Inventer, Procurer, and guide of new pleasures, fresh delights; as it is, in
Suetonius: and though, these abuses were justly taxed by Seneca; yet, it
grieveth me to say, but that, I both find it so, and think that Seneca, the
Philosopher, was a very compound of Sin, as bad, as any, whom he disapproved:
Cornelius Tacitus (qui Antiquitatum canos collegerat, as Tertullian ( ad
Nation, 2.12.) phrazeth it; who gathered up the very hoary hairs, which fell
from Antiquity; and was the best humane Historiographer (except, when he
speaks of the Jews, or Christians) that ever wrote, relates many observable
passages concerning him: Suilius accused him, for defiling of a Princes bed, (
An. 13.10.) and he was justly banished by Claudius, says Suilius, ibid. and
when Claudius was dead, he made a most spitish, and revengefull invective
against him, in (...); he was rayled at, by Agrippina her self, who pocured
Seneca his return from exile, for quarrelling, and debating the rule of the
whole world ( Annal. 13.3.) Suilius further accused him, that he had cozened
men of their Legacies, and such also, as died without children; he was further
complained on, by Suilius, that he had got, within four years, two thousand
thousand, three hundred forty three thousand, seven hundred, and fifty
pounds; even three thousand times, three hundred thousand Sesterces, which a^
ounteth, of our Coin, to, 2343750. pounds; and though the informer Silius, was
condemned into exile, yet, says Tacitus himself, it was not without spot, or
touch on Seneca his credit ( Annal. 13.10. in initio) Seneca further, consented
to the Paricide of Agrippina ( Annal. 4.2.) (not considering, that if he killed
his mother, he would not stick at the murder of his Schoolmaster) yea, he
was accused by others, that the thought, to win the peoples hearts, and the
report was, says he, ( Annal. 15.14. in fine) that Subilus Flavius, with the
Centurions, in secret council (not without Seneca's privity) had determined,
that after Nero had been slain, by the help of Piso; Piso also should have
been slain, and the Empire delivered to Seneca, as to one just, and upright;
to this end, he made pleasant gardens, -- Magnos Senecae praedivitis hortos,
says Iuvenal, ( Satyr. 10.) and, in gardens, and stately buildings, he did
almost exceed the Prince ( Annal. 14.14.) but, what says Seneca himself, in
his own defense; he confesses in his Oration to Nero ( Annal. 14.14.) that
Nero had enriched him, with infinite wealth; and by confessing, that he was
once content with a little, he secretly acknowledges, that of late, he was
more covetous; and could not deny, but he abounded, in scope of grounds, and
usury, in many places; ( Italy, and the Provinces were drawn dry, by his
excessive usury, Annal. 13.10.) and his usury extended even into our Britany,
as Lipsius records it; that he was dimmed, and dazeled with wealth, that he
spent his time, in gardens, and houses of pleasure; that he could not sustain
the burden of his riches, and longer; yet, when he was put (for being found
manifestly privy to the conspiracy, Annal. 15.14. perhaps for the cunning
affecting of the Empire) to death; almost, at the last breath, he complained
against Nero; neither did there remain any thing, says he, to be done (
Annal. 15.14.) after he had murdered his Mother, and Brother, but that he
should add the death of his Master, and Tutor: but what says Tertullian (
Apologet cap. 12.) Seneca convitiatus est Deos, he railed at the gods; see a
fragment of it, in Augustine ( De Civ. 6.10.) from whom Lipsius has taken it (
Elector 2.18.) if he jeered at the Roman gods, (or Idols rather) I commend
him; Cyprian thus; Pudeat te eos colere, quos ipse defendis; pudeat de iis
tutelam sperare, quos ipse tueris; one may be ashamed to worship those Gods,
whom himself defends, or lock for help from them, whom your self do help
and maintain; his master Tertullian ( ad Natisnes. 1.9.) pudeat, deos ab
homine defendi, it is ashame that gods should need man's Patrimony, and be
upheld by them; yet while men continue the profession of the same Religion; it
is unfit to mock at their own Religion but so did Seneca, who shows no token,
any where in his undoubted works of approving the Christians, and rayleth
downright, at the Jews, as being Natio Scelestissima, likewise Cornelius
Tacitus, does lay cruel aspersions, both on Jews and Christians; and calls
the Christian Religion, Maleficium; though he confess they were falsely accused
by Nero, for firing Rome, ( An. 15.10. And yet they were most direfully
punished both day, and night: but you will say, his books are Divine? It is
true, that never any profane Heathen man wrote better; though Gellius (12.2.)
senselesly and horribly, profaneth his works; but take my opinion withal;
till he saw himself decayed in Court-credit, or till he repented of his ill
courses, he wrote none of his diviner works; but toward his end, because his
wealth could not uphold him, for the present; he laid a foundation for future
estimation, by writing most excellent books, and Epistles; but in his
flourishing times, he was very wicked; for Dion (in Nero's life) records:
Seneca was most Covetous, and that which was an effect of his Covetousness; he
did unjustly accuse too many, unto Nero; and so begged their goods; and Dion
accuses him in particular; that Seneca played the Adulterer, with Iulia, the
Daughter of the ever-honoured Germanicus, and was not his excess abominable,
when he had, as Dion says, five hundred Caedar-Tables, standing on Ivorie
feet, to feast upon?

PAR. 14.
THe Apostles also at the last Supper, ate out of the same dish with Christ,
says he, for Matthew. 26.23. where Judas is said to dip his hand with Christ in
the dish: I answer, because he did, does it therefore follow they had but one
dish? and because (he) did so, did (all) so? and every one? The sauce of the
Paschall-Lambe, was to be of diverse sorts of herbs; who ever said, they were
served in with the Lamb, in the same dish? Besides, they must needs have more
Platters, to hold their second, or ordinary Supper, and the sawces thereunto
belonging; such as was the dish, in which Christ dipped the sop before he gave
it to Judas; and the ordinary Supper was made up, both of the flesh of the
Heard, as well as of the fold, and could not conveniently be comprised in one
dish. The Egyptians used such great Platters, as may be gathered, from
Cleopatra her banquers, and the Jews had as great, and former correspondence
with the Egyptians, before the Romans. Briefly, I do not see any inkling of
any great Platters, in Christ's time, among the Jews, save such ones, as might
hold the whole Paschall-Lambe, but such Platters were, no doubt, even from the
first eating of the Paschall-Lambe; which was long before the Romans were a
people or Nation: when Salomons daily provision or for one day, was 30.
measures of fine flower, and 60. measures of meal, and 10. fat Oxen, and 20.
Oxen out of the Pastures, and an 100. sheep, besides Hearts, and Roe-buckes;
and fallow-Deere, and fatted foul, 1 King. 4.22.23. I cannot choose but think
the Jews had great Platters, and this was, before Romulus was borne: Neither
did ever Roman King, Consul, or Emperor, for daily provisions, come nigh
Solomon; wherefore, the Jews could not take this Custom, from the Romans;
but the Romans might imitate the Jews: twelve silver chargers were offered,
Numb. 7.48. of 130. shekles weight, after the shekell of the Sanctury, and they
must needs be great: afterward, Cyrus re-delivered to the Israelites, to carry
to Jerusalem, 30. chargers of gold, a 1000. chargers of silvers; 30. basins of
gold; silver basins, of a second sort, 410. Lastly, if we grant all this, yet
is Pererius never the nearer his maine conclusion; that they borrowed this
fashion of the Romans: Judge. 5.25. She brought forth Butter in a Lordly dish;
Phiala magnatum usa est, she made use of a plate, fit for a Prince; which
(says Peter Martyr, on the place) was very great; Poculis enim peramplis, ac
patentibus, insignes vini solent accipi: For great men do use to be
entertained, in very great, and spacious cups, pieces, or vast drinking
bowls. Cicero (in Antonium) mentions Anthony his immania pocula, vast
drinking bowls, in Conviviis magnatum consueve unt sub finem, afferri majora
pocula; toward the end of the banquets of Noble men, greater cups did use to
be brought forth: in Cratere insignium, in a goblet of Noble men, as Vatabl is
has it, making it to be a drinking-cup: Tremellius has it, In simpulo
magnificorum, in a Chalice of honorable magnificoes; or persons, id est,
ample, ut ad satietatembiberit; that is to say, says he, that he might drink
his fill. All are in one error; the Lordly dish was not to drink in, but to
eat on; who gives butter, in a great drinking vessel? The Lordly dish was
either some great or costly platter: R. David kimki expounds it, in mine
opinion, far more likely that Iabel, after she had given him drink, now sets
something for to eat: and in this sense Peter Martyr expungeth the word
(phiala) which is often used for a (drinking) vessel, rather than an (eating)
one; unless says he, by (phiala) genus vasis intellexerimus, in quo and ipse
Cibus apponi soleat; that is, unless (phiala) may be taken for a Platter, out
of which we eat meat: in the great feast, or Supper, (as the 70. have it)
which Belshazzar made to a thousand of his Lords, Dan. 5.1. though Belshazzar,
and his Lords, his wives, and his Concubines did drink, in such sacred
vessels, as were fit, to contain, and handsomely re-deliver the wine; yet, I
presume they drank not, in basins, and Chargers, of which they had store, from
Jerusalem; and I doubt not, but they did also eat, out of such holy vessels,
as were convenient to hold the meat; though so much be in drinking, and
carousing, than in eating: Nor could this great feast be without great
platters, and chargers: I am sure, some of the vessels of the house of God,
were great; 2 Chro. 36.18. and are called goodly vessels, or vessels of desire.

PAR. 15.
THe close of the 12. point in Pererius his resemblances, is this; the Romans
did lie, not sitting on the beds, but stretched themselves along, resting on
their left elbowes, or on pillowes, or cushions, sometimes with legs
stretched out at length: now and then the hamme of the right leg leaning on
the left knee; then with feet folded up interchangeably; at some times weaving
one leg within another, as if they sat on benches; that I may use the old
words of Pemponius, in a bodily posture, and gesture, like to Taylours; and as
Turks, and other Eastern people use to sup, that is, crosse-legged:
concerning this fashion he expresses nothing of the Jews imitation of the
Romans, Secondly, he denies and yet confesses the sitting on the beds; the
truth is, the greater part of their time spent in feasting, they did lie all
along; thence has it the name of discubitus; yet because they could not so
conveniently eat or drink, lying at full length; as if they sat up, it must
fairly follow, they did rise up, and sit sometimes also, as, sick people with
us, when they keep their beds, are raised up right, or almost upright even
unto their middle: that they may, as it were sit, and most commodiously eat
and drink: So did both Jews, and Romans; they changed their gestures, and
postures, as was easiest for them; or else, we must acknowledge them, to be
fools; for nature delights in variety. I would not wish one a greater
torment, than to lie along all the feast time, without any manner of sitting
up: their Suppers were sometimes, from night to morning, Martal, (7.9.) In
lucem coenat Sertorius: Sertorius uses for to sup, till the night set, or,
till darkness fly, and day be up: Martial, (1.29.) Hesterno foetere mero,
qui credit Acerram,
Fallitur; in lucem, semper Acerra bibit.
that is, Who ever thinks Acerra stinkes, with wine he drank ore night,
Is much deceived; Acerra drinks, until it be day light.


If they had eaten, and drank (lying along) it had been a woeful Supper; it
would rather have choked them than afforded them delight, and ease; therefore
as they did, most an end discumbere, during their times of discoursing; so
diverse times they rested their bodies on their elbowes; and their elbowes on
pillowes, or cushions; and at other times they sat upright; and they may be
truly said to fit, even then when they are as truly said to lie on their
beds: See what weapons, I used, in the sift grapple with Pererius. That I make
not mine own, ipse dixit, or affirmation, for the guide unto error; I have
learned this, from that great Antiquarie Rosinus, who ( Antiquit. Roman. 5.28.)
describes the Roman discumbing, partly from books; partly from monuments,
thus they lay with their heads somewhat lifted up, pillowes at their backs: If
more lay upon one bed, the first lay at the head of the bed, whose feet
reached behind the back of the second; the second man's neck and pole, being
to the Navell of the first man, a pillow being between, and his legs lay at
the back of the third man; and so the third fourth and fifth; when they had
ended eating, they laid down their heads; on the boulster, and sometimes they
sat bolt-upright: He who will see more rarities, concerning this point, let
him have recourse to Dionysius Lambinus, in his edition on the fourth Satyr,
of the 2. book of Horace, who has exceeded all other in this point: the same
Rosinus ( cap. 29.) says, from Macrobius, and Plutarch; Veteres foris
coenitare, nec mensam omnino tollere, sed semper aliquid, super ea reliuquere,
consueverunt; our Ancestors were wont to sup, without doors, and removed not
the Table, but always left something upon it: Rosinus ( cap. 30.) confirms
another custom, which before I touched at from Peter Martyr; A parvis
calicibus incipiebant and in capaciores desinebant; they began with small Cups,
and ended in full bowls; Nature being glutted with great draughts, at the
beginning, the feasters drank the less, and if they do but as it were kiss
the cup, drink a little at first; 4. spoonefulls, (which was the measure of a
Cyathus) they might afterward drink larger draughts, and greater quantities:
And they commonly used this form of speech; Been te, Been me, Been, etc. God
bless thee, and God bless me,
God bless our friends, and all the company.
Pitissando releverunt omnia mihi dolia, says he, in Terence; concerning the
women, by simpering, and sipping, they drew all the liquid linings out of my
hogshead, or Tuns, (he says not amphoras, which were 30. times, less
vessels) they left no liquour, in the vessels, either greater wooden
vessels, or less Jugges, or stone vessels: who desires to know more of
these points, let him; says Rosinus consult with Justus Lipsius, Hierome
Mercurialis, Coelius Rhodiginus.

PAR. 16.
THirteenthly, says Pererius; the Romans, in their feasting, appointed
Magistrum potandi, seu Regem vini, (for so they called him) a King of good
fellows: That the Romans had it (always) thus, may be denied, or for the
most part may be justly questioned: as in ordinary feasting; the master of the
family; or he at whose charge the feast was made, or his substitute, or
especially deputed friend or the chiefest man, in esteem was called the
governor of the feast, (such a superintendant, was the Archi-Triclinus, in the
Nuptiall-feast, at Cana of Galilee, Job. 2.8.) So I cannot imagine, this was
practiced daily, at their suppers; but on some great momentuall occasions, they
might have one; I mean, both Jews and Romans, who might have such titles
given unto him: In Varro, the Ruler of the Feast is called Modimperator: out of
doubt, Christ was Rex Sacrorum, the King of the Ceremonies; which was a name of
high account, given by the Romans, to chief men: Christ was also
Pater-familias; and the chiefest in the Tricoenium; and in a large sense, he
who is Rex mundi, the King of the world, may be called, Rex Vini, the King of
wine; but to intimate, (much more to say) that Christ was Magister Potandi, the
master of drinking; or, King of wine, Rex Vini, in the Roman sense, does
derogate from our Savior; and if Pererius apply it not that way; it needed not
to have been mentioned at all; when we speak of the Paschall-Supper: I cannot
pass by that heathenish observation; Numero Deus impare gaudet, God affects
not the Even, but the Odd number; and amongst men, their inclinations bended
that way, in very many matters: in the very point of bibbing, and carousing,
the Graecians had a kind of diverbium; Plautus ( in Sticho, Act. 5. Scen. 4.)
has it thus; Cantio est Graeca, (...); It Is a Greek Caroll, drink thou three,
or else, five cups, end not thy quaffing, in four cups: In the beginning of
the same Scene, is the manner, and form of the Joviall indulging, by the
Roman Serving-men, -- Cado te praeficio, Sticho, O Stichus, I make thee Ruler,
and master, over my wine, and wine vessel; and there, he intituleth him to be,
Strategus Convivii, the General of the feast; then follow their familiar
options, and frolickes; when they drank, Been vos, Been nos; Been te, Been me,
Been nostram etiam Stephanium; that is, God bless you, and God bless us,
God bless me, and God bless thee;
And may our sweete-heart likewise have,
Life, health, prosperity, I do Crave.
The Latins excess of drinking (which began after the Jewish Compotations,
and good-fellowship) I handled before; and so I quit this matter.

PAR. 17.
AS the Epitome of all; Pererius says two things: first, I have disputed these
things briefly, concerning the manner of supping, and feasting; of the old
Romans, and of the Jews, in the time of Christ: he should have said of the
ancienter Jews, and latter Romans; for it is most certain that some of these
ceremonies were used by the Jews, before Rome had a Being: nor has Pererius
exactly proved; nay, scarce so much as probablized, that any one of these
Jewish customs was borrowed from the Romans: Secondly, (says he) I touched
those points which may seem to confer much, to illustrate the History of
Christ's last Supper: I answer, if he understand by Vltima Coena all that was
done at the three Suppers, in the night that Christ was betrayed, he speaks
somewhat to the point: But Pererius did not so much as dream of the second,
common, or ordinary Supper; and erred concerning the discumbing at the
Paschall: and for the most holy of holies, the third Supper, the Supper of the
Lord, the Eucharisticall Supper; Pererius against all authority, against sense,
likelihood, reason, or devotion, avoucheth; that the Apostles took it, as they
did discumbere on their beds; for who can think, that our most glorious, most
wise Savior, would sit on a bed, or lie on a bed; and then, and there,
administer that heavenly banquet, the food, and refreshment of men's souls? who
descended from his discubitory bed, in the second Supper, and put off his
clothes, and girded himself to wash the feet of his Disciples; was he more
cleanely, in Ceremonialibus; or Moralibus? in Matters of Ceremony, or Morality;
then reverend or Devout, in Sacris? in point of Religion? -- Credat Judaeus
Apella,
Non ego, --
Believe 't Apella, of the Jewish seed,
It nere shall come into my Christian Creed.


Hac hactenus: So much for this.

PAR. 18.
MY Conclusion is directly opposite to Pererius, and is thus briefly
determined, viz. the Jews in Christ's time, did not either through flattery or
emulation, keep the Roman fashion at feasts, and suppers; but rather the
Jews kept, their own old custom, which the Romans borrowed from the
Graecians, and the Gracians from the Asiatickes.

The Prayer.
O Thou Aeternall truth, who know that in this Controversy with my
adversary; I principally sought after thy mistaken verities; not after any
vanity; I adore thee with my soul for such Patefactions; as thou have
vouchsafed unto me; and in most submissive manner beseech thee to pardon my
errors; and to guide me in the true way, which leads to life everlasting;
for Jesus Christ his sake; who is the way, the truth, and the life. Amen.

CHAP. XXII. The Contents of the two and twentieth Chapter.
1. How Christ with his 12. Apostles, kept his last Passover: (...): two
Disciples prepare it: Christ with the 12. eat it: in the Evening, they sit
down.

2. (...) expounded: S. Matthews Evangelisme, written in Hebrew: (...), its
diverse significations; (...), interpreted: The Apostles, in the description of
the Lords Supper, single out words, properly signifying, lying down.

3. Our English Translatours excused.

4. Sitting Communicants censured.

5. As they did eat expounded.

6. The use of the word, Verily; Amen, its diverse acceptions.

7. Future things are to others unknown; to Christ known. The Table and its
rites sacred, even among the heathen.

8. Judas not necessitated, to betray Christ: the manner of Christ's detecting
him, Traitor.

9. What was done in the first Paschall-Supper: Judas detected for a Traitor
in a generality; Disciples enquire.

10. Judas discovered for a Traitor, in a mixed manner: good for Judas not to
have been borne.

11. Thou say, is no full discovery of Judas, to be the Traitor: Simon de
Cassia his error: Judas, his treason not discovered till the second Supper;
diverse reasons thereof.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
HAving ended whatsoever I thought convenient about the Passover; so far as
the old Testament directed, or explained, or as the voluntary practice of the
Jews was. The next part of my method leads me to handle how our blessed
Savior, with his Apostles observed this his last Passover, (which most
properly may be (...), the Passover of the Cross) so far as the New Testament
affords light. S. Mark describes the Paschall Supper briefly: observe
these things: first, although S. Luke says, (...), Luke 22.13. two Disciples
went from Christ, to prepare the Passover; yet in the Evening Christ came with
the 12. Mar. 14.17. therefore they who prepared the Lamb, viz. Peter and John,
Luke 22.8. went forth to meet Christ; and went back again to him (whilst
some other of the house tended it) to signify, all was prepared; whereupon
Christ knowing the Passover was made ready, ver. 16. He comes in the evening
with the 12. not with 10. only, but with the 12. Secondly, They sat, it is
added, Luke 22.14. When the hour was come he sat down: So they might be in
the house before; and might both say and do diverse other things; yet, till
the exact appointed time of the Passover, they sat not down to eat it.
Thirdly, he sat down and the 12. Apostles with him, ver. 14. the circumstance
of that number is exactly instanced upon also, Matthew. 26.20. Though other
where, it is likely that more than 12. did feast with Jesus, Matthew. 9, 10.
Sinners sat down with Jesus, and his Disciples, (...). Fourthly, S. Mark
uses the phrase, (...), (as they sat) Mark. 14.18. which is all one in sense
with that, Matthew. 26.20. (...), he sat down with them, both words being
derived, from (...), to sit down.

PAR. 2.
I Cannot omit, how the learned do interpret the word, (...): Maldonate
thinks, that at the Paschall they did not discumbere but sedere: Barradius
judges it more likely to be so: accordingly, our late translation renders it,
he sat down, Matthew. 26.20. They sat and did eat, Mark. 14.18. He sat
down, and the 12. Apostles with him, Luke 22.14. Moreover, Irenaeus (31.1.)
says S. Matthew wrote his Evangelisme in the Hebrew tongue: and I am sure in
the Hebrew Gospel, according to S. Matthew, set out by Munster it is said, he
sat; Iashab gnal hashulcan, sedit ad mensam, He sat at the Table, as Munster
translateth it; yet in the Greek the words which properly signify sitting are
not used in the text, nor any one of them: the word (...), is often used, when
no (lying down) can be understood, Matthew. 19.28. When the Son of man, (...),
shall sit in his glory; (...), ye also shall sit; Mark. 10.37. grant that
(...); we may sit, one, on thy right hand, another on thy left; and ((...))
signifies (sitting) at meat, as opposed, in my opinion, to (recumbing) Genesis
43.33. They (sat) before him; and in those times, it was not the Egyptian
guise, to lie all along at meat; Exodus 32.6. (...), The people (sat) down,
to eat, and to drink; which words are repeated, 1 Cor. 10.7. Nor were
discubitory beds in fashion, in the wilderness: (...), runs to the same
sense, Matthew. 22.44. (...), (sit) thou on my right hand, excluding (discumbing)
beds Matthew. 26.69. (...), Peter (sat) without in the Palace; you must not
think, he (lay) all along, basking himself against the fire; yet, Peter was
warming himself, Mark. 14.67. and more expressly, Luke 22.55. The fire was in
the midst of the Hall, and they (sat) down together with Peter in the midst
of them; for so runs the Original; no likelihood at all, that he (lay)
along: (...), also, is so to be interpreted, Matthew. 26.55. (...), I (sat)
daily, with you, teaching; Non (jacet) in molli veneranda scientia Lecto, that
is, Knowledge, that brings men to renown,
(Lies) not upon a bed of Down:
Nor did they teach, e molli Lecto, on a feather bed: Io. 4.61. Jesus (...), he
not (stretched) himself, at length but (sat) on the well: Nor is the word
((...)) or its derivation, or descendents, once named, in the description, of
the Paschall Supper; but the Apostles do single out such words, as principally
import, lying along; S. Matthew, and S. Mark, the compounds of (...), the word
used by S. Luke is, (...), He (sat) down, Mar. 6.39. upon another occasion,
the people are said, (...), to (sit) down: and though it be said, in the time
of the second Supper; after he was (set) down, again, Ioh. 13.12. where his
thrice sitting is insinuated; yet the original runs, in that place, (...),
was (set) down again; yet, Maldonate truly expounds the meaning of both
words; Evangelistae verbis (discubitum) significantibus, significant
(sessionem;) sicut nos nunc dicimus, Accumbere mensae, and in mensa discumbere,
cum tamen sedeamus, non discumbamus; mutatus mos est recumbendi, verba retenta;
that is, the Evangelists, by words, which signify (discumbing, or lying down)
do mean (sitting) as we now adays say, to sit at the table, and to discumb,
or lie at the table; when as nevertheless, we do (sit) and do not
(lye-downe) the manner or fashion of (recumbing) is changed; whereas we keep
the words still: Barradius also judges this opinion probable, Joh. 6.10. There
was much grass in the place, so the men (sat) down in number about 5000.
(...): Mark, 6.39. Jesus commanded them, to make all (...); (another word
implying recubation) to (sit) down by companies upon the green grass; the
Interlineary erred, to interpret it, super viridi foeno, upon the green Hay:
Franciscus Lucas Brugensis thus; ut verbo (discumbendi) vel (accumbendi) non
necessario significatur, quod cubuerit, seu jacuerit Jesus, inter coenandum,
(quanquam ea est propria verbi significatio) ita nec significatur necessario,
quodsederit, praesertim semper, quasi non potuer it aliquando stetisse; sed
quod convivio afuerit; quod ex ea, ad quam accesserat, mensa, caenam sumpserit,
nunc stans, nunc sedens, pro opportunitate -- vox Syra, Semich, and stanti, and
sedenti ascribi potest, significat enim proprie, innixum esse; quod quidem, tam
de baculo, quam de lecto, vel scamno, potest accipi: that is, as by the word of
(discumbing) or (accumbing) we are not necessarily, to understand, that Jesus
(lay down) at supper time, (although that indeed, be the proper signification
of the word) so, neither is there any necessity, enforcing us, to say; that he
(sat,) at least that he sat (always) as if sometimes, he might not also
(stand;) but the meaning is, that he was present at the Passover; because, he
supped, at that Table unto which he came; sometimes standing, sometimes
sitting, as occasion served. -- The Syriacke word Semich may be applied; either
to him that stands, or to him that sits: for it signifies properly (to
lean upon) which may be understood, as well of a staff, as of a bed, or of a
form or board: and (...), they (sat down;) in ranks, by hundreds, and by
fifties; these places, were no discubitory beds, besides the green grass; and
yet the Holy Ghost, forbeareth the properest words, for sitting, the Evangelist
also doubleth the word, (...), that is, in a sort, as they did, at feasts; to
that effect, I think, the original ought to be interpreted though our
translatours, wholly skip the words, and render it only by companies, though
many thousands might be by companies, which had no reference to (...): Piscator
thus observes, S. Mark (says he) chap. 6. ver. 39. word for word has it,
banqueting companies, banqueting companies: it is a kind of distributive
speech; as above, two, two, in a company; So, in the verse following, rows,
rows; the praeposition (...), per, or By, is understood; so that the sense
must be, by companies, that is to say, they were so distributed, into smaller
companies, as they commonly use to be, at banquets, etc. See Piscator farther
(on Matthew. 14. ver. 19.)

PARA. 3.
AS this is a fair excuse, why our English Translatours do use the word
(sitting) throughout all their description of the Ceremonies, in the eating of
the Paschall, though the words, in the Original do signify no such thing,
sensu primo, at first sight: for the learned translatours respected the sense,
and significant meaning; not the propriety of the words; and in their very
(discumbing) beds, there was (sitting) as I noted before, and though we should
grant that most of their time was spent, in discumbing; yet sitting was in
likelihood the next lasting Posture, and (under it) in much practice.

PAR. 4.
SO, the^ madness of some people, is hence apparent; who will (fit) forsooth
at the receiving of the thrice Sacred Eucharist, because Christ is said, by
Matthew, Mark, and Luke to (fit) at the eating of the Paschall-Lambe; nor,
have they ought to insist upon, but the English Original; upon whom a just
seducement has fallen, for being deceived by an indifferent translation of
such whom they will not, they dare not trust for a faithful interpretation;
whilst they will be lead only by the evidence of the spirit, but, let them
take heed, it be not a black spirit, transfigured into an Angel of light: I
ever suspected any spirit, who shall offer to lead me into matters beyond my
Capacity as God knows, the Common-peoples capacity; and the floating
imaginations of boys and girls, Apprentises, and monoglosses, cannot be, (as
such) stewards of the Mysteries of God.

PAR. 5.
THe fifth Puncto, expressed by S. Mark 14.18. is this. As they did eat Jesus
spoke; no doubt some at that instant did not eat, and to those perhaps, Christ
principally spoke those words; they might pawse a while; others did eat, and
yet harken also; yea chiefly harken, yet fall again to their meat: and it
seems Christ both are, and yet chose a fit time, to speak; One of you, who
eats with me, shall betray me, ver. 18. Ergo, he ate; and yet it may seem
probablest, that Christ spoke not much, of the act of their eating; but spoke
only of them, as they were Convivae, or Convivatores, eaters together with
him: Beza. (on Matthew. 26.23.) (...), He that dippeth his hand with me, in the
dish; whether it be, (...), (as it is read, Mark. 14.20.) it is not to be
taken, as if at the very time, when Christ said these words, Judas his hand was
in the dish, (for this had been a manifest, and undoubted sign of the
Traitor, as Erasmus rightly observes, but it is to be referred, to the
mutual daily eating together: I say, against Erasmus and Beza, the Apostles
understandings being clowded with sorrow, or eclipsed, divinely, they did not
take this for an unboubted remonstrance, as they suppose.

PAR. 6.
What said our Savior? Verily I say unto you, one of you, which eats with
me, shall betray me: all words of our Savior, were full of verity; nor was one
more or less true, than other, yet, all words of truth are not of equal
weight, goodness, benefit, or consideration; therefore when remarkable
momentuall, or more necessary marters are handled, the word (verily) is
perfixed; and set as a Beacon upon an hill; as a Diamond, in a Ring of gold:
and sometimes the word is doubled, Verily, verily, Amen; sometimes is a kind of
Prayer, 1 King. 1.36. After David had declared that Solomon, should succeed
him; Benajah said, Amen; the Lord God of my Lord the King, say so too; and it
was commanded to be used at the vote of the people, in cursing of sinners,
Deuteronomy. 27.15. etc. and ever since used at the close of all Prayers in all
Churches: likewise it signifies, a certain asseveration, next in firmitude to
an oath; thus, 2 Cor. 1.20. All the promises of God is Christ, are yea, and in
him Amen; the adverbe being put, for the adjective, truly or certainly: for
true, certain, and faithful; Amen, in this place, signifies no other thing
but (assuredly) by which he raises up their attention, to observe somewhat
more than ordinary.

PAR 7.
I Say unto you; future things are to others unknown, but not unto me; others
may be deceived, I cannot; though no man knows the beart of man, except the
spirit of man; though man's mind be volubilis, and deambulatoria, usque ad
mort^^; slitting and roving even until death; and what he purposes one day
he alters estsoone, and sometimes contradicts, ere long; yet praescience
Divine enlightneth me, assures me; I say unto you, even among the heathen; the
Table was counted sacred; and the rites thereof hallowed, and it was not only
a degree of friendship, but of familiarity, and most inward love, to eat daily
together; and therefore Judas had the greater sin, to violate the Laws of
Hospitality; the words are Emphaticall; one of you who eats with me, shall
betray me.

PAR. 8.
BY the word (shall) let no man think that Judas by a compulsory decree of God
was violently drawn, and enforced to betray Christ; that his will was haled,
or bound up in fatal chains of impelling, and co-working necessity: it was
indeed written, and set down; that one of Christ's company would betray him;
but Judas was not compelled to do so, though it were fore-prophecied, but it
was fore-prophecied, because Judas was known willingly, wittingly, and of his
own accord, resolved to betray him: I think it may with less offense be read,
One of you will betray me; concerning Christ's manner of detecting of the
Traitor, and the degrees thereof; because there were diverse steps to it, both
at the eating of the first Paschall Supper, as also diverse times in the second
Supper; suffer me to recollect, by way of an entire history: First, what was
done, at the first Supper: then in the second book, what was accomplished, at
the second Supper.

PAR. 9.
IN the first Supper, there was a general, mixed, especial designing out of
the Traitor: In the general, Thus; after Christ had voluntarily begun, to
open the gap; and said, verily, I say unto you, one of you that eat with me,
shall betray me; it lessened their fears, that but one was the Traitor, but it
troubled them all, that it was one of them; They began to be sorrowful,
Mark 14.19. yea, their sorrow took deep root, and sprung up* higher, and
higher; They were exceeding sorrowful, Matthew. 26.22. Semi-mortui erant, they
were half dead, (says Chrysostom) Christ's words, like a sword, piercing
through their hearts; from this exceeding sorrow proceeded, the first
disquisition, mentioned by S. Luke alone. Luke 22.23. They began, to enquire
among themselves, which of them it was, which should do this thing; Judas kept
his countenance, was not appalled, looked, as if he had been innocent; the
traitor was not manifestly revealed; things manifest; need no secondary, after
disquisitions, doubtful things are the object of enquiry; and because, they
could find out, who was the Traitor, after they enquired among themselves, in
more general terms; who should do this thing; they fell to a more
particular, and distinct examination, proceeding, and saying one by one, Is it
I? Mark 14.19. Erasmus expounds it, by qul intinxit, He that dippeth his
hand; yet in Matthew, Mark, and Luke, is no word, that inclines, as if Christ
spoke of a deed, but rather present; In the third place, when all their search
could not discover him, when humane endeavors failed; yea, every one said unto
Christ, Is it I? Lord, Is it I? Matthew. 22.22. Judas, among the rest, here
calls Christ, Lord; as it is, in the Syriake, Mari Domine mi, My Lord;
appealing to him, as to the judge of men's hearts, and interrogateth Christ, as
the other Apostles did; our blessed Savior answered the particular question,
more generally; He that dippeth his hand with me in the Dish, the same shall
betray me, Matthew. 26.23. Origin thinks, Judas little thought, his heart had
been known; but, when he saw his conscience known to Christ; he embraced the
opportunity of lying hid under the doubtful speech; the first arguing
Infidelity; the other impudency: and this is all one, with that, which is
said, Mark 14.20. It is one of the twelve, that dippeth with me, in the dish;
and both these agree with that, Luke 22.21. Beheld, the hand of him that
betrayeth me, is with me, on the Table; for, he could not dip his hand, with
him, in the dish, if his hand had not been on the Table; and, all pointed, I
think, to that, Psalm. 4.9. Mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, did
eat of my bread.

PAR. 10.
THen follows that fearful menace to the Traitor (though then not perfectly
known to the Apostles, yet, in a mixed sort, general and undefinite) Woe to
the man, by whom the Son of Man is betrayed; it had been good for that man, if
he had not been borne, Matthew. 26.24. The Hebrews want the degrees of
comparison; It had been good, that is, it had been less evil: Augustine (
lib. 2. de lib. Arbitr. cap. 7. tom. 1.) thus; Si beatus es, utique esse, quam
non esse, malles; and nunc miser, cum sis, mavis tamen esse vel miser, quam
ominino non esse, cum nolis esse miser, -- non tibi displiceat, imo maxim
place at, quod mavis esse vel miser, quam propteria miser, non esse; quia nihil
eris -- qui mavult non esse, ne miser sit, quia non esse non potest, restat, ut
miser sit; that is, if thou be happy, verily thou had rather (be) than (not)
be; and now, though thou be miserable, yet had thou rather be, even
miserable, than not to be at all, when thou would not willingly be miserable;
let it not displease thee, nay, let it exceedingly please thee, that thou had
rather have a being, though a sorry miserable one, then therefore not to have a
miserable being, that thou might have no being at all; He that had rather
have no being at all, that he might not be miserable; because, he cannot
choose, but have some being; it remains, that he is in a miserable taking; and
(in the beginning of the eight Chapter) Absurd, and inconvenienter dicitur,
mallem non esse; quam miser; it is an absurd, and unseemely speech, to say, I
had rather not be, at all, than be miserable; but Hierome thus; Multo melius
est, non subsistere; quam male subsistere; It is much better, not to subsist,
or, to have no being at all than to subsist unhappily, or, to have a wretched
being; Victor Antiochenus, in Marcum; Christ says, it had been good for
Judas, not to have been borne, because of the horrid torments, which Judas was
to endure in hell; for, it is much better, not to have any being at all, than
to be eternally tied to such miseries, and calamities; Lucas Brugensis
reconcileth all thus; Although it be impossible, that a not being should
properly be chosen, or desired; yet, if it be considered, as a Privative, or
exclusive from misery, so, it is apprehended as good; and (as such) it may be
desired, though in it self it be nothing; yea, the misery may be so great,
that a not being may be rightly, and reasonably preserred, before a very being:
but, I return unto the words, (Woe to the man, etc.) where he does not
design out the Individual; non aperte affirmat, de quo quaeritur he does not
make, or shape a direct, and plain answer, to the Question, says Augustine;
now, because none of those words did sufficiently enough declare the Traitor,
(for diverse might dip-together, with Christ; and, in likelihood, diverse did
dippe) yet, did they make the galled-horse, to winch; when Christ said, It had
been good for that man, if he had not been borne; whereupon Judas alone
replied, Master, Is it I? Matthew. 26.25. and Christ replied, Thou have said.

PAR. 11.
Which words (Thou have said) though they be an Hebrew Idiotisme, and plain
enough to those, that are skillful, in that language; yet, in another Language,
they are ambiguous, and reserved enough; The Apostles now spoke Syriacke, and
perhaps, were not then acquainted, with the more learned proprieties of the
holy tongue; I acknowledge, that Matthew. 26.64. and Luke 22.70. the words are to
be taken, for the affirmation of a question; yet, it may be doubted; whether of
malice, they did so interpret them; that they might the rather condemn Christ;
I am sure, when Christ said to Pilat. (...), Thou say, Matthew. 27.11. Pilat
esteemed it not for an affirmation, for then he would, and must have condemned
Christ, as publicly professing, He was King of the Jews; and durst not have
excused him (as he did) for fear of Caesar, his Master: The words, Thou
say, are ambiguous; and, to any, to all of the Apostles; who likewise
interrogated, Is it I? Christ might have said, Thou say; Christ could have
said, O sordid, and wicked Judas, thou haste a long time, sat abrood, on this
evil, and of late have concluded for money; dare thou as an innocent man,
interrogate me? to thy question, Is it I? take this answer, thou say;
Terminos nobis, ac regulas tolerantiae figens and oblivion is injuriarum: Thou
say the truth, or a truth; or the matter questioned may be here understood:
a full and clear light of detection, as yet shines not, These are all the
things, which S. Matthew, or S. Mark have recorded of the words, or deeds
spoken or done, at the eating of the Paschall-Lambe: If any object that I leave
the business of Judas imperfect, let him consider that our blessed Savior,
during the Passover, and till that Supper was ended, did leave the designing
of the Traitor, in ambigno: so that the Apostles knew, not perfectly whom
Christ meant: they might perhaps upon some of those several Indicia, or
discoveries, which Christ made, guess at the Traitor, certain knowledge of
him they had not: Simon de Cassia thinks Christ did purposely withold the
Apostles, from understanding when he described the Traitor, lest they would
have made a tumult: Aquinas, and before him Theophylact, and Chrysostom
think, Peter would have killed Judas: yet Simon de Cassia might have remembered
that our blessed Savior could as well, and as easily withold his Apostles
from a tumult, and Peter from killing Judas, as he could keep the Apostles,
from understanding, what he meant, by words, not very obscure; Barradius
judges, that, if the Apostles had infallibly known Judas to be the Traitor,
they would have labored to convert him. I answer, could not Christ himself
have done it, more easily, if he would; and if they had labored, to convert
him; would Judas have regarded their words, who regarded not the words of
Christ; and who, after so many warnings, so many reproves, and menaces,
intermixed also, with many kind offices, done to him, by our Savior; yet
would not be recalled? I rather imagine, our Savior, at the eating of the
Passover, made no exact, and perfect discovery of him; because, his sin not
full, and ripe, as then, his conscience might recoyle; and be on the stays; he
might doubt, fear, and vary from himself: but as Treason did grow upon his
soul, more and more; so were the detections proportionable; and none beyond
the present intentions of Judas, when our blessed Savior spoke: degrees of
detection answered the degrees of Judas his entertainment of sin, and
courting it; nor may a man doubt, but, at that instant, when Christ spoke in
the present tense (...), traditur, Is betrayed, Matthew. 26.24. even then the
Treason was in Judas; often, before Christ had foretold them, he should be
betrayed; when Judas began, to undertake the Treason, Christ spoke more
clearly of it; and, the more his heart was hardened, the more did Christ
detect him; but, a full discovery of the Traitor, was not clearly made to the
Apostles, was not made at all; at least, till toward the end of the second
Supper; though Judas perhaps understood every word: but in the second Supper,
you must hear more of this. He named him not, Ne irritaret cum, and, ut
conscius agat poenitentiam, says Hierome, lest he should stir up his
conscience unto Repentance. Leo ( Ser. 7. de Pass.) Notam sibi esse proditoris
conscientiam demonstravit, non aspera, and aperta eum increpatione confundens,
sed leni, and tacita admonitione conveniens, ut facilius corrigeret poenitendo,
quem nulla deformasset abjectio; that is, he made demonstration, that he knew
well enough, what was in the Traitors conscience, in that, he did not reprove
him sharply, and openly; but admonish him gently, and privily; that so he
might the more easily draw him to repentance.

The Prayer.
WHom have I, O Lord, in heaven but thee? and there is none on earth, nor any
thing, that I desire, besides thee; keep me ever, in this constant love; I
beseech thee; and if thou vouchsafest unto me, but the meanest degree of glory;
if I may but eat of the crummes that fall from thy Table; my soul shall be
refreshed; and, I shall for ever, magnify thy holy name, through Jesus Christ,
my Mediator, and Advocate. Amen.

CHAP. XXIII. The Contents of the three and twentieth Chapter.
1. Christ's hearty desire, to eat his last Supper.

2. The words (before) after, until, unto, from, etc. are particles, sometimes
inclusive, sometimes exclusive.

3. Donec, or until, negatively used, de futuro.

4. Kingdom of God, what.

5. He took the Cup, not the Eucharisticall Cup: fruit of the vine, spiritual
Nectar: Turks place eternal felicity, in sensual Pleasures.

6. Maldonates error, concerning the Cup.

7. Spiritual Table-Talke, at Christ's last eating of the Passover.

8. Methodus rerum, aut Historiae, not always observed, in Scripture: the
Original, of greatest authority: nothing to be altered, in the Scriptures.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
SAint Luke has most considerable varieties; Christ said; With desire have I
desired, to eat this Passover with you, before I suffer; that is, I have
heartily desired, to eat it with you, Luke 22.15. Tertullian ( Contra Marcion.
4.46.) renders it, concupiscentia concupivi; the reason of his desire, annexed
by S. Luke, which is omitted by all the other Evangelists; For, I say unto you,
I will not any more eat thereof (donec) impleatur, (until) it be fulfilled in
the kingdom of God. Luke 22.16. He means not, says the learned Lucas
Brugensis, that he would again at another time, eat the Paschall-Lambe
(especially in the Kingdom of God) but, that he would eat it, no more, in
this world; much less, Quando suppetet Pascha beatius, cibusque coelestis, in
Regno Dei; since he had a more blessed Passover, and a heavenly banquet in
the Kingdom of God.

PAR. 2.
IT is a true Rule, that not only the prepositions, before, after, until,
unto, from, and the like; which denote, or signify the bounds, and limits;
either of time, or place; either initiall, or final, and determinative, but
all other descriptions, or circumscriptions of time, space, or place, are
ambiguous, and sometimes include, sometimes exclude those very bounds assigned
out: Before the day of the Passover; the word (before) says Illyricus,
sometimes includes, sometimes excludes the very day of the Passover; when it
is to be understood inclusive: the sense is, Ante diem Pasche terminatum, vel
finitum; before the day of the Passover, was terminated, or ended; yet
commonly, it is used exclusive so, after three days, Christ shall rise again
Mark 8.31. and, after three days, he said, he would rise again, Matthew.
27.63. by which expressions, is not meant that he would rise again the fourth,
fifth, six, or seventh day, or any time after that; but the third day is
included, not excluded; for his Resurrection was fore-prophecied of, by Christ
himself, that it should be accomplished, on the third day, Matthew. 16.27. (...)
raised again, the third day, and accordingly, it was performed: Christ rose
again the third day, says the Apostles Creed: He rose again, the third day,
1 Cor. 15.4. according to the Scriptures. After six days, Jesus takes Peter,
and James, and John, and brings them unto an exceeding high mountain, Matthew.
17* 1. Mark 9.2. yet, is it varied, Luke 9.38. about an eight days after: The
reconciliation is fair: the word (after) in S. Matthew, and Mark, excludes
dies terminales; It was not, in any part, or parcel of the six days; they
were fully ended, and passed; but the preposition (after) in S. Luke, excludes
them: So Christ became obedient unto death, Phil. 2.8. and though the word
(unto) be often exclusive; yet, because Christ came, not only to the gate,
door, or chamber of death; but passed through them, and really, truly was
dead; therefore, death is not here excluded, but included, in the word (usque)
or (unto) 1 Samuel 15.35. Samuel came no more, to see Saul (until) the day of
his death (usque ad) that is, from the hour, neither before, nor then, nor
after. I have the more insisted, on this Rulebecause it removes many seeming
contradictions, in Scripture; which the ignorant are not able to reconcile, but
swallow down, with their difficulties: and now, I descend unto the word,
Donec, or until: to the further clearing of these difficult words, Donec, or
until: the first is affirmative, Matthew. 28.20. I will be with you, unto, or,
until the end of the world: which promise proves not, that he would not be
with them, after the end of the world; but rather, that he would be much more
with them, in another world, though he would not desert them here, Psa. 110.1.
Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies, thy footestoole; gross
is the man, who, hence infers, that Christ shall not sit at Gods right hand;
when Christ shall tread upon his enemies; now, he does reign over them, even
whilst there is opposition; and, shall much more hereafter, when they shall be,
under his feet; here (Donec) also affirms, of the future times.

PAR. 3.
THe second force of (Donec) is negative, defuturo, for the time to come, Matt.
1.25. non cognoscebat eam (donec) peperit, He knew her not (until) she had
brought forth, etc. he means not, that after her sacred childbearing, Joseph
knew her; for, it is an Hebrew Idiotisme; (...) donec, the word (until)
excludes without exception, expressly, till such a time; and leaves it
implicitly, to be understood, that much less was it done, or to be done
afterward: Rem nunquam factam certo tempore, exprimit non factam, quo videri
facta poterat, scireque necessaria erat non factam; Excellently says Lucas
Brugensis; he expresses a thing never done, by the not doing of it at a
certain time; viz. at such a time, as in all likelihood, all others would have
known their wives, upon a new marriage: but Joseph did not so much; no, not at
that time; much less, did he so afterward. Michal the daughter of Saul, had no
child (until) the day of her death, 2 Samuel 6.23. Stupid is he, who concludes,
that she had children, or a child after her death. The Resultance is rather,
and firmer thus: If she had no child (till) her death; much less, had she
one after: Joseph knew not the blessed, ever-Virgin Mary, till she was
delivered; much less did he, after that. In both these passages, the force of
(donec) is negative: So here; I will not, any more, eat thereof (till) it be
fulfilled; not here; much less hereafter, in heaven; where we shall have, a
more blessed Pascha, sine intybis, vel amaritudine, without any bitter Sallet:
the like may be said, of the word (until) in the 18 verse; but, what is the
kingdom of God? Or, how is the Passover fulfilled, in the Kingdom of God? I
answer, by the Kingdom of God, in this place, is not meant the Militant
Church, but the Triumphant; Origin, Euthymius, and others here appropriate it,
to the future world; and in the world to come, the Passover is thus; then
fulfilled, and perfected; because the Jewish Passover, was to be eaten, with
bitter herbs; and that Passover was accompanied with a second Supper: nor,
were all, and every one blessed, that took the Passover; therefore was it, in
a manner, imperfect; but, blessed are all, and every one, who are called, to
the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, Rev. 19 9. and, in that Supper, is nothing
wanting; all sorrow excluded; all joy prefected; the Type being drowned, in the
glory of the great antitype; an happier Supper; an happier Passover, shall be
in heaven. This manner of speech perhaps hence arose (says Illyricus) because
the Writer would determine only, for his own time; or the time, he
propounded, to handle; and, cared not, to speak, of further, or remoter times,
as it was principally intended, and all things were accordingly prepared; that
Christ might eat the Passover, Mark 14.12. So it is most true; Christ sat
not, as an idle spectator: but, he did, indeed, eat the Passover, and
promised, never to eat it more.

PAR. 4.
WHat else? Luke 22.17. He took the Cup, and gave thanks, and said; Take
this, and divids it among your selves; for, I say unto you; I will not drink,
of the fruit of the Vine, until the Kingdom of God shall come: that this was
not the Eucharisticall Cup, appears, by the Sequel, where he instituted the
blessed Sacrament, of his body, and blood.

PAR. 5.
BUt, what mean these words? I will not drink of the fruit of the Vine,
until the Kingdom of God shall come? What is the fruit of the Vine, which
then shall be drunken? the wine says Lucas Brugensis, Non exvirtute vitis, sed
ex Dei fruitione proficiscitur, that wine shall not flow-forth, from the blood
of the Vine: but from the beatificall fruition of the face of God, Psalm. 36.8.
They shall be abundantly satisfied, with the fatness of thine house, and thou
shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures: inebriabuntur ab ubertate
domus tuae; they shall be drunken with the plenty of thine house; as it is in
the Vulgar: Bellarmine ( de Sacramento Eucharist. 1.11. in fine cap. and, 4.10.
says truly, and exquisitely, to the purpose; the first cup of wine in Luke
ended the Pascall; or the Supper of the Paschall-Lambe: So also think,
Theophylact, Montanus, Beda, Cajetane, Carthusian: but if you will see the
point handled at large, have recourse to the first cited place of Bellarmine:
the best Nectar: I appoint you a Kingdom, that ye may eat and drink at my
Table, in my Kingdom, Lvk. 22.30. Math. 8.11. Many shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven: not as if Christ and his
Disciples did place eternal felicity in sensual pleasures, as the Turks do
at this day, but by these outward things the inward is sigured: Titus
Bostrensis, haec ea de causa non asserit, quasi ullus istic denuo mensae, aut
esculentis locus futurus sit, sed quod res spirituales, rebus apud nos
usitatis, exprimere voluerit; that is, our blessed Savior does not therefore
speak this, as if there should be any place hereafter, for tables, or meat,
or drink, in the Kingdom of God: but that he might express spiritual
things, by carnal things: things, that are frequent and usual amongst us, i.
you shall enjoy all possible spiritual pleasures with me: Beza has an old
exposition upon usque quo completum fuerit, until it be fulfilled, S. Paul.
says he, 1 Cor. 5.7. best clears the sense, Christ, our Passover is
sacrificed for us, for from that time complete, Christ does feast with us, and
we with him, in the Kingdom of God, which truth that figure design: Beza, on
Matthew. 26.29. Non bibam, ab hoc Tempore, ex hoc fructu vitis, usque ad diem
illum, quum ipsum bibam vobiscum novum, in regno Patris mei: bie sermo, vel
Metaphorice accipiendus est, in posteriori membro, de convictu, ac si diceret
Dominus, adhuc vobiscum vixi, ut homines cum hominibus consueverunt; ab hoc
Tempore, desinet vitae istius consuetudo; siquidem, vobiscum non ero, nisi in
Regno illo aeterno, ubi aliam vitam vivemus; that is, I will not from
henceforth drink, any more, of this fruit of the Vine, until the day when I
shall drink it new, with you in my Fathers Kingdom; this saying is, either to
be understood metaphorically; in the latter member of it, concerning his manner
of living with them; as if the Lord should have said, hitherto have I lived
with you, as men use to do with men, but henceforth that manner of living
shall surcease; for I will not be with you any more, but in that eternal
Kingdom, where we shall live another manner of life: or (says he) this is to
be referred to that which is written, Act. 2. that Christ, to make his
Resurrection believed, did eat 40. days with his Disciples; not for
necessity; nor as other men do usually eat; because he had put off all bodily
infirmity; which is signified here, under the name of the Reign of his Father:
to which those words seem to have reference, Mat. 16.28. Some here shall not
taste of death, (till) they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdame; So
Beza: That this cup was part of the second Supper, I see no probability; the
words praecedent, of eating the Paschall-Lambe, co-haering so strictly to the
drinking afterward of the wine, (used also at the Paschall) do evidently
evince, that all this was done at the first Supper, only of the Passover.

PAR. 6.
MAldonate thinks, Christ speaks twice, of the same cup, because the words
which S. Luke here uses, of the first cup; I will not drink, of the fruit of
the Vine, until the kingdom of God shall come, Luke 22.18. is in substance,
repeated, and applied, to the most sacred cup, Mat. 26.29. Mar. 14.25. But,
Maldonate is deceived: for in S. Luke, he spoke of the wine at the Paschall, as
is most apparent; and it is as apparent, that S. Matthew and S. Mark do apply
the like words to the Vine Eucharisticall; and there is no incongruitie, to say
that Christ did repeat the substance of the same words twice; on two several
occasions: for he never drank of either of those cups afterward, either of
that belonging to the Old Testament* or of that which belongs to the new-law
of grace. Secondly, the very variety of words, which are used by the several
Evangelists, prove that he spoke not twice of one and the same cup, but of
several and distinct cups: so much for the words spoken* at the eating of the
Passe-over.

PAR. 7.
IF any object, Christ brake the Law, because by the Law their especial
Tabletalke was appointed, (of which before) and the children were to ask and
the men to answer, as it is Exodus 12.25.26.27. but here was no such thing at
the eating of the Paschall; but other discourses which now I have recited: I
answer; blessing and giving of thanks, and diverse other things are omitted in
words; which we may be sure were performed in deeds: and why might not this
rite be performed, though it be not recorded? Secondly, I answer, if Christ at
his last eating of the Paschall-Lambe, mentioned nothing concerning the
deliverance in and from Egypt; I say, he therefore might well omit the type;
because, he spoke of the substance, at least implicitly: of the Son of man,
and his death, (to deliver mankind from hell) of the fearful woes, due to
the Traitor (worse than the Egyptian drowning) of heavenly promises, and food
spiritual, at the heavenly Table; (which super-coelestiall Manna, far
exceeds the being carried on Eagles wings; and being enlightened by a Pillar
of fire by night, and guided by a Pillar of clowd in the day; or, their Manna
on earth) of Christ's ardent desire to eat the Passover with his Apostles,
(the Law required the performance only) a fervent desire to eat it, was more
than was commanded: of the voluntary death of the worlds Savior, under the
covert of these words) The Son of man goes indeed (...) vadit; of the going
out of this world, to his father, John 13.1. even by the phraze of Transitus or
Passover; ut transeat ab hoc mundo, ad patrem, to pass out of this word unto
his father as the Vulgat translates it, (...), better; then Beza his
digrediatur go away: of Gods determination that the Son of man should
fulfill his will, of Judas his treason, against the innocent blood of Christ,
which was to be far more precious than the blood of the Paschall-Lambe, that
sprinkled the doors, and the lintells; this sprinkling our Consciences; that
blood delivering from temporal death; Christ from eternal: the standing-water
being a wall to the Israelites, on hoth sides; but the flowing water and blood
streaming from his side, washing and purging our souls, and preparing us for
heaven; of which the terrestrial Canaan was but a Type: thus of the Paffeover;
and of better than the Passover did our Savior discourse, according to the
Law; at the eating of the Paschall-Lambe.

PAR. 8.
THe words which follow, Luke 22.24, And there was also a strife among them;
were spoken at the second Supper: when I handle it, they shall have their
explication, in their due order: and this is plainly acknowledged, that the
blessed Spirit did not, by S. Luke keep Methodum Rerum, or Historiae; the
History of things in order, as they were done; but upon great and just cause,
(though unknown unto us) did intermingle other matters; unless we fly to
that which Beza thinks not impossible, that there is a transposition of verses,
that the now 19. and 20. verses, should be annexed to the 16. verse: and after
them the now 17. and 18. veses, should be numbered, but this transposition and
trans-changing of verses, does as much confound the story in mine opinion: and
the same things might be said at two suppers: Apud Syrum interpretem, maximae
merito authoritatis; in the Syriake translation which does worthily deserve the
greatest authority. ( Beza should rather have given the greatest authority to
the Original Greeks, from whence the Syriack was derived) the 17. and 18.
verses, of Luke 22. are wanting: Contrarily in a Greek and Latin Coppie of
mine, says Beza, venerable for Antiquity, the latter part of the 19. verse,
and the whole 20. verse, are not read; I do say with Beza; Ego nihil mutandum
censeo, I hold, that nothing ought to be altered: and yet he propounds a
transchanging of the verses; but I would have nothing altered at all; nor like
these shifting dislocations.

The Prayer.
O God, thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path; the
fullness of thy Scripture do I adore, the riches thereof are above silver,
gold, or precious stones; good Lord grant that I may examine all my actions,
words, and thoughts by it, and frame them all unto it: in thy light I shall see
light, and come to the light of the living; which I beseech thee to grant for
Jesus Christ his sake, who is the joy of my soul, and the blessed sum of my
desires. Amen.

CHAP. XXIV. The Contents of the twenty fourth Chapter.
1. Ministers or attendants, at Christ's last Passover: the blessed Virgin Mary
no attendant: difference between Apostles, and Disciples: Disciples might
attend.

2. Bishops, Presbyters, succeed the Apostles, the seventy: Names of Apostles
and Disciples, confounded: S. Augustine questioned.

3. Whether any of the 70. Disciples were Apostates, other Disciples, beside
the 70. Some of them back sliders: the 70. Disciples were the future
Presbytery Idolater: the 70. Disciples who they were, whether there were 72.
Disciples.

4. Diverse Legal Types of the 12. Apostles, 70. Disciples.

5. The Master of the house was not excluded, he might wait on Christ, also
some of the household might be attendants.

6. Attendants, Male, and Female; three degrees of Male-attendants: diverse
offices of Attendants; Christ and his Apostles had their attendants.

7. Some of the 72. were Christ's Auditors, to hear his Table-talke:
Servitours, ammated instruments.

8. The Synopsis, or sum of all.

PARAGRAPH. I.
I Cannot end this first book of the Paschall Supper, till I have handled one
quaere more, whether any waited in the room, whether my servants, ministers,
or attendants were present besides Christ, and his Apostles, at his last
Passover? For the Negative part, these arguments may be collected. First,
there is no mention of any one attendant; Ergo, none. Respondeo, the argument
for the Negative, is but weak; for I thus retort it: there is no mention that
there was none attendant; Ergo, some were, Argumenta a Scripturis Negative non
tenent; arguments drawn from Privative Scripture, are no good Logic.
Secondly, there is mention of no more, than twelve, who came with Christ, Mark.
14.17. Thirdly, there is mention only of 12. that did sit, or sup with Christ,
Luke 22.14. He sat down and the 12. Apostles with him. Fourthly, Mark. 14.20.
It is one of the 12. that dippeth with me in the dish. I answer to all three,
that the certain mentioned number, that came, or did sit or suppe with Christ,
does not exclude the unmentioned servants attendant: both may well consist
together, (...), the sitters at meat and the attendants. Fifthly, Christ says
Luke 22.26. Let him that is chief, be as he that does serve, and ver. 27. I am
among you, as he that serves, I am in the midst of you, (...), as he that
serves: I answer, this rather proves, that some did serve indeed, to whom
Christ did liken himself; that Christ did not serve (as others) but was as
one, that serves; Cinctura ministrantium est; the being girded about, is a
sign of service, attendance, and administering; whilst Christ was bound, and
busy with water and the basin, and the towell, he might properly be said,
through his own voluntary condescent, to serve and administer; and so Kings
and Queens may be said, to serve, when they descend to wash the feet of the
poor. Sixthly, S. Peter's, and S. John's praeparation, for the Passover, may
seem to be of little weight, if all things, and every thing necessary was not
thoroughly provided, but they must have others to attend: I answer, no
preparation was so exquisite, that waiters were unnecessary; who should fill
out fresh wine? who remove the dishes? who serve them in? who was to take them
away? who to save or gather up the fragments? Seventhly, if any one besides the
Apostles, had been there; we may think, the most blessed Virgin was there,
but she was not to be an attendant? I answer out of question. Christ's most
holy Mother had not attended if she had been there; though she would not
grudge to wait on him; but his greatest humility would never have permitted
her, to serve him; yet other attendants might be, and were in likelihood,
though she were absent. Eighthly, it is not likely, Christ would have washed
his Apostles feet, especially the feet of Judas, if other attendants had
been there? I answer if in the presence of others he did wash them all; it
was an evident sign of his greater humility, and then more might take good
example, contrarily, for the Affirmative. 1. It is said, Matthew. 26.18. I will
keep the Passover at thine house, with my Disciples; so ver. 19. Mark 14.12,
13, 14, and 16. verses; Luke 22.11. But there is great difference between the
Disciples, and the Apostles; wherefore the Apostles might sup with him; and the
Disciples wait, and eat after him in some other room; or perhaps after the
2. Supper, in the same room. I answer, indeed they were distinct, in dignity
and order; and the Apostles were a choice sort, selected out of the Disciples
and Peter, James, and John were exempt in great matters, out of the rest of the
Apostles.

PAR. 2.
MOreover, Bishops succeeded the Apostles, as the Presbyters do the 70. in the
Language of antiquity: and the Commission of the 12. Apostles, was more large,
than that of the 70. Disciples; and had more and better promises. See Matthew.
10.1. etc. and Luke 9.1. etc. And he ordained 12. that they should be with him;
Mark 3.14. that is, of his house and family; Sacellani Domestici, Domesticke
Chaplains, in Ordinary, unto him, a sacris, the 70. were to go still before
him; we read not that after their Commission was certified by them; to have
brought forth wonderful effects; that ever they did eat or drink with him,
if not now: and if (they) were none of the waiters, yet many (other) might, yet
are the 12. Apostles called 12. Disciples, and the names are confounded, Matthew.
10.1. He called unto him his 12. Disciples, and ver. 2. names, Simon, Andrew,
James, and John, etc. who were most properly Apostles, Luke 9.1. he called his
12. Disciples together, and it is apparent; (if you compare, S. Matthew with S.
Luke) that they were the 12. Apostles only: for after the Commission given to
the Apostles, The Lord appointed other 70. also, and sent them two and two,
before his face, into every City, and place, whither he would come, Luke 10.1.

PAR 3.
SAint Augustine, (on those words, Psalm, 99.5. Worship at his footestoole; but
with him it is, enarration, on Psalm. 98. fol. 230. litera. A.) thus,
Scandalizati sunt quidam discipuli ejus, 70. ferme, and dixerunt, durus est hic
sermo, and recesserunt ab eo, and amplius culm eo non ambulaverunt; that is,
Certain of his Disciples, (well nigh 70.) were offended, and said, this is a
hard saying; and departed from him, and walked no mort with him: the words
indeed he spoke, Joh. 6.60. and 66. but that they were propetly, wholly, or for
the greater part of the 70. Disciples; S. Augustine shall give me leave to
doubt: Ambrose ( in Epist. ad Romans cap. 8.) gives over the 70. Disciples, as
castawayes, apostates, or reprobates: Epiphanius ( Haeresi 51.) is more
moderate, that some of them returned unto Christ, yet he secretly grants
their fall from Christ: If the fathers say true, we cannot think that any of
the 70. ministered after unto Christ; viz. at his last Supper: But I first
require proof, that any of the 70. peculiarly so called; did fall, either
totally, or finally, from Christ: Secondly, I am sure, Luke 10.17. Even the
Devils were subject unto them, through Christ's Name; and Christ said unto
them, ver. 20. Their names were written in heaven, and bids them rejoice
therefore. Are they reprobates, whose Names are written in heaven? And they had
small cause to rejoice, if they were to be damned. True it is that many
Disciples of his went back, yet it cannot be evinced, that any of the 70. were
among the number of those backesliding Disciples. I am sure, besides the
Apostles, and besides the 70; there were another sort of people; who sought him
and followed him, for to satisfy their hungry guts. Ioh. 6.27. and in a large
sense, may be called Disciples; and some perhaps followed him, for
Novelty-sake; some for curiosity; others to spy bis ways; others, to
question him, on the sudden, and to entrap him; Morbus, signa, Cibus,
blasphemia, dogmafuerunt
Causae, cur Dominum turba sequuta fuit.
that is, Cures, signs, meat, Doctrine, (supposed) blasphemy,
By these five cords Christ drew his Company.


These also, in as much as he taught them, and they followed him, and he fed
them, may in a general appellation, be termed Disciples; and some of these
Disciples believed not, and Christ knew who they were that believed not, John
6.64. But that any one of the 70. to whom Christ said before, that their names
were written in the book of life, did Apostatize, or that they to whom the
devils were subject, should be subjected to the devils (as they were if they
were damned) cannot creep into my Creed, that a whole troop of 70, or the
major part, chosen especially out by Christ himself, and representing
Idaealiter, the future Presbyters of the Church for ever should perish
everlastingly, seems unto me contrariant to reason, or Divinity, Let any
that are uncharitable concerning the 70, remember what Christ said unto them;
Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you
despises me, and ver. 19. I give you power over all the power of the enemy;
but they had not power over all the power of the enemy, if they were damned.
And nothing shall by any means hurt you; which words extend to more than
miraculous outward operations; and design Christ's particular grace, and saving
Cooperation for them: I must add, that Christ in that hour, (thanked) God,
ver. 21. for revealing those things, unto babes, (for so he calls the 70.)
and opposes them, unto the worldly wise, and seeming prudent, which were
blind. Were those Babes, to go to hell, for whose Illumination, Christ gave
thanks unto the father, so solemnly, so speedily? Besides, antiquity says,
Matthias was one of the 70. Disciples. So Eusebius, (1.12. and lib. 2.1.) so
Epiphanius, ( Haeresi 20.) and Hierome (de Scriptoribus Ecclesiast. in Matthia)
yea, Beda, (on the Acts) says, from Clemens Alexandrinus; that both the
Competitors, Joseph called Barsabas, and Matthias, were two, of the 70.
Chrysostom ( Homil. 3. in Acta) avoucheth, that the 70. whom Christ chose,
were among the 120. Brethren, who were assembled at the Election of Matthias,
Act. 1.15. Clemens, (as Eusebius has it, 2.1.) maintains that the Apostles
did instruct the Disciples, as Christ instructed the Apostles, the seven
Deacons were chosen out of the 70. Disciples, says Epiphanius (1.21.) the 70.
were exactly tythed, say I; the same Epiphanius ( Here Is. 20) says that after
Christ's Ascension, the 70. were great Publishers of the Gospel: James the
brother of the Lord was one of the 70. and made a Bishop, by Apostolical
authority, says Eusebius (2.1.) Like-wise, S. Mark, was one of the 70. says
Epiphanius ( Haer. 51.) Christ had many Disciples, ere he chose the twelve
Apostles; and of the Disciples, immediately, after a whole nights prayer, he
selected twelve Apostles, Luke 6.13. The very Apostles, are called twelve
Disciples, Matthew. 10.1. and Luke 9.1. nor were they part of the 70. Disciples;
for, after Christ had chosen his Apostles, out of other disciples; The Lord
appointed other 70. also, Luke 10.1. Some indeed, who were called Christ's
Brethren, like false brethren, did not believe in him, Ioh. 7.5. I cannot
find, an Instance effectual, to prove; that any of the 70. were condemned: I
know many reckon the disciples to be 72. but the Greek, Chaldee, and Syriack,
are for the just number of 70.

PAR. 4.
THe twelve Patriarchs, Fathers of the twelve Tribes, were in the Law of
Nature, figures of the twelve Apostles: the twelve Wells of water, at Elim,
where the Israelites encamped, under the Law of Moses, were types of the twelve
Apostles: The 70. Languages arising from one (if they were, nor more, nor
less, in number) as is commonly held, from Genesis 11.7. may then be said, to be,
in the Law of Nature, types of our 70. The 70. souls, of the house of Jacob,
Genesis 46.27. were figures in the Law of Nature, of our 70. Disciples; which were
to be in the Law of Grace. The 70. Elders, Number. 11.16. in the Law of Moses did
typifie, our 70. Disciples, to be chosen, by a better, than Moses: the 70.
Palm trees at Elim, Exodus 15.27. did signify the like; the Law adumbrating
the verity of the Gospel. Lay all, that I have writ together; and I presume,
no man will now be so censorious, against the 70. as some others (without
deeper considerations, concerning that point) have been; and therefore, as
mine own opinion, in probability; I hope, I may set it down; that some of the
70. might minister, and attend upon our Savior, even when Christ, and his
twelve Apostles did ear the Paschall-Lambe. I am sure, the two Carthusians,
Ludolphus, and Dyonysius, are confident enough, that Martialis, and some other
of the Disciples, did administer unto Christ, and the twelve Apostles; and some
of them brought water to Christ, says Ludolphus.

PAR. 5.
ANother opinion is not improbable neither; namely, that some of the household,
where Christ was entertained, might wait upon him, and his Apostles, at his
Pascha (...), or crucifying Passover: He, who might command the room, might
command the attendance; yea, the Master of the house himself; or the best
Master, or man, in the world, would not grudge; to wait upon Christ; may I
attend upon them, who attended on him: yet, concerning the owner of the house,
I hold it more probable, that he, with his company, did eat another Lamb, in
his own house; for Christ desired but one fair Chamber, to keep his
Passover in, with the twelve; likely it is, other rooms were in the same
house, and large fair enough, to serve, to that purpose; for, he kept the
Passover also; and therefore, he did eat, either in a room, of the same
house; or else he, and his joined, with some others; and ate the Passover; in
another man's house; where they had a competent company of Receivers; but, this
is not so likely, for, it was not, against the Law, to have two or more Lambs,
to be eaten, in one evening, in one house: See the first Book, 12. Chapter.
Secondly, the Master of the house, seems to have been a rich man; he had a
manservant bearing a pitcher of water; a great vessel, as the word ((...))
shows, quod proprie de (gravioribus) oneribus dici puto, says Beza; which I
think, properly, is to be understood, of heavy burdens: he had a
guest-Chamber, Mark 14.14. Many rich men have none such; every guest-Chamber
is a costly Chamber; that Chamber was furnished, and prepared, large, and above
stairs, ver. 18. which never concurred, in a poor man's house, in their great
Metropolis at Jerusalem: In which large room, without annoyance, or
inconvenience, among other things, was there also a basin of water, and a
Towell, or Towells, large, and long enough; both, to gird our Savior; and to
wipe the feet of the twelve washed Apostles, Joh. 13.4. etc. What favor
Christ could show to the owner of the house, without breaking of the Law: no
man may doubt, but our Savior did it unto him; therefore, to me it seems not
likely that our Savior would, as it were, force a man, and all his family,
wholly, out of his own house: Christ confined his desire, to (...), as it is
in Beza his oldest Copy; the under-roomes, or some other upper-roome, might
serve the turn of that family; Christ came often, into men's houses; that ever
he excluded his hosts, out of their own houses, I am yet to learn; Though
Christ might have requited them, which greater kindnesses, by far, if so, it
had been (for, he never received courtesy, but he gave better; and more) yet,
I see no probability stand forth, to persuade, that it was so; but rather, that
the household continued in their masters house, and all necessary service of
attendance, was presented, and performed, unto our Savior, by some of the
family: but nothing is demonstrative, or certain; and therefore, I leave every
man to his own conjecture; and only show mine own, that Christ, and his
Apostles, had some, to administer unto them; (and that, either some of the 70.
or some of the household attended them: Hoc ultimum Pascha, this last Passover
(says the great Joseph Scaliger) was like to the precedent ones, and the
precedent were kept after the same manner, by Christ, as the Jews kept them: (
de emendat Temp. 6. page 571.) let me add, that the other great Feasts of the
Jews, had, in the lesser matters, some correspondence, one with another;
without attendants, they were not, at other their feasts, nor now in likelihood.

PAR. 6.
THere never were discubitory beds, and Feasting-Suppers, but there were
always some administrants; let a contrary example be instanced in, from either
Jews, or Romans: Solomon was renowned; 1. King. 10.5. For, the meat of his
Table, the attendants of his Ministers, and their apparel, and his
Cup-bearers; and the company received it, by the hands of the waiters, says
Hierome; Pincernae, and pocillatores, Butlers, and Cup-bearers, were of great
esteem, both young men, and Virgins: Hierome calls them, Ministros vini, and
ministras; fusores vini, and fusalrices; propinatores, and propinatrices, says
Olympiodorus, men, and women-servitors, powrers-out, or Cup-bearers of the
wine: Philo (de vita contemplativa) reckons three degrees of male-attendants,
lesser children, greater boys, and downy-bearded youths: Among them, the
Syrians, and Egyptians, boys were, in chiefest request; Publius Mimus, of
Syria, is famous: Syrians, and Mores, were Augustus his playfellowes; Suetonius
( in Augusto, cap. 83.) the Epigrammatists intemperate lust preferred the
Egyptian boy ( Marcial (4.42.) Niliacis primum puer hic nascatur in oris,
Nequitias tellus scit dare nulla magis:
that is, Let my lewd Catamyte be borne on Nilus banks,
No nation has such witty, wanton, damned pranke.


A sweet commendation of Egypt; but such lips, such lettuce: Seneca ( Epist.
47.) superbissima consuetudo, coenantem Dominum stantium servorum turba
circundat; -- Cum ad coenandum discumbimus, alius; sputa detergit; alius,
reliquias temulentorum subditus colligit; alius pretiosas aves scindit, pectus,
and clunes (certis ductibus circumferens eruditam manum) in frusta excutit;
infelix, qui huic uni rei vivit, ut altilia decenter secet; nisi quod miserior
est, qui hoc, voluptatis causa, docet: quam, qui necessitatis, discit; alius
vini minister, in muliebrem modum ornatus, cum aetate luctatur; effugit
pueritia, sed retrahitur; that is, It Is a most insolent custom, that a company
of Servingmen, must stand round about the Table, waiting upon their Master,
whilst he sits at Supper: when we are set down to Supper, then one (forsooth)
must tread-out our spitting, and spawling; another must take up that, which the
drunkards have let fall under table; another carves up the costly fowls (and)
carrying about his cunning hand, this way, and that way, disjoynts the legs,
and the wings; unhappy wretch! who was borne, for none other purpose, but to a
cunning Carver; only of the two, he is the more wretched, who does teach it,
for pleasures sake, more than he, that learnes it, because of necessity;
another waytes on his Master, to attend him with wine; and he (forsooth) must
be attired, like a Virginella, that so he may seem young; and contend with
age; his youth is past; but he would feign (if it were possible) draw it back
again: he intimates also the censors of the guests; and obsonatores, quibus
dominici palati notitia subtilis est. To them were added Tasters, and carvers,
and analectae servi; which took up the remainders of Supper; or, the things,
which fell from the board; more than one Analect; whereas almost the meanest
householder, had one, or more, to tend on him, at Feasts; we cannot imagine,
that our blessed Savior, and twelve others, of his Apostles, were without some
Administrants. It must be acknowledged, that as it is not impossible; so it is
very improbable, that thirteen discumbing should serve themselves without any
other assistants; we can hardly suppose such a thing, at our Refections; which
yet were, and are more commodious, for such ministerial subserviency, then the
discubitory beds of the Jews, or Romans, especially on their feasting days:
and yet more especially, on this great Feast; by how much sitting with shoes
on, they can sooner, aptlier, and easier stand, and go from place to place;
and move, or bring any thing to the Table, or carry and remove any thing from
it; then they could, on discubitory beds; whence it was harder to arise, and
more cumbersome to address them, and put on their shoes, if not their
clothes also. When our Savior arose, to wash his Apostles feet, observe the
preparation specialized (besides, what was omitted, as putting on of Sandals,
or the like) He rises from Supper; He laid aside his garments; he took a
towell, and with it he girded himself, Ioh. 13.4.5. and, after he had washed
their feet, he took his garments (put them on) and did sit down.

PAR. 7.
THe Jews were appointed, to have a company of the younger, and inferior sort
to ask questions, and hear the Rememorative Table-talke; but, this was a
fixed Ceremony; and therefore Christ omitted it not; and whom should he have,
in all likelihood, but some of his 72. Disciples? For they were as children, in
comparison of the Apostles, who were as fathers. Our Savior himself
mentions two distinct sorts, at the Table, at that Table; one greater, that
sits at meat, and one that does serve, Luke 22.27. and yet, even the
Servitors were esteemed, and called by Crassus: the animated instruments of
household affairs; Comiter servum in sermonem admit, and in consilium; and in
convictum, amicum invenies; Seneca ( Epist. 47.) Be affable to thy servant, in
thy common discourses, in thy counsel, at meat, and meal; and thou shall
indeere him unto thee, and make him thy friend. Some servants have been, even
to wonder, faithful, and careful of their Masters; and have voluntarily shed
their own blood, for them: So was Eros to Antonius; and in the times of the
great proscriptions, many more: Naamans both maidservants, 2 King. 5.3. and
his menservants, ibid. ver. 13. gave him better advice, than himself; and
being followed, proved benificiall to him above expectation. Virtue known, and
always steadfast, draws on the love of all bystanders, as the loadstone
attracteth iron; and if it breed love in others, it raises admiration in
servants. They who behold the divine worth, the glory of the Creator, the love
of the Redeemer, and the sweet refreshing of the Comforter; and see it, as it
were, but a far-off, cannot be so ravished with it, as Gods sons, and servants,
who daily discern it, and feel warmer flames of zeal, piety, and
conformity, to the divine will: O Lord, I am thy servant, I admire and love
thee for thy self; and in my most rectified reason, acknowledge thee, the
chiefest good, the only good, such a good, as (if it were in my power) I would
not alter, nor wish any way altered; I meekely praise thee, for being as thou
art; for thou continuest such, as nothing can be imagined better; either, in it
self, or in the common, eating its goodness, of which I have found manifest
experience; and therefore, among other things;

The Prayer.
MY God, my God, I humbly bless thee, that thou have prolonged my life, and
sent me such a portion of health; that I have made an end of this first Book;
and I entirely desire thy fatherly goodness, to continue thy gracious favors
unto me; that the rest of those Works, which I have undertaken to declare thy
truth; may be also accomplished, and published; and that thereby thy great name
may be glorified, and the souls of the Readers, and my self edified; and
that, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

PAR. 8.
BEhold then the Sum of all, that has been delivered by me, as in a Picture.

A fair upper-Chamber well furnished.

A Table almost foure-square in it, decently adorned.

Three Bedsteeds, with their furniture; one on each of the three sides of the
Table (the fourth side standing uniclosed, and open) on which, they might
either sit; or, lie down; but most probably, they sat, and lay not down, at
the Passover; which was, in a short time, dispatched; for, the first Supper
was quickly ended; in the first Passover, were no such discubitory-beds.

Our Savior, and the Apostles washing.

After washing.

Unleavened bread brought in.
A Lamb.
An unspotted one.
A male Lamb.
Under a year old, served in, in one dish.
Sour herbs were also set on the Table: in all likelihood, salt; it being the
general Condiment. All Consecrated, as well as the wine.
The number of the recipients was thirteen; Christ and the twelve Apostles.
All of the Jewish Church.
This was all done, on the first month of the Jewish year.
On the fourteenth day of that month.
Between the two Evenings.
At Jerusalem.
In one House.
The Lamb was dressed whole. Roast with fire,

Not eaten green, or rawish; but thoroughly roasted.
No part sodden with water.
The Head with the legs, altogether.
And with the purtenance, altogether.
So was it eaten; and

A bone not broken.
No part of the flesh earried out of the House.
The Table-talke of our Savior, equal in goodness; if not better, than was
commonly appointed.
No part of the flesh left till morning: Or,
If any was left, it was burnt with fire.
The Servitors, or Attendants.
No certainty, who they were.
In likelihood, some of the Seventy; (the 70. defended) Or,
Some of that household, where our Savior Supped.
BEnedictus sit Deus, qui dat lasso virtutem, and cui non sunt vires robur,
multiplicat! As it is in the end of the Logique, of wise Rabbi Simeon,
latinized by Sebastian Munster.

(...)
TRICOENIVM CHRISTI, WHEREIN IS HANDLED THE SECOND SVPPER OF OUR LORD.

LIBER SECUNDUS.

Explained by EDWARD KELLETT, Doctor of Divinity, Canon of Exeter.

NOSCE TE IPSVM NE QVID NIMIS LOVE AND LYVE D

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes, for Andrew Crook at the green Dragon in
Saint Paul's Church yard. 1641.

THE ANALYSIS OF THE SECOND BOOK.
The second, or common Supper was the second general part of my method. Herein
consider 1. The Praelibanda or convenie^t points preceding: and they are these
1. The temperance of our Savior and of his Apostles, though they were at three
Suppers. 2. what, each of the four several Evangelists wrote of the several
three Suppers. 3. Why there is no express and literal mention of a second
Supper.
2. The proofs that there was appointed a second Supper at the Jewish
Passover from the 1. Old Testament and the Rabbis. 2. New Testament. 3.
Fathers. 4. Protestants. 5. Papists.
3. That Christ was at it. Where observe 1. When this second Supper begun. 2.
What was said and done in it. 3. When it ended. 4. Whether Judas partaked of
the sacred Eucharist, when he took the Sop.
4. The Concomitants or Subsequent Occurrences are these 1. Satan's entrance
into Judas. 2. Christ's sentence of separation of Judas. That thou do, do
Quickly. 3. The Apostles Nesciencie. 4. Their misunderstanding of Christ his
words. 5. Judas his egresse and the time. 6. Giving of thanks at the end of the
second Supper. 7. A Grace-Cup. 8. A Psalmodie.



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE TRICAENIVM CHRISTI; WHEREIN IS HANDLED THE SECOND
SVPPER.
The first Branch of the first Particular of the first General.
LIB. II. CHAP. 1. The Contents of the first Chapter.
1. Three premises.

2. Christ's, and his Apostles Temperancie.

3. The Paschall Supper a Sacrament Type of the New Old Testament. Christ ate
of the three Suppers sparingly.

4. Christ did seldom eat flesh, Christ ate Butter and Honey. Christ's
knowledge to refuse the Evil and choose the Good: The words Ad scire ipsum
interpreted.

5. The Jews blasphemy against Christ.

The words Emmanuel Samuel whence derived.

That Christ was God proved from Scriptures Rabbis and The word Emmanuel.

Difference between Emmanuel and Samuel.

6. The Jews blasphemy against Christ's Mother.

7. Christ borne according to the Scriptures: Borne of a Woman, not of a Girl.
The Nobility of Christ's Birth wherein it consisted.

8. Christ a Stone.

9. Gnalam, or Glialam: and Gnelem what it signifies.

10. Emmanuel. Jesus. is a name of Nature. Imposition.

11. Mary a Virgin; Arons Rod; Christ borne of a Virgin by Miracle; A threefold
Union in Christ.

12. Christ made but one meal in one day. The aspersion of Gluttony, in him
rejected. Christ fasted, even to a miracle: often times. Christ as God knew all
things.

13. Why Christ sought fruit on the Figtree? How Christ seemed ignorant of many
things. Admiration is of doubtful and great things.

In Christ a threefold knowledge: Divine: Infused: Experimental. How Christ is
said to wonder: No man's knowledge ever equal to Christ's.

14. Why Christ cursed the Figtree?

15. Christ's hunger, rather Volentary then necessary: Christ under-prised
Temporal food in respect of Spiritual. Christ's abstinence from flesh.

16. Difference between Christ's Eating before his Death.

A double Digestion after his Resurrection.

A Prayer.
MOst holy Lord God my gracious Father the life of my body, the light of my
soul, I do most humbly beg at thy Mercy seat, that thou will vouchsafe to
guide a poor penitent ignorant wretch in the way of truth: O keep me from
error, and sharpen my desires to love thee, to fear thee: and through all
obstacles, to search and find thy divine verities. Amen.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
ANd yet once more, before I particularly handle the Second Supper, with its
Concomitants, I must premise some necessary matters: to prevent the Cavillous
objections of Adversaries.

1. The first concerns the temperancie, and abstemiousnesse of Christ himself
and his Apostles, which seems to be disproved from the threefold Supper, at
which all they were, and all partakers of, in good likelihood.

2. The second is a Disquisition, what several Evangelists wrote of the
seve^rall Suppers; and this chalketh out a way to avoid confusion.

3. The third point of inquiry is, Why there is no express mention of a
Second Supper.

PAR. 2.
TO the first point; Because enemies to Christ and his Religion; and Epicurean
Libertines who make their belly their god, and live to eat; and eat to
drink: and indeed whose Bibere is (more then in pronunciation) Vivere: I say,
because they are likely to say, concerning our blessed Savior; Is this that
immaculate Lamb of God, void both of Original and Actual sin? Is this He
whom ye believe to have fasted forty days and forty nights? and yet cannot
one Supper content him? No nor the second Supper, but was at three Suppers in
one night? Fabius Gurges grew not to that height of ingurgitation: No Grecian,
no Roman, no Effeminate Asiatique in one night ate of three Suppers: Nor the
Rich man, though he fared deliciously every day. It is not for nothing that
they of his own time said: Matt. 11.19. Behold a man gluttonous and a wine
bibber. And himself confessed, He came eating and drinking.

PAR. 3.
I Answer, The first Supper was only a Sacrament of the Old Testament, and
Type of the New Testament; whereof they ate but sparingly. For sacred morsels
were never intended to be fill-bellies.

At the second Supper, he might eat a little. We read not expressly that he
ate much; discourse, and the works of mercy, humbleness, good advice, and
the clear manifestation of the Traitor was the meat he then principally ate,
for ought that can be discerned, or is revealed in terminis. But collectively
and inferentially thus. 1. Cor. 11, 25. He took the Cup. Beza indeed has it,
postquam coenati sunt: after they had supped: and the Arabic, postquam
sumpsissent coenam suam: after they had received their Supper; Christ and his
Apostles together: but Tremellius renders it from the Syriac, viz. postquam
coenasset in the singular: When He had supped. Therefore he did eat and sup,
and was not only a beholder. He that eats bread with me has lift up his
heel against me. John 13.18. which words were spoken of Christ and Judas, and
are applied to them. Therefore in probabilite, then he did eat, and ate with
Judas himself: But this was at the second Supper. For one Supper was ended.
John 13.2. (and that was the Paschall) before Saint John began his large
discourse in the same Chapter.

The third Supper being the most blessed Sacrament of the New Testament, had
only a little bread, and a little wine (which they did rather taste of, then
take in great quantity) and does wipe off the aspersion of Gluttony, or
Drunkenness, or of any kind of Intemperancie in meat and drink. Thus
again, Never was any found fault withal, who ate but little of the Paschall
Lamb. And lest any should force himself to eat too much, the remainders (how
great in quantity soever they were) were commanded to be burnt. Never were a
whole company or family commanded to eat all, and every part of the Paschall
Lamb; so that nothing was to be left. A mind spiritually elevated, at holy
feasts, little esteems muchnesse of eating and drinking.

Sure it is, that what Christ with desire desired to eat, viz. the Passover;
he did eat it; he was not frustrated in his desires; and the prosperous means
led him on fairly, to the end of his intentions. The Passover was prepared
for Christ. Mat. 26.17. Where will Thou that we prepare for Thee to cate the
Passover? Mark 14.12. Where will Thou, that we go, and prepare, that Thou
may eat the Passover? Thou principally. For Thee, emphatically. Therefore
we must say, He did eat part. Besides, He said, I will not any more eat
thereof. Luke 22.16. Therefore He did then eat of it, or else the speech were
improper. When He dipped in the dish. Mat. 26.23. He dipped with intent to
take up something, and to eat of it.

That He ate much of the Paschall Lamb, and sower Herbs, I wholly deny. And
clearly, there are more passages, to prove the Apostles eating at the
Passover, then our Saviors: As they sat and did eat Mark 14.18. (Jesus fell
to discourse) as they did eat, He said, Verily, etc. Mat. 26.21. In both these
places, the words are spoken exclusively, concerning Christ. As if it had been
said, He was none of them, that at that instant did eat. Whilst they did eat,
Christ did not. At those speeches He ate not.

In conclusion; Of the Paschall Supper, He neither ate much, nor nothing; His
end approaching, and He knowing the wonderful pains He was to endure, He had
little stomach to eat much. Yet duty and Religion both sharpened his desire to
eat some, and his actuall-orall-manducation followed.

Concerning the second Supper, it cannot be proved, that He did partake much of
it; nor is there any great likelihood for it. For, He was tronbled in Spirit.
John 13.21. And such have no great appetite to their victuals. Indeed He took
a sop, and dipped it; and gave it to Judas. John 13.26. But there is altum
silentium, not a word concerning his own free eating of any thing largely, in
this second Supper. Therefore no imputation of intemperancie can fasten hold on
him.

So in the third Supper, the Scripture mentions not, either that he did, or
did not eat. And many think He gave it, and administered it; but are not of
it himself; though I opine, He did taste of both kinds. But of this hereafter.

This suffices to clear our blessed Savior from any shadow of excess at
any, or at all of these three Suppers in one night. The phrase of three Suppers
in one night, sounding in some men's ears very profanely; but being in truth
far more holy, then only one ordinary Supper of civil men.

PAR. 4.
TO the other parts of the Epicureans exception, who would willingly shelter
themselves under our Saviors example, that they might be intemperate
lawfully: I answer; that when I have produced what I can, to show our blessed
Saviors most temperate behavior; I doubt not but any different man will say,
that Christ went beyond all that ever were renowned in Heathen story, for their
moderation in meats and drinks.

First we read not that Christ ever tasted of any flesh, nor can it be evinced
by deduction mediate, or immediate, except only when He as well as all others
were commanded to eat, when He are the Passover, or was at the great Feast
appointed in the Law, though He were at many Feasts, made for his sake, both by
his Disciples and other Jews, and partaked of them; Yet I doubt not but He was
left to choose his own diet. So it is only probable, not certain, that He are
of flesh at any civil Feasts, Esay^^ 15, it was fore-prophecied of him: Butter
and Honey shall be eat; And sure He did so. But what is the meaning of the
following words? That he may know to refuse the evil and to choose the good. I
answer, The words in the Original are, Ad scire ipsum; as Montanus on Esaias
has it in his Comment; or as it is in the Interlineary, Adsciendum ipsum
reprobare in malo, and eligere in bono; And the word [ That] is not mere
finale nor causale, as if Butter, and Honey, or the eating thereof made one
wise, or knowing, rather his knowledge made him eat Butter and Honey; but
ostentionale or discretivum; as if it had been said, other young children
choose not their meat by discretion, but take whatsoever is given them, But if
any should offer any bad meat to Christ, He shall refuse it: if they offer
good, He shall take it: He shall have that knowledge being a child, that others
shall not have at a fair age. Butter and Honey shall He eat: noisome things
He shall avoid. I have eaten my Hony-combe with my Honey: I have drunk my Wine
with my Milk, (says Christ) Cant. 5.1. Butter, Honey, and Hony-combe, Milk,
and Wine, were fore-prophecied food, and are the most agreeable things to the
nature of Infants.

Or this way; The words Adsciendum or ad scire, in Latin may be interpreted;
Butter and Honey shall He eat; that ye may know, He chooses the Good and
refuses the Evil. The knowledge of Good and Evil, which Adam and Eve had not
in their Innocence, Christ had in his Infancy. By this choice and refusal it
might be discerned: He had a prerogative above all other children; for God was
with him: and his name was Emmanuel, verse. 14. He knew all things, ab instanti
Conceptionis, says the School, as soon as ever He was conceived in the
womb. See Gregory de Valentia Tom, 4. page 254. But the Hebrew will not bear
this exposition; nor the Greek nor English.

It ever digression merited pardon, I hope the next will.

PAR. 5.
THe accursed Jews do blasphmously declaym against our most blessed Savior,
against his most holy Mother; against religious Joseph, calling them by most
odious false names, which you may read in Munster, in his Annotations on the
first Chapter of S. Matthew, toward the beginning; you shall not in my
writings: Especially they laugh at us, for proving Christ to be God, from the
word Emmanuel. Then (say they) Samuel is a God; for the word Samuel signifies,
Nomen ejus Deus i.e. His name is God. Read the answer in Munster, even from
Rabbi Kimhi, I meddle not with that.

Others derive the word Shemuel from Shaal, which signifies to ask: (...)
keeping only the first radical from it. Secondly, from Min, or of the
praposition. Thirdly, from the Pronoune Affix, which is rendered, Him: and
fourthly, from El, betokening God, I have asked him of God; and how is Samuel
to be called a God, as the Jews say, from this his name? When he was called
Samuel, because I had asked him of the Lord, as his Mother said, 1. Sam. 1.20.
is all that is asked of God, and obtained from God, God himself?

But setting aside uncertain nicities of the Jews, this I say: We have many
more proofs both from Scriptures, and the Rabbis themselves, that the Messiah
was to be God, besides the firm argument from the word Emmanuel.

Secondly, I say; There was a maine difference between our glorious Savior,
and his Mother; and between Hannah the Mother of Samuel, and himself. For
Hannah was married, and had long, and much company of her husband; and was
beloved of him more then the fruitful Peninnah. 1. Sam. 1.5. And no Rabbin
ever held Samuel to be a God, whose Father and Mother were so notably known:
which much varieth the case between the two children. The rather also, because
the spirit of God, by the Jews confession set the name of Emmanuel upon
Christ. But Hannah, or Elkanah, on humane consideration entitled the child
Samuel.

PR. 6.
BUt their more particular belchings against Christ, and his Mother, are in
show more pithy, sharp-pointed, vivid, and specious unto any ignorant man, or
ill-aff^cted unto Christ; whilst thus they object, as it is in the first
Chapter of Saint Matthew in Hebrew, and the Annotations of Munster on it,
saying: Quale novum est, quod puella fit gravida, juxta morem universae terrae
per copulam viri? What new thing is this; That a Virgin should be with child,
by copulation with a man, according to the manner of all flesh? And thus again
they rave, in Munsters Annotations on the second chapter of Saint Matthew. Si
juxta verba vestra natus est (Christus) sine patre; quare ostendit vim suam in
filia tredecum annorum, quae apla erat conceptui, and partui? Potius ostendere
debuit potentiam suam in s^liatrium, aut quatuor annorum, quae non est apta
conceptui: and tunc potuisset mundus cognoscere signum illud novum, est a
saeculo inauditum. If according to your own words, Christ were borne without a
Father; Why did he show forth his power in a daughter of thirteen years of
age, which was apt for conception, and child bearing: He ought rather to have
showed his power in a daughter of three or four years old, which was not apt
for conception: And then might the world have known that New-Signe, which was
not heard of from the beginning of the world? Munster says, he answered the
Jews in Hebrew. Abunde magnum signum esse, Nasci de Virgin, juxta Propheitam
illam Esaiae, Ecce Virgo impregnata pariet filium. It is a wonder strange
enough, to be borne of a Virgin, according to that Prophecy of the Prophet
Esaiah: Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a sonne^ Let me enlarge his
too concise answer, thus: or rather to declare mine own answer, to the
blind-folded, yea blind Jews. Shall Christ be borne according to the fancies
of man, or according to the will of God? What Christ said to them, I wish they
would observe John 5.39. Search the Scriptures: and they are they which
testify of me. The very manner of his suffering and resurrection, was
fore-prophesied, Luk: 24.46. Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to
suffer: And, All things must be fulfilled, which was written in the law of
Moses, and in the Prophets and in the Psalms concerning me, verse. 44.
especially concerning Christ's Incarnation, and his Birth, All this was done,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying,
Behold a Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and his
name shall be called Emmannel, which being interpreted is GOD WITH US, Mat.
1.22. and 23. verse.

I resume mine old Quaere; and turn it into this Thesis, Christ was not to be
borne according to the humerous discourses, or partial reason of man; but
according to the Scriptures, and the fore-running prophesies, dictated unto
holy men by God himself, This is a ground work, on which both Jews and
Christians do build, and is confessed by all. The denial of this Thesis
prefers man's judgment before the wisdom of God: and floting imaginations
of silly ignorants, before the stable power, and perfection of Holy Scripture.
Let us now assume: But the Prophets no where foretold, that Christ was to be
borne of a young Girl, or child of three years or four, as the Jewish
argument would enforce; But the heavenly inspired Scriptures, did fore-divine,
that Christ should be borne of a Virgin of ripe years, (...)
of a woman fit for so great a work, rather than an unfit infant. Let us come
to the Prophet Jeremy 31.22. Foemina circundabit virum: A woman shall compass
a man. Nekebak (with Koph) is not taken any where pro puellula: for a young
wench of three or four years of age: but for a female of ripe years (...)
and Nekebah, foeminam woman, in adulta: viz. aetate, in a ripe age. Genesis 1.27.
If a man would reason against God, according as the Jews do, against both him
and Christ: One might say; It had been a great wonder indeed, if Adams wife
had been but three or four years of age, and had brought him forth children.
But we may more truly say concerning both Eve, and the blessed mother of our
Lord, Gods will was his law: what he decreed, was performed: what was
performed, was best of all; what God spoke before by his holy Prophets, must be
accomplished, however the folly of man, would seem to project better courses.

Whereas the Jews object: God has created a new thing in the earth: A woman
shall compass a man; and most carnally and cursedly say: Is this a New thing
for a woman to be with child? It is the ordinariest, and commonest matter in
the world.

I answer. These obstinate Jews consider not, that the novelty consists not
in this, that a woman was with child: but this was the greatest new thing in
the world, that a virgin without the help of a man should be with child. Adam
came into the world without the help either of man or woman; Eve of a man
without any aid from any woman: other men not without the help both of man
and woman: The Newest thing, the greatest wonder was, Christ was to come, and
did come of a pure Virgin without the help of Man.

PAR. 8.
A Second Prophet divinely describes him, calling him the stone that was cut
out without hands, Dan. 2.34. that was cut out of the mountains without hands.
v. 45. a stone he is called otherwhere, a living stone. 1 Pet. 2.4. A chief
corner stone, elect and precious, a tried stone; a sure foundation, Esaias 28.16.
Christ's holy mother may be called a Mountain, a fruitful Mountain for us;
from which this stone was taken without hands, or the aid of man; not without
the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost. She was Virgo a viro, virgo a part^s,
semper virgo. Avirgin free from a man; a virgin after she had brought forth a
man, always a virgin* maugre the hellish opposition of the Jews. Virgo
concipies, virgo pariet, Virgo qua virgo. A Virgin shall conceive, a Virgin
shall bring forth, a Virgin, a true Virgin.

PAR. 9.
YEa, but say the Jews Gnalmah, does not signify a virgin. (...)


I answer, 1 challenging them to show a place where it means a female young
child, or a gristle of three or four years old, as they expound it; and
therefore say that Christ should have been borne of such a childish girl, if
God would show his extraordinary power: Gnelem, (...)
is constantly taken for a youth, or stripling, not for a tender bread and
butter boy, of three or four years, unable to put on his own clothes. 1 Samuel
20.35. Jonathan took a little lad with him, yet was he not so little or young,
as a trimulus or quadrimulus: but a Lad of fourteen or fifteen years, or
thereabouts, a pretty page; for Jonathan gave his Artillery to the Lad, and
said, Go carry them to the City, verse 40. which a small child could not do.
So Gnalmah, is commonly taken for a Virgin, (...)
or Woman about twelve years of age, or more. in annis adolescentiae virgo, a
virgin in the years of her youth. Exodus 2.4, 5. Moses his sister, who was to
watch the motion of the Arc of bulrushes, is called Gnalmah. But a child of
three or four years of age could never so handsomely have insinuated her
self into the company of Pharaoh his daughter; nor have wrought her mothers
and her own desires, and her brothers good, so ingeniouslie, so suddenly,
capiens consilium e're nata: cooperating with so fair an opportunity. Who would
trust so little a child with so great a matter, as for to negotiate for the
life of a child, and to prevent the effusion of blood? She had been impar
negotio; unfit for such a business, if she had been so young, and infrarem
commissam: unworthy for so great a charge.

Again, Genesis 24.43. Rebekah was able to draw water out of a well, which is no
work for small children, especially to satisfy both man and beasts,
especially the vast camels, which when they do drink, drink very much, yet
she is called Gnalmah; a virgin, fair, very fair: neither had any man known
her, (says the Spirit of God) verse. 16. implying she might have been known
before, as a little while after she was known by man, in holy wedlock. The
pitcher also on her shoulder probablizeth, that it was a great pitcher, greater
than little payles carried in women's hands: and so unfit to be borne by a girl
of four years. See more in Pagnine, who cites to this purpose Gnalmah, being
used for a full grown virgin, Prove. 30.19. Cant. 1.3. and other places.

The Prophet Esaias by that word, and virginem, and adolesculam aetaie,
parituram veluit dicere* did mean a virgin: a young one, yet so old; that she
might be fit to bring forth a child. If he had called her Bethulah, and only
so, status tantum, non etiam aetatis, nomen fuisset: it had been a name only
of condition, and not of age: it might have betokened a very young virgin. But
let any show me any one place, where ever Gnalmah was used for a Virgin under
five years. I confess a child may be said to be, foemina, a woman; as
foemina, a woman, is opposed to mas a man* and a child of two years of age,
may be said to be Virgo a Virgin: as Virgo a Virgin, is opposed to Marita, or
Maritata, a married Woman, or Vxor, a Wife; or Concubina, a Concubine: but so
it is not here. The conclusion then is this. Let Christ be borne, (as was
foretold by Jeremy, and Esaias he must be borne) of a pure Virgin; nubilis,
marriageable, and fit for such a work, and might not be borne of a child of
three or four years.

PAR. 10.
I Hope I have stopped the mouths of the barking Jews. May I now proceed. Yet
two or three things I must add out of Porchetus his victory against the
Hebrews: Part. 2. c. 14. fol. 81. De virginitate Matris Dei: whereas the Jews
object, that Christ's holy mother never called him Emmanuel, but Jesus: and tota
Christianitas, all Christendom calls him Jesus, and not Emmannel: Porchetus
answers, aliud est nomen naturae, aliud impositionis: the name of nature is
one thing; and the name of imposition another, For Nature giving a form, gives
a name, as the name of Man is man, for he is called a man from the nature of
man, which he does participate. So the Messiah our Lord Jesus Christ is called
Emmanuel; that is, God is with us: and is called GOD and man, by the Holy
Spirit, and his Mother; and is so believed of all Christians; because he
partaked of two Natures; the Divine, and the Humane. But Jesus was the name of
our Savior, secundum impositionem; by imposition: Emmanuel, and other names,
according to the condition of both Natures* and so nothing is amiss. Again,
they sometimes called him one name, sometimes another: Andrew calls him
Messiah: John 1.41. Peter called him Jesus, Act. 2.22. and singly Christ. Act.
2.30, 31. and Jesus Christ of Nazareth, Act. 3.6. and the same Jesus, is both
Lord and Christ, Act. 2.^6. That Jesus is the Christ, the son of God, says
John 20.31. He was called sometimes God, sometimes Lord: Thomas styled him,
His Lord and his God: John 20.28. Thou shall call his name Jesus, says the
Angel to the blessed Virgin, Mat. 1.21. and they shall call his name Emmanuel;
says the same Angel. verse. 23. or his name shall be called Emmanuel, as others
translate it: how was this Angelical prediction fulfilled, if they did not
sometimes call him Emmanuel, God? Angels do not prophecy false things.

PAR. 11.
THe second is out of Mahomets Alcoran. Mary said, how shall I have a child,
when a man has not touched me? nor have I been lascivious; The Angel from
God answered, This is easy for me, both to make a miracle for men, and mercy
from my self. And so it came to pass, she kept her self chaste; Et
insufflavimus in eum de spiritu nostro: and we breathed into him of our
Spirit, says God: So much Mahomet himself confesses. When the Devil
speaks truth, will the Jew continue incredulous?

Ebi Horarai the fellow of Mahomet, heard Mahomet say; None is borne whom Satan
touches not, when he is borne; and therefore the child cries; except Mary and
her Son. Much more he adds to good purpose, as that May (as a Virgin)
brought forth a Savior, etc. But the words of Saint Augustine, cited by
Porchetus, page 87. are worth the transcribing. The rod of Aron against the
universal laws of Nature, did fitly or conveniently bring forth Almonds,
which neither came from seed nor root: Shall a stick or rod contrary to
nature bring forth fruit; and may not an holy Virgin against nature at the
command of God, bring forth a Son? Let the incredulous Jew show me, how a
dry and withered rod did flourish, bear leaves, and fruit, ripe fruit: and I
will show him how a Virgin may bring forth the Son of God. Let them think of
Sarah their mother, who was old, and well stricken in age: Genesis 18.11. and it
ceased to be with her after the manner of women, for she was 90. years old ere
a Son was promised, Genesis 17.17. But is any thing too hard for the Lord? Genesis
18, 14.

The Jews believe (says Porchetus) that Eve was created of the body of Adam:
but they say, this was miraculous, according to the disposition of the Divine
will. We say the same concerning the Na^ivitie of Christ by a Virgin. The
course of Nature is not to be enquired after in the Divine will. For Moses his
rod, against the course of Nature, by the will of God, did with a touch divide
the Sea. What Moses saw in a bush burning, and not consuming: what was showed
to Aaron in a dry rod flourishing: what to Gedoen in his wool, and the dew:
Solomon saw plainly in the strong woman: Jeremy more^ plainly fore-tels of a
woman, and a man compassed, I say as most apparently speaks of a Virgin, and
God: till Gabriel presented it really at the Salutation. So far Porchetus:
and so he ends that chapter. But I will end with Simon de Cassia 1.2. Quibus
anthoribus, quibus ministris fuit incarnatio? Who was Author, who were
ministers at Christ's Incarnation? The Father sent, the Holy Ghost overshadowed,
the Son descended: an Angel foretold: Mary agreed: So in the Virgins womb,
the increated Word, the Eternal Word, the Word with the Father, the Word in
the Father, the Word from the Father, and with the Father ineffable,
incomprehensible, incircumscriptible, was made flesh, flesh of flesh, in the
flesh, among flesh, below flesh, besides flesh, against the flesh (he might
well have added) above the flesh, in that instant when Mary said, Be it unto
me according to thy Word. Luk 1.37.

Nature changed her course. There was but one: a Mother, and a Virgin: a God,
and a Man* Temporal and Eternal me^ in one; Old and New kissed one another.

In the same instant wherein Christ's soul was created, there was a three fold
Union, (says the same Simon) The Union of the Deity to the Soul: of the flesh
to the Soul: and of the Deity to the flesh. There was a Divine substance,
distinct in three persons; a spiritual substance created with three powers or
faculties, and a bodily substance of the four Elements, which made one person:
as the three persons have one essence or substance: so these three forenamed
substances made one person of Christ. More I will not say, wonder will I more
and more: abhorring ever the Jews malignant reasonings, whilst they swallow
down other things above reason precontrary to it.

PAR. 12.
SEcondly, I read not that ever our holy Lord made above one meal in one day.
He did O'meale himself perpetually (so far as is likely) but when he fasted
he fasted wholly. His Disciples were gone to buy meat John 4.8. Sure it was he
was weary, weariness may come by fasting: Fasting breeds thirst: because the
natural heat by fasting feeds strongly on the radical humor.

Nor did Iudian the Apostata, who was a man of a spare diet, accuse our
Savior, as a Gurmandizer, so far as my memory carries it. Vidi monstrum in
natura (says Plato) hominem uno die bis saturum. I have seen a monstrous
thing in Nature; namely, that a man should make two meals in one day. None but
such as sin against the Holy Ghost will accuse Christ of such a sin; for
he did not glut himself at any time. As for their foul aspersion who said,
Behold a gluttonous man and a wine-bibber, it is no more to be esteemed, than
other their words, who said, Ioh. 8.48. He was a Samaritan, and had a Devil.
Or the Scribes scandal, who said, he had Beelzebub, and by the Prince of
Devils did cast out Devils, Mark. 3.22. It is good to be evil spoken of by
evil men, Ab iis laudari vituperari est (says Seneca) and it is
discommendation by such to be commended. But Wisdom is justified of her
children, Matt. 11.19. And with this fair sweet answer, or appeal from
malicious false wise men, Christ wipeth off the false imputation of gluttony,
and wine-bibbing, that it should not fasten on him.

I must boldly tell you my beleese concerning my most blessed Savior Jesus
Christ Saturivit uunquam: sitivit saepe: esurivit saepe, and usque ad
miraculum. When Christ did cast out the deaf, and the dumb spirit, and the
Apostles could not, because that kind could come forth by nothing but by
prayer and fasting, Mark. 9.29. Do not the words evince, that Christ did fast?
yea, fast much, when the Apostles did not fast? Belike our Savior had fasted
much before, for in the morning, as he returned into the city, He hungered,
Matt. 21.18. and came to a fig tree, and looked for figs on it, but found
none. And though Christ's words were only. Let no fruit grow on thee from
henceforth for ever. So that it might have grown many years, and bore
boughs, and leaves, and afforded shadow, notwithstanding the letter and words
of the curse: yet the earth denied sap, and juice, and sustenance to the roots:
the roots to the branches, and both heaven and earth conjoined to hasten it is
destruction: so that presently the fig tree withered away, yea the fig tree in
the morning, was dried up from the roots. Mark 11.20. If Calvin writ that
Christ knew not the tree afar off: or thought it to be another tree: or was
ignorant, that fruit was not on it, Calvin much forgot himself; and it
derogateth too much from our Saviors perfection. Even the day of judgment,
though he knew it not by any natural knowledge, discourse, or understanding,
no more then the Angels did: yet he knew it perfectly, as he was taught of God,
(which point the Angels knew not by any infused knowledge) for He knew the
Father, which is a far greater knowledge; And he was the wisdom of God, and
all the treasures of divine knowledge were hid in him.

Moreover he made all things, and was ever workman ignorant of his own wo^ke?
Quomodo rem aliquam ignor at ipsa sapientia (says Gregory Nazienzen) Ille
saeculorum factor -- ille rerum quae geruntur finis, ille ea, quae Dei sunt,
non minus cognoscens, quam spiritus hominis ea, quae in ipso sunt. How can
wisdom it self be ignorant of any thing? That maker of the world, that end of
all things, which are done here in this world; he that knows the things of
God, as well as the spirit of man knows the things that are in a man. Esaias
11.2. The spirit of wisdom and understanding shall rest upon him, the spirit
of counsel, the spirit of knowledge; verse. 3. He shall make him of quick
understanding, under which is comprised, Omne scibile, every thing that may be
known; All Theory, Wisdom reaches to the knowledge of all divine things,
understanding pierces into all Immaterials. The spirit of God searches out
all conclusions. To counsel belongs the understanding, rerum omnium
Agibilium: of all practical affairs and things Agible.

Whosoever desires a further examination of Christ's knowledge, let them consult
with the Schoolmen. Tertia part in Thomam Quaestionibus. 9.10.11.12. Amongst
other things he shall find that Christ knew Omnia singularia praesentia,
praeterita and futura, All and every particular thing, present, past, and to
come. And could he be ignorant what tree he saw? But of Christ's extraordinary
knowledge we spoke before.

PAR. 13.
IF any for Calvin do object, why came he thither to the^ tree^, and sought
fruit, if he knew there were no fruit on it? and why did he curse the tree,
when the time of Figs was not yet? Mark 11.13.

To the first I answer; He took an occasion to work a miracle: and by that
miracle to signify, that he would root out the Jewish Synagogue for not
bearing fruit. Indeed there are many places of Scripture, the resultance^
whereof may seem to be this: That Christ was ignorant of many things: For he
asked, John 21.5. Children have you any meat? If he knew it himself, what
need he ask them? So Luke 24.41. he enquired: Have ye here any meat? But
Disquisition is of matters doubtful, or unknown. And yet ere this mortality,
was swallowed up of immortality; and he had an incorruptible body, and a
beatified soul in a superlative degree (for he was risen from the dead)
Therefore, it seems this was spoken to confirm the doubtful.

Likewise in his natural life he seemed ignorant of diverse things which he
knew well enough; as when he said John 11.34. Where have you laid Lazarus?
which words from any other man had argued Nesciencie. So he said, John 5.6. to
him that had an infirmity, 38. verses. Will thou be made whole? When as both
Christ, and others knew; the man waited for it. Mark 7.18. Are ye so without
understanding also? He questioned what he knew, that they were without
understanding in that point. Mat. 22.20. Whose is this Image and
Superscription, says Christ; Yet knew he that before, and thence drew the
argument to reprove the Jews. Matthew. 22.12. How came thou in hither, not
having a wedding garment? Christ marvelled at the Centurions faith. Matthew
8.10. whereas no man uses to marve^ll at such things as are evident to his
knowledge.

As for Christ's words concerning the Centurion, I answer: First they were
spoken (says Aquin. 3. part. Quaest. 15.) as if the Centurions faith were
wonderful to other men; and in regard of other men's faith: Not in respect of
Christ himself. Let me add. Sure it is, that Christ infused that faith into
the Centurion, and therefore must needs know it: In the School terms take it
thus, Christ as God knew all things; Christ as Man, and considered as a
Comprehensor, had Cognitionem facialem, and was not ignorant: the same Christ
as he was Viator had knowledge infused, which was great: and acquired
knowledge also in matters experimental; Nor can he be blamed for having some
Nesciencie, since Ignorantia negativa non habet formale peccati: Negative
ignorance has not the formality of sin.

A second answer is, indeed commonly among men Admirans dubitat, He that
wondreth, doubts: Aristotle says so in the first of his Metaphysics. And
admiration grows from precedent Nescience; yet Christ's divine knowledge could
not wonder, nor his infused knowledge: but the experimental knowledge in
Christ might wonder. Thus did he learn obedience by the things he suffered,
Heb. 5.8. and therefore knew them not before.

Thirdly, Plato says, Admiramur proprie magna, we properly admire great
things. And therefore the Centurions faith being great, Christ is said to
wonder; Not as if any thing were strange to Christ: but because thereby He did
stir up those that followed him, to wonder at his faith: tacitly recommending
the like great faith unto them.

Fourthly, he is said to wonder, as he is said to be angry; not properly, but
per (...), or (...): assuming unto himself like passions of men, speaking of
himself as other men do, and as a wondering man does wonder indeed. Such an one
did Christ resemble, when it is said He wondered: Though his name shall be
called wonderful: Isaiah 9.6. (...): not (...). It is Admirabilis, not
Admirabundus, He is one to be wondered at; not one that did wonder. The object
of wonder to others, not the subject of wonder in himself. Wonderful,
Efficienter, efficiently; for He only does wonderful things. Psalm. 72.18. Not
wondering ignoranter, ignorantly, or ex antecedente Nescientia: and nupera
consecuta cognitione. Out of former antecedent Nesciencie, and newfound
knowledge. Again, though the rest of the forenamed Scriptures seem to imply
Christ's Nesciencie, yet indeed they do not: Christ was ignorant of nothing,
though he propounded many questions, for he questioned many matters, and seemed
a learner, whilst he intended to teach; and I am bold to say, that, nor
Solomon, nor Adam himself, nor the best, and skilfulest of men put to them,
could co-equall the knowledge of Christ. Lord thou know all things. John
21.17. When he said to his Apostles: How many loaves have ye? Go and see:
Mark 6.38. It is said indeed there, When they knew: which words argue, they
knew not before: But no such word is said of Christ. And when Christ said to
Philip, John 6.5. Whence shall we buy bread that these may eat? The holy
spirit incloseth it with a Parenthesis, verse. 6. This Christ said to prove
Philip: for He himself knew what he would do: Not only what He could do;
but what he would do also, nothing was, is hid from him. Hell is open:
destruction has no covering.

PAR. 14.
TO the second objection, to wit, Why He would curse the tree, for not bearing
fruit, when the time of ripe figs was not come.

I answer briefly, That Christ did not curse the tree in any anger: nor was the
tree sensible of the curse. Nor were the Jews accursed for not bringing forth
fruit before the due time. To say thus, were to wring blood out of the
Scriptures, and in every minute particular to expect a correspondencie with the
Type; Whereas we must rest content, when the maine intent holds.

And yet, if I should say, That our blessed Savior did cause the tree to
wither for not bearing fruit, though the time was not come: to intimate unto
us, That, if he were so severe against a plant, a tree, a mere vegetative
creature for not bearing fruit: it behooveth us reasonable men to bring forth
fruit, with all possible speed: since the time of bearing fruit is always
present with us: and there is none hour, but we may, we must do good; and,
if the holy spirit related, that the time was not come, to quicken us men; what
inconvenience arises? And so I part with this point.

PR. 15.
WHen Christ had fasted forty days and forty nights, He was afterward an
hungered: Matthew 4.2. Yet was he not so hungry as to tempt God: or to make
bread of stones, as he could have done. Wherefore God sent unto him, at the end
of the temptation, the help of Divine Servitors. They will not grudge the name.
Behold, Matthew 4.11. Angels came and ministered unto him; and no question
brought him food. Let Ravens wait on Elias: The Angels of Heaven joy to serve
Christ.

Jesus being wearied with his journey, said to the woman of Samaria, Give me to
drink; for his Disciples were gone away unto the City, to buy meat. John 4.6.
etc. we read that the woman left her water-pot, verse. 28. But that she drew
water for him, or that he drank we read not. It may be he did by the water, as
he did after by the meat, when they prayed him: Master eat, verse. 31. He said
unto them: I have meat to eat that ye know not of. verse. 32. And verse. 34.
My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. But
we read not that He did there eat. His hunger was rather voluntary than
necessary.

Temporal food he always under-prised in regard of the spiritual. John 6.27.
Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures
unto everlasting life. Matthew 6.25. Take no thought, what ye shall eat, or
what ye shall drink. John 21.4. When the morning was come, Jesus stood on the
shore, and said; Children, have ye any meat? In all likelihood Christ said so
to refresh his wearied Disciples; not for himself. For we do not read that he
then ate: but gave to them both bread and fish: verse. 13. So Luke 24.30. He
sat at meat with the two Apostles (that were going to Emmaus) and took bread
and blessed it, and brake and gave it to them. That himself did eat, I read
not, I believe not.

He that fed many thousands, are not then himself, for ought that is revealed:
He who was the Bread of Life, and heavenly Bread, and better then Manna, yet
often fasted. He thirsted also who cried out, If any man thirst, let him come
to me, and drink. The water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of
water springing up unto everlasting life. John 4.14. Indeed, Luke 24.41. he
enquired, Have ye here any meat? And they gave him a piece of a broyled fish,
and of an honey-combe. 42. And he took it and did eat before them. verse. 43.
Act. 10.41. We did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead.
Augustinus Epist. 49. Propter dubitantes cibum, and potum sumere voluit, non
semel, sed saepius, ne illum non corpus, sed spiritum esse arbitrarentur; and
sibi non solid, sed imaginaliter apparere. He received meat, and drink not
once alone, but oftentimes for their sakes that doubted; left they should
think him not to be a body, but a spirit: and that he did appear unto them
not indeed, but only in conceit. All this was done after his Resurrection,
and before his Ascension: And out of question, they did eat, and drink with
Him often, far oftener even in his natural life: Yet neither before his
death, nor after his Resurrection is there any demonstrative argument, that he
ate flesh, save only of the Paschall Lamb.

PAR. 16.
YEt is there a great diversity between his eating as he was a mortal man
before his death: and his eating after his Resurrection. Whilst he lived
amongst men, what he did eat, converted, as other men's meat does, into the
substance of his body, and nourished it: for, He was like unto us in all
things, sin only excepted. But after his Resurrection, as we are to know,
He did not eat phantastically: so He did not delude their senses: but did
orally and really.

And whatsoever He did then eat, turned not into any nutriment, became not
flesh, not blood, none was chymified, nor chylified; but consumed, or vanished;
Whatsoever Durandus Sentent: 3. Distinct: 2. Quaest. 6. ad 2. imagines to the
contrary.

Augustinus in his 49. Epist. to Deogratius, toward the beginning thus.
Christus post resurrectionem cibatus est: and legimus Angelos ejusmodi escas,
eodemque modo sumpsisse non ficto, and inam phantasmate: sed manifestissima
viritate: nec tamen necessitate sed potestate. Aliter enim absorbet terra aquam
sitiens, aliter solis radius candens. Illa indigentia: iste potentia. Futurae
resurrectionis corpus imperfectae foelicitatis erit, si cibos sumere non
potuerit: imperfectae foelicitatis, si cibis eguerit. Which is thus translated.
Christ did eat after his Resurrection; and we read that the Angels did eat
meat, and after the same manner, not in a fained and empty fantasy: but in
most apparent truth. Not by necessity: but by power. The thirsty ground drinks
up the water one way: the hot rays of the Sun consume it another way. That
through need, or want; This through power. A body after its Resurrection shall
have but imperfect felicity, if it cannot take meat: or if it stand in need
of meat. Let me add; or if it could not consume the meat in the passage,
before it come to any immutation, or any degree of concoction.

Some over-nicely distinguish a double digestion: The first reaching from the
lips, and mouth to the taste: The second digestion from the palate to the
ventricle, and so far (say they) the meat came: but I say, not so far: but
either was changed into some more subtle substance: or vanished as it were into
the air: or was consumed some other unknown way. But it was truly eaten.

The Prayer.
MOst glorious and blessed Savior, the more I think of thee, the more I love
thee: the more I search into thee, the more I adore thee. In all thy works
thou art wonderful, in all thy words powerful, in all thy thoughts most holy:
Frame me sweet Jesus! by little and little to be like unto thee, though I be
wounded with a crown of thorns, though I taste of the gall which was offered
thee: give me grace I beseech thee patiently to run through these or other
crosses, that thou may receive me into the Kingdom, and crown me with
some portion of glory. Amen.

CHAP. II. The second branch, of the first particular, of the first General.
The Contents of the second Chapter.
1. The ancient Romans ate four times in a day.

2. The Apostles temperancie in meat and drink. A double daily refection
allowed by God. The Apostles provision not costly.

3. The Disciples of Christ fasted often. The place Act. 27.33. cleared. The
word All in Scripture, often used for many.

4. Fasting much used in the old Testament.

5. Poenitentia Nineveb what it is. Hearty devotion the Salt of Religion. Why
the Ninivites made their beasts to fast.

PARAGRAPH. I.
MOre concerning Christ's temperancie I will not say. Let me say something also
concerning his most holy Apostles, but first a little of the Romans.

The Romans ate four times a day, I mean the youth, laboring men, travellors,
and sick people, as they were able. The first Refection Martial speaks of in
his Epigram.

Surgite jam vendit pueris jentacula pistor:
Cristataeque sonant undique lucis aves.
Awake, arise, hot Pudding-pies,
to the boys the Bakers sell.
And crested Cocks, like faithful Clocks,
the mornes approach foretell.
Some called this breakfast, prandiculum.

The second Refection, was prandium or Merenda: they two were all one (says
Festus) or diverse words of the same signification. Their dinners were short,
sparing, private; The whole day was time little enough for the busy active
Roman. The more Gentilely bred ate at the most but twice, as Hierom Mercurialis
variarum Lectionum, 4.17. and Aldus Manutius de Quaesit. paer Epist. lib. 1.
Epist. 4. proves from many old writers.

The third Supper, which of old, or at first they were wont to eat in
propatulo: in the open air, or sight of all men: In after times they invited
their friends to their private houses and chambers. Our men are wiser then the
Graecians, says Cicero, Epistol. ad Familiares. 9.24. The Graecians call these
Suppers, (...), or (...); compotationes, or concoenationes, drinkings together,
or suppings together. The Romans style them Convivia, as it were livings
together, quod tum maxim simul vivitur; because then especially men lived
together. In defense of the Graecians I might say, that the Hebrews also
excellently do call this Epularem congressum, this feasting of friends, from
their drinking: for, from Shatath, bibere to drink, a feast is named, Mishteh,
potatio, a drinking. In eating they mentioned not their friends: In their
drinking they did. Haman was called ad bibendum cum Regina, to drink with the
Queen. Ester. 7.1. that is ad Convivium, to feast (says Bolducus) on Job 1.
But of wine and sweet meats (say I) rather then of Shamble-meates or foul.
Yet must I needs join issue with Cicero in the same place, when he says to
Paetus; Extra jocum monco te, quod pertinere ad beat vivendum arbitror, ut cum
bonis viris, jucundis, amantibus tuis vivas. I would advise thee in good sober
sadness (which may much conduce to thy happiness,) that thou comfort thy
self with merry companions, and those that are thy true friends: nor do I
refer it to pleasure (mere pleasure) but to community of life, and repast,
and to the relaxation, and unbending of the mind; which is chiefly wrought by
familiar discourse, which is most sweet and comfortable at our refections with
our friends.

The Romans fourth meal was Commessatio, or postcoenium a rear supper, or
beover taken after supper, a night drinking. This tasted of superfluity, and
was not practiced of all; but was disliked by some, and them of the best sort.

The moderate use of meat and drink which was practiced by the Apostles, was
so well known, that they who accused our Savior himself, yet they accused
not the Apostles.

Indeed when the knowledge of languages was immediately and divinely infused
into the Christians, and when they spoke in diverse tongues wonderfully, the
wonderful works of God, other men mocking the Apostles said, Act. 2, 13. These
men are full of new wine, which being a foul imputation, Saint Peter wipeth it
off, saying: These are not drunk as ye suppose. verse. 15. And if there had
been any truth or likelihood of truth of any ones being drunk, that then was
there; yet it concerned other men, and not the Apostles, the auditors and not
the speakers. But the aspersion was laid on the Apostles only, and Saint Peter
intended not to defend any auditor, who were not accused; but as the malicious
Jews said, These men (meaning the Apostles) are drunk: the Apostle
contradicts saying, [these are not drunken] for the defense of others had
been impertinent when only the Apostles themselves had been charged home with
the fault. The Apostles all of them stood up with Peter (to defend themselves
from so foul a crime, and false fame spread concerning them) Act. 2.14.

The Raven brought Elijah bread, and wine in the morning, and bread and flesh
in the evening: 1 King. 17.6. Twice in a day God miraculously fed Elijah: and
the Ravens left off their ravenous nature, and twice a day ministered to the
Prophet. A double daily refection God allows: and if any one can prove that
the Apostles are twice in one day; I dare say, that he cannot prove that ever
they did eat a third time in one day: which inclines to excess.

Thy Disciples fast not (say the Disciples of John to Christ) Mat. 9.15. Christ
answers; Can the children of the Bride-chamber mourn, as long as the
Bridegroom is with them? Where Christ tacitly confesses, that in his
lifetime, his Disciples did not fast, as the Pharisees, or as the Disciples of
John did fast, viz. extraordinarily, so that the people took notice of it. and
yet assured them, that the time should come, when the Apostles should fast. For
all this we never read of any great provision that they ever had. We read,
they were an hungered, Mat. 12: 1: and did eat the very ears of corn, and
Christ pronounces them guiltless; verse: 7. Necessity and want was their just
excuse: as the parallel of David and his company shows and proves: Neither
when they had provision, was it very costly, but cheap, scant, ordinary, and
easy to be had. We have here but five loaves and two fishes, say his
Disciples, Matt. 14.17. and they were also Barley-bread, and two small fishes:
Ioh: 6.9. At another time their store was only, seven loaves, and a few
little fishes, Matthew. 15.34. And when he asked for meat, they gave him a piece
of broyled fish, and of an honey comb. Luke 24.41, 42. verses. Again he asked
his Disciples: Children have you any meat? and they answered him, No. Ioh.
21.5. And though hee^ kindled a miraculous fire: yet (only) fish was laid
thereon, and bread, verse. 9. this was but poor entertainment for the Lord of
Life, and for the company of so good, and gracious Disciples.

PAR. 3.
THe Disciples ministered unto the Lord, and fasted, Act. 13.2. and at the
Imposition of hands upon Barnabas and Saul, they fasted, verse 3. They did give
themselves to fasting and to prayer, at some especial times, 2 Corinthians. 7.5.
Anna (who also was a Disciple) served God with fasting and prayers night and
day. Luke 2.37. yet she lived not without sleep and some refections to
strengthen nature. Saint Paul was very patient in afflictions, necessities, and
distresses: in stripes, imprisonments, tumult, and labors, in watchings and
fastings. 2 Cor, 6.5. he was also in weariness, and painfulnesse: in
watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and
nakedness, 1 Cor. 11.27.

There is a strange place, Act. 27.33. This is the fourteenth day that ye have
tarried, and continued fasting, having taken nothing. Aqua vorax ( inquit
Hipocrates) quia voraces facit. As, Pallida mors, quia facit pallidos. The
water (says Hippocrates) is said to be devouring, because it makes devouring
men: as, death is called pale, because it makes men pale. They who travile by
sea, or the arms of it, or by great waters, know it, and that, not only the
holy Apostle Saint Paul, and his friends, but even the Edaces nautae, and dura
militum ilia, the hungry seamen, whom I have seen to eat heartily on cold
dried Poore-Iohns. tough-foody-souldiers, that any strong bodies, or strong
temperatures should suffer inediam and imbibesiam quarta decimana, hunger and
thirst for fourteen days together is impossible to Nature; therefore when it
is said, They continued fasting, having taken nothing: we must not either fly
to miraculous operations, or say, they kept no set meals (such as Mariners
use to take in calm weather) all these fourteen days, though they might now
and then snatch in a little to comfort Nature; and eating work, and working
^ate, even as by nature the dogs lap, and drink of Nilus, and for fear of
danger keep running all the while: or by a Scripture phrase, they are said,
not to eat, or drink, who are spare eaters, and spare drinkers. As it is said
of John the Baptist. Matthew. 11.18. John came neither eating nor drinking, and
yet his meat was locusts and wild honey. Matt. 3.4. And we may as well presume
he lived not without drink.

There is also another rule or two in Divinity, which inclines to the clearing
of this point. First, what is said to be done of many, is said to be done of
all. Absolon, and all the men of Israel said: 2 Samuel, 17.14, when indeed he
speaks only of the Counselors of war, or chief men that were with
Absolon. Secondly, what is done often, is said to be done always. Luke 24.53.
The Apostles were continually in the Temple: and yet they were in an
upper-roome. Act. 1.13. And were often otherwhere. So by the rule of
contraries, here they are said to take nothing; for they took it but seldom;
and took but a little, and took not any at all after their ordimary fashion.

PAR. 4.
IN the Old Testament they used much fasting, even wicked Ahab, 1 King. 21.27.
put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth: and because
Ahab did humble himself so before God, God did respite, and reprive his
punishment, verse. 29. The children of Israel being overthrown, Wept before the
Lord until evening, Judge. 20.27. And yet were overthrown the second time,
verse. 25. After, all the children of Israel came to the house of the Lord: and
wept, and sat there before the Lord, and fasted that day until even. And then
at the third time the children of Israel prevailed against the children of
Benjamin, verse. 46. I humbled my self with fasting (says David) Psalm. 35.13:
My heart is wounded within me, Psalm. 109.22. My knees are weak through
fasting, verse. 24. Neither eat, nor drink three days, night nor day, said
Ester to her people, Ester. 4.16. The Queen her self did so, and God sent a
blessing, Turn ye even to me with all your hearts, with fasting. Joel 2.12.
Sanctify a fast, verse. 15. Who knows whether he will return, and repent,
and leave a blessing behind him. The Prophet answers verse. 18. The Lord will
be jealous for his land and will pity his people.

PAR. 5.
SOme well-devoted of old in three whole days ate but once, and they termed
that space of time, Penitentiam Nineveh, the repentance of Nineveh. And this
leads me to speak of that uncouth fast, Jonas 3.7. Let neither man, nor
beast, herd, nor flock taste any thing: let them not feed, nor drink water.
An ecstasy of sorrow godly, and holy, bears out seeming infirmities. The
devout raptures of grace, made Mary Magdalen speak, with seeming-little sense:
John 20.13. They have taken away my Lord. Which they? Jews? or Disciples? She
can name none, but strongly imagine some. And I know not where they have laid
him. If Christ had been taken away, is it likely they would tell her? she
remembered not his promised resurrection, but dreamed of his bodies asportation,
and resting otherwhere. Likewise in the 15. verse, she supposes Christ to be
a gardener, saying, Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou have
laid him? An unlikely matter that he would tell her if he removed him. Tell
me and I will take him away, Did she not complain that he was taken away
before? I think she should rather have thought of bringing him back again
to his first grave, than of a second carrying him away; nor she, nor I can
tell whither. I say the superabundance of her grief pouring forth those
imperfect words, I doubt not made her as much accepted with Christ as ever any
of her words or deeds had done before, though most rationally; Hearty devotion
is as the salt of the Sacrifice and keeps all in good savor.

Semblably, though Jonah 3.7. the Nineviticall clothing of beasts with
suckcloth may seem ridiculous, if not barbarous: though the keeping of them
from necessary food, may in the eye of the clown appear unreasonable,
unseasonable, and most unconscionable: because God never looked for repentance
from brute beasts, because they could not be taught God was angry: or why: or
that this was a means to pacify him: because some offended, and others were
punished, which seems to taste of injustice: because a reasonable service of
God is required, Romans 12.1. not beastiall.

Yet since this extraordinary humiliation was performed, as it was appointed
out of the depth of sorrow, out of the inmost bowels of repentance, out of a
sanctified distraction, out of a measurelesse fear and love; God would not
contemn humble spirits, nor reject contrite souls. The sacrifice of all other
things must be in their sorts perfect, entire, or whole; but a bruised reed
shall not be made worse: a wounded-broken heart shall be accepted: and God will
esteem the blemishes as ornaments, where the intentions are profound, and
surcharged with sacred fervencie: whilst they would, if they could force their
cattle to know Gods wrath against Nineveh, by painful fasting, because they
knew it not by Jonah his preaching, Who can tell if God will turn, and repent,
and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? verse. 9. And God
repented of the evil he had said, and he did it not. verse. 10. Daniel, 9.3. I
set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer, and supplications, with
fasting, sackcloths and ashes. and whilst he was speaking in prayer he was
divinely illuminated.

The Prayer.
O Lord, the seeds of all sins are in me, without thy preserving power into
them I should fall: I humbly bless thy grace and goodness, for keeping me,
from presumptuous sins: and do meekly implore thy divine favor to teach and
direct me, that I may imitate the blessed temperancy of the Apostles, as they
did of Christ, and that I may be partaker with them of Glory in the world to
come. So be it, Lord Jesus, so be it. Amen.

CHAP. III. The Contents of the third Chapter.
1 Illyricus his errors concerning fasting. Confession and beating the breast
in fasting.

2 Rising in the night to serve God. Christ shall come at midnight. A Jewish
Tradition.

3 Bowing down the head in fasting.

4 Shaving the Head. Beard.

5 Calixtus fourfold fasting. Jejunia quatuor temporum.

6 Illyricus his absurd Division of a religious fast into crapulosum jejunium
Holy. Hypocritical.

7 Fasting taken for innocence of life. Saint Augustine, and S. Chrysostome^.
falsely taxed by Illyricus, Jejunium generale.

8 Illyricus his wild positions concerning fasting.

Fasting not always a sign of, but sometimes a means to a contrite heart
Rending of garments.

9 Washing of Guests feet.

10 Rending of clothes.

11 The Ceremonies of Fasts. Lutherans crapulous repentance.

12 Illyricus his two Reasons against fasting. The colder the climate, the
hotter the stomach. Germans must fast proportionably to the Jews. Fasting
must tame; not disease, or kill the body.

13 Illyricus plays the Dy-dapper. He denies Fasting to conduce to Prayer.
Why Christ and his Apostles did Fast. A broken heart sometimes goes before
Fasting, sometimes follows after Fasting. God often commutes eternal punishment
into temporal. Fasting not always a sign of a contrite Heart.

14 A body weakened by fasting is more fit to pray. Preparation before the
Sacrament necessary. Illyricus and Luther taxed. Fasting the best way to please
God. Two extremes in fasting. Some fast too much, some fast not at all.
Illyricus an Epicure. The best Christians fast to pray, and pray to please God.

PARAGRAPH I.
IF I should recount all the manifold blessings of God, which he has
apparently vouchsafed upon those, who have chastened their souls with fasting;
I might spin out the remainder of all my days, ere I should handle every
passage.

I confess I have said somewhat the more, because Illyricus is much awry in
the matter of fasting: Nae, ille, vir summus extitisset, si sua quaedam
emendasset (says our Doctor Whitaker (...).) verily he had been an excellent
Writer, if he had corrected some of his errors. It may be this was one of his
errors, needing amendment, which our Professor aimed at. Surely Illyricus
runs with a byas, to uphold the intemperate German usanses: and is many
ways awry, whilst he would find out new Divinity contrary to the paths of
old, or cloth ancient Divinity, with novell new fashioned robes.

Illyricus in his second part of his Clavis Scripturae; in his Tractate de
jejunio ( page 106. and in sequentibus) shows himself a right German. Let
me begin at the end of the Tractate, where I last left of reading him; so
ascend step by step to discover his vanities. He dislikes that note of popish
fasting, when they say, Mea maxima culpa: I have most grievously offended
against thy divine Majesty; and beat the breast, and sometimes the face. Yet
he confesses the Jews did so in Christ's time, and instanceth in the
Publican, Luke 18.13. I had not thought any Christian would have faulted a
penitent, for saying, mea maxima culpa, my sins are most heinous. Did not
Saint Paul say, 1 Timothy 1.15. He was chief of sinners? Peccator omnium notarum
sum, nec ulli rei nisi poenitentiae natus (says Tertullian) I am a most
notorious sinner, and borne for nothing but to repent. Ego praestantiam in
delictis meis agnosco, I acknowledge mine exceeding sinfulness in sinning. The
accusing of a man's self is a principal way moving God to acquit us. And
David's heart smote him. 2 Samuel 24.10. And may we not think he smote his breast?

PAR. 2.
HE taxes them for rising in the night to serve God; saying they did roar
like bulls, oxen, or kine, in Temples. Is it possible a well-fed, a well tipled
Lutheran, snorting securely, should, when he is awake, jeere at other men's
midnight devotions? Indeed Tertullian ad uxorem 2.4. says of Pagan husbands
irreligious behavior toward their wives, Quis nocturnis convocationibus, si
ita oportucrit a laetere suo libenter eximi feret? Quis solennibus paschae
obnoctantem securus sustinebit? Who with patience can endure to have his wife
taken from his side to be present at the Christians nightly meetings, when
occasion so requires? Who without jealousy can suffer her to be absent from
his bed, at night, and to be present at their Paschall solemnities? Yet thence
you may gather the night-devout service of the Christians. Tertullian in
Apologetico. Cap. 34. Ita saturantur, ut qui meminerint, etiam per noctem
adorandum sibi Deum esse. They so feast in the day time, as that they remember
they must arise in the night time to serve God.

It is a Jewish tradition (says Hierome) that Christ shall come at midnight,
as the Angel did in Egypt. Whence I think an Apostolical Tradition has
remained, that on Easter eeve, they dismissed not the people till midnight,
expecting the coming of Christ; and after that time, boldly, and securely they
feasted. To that effect Hierome cited by Rhenanus in argumento, lib. 1.
Tertulliani ad uxorem. Psalm. 119.62. the Prophet David says: At midnight will
I rise to give thanks unto thee: Whilst Illyricus seems rather to approve
more ease, and to give thanks on a good warm feather-bed. At midnight, Paul
and Silas prayed, and sung praises unto God, Act. 16.25.

PAR. 3.
Again, because some in Esaias his time did bow down their heads like
bulrushes, Esa. 58.5. Therefore Illyricus finds fault with the Monks for the
like: and says, Incurvant cervicem and obstipo capite velut nummos quaerentes
incedunt. They hang down their heads, as if they searched for money. The high
and mighty German might have remembered, Luke 18.13. The Publican would not lift
up so much as his eyes to heaven.

It was David's holy joy, that his eyes were not lofty. Psalm. 131.1. Indeed
there is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids are
lifted up. Prove. 30.13. I wish Illyricus had remembered, A proud look, or hauty
eyes are an abomination to the Lord. Prove. 6.17. Looking down in true fasting
argues a contrite soul, as well as a dejected body.

PAR. 4.
FOr the other part of his censure, that because anciently in their griefe^
they did shave their head, and their beard, therefore the Monks do so now: it
savoureth of no learning, but is a gross mistake, or at least a fallacy.
Ponit Non-causam, pro causa. Nor shave they their heads always in time of
fasting, or mourning: but at that ceremony make great feasting.

PAR. 5.
HE finds fault with Calixtus, for apppointing a foure^-fold fast; because
there were four parts of the year. By the same reason (says he) he might
have commanded to fast twelve times, because there are twelve months in a
year, or two and fifty fasts, because there are two and fifty weeks yearly: I
had thought the new-fangling Magdeburgian would have added. Calixtus might have
commanded three hundred and odd fasts, because so many days make a year. But
Illyricus is to know, Calixtus appointed Quarterly fasts, for other ends, than
only for a correspondence in number, with the parts of the year. For great
holy ends.

Before Calixtus his time, they fasted in Lent, which is about the^ twentieth
part of the year. After they fasted once a quarter, and the fastings were, and
are called, jejunia quatuor temporum: and we fast weekly, one day in a week
at least, whatsoever the Germans do. I see the stout German looks up to the
cap of liberty, and would be under no command.

PAR. 6.
NOr may I well omit that when Illyricus had said, We call that a religious
fast which belongs to Religion and worship of God: he profanely adds; This
religious fast is rightly divided into an Holy one, and Hypocritical one. As
if hypocrisy were a true part of Gods worship: Crapulosum jejunium: a
gluttonous fast, he justly condemns, though it deserves not the name of a
fast, if it be Crapulosum, gluttonous, or stuffed up to surfeit, or vomiting.

PAR. 7.
BY an Allegory (says he) fasting may signify, innocence of life: So Saint
Chrysostom, and Saint Augustine use it. Who when they saw that there is much
mention in Scripture of fasting: yet understood not, how fasting conferred so
much unto piety, transferred fasting unto abstinence from sins: building on a
place of Esaias, which they did not sufficiently understand (says Illyricus)

Behold novelty speaking in its own language, imputing needlessly and falsely,
ignorance to those famous lights of Gods Church, Saint Chrysostom, and Saint
Augustine, when as the place of Esaias is punctual to this purpose. That the
fast acceptable to God lies much in the way of piety, Esaias 58.5. etc.

The answer to the interrogations can be no other than these: I have not chosen
such a fast, wherein a man for a day, afflicts his soul, bows down his head,
spreads sackcloth and ashes under him. But this is the fast that I have
chosen: viz. to loose the bonds of wickedness: to undo the heavy burden: to
let the oppressed go free: to break every yoke: yea not only to abstain
from evil: but to do good; as follows. It is to deal thy bread to the
hungry; to bring the poor that are cast out, to thine house: to cover the
naked: then shall thy light break forth as the morning; and thy health shall
spring forth speedily: Thy rightcousnesse shall go before thee (or be thy
vaward) and the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward, Now (Illyricus) does
fasting make much for piety, or not?

Is there any acceptable fast, that is not pious? or is impious? or how are
those Fathers without understanding in this point? August. Tract. 17. in
Ioannem, jejunium magnum, and generale est, abstinere ab iniquitatibus: and
illicitis voluptatibus seculi. This is the great and general fast; namely to
abstain from the iniquities, and unlawful pleasures of the world. The same
Augustine, Quaestionum Evangelicarum. 2.28. Scriptura docet generale jejunium,
non a concupiscentia ciborum tantum, sed ab omni laetitia temporalium
delectationum. The Scripture does teach us, that the general fast is not only
to abstain not one^ly from the lust of meats: but also from all joy of
temporal delights, Who can speak more intelligently? yet this hindered not,
but fastings may confer much unto piety: and bodily fasting is much accepted
by God, and many ways profitable; of which point hereafter.

PAR. 8.
IN the passages where he comme^th to show, how far we are^ bound to
fasting, or how far God requires fasting of us; he has wild positions.

1 Since fasting is a certain outward sorrow, or an outward effect, or sign
of an inward contrite, and repentant heart: and God would have us rend our
hearts and not our garments: if we truly mourn inwardly, and be contrite for
our former sins, out of doubt (says he) God does not greatly require
fasting of us* no nor of the Jews neither. This Epicure would have his (...).
His bare word, to rule the world. Does not the Scripture say, that by fasting
the soul is afflicted, and humbled? and so it is not always a sign and
effect of a contrite heart; but a means, and a way to make the soul contrite,
and to prepare repentance.

When God commanded, to rend their hearts and not their garments: speaks to
the wicked; as to the drowsy drunkards. Joel 1.5. Awake ye drunkards and
weep; and howl ye drinkers of wine. These indeed did not rend their hearts;
but forsooth would rend their garments. Gods command is not absolutely
exclusive, making it a sin to rend their garments: but rather comparative,
showing, that God would rather have whole garments and rent hearts, then rent
garments and uncontrite souls; And this appears, because God approves, if,
not commands rending of garments. Holy David 2. Sam. 3.31. said, not only to
bloody Ioab who most traiterouly murdered Abner, but to all the people that
were with him; Rent your clothes, gird you with sackcloth and mourn. And did
not God accept Ahabs rending of his clothes, and fasting, and call it Ahabs
humbling of himself? 1. King. 21.29. Hezekiah rent his clothes. Esaias 37.1. Yet
he was a good man, and God was with him. Josiah rent his clothes. 2. Chron.
34.19. and God by Huldah the Prophetess, and she by Hilkiah his Ambassador
sent Josiah answer in these words, Because thine heart was tender -- and thou
did humble thy self before God, and did rend thy clothes, and weep before
me; I have heard thee. verse. 27. As on the contrary, some are reprehended for
not rending their garments. Jeremy 36.24. For by this omission they testified
their unrepentant hearts.

PAR. 9.
Again (says Illyricus) the Jews had a custom to wash feet: for the Region
was dustie: and they went nudis tibiis bare foot. Christ washed his Disciples
feet, and willed them to do the like one to another. It is not so required of
us (says he) I say, some of them were soleati, shod, as well as we.

PAR. 10.
THe Jews were wont (says he) in all great commotion, or angatiation of mind
to tear their clothes from their breasts: God requires not this of us. I
answer, God forbids it not. And when it is done in a just agony, God
approves it. Paul and Barnabas rent their clothes. Act. 14.14. Who dare think
their rending of their clothes did not proceed from a rent and torn heart? The
seemeing inhibitive precept made them not guilty of any sin.

PAR. 11.
ILlyricus his gangs, and humors, have urged me to lengthe^n this digression. I
return to him again, who in the same page 311. thus to the old matter.

Such almost is the ceremony of Fasts; Because the Jews were wont in every
great grief to afflict their bodies, and to Fast, therefore the Lord liked it.
But since we have no such custom in any grief of mind to use so great
vexations of our bodies; God requires them not, nor so great in our repentance.

Let the world now judge of the Illyrican crapulous repentance. Gods especial
approbation of Fasting, exempteth (for sooth) the full-fed, and well tipled
German, because they have no such custom of Fasting among them, who but a bold
Libertine durst write in this manner?

PAR. 12.
LAstly, (says Illyricus,) Two reasons, and those not contemptible ones, may
be drawn from the nature, and site of the countries why we are not bound to
Fast as the Jews were.

1. First, here in Germany our stomachs for the circumstant cold, yea
naturally are hotter; and therefore consume more meat: and can less endure
hunger.

2. The second re^ason is; Since cold does more afflict the Fasting, then the
full stomachs, or men; if a man would here macerate himself with much Fasting,
without doubt in those so great colds he would dye, or fall into some most
grievous disease.

Some have made their belly their God; I dare say this super intendent
Illyricus may be his High Priest. How tender is he of his God? They were never
more careful to provide for Baall, then he does for the belly.

To the first reason, I say it is ridiculous. For because they are more hungry
naturally, or accidentally then the Jews, shall they less afflict themselves,
then the Jews did? If they take away from their dyer but so much as may humble
them; as may tame their rebellious flesh, or may further them in the ways of
devotion, this is a true and acceptable Fast, though before and after their
Fasts, the Northern stomach eat more meat, then the Eastern can. Again, if
the German can less endure hunger; yet let him endure some: let him endure but
proportionable affliction, as the Jews did: or as God intends in his precept
of Fasting: and then his after-eating is of easier dispensation.

To the second reason I answer, Illyricus is very cautelous, very curious in
cute curanda, in pampering his belly: For though cold weather more punish the
Fasting, then the full and crammed paunch; yet, nor God, nor good men did ever
command us, to macerate our selves with Fasting, so eagerly, so vehemently, so
extremely, as should bring us either to death or diseases, who do so
willingly; are murderers of themselves: and if any should do so unwillingly,
he is accessory to his own death, and incurreth the wrath of God, for drawing
sickness upon himself. The golden mean is a just tribute, due to God,
payable to man.

In some other matters concerning Fasting, Illyricus so plays the Dy-dapper
up and down, in and out: that he is not worth the following; Yet I cannot
wholly give him over. He denies that Fasting conduces to Prayer: or is a good
work of it self, but is only a sign, and effect of a sorrowful, humbled
and contrite heart. And if any object; why did Christ then Fast; even he who
had no sins, for which he should be sorry? Why did the Apostles Fast? Act.
13.3. of whom we do not read (says Illyricus) that then lately they had
committed any great sins, for which they should cruciate themselves with
grief, and fasting? Illyricus answers; Christ did not Fast to prepare
himself to Prayer, since his flesh did not rebel against his spirit; nor
needed any such castigation: But he fasted for grief of mind, and contrition
of heart: because he was to be punished, as if he had committed all the sins of
the world. I reply, did Christ Fast only then, when he had such dolorous
thoughts? Did He not Fast to teach us to Fast? Either before, or in, or after
his forty days Fast, is there any word evincing, that Christ fasted in
consideration of a most doleful and broken heart? Likewise concerning the
Apostles, All (says he) that add fasting to Prayers, and pray rightly, must
come with a broken heart: and then desire mercy for Christ's merit. Who denies
this wholly? or what is this to the purpose? or how is the objection answered?
The Apostles, and others fasted, and prayed that God would bless them in the
calling, to which they were then separated; and to obtain the favor of God,
for that especial business, though then they had no extraordinary cause to
have broken hearts, as Illyricus confesses: and no question but they implored
Gods mercy for Christ's sake; but their fastings, and Prayers were not here
signs, or effects of broken hearts: but Signanter, fasting aided Prayer;
Prayer fasting: both desired, and obtained a blessing of God upon what they
requested.

Most times a broken heart preceedeth fasting: Sometimes fasting prepares the
way to a broken heart: as the chewing of meat does to the speedier
nourishment; As in our late, just, holy, and commanded Fast, that the Lord
would vouchsafe to free the City of London, and the infected neighboring
places, from the plague: many a thousand contrymen by fasting came to a
sorrowful heart, who at first came not to a fasting by a contrite heart, but
by command.

And truly, as God does often commute the eternal punishment, which we have
deserved into a temporary: so, when he sees the inward humiliation of the
soul, attended on with selfe-inflicted pain upon the body, the Lord does take
off some of that punishment which otherwise had laid strong hold on us. This
was Ahabs case, 1. King. 21.27. and the Ninevites, Jonah 3.7. whose voluntary
subjecting themselves to punishment, diverted from them the full viols of Gods
wrath. Christ had compassion on such as fainted, or were tired, and lay down.
Matthew 9.36. And I have (says Christ) compassion on the multitude, because
they continue with me now three days, and have nothing to eat; and I will not
send them away fasting. Matthew 15.32. Illyricus cannot prove that these men
fasted as a sign, or effect of their condoling contrite hearts: but they
fasted to feed on Christ's holy words: they fasted to behold more of his
wondrous works; and in expectancie of some divine blessing: and when Christ
saw that they fasted so long, that they were like to be the worse, he
miraculously fed them. verse 37.

PAR. 14.
MAny learned men (says Illyricus) think, fastings were of old, and are now
to be used that the weakened body might the rather obey the soul; and that a
man may be fitter to pray and perform divine duties. But thus, I think (says
he) and we find it by experience, that the body Rectissime curatum, tended
most contentedly, and exactly, with necessary meat, drink, sleep, apparel;
and other requisites is most composed, and best settled: and therefore can best
of all obey, and serve the actions of the mind, and (that I may so say) will
obey. He rests not here, but proceeds. Yea a somewhat exhilarated body,
with competent meat, and drink, we find by experience, to make us better
affected both toward God and Man. Hold man, hold, though thy Master hold, that
when a man has eaten moderately, he is fitter to receive the Communion then
when he is fasting; because after meat the head is more purged; the mouth
cleaner, the breath sweeter: yet I dare say, the head is fuller of noisome
fumes, the mouth no cleaner when one has eaten: and if thy breath stink,
common food makes it no sweeter, then the Divine Eucharist: I am sure the
third Council of Carthage, Canone 29. has decreed: Vt Sacramenta Altaris non
nisi a jejunis hominibus celebrentur: That the Sacraments of the Altar should
not be celebrated, but only by those that are fasting, and the seventh
Council of Toledo, Canone 2. excommunicateth such as eat any thing before the
performance of divine offices. It was likewise a Novell position: That when a
man comes most unprepared to receive the holy Sacrament, then he comes
best prepared; and when he is most sinful, then a sinner may most worthily
receive. His very words are these in his Sermon of the Eucharist, made 1526.
Ille ut aptissimus ad communicandum, qui ante and retro, est peccatis
contaminatissimus, and sine peccatis mortalibus nullum debere accedere. He is
fittest to communicate, who before and behind (who on all sides) is most
defiled with sin: and without deadly sin none ought to come to the
Communion: He means not, that a new life suffices without contrition,
confession, satisfaction, as some of his fellows say, his words run to a
worse sense: For in another Sermon of the worthy receiving the Eucharist, eight
years before; Optima dispotio est (says he) non nisi ea, qua pessime es
disposit us; and e contrario, tunc pessime es dispositus, quando optime es
dispositus. Then art thou best disposed, when art thou worst disposed, and
contrarily; then art thou worst disposed, when thou art best disposed. Are not
such words the means for men, to commit sins, and continue in them? and with
unrepentant hearts, boldly, fiercely, impudently, to swallow up the heavenly
food of our souls, the sacred Eucharist, rather then exhortations, to devout
receiving? Is this way the proving and judging of our selves? does it teach
repentance for sins past? sorrow, shame, fear, selfe-accusing for the
present? does it teach a steadfast resolution? and a settled purpose never to do
so again? does his way increase faith, strengthen hope, nourish charity? yet
these things are expected from a worthy Communicant. What preparation was used
at the giving of the Law, Exodus 19.20. etc. What sanctifying of themselves,
both people, verse, 14. and Priests, verse. 22. All this preparation might have
been cut off, and saved, by Luthers doctrine. They did not eat the Paschall
Lamb, without diverse washings, and many legal purifications: insomuch, that a
second Passover, in another month, was ordained for the unclean, by Gods
extraordinary appointment. Numbers 9.10. Which was practiced in Hezekiah his
days. 2. Chron. 30.15, 18, 19. verses. Abimelech gave the hallowed Bread, to
the sanctified only, 1. Sam 21.4. etc. David professed, I will wash my hands
in innocence: So will I compass thine Altar O Lord! Psalm. 26.6. Saint Paul
advises, or commands. 1. Corin. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. Aug. alluded to the words of
the Psalmist. when he said: Tractatu. 26. in Iohannem: Innocentiam ad altar
pertate: peccata and si sint quotidiana, vel non sint mortifera: Carry
innocence, (instead of Frankincense) unto the Altar, though thou have
committed no mortal sins, but sins of infirmity. The same Divine, Saint
Augustine. Hom. 50. Tom. 10. page 115. Constituto in cord judicio, adsit
accusatrix cogitatio, testis conscientia, carnifex timor; Inde quidem sanguis
animae confitentis per lachrimas profluat, posiremo ab ipsa mente, talis
sententia proferatur, ut se indignum homo judicet, participatione sanguinis and
corporis Domini: Vt qui separari a regno coelorum timet per ultimam sententiam
summi judicis, per Ecclesiasticam disciplinam a Sacramento coelestis panis
interim separetur. When a Tribunal is erected in thy heart, let thy thought
accuse thee, thy conscience be witness against thee, thy fear and dread be
thy tormentor, then let the blood of a soul confessing it self, flow out in
tears; Lastly, let the mind pronounce this sentence: That a man judge
himself unworthy to receive the body and blood of our Lord: That he who
fears to be separated from heaven, by the last sentence of the supreme judge,
may in the mean time be separated according to Ecclesiastical discipline,
from the Sacrament of the heavenly Bread: By which words, in the mean time,
might well be inferred that S. Augustine differed (...) heaven wide from a
novel German, who would have a man fall upon the Sacrament with mortal
offenses on his soul, with unwashed hands, having newly committed sins,
Vastantia Conscientiam: devoratoria salutis, which lay waste a man's conscience,
and woorie his salvation. He avoucheth the best disposition to be the worst;
and the greatest preparation the unfittest. But Augustine would have a man
after mortal sin, to abstain from the most holy Eucharist, a competent
time, till he had repented, till he had proved and judged himself, till he
had confessed his sins, and labored to wipe away the blots by his tears.
Which truth is confirmed divinely, by our sacred Liturgi -- If any of you be a
blasphemer of God, etc. -- unto these words -- so shall ye be meet partakers
of these holy mysteries, when Christ said. Come unto me all ye that are heavy
laden -- he meant not, with loads of unrepented sins, for, as such cannot
move one foot toward Christ; to such obstinate sinners Christ is a judge and
condemner: not a merciful Savior: And the words cannot aim at that sense:
for then not only the spiritual food in the Sacrament, but even Christ should
be the great allurer unto sin, as being abettor thereof, which God forbid:
for then not only a window, but a door were set open to all iniquity and
villainy: but the meaning of that most comfortable invitatory, is, and must be,
this: All ye who have sinned, and are heartily sorry for your offenses,
wearied, groaning, and ready to faint under grief, for the same: yea, who
find no comfort in your selves, but are ready to be swallowed up of despair,
or too much (not sins) but sorrow for sins, O come ye unto me: and this is
evidenced by the gracious promise, I will refresh you, refreshing, being
opposed to trembling, dejectedness, weakness, swownings, trepidations,
grievings, faintings, which are fruits of the heavie-hearted sinner, and steps
or breathings toward repentance: refreshing is not opposed robustae iniquitati,
to strength of sinning, or boystrous coutinuing in iniquity, or triumphing
rebellion: and so the sorrowful penitent is called to Christ, and not the
filthy, continuing in his filthiness: nor may the sinner in flagrantia facti,
in any present actual, unrepented, heinous sins approach to the holy
Sacrament. See Injunction the 9. of Edward the 6. And the order of the
Communion where it is said, Let a man awhile bewail his sins and not come to
this holy Table. But to return to this gluttonous German, who will be wiser
then the Church of God has ever been: wiser then Christ, wiser then God
himself. Would God ever have appointed fastings, if he could have been
better served without fasting? Will God be served the worser way? Did not
Christ take the best way to please God, when he fasted so long? If any course
had been better, surely Christ would have used it. Deus optimus, the best God
will be served the best way. In the best sort that they could, did the Chorus
Apostolorum the Quire of the Apostles, yea, and the whole Militant Church seek
to please God. Yet they never found out this trick: but fasted full often;
which they would not have done, if by feeding until mirth, unto exhilaration,
if a jolly well refreshed body had been best accepted with God.

Let us observe the two extremes: One of such as fast too much till they
destroy their bodies, or hurt themselves; which nor God commanded, nor do we
approve. The other of such as will not afflict their bodies at all: who may be
compared to the Epicurean porks. And among them is Illyricus justly reckoned.
And then we shall find the blessed mean, or middesse of a third sort, and
those the best Christians, who fast to pray the better, and do both to please
God. A beast is he, and not a man, who says, writes, or thinks, that ever
God appointed man to fast, till man's body was the more unfit to serve the
soul: or made the soul more unfit to do holy services to God.

The Prayer.
O Gracious Creator, and Father of mercies, who did appoint all things to
serve man, and man to serve Thee, who also have fitted him with such a body;
as will both decay, if it be unrefreshed, and grow wanton, if it be too much
pampered, I humbly beseech thee to grant me that temperance, that I may
macerate my body, and so keep it under, that it may not rebel against thee,
but be the apter for all holy and spiritual exercise, for the merits of Jesus
Christ.

CHAP. IV. The Contents of the fourth Chapter.
1. Sick and old folks exempted from fasting.

2. Night-meditations advance day-studies.

3. The trouble of the body disturbes not the intention of the mind.

Homer falsely cited. The belly an importune evil.

4. A difference betwixt Ordinances at Fasting and Feasting.

5. Fasting a voluntary not natural action.

Diverse ends of the same Fast.

6. Sorrow prepares us to Prayer.

The Apostles did not neglect fasting.

A difference between neglecting and not performing.

Hypocritical not true fasting faulted in the Jews. Christ fasted; and why?

7. Sorrow a Concomitant of fasting: fasting and mourning two distinct things.

8. Illyricus makes Nature, Custom, and Chance, the grounds of fasting and
prayer.

Prayer not the only remedy for all evils.

Fides sola and solitaria saves not.

Saving faith is not separated from other Theological virtues.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
THe last observation in few words answers almost all his tedious arguments,
let us briefly survey them.

The soul is most nearly conjoined to the body, and helped by its
instruments, does most things; Therefore if the body be out of temper, the
soul cannot rightly do, as appears in sick and aged people. I answer, no
man is commanded to fast till he come to the habit of a sick man: nor till he
come to the feebleness of an old man, who has as it were lead in his heels,
and cannot lift up his legs: nor draw them after him. Yea, in all good forms
or appointments for fastings, sick and old men are exempted from fasting, and
left to their own liberty. The whole have no need of the Physician, but the
sick. The sick are not enjoined by God to make themselves more sick by
fasting: but the whole are appointed to fast; and not to exceed the bounds of
mediocrity; which are transgressed if a man willingly draw sickness upon
himself.

PAR. 2.
Again, (says he) studious men discern in themselves most easily, if they
want three or four hours of their ordinary sleep, they are the unfitter all
the day. I solemnly profess the contrary. When my studies past break off my
sleep three or four hours in the night at one time; my night meditations
have made me proceed further in my day studies, then I should have done
otherwise.

PAR. 3.
THe bodily trouble does disturb the intention of the mind (says he) and
recalleth it to the care of the body, as most truly, Odyss. 5. Ulysses says.
There is not a more importune evil, then an hungry belly: which above all
things compels by a kind of necessity, even those who are troubled with
great businesses, to remember themselves. As Cato also said: The belly wanted
ears. Let me add the ingenious parable of Menenius Agrippa; That if it went
ill with the stomach, or belly, all the body will pinch for it; for the stomach
must be satisfied, and is, ere it satisfy other members.

Concerning Homer, there is is no such thing, as is cited in the fith or sixth of
the Odysses. And yet I will not blame him: for it is a mere mistake of the
Printer, which is usual. But in the seventh these are the words, post medium,
versu 215. etc.

(...). vide cetera. But let me now put pensive thoughts to flight
With regal cheer, and joviall delight.
Nor will I dislike him because he hitteth the sense: though the word be^e not
literally translated, importuno ventre, sed odioso (...) molesto, gravi,
tristi: which implies one in greater necessity, then any one is commanded to
be, during the time of his Fast, or by his Fast. Again (says Illyricus) men
are taught by daily experience, especially Students, who are men versed in the
actions of the mind, that the least molestation of the body troubles the
intention of the mind: namely that I may use a ridiculous example, the biting
of a little Flea, often revoketh a man from an intense meditation, and
troubles his thoughts, so he.

It is a poor and silly avocation, God knows, to a man in earnest or study,
or devotion. If he had spoken of a remiss, or lazy kind of speculation, or
cursorie reading, it might have passed: but that a Flea-bite should trouble the
intention of the mind, and often awake a man from an intense meditation, and
disturb his cogitation: I believe not. A serious, elevated, high-strained
amazement, overcommeth the sense of a flea-biting, and is beyond, and above the
being disturbed or interrupted or drawn away by it, or any light matter.

PAR. 4.
But God appointed feasting at his sacrifices: and the tithes, and other things
dedicated unto God, were to be eaten before the Tabernacle, that they might be
the merrier, and apter to give God thanks: For the same cause Music was
always used in rebus sacris, at their devotions to exhilarate, and stir up
the spirit. So he.

Is there no difference between the ordinances at feastings, and those at
fastings, Because feastings were appointed, and music, when they had offered
their Sacrifices, is there any show of resultance, that therefore we should be
merry, and well fed at our fastings? Or did they feast, dance, or sing, whilst
the Sacrifices were offered? silence with solemnity of devotion, was the
anteamble, or usher to their festivals. His other reasons are these.

PAR. 5.
FAsting is a kind of natural thing: and therefore is not undertaken
purposely for another end; but naturally flows from another precedent cause:
viz. from a contrite sad heart, so he.

I say, fasting is rather a kind of voluntary, than natural thing: and is
never undertaken without some end: nay diverse ends may be, and are of the same
fast. If some fasting proceed from a broken contrite heart, beforehand
afflicted: yet all fasting does not so. And if all did, there must be some end,
even in that natural flux.

PAR. 6.
MAny examples the^re^ are of fastings for grief, and sadness of mind, for
past, present, and imminent calamities: but as a kind of sorrow, not for
preparation to future prayer. So Illyricus. Answer, He seems to be ignorant
that sorrow it self prepares us to prayer. Does sorrow exclude prayer? when
do people pray more, or more fervently than in sorrow t In their afflictiction
they will seek me early, Hosea, 5.15. Thou called'st in trouble, and I
delivered thee. Psalm. 81.2. A command there is for it. Psalm. 50, 15. Call
upon me in the day of trouble. And it is divinely answered. Psalm. 86. In the
day of my trouble I will call upon thee.

It is not likely (says he) that Christ would (whilst he lived) have
suffered the Apostles to neglect fastings, if they were so profitable
exercises, for piety and prayer as some think.

I answer. The Apostles did not neglect fasting: there is a great deal of
difference between Not-performing, and Neglecting: Neglect has sin wrapped
up in it; bare omission may be upheld by many just reasons. Christ's
dispensation was sufficient for them. And what if I should say, their
attendance on Christ, and observing of him, in words and deeds, and behavior,
was a more powerful means toward piety and prayer, than their fasting would
have been, without eying of Christ: and thereupon Christ permitted them to take
the better way. Who would take up an handful of silver; when instead of it he
may take up an handful of gold?

Never did Christ turn from the people, and turn himself to his Disciples;
and say things privately to them, but the things were of extraordinary note.
But so did Christ, Luke 10.23. showing what a happiness they had to be with
him. So Matt. 13.16. Blessed are your eyes, for they see: and your ears for
they hear: (says Christ to his Apostles) for many Prophets and righteous men
have desired to see the things which ye see, and have not seen them, and to
hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them. verse. 17. It is
varied excellently, Luke 10.24. Prophets and Kings: So the Kings were reckoned
as righteous men, more righteous than others.

Again (says Illyricus) God would not have rejected the fasts of the Jews,
Esaias 58.3. If they had been exercises truly preparing men to prayer, and other
virtues.

I answer: how blind is he that will not, or cannot see, that God finds
fault not with true fasting, which much conduces to holiness: but with their
Hypocritical fasting. Behold (says he) in the day of your fast ye find
(perhaps invent) pleasure; ye offer grievances: ye fast for strife and
debate. verse. 4. Then he shows what a fast God likes, verse, 6. And after such
a fast. Thou shall call, and the Lord shall answer: thou shall cry, and he
shall say, here am I. verse. 9. Where the Prophet of set purpose shows, that a
true fast prepares men to pray, and God to hear. God found fault with the
abuse, and not with the right use of fasting. And shall we cut down the vines,
because some are drunk? God never rejected a true fast. When ye fasted and
mourned, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me? Zach. 7 5. Here is both
fasting and mourning: yet because they did not conduce to the ways of God, or
godliness, but fasted to their own profane, and civil ends, and not to holy
ends, or exercises of piety; God renounceth them.

Again (says he) Christ fasted; whose body needed no such castigation.
Therefore he did not prepare himself by fasting unto prayer. I answer. Indeed
Christ was the immaculate lamb of God, without either original or actual
sin. But he fasted to satisfy Adam and Eves intemperate eating, he fasted to
recompense our gluttony, he fasted so, to teach us to fast. And he fasted for
us, not for himself; If he fasted that needed not, how much rather ought we
to fast, that do need? Christ fasted not without great good causes; and to
great good ends, and purposes, and the issue was divine. For had he made bread
of stone: had he eat that bread, had he not still fasted, he had been
surprised by the tempter, but by fasting he grew hungry.

Graeculus esuriens, in coelum jusser is, ibit. A man will do any thing, to
satisfy nature, if his appetite be sharp set; hunger will break through
stone walls; yet whereas Adam, and all we in him fell by his eating: our
blessed Savior stood out against Satan, and over came him by hunger and
fasting: as I have manifested in my Miscellanies. I deny not the conjunction of
other helps, for Christ. Christ in the days of his flesh, when he offered up
prayers, and supplications, with strong crying, and tears: he was heard for
his piety; or in that he feared, Heb. 5.7. But in the tempting Christ to eat,
did the serpents head work chiefly; and it was the maine drift of Satan's first
great temptation.

PAR. 7.
CHrist defines a fast to be^ a sorrow, Matthew. 9.15. Can the children of the
Bride-chamber mourn? I answer, it is no definition of a fast, Christ speaks
of mourning: as of a companion, fellow, and concomitant of fasting. Yea, some
mourning may be without fasting; and therefore they be not reciprocal.

But Daniel 10.3. it is so defined. I answer, it is not: it is true Daniel
mourned three weeks: and as true that he did eat no pleasant bread; neither
came flesh or wine into his mouth: neither did he anoint himself at all,
till the whole three weeks were fulfilled; yet might he eat other bread, and
other food* though costly or curious food, he ate not. Illyricus might have
remembered, that because Daniel did chasten himself before his God: his words
(or prayers) were heard, verse. 12. Therefore his fasting prepared him to
prayer, and other exercises of devotion: and prepared God to bless all.

But fasting is defined to be a mourning, Zach. 7.5. When ye fasted and
mourned. I answer, Here fasting precedeth mourning: where Illyricus says
Fasting is an effect of mourning, and naturally flows from it: when it is
commanded, Watch and Pray, is one a definition of the other: because they be
conjoynd? Fasting and mourning be two distinct things, and fall not under one
definition.

PAR. 8.
THese be his arguments, which he thinks strong enough to withhold him from
subscribing to those, who think, fastings of old were, and now are to be used,
that the macerated body may better obey the soul, and that a Christian may be
apter to pray, and to all divine exercises.

But Illyricus objecteth against himself. Are fastings wholly unprofitable?
Why are they then so often conjoined with prayers, if they be not exercises
preparing to prayers?

He answers. Since these afflictions of fasting are undertaken by the prime
motion of nature in great grief of mind: and then confirmed by custom in the
eastern countries: it came to pass, that they did both fast and pray in
troubles. Nature, custom, chance, are his grounds for fasting, and prayer: Not
God, not Scriptures, not holy examples precedent: these are nothing to the
frothy German.

Moreover (says he) the calling upon God was their only remedy for all
their evils: therefore they always added earnest prayers to their afflictions
that their sins might be remitted and the punishments averted.

Is calling upon God the only remedy? Did not faith, and contrition, and
repentance precede? Does not fasting accompany? Shall we exclude hope?
renounce charity? and make prayer to be the only remedy? Thus forsooth in some
other humors, Faith alone saves: only faith; Fides sola, and solitaria. Yet
all Novelists must know; They shall sooner separate light from the Sun, heat
from the fire: then they shall separate faith, true faith, saving faith from
Charity, from Hope; from the fear and love of God, or from other Theological
virtues.

I profess that I am sorry, that Illyricus gave cause of so long a diversion.
I have only censured his Tractate, de causa finali jejunii. I must be brief
in the rest.

The Prayer.
MOst glorious Savior, in thy feastings thou were holy; thy words full of
power, thy actions full of wonder: in thy fastings thou wast divine, thou were
an hungered, and yet would not eat: thou were a thirst, and yet did not
drink: grant good Lord Jesu, that thy gracious example may be my guide, both
in feasting and fasting; and that I may so behave my self in this temporary
fading life, being the very valley of misery, that through the merits of thy
fasting. I may gather the crummes under thy table in thy eternal Kingdom, So
be it Lord Jesu, so be it.

CHAP. V. The Contents of the fifth Chapter.
1 All in fasting must afflict their souls. Fasting commanded in the Old and
New Testament.

Fasting is more than a temperate sober life.

2 Diverse effects of sorrow. Diverse efficient causes of Fasting.

3 The Germans little practice Fasting.

The singular commendation of Fasting by
Athanasius. S. Chrysostom. Leo Magnus. S. Ambrose. Bellarmine.
4 A parting blow at Illyricus.

PARAGRAPH 1.
ILlyricus in his first Tractate De Iejunio, materia hactenus parum liquido
explicata, vera dissertatio; Having not all this while explicated the matter
distinctly enough, the true dispute, etc. he begins with two positions
boldly averred, hardly proved.

At all times great has been the superstition, and abuse of fasting, and of
other afflictions thereunto annexed. Yet was there not one certain form of
that fast: for it was free and voluntary, and therefore out of doubt, one did
cruciate himself otherwise, than others did.

And yet himself truly confesses, they fed on no dainties: But that is one
certain form (say I) And he confesses further: To fast is to abstain from
the chief commodities of the body; and to draw discommodities upon a man's
self. To abstain from meat, drink, sleep, washing, anointing, change of
apparel, music, mirth, and all recreations: yea to put on sordid, and ill
apparel, which they call sackcloth, to lie on the ground, on ashes, dust or
any other sordid place.

His very definition prescribes this form, and accordingly was it used: and
yet he denies any one certain form. That some fasted longer, or oftener, or
stricter than others, none will deny; but all did afflict their souls, or
otherwise it was no true fast. Whereas he says, it was free and voluntary: no
man can deny, but some had more occasion than others had, and did fast when
others did not; yes, and fasted voluntarily: yet himself confesses they were
commanded to fast on the days of expiation. Levit. 23.27. Ye shall afflict
your souls. And the Prophet gave precepts for fasting: which in like case we
are to imitate. Christ foretold the Apostles should fast. Christ said; When ye
fast anoint your heads: implying that men were to fast.

I see fasting is commanded in the Old and New Testament, but what days we are
to fast, and not to fast, by precept from God, or his Apostles I find not.
Augustine, Epist. 88. ad Casularum. Yet in that Tractate he does very well
confute such as say, of old fasting was no other than a temperate and sober
life. His reason is excellent. Moses, Elias, Daniel, Christ, and his Apostles,
who questionless always lived temperately, and soberly; yet even they did
fast certain days. Again (says he) It is easy to discern from 2 Samuel
1.12. where they mourned, and wept, and fasted until even. from Daniel, 10.2.
and from Jonah 3.5 etc. that fasting is a more sour, sorrowful and hard
thing, than a temperate, and sober life.

PAR. 2.
IN the middle Tractate, De efficiente causa jejunii; Thus he discourses,
naturally, Omnibus animalibus incitum est, it is given to all living creatures;
not only to live, but to live contentedly, and sweetly: and to procure
pleasing things; and to fly the contrary. But in great sorrows men lead a
discontented life, and desire to die; and therefore begin to neglect all
things, belonging to an happy life. And in greater sorrow beat their breasts,
tear their faces, and hair, as in the Southern parts women were wont to do.
These sorrows are not fitly ordered by Illyricus. The sorrow which causes men
to desire death, is greater than that, when people beat their breasts: tear
away the hair from their heads, and skins from their face. But I must
remember my promised brevity. He returns to his first position. When we are
glad, we naturally love this life, and the things te^nding to it: and when we
are sorry, we hate life: fly the presence of men, and pleasures; yea embrace
things discommodious. Yet custom much prevails in this point; for some
people testify their joy, and sorrow otherwise, both by the quantity and
quality, than others do.

Then defines he thus. Fasting is (in the holy Scriptures) a certain
affliction of the body, and an outward sign, and effect of a mind inwardly
sorrowful. or, a certain outward mourning, which voluntarily, yet by a
natural motion, is undertook whilst the soul mourns. The efficient cause
of fasting is (says he) plainly natural: though both will and custom, do
some way concur unto it. His conclusion runs to this e^nd: that the
torments or macerations of Fastings, may, and use to arise from great sorrow of
the mind, from a broken and contrite heart, from the humiliation and
prostration of the soul. Thus much (says he) of the efficient cause of
fasting. Yet certainly some, if not many fast, not out of any great precedent
sorrow, or natural motion: but from the motion of grace, from a willing mind
to prevent evils, either of sin, or punishment, to obtain Gods favor in
things they desire, to tame their bodies, to prepare themselves for prayer, and
holy exercises of devotion, to help the afflicted either near or far off,
to show obedience to the Magistrate; and by fasting to humble themselves more
than when they began to fast; and more than they would have been humbled, if
they had not fasted, to procure a blessing upon such great and difficult
affairs as they intend to compass, and to adapt the mind to spiritual
conte^mplations. Experience proves all this. Fasting-spittle, Saint Augustine
calls Virginem salivam, perhaps you may term, Virgineam salivam,
Virgin-spittle, and is in it self more powerful than any other spittle.

PAR. 3.
I Would say, fare^well high and mightily fed Illyricus, butchers, cooks,
musicians, bakers, brewers and taverners will extol thee: perhaps it grew from
thy Doctrine, in that Hamborough are 777. Brewers, 40. Bakers, one Physician,
one Lawyer. But learned men will think, that ye Germans little practice
fasting for your self confess, your northern Nations, have no such fervent
affections, and do not grieve so much as others do, and do less show
outwardly their affections. And therefore ye will put your selves, to little
or no bodily pain. Ye are neat men, and will not (...), jejunium olere,
smell of fasting: ye have believed Plautus, rather than Christ, jejunitatis
plenus, anima foetidat: Plautus in Mercatore. He that is given much to
fasting, does use to have a stinking breath. Plautus in his Comedy entitled,
The Merchant. If Illyricus had much studied the Fathers, he would not have
spoken so largely against fasting, Athanasius (in lib: de Virginitate) says,
Qui dicunt tibi, ne frequenter jejunes, ne imbicillior fias, istos Diabolus
subornavit. The Devil has suborned those who say: fast not often, lest ye
grow weak. An heavy yet true censure in some cases, and to some persons. See
what fasting can do, says Athanasius, ibidem. It heals diseases, dries up
distillations, chaseth away devils, expels evil thoughts, makes the mind
more neat, and the heart more purified. Fasting is the food of Angels; and he
who uses it, may be thought to be reckoned among the orders of Angels. What
says my crammed, and pampered German to this?

Chrysostom ( Homil. 1. in Genes.) says, God desiring that we should wash
away all our sins, has invented this help, even our fasting, which is the
mother of all good things, the mistress of Modesty, and shamefastness, and
the food of our souls. And in the next Homily. It is the tranquillity of our
souls, the ornament of old men, the Schoolmaster of youth, and the teacher of
continency. If Adam had abstained and fasted from one tree; death had been
dead; or there^fore had not dyed, because it never had been, says the same
Saint Chrysostom:) in his first Sermon of fasting: The Prophet was slain by a
Lion for eating and drinking, where God said, eat no bread, and drink no
water. 1 King. 13.22. Fasting is the imitation of Angels, as far as lies in
us, a contempt of pleasant things, a school of prayer, a bridle for the mouth,
and a tamer of concupiscence. It slacketh fury, curbeth wrath, appeaseth the
insurrection of nature, quickens reason, lights the flesh, drives away
filthy nightly intemperance. It has revoked Gods sentence, and stopped the
execution of his judgments. Fast because thou have sinned: Fast that thou
may not sin: Fast to receive good; Fast to retain good. The prayer of a
fasting man is pleasing to God, and terrible to the devil, says Leo Magnus,
Sermon. de Iejunio septimi mensis. Iejunium est prima virtus contravitia, says
Chrysologus. Fasting is the first, or chiefest virtue against vices. Again,
what is of more virtue than fasting (says Leo) by observing it, we draw near
to God; we resist the Devil: we overcome vice. Fasting was always meat to
virtue; from abstinence proceed chaste thoughts, reasonable desires, wholesome
counsels. The most effectual prayer against sin is Alms, and Fasting. All
vices are by continency destroyed. Whatsoever covetousness thirsts after,
pride affects, luxury lusts for, fasting overcommeth. From the observation
of holy fasting, begin the rules of all virtue. Leo Sermon. 11. de Quadrages.
Adest maximum, sacratissimumque jejunium. The greatest and most holy fast of
Lent is now come: which all faithful men are bound to observe; for none is so
holy that he may not be holier; none so devout, that he ought not to be more
devout. Much more could I cite from the fathers; Who are those new masters,
which exclude the merit of Fasting (says Saint Ambrose) in the aforesaid 82.
Epist. to the Church of Vercellis) who desires to see more, let him have
recourse to Bellarmine, Tom. 4. de bonis operibus in particulari. lib. 2. cap.
11. etc.

PAR. 4.
I Profess I am weary with turning after this Noveller, I am sorry it has
hindered so much my maine intentions; yet because I find him an
antimonarchicall man, a very firebrand, and bellows for sedition: a jacke of
the people, teaching them rather to terrify the Princes by rebellion, than to
yield any thing for quietness sake; and that the people should defend their
opinions with uprisings, commotions, and insurrections (for which cursed
opinions, his city of Magdeburge has justly suffered) therefore have I spared
him the less, esteeming him no other than a selfe-willed Epicure.

The Prayer.
ON great and just occasions, O blessed God, have thou commanded us to fast:
and in fasting to afflict our souls: good Lord grant that I may all my life
moderately, temperately, and soberly demean my self: and yet upon just
occasions may fast both privately and publicly, to serve thee, and to procure
thy love, and thy blessings with thy love, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

CHAP. VI. The Contents of the sixth Chapter.
1 What several Evangelists wrote concerning the several Suppers.

2 The Supper of the Lord, instituted after the second or common Supper.

3 Why there is no express mention of a second Supper.

Consequentiall divinity,
Proved. Approved.
Creation of Angels: and when. Infants Baptized, Scripture not always tied to
express terms. John 21.25. expounded, reasons thereof rendered.

4 Diverse reasons why the name of a second Supper is pretermitted.

PARAGRAPH. I. The second Particular of the first General.
MY propounded method leads me now, to examine in the second place, what
several. Evangelasts wrote, concerning the several Suppers. Which being
cleared, much confusion will be chased away, and the greatest dubious matters,
will distinctly appear.

S. Matthew Chapter 26. speaks of the Passover from v. 17. to the 25.
inclusive.

Saint Mark Chapter 14. does the like from verse. 12. to verse 21. inclusive,
also.

Saint Luke Chapter 22.7. begins a large narrative, from the beginning of
the preparation, to the Supper it self; and at the 14. verse the continuance
of that Supper till the 19. verse. exclusive.

The Passover which the three Evangelists had described so fully, Saint John
omitteth; and touches only at the heel, or end of that Supper. John 13.2.
Supper being ended: viz. the Supper of the Paschall lamb. For neither was the
sacred supper then instituted, or begun, much less ended: No nor yet was the
Common supper; during which so many matters of moment were acted: (of which
hereafter:) and therefore the words must be understood of the ending of
Paschall.

Concerning the second Supper, the common, or ordinary Supper, Saint Matthew
said nothing: and Saint Mark nothing. And Lucas usus est praeoccupatione.
Saint Luke records the last supper before the second (says Barradius) Tom.
4. page 64. concerning the history of the Supper, adding that he learned it of
Saint Augustine. Yet Saint Luke admirably declares things done, and words
spoken, from the 21. verse. to the 30. inclusive which in fairest probability
were done, and spoken at the second supper, rather than in the first, or in the
third supper.

Saint John writing last, and seeing memorable passages omitted in the second
supper, he only points at the passover, making the end of it to be the
beginning of the second supper. Nor does he mention, or so much as point at
the third supper at all; because it was thoroughly discribed by all the other
three Evangelists: but applies himself wholly to a large, and full explanation
of things done, and words spoken at the second supper. John 13. from verse. 2.
to the 30. verse. inclusively.

PAR. 2.
COncerning the Supper of the Lord, it is apparent, that it was not be begun
till after the second supper, 1 Cor. 11.25. In the same manner he took the
Cup when he had supped. Likewise also, he took the cup, After Supper. Luke
22.20. So the first supper was ended; and then began the second. And after the
second supper was ended; that is, when Judas was gone forth (of which
hereafter) when it was night, John 13.20. and after some little discourse, from
verse 31. to verse 38. inclusive: Christ instituted his last, best, holiest
Supper of the Eucharist. So the first supper, that is the Passover, was ended
where Saint John began his discourse of the second supper. And the blessed
Eucharist was also instituted after supper; which must be understood of the
ending of the second supper after their being washed.

The third supper is described from Matthew 26.26. to part of the 30. verse
inclusively from Mark 22. to part of the 26. verse, inclusively also. And from
Luke 22.19. and 20. verses. And this third supper they ended with an Hymn.

PAR. 3. The second Supper. The third particular of the first General.
ANd now two of those points which I thought fit to be premised being done; I
come to handle the third and last puncto, or praelibandum. And it consists in
the answers to this question: Why there is no express mention of a second
supper?

I am bold to say, express mention is not necessary. A thousand matters of
weight, and moment have been passed over without express mention: yet really
have been performed, and are most true of their own nature. Moses passed over
the creation of Angels, and Archangels, and the innumerable glorious hosts of
heavenly incorporeall spirits, and does not so much as once name them: whence
the Sadduces belike did gather, that there are neither Angels nor Spirits.

No express mention is there of baptizing of infants, or many other matters.
Consequentiall and inferentiall Divinity, if truly, and unforcedly collected,
cannot be disapproved. Quae colliguntur ex Scripturis, perinde habenda sunt, ac
si in illis scripta essent. Greg. Nazianzenus Theologiae, lib. 5. You are to
esteem such things as are gathered out of the Scriptures, as those that are
written in them. Quae in divinis Scripturis non sunt scripta, tractare debemus
per ea quae scripta sunt, says Origin in Matthew. cap. 23. Those things which
are not written in sacred Scriptures, must be handled or explained by those
things that are there written. Augustinus contra Mendacium ad Consentium: cap.
10. In divinis Scripturis vera aliquando tacentur, non mentiendo, sed tacendo.
Many true things are concealed in Scripture not by lying, but by omission or
silence.

From those things that are written, we must (says the Divine Saint Augustine)
gather such things that are not written. In the whole book of Hester there is
not the name of the Father, Son, or Holy Spirit, No nor so much as the name
of God; yet manifest effects are there of the divine providence, justice and
mercy of God. In the whole Scriptures, there is not, in expressis terminis, a
mention of the Unity in Trinity: or Trinity in Unity: yet the deductions
naturally flowing are most evident for it.

Thus though there be no express mention of Angels in the History of the
Creation: yet by resultance, the hidden truth is enlightened; the concealed
doctrine is revealed.

Some of the Fathers, because no such is named in the story of the Creation,
have held that the Angels were created before the world: as Hieron. in his
Commentary on the Epistle to Titus 1.2. from the words. God promised eternal
life, before the would began. If any who besides the Angels? Therefore the
Angels were before the world began.

I answer. 1 In that place is no mention of Angels, nor intention toward
Angels, or any promise to them, or for them, of eternal life. The Apostle
speaks concerning the hope of men's salvation. 2 Augustine de Civitate. 12.16.
truly observes, Promittere eo loco nihil aliud esse, quam statuere, vel
praedestinare: promised in that place signifies nothing else, but ordained or
predestined. 3 Why may I not say, if the words were taken literally for
promise, it is an holy trialogisme, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost before
the foundations of the world, sweetly concording and promising eternal life to
mankind, though man was not as yet created.


Ambrose, Hexameron, cap. 5. says, Angels were before the creation. So
Hilarious de Trinitate 12. So among the Greeks, Basil, Homil, 1. etc. 2.
Origin. Homil. 4. in Esaiam, Chrysostom. and Nazianzen. Ludovicus Vives, on
Augustine de Civitate Dei, 11.9. says. The Greek Divines for the most part
hold, that Spiritual things were made before corporal: and that God did use
those as instruments to produce these. Others ran into another extreme, that
the Angels were created after the world; as the soul of man was after his
body, So Gennadius and Acatius. Yet Beda, Cassiodorus, and others are
peremptory that the Angels were created within the six days. And they
followed the Divine S. Aug. for after Aug. almost all the Latins (says
Ludovicus Vives de Civitate. 10.9.) and since them all the Schools say: all
the Angels were created within the six days. I boldly say; Col. 1.16. By
Christ were all things created, that are in heaven and earth, whether they be
thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: he might have specialized
Angels or Archangels, Cherubims, or Seraphims, since he added: Al things were
made by him and for him.

What some said of Origin, I may say concerning those Greek Fathers, that they
rather Platonize, than Christianize: for Plato long before them in his book de
mundi opificio, held the same opinion. The reasoning of Augustine de Civitate
Dei, 11.9. is good. That the creation of Angels is not left out only by Moses,
I think by this (says he) it is said expressly: God ended his work on the
seventh day, and he rested the seventh day from all his works, Genesis 2.2.
And, In the beginning God created the Heaven, and the earth, Genesis 1.1. Now if
he made nothing before the six days, and rested from all his work the
seventh day, then the Angels must needs be created within that time. But yet
there is a plain place, Exodus 20.11. though it be not sufficiently expressed
without some deduction. In six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea
and all that in them is. The Angels are in heaven, and on earth: (This is the
assumption.) Therefore in the six days they were created. Psalm. 146.6. It is
varied somewhat, God made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that therein is.
From whence you may extract the same conclusion. As man was created when all
things were fitted for him: and the soul is infused into the body, when the
body is prepared to receive it: so as soon as the Heavens, the Angels (...),
now framed, the Lord filled it with Angels.

Furthermore, it is said, Psalm. 148.2. Praise the Lord all ye Angels of his:
the reason is added in the fifth verse, Let them praise the name of the Lord,
for he spoke the word, and they were made, he commanded, and they were
created, not only Sun and Moon, not only Stars of light, not only heavens
of heavens, and the waters above the heavens: but Angels also; and first of all
are Angels placed, when he had formerly said: Praise the Lord from the
heavens; And so are they comprised as well as other creatures within the six
days compass of the creation.

Augustine in the forecited book and chapter argues from the song of the
three children, in the midst of the fire (though it be Apocrypha tous) for in
the 34. verse it is said, All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: and
in the next verse, O ye heavens, bless ye the Lord: the subsequent verse
has it: O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: as if they were
created, and indeed so they were, so soon as their habitation was made; and
God had fitted them a dwelling place. But that was done toward the beginning
of the creation: and therefore the Angels were then created.

Again, though there be not express mention (in iisdem terminis sic
terminantibus) In plain words and disert terms; of baptizing of infants, yet
the Church justly, profitably, and excellently observes it. And thus it may be
evinced by Scripture.

In the Apostles time they did baptize whole households, 1 Cor. 1.16. I baptized
the house of Stephanas. Lydia was baptized, and her household, Act. 16.15. So
the Jailer was baptized, he and all his straight way, Act. 16. verse 33. that
is, his children, as well as his household servants: Act: 2: 38. Be baptized
every one of you. -- For the promise is made to you, and to your children,
verse. 39. This were a silly reason, if children might not be baptized: but
indeed it is a strong motive, that they should bring their children to
Baptism, and an argument fair enough, that children were baptized: for those
to whom the promise is made must be baptized: but the promise is made as much
to children as to any others, therefore children ought to be baptized.
Certainly the Apostles would never have named their children, if none of them
had any children, but the converts in that place being some thousands, it could
not be otherwise, but many of them had children, yea and that their children
were baptized with themselves: as in the same day was Abraham circumcised, and
Ishmael his son, and all the men of his household, Genesis 17.26. For otherwise
he had been disobedient to the holy Apostle, who said: Be baptized every one
of you: But no good Christian will or can think, that those then converted
were disobedient, and therefore their children were baptized.

It is a ridiculous thing to think the Apostles chose out such households only,
as had no little infants in them, leaving great and numerous families
unbaptized, because some little children were in them. And fairelier we may
conclude. In many families there were some infants. But many whole families
were baptized: therefore some infants. If some, why not others? If others, why
not all? And so all infants are to be baptized. Again, Baptism is necessary
for us, as Circumcision was for the Jews. This is proved because of the
correspondence between the Type and Antitype, which correspondency is so
square and perfect between the Old and New Sacrament, that the Apostle
2.11.12. in effect designeth out Baptism, by the name of Circumcision. But
their infants were circumcised, Genesis 17.27. and therefore our infants must be
Baptized: Act. 2.41. In one day were added to the Church about 3000 souls, yea
daily the Lord added such to the Church as should be saved, verse. 47. but
children are some of those that must be saved, for of such is the Kingdom of
God, says Christ, Matthew. 19.13. It is added Mark 10.15. verse. Verily I say
unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child,
he shall not enter therein.

Lastly, lest any should cavil, these children were not very little, but such
as came of themselves unto Christ, it is said in the same verse of Saint
Matthew; They brought little children unto him: and some of those children so
brought were infants, Luke 18.15. (...): it being significantly translated in
our best and last translation: They brought unto him also infants. Therefore
infants according to Christ's, yea the Apostles practice must be baptized. For
there is no likelihood, but in such great multitudes, as were together
baptized, and diverse day by day, but there were some infants.

Much more may be added to this point, but Quanto diffusares est, tanto
substringenda nobis erit, that I may use Tertullians phrase ad Nationes, 2.12.

The second Supper is not to be thought a fancy, because the word Second is
not expressed.

The Scripture is not tied to terms of method or number. I have many things to
say, says Christ, John 8.26. I have yet many things to say unto you; John
16.12. but ye cannot bear them now. So Christ spoke not all things, but
concealed some. Likewise also Christ Jesus did many other signs, and them
truly in the presence of his Disciples, which are not written in this book:
John 20.30. And after this John 21, 25. There are also many other things which
Jesus did, which if they should be written (every one in particular) I suppose
the world it self could not contain the books which should be writeen. But
lest these words may leave a scruple in men's consciences, they are to know,
that the world does not comprehend here the whole earth, much less heaven and
earth, but is used for a great compass only, as some do opine. And they have
a parallel. For it was promised to Abraham that he should be heir of the
world, Romans 4.13. yet God gave him no inheritance, no not so much as to set his
foot on. Act: 7.5. Neither had ever any, or all his children the hundredth part
of the world. Therefore (...), world is to be taken in a more contracted sense.
It is said, Their sound is gone out into all lands, and their words into the
end of the world, Rom: 10.10. and yet to this day the greatest part of the
world never heard of Christ: you are not to set the word World upon the
tenter-hooks, but to interpret it more restrainedly, and strictly in the above
cited places. Rather a second sense is better: John 14.30. The Prince of the
World comes (i.) of the wicked.

The world may be taken for the wicked sort of men: John 1.10. The World know
him not. John 14.17. The world cannot receive the Spirit of truth. So here it
may be: The world it self cannot contain the books. Capere non possunt, is
expounded by, intelligere non possunt. And so Augustine, Theophylact, Rupertus,
and Beda. For if the wicked did not comprehend (as they did not) all that
himself spoke, or the Apostles, and Evangelists writ, they would not have
understood them, though they had spoken, or writ much more. Capere, you must
refer, non ad spatium loci, sed ad animum: you must refer the word
Contain, not to the space of place, but of the mind, Mat: 19.11. All men
cannot receive this saying: The same words both in Latin and Greek being in
both places, and all run to this, That they could not understand. The World,
by reason of infidelity, cannot receive them, says Hierome.

Thirdly, in the words of John is a strong Hyperbole, as Amos 7.10. The land is
not able to bear all his words: to which place Saint John alludeth, says the
most learned Heinsius.

Another vehement Hyperbole is, Gen: 41.44. Without thee (says Pharaoh to
Joseph) shall no man lift up his hand, or his foot in all the land of Egypt.

The reasons why Saint John used this high strain in this place may be these.

1 He knew the larned would, and easily might understand it to be an Hebrew
Idiotisme, and so would take no exception. 2 He thought the unlearned would
believe, though they did not fully understand. 3 It is apparent he did not go
about to deceive: for deceit has false lights, false colors, false shadows,
Quorsum tegmen pellacidum? He deals plainly, he would have made trial in
likelyer matters, if all truth had been to be expounded according to the
letter. But from the impossibility literally, we are to fasten on a sense
mystically,
More positively he made use of this Hyperbole, to remove the aspersion of
Flattery, Oscitancie and Negligencie of singularity, and of untruths, of each
very briefly.

1 Least people might think he had written already, more than was true,
because friends omit nothing in commendation of their friend, Saint John
excuses himself from flattery, because he omitted many things, yea a world
of things. He wrote not partially as Philinus did for the Carthaginians, and
Fabius for the Romans, for which both of them are justly taxed by Polybius. The
holy Apostles not spoke all, or wrote all that they could: intra veritatem
steterunt: but fell purposely much short of all the truth.

2 Lest people should accuse him of Oscitancie and Neglect, in that he wrote
no more, but lets them know he wrote enough, more was needless, and secretly
acquitteth them for not writing all which Christ said, by affirming that his
very works exceeded all writing,

3 For Singularity: to prevent this objection, Why do you pass by so many
things, which the other Evangelists wrote; he presupposes, that what any one
wrote, was (...), therefore he wrote other things, and nor he, nor they did
write all. nor a tenth part of what they could.

4 Lastly, to remove the suspicion of Untruth, and to prove that which he
wrote in the precedent verse, John 21.24. We know that his testimony is true,
is, as if he had said. Not only my self, and other Apostles heard, or saw
immediately such things, as I write, from Christ himself: but know ye also
that many other things, partly by the sight of the other Apostles, partly by my
own sight, partly by the relation of other credible witnesses may be written,
because we will not go beyond the truth, but speak and write, within
compass rather than without,

And now let my Christian Reader judge, whether it be necessary that every
matter of moment, should be specialized (...), ad unum: un, a. un, as it is in
the French, and what huge volumes had been compiled, beyond all that ever was
written by one man, or of one man particularly, if every thing had been
particularly described.

Away then with that fond conceit, that express mention is necessary, and that
substantial things described, are colligible by a natural flowing derivation;
yet need a punctual and direct expression of words.

PAR. 4.
A True distinct real Supper there was in the second place, though the words
of the second supper be pretermitted. And a good reason may be given for the
omission in particular.

The first supper quickly passed away, and there being no distance between the
end of the first, and the beginning of the second Supper; besides the setting
down of the meat, and furnishing of the table, no marvel though the name of
the second supper was omitted.

Besides, the Paschall Lamb was eaten at the common supper also: and so from
the more sacred supper (as the Pesach was in comparison of the usual Supper)
things done in the second Supper are ascribed, as done in the first Supper, and
they two distinct Suppers are imagined but as one, or as two several courses,
of one supper: when by the Law, the first supper had no flesh but the lamb,
and the ordinary supper had offerings both of the herd, and of the flock, as I
proved before.

The Prayer.
MOst infinite and incomprehensible Lord God, the first Fathers and Patriarchs
of the Church knew thee, by thy many glorious names and Epithetes, and by thy
frequent apparitions, and revelations unto them: we know them by thy holy
Scriptures, in them are both milk and strong meat, there may the Leviathan
sport himself, and the Lamb may wade and drink, most things thy wisdom has
concealed: all things needful for mortal men have thou written; some in more
dark terms, and some in more clear patefactions: Thy glorious self being
most free, art not tied to any other expressions, than what please thee: Good
Lord, let thy divine writ teach me, guide me, in all goodness till death,
deliver me over to a more blessed estate: Grant this O Father for Jesus Christ
his sake. Amen.

CHAP. VII. The second General. The Contents of the seventh Chapter.
1 That there was a second Supper at the Jewish Paschall. Proofs from the Old
Testament. Unto the Paschall was annexed the Chagigah.

2 Difference between the first and second Supper. Maimonides, Scaliger, Beza,
and Baronius erred in this point.

3 The first Supper when it began.

4 The different meats a^ the First, Second, Supper, Jews Gentiles at their
great feasts did eat two suppers.

5 Christ's gesture at the Paschall Supper. Coena Domini Tricoenium
Christi-Christ in his last Passover kept the Ceremonies of the Jews. Coena
Dimissoria, what it was.

PARAGRAPH. I.
IT now follows, that what I have averred and avouched, I should confirm by
proofs.

First then I must evince: That there was a second Supper at the Jewish
Paschall.

Secondly, that Christ was as it.

Thirdly, more particularly let us weigh 1 When this second supper began. 2
What was said in it, and what was done in it. 3 When it ended. 4 Whether Judas
partaked of it.


In the first point I will prove, That there was a second Supper at the Jewish
Paschall,
From the Old Testament. From the New Testament. From the Fathers. From
Protestants. From Papists.


1 Proofs from the Old Testament.

Toward the end of the Paschall Supper, or at the end of it, the Jews usually
had a larger Supper, called a common supper, as Maimonides, and the Jewish
Doctors confess: which supper, though it was not enjoined at the Egyptian
Passover, when they were in so perplexed an estate, and in such hurly-burly,
that it was hard to say whether the Jews or the Egyptians most bestirred
themselves, to hasten the Israelites abrupt departure: yet you shall find it
expressly precepted: Deuteronomy 16.2. Thou shall sacrifize the Passover unto
the Lord thy God of the flock and of the herd. The Lamb of the flock was the
proper Passover, The beast of the herd were for the festival refreshments of
the second supper; some of them, even the same night, as well as for the
succeeding seven days. Yea it is most observable, that both the flock and the
herd are commanded, and the order expressed.

First they must sacrifice the Passover of the flock. Secondly of the herd.
Thirdly is mentioned the bread, verse 3. Thou shall eat no leavened bread with
it.
Vain are they then that think that they might eat none of the herd that
night. With the Passover indeed they might eat none: but so soon as the
Rites of the Passover were performed, they did eat of the herd, of which
hereafter. Nor might they eat unleavened bread at either of those suppers, or
feasts. For the Sacramental supper was not ordained merely as natural food at
civil Feasts; Every one present had some of it, but they made not their full
meals on it: every one had a little, and with fear and reverence did they
approach to the beginning of it.

Sacred things were sparely and warily taken, and used in respect of their
eating of ordinary food. As with us, the taking of the blessed body and blood
of our Lord precedeth our usual refections at dinners, and is first eaten,
propter honorem corporis Dominici: for the honor of the Lords body: as S.
Augustine excellently phraseth it. So the sacred partaking of the Paschall
Lamb, with unleavened bread, and sour herbs was the antipast to their
second succeeding supper.

Apparent then it is, that unto the sacred offering of thanksgiving in the
proper Paschall sacrifice, which was their first and devouter part of the
night, there were to be added Peace-offrings, or Feast offerings, at the same
time.

Unto the Pascha was annexed the Chagigab. The herd did minister meat-offrings
of more joy, and comfort, as it were at the second course; as the flock had
done before of dovout thankesgiving mingled partly of joy partly of sour
sorrow. For it is expressly said, Deuteron. 16.4. Neither shall there any
thing of the flesh which thou sacrificest the first day at even remain all
night, until the morning. Where observe, they also sacrificed the very first
day at even, both of the flock, and of the herd, as appears by the second
verse: and they roasted the Passover: some of the herd they did also boil the
same night. Deuteron. 16.7. (as it is in the Bishops Bibles) Thou shall sees
and eat it. Coques: as the Interlineary has it, and Hentenius, and
Santandreanus. The Margent of the Interlineary has Assabis: and Vatablus,
Assabis. Vebishaltah is the word: (...), as the 70. rendered by Vatablus,
coques. Tremellius has it coques. Our last translation, and Vatablus did
interpret the word according to the use of the proper Passover (which was to
be roasted) but both the original it self, and the 70, and Vulgat, and other
interpreters understood it truly, of the other Sacrifices, which might be
sodden, yea some of them were precepted hereby to be boiled.

PAR. 2.
THe great Maimonides utterly makes this to be a difference betweene^ the
first and second supper; between the more sacred and common meat. The^ flesh
of the Chagigah, might be served, and kept a day or two after; but the flesh of
the Pascha must be eaten or burnt before morning.

Both Scaliger, Beza, Baronius, and the adherents of them, though they plainly
and punctually confess a second supper, yet they ascribe too much to the
Jewish rituall.

First was brought in, In posteriori mensa: at the second course, (says
Baronius from the rituall), Embamma ex intybis: a sallet of sour herbs: That
they had more sallets, more sauce, and no other fresh meat of the herd, seems
strange to me. No other Bellaria, junkets, were brought in, says he and
Beza. If by bellariae they exclude all other flesh of the herd, or what was
offered in Peaceofferings, they are confuted by the place in Deuteronomie. Let
reason try it. If the Jews at their second suppers, had no junkers, nor flesh
of any other beasts but only acetarium ex intybis, and lactucis agrestibus,
bitter sharp sallets, it deserves not the name of a supper. But whosoever
exactly looks into it, will find great part of that which follows in Beza,
belonging not to the first supper, (as he would have it) but to the second
supper. And I am most sure, they had sour herbs enough at the eating of the
Paschall Lamb.

The Jews having but two suppers, and having liberty to eat as little as
they would of the first, so they did eat some (and that some of the Paschall
was to be taken by tradition, and practice of the Jews in no greater quantity
than an Olive) and having no meate^, or cates, but a little unleavened bread
with distasteful sauce in their second supper, were poor feasts in the first
and great night of Paschallizing solemnity. Let me add. The Pascha might be
eaten either at the first, or second supper, or at any time of the night before
the dawning of the day.

The Passover was (that I may so speak) the standing dish, for that nights
Festival. And I have read a tradition of the Jews, that they closed their
appetites by eating their last bit of the Pascha, when they had satisfied
themselves before, most of all with the Chagigah. For though the Chagigah was
not to be^ brought to the Table, much less to be eaten, till the^ first supper
of the Pascha was near e^nded, or the greatest part of it legally performed:
(since Bread and Wine, the Roasted Lamb, and sour herbs, or sauce, were the
only permitted food at the first, of which we have spoken be^fore) yet when
the second supper began, they did eat more freely of the Chagigah, than they
did usually of the Pascha.

That God should ordain a feast for his people, and let them have only a
pittance of the sacred Typical food, and go away with hungry stomachs, is
against the nature of a feast; especially of the most wise, and indulgent God
his appointing. Man would not serve man so. Ezra 6.22. The returned captives of
Israel kept the feast of unleavend bread with joy seven days. For the Lord
had made them joyful.

PAR 3.
THe first instant of the seven days for the eating unleavened bread, began
at the beginning of the eating of the Paschall Lamb, and the passover was
their first mess, or rather their first supper. The ending of the first was
the beginning of the second; and their merry feasting continued seven days
after.

In this second or usual supper the Jews might eat boiled, baked,
stewed-meate, as well as rost-meate.

PAR. 4.
IN the Passover, or first supper they might have no other meate^ but roasted,
and no other roasted meat but a Lamb.

In the 2. Chron. 30.21. The children of Israel kept the feast of unleavened
bread seven days, with great gladness, yea seven other days also of a
voluntary devotion, verse. 23. For Hezekiah gave to the Congregation 1000.
bullockes, and 7000. sheep, verse. 24.

More plainly, 2 Chronicles. 35.13. They roasted the Passover with fire, according
to the ordinance: but the other holy offerings sod they in pots and in
cauldrons, and in pans, and divided them speedily among all the people.
Speedily, that is, even in the same night, even in the same hour, that they
began to eat unleavened bread (and the eating of the unleavened bread,
immediately and presently prepared the way to the eating of the Paschall Lamb)
so the boiled meat was not kept till next morning untouched; but was speedily
distributed among all the people.

Deeply consider the whole context, and by the effects you shall apparently
discern their second supper distinguished from the first (though not by those
names of number) Their Chagigah from their Pascha, and the several dressings
of some of all the meat, at one meal: in the beginning of the first day of
unleavened bread: and several offerings at the same time made ready, the very
night of the Passover; which offerings of the herd were spedily divided unto
them in the first supper; one supper did as it were touch the other.

Once more I desire you to weigh this point, viz: that the beginning of the
first day of unleavened bread, wa^ at their beginning to eat their Paschall
Lamb. For they did not eat unleavened bread till that hour; and then they
did eat it with the Passover, and with sour herbs.

Duplici coena fungebantur in ritu Agni Paschalis. They had two suppers at the
eating of the Paschall Lamb; yea all their greatest solemn feasts, as not
only the Passover, but Pentecost, and the feast of Tabernacles, whilst the
Jewish policy flourished, and whilst their Temple stood, were always passed
over, with partaking of two suppers. So far excellently, the worthy Joseph
Scaliger de emendatione temporum, 6. page 571. What was granted to their other
high feasts, cannot be thought to be denied to the passover; which was indeed
their most solemn chiefest feast, and was ordained on greatest occasions: Yea
seldom did the Jews offer any sacrifice; but they also feasted. See the 1 Samuel 9.15. etc. which custom, it seems the heathen took from the Jews: for
the heathens themselves did so. It is observable from Theophrastus (...): that
when the Grecians offered any sacrifices, they used to second them with
feasting, and carowsing. Causabon has observed it: which custom it seems
they took up from the Jews.

Immolabisque Phase Domini de ovibus, and bobus, Deuteronom. 16.2. as it is in
the vulgar both of Hentenius and Saintandreanus. Thou shall sacrifice the
Passover unto the Lord thy God of the flock, and the herd. Vainly do some
Jews think a calfe might have supplied the room of a lamb, because in great
families one lamb could suffice. Cornelius a Lapide truly answers: The
Paschall Lamb was not ordained to satiate every one: but that every one should
have a part (I say a little part.) But besides the eating of the Lamb, they
did eat other meats, with which they filled themselves, or rather drove away
hunger, as I say.

The constant offering for the first day, which began at the eating of the
Passover, was two young Bullocks and a Ram, seven Lambs of the first
year, though one only, and that the first was properly the Paschall Lamb.

The meat offering was of flower mingled with oil, and a Goat for a sin
offering. Numb. 28.19. etc.

Besides the Lamb (says Cornelius, Cornelii a Lapide) alios commedebant
cibos, quibus se satiabant. They did eat other meats wherewith they did
satisfy themselves, namely, those immediately before by me named.

PAR. 5.
CHrist (says he) as may be more fitly said, stood when he did eat the
supper of the Lamb. Ribera is directly against him de Templo, 5.3. But he did
Recumbere, lie down, at the common supper, which followed the supper of the
Lamb, And from this common (or second supper) he rose to wash their feet, and
recumbed again. So he.

Of the first point I doubt, and incline rather to those who think he sat.
But I forbear repetitions: and conclude with the Jesuit, That there was a
common Supper after the Supper of the Lamb.

Surely Ribera, de Templo. 5.3. in fine, erreth, to say, it was the consent of
many, that Saint John spoke de coena Agni, when he said Christ rose from the
Supper, and laid aside his garments; for the Lamb was ended before, as Saint
John has it. John 13, 1. and the 2. and there are but few who say, as Ribera
relates in comparison of others. One of these learned men of the same order,
are opposite to another, and both the ground is most weak, and the matter most
unlikely, if not untrue, that Christ did Recumbere, lie down, at the
Passover, which Ribera intimates.

Kemnitius in the 8. chap: de Fundamentis Sanctae Coenae ex Lucae 22.20. thus
to our purpose concerning the maine; though on the By he has some errors.
Absoluta jam typica coena Agni Paschalis. Finita etiam, and conclusa altera
illa subsequenti coena communi: instituit Christus novam, and peculiarem Novi
Testimenti coenam, qua^ Paulus Dominicam appellat, and hoo est, quod Paulus and
Lucas dicunt, (...): The typical supper of the Paschall Lamb, being now
finished, and that other common subsequent supper being concluded; Christ
instituted a new, and peculiar supper of the New Testament, which Saint Paul
calls, the Supper of the Lord. And this is that which Paul and Luke do say:
after he had supped. And this is that which I call Tricoenium Christi; most
divinely expressed by Kemnitius in other words, but fully to my purpose. And a
little before; Illam etiam alteram communem coenam Christus concludit more
Israelitarum (sicut Hebraeorum Commentaria habent) usitato, Accepto poculo,
gratias egit, and dixit, accipite hoc and dividite inter vos. Christ concluded
that other common supper, after the usual manner of the Israelites (as the
Commentaries of the Hebrews have it) when he had taken the Cup he gave
thanks and said: Take this and divide it among you.

That the last Passover of Christ was observed like the Antecedent ones. No
man denies this, says Scaliger; and Christ kept the antecedent Passeovers
according to the same rite, custom or ceremony, as the Jews did (says he)
and indeed, otherwise he had broke the Law, which he rather fulfilled.
Therefore both at other Passeovers, and at his (...) Pascha, his saving
Passover. Christ partaked of the two Suppers appointed by the Law, besides the
new third one, which he instituted.

Scaliger ibidem page 569. mentions the Cibaria, or dishes, which to this day
the Jews call cibaria duarum coenarum, the dishes of two suppers, or duorum
symposiorum, of two banquets. And the second supper was called Coena
dimissoria, a dimissory supper, as the Secundae mensae, or second supper of the
Gentiles (says he) or rather, say I, the Secundae mensae of the Gentiles,
were like the second supper of the Jews.

So much concerning my proofs from the Old Testament, that a second supper
did, as it were, tread on the heels of the first supper of the Passover, by
the very letter, and express command of the Law.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, in thy great wisdom thou did ordain the Paschall Lamb,
principally as food for the souls of the Jews: and did annexe a second
supper, for a refreshing of their bodies, grant that we may chiefly attend the
good of our souls, and desire that spiritual meat, and for the weak,
fading, transitory, corporeal nourishment, we may so use it, that we may be
truly said to look up through the creatures to the Creator, and eat to live
thankfully, not live to eat intemperately, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. The Contents of the eight Chapter.
1 Proofs from the New Testament for a second Supper.

2 Proofs from the Fathers, especially Saint Cyprian. Cibus inconsumptibilis.

3 The second Supper was Fibula Legis and Evangelii.

4 Inter, or between, evinceth a Triplicity. Saint Augustine, Theophylact,
Damascen.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
SEcondly, the proofs from the New Testament for the second supper are these.

Matthew 26.21. Edentibus ipsis, As they did eat. Namely when Christ, ad
secundas mensas discubuisset, coena priore jam peracta: sat down at the
second supper, the first Supper being now ended: as appears John 13.2. says,
Beza, whence thus I argue.

The first supper was ended, John 13.2. before the discourse, and actions which
followed; but after that, Christ rises from supper verse 4. And sits down
again verse 12. and did eat, and eat bread with Judas verse 18. Therefore
this was the common and second supper. For no man will say, that Christ at the
most holy Supper of the Eucharist, would rise from it: and wash their feet and
sit down again. A flying thought ought not to disturb our devotion at the
receiving of so high a mystery: neither would Christ give an example of so
irreverent an action during the administration of the Supper, of the holy
Supper of the Lord. So it being neither the Paschall, nor Eucharisticall
supper, it must needs be the second-common supper, from which Christ arose, and
after returned to his old place, For he did rise from supper.

Again, as Saint John is punctual, that the first Paschall supper was past
and ended, ere he described the second supper: So Saint Luke is as punctual,
that Christ administered the sacred Eucharist after supper, Luke 22.20.

If any one say, the words, After supper, may be understood of the Paschall
supper, and after it: I confess they may be stretched so far according to
the letter, yet from the sense we must necessarily distinguish, (...) after:
may be interpreted either (...), or (...), mediately or immediately. After,
with some distance of time, words, and actions intercedent: or after, that is,
presently after; but it cannot be meant presently after the Passover, because
S. John records many things, both said and done after the Paschall, which
were not performed in a short time, and so not presently after the Passover,
but mediately. Therefore (...): After supper, must necessarily have reference
to the end of the second, or ordinary supper, which approaced nearer in time,
to the supper of the Lord, than the Paschall supper could. Between which and
the holy Supper many matters arose, and matters were begun, and ended in the
second supper: of which hereafter.

PAR. 2. Proofs from the Fathers, especially S. Cyprian.
SAint Cyprian Sermon de Coena Domini, page 500. distinguishes thus: Coen^
disposita inter Sacramentales epulas, obviarunt sibi instituta antiqua and nova.

Two sacramental feasts there were, the Paschall, and the Eucharist; and
between them was a supper made, or placed (what could this be else but a
second supper) and thus did the old and new rites meet, for as I proved
before, it was one of the old rites of the Paschall, to have annexed to it a
second ordinary supper: and when the Lamb was consumed, as the old tradition
prescribed (which none ever proved was done, or to be done wholly at the first
supper; and I have proved, it might without sin continue uneaten, or
unconsumed, even in the second supper, yea till toward the morning) and which
Paschall was commonly the last bit of that nights festivitie (as some Rabbines
affirm) Christ set before his Disciples cibum inconsumptibilem, everlasting
food, (says he.) Nor are the people now invited to elaborate, costly, and
artificial feasts, (as was usual in the second supper) but immortal food is
given differing from common meats, says Cyprian.

PAR. 3.
Lo here the common supper; for both the Paschall and the Eucharist were
Sacramental, not common meats. And this ordinary supper was tanquam fibula
legis and Evangelii. The button (as it were) of the Law and of the Gospel, as
one of old said of the Baptist: So long (says he) as those meats which were
provided for the feast were eaten by the Apostles, the Passover was remembered.
The most learned Father alludeth not to the Paschall Lamb it self, in his
words of meats provided for the feast, but to other victuals allowed, yea
commanded to be used in the second supper. Besides bread, wine, and sauce, they
were to eat no meats, but only the Lamb, one single meat.

PAR. 4.
What if I should furthe^r say, that the^ word Inter, or betwee^ne, evince^th
a triplicity.

The Son in Divinis, is in account betwe^ene the^ Father, and the Holy Ghost;
which establishes our belief in a Trinity of persons.

That virtue is a middesse, mean, or middle between two extremes, argue^th
three things: argues two opposite vices, and the golden mediocrity, to be
between two, evinceth not only a duality, but plurality. A thing done: a
sentence spoken between dinner and supper, is passed over in a third parcel
of time. A supper between two banquets shows the Antipast, the maine
refection at supper, and the postpast. Nothing can be placed between fewer
than two other preexistent things. Vnio est rerum praeexistentium; unio
Inter, praesupponit duo entia.
Union, is the union or coupling together of things, which formerly had a
being: The word between presupposes two things at the least. A Mediator is
not a Mediator of one, Gal. 3.20. To be a Mediator between two necessarily
introduces a third, some way distinct from the other, and he officiateth his
Mediatorship.

None can judge between two men, or two causes, if they be not before in rerum
natura, or in the world.

A Supper inter Sacramentales Mensas, between the sacramental banquets, (of
which hereafter) distinguishes it self from the two banquets, and them from
it: evidencing at the least numerum ternarium, the number of three.

Saint Augustine lib. 5. Quaestionum super Deuteronom. cap. 24. Why did he
add oxen? Deuteron. 16.2. When the Passover was to be taken ex ovibus,
hoedi^, a^t capris? of sheep, kids, or goats why is mention made of Oxen? He
answers his own question by another. Is it for other sacrifices, which were
to be slain on the very days of unleavened bread? Whence I may truly collect,
that on the days of unleavened bread they had other offerings. And therefore
on the first day of unleavened bread, which was when the passover was eating,
they had other provision to be eaten also, when the Paschall rites and
ceremonies were ended.

Theophylact on Luke 22. Pascha stantes comedebant: quomodo igitur Dominus
recumbere dicitur? Dicunt itaque quod postquam comedit legale Pascha,
recubuerant more vulgari commedentes alios quosdam cibos. They ate the
passover standing. How then is the Lord said to lie down? They say therefore,
that after he had eaten the legal Passover; they lay down after the common
fashion, eating certain other meats.

Damascen de fide orthodoxa, 4. 14. In coenaculo sanctae and gloriosae Sion
Christus antiquum pascha cum Discipulis suis manducans, and implens antiquum
Testamentum lavit discipulorum pedes. Christ having eaten the old passover
with his Disciples in the supping chamber of holy and glorious Sion, and having
fulfilled the Old Testament, washed his Disciples feet. When besides the
passover, the second supper appointed by the Old Testament may very well be
understood,

Suarez cites Damascen thus. Expletis mysteriis ad communem coenam ventum est:
having fulfilled the mysteries, they went to the common supper. But there are
no such words in the cited place, nor in Iodocus Clychtonaeus, the Commentary
on Damascen,

The Prayer.
O Heavenly Father thou have created all things for man: and blessed them for
man: add these further testimonies of thy favor, holy Father, to sanctify
them unto us, and us unto thy self for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

CHAP. IX.
1 Proofs from the Protestants for a second Supper Kemnitius, Beza (...) Beza
awry. Scaliger commended.

2 Diverse kinds of sauces at the second supper. (...) what it signifies.

3 Bellaria expounded, Bacchus his Bellaria. Rich wines. Scaliger and Beza
censured.

4 A description of the Ceremony of the Passover. Poculum Hymneseos, Things in
the description of the Paschall Supper
Redundant. Deficient.


Embamma, what it was. At what time of supper Christ washed his Disciples
feet. Benediction, at what time of supper used. What kind of herbs were eaten
at the Passover. The second supper when it began.

PARAGRAPH 1.
YOu heard before the opinion of the incomparable Joseph Scaliger, of
Kemnitius, of Beza; and yet Beza has more to say. Beza on Matthew. 26.26. on the
words, Edentibus illis, etc. As they were eating, etc. Hoc est factum (...):
This was done after supper: he proves it by Luke 22.20. and the 1 Cor. 11.25.
Thence he concludes: (...), this word supper in this History is called the
Legal supper, which Christ abrogating afterward, substituted his (...):
supper of the Lord for ever.

The same Beza in Mat. 26.20. speaks of the Jewish custom thus, Coena (Agni)
peracta, consurgentes, altera pedum ablutione facta, rursum discumbentes, ad
secundas mensas sese comparabant: In has secundas mensas pro bellariis
inferebatur in tribulo acetarium ex intybis, and lactucis agrestibus. The
supper (of the Lamb) being ended, they arose, and having washed their feet,
the second time, they sat down again, and addressed themselves to the second
supper. At this second supper, instead of junkets, there was brought in, in a
platter a sallet of Succory, Endive and wild Lettice. Here Beza is awry, making
the sour herbs or sauces, to be excluded from the first supper. Agno illo
solidocum paucis azymis vescentes. Eating that whole Lamb with a little
unleavened bread, not mentioning the sour sauce. He might as well exclude
unleavened bread.

Wiser Scaliger de Emendatione temporum 6. page 567. They err who think that
Christ did eat the Passover with unleavened bread, for how was it then the
Passover? Therefore with unleavened bread and sour herbs did Christ
celebrate the Passover, says he. And indeed sour herbs were a necessary
ceremony, lasting, and fixed, at the eating of this Paschall, as I proved
before, and the sacrifice had been maimed, if it had been defrauded of this
sauce: and properly no Passover, if either unleavened bread, or sour herbs
had been away: or the sacrifice of the herd, had not been offered, though at
first supper not eaten,

PAR. 2.
BUt (says Beza) from Scaliger, and he from the Jewish Rituall. At this
second supper they brought instead of banqueting dishes, a platter of sauce: I
reply; That sauce of sour herbs embammated, should be instead of banqueting
meats, I see no reason. I doubt not but they had diverse kinds of sauces at
the second supper. And that Christ gave to Judas a sop dipped in one of the
sauces, I hope to make most probable; and this was also in the second supper.
For Matt. 26.23. When Judas dipped his hand with Christ in the dish, he dipped
his bread (says Maldonate.) Why not the flesh of the Lamb, say I? We dippe
our meat more than our bread in sauces. Likewise, when at the second Supper,
Ioh. 13.26. Christ dipped the morsel, or soppe, and gave it to Judas, it was
the sauce into the morsel was dipped; (...), signifies a mouthfull, or
morsel, whether of bread, flesh, or fish; yet (...) in Homer, Odys. 9. verse.
374. is used not for a soope of bread, but for a gobbet of flesh (...), frusta
humanae carnis: Gobbets of man's flesh, which Polyphemus vomited up.

PAR. 3.
I Confess also that, In Paschali, etc. ut est infra, they were forbid indeed,
bellaria junkets, or any other meats whatsoever besides the Lamb, sour
herbs, and unleavened bread, in the first Supper of the Passover. In paschali
epulo, ipse convivae interdicebantur omni genere bellariorum: as it is in the
Canon of the Rituall, says Scaliger truly, if you interpret him of the first
proper Sacramental Supper, distinguished from the second ordinary Supper.

Aulus Gellius Noctium Atticarum, 13.11. well expounds the word, Bellaria
from Varro. Vocabulum Bell^ria significat omne mensae secundae genus. The word
Bellaria signifies all kind of banqueting dishes, at second course; and some
of them were sweetened with honey: though Varro says, Bellaria ea optime sunt
mellita, quae mellita non sunt, those are the sweetest junkets indeed, which
are not sweetened at all. Again, (...): oftentimes, with these Bellaria is
butter mingled as Dioscorides witnesses, 2.83. what Plato, and other Grecians
call (...), aut, (...); Varro, and the Latins called Bellaria, we junkets,
ordaintye dishes, and the sweeter and richer wines were called Bacchus his
Bellaria, says Gellius ibidem from Varro; yet both in their first Supper they
had their sour herbs: Comedes azymos panes cum lactucis agrestibus; Thou
shall eat unleavened bread with sour herbs, Exodus 12.8. and in the second
Supper, they might have Bellaria, dainty dishes, most likely it is they had so,
made of the flesh of the herd, as best pleased them to have it cooked or
dressed.

Though Scaliger and Beza say, that the Acetarium, or sharp sauce, made, ex
intybis, and lactucis agrestibus, of Succorie, and wild Lettice, was brought
in locum Bellariorum, instead of their junkets, they prove it not so from the
Canon of the Rituall, which speaks of the first Supper of the Paschall
excluding all banqueting stuff; but to the second Supper they were admmitted.

Nor indeed does the description used by the great Scaliger (from whom others
take it) seem probable or coherent to it self. Thus he; in the room of
junkets, or sweet meats at the Paschall feasts was brought in a platter, a
sauce of Endive (yet Endive is of no bad taste, says Cornelius Cornelii a
lapide) and because the juice of them was unpleasant and sour, therefore was
made a confection of Vinegar, and other sharp sauce, of I know not what
ingredients, into which they dipped the unleavened bread, and those bitter
herbs, it was called (...): to this day they make that sauce as thick as our
mustard.

PAR 4.
A Bit of unleavened bread, the Master of the Family did first dip into that
Embamma, and ate it. Then under the Carpet, or under a Napkin kept he another
part of unleavened bread, which he break into as many pieces, as there were
guests. The pieces were about the bigness of an Olive, which he gave to every
one in order. When therefore the Master of the Family, was about to eat the
dipped Bit, he prayed; Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the world, who
have sanctified us by thy Commandment, etc. of which I spoke before. Then he
blessed the wine, and drank, and gave it to him that was next him, and he to
the second, and the second to the third, till it went round about to all the
company; and this Cup was called (...); A Grace-Cup, poculum hymni; which pot
was called, poculum hymnesews, because an hymn being sung after this draught,
they darted; and it was (...), that which ended Supper; for the Cannon of the
Passover directly forbad them after this song of praise, either to eat, or
drink. This was the Ceremony, and Rite of celebrating the Passover, in the
days, or time of the Missias; so far the admired Scaliger. page 572. etc.

Yet me thinks in this description of the Paschall Supper, somewhat
redoundeth, much is deficient.

That they had an Embamma or sallet, of diverse other herbs at the first
Paschall Supper; and that they who had scarce leisure to cook their meat, and
not leisure to bake their bread, yet were so curious, as to have elaborated
sauces, stands not much with likelihood.

Secondly, was this Embamma more pleasant, or displeasant to the taste, than
the sour herbs only? If they used it to adoulce, and sweeten the soure-bitter
taste of the herbs, it defrauded the intent of the Law.

Beza, who borrowed of Scaliger much of that he had concerning the Paschall
Supper, skippeth over the spissitude of the sauce, like mustard: and says the
Embemma; (it should have been printed Embamma) was to temper the bitterness,
and soreness of the herbs, which is nothing else but to ensweeten them, and
fit them for the pleasantness of the taste, or pallat: But this is unlikely
(as I said) that it might be Satura olerum amarorum, full of sour herbs. Then
I say, that addition needed not, since God appointed the former, and he knew
what was best; and since all (that have tasted) do know, and others may read
it, as confessed, that Lactuca Silvatica, or Silvestris, wild Lettice, is of
an harsh taste of it self, sufficiently bitter for sauce.

Again, he says; that this Embamma was of such a nature, that they did dippe
in it both their unleavened bread, and the bitter herbs. So by his reckoning,
it was the sauce, for the sauce of herbs.

Things deficient in the description of the Paschall Feast used by Scaliger,
are these.

1. That he makes the second supper to consist only of unleavened bread, and
wine given round to every guest, and singing of a laudatory hymn: and in the
room of sweete-meates brings in his thick sauce, forgetting the meat of the
herd, which was to be eaten with it, having bread to eat with that sauce of
herbs; and another sauce into which both bread, and sour herbs were dipped.

2. That he makes a double washing; first, from the daily use, that they might
lie down, and eat the paschall Lamb. Secondly, Supper being done, they
washed according to the Rite of the passover, says he, where he makes the
time of the second washing, to be just at the end of the first Supper, or of
the beginning of the Second Supper.

More plainly, yet he avoucheth. Duplex est Coena incontinenter, cum duae
lotiones utramque praeeant; there was a double Supper forthwith joining
together without space between, incontinently; two washings preceding both of
them (or rather one washing going before each of them) Barradius his argument
well refuteth the opinion of Scaliger: Coena facta surgit a coena (says S.
John) Si a coena surrexit jam discumbebat, and coenabat. Non ergo ante coenum
(illam) exhibita est pedibus aqua. After Supper, he rose from Supper. If he
rose from Supper, he had before sat down, and had supped. Therefore (the
Apostles) feet were not washed, before (that) Supper. Lucas Brugensis
Itinerary says, that Christ, post agni esum, and coenam vulgarem, lavit pedes
Apostolorum: after the Lamb was eaten, and the common supper, he washed his
Apostles feet. As if Christ washed them when the second Supper was ended
(being opposite to Scaliger) yet it is apparent, Christ sat down again, and
again did eat.

Augustine Tractatu in Johan. 55. reasons as well against this extreme of
Brugensis, as he did against the other extreme of Scaligers Augustine thus: Non
debemus intelligere coenam factam, veluti jam consummatam atque transactam:
adhuc enim coenabatur, cum Dominus surrexit, and pedes lavit discipulis. Nam
postea recubuit: and buccellam suo traditori postea dedit, utique coena nondum
finita (i) dum panis adhuc esset, in mensa. We must not conceive, After Supper
(to be spoken) as if Supper had been then consummated, and perfectly finished:
for as yet they were at Supper, when the Lord arose, and washed his Disciples
feet. For afterward he sat down again, and afterward gave the Sop to him
that should betray him; Supper being not yet fully finished: (that is to say)
while bread was yet upon the Table.

Beza was more judicious in this point, saying of Christ, a mensa consurgens,
and pedibus discipulorum in medio convivio, contra quotidianum morem, ablutis
rursum discubuit: agreeing with, Ioh. 13.4. and 12. verses. It was toward the
midst of the second supper, when Christ arose to wash his Disciples feet, and
after his second sitting he did eat again. Yet Beza seems much mistaken;
saying, that the chief of the family keept some of the unleavened bread, hid
under a Napkin till the end of feast: which feast being done, he drew out from
under the Napkin; the other part of the bread, broken into so many pieces, as
there were fellow-feeders, or friendly guests; and he first took part, and
gave the rest to his companions, with this blessing. This is the bread of
affliction, which our Fathers did eat in Egypt; for this Benediction was at
the beginning of Supper, before the Master of the house had dipped the sop in
the platter, as Scaliger well observes; and it stands with all likelihood,
that they should be instructed thus, before they did eat, rather than
afterward.

3. That he brings an authority from the Rituall of the Jews; viz. That every
other night they did eat of herbs of all sorts, but in the Rite of the
passover, only ex intybis; and yet Scaliger confesses, that the sauce, into
which both the unleavened bread, and the sour herbs were dipped; was, Satura
olerum amarorum, quae aliis ejusmodi spissabatur, was full of bitter herbs,
and thickened with other herbs of the like kind. Here are more herbs than the
Rituall allows.

4. That he makes the second Supper to be incontinently, and immediately after
the first: when of necessity, we must grant a time for the administrants, or
servitours to bring up, and hansomely, and orderly, to place on the board, the
diversly-dressed flesh of the Herd; though the paschall Lamb was not wholly
consumed, but yet stood on the Table, whilst the heavenly Table-talke
continued: and though the Table-cloth was not wholly, or fully removed, but
rather cleansed.

The Prayer.
MOst Gracious God, who sees not thy provident wisdom, ordering all things,
in number weight, and measure, he has blindfolded himself. The Passover thou
command to be eaten with unleavened bread only; Grant; good Lord, that we
may cast away the leaven of maliciousness, and with all sincerity,
simplicity, and singleness of heart, serve and love thee, through Jesus
Christ, our Lord, Amen.

CHAP. X. The Contents of the tenth Chapter.
1. Proofs from the Papists. Baronius amiss in some points of the Paschall
Supper. Baronius, Lucas Burgensis, Sebastian Barradius, and Maldonate, prove a
second Supper.

2. Maldonate doubts, whether the Paschal be called a Supper: Piscator
censured.

3. Tolet, Suarez, Bellarmine, prove a second Supper.

4. Bellarmine censured; S. Cyprian cleared.

5. Adam Contzen, and Stapleton, prove a second Supper. Poculum bibatorium. The
Tricoenium accomplished.

6. Christ was present at the First, or Paschall Second, or common Supper.

7. The Jews at their solemn feasts, had double Commons.

8. When the second Supper began, about six of the clock at night. How long
the second Supper lasted. When it ended.

PARAGRAPH. 1. Fifthly, Proofs from Papists.
BAronius also ad annum 34. Numero 38. is much amiss in some points: Two
Suppers (says he) were conjoined in the Paschall feast: or rather, Vnius
coenae, duplex mensa; a second course at the same Supper: So far well enough
with a good interpretation. In the first was the eating of the Lamb. In the
second, was the Ceremony of unleavened bread. But is it possible, that so
learned a man should think, They did eat the Paschall Lamb without bread? Or
first gobble in the flesh, and at the second course thrust in the unleavened
bread after? was it not the express Law to eat the one with the other? The
flesh roasted with fire, and unleavened bread, Exodus 12.8. Suppose we grant it
to be a second course (which indeed was a second Supper) do any of us eat
our flesh at the first Mess, and our bread at the second Mess? And though it
be said, they shall eat it in the same night; yet no man can justly imagine,
the flesh was eaten the first part of the night; and the bread was crammed in
after the first service. Sense shall guide me above any Rituall, and yet the
Rituall both begins the paschall Supper, with the consecration of the
unleavened bread; and confesses (says Baronius) um tantum in paschate, sed
and in aliis maximis Judaeorum solennibus diebus, ut Pentecoste, and Scenopegia
ejusmodi duplices coenas exhiberi consuevisse. That not only at Easter, but
also on other great feastivall days of the Jews; as at Whitsontide, and at
the feast of Tabernacles, such double Suppers were wont to be exhibited.

Thus among the Jews, you shall find Maymonides, for the second Supper; and
the very Rituall it self, you have also Scaliger, Kemnitias, and Beza, for the
same among the Protestants.

I have begun with Baronius among the Papists. He again says expressly: Christ
gave Judas the Sop in the second Supper.

I touched also at Franciscus Lucas Burgensis: who again, on Matthew. 26.21.
Edentibus illis, thus has it: Inter edendum; edendum autem non pascha, quod
primum festinanter a stantibus comestum fuerat, sed reliquos ejus coenae cibos;
as they did eat. But the passover was not to be eaten, which was first eaten
in haste (by the Israelites) standing; but the other Viands of that Supper.

The same Lucas Burgensis, on Iohnn 13.2. Coena facta: The Supper being ended:
thus: Coena, (cujus primus cibus fuer at agnus Paschalis; reliquus cibus
vulgaris) facta, non ita ut mensa esset ablata, and gratiae actae. -- post
coenam ordinariam: sed ante sacram, and Eucharisticam. The supper (whose first
service was the paschall Lamb, the rest of the dishes ordinary, or common
victuals) being ended; not so ended as that the table was removed, and grace
said -- after the ordinary, or common supper: but before the sacred and
Eucharisticall supper.

The same on Luke 22.20. Addit hoc Lucas, postquam coenasset, or post coenasse,
or postquam coenassent, (as it is in the Syriack) ut intelligamus sacramentum
hoc, non pertinu^sse ad vulgarem coenam, quae pascendo corpori subservierat.
After he had supped; or, after supper: or, After they had supped -- to give us
to understand, that this Sacrament did not belong to the Vulgar, or Common
Supper, which served for the feeding of the body.

Sebastian Barradius. Tom. 4. page 31. After Christ with his Apostles had eaten
the Paschall Lamb, In mensa recubuit, cibosque alios sumpsit. Again, ibid. It
was not forbidden, but usual to eat other meats in the Paschall Supper.

The same Barradius. page 64. speaking of the words: Post quam coenavit: After
he h^d supped; They are to be understood de sola coena legali, and communi,
quae sequuta est legalem -- Only of the legal and common Supper, which
followed after the Legal: where he plainly acknowledges two suppers, the
Legal one: and the common one following it.

The same having a little before cited the Ecclesiastical hymn. Post Agnum
typicum expletis epulis,
Corpus Dominicum datum discipulis.
After the Pascall Lamb, and second Festival
Christ gave his Disciples his body mystical.
He coucludeth from expletis epulis, ergo post coenam and epulas omnes. The
banquets being ended: Therefore (he gave his body) After supper, and all other
banquets; which words prove more banqueting stuff, than a platter of sour
sauce only (as Scaliger would have it) in the second supper. Fost agnum alios
sumebant cibos, quos intingebant in condimentum hoc, vel aliud praeparatum,
says Barradius truly. After the Lamb they did eat other meat, which they
dipped in this sauce, or some other sauce newly prepared for that purpose.

Maldonate on Matt. 26.26. page 555. thus Cum tres eodem tempore actiones
fuerint, quae tres coenae vocari solent: Whereas there were three actions,
which commonly they call three suppers: the first in which the Paschall Lamb
was eaten, which is called the ceremonial supper. The second, the common, and
usual supper: for (says he) the Lamb being religiously eaten, because (for
the most part) they who ate of it, were not filled or satisfied, they had
another supper of which they did sup to saturity; and page 557. at the
beginning, Solebat eso jam agno, coena communis apponi. There was wont, when
the Lamb was eaten, to be served in a common supper. The third supper was when
Christ consecrated his Body, and Blood. So far, well.

PAR. 2.
Whether the first ceremonial suppe^r, be called any where a supper: I do not
well remember (says he) and yet he knew it was to be eaten between the two
evenings; then which, there is no time more proper for a supper. And himself
at the last words of the next page: The Lamb might be eaten at no other time
than at supper.

Does not Saint John say, After Supper. John 13.2. which could not be after the
third or second supper: for they were after those words spoken, but of
necessity must be interpreted, of the first supper of the Lamb, which was then
ended. Therefore the eating of the Passover, is justly and truly called a
supper, and the first supper.

I pity the peremptory ignorance of Piscator, in his Scholia on that place,
who says, Omnino pro (...), videtur legendum (...), ac proinde vertendum, dum
coena fieret: hoc est. inter coenandum: non autem coena peracta. It seems
altogether (says he) that instead of (...) the 2. Aorist. mediae vocis, which
intimates the time perfectly, though but newly past: we ought to read (...),
which is a participle of the time present. And so indeed in the Greek New
Testament printed by John Crispin in the Margent we find it: and therefore
that place of Saint John ought to be translated; Whilst they were at supper,
or, at suppertime: not when supper was ended: for all his arguments prove the
second Supper, was not ended, which no man denies; though the Paschall supper
were transacted before.

The second, or ordinary supper, Saint Luke, Saint John, and Saint Paul call a
supper (says he) A plain confession of a second supper, and yet not plainer
than that the eating of the Paschall is called a supper.

PAR. 3.
TOlet on John 13.2. Annotatione 7. distinguishes the^ legal supper, from the
common supper. Peracta Paschali Agni coena, and communi incaepta, says he
again. The Supper of the Paschall Lamb being ended, and the common supper
being begun, he washed their feet.

The most learned Suarez on Thomas: page 487. (says) Augustine and Iansenius
do not distinguish, Coenam usualem, a coena legali. The usual supper from the
legal supper; But himself does; and again is expressed, page 483. Christus
illa nocte duplicem vel triplicem coenam egit cum suis Discipulis: Christ in
the same night did eat two or three suppers, with his Disciples.

Bellarmine de Sacramento Eucharist: 4.27. ad 2. object. says, the Eucharist,
sub specie panis proprie respondet coenae Iudaicae, and Agno Paschali. Under
the Element of bread does properly answer, unto the Judaicall supper, and to
the paschall Lamb. Where he acknowledges a Judaicall (Supper which Suarez
called the usual Supper) besides the eating of the paschall Lamb.

PAR. 4.
BUt Bellarmine is much to blame, to think that the Eucharist was given, in
Coena sub-specie panis: at supper-time under the element of bread; and the Cup,
post coenam: after supper. There was no such distance of time between them.
Both Saint Matthew, Saint Mark, and Saint Paul, immediately conjoyne them: and
so does Saint Luke: though somewhat (as the Copies now are) is placed, as done
after the Eucharist; which by the other Evangelists is related, before the
taking of the Eucharist. But no action intervened, to sever the Bread from the
Cup, but the sumption of the sacred Bread, and the immediate consecration of
the Wine. If Cyprian in sermon S. de Lapsis, said, Calicem offerri solere
praesentibus post expleta solennia. That the cup was wont to be offered, after
the solemnities were performed: which (says Bellarmine) is, finita jam Missa.
after the Mass was ended: yet he speaks of his own time, not of Christ's
Institution of both kinds: where both were given, similiter post coenam, alike
after supper; and not the one during supper time, and the other after it.

PAR. 5.
A Damus Contzen, a Jesuit on Matthew. 26. thus, Post agnum solita ceremonia
absumptum, epulari soliti sunt Iudaei: nec in esu Sacramenti saturitatem, sed
mysterium spectabant Christi etiam tempore, at que in ipsis aedibus, praeter
sacrificii consumptionem, etiam convivia celebrata sunt; says he: The Jews
when they had eaten the (paschall Lamb) according to the usual manner, were
wont to banquet. Neither did they so much look after saturity or fullness in
the eating of the Sacrament, as after a mystery: yea even in Christ's time, and
that in the very supping chamber, after the eating of the Sacrifice, banquets
were also solemnized.

Stapleton most excellently writes to our purpose, in his promptuarium
Cathelicum. In feria. 3. Hebdomadae sanctae. page 240 thus, Christus hac ultima
nocte mortalis suae vitae triplicem coenam peregit. Christ in the very last
night of his mortal life did eat a threefold supper.

In the second, common, and familiar supper, Poculum bibatorium, more gentis
illius, omnibus suis propinavit. He drank a cup of charity, according to the
usance of that country, to all his (Apostles) when he said, Accipite, and
dividite inter vos. -- Take this and divide it among you. By thus expounding
the^ three Suppers, not only Christ's new supper shall be distinguished from
the Paschall, as the truth from the figure; but the most new, and sacred
mystery shall be separated from the common Supper, the common bread and wine,
says he.

And now (good Reader) know, that in so abstruse a matter as this is, there is
a world of diversity in several men's opinions, and therefore I may not stand
to confute them all, though I approve them not all as I quote them; but I only
fasten on those words which prove the maine point. Of two suppers of the Jews
at their paschalizing: of the third supper instituted by Christ, confessed by
eminent Christian men, on all sides. And so the Tricoenium is accomplished.

PAR. 6. The third General.
I Have proved there was a second Supper, at the Je^wish passover. The next
point is, That our Savior was at both of them. This also is involved in the
former. For he kept the Law exactly. And Scaligers passages are admirable to
this effect, as before I cited, viz. Christ kept the passover, as he kept the
precedent, and kept the precedent as the other Jews did.

PAR. 7.
BUt the^y had their double commons: or second re^fections, on their gawdie
days: especially at the most solemn feast of the passover. They fed both on
the flock and on the herd: and by them was the first and second supper
distinguished.

Even at the we^aning of Isaak, Abraham made a great feast Gen: 21.8. At the^
making of the covenant with Abimeleck, Abraham gave him sheep and oxen. verse.
27. At Samuels weaning, his mother caused one bullock to be slain: and two
other she carried, either for peace offerings, or to bestow upon Ely, 1 Samuel
1.24. for part of the Priests portion was of oblations and sacrifice^s. She
brought also both wine^ and flower: (and flower) somewhat more, than the Law
appointed, to make the feast, or the offering more complete. At all feasts they
had great variety; and at the most solemn feasts of the Passover, had they
nothing but Lamb? If they had more, did not Christ partake? Did he sit by and
eat nothing.

Next Chapter after institution of the Passover, and in re^membrance^ of the^
Passover, when they were come into Canaan, they did sacrifice^ to the Lord,
all (clean beasts) that opened the matrix, being males, Exodus 13.15, so the
he^rd was to be slain, as well as the Lamb, in remembrance of the Passover.
More nearly, and punctually. Christ ate of the passover at the first Supper,
as I proved before: Christ did eat of the second supper, as I also from the
Text plainly evinced. Concerning the third supper, (God willing) I shall speak
hereafter.

PAR. 8.
ANd thus I pass to the next point. The first particular of the third
General: when this second supper began whereby we may the better distinguish
it from the passover.

Thus went the time away: and these things are most certain.

On Thursday immediately preceding his passion, Christ commanded to prepare the
passover. Mark. 14.13. Peter and John went to see it done, Luke 22.8. and 13.
verses. When the passover was made almost ready: Peter and John return to
Christ: and then in the evening Christ comes with the twelve. Mark. 14.17.
And they washed: as may be gathered from Ioh. 13*10. And when the houre^ was
come he sat down, and his twelve Apostles with him. Luke 22.14. Between the
two evenings did the^y e^ate of the passover, as the Law appointed. Exodus
12.6. The passover was eaten, and to be eaten in haste. Exodus 12.11.


These things seem to me most probable, They began about six of the clock at
night, and they were not much above one Quarter of an hour, ere the first
paschall Supper was ended. The second Supper continued about three^ quarters of
an hour, or a little more. Herein Christ washed their feet, and discoursed
much. Judas received not the blessed Eucharist; but went out about seven of
the clock at night or somewhat after; for it was night John 13.30.


Then ended completely the second supper. Whe^n I come to spe^ake of the
blessed Eucharist. I hope to probablize, how long it lasted.

The Prayer.
I Now behold thee O gracious Savior, as humbling thy self, as vouchsafing,
to sit, and eat after an usual fashion, a common suppe^r with thy Apostles:
lift up my heart, good Lord, to think of thee, as thou art glorious in thy
Kingdom of heaven, and of thy great mercy make me one of them, who shall
partake of the Supper of the Lamb, at thy celestial Table. Grant this for
thy metits sake, O gracious Savior. Amen.

CHAP. XI. The Contents of the eleventh Chapter.
1 What was Said Done at the second supper the first quarter.

Christ began the Chagigah with saying of grace. Grace and thankesgiving a
prime duty at feasts.

2 The form of Grace at The eating of Manna. Other feasts. The Paschall
Festivity,

3 The Jews began their second Supper, with the cup of Charity. Wonderful
great grapes.

4 An hymn was sung after the Grace cup among the Jews. The hymn in the New
Testament sung after the Eucharist.

5 The discourse at the second Supper.

6 The Apostles contention before they received the blessed Eucharist. The
Apostles contend for superiority.

7 When Christ began to wash the Apostles feet. Osiander rejected. Saint
Cyrill rejected. The Jews began their second washing at the beginning of their
second supper, Christ in the middle of it. Baronius argument confutes Osiander.

PARAGRAPH. 1. The second particular of the third General.
BUt the next branch of my method inforceth me to consider, what was said, and
what was done, from the second Supper, to thy end of it, inclusive. In
general, I say; much is plainly set down from Ioh. 13.4. to the 30. verse
inclusively. And in General I say, They fell to their second Supper, and
continued at it about a quarter of an hour, in all likelihood. Then Christ
rises from this second Supper, though they continued still at Supper, and was
about one quarter of an hour more washing the feet of all the 12. Apostles,
and putting off, and putting on his garments as may be well conjectured at, by
the proportion of time to the things done, and said. Thirdly, when Christ was
set down again, he began his discourses, designs out the Traitor: gives
him a sop: bids him do quickly what he did: and upon the receiving of the
sop, Judas immediately went out: and these things took up the last part of the
hour, or somewhat more; and in, and about that time they may well seem to be
accomplished and transacted.

And so the first and second Supper, took up one whole, hour, or about one
quarter more rather. More particularly, concerning the first of the three
quarters spent in the second Supper, this seems to me most probable.

Scaliger cites the Jewish Rituall thus, concerning the Paschall. Quam
diversahaec nox a caeter is noctibus? In aliis noctibus semel tantum lavamus:
in hac nocte bis. How diverse was this night from other nights? In other nights
we wash but only once, in this night twice: and this was at the beginning of
their second supper* yet they did not break the Law: for Gods Law established
no such second double washing: but it was a custom and tradition of the
Elders, to which Christ was not bound. And we find no shadow of a second
washing before the beginning of the second supper: but rather about the amidst
of it, or rather toward the end of it. I therefore think the second supper
began with thanksgiving giving to God, and blessing of the meat of the
Chagigah which was newly served in: for this was far a more necessary duty:
and was as frequently used by all good people, as it was necessary. Giving of
thanks was a prime duty of a feast. Tertullian in his Apologetick, cap. 39.
Nee prius discumbitur, quam oration ad Deum praegustetur. We sit not down to
meat before we have said Grace. And this he writes with exact reference to
the second Supper of the Jews, where the like was practiced, both before and
in the time of Christ's conversing among men. And the grace at the beginning of
the second Supper was this. Benedictus sis (Domine Deus noster) qui educis
panem de terra. Blessed be thou (O Lord our God) who do bring forth bread out
of the earth. Then drank they the second round.

PAR. 2.
BEfore the eating of Manna the grace is thought to be^ this. Benedictus es
(Dominus Deus noster, Rex Angelorum, Pater Coeli) qui cibasti nos pane coelesti
Angelorum. Blessed be thou (O Lord our God,) King of the Angels, Father of
Heaven, who have fed us with the heavenly food of Angels. Before I showed you
in the first Book, and second Chapter, the form of thansgiving at other
feasts, and in likelihood at their common meals was, Benedictus sis Deus, qui
educis panem de terra. Blessed be thou (O God) who do bring forth bread out
of the^ earth. This was the ordinary blessing of bread, which was commonly used
after the Jews came to Jerusalem: and perhaps in Christ's time. But the
thanksgiving for the unleavened bread in the Paschall festivity, is said to be
this. Benedictus es Domine Deus noster, rex universi, in esu panis azymi.
Blessed be thou (O Lord our God) King of the whole world: in the eating of
unleavened bread, and no doubt a blessing was powered forth with thanksgiving to
God for all their meat.

PAR. 3.
THe Jewish Rituall mentions, that they had wine^ at the second Supper. I
say, that in all fair likelihood they had it at the beginning of this second
Supper. Presently after Grace: as Bellarmine said, the first supper was ended
with the wine. So say I, the second was begun with a cup of wine walking
about. Soto also 4. Sentent. Distinct. 12. Quaest. 2. Art. 2. on the words. Hic
est Calix, ubi insinuatur (says he) Christum cocnam Agni consummasse, in potu
non consecrato. This is the cup where is insinuated -- that Christ had
consummated the Supper of the Lamb in unconsecrated wine. Seneca in Thyeste,
Act. 5. Scena ultima. -- Poculum infuso cape
Gentile Baccho.
Take off this cup full of wine,
Which b'inheritance is thine.
It was at the beginning of the pretended feast in an hereditary cup, if I may
so expound Gentile poculum: the Gentile Cup. Poculum (...), the cup of charity
-- -- Paternis vina libenter Deis,
tunc hauriatur.
says Thyestes. Let e^very one within the house
Drink to his God a full carouse.
Scaliger de emendatione Temporum: 6. page 571, The second supper of the
Jewe^s, was like the Secundae mensae apud Gentiles, the second course among the
Gentiles. Nam apud illos mensis secundis libabatur, ac potio in Calice
circumfere batur. For among them they were wont to have a second course, and to
drink a round one to the other. Virgil says of the rich Rhodian wine: Non ego
te Diis and mensis accepta secundis:
Transierim Rhodia --
I cannot here pass over the^ Rhodian wine^,
To th'Gods and second banquets held divine.
Scaliger might have added the rest,
-- and tumidis humasta racemis: And clustred grapes plucked from the swelling
vine. It may well be thought they had also their second Supper, when Grapes
were in kind, great bunches of ripe sweet grapes, so long as they would well
last. Be not offended with this Digression. If Virgil had tasted of the Grapes
of Escholl, he would have extolled them above the Rhodian bunches. Mr John
Sanderson, our country man, traveling 1601. (as Purchase has it, page 1635.
relates. In the valley of Escholl at this day, there are grapes: one bunch of
them will weigh, of our weight about twenty, or one and twenty pounds, The holy
Scripture, Number. 13.24. records, that the Spies came to the River of Escholl,
and cut down thence a branch with one cluster of grapes, and they bare it on a
bar betwixt two. Lest the heavenly Scripture may suffer prejudice, and be
thought hyperbolicall, where it is apparently literal, I think fit to add,
in another quarter of the world namely in Africa (as you may find in the
second book of Johannes Leo, and in Purchase from him, page 779.) viz. in
Tagodast, a City seated on the top of a Mountain. That the Grapes thereof are
red, and are for their bigness, called in the language of that people, Hens
Eggs, which is meant of the several particular grapes, not of the several
bunches: for even our cold climates have bunches as big as three or four
Hens eggs. And now suppose that three hundred such single Grapes, grew upon
one branch, may it not be carried between two, upon one colt-staffe? So much
on the by, to explain a seeming difficulty of Scripture; and yet I opine that
the messengers did carry on the bar between them some Pomegranates, and
Figs also, as is in the same verse, which might be so many, as to make a just
and portable shoulder-burthen.

I cannot omit this parallel digression, because it gravelled me in my youth,
before I came to taste of Rhetoric, or much humane learning. Judge. 20.16. of
seven hundred men left handed, every one could sling stones at an hares breadth,
and not miss. Peter Martyr, Tremellius, and others are wholly for the
hyperbole. And indeed I see no reason why the Divine Scripture may not use an
hyperbole as well as humane authors; if not better: as certainly it does, in
diverse places. But since we can find examples, in profane stories which do
almost equal this, even in truth of things done (though the heavenly
prescripts be (...), to be believed for themselves) yet the additament of
humane authority, to a doubting mind, will make the Seripture more credible,
and more seemingly reasonable There was one, who before Alexander the Great,
showed extraordinary dexterity by standing a pretty distance off, and did sling
a pease, into, and through the hole of a board, which hole was very little
bigger than the pease it self. One Aster did grave on the shaft of his arrow,
Aster Philippo: and with that arrow stroke out one of Phillips eyes. See Strabo
lib. 8. and Plutarch reporting this to have happened to Philip, Alexander the
Great, his father. If it were not for like performances, it were incredible,
what Damianus a Goes, page 200. says of those of L^spland for their admirable
skill. Also Florus 3.8. says thus of the Islands of Majorca and Minorca, in
Bello Balearico: Every man fighting, has three darts: who can mervell that
they strike so certainly, when darts are their only weapons, and they study
nothing else but to be apt slingers? The mothers give not meat to their
children, till they have hit the mark she appoints. Johannes Stadius (on
that place of Florus in his Commentary) says, some think they were called
Baleares, a studio per fundos feriendi, from their study and practice, in
exquisite striking of the mark by stones from their slings. Livy in diverse
books mentions, the great skill of the Baleareans for slingers: yet in his
38. book: he prefers before those Ilanders, certain men of Aegium Patre
and Dimae, towns of Achaia, and says of these latter. They were so skillful,
that they would a great way off sling a bullet, through a garlands rings, and
small hoopes: nay, they would be sure to hit, not only the head of the enemy,
but any part of his face they aimed at, and never fail. So far Livy: who so
believes these strange relations, need not much doubt of the words of sacred
Scripture, Judge. 20.16. Purchase in his Pilgrimage of Africa. 9.9. page 1499.
thus historisieth of the Arabians. Their horses are lean, little, swift,
laborious, and bold: and the horsemen, active beyond belief, darting, and
catching with the hand the same dart, in the horses swiftest race, before it
comes to the ground: also taking up weapons, lying on the ground, while the
horse is running: and in like swift race, hit the smallest mark with Arrow or
Sling, Who so believes, etc. I return. Joseph Scaliger goes on; Hebraei
epulis sacrificii functi, secundis mensis gratias Deo ageb^nt, and potionem
circumferebant: id quoque body retinent. So he. The Hebrews were wont at the
banquets of the sacrifice, and second course to say Grace, and to drink round
a Cup of Charity; which custom they keep even at this day.

PAR. 4.
POst poculum bymnus cantabatur, says Scaliger, after he Grace-Cup they used
to sing a Psalm. If he means it of the Jews, he says true, if of Christ,
and his Apostles, then he misseth his mark, for the hymn mentioned in the new
Testament was not sung, till the end of the third Supper; till they had
received the Eucharist. For when they had sung an Hymn, they went out into the
mountain of Olives, Matthew. 26.30. And yet perhaps they might sing a little
Hymn at the end of the second Supper: concerning which I intend to speak
hereafter.

Solenne fuit antiquis Israelitis, sacra, celeberrimaque Cantica Cantica a vini
degustatione nichoare, says Montanus, on Judge. 9. page 367. It was the usual
custom, amongst the ancient Israelites, after they had drunk a Cup of wine,
to begin some sacred and choice Psalms.

PAR. 5
THey gave thanks; they drank wine, they did eat; they discoursed: and all
this was done in the first quarter of an hour in the second Supper. But what
was their discourse? Or why did Christ take occasion to wash their feet? I
answer, we can know neither of these things infallibly, and demonstratively.
Secondly, I answer, if we knew no ground of it, nor could guess at the reason
of it, we may well presume Christ did wash his disciples feet, on great,
just, momentuall motives. For many things, he knew cause, why he did so; or not
so; though they be hid from us. And we must not be too inquisitive when he is
silent.

Before I come to demonstration, I must proceed upon three foundations
probable enough.

First, that the Apostles might fall out, or strive upon several occasions,
though none be expressly mentioned. Seven guests make a feast; but nine
feasters make a brawle, or are scandalous, says the old proverb. Many
harmless occurrences might engender debate.

Secondly, that there was controversy between them, now especially in the^
second Supper, about superiority is most probable.

PAR. 6.
THirdly, that S. Luke touches at their contention, Luke 22.24. I hold very
likely. For though he places the contention after the third Supper, according
to the literal Method; yet in the order of History it is to be taken in at the
second Supper. And behold the ground of my conjecture.

It is scarce credible that presently after the devour receiving of the most
holy Eucharist, there should be dissension for Primacy. I dare say, who had
such pridy, ambitious thoughts, presently upon the new Sacrament, they had
been unworthy receivers thereof: which none of the Apostles were; for Judas
received not: of which hereafter.

Again, it is said, Luke 22.21. But behold the hand of him that betrayeth me,
is with me on the table. Now these words are spoken after the administration of
the blessed Eucharist, what follows thence? Either we must make Judas a
participant of the body and blood of Christ (which though some have held, more
have held otherwise, and that with greater reason) and we must make, that after
the third Supper, they continued eating, the Table being yet spread, and meat
thereon: (for else, why was the hand of Judas with Christ on the Table?) and so
in effect we must make a fourth Supper of Christ; the Passover; the common
second Supper, the most blessed Eucharist; and lastly, this Post-coenium, or
Reere-Supper, which is most false and vast. Or else, we must grant, that the
holy Spirit did not stand so strictly, upon the literal method in S. Luke,
which is most true; as I touched at before; and may appear yet farther,
because almost the same words, are described by S. Matthew, and S. Mark,
Before Christ administered his most holy Supper, which S. Luke places after the
third and most sacred Supper.

Therefore I say, Their contention was before their being satisfied in the
point controverted; and their satisfaction was before the receiving of the most
blessed Eucharist; and the means to satisfy them, was Christ's most
extraordinary humiliation. And now by these steps of conjecture, and
probability, I am come to the more certain observations.

That the Apostles often fell out among themselves, striving for superiority,
cannot be denied. S. Peter himself, was in a manner over-curiously jealous of
the company of S. John, What shall this man do? Ioh. 21.21. And Christ beat
off S. Peter, thus, If I will that be tarry till I come, what is that to thee?

The ten Apostles were moved with indignation against the two brethren of
Zebedees children, Matthew. 20.24. because one would have a promise to be on the
right hand of Christ; and the other on the left. And Christ took the Apostles
off from their passion, saying, Whosoever will be great among you, let him be
your Minister, and whosoever will he chief among you, let him be your servant:
as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, Matthew.
20.26, 27, and 28. verses.

By the way they disputed among themselves, who should be greatest, Mark 9.34.
but he told the twelve. If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last
of all, and servant of all, verse 35. A primacy he denies not among them, it
was, and is necessary; but the affectation, and ambition of it, he disliketh,
and sets them point blanke on the contrary.

Luke 9.46. There arose a reasoning among them, viz. the twelve Apostles, which
of them should be the greatest? And Jesus perceiving the thoughts of their
heart, took a child, and set him by him, verse 47. set him in the midst of
them, and took him in his arms, Mark 9.36. and said to his Apostles; Except
ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven: and whosoever shall humble himself as this little child,
the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 18.3. and 4. verses.

It was one thought of many men: one heart of twelve Apostles; the thought of
their heart; all thought so, every one desired it: and every one was answered.

When all these most divine actions, words, and counsels were either forgotten
or neglected: and after the Passover, and at the second Supper. There was a
strife among them, which of them should be accounted the greatest, Luk 22.24.
Christ answers in words, from verse. 25. to verse. 30. inclusive.

And when those words had not wrought fully enough on them nor humbled them
sufficiently. Then, and upon this occasion (as I judge) Christ answered them
indeed, and went a quicker and more piercing way, to teach them humility,
knowing their contention came not from God: knowing he came from God, and went
to God; Christ rises from Supper, and laid aside his garments, and took a
towell, and girded himself, powers water into a Basin, Joh. 13.4. etc.

The strife mentioned by S. Luke was before Christ washed their feet, says
Salmeron; though Barradius says, perhaps the strife arose, because S. Peter's
feet were first washed: which speech interferreth with that of Barronius next
to be cited; That the Apostles never grudged at S. Peter's Primacy.

PAR. 7.
THis did Christ begin, about half an hour after six in the Evening,
toward the end of the first quarter of an hour in their second Supper, to
wash their feet; and Baronius much erred, to say, that Christ washed the
Apostles feet, ante secundam mensam; when S. John is express, that Coena
facta, the Paschall being ended: Christ rose from Supper, and washed them;
therefore it was not before the second Supper, but in it, one Supper was ended,
and Christ arose from another Supper: Non debemus coenam adhuc factam, veluti
jam consummatam, and transsactam intelligere. Adhuc enim coenabatur, cum
Dominus surrexit, and lavit, says Augustine, Tractat. 55. in Johannem. We must
not conceit of the Supper being yet a eating, as if it were consummated and
dispatched: for as yet they were at Supper, when the Lord arose, and washed
them: he adds most remarkeably. Panis adhuc erat in mensa, cum buccellam
dedit suo traditori. The bread was yet on the Table, when the Lord gave the
Sop, to him that should betray him.

But Osiander was mad to say, Christ washed their feet before the eating of
the Paschall, we have proved, Christ washed them in the second Supper. There is
not so much as a shadow of likelihood, that Christ washed the Apostles feet,
before the Paschall: and in the second Supper also.

S. Cyrill in his Book, De Ablutione pedum, is in another extreme; That our
Savior washed his Disciples, after the receiving of the Eucharist. But this
cannot be; for he put on his garments again, and did Discumbere, or lie down
again, and entered into discourse, and gave his Sop to Judas: all which did
precede the Eucharist, and not follow after it. The truth is, the Jews of
those times, began their second washing, at the beginning of their second
Supper: but Christ did so in the middle of the second Supper, or rather toward
the beginning of the Eucharist preparing his Apostles to a worthy receiving,
both by washing them, and giving them good advice; and I hold his Conclusion to
be good, who said, Cum loti^ animi, puritatis, ad suscipiendum Saccramentum,
necessariae, monumentum fuerit, ante Sacramenti institutionem exhiberioportuit.
Since the washing of the mind, was the monument of the purity, which was
necessary to the receiving of the Sacrament, it ought to be used before the
institution of the Sacrament.

Baronius has a good argument against the innovating Osiander, That the
Paschall Lamb being to be eaten in haste if Christ had risen from it, and
washed their feet, before the end of that Supper, he had broken the Law; but
he brake not the Law. Therefore it was at the second Supper; even toward the
latter end thereof, that Christ by his own washing of them, prapared them by
humility unto the receiving of his own last, best, and blessed Eucharist,
being truly called the Supper of the Lord.

If I have not guessed rightly, at the true cause, and just occasion, why
Christ washed his Apostles feet; yet it is most certain, that he washed them;
which, as I said, took up about another quarter of an hour of their second
Supper.

No man can reasonably think, that Christ did wash their feet at the
Passover; that was soon ended, as the washing and wiping was ended. Nor may
it be thought that Christ would rise from the most sacred Supper of the
Eucharist, to wash them. This derogateth too much from that divine Supper.
Therefore the second Supper was the fittest time; and in it, indeed did Christ
wash them: For, how could he wash the feet of twelve of them severally, twenty
four feet in all, as they continued at Supper, in less time, then a quarter
of an hour? and wipe them all (and well wiped them out of question) with that
towell wherewith he was girded? Ioh. 13.5. weigh that time, by the time we
should spend our selves, if we were to dispatch such a business: if we wash
but our own feet, and wipe them, above a twelfth part of a quarter of an
hour quickly slideth away.

The Prayer.
O Redee^mer of mankind; thou were pleased to wash the feet of thy Apostles,
even those feet of Judas, among the rest, which had trotted before, to the
high Priests and Elders to betray thee, and those which were apt and ready to
shed blood, even the innocent blood of thee, the Lord of life. Wash, I beseech
thee, not only my feet, but my hands, my head, my whole body; and especially
my heart, that I may be wholly purified; and fitted to partake of thy blessed
mysteries, and by them be united to thee, my gracious and merciful Savior.
Amen.

CHAP. XII. The Contents of the twelfth Chapter.
1. What was Done Said the 2. of the 3. quarters of the hour in the Second
Supper. Christ begins to wash his Disciples feet. The Scribes book
Commanded frequent washings. The Jews used much water for purifications both
Legal. Praescribed.

2. S. Peter the Primate, and Prince of the Apostles. Whither S. Peter lay on
the Discubitory bed above Christ.

3. Whither Christ washed S. Peter's feet first of all. Whither Judas was
washed at all. No washing of the feet: no partaking of the Eucharist.

4. S. Bernards Pedilavium no Sacrament: Christ's washing his Apostles feet an
example of humility. Whither Judas were first washed.

5. All the Apostles were washed. Uncertain who first. It matters not. S.
Peter's Privilege.

6. S. Peter's Christ's Dialogue. Obedience required. John the Baptist called a
fool. Peter's double denial reproved.

7. Bodily washing. Spiritual washing.

8. Christ kissed his Apostles feet, Even Judas his feet.

9. Whither Christ at the second Supper had on a supping garment. Whither he
had on a Cloak as Barradius -- 3. Vestments as Euthymius 5. As some others
have thought. Christ at his Passion had -- (...). (...).

10. The last Quarter of the seventh hour: or the third part of the second
Supper. What was Done Said in it. The first passage is Christ's Question. His
Diversion.

11. The Titles of Lord Master forbidden to the Apostles. The difference
between Rab and Rabbi: Ambition forbidden. The word (...) attributed to Man
God in the Old New Testament. How God Man Christ. is (...) a Lord.

12. Washing of feet imports humbleness of mind, Christ's Precept Example to
be imitated. Lorinus his story. Christ the most perfect example of all. Seneca
his advice. The difference between Exemplar. Exemplum. Examples move more than
Precepts. The Worthiness Unworthiness
of the Administrant adds nothing detracteth nothing
from the Sacrament.

13. Motives to Humility. Servants equal to their Masters in participation of
Troubles. Blessings.
Servants inferior to their Masters in Civil Moral. Oeconomicall
affairs.

14. Nor Worders, nor Knowers: but Doers enjoy happiness.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
NOw let me descend to the things done and said, in this third quarter of an
hour; the middle part, and second quarter of the three, allotted as it were to
this second Supper. About half an hour after fix, our holy humble Savior,
begins to wash the Disciples feet.

A little before Christ's incarnation there was a book written by the Scribes,
in which they commanded frequent washings, even in the times of dinner or
supper, because there were many Legal uncleanness, which came by the very
touch of diverse things: and by which they were unclean till the Evening.
Therefore had they store of water always in a readiness. At the Marriage in
Cana, John 2.6. There were set six water-pots of stone, after the manner of
the purifying of the Jews: Sc. aut legalem, aut traditionalem, aut convivalem,
either Legal, or traditionall or convivall Each water Pot containing two or
three firkins a piece, non ad potum sed ad lotionem paratae aequales illae
hydriae, aut vasa aquaria. Those water-pots were not prepared, for drinking but
for washing. And in likelihood they had spent some good quantity of that water.
For Christ commanded them to fill them: and they filled them up to the brimme,
verse. 7. And against the Passover, our Savior did foretell them they should
meet a man bearing a pitcher of water, Mark. 14.13. And when it is said, He
shall show you a room furnished: among other things it may well be expounded:
A room furnished with store of water; for they had water always in a
readiness for purifications prescribed by the Elders, as well as for legal
purifications.

Ciacconius is of opinion, that water was given for their feet at the entrance
into the houses, yet it was to such, as were soul and unclean: for if they
were clean they presently sat down, says he. But Baronius from the Rituall
says; the Jews washed their feet twice at the Paschall Lan be: once at the
eating of the flesh, and once at the eating of unleavened bread. Either the
Rituall, or Baronius confounds matters: for they are not Paschall Lamb, but
with unleavened bread first taken. Baronius should rather have distinguished
two suppers, Legalem, and communem, the Paschall and Common Supper, then make
one Supper of the Lamb, another of unleavened bread, as he does in the words
following: Paschalis Convivii duplexfuit Caena conjuncta: vel si dicere
velimus, unius coenae duplex mensa: in cujus priori, esus agni, in posteriori
vero ceremonia agebatur azymorum. There was a twofold joint supper of the
Paschall banquet: or if we may so speak, two courses at the same Supper: In
the former was the Paschall Lamb eaten; in the latter was the Ceremony of
unleavened bread performed. Yet indeed neither was set on the board or table
without the other, and they are not the flesh of the Lamb without unleavened
bread. Now though this was a tradition of the Jews often, yet this was their
own Sumpsimus: and Christ did not wash the Apostles feet, for the same
respects, that the Jews washed themselves; but to give a good example of
humility.

PAR. 2.
I Will not deny S. Peter to be first in place among the Apostles, the
chiefest of them: their Primate, yea the Prince of the Apostles. Antiquity and
that of the best have afforded him title sufficiently hyperbolicall. Truth has
no need of false foundations, or slippery untrue superstructures: therefore
when I see earnest and foolish contention, for his superiority in things which
afford him no true privilege, I say this is the way to cry him down, rather
than to raise him up.

There is more than one who says, that S. Peter lay on the bed above Christ,
and S. John below: if S. John lay below, he could not so conveniently discern
the beck of S. Peter above, as he might of any other of the Apostles, on whom
he looked forth-right, for Christ was between them; and the eyes of him in the
lowest part of the discubitory bed, were averse from him who was highest. S.
Peter's foot might rather have touched some part of S. John, (if so they lay
along) then his beck be observed, whilst Christ's holy personal, corporal
presence lay between them; and so eclipsed the eyes of S. John, who desired
not to look much beyond our blessed Savior.

PAR. 3.
LIkewise concerning the order which Christ used in washing of their feete^,
and with whom he began, is made a question, a great question.

Baronius says that the Apostles never took it unkindely, that S. Peter
should be set before them: but they bore it impatiently; when James or John
were preferred, or had hopes to be preferred, as appears, Mark. 10.41. They
began to be much displeased with James and John.

S. Peter was first washed (says Baronius) and he cites S. Augustine to hold
the same, on the 13. Chapter of S. John, Tractaet. 56, Indeed S. Augustine
concludes, we must not understand that Christ came to S. Peter, after he had
washed others, but that he began from him, when therefore he began to wash the
Disciples feet, he came to him from whom he began, that is from Peter.

And immediately before, who is ignorant primum Apostolorum esse beatissimum
Petrum: That the most blessed Peter was the Primate of the Apostles; I
willingly subscribe to his primacie: but that Christ was so strickt in point of
Ceremony, that the chiefest man should be first washed, both others and my
self do deny. Peter's privilege of Chiefe-dome, was not taken away, or
diminished, though Christ had washed others first, who were nearer to him or
more conveniently placed.

Secondly, what the most worthy father said a little before, ought to be
thoroughly weighed, for it carries meat in its mouth; we must not think
(says he) that Peter among the rest did fear, and refuse to be washed; when
others before him willingly or patiently had permitted it to be done to them,
for so these words of the Gospel are easier taken or interpreted: because when
it was said, He began to wash the Disciples feet, and wipe them with the
towell, with which he was girded, it is added, therefore he came to Simon
Peter, as if he had washed some before and after them came to the first, I
only say (which is likeliest? the easier or the harder interpretation of a
piece of Scripture? which is safest to be embraced? on the other side the word
(...), therefore not (...), then (though it be Then in our last translation)
somewhat inclines me to think, that when he began to wash his Disciples, he
came therefore to Peter: for it is not said when he had washed but when he
began to wash, etc. He therefore came to Peter.

With S. Augustine, do agree Rupertus, and Simon de Cassia and Nonnus that
Christ did wash S. Peter; yet Ambrose says, Christ washed Peter last, and
Ambrose is none of the hindmost in extolling of S. Peter.

Some relate that Origin thinks, and Cyprian accordingly, that Christ did not
wash Judas at all: because Judas had no part with Christ. But it follows not
necessarily, that every one who was washed had part, because Peter refusing to
be washed, was reproved by that answer. If I wash thee not, thou have no part
with me: thou shall have no part of the Eucharist with me, as Tolet expounded
it. And indeed Judas had no part, nor (do I think) should S. Peter have
partaked of the blessed Sacrament, if he obstinately, and refractarily had
disobeyed Christ, and utterly refused to have his feet washed. Judam, qui se
jam tradere proposuerat, Christus lavit, says Chrysostom: Admiror excellentem
Christi clementiam, quia hujus etiam pedes lavit in proximo erat eum
traditurus. Christ washed Judas, who was then resolved to betray him. I wonder
at the excellent clemency of Christ, who would vouchsafe to wash his feet, who
was about by and by to betray him. To this effect Euthymius, Augustine,
Tractat. 55. in Johannem. Hoc ad maximum cumulum humilitatis accessit, quod
etiam illi non dedignatus est pedes lavare, cujus manus jam praevidebat in
scelere. This may be added to the huge mass of his humility, that he
disdained not to wash his feet, whose hands he foresaw would be embrued in
wickedness.

PAR. 4.
I Will not with S. Bernard in Sermon de Coena Domini; account the Saints
feet to be a Sacrament; ut de remissione quotidianorum (peccatorum) minime
dubitemus, habemus ejus Sacramentum: pedum ablutionem. To the end we should
make no doubt of the forgiveness of our daily sins; we have his Sacraments,
even the washing of our feet. Whether he take Sacramentum strictly, or largly;
the pedilavium, or washing of feet, was no Sacrament for remission of sins.
No, not as it was used by Christ; but it was an example of humility: a motive
to mutual love; a preparative to put them in mind, of washing, cleansing, and
purging their souls, against the receiving of the most sacred Eucharist. Which
because Judas did not perform, though his feet were washed, he was as it were
excommunicated, when Christ said, That thou do do quickly: and he went out
immediately, and received not the most blessed Sacrament with them; but because
all the other Apostles were prepared, and had learned the new doctrine of
climbing up to heaven, by humbleness, all the rest received the precious Body,
and Blood of Christ.

Chrysostom and Euthymius, Origin, and Leontius (says Maldonate) do thinke^,
that Christ did first wash Judas; because Judas had most need: for the sick
have need of the Physician, more than the sound and whole. In which regard
Christ appeared first to Mary Magdalen before he appeared to any of his
Apostles, or to his own most blessed Mother: for certainly, Mary Magdalen had
been the greatest sinner; and perhaps stood at that instant in most need of
comfort. I answer her speeches bewray her to have been amazed, rapted almost
besides her self.

Theophilact. on John 13. Non primum lavit Petrum, quamvis primatum
discipulorum gerebat, sed forte proditor cum esset impudens, and inverecundus,
ante Petrum lotus est; Though Peter was Primate of the Apostles, he was not
first washed: but perhaps the shameless Traitor put forth himself (which the
other Apostles would not do) and so he was first washed.

PAR. 5.
MY conclusions are, concerning this point. 1. There is no certainty whom
Christ washed first. 2. It did not make a prerogative, to be first washed, nor
mar it to be washed last. 3. All the Apostles were washed, even Judas among
them. 4. S. Augustines determination that Peter was first washed, was most
acute, and witty: yet I think, the words of the Apostles run more plainly,
and unforcedly.
That Christ had washed some others of the twelve, ere he came to Saint Peter:
for it is not only said, that he began to wash his Disciples feet: but (also)
to wipe them with the Towe^ll, wherewith he was girded; he did not begin to
wipe till he had washed some; and so Christ came to S. Peter. Lastly, S. Peter
has this privilege, that there is not any one particularly expressed, or
named to be washed but S. Peter only.

PAR 6.
THe Dialogue between S. Peter, and our blessed Savior, before Peter yielded
to be washed, is this: Lord do thou wash my feet? Christ answered; What I
do thou know not, but thou shall know hereafter: thou know the matter,
thou know I wash thee, but thou know not mine intentions. And this
affords one Doctrine necessary for these times.

Obedience must be performed (if required) though we know no reason why it is
appointed, much more when we see reason: Cornelius Tacitus Historiae 1. Vbi
jubeantur, quaerere singulis liceat, pereunte obsequio, imperium etiam
intercidet. If it were lawful for every one to ask a reason of their
Superiors commands; obedience would perish, and Authority would fall to the
ground. It was spoken by a rude blunt soldier in Lucan, at the Garboyles of
the civil war

-- Rheni mihi Caesar in undis,
Dux erit: Hic socius facinus quos inquinat, aquat.
Caesar my Captain is at Rhene,
But in the civil broils,
He is my fellow: They are like,
Whom the same sin befoyles.
Julius Caesar regarded not the tongues, or taunts of his Soldiers, so long as
he had their arms, and swords for him. He let fall the strictness of
discipline, and was (as a General) over-familiar with his Soldiers, calling
them Commilitones, fellow soldiers: Augustus disliked him for it; yet if it be
well weighed, Julius Caesar forbore his soldiers at the time of triumphs, and
rest, more, than in the time of war; where he observed most strict discipline.

A late Writer calls S. John Baptist a fool, for denying to Baptize Christ:
I say, a fool must not judge a wise man: and a religious man would find in
the Baptist, heavenly humility, rather than style it folly; But Wisdom is
justified of her children.

Likewise, I doubt not of S. Peter's holy, humble intention; either when he
refused to be washed, or when he accepted of it; for, till Peter was refractary
the second time, Christ did not chide him: but perhaps, because of his double
refusal to be washed, and because of his selfe-trust, he was deserted, to deny
Christ at his passion thrice.

PAR. 7.
THe other discourse of the Dialogue, or the second part, is this. S. Peter
said, Thou shall never wash my feet, ver. 8. which indeed were words too
peremptory, from such a servant, to such a Master: but when Christ replied; If
I wash thee not, thou have no part with me: Peter was converted; and was not
only like the Son in the Gospel, who said, He would not go into the
Vineyard to work, but after repented, and went, Matthew. 21.29. but out of
surplusage of obedience, more than was commanded, he cried out, Lord, wash not
my feet only, but my hands and my bead, Ioh. 13.9.

The close before the washing of S. Peter, or at the beginning, to wash him, is
in these two points; He that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet, but
is clean every whit, ver. 10. whence some do truly collect, the Apostles were
once washed before; viz. before the Paschall Supper began. I doubt not, but
Sensu mystico, he aymeth at the Spiritual washing of the soul, without which
all bodily purification, and washing is to little purpose. And this sense is
made good by the words following. Ye are clean, but not all; because Christ
knew Judas his soul was defiled with resolutions for the Treason, it is said,
ver. 10. Ye are not all clean: here is spiritual uncleanenesse, for all the
corporal washing and wiping.

PAR. 8.
YEa, if we may follow Justinian in his Book, De Christi agone, cap. 3. He
opineth, That Christ did not only wash the Apostles feet, but kissed them
also. If so it were, what an un-heard of humility did Christ show, to kiss the
feet of Judas; which were swift to shed blood, even innocent blood, even the
blood of the Son of God? To kiss the rod, even the rod which was to be cast
into the fire, after correction performed? To kiss Judas his feet, in a more
submissive way, though he knew, that Judas would kiss Christ's face, and
betray him by that kiss? Both which compared together, do justly aggravate
the sin of Judas, and subject him to greater damnation, to offer the kiss of
Treachery unto Christ, who offered unto him the kiss of love, and humility.

PARA. 9.
ANd now by this time, or there abouts, is exhausted, the third part of the
sixth hour, or more; and the middle quarter of the hour spaced for their
second Supper. I will not grant (says Barradius) that Christ had a supping
garment, for he laid down his own garments; not the supping garment, (says
he) as if Christ borrowed a supping garment, and had none of his own. And
there was little honesty, or modesty to have a supping garment on his naked
body (says he) as if he might not have both his own clothes, and a supping
garment also, and yet keep others on; for no good Christian will think, he
stripped himself to nakedness, when he laid aside his garments: Barradius
without ground, says, Christ had a cloak; Euthymius on Matthew. 26. says, some
thought Christ had on five Vestments; himself judges he had three. That this
was at Supper time cannot be proved; and is not said. At his Passion indeed,
the Pasmist foretells in the plural number: They shall, or will divide my
garments, as it is in the Hebrew, Psalm. 22.18. The 70. read (...), first, and
(...) after. Our Printers of the last Translation, have it in the Singular in
both places: They parted my garment among them: and cast lots upon my vesture.
But because they had parted them indeed, it is said, Matthew. 27.35. as in the
time passed, They parted his garments (in the Plural) casting lots: and the
Psalmist is divinely cited; as speaking first of his ordinary garments;
secondly, of that excellent coat without seame: They parted my garments among
them (there is the Plural number) and upon my vesture did they cast lots: and
the Singular is meant of the goodly seamelesse coat, wrought from the top
throughout, Ioh. 19.24.

PAR. 10.
AFter his washing the Apostles, resuming his garment, and recumbing again,
follows the last quarter, the third part of an hour, or somewhat over,
allotted for dispatching the second Supper; and it may seem thus to be spent.

First with heavenly instruction to his Apostles: then with a farther detection
of the Traitor: Lastly, with the subsequent occurrences. The first point
begins from Christ's question, and is continued with his own diversion,
reinforced with holy conclusions, from verse. 13. to 17. inclusive. The second
distinction of time, may be from the graduall detection of the Traitor, to the
last consummation thereof, namely, from John 13.18. to John the 13.27.
inclusive. Lastly, the subsequent occurrences are described from verse 28. to
verse 31, inclusive; but of these in order.

What our most sacred Savior first said to his Apostles, after he was again
laid on the discubitory bed, is discerned by that, he made this Quaere: Know
you what I have done to you? which is not spoken of his action, which all knew
well enough without asking; namely, that he had washed them; but of his maine
ends, and intentions to them unknown; even to Peter ugknowne a while; why he
washed them: Then follows Christ's own Diversion Ye call me Master, and
Lord, and ye say well, for so I am.

Not only many other times, but even at the preparation of the Paschall Lamb,
he is called Master, Matthew. 26.18. The Master says: And during that first
Supper, Judas said, Master, is it I? verse. 25. Also every one of them said,
Lord, is it I? ver. 22.

PAR. 11.
THe Apostles were forbid to be called Rabbi, or Master, and the reason is
annexed; For one is your Master, even Christ, Matthew. 23.8.

The title Rabbi, is held to be given to them, who took their Masters degree,
in the Babylonian Academies; and Rabbi, to them, who were declared to be wise
men by imposition of hands in Israel. Be not ye called so; Christ forbids not
honor to be given to the Magistrate, or to the Doctors, but he would not have
them ambitious of it, and dislikes ambition. So Beza on the place, assisted by
Augustine, and Erasmus; and indeed, he would have his Apostles to be unlike,
or rather contrary to the ambitious affection, of worship, and honor, and high
places, and titles, which ungraciously reigned in the proud hearts of the
Pharisees.

Concerning the word (...), or Lord, it has been ascribed to men, both in the
Old, and New Testament, Exodus 33.22. Let not the anger of my Lord wax hot,
says Aaron to Moses. And Sarah called Abraham Lord, as is witnessed, 1 Pet.
3.6. Likewise in the Testament of Grace, the Grecians said unto Philip, (...),
Joh. 12.21. Lord, we would see Christ. Yet these men not affecting or desiring
that great attribute were called so without sin, and the other did without
sin call them so.

But as the word (...), signifies, or expresses that great, most proper name
of God, Jehovah: so may no man give to man; nor man accept from man, the title
(...), Lord; for God alone is the only Lord; absolute, perfect, supreme, a
Lord paramount, of things that are not, as well as of things that are. Man is
no other at his best, than a petty, diminitive Lord; a Lord needing these
things, of which he is Lord; a Lord of a little, or no time, a weak Lord, who
cannot command a disease, to go from his own body; nor so much as a tree of
his to grow. A Lord by communication, partitipation A Lord that must give
account as an Vsu-fructuary, to an higher Lord; and so a little Lord in small
matters; a great servant to the greatest Lord: indeed not so much a Lord, as a
slave to his passions. Christ, as he is God, is Lord; and as God and Lord is
called (...), Ioh. 21.15. Lord, (...); Thou know that I love thee, says S.
Peter; yea, Judas himself questioning, Is it I Lord? tacitly confesses him
to be God, that could search the reins, and judge truly of the thoughts of
men. S. Thomas divinely confesses both in one, Ioh. 20.28. (...), My Lord, and
my God; and they all said well herein, for Christ is our Master, our Lord, yea,
our Lord God.

PAR. 12.
AFter Christ reasons thus, both from the matter it self, and from their
own confessions, If I then your Lord, and Master have washed your feet, ye
ought to wash one another feet; Ioh. 13.14. And by the washing of feet, he
means not only the bodily washing, literally; but rather the exceeding
humbleness of mind, and the double diligence, which we are to exhibit unto
our brethren for their good. Every superior must have his heart so prepared,
that though he command others outwardly, he may deserve to himself inwardly
such Christian humiliation, that he prefers the very inferior, whom he
commands, before himself; and grudge not any servill-seeming, base work to
save the soul of a sinner. It follows, For I have given you an example, shat
ye should do, as I have done to you, verse. 15. The man was healed, who cast up
his eyes to the fiery brazen Serpent, Number, 21.8.9. verses; and happy is the
man, that casts up his eyes to follow and imitate Christ, in whatsoever he
can, that in all businesses to be done, first examineth, whether they be
according to Christ's precept, or example. I have seen them, who have the sweet
name of Jesus, pounced, stamped, and as it were inlayed, in Azure most blew
indelibly, and as it were cut out on their Arms, or printed or graven. I have
read in Lorinus of one, upon whose dead heart was found written, and as it were
engraven: Christ is my love: or that effect. I am sure he is to be our Example,
I beseech you, be ye followers of me, says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 4.16. Yet he
shows other-where how they must follow him, Be ye followers of me, even as I
also am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. Perfectissimum est exemplar, quod minus
perfectum imitatur, says Aquinas, 3. part. Quaest. 56. articulo: 1. ad 3. But
all other Examples take Christ for their example, therefore he is the most
perfect example of all.

Even Seneca did advise, that a man should propound unto himself, some eminent
man, as if be were present, to be a spectator of all his actions, and an
example and guide unto him.

But no example is so perfect an example, as Christ was and is. The School
distinguishes between Exemplar, and Exemplum, thus: Exemplar est, ex quo
aliud simile facimus: Exemplum est, quod aut sequimur, aut vitamus. Exemplar,
is the person from whom we take Example: Exemplum, is the thing which is
propounded to us to imitate. Christ is the Exemplar, his humility is our
Example. I have given you Example, that ye should do, as I have done to you.

Examples certainly move more than precepts, though precepts ought to move
more than Examples. For our Savior has most divinely instructed us, by one
rule of all other like matters; and it is a lesson, not only for the
multitude, but for the Disciples also: The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; not
only Observe, but Do; which is a double expression of the same duty; But do
not ye after their works, for they say, and do not, Mat, 23.1, 2, and 3.
verses. Earthen vessels may hold rich treasure, a seal of brass makes as
good a print, as a seal of gold, and S. Paul being so holy as he was above
others, had been to blame to say, 1 Cor. 1, 14. I thank God I baptized none
of you, but Crispus and Gaius; if the worth of the administrant had added any
thing to the effectualnesse of the Sacrament, or ill example had diminished the
power of it, to the truly prepared and devout recipient. Eliah refused not
meat which was sent of God, though it was brought unto him, in the mouth, or
claws, of diverse unclean Ravens, 1 King. 16.6. Yet such is the perverseness
of man's nature that it justifies the School conclusions: Aquinas 1.2. quaest.
34. Artic. 1. in corpore Articuli. If those who teach all delights to be evil,
be found to embrace some delights: men will be more prone to pleasures, by the
Example of their works, than free from pleasure for all their words. For in
humane operations, and passions, in which experience is most prevalent,
examples, are more forcible, than words. I have given an example, that ye
should do as I have done to you.

PAR. 13.
A Reason why we should stoop our souls, down to humility is added, Verily,
Verily, the servant is not greater than his Lord; neither he that is sent,
greater than he that sent him, verse. 16.

Other-where Christ varieth this thus; The Disciple is not above his Master,
nor the Servant above his Lord, It is enough for the Disciple that he be as his
Master, and the servant as his Lord, Matthew. 10.24, 25. ver. Again, Every one
that is perfect shall be as his Master; or Every one shall be perfected, as his
Master, Luke 6.40. John 16.20. Remember the word I said unto you, the servant
is not greater than the Lord: whence he infers a kind of equal
participation, In troubles; if they have persecuted me, they will also
persecute you, and in blessings; If they have kept my sayings, they will keep
yours also: all these terms of equality, and likeness, are but incentives
unto humility; that Masters might not domineere too much, nor servants be too
much dejected; for servants are fellow-brethren to their Lords, and Masters. In
our Lord and Master Jesus Christ. S. Paul in his Epistle to Philemon, verse. 16.
commends to Philemon his repentant servant Onesimus, Not now as a servant but
above a servant: a brother beloved especially to me, but how much more unto
thee, both in the flesh and in the Lord?

Yet to show that the Lord is indeed, and in civil conversation among men,
ought to be above the Servant; not only the inference is pregnant, Mat. 10,
25. If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall
they call them of his household? But the doctrine drawn from their confession
in the practice Luke 17.7. and 8. verses. Which of you having a Servant
plowing, or feeding cattle, will say unto him, by and by when he is come from
the field, go and sit down to meat? and will not rather say to him, make
ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thy self, and serve me, till I have eaten
and drunken; and afterward thou shall eat and drink. And in the 9. verse,
Christ denies thanks to be given, as due to that servant, who did the things
that were commanded. Here is a lawful superiority of the Master above the
servant in all civil, moral, and Oeconomicke affairs.

S. Peter goes one step further: Servants be subject to your masters with
all fear, and not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward, 1
Pet. 2 18. And in the verses following argues; It is their duty to take things
patiently, though they suffer wrongfully, for hereunto ye were called; because
Christ suffered for us, leaving us an Example to follow his steps, etc. here
are foote-steppes of inequality; that the Master is above the servant, lest
servants should grow proud, and lazy, or stand upon terms of comparison.

PAR. 14.
THe last part of Christ's holy conclusions in this point, is, If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them, verse 17. The worders, the knowers, are
but the addressers to happiness; the Doers enjoy happiness. Not every one who
says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that
does the will of my Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 7.21. He that hears my
words, and does them not, shall be likened to a foolish man, which built his
house upon the sand, Verse. 26. Not the hearers of the Law, are just before God,
but the Doers of the Law shall be justified, Romans 2.13. See the same practical
duty, enjoined, and enlarged, James 1. from verse. 22. to verse. 25. inclusively.

The Prayer.
O Lord, Legal purifications cleanse not the spirit: pour down, I humbly
entreat thee, but one drop of Christ Jesus his sacred blood, and it will
cleanse the spots of my soul, better than milk, or much soape, better than
all the Lavers in the Law: hear me O holy, holy, holy, father, Son, and
blessed Spirit, for the merits of Jesus Christ. Amen.

CHAP. XIII. The Contents of the thirteenth Chapter.
1. The 2. Passage in the 3. quarter of the second Supper, is, the graduall
detection of the Traitor. The first degree. Judas not chosen. Judas like an
Ass, kicked against Christ. The second Degree. Judas a horse-Leech, a blood
sucker.

2. Judas aimed at in the Individuum vagum. One of you, etc. The third degree.
Judas, a bold, shameless, impudent man, a brazen face.

3. Peter beckned to John. Beckes have their language. S. John understood S.
Peter's beck. S. John S. Peter's Mediator to Christ. D. Collins vindicated.

4. The 1. Detection of Judas his uncleanness.

5. The 2. Detection; he lifted up his beele against Christ. God fore-knew
Judas would be a Traitor. He praedestinateth no man to sin. Why Christ would
choose Judas. The book of Gods Praedestination cannot be opened.

6. The 3. Detection of Judas. One should betray him. Christ's Passions and
perturbations free from sin.

7. The fourth and last Detection of Judas, He it is to whom I shall give a
sop. Many questions concerning the (...). 1. Whether it were Bread or flesh.
Diogenes saying of the Megarians.

Nonnus holds that 1. The thing delivered was Bread. 2. It was dipped in Wine.
3. It was Sacred and Divine.


The Egyptians Custom. Pope Julius wholly forbad the Intinction of the Bread
in the Wine. S. Augustine mistaken.

8. The Morsel was Part of the second Supper. Not of the blessed Eucharist.
S. Bernard, Soto, Ludolphus, S. Augustine. S. Hilary.

Soto mistaken in Bucella. Salsamento.


Wine in all three Suppers. In the second Supper great varieties. The Sop not
dipped in Wine.

9. The second Quaere concerning the (...). Whether Judas received the blessed
Eucharist in it or no? Authorities that he did. S. Augustine, Nonnus,
Dominicus, a Soto, and Aquinas from Chrysostom, Dionysius; S. Hierome, and S.
Bernard think so; and Soto says that Haymo and Remigius thought so.

10. Soto his note upon the words. Edentibus illis. He makes the Tricoenium
complete.

11. Barradius, S. Hierome: Eugenius; S. Cyprian: Euthymius, Equinas think so.
S. Cyprian thought the Sop to be the Sacrament.

12. S. Augustine thought Christ praised the Eucharist, By Word. Deed. S.
Augustine says, Judas received it. Theophilacts wild Crotchet.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
I Am now come to the second passage in the last partition of time, allotted to
the Second Supper; namely a further detection of the Traitor Judas, and this
was partly whilst Christ washed their feet: partly after it. What I before
handled in the first Supper, I repeat not; you may have recourse to it.

Thus hangs our present Cohaerence. Our Savior having pronounced happiness,
to them that do well because Judas did not so, He excludes Judas from
happiness, saying in the 18. verse. I speak not of you all: I know whom I have
chosen: implying whom he had not chosen: not him who did eat bread with
Christ, and (yet) lift up his heel against him, verse. 18. It is a Metaphor
taken (say some) from wrastlers: who put their legs, between the legs of
their adversaries, and by that means cause them to fall, and so metaphorically
signifies him who by craft and deceit ruineth another: perhaps Christ
secretly compares Judas, to some horse, Ass, or other beasts, who use to
kick backward. Aristotle was justly taxed for recalcitrating against Plato,
as showing great unthankefulnesse to his Master. Christ infinitely surpassed
Plato in all goodness, and Judas extremely went beyond Aristotle in
unthankefulnesse. Qui velit ingenio cedere rarus erit. says Martial. In
contestation of a wit,
Not one will yield no not a whit.


Though omnis ingenii arrogantia turpis est; It Is a base thing for a man at any
time to brag of his wit. Aristotle only labored to outgoe Plato in
learning, and in good same; But Judas was a very horse Leech.

Non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo. PAR. 2.
A Blood-sucker, a sucker of innocent blood: Lutum sanguine maceratum, as one
said of Tiberius. One who loved to bathe himself in blood. In contemplation
whereof, after some other discourse, our Savior was troubled in Spirit, and
testified and said; Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall
betray me.

That the same matter with some little variety of words might be spoken in both
the first and the second Supper, no man can deny; considering the manifold
relations in all the Evangelists, of the same protestations of Christ. Vbi
dolor, ibidigitus; where the soar itches; there the finger scratches. The
presence of the Traitor often gave Christ occasion to touch at him: often to
forewarne him. The repetitions made him more inexcusable, as growing still more
refractory, forewarned fore-armed, as is usually said; but a triple cord will
not draw some.

It follows, The Disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spoke,
verse. 22. This is a passage which none other of the Evangelists do touch at.
Frons index animi. And the wickedness of the heart, breaks often out into some
change, or disfiguration of the countenance.

In the forehead you may find,
All the passions of the mind.
But belike Judas, being a bold shameless man whose forehead was hardened, and
his conscience seared, had such command of his passions, that his intentions
could not be discerned by his looks. A man past shame, has great advantage
over a modest man, in point of contestation; Judas (it seems) kept a stanch
countenance, out of which the other Recumbents, could not pick his
guiltiness; nor read the dictates of his heart, trafficking for blood.

PAR. 3.
AFter the Apostles doubting, and gazing one upon the other, when they found no
signs of discovery, Peter who before was chid, about his too resolute denial
to be washed, fearing perhaps, lest the aspersion might rest on himself,
Beckned to John, who was leaning on Jesus bosom, that he should ask who it
should be of whom Christ spoke, John 13.24.

Even beckes have their language. Augustine de Doctrina Christiana, lib. 1. cum
oculis fabulamur; we discourse with our eyes: Confessionum; 8.8. plus
alloquebantur animum meum, frons; genae; oculi, color; modus vocis, quam verba
quae promebam: my frown, my cheek, my color; my manner of speaking, did make
fuller expression of my mind, than did the words themselves, which I did
utter. Ovidius Metamorpho (...) 4. -- Nutu signisque loquuntur; With beckes and
signs,
The express their minds.
Proverb. 6.13. He speaks with his feet, he teaches with his fingers;
loquens in pedibus suis: docens in digitis suis, as Montanus has it. Digitis
loquitur, says the Vulgar. -- digitis saepe est nutuque locutus
Et tacitam mensae duxit in orb notam,
Ovid. Trist. 1. Often with his fingers, often with beckes he spoke,
And on the round board secret signs did make.
Navius in Tarentilla, -- Alii: dat digito literas. To some others he wrote
letters on his fingers ends. Et potest de computo digitorum manualis loquela
figurari, says Beda, in libro de indigitatione. There may be framed a certain
kind of speaking by the hand; even by an arithmeticall disposal of his
fingers. The wanton Tibullus was not ignorant, Lib. 1.

-- nutus confer loquaces,
Blandaque compositis abdere verba notis.
How to confer by speaking beckes,
How to compose his speech.
In silent language, when h' intends
To flatter and beseech.
No mervaile then, if S. John understood S. Peter's significative beckning: and
leaning on Jesus breast, said unto him, Lord, who is it? Here I could reproove
the over earnest affectators of S. Peter's Primacie. I could tell them that D.
Collins has divinely weighed, not in the Bakers balance, but in the Gold
smiths scales, both S. Peter and S. Paul. Let others judge, I forbear. It is
in his Increpation of Eudaemon Johannes, page 305. and sequent: I could tell
them hence, that S. Peter was glad, to make a Mediator of S. John, to
interrogate Christ, which himself either dated not, o^ thought inconvenient to
propound: but such comparisons please not me.

PAR. 4.
LEt us lay the Detections altogeter, as we did in the first Supper, so in the
Second: and this will be found to be the order.

PAR. 5.
1 When the Devil had put into the heart of Judas Iscariot to betray Christ
John 13.2. the first touch at Judas is in the 10. verse. Tee are clean but not
all; the foulness, or uncleanness was spiritual and appropriated to the
traitor Judas only, verse. 11. This was said whilst Christ was washing, wiping,
and cleansing them; after he recumbed again. 2. The next and second touch of
this, v. 18. He that eats bread with me, has lift up his heel against me,
that the Scripture might be fulfilled: think not that therefore Judas sinned
because it was foretold, he would be the Traitor: but it was foretold, because
God fore-knew he would be the Traitor. God predestinateth no man to sin: That
the Scripture might be fulfilled; (...), Vt, or That, here is used causaliter,
non consecutive, as a cause; not as a consequence, says Cardinal Tolet on the
place) and if you enquire a reason, why Christ did choose an Apostle, whom he
knew to be wicked: Cyrillus 9.10: answers divinely. You may as well
interrogate why God made those Angels, whom he knew they would turn Devils?
why he made Adam, seeing he foresaw he would fall? why he created men, whom he
fore-knew that they would be damned? Let me add, the book of Gods
predestination cannot be opened, and unfolded: nor men, nor Angels, nor any
other heavenly powers, ever read it through; it is an Arc that must not be
pried into. They are most blind who gaze too much upon it. Christ chose Judas
when he was good, when he began to keep the bag he began to be ill. No man
was ever pre-ordained or created purposely that he should sin, manger all
Novellisme.

PAR. 6.
THe third puncto is in the 21. verse: Jesus was troubled in Spirit, and
testified; Verily, verily, J say unto you, that one of you shall betray me,
this was rather a propassio, than passio, or if you will a passion which Christ
raised up himself, and voluntarily assumed. He likewise groaned in Spirit, and
troubled himself, John 11.33. (...). Justinian in libro de Agone Christiano,
cap. 5. thus; Turbatur Christus, potestate, non insirmitate: cum vult, quando
vult, de quo vult. Christ is troubled by his power, not through infirmity; when
he will, how he will, for what he will. His perturbation was as free from
sin, as his tranquillity of mind. Augustine de Civitate 14.9. Dominus
adhib^it affectiones, ubi adhibend^s judicavit. Christ assumed affections upon
judgment; he who had a true humane both soul and body, had also true humane
affections. Though they moved up and down in the lower part of his soul; they
reached not to his mind, and spirit.

PAR. 7.
IN the fourth and last place, Christ, who had used general warnings; and
after some more especial ones, both in the first, and second Supper: now
toward the end of the second Supper, falls (upon S. John's request) to sign
the very individual man; Jesus answered; He it is to whom I shall give a Sop,
or a morsel, when I have dipped it. And when he had dipped the Sop, he gave it
to Judas Iscariot, Ioh. 13.26.

And now is the detection: and the words are as significant, as if Christ had
said, Judas Iscariot, Thou art the man, that will betray me, unto the words,
which were plain enough (because Segnius irritant animum demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus.
Those things the mind do less delight,
Which pass by the care, than what by sight:)


Christ added an evident sign, and therefore did Christ, according to his
promise, dip the Sop, and gave it; and himself gave it into the hands of
Judas; wherefore no man need doubt, but both Judas himself, was now convinced
in his own conscience; and his silence, and accepting of the Sop, proclaimed
his consent* and every other of the Apostles, rejoiced that themselves were
acquitted, and that the Traitor was sufficiently revealed to them.

Concerning that (...), or Sop, many questious may arise. First, whither it
were bread, or whither it were flesh? The Expositours are most for the bread:
but it is in the Margin of our New Translation: or Morsel; and yet it may be a
Morsel of bread; and the word will bear both (as I told you before) for
Opsonium, is all manner of meat; Opsopoeus, a Victualler; Opsopolis, a
woman-Cooke; and Opsopolium the Shambles; (...), is not taken for bread only,
nor its derivatives.

Diogenes was wont to say of the Megarians; Obsonant quasi crastina die
morituri; aedificant tanquam nunquam morituri, says Tertullian in Apologetico.
cap. 39.

They eat as they were to dye next day,
They build as they were to live for aye.
To the former part of which Diverbium of Diogenes concerning the Megarians; S.
Paul alluded, 1 Cor. 15.32. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die:
Obsonemus, quasi cras morituri. If the Spirit alluded to any Heathen Author,
and not rather to to the Prophet, Esaias 32.13.

I am sure they did eat somewhat more than bread. Beza translates it, Offulam;
Erasmus, Offulam vel bucellam. Erasmus shall hardly persuade me, that (...), is
properly Offula panis intincta juri; A bit of bread soked in pottage. The bread
in pottage is commonly so steeped, that it is unfit to be taken up, or to be
given without a spoone, from one to another: but meat is ordinarily cut and
dipped in the sauce, and then delivered from one to another, Ruth. 2.14. Eat
of the bread, and dippe the morsel in the Vinigar. Though Esau sold his
birthright for bread, and pottage of Lentiles, Genesis 25.35. yet was meat sod
in the pottage; and for one morsel of meat he sold his birthright, Heb.
12.16. (...). Our Bishops Bible reads it, for one mess of meat; Propter
escam unam, as it is in the Interlineary, Vnico edulio, as Beza has it; for
Esau was Edulus, an Eate-all.

The Vulgar rendereth it twice, Panem, Bread, in the 26. verse; but in the 27.
verse. Buccellam, a Morsel; and because he did eat bread with Christ, as both
the Psalmist foretold, and indeed was accomplished, verse 18. Therefore many
conclude, it was bread, which Christ gave; but the argument holds not,

For he did eat bread with Christ at both Suppers: and yet what Christ gave
him now, at last, might very well be a morsel of meat, dipped in the Embamma,
or sauce; some say in the Wine.

Nonnus is thus rendered by the most learned Heinsius. Cuimanum intingens nigro
liquore made factum panem praebuero, ipse me prodit. Et in poculum plenum vino
intingens extremum panis, impudenti dedit Iudae. To whom soever I shall give a
morsel of bread, soaked in the black pottage, when I have dipped it therein
with mine hand, he shall betray me, And when he had dipped the tip of the bread
in the Cup, full of wine, he gave it to the impudent Judas. He holds three
things, 1. That the thing delivered was bread. 2. That the Bread was dipped in
wine. 3. That this Bread, was sacred, and divine, for it follows (...); post
panem Deo similem: (...), Divinum panem: After the Bread like unto God, or the
Divine Bread the devil entered into him.
The Egyptians (as says the most accurate Heinsius, page 464. (of which
Nation Nonnus was) Intinctam vino offam exhibent. Give the bread dipped in
wine, which might be done in time of necessity, as Eusebius proved from
Serapion; but the Egyptians did so ordinarily; till Julius the Pope for-bad it
in his Epistle to the Egyptian Priests. Micrologus. cap. 19. disliketh and
disproveth that custom thus; Julius wholly forbids such intinction: and
teaches that the Bread is to be taken by it self; and the Cup by it self,
according to Christ's institution. Again, in Canonibus, titulo de consecratione.
distinctione. 2. C. cum omne; Julius both refuteth, and abrogateth that custom
of giving to the people the Eucharist dipped, because Christ gave to none of
his Apostles such an endippid bit, but to Judas only; which soked morsel
should be, as an infallible token; to sign out the betrayer of his Master: not
a sign of the institution of the Sacrament.

So far the excellent Heinsius; who also cites S. Augustine Tractat. 52. in
Iohannem. Judas took not Christ's body, when he took the Sop, as some think,
who read the words negligently. In this point he is right. But S. Augustine is
much mistaken in thinking, that before this Sop given, Judas, and all the
Apostles had received from Christ the Sacrament of his body and blood. And
though otherwhere; he embraces not the method of S. Luke, yet here he stands
too strict upon it; and makes a kind of Supper after the blessed Sacrament,
which has its inconveniences, great and unsufferable; of which, (...), God
willing hereafter.

PAR. 8.
I Wind up all. Suppose we, that this Morsel was Bread, that this bread was
dipped in wine; yet was it not the consecrated, either bread, or wine, but part
of the second Supper. S. Bernard, in Sermon. 3. de Coena Domini, Columella.
1355. is express. That the Sacrament was not given Tune, by the soppe;
Christus buccellam solummodo intinctam, non consecratam Judae porrexit, says
Ludolphus Carthusianus, part, 2 cap. 55. Christ gave Judas only a dipped, not
a consecrated soppe.

The reason of Soto is good. When Christ gave to the rest of his Disciples
severally his body; and his blood after, sub forma Potus; under the form of
wine; we may not think he gave it to Judas, dipped, or soked; for this is not
to eat and drink. Therefore the same Soto in the same place, viz. 4. Sentent,
Distinct. 12. Quaest. 2. Artic. 2. thus, Hilarious and universi; Hillary, and
all the rest of the Fathers with S. Augustine agree, that in, or with that
soppe, Judas took not the body, and blood of Christ. And no man can dissent
from this, says he. Yet I dissent from, Soto, when he is peremptory, that the
buccella, or morsel was intincta in vino, dipped in wine; for Salsamentum, was
not necessary, says he, to the eating of the Lamb. First, he is much mistaken
in the word Salsamentum, which (I opine) he takes for sauce, when it
signifies any salted thing; fish, flesh, or other salt Edulia, or victuals;
or must it needs be dipped in wine, because there was no Salsamentum, or
sauce? I am sure there is no salt in that inference.

Secondly, they had sour herbs, and their juice (says the Rituall) at the
eating of the Paschall. Thirdly, this Institution was after the Paschall
Supper. But says he, Christ cared not for delicates. True; but first, who
says, Christ took any of that soppe? Secondly, who grants the Embamma, or
sauce to be delicate? Wine was more delicate then it. It is not likely that it
was dipped in water, says he. True; How follows it, that it was dipped in
wine? They had (says he) both consecrated, and unconsecrated wine. I doubt not
but in this Second Supper, they had Esculenta, poculenta, condimenta. Meats,
drinks, and sauces, of great variety.

At the Pascall they had wine, as I proved fully before.
At the second Supper, says the Kituall they had wine.
At the sacred Eucharist they had wine.
Yet that the soppe given to Judas, was dipped in wine, cannot be proved, or
probabilized. In Evangelio nihil habetur, the Gospel does not at all
specialize, (says Soto himself) into what it was dipped. Conjecture therefore
had been fitter than the positive answer, That it was dipped in wine.

PAR. 9. The third Particular of the third General.
ANd now we are fallen upon the second Quaere; whither Judas received the
blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist with Christ, and his other Apostles, yea, or
no?

Authorities to prove that Judas did. S. Augustine in the place last cited, is
confident, that Judas did receive the sacred Eucharist. And in Evangelium
Iohannis, Tractatu. 6. post medium. Et sancta possunt obesse. In bonis enim
sancta ad salutem insunt; in malis ad Iudicium. Qui manducat, and bibit
indigne: Iudicium sibi manducat, and bibit. Non ait, quia illares mala est; sed
quia malus, male accipiendo, ad Iudicium accipit bonum quod accipit. Non enim
mala erat Buccella, quae tradita est Iudae a Domino. Absit. Medieus non daret
Venenum; salutem Medicus dedit, sed indigne accipiendo, ad pernitiem accepit,
quia non paratus accepit. Even holy things may hurt a man. For holy things in
good men, tend to their salvation, but in wicked men to their condemnation. He
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks unto himself
damnation. He says not, that, that thing was evil, but that, that evil one
receiving it evilly, received to his condemnation, that good thing, which he
received For the Sop was not evil, which was delivered to Judas by the Lord.
God forbid. The Physician would not deliver poison; he gave health. But he that
received it unworthily, received it to his destruction, because he received it
without due preparation. I answer, S. Augustine other-where is express, that
the soppe was not the Sacrament, though here he seems to conclude so.

So Nonnus Dominicus Soto in 4. Sententiarum, distinctione 12. Artic. 2. thus;
Because it were wonderful, that Christ by way of charity, should give his
own body to him, who highly hated, and betrayed him. But let it be the Quaere,
whether he did so or no? Aquinas thinks Judas did receive the Eucharist. And
he made this Hymn.

Cibum turbae duodenae.
Se dat suis manibus.
But says Barradius, Aquinas himself, was of another opinion. Where man?
where? Barradius should have done well to have speciallized the place. Aquinas
proves Judas received it from the authority of Chrysostom Homilia, 83. on
Matthew, where he says, the Traitor was Divina mensa susceptus; and ineffabile
mysterium communicavit. Entertained at the Lords Table, and partaked of the
unspakeable mystery. And homilia de proditione Iudae: adsuit Judas, and illius
sacrificii communicationem Meruit. Judas was present, and was accounted worthy
to be a Communicant of that Sacrifice, if so it be truly cited to my hands.
Merit is not always used to signify a work of condignity, deserving eternal
reward, (it were better, receperat) received.

Diomysius, Ecclesiasticae Hierarchiae, cap. 3. Christus Iudam secum, in
(Sacramentalem) Coenam perceperat. Christ admitted Judas with himself, unto
the (Sacramental) Supper. So Hierom. on Mark 14.23. When he had given
thanks, he took the Cup to them; and they all drank of it. Soto doubts
whither it was Hieromes Commentary. I say, There is no doubt, but that all, and
every one, who were present, received the blessed Sacrament. But it must first
be cleared (which never can be) that Judas was present. For indeed he was gone
out, ere the holy Sacrament was instiruted.

Bernard says, In eadem mensa. At the same Table, were Peter, and Judas: but
it must be understood, de mensa Dominica, and Sacramentali: of the Table of the
Lord, or the Sacramental Table, else he reaches not to our purpose.

He is of the same opinion, in Sermon de Coena, page 1709. Leo Sermon 7. de
passione Domini, says Judas took it. Haymo, and Remigius think, Judas
partaked of it says Soto; and therefore this opinion, Tanquam Sanctorum
Communis, imo tanquam Evangelii affinis amplectenda est. And more peremptorily
afterward. This opinion is to be received, not only as the common opinion of
the Doctors; but as the opinion of the Gospel.

PAR. 10.
SOto has this further note, where S. Matthew says Coenantibus illis, accepit
Jesus panem: and as they were eating, Jesus took Bread, he did not use the word
Supping, as S. John does, for the eating of the Lamb; but for the whole entire
Supper, consisting, ex primo accubitu: and secundo recubitu, of the first
accumbing, and second recumbing. For, though the washing came between, it is
called all, One Supper. Thus far Soto acutely reasons, Primo sedens, coenavit
paschalem agnum: at his first sitting down, he supped of the Paschall Lamb;
which S. John calls a Supper, when he says, Caena facta, Ioh. 13.2.
Secondly, he also accounts another Supper, to consist of Christ's first
accubation, and second recumbing, though the washing came in the midst of it;
and he says truly; All this was called but one Supper. But if he includes,
both the Paschall Supper, and the second Supper; all to be one Supper, he
confuteth himself; for before he distinguished the Paschall Supper by sitting;
the other by discumbing. If he mean, that the second Supper, which S. John
speaks of, though Christ lay down, and again discoursed, and did eat
before, and did eat afterward, and rose, and washed, and wiped their feet,
and again, lay down, and again discoursed; yet all this was but one Supper,
then Soto has hit the nail on the head; the bird in the eye; Acu rem tetigit:
and then necessarily the former Paschall Supper, and this other entire Supper
(though consisting of many parts) make not one only, but two distinct Suppers;
to which, if we add, the sacred Supper of our Lord, we have the Tricoenium
complete.

PAR. 11.
BArradius says; Judas did partake of the sacred Supper; so Hierom in his
second Book against Iovinian; so Eugenius; so the Author of the Book, de
Ablutione pedum in Cyprian; so Euthymius in Mat. 26. So Aquinas, part. 3.
Quest. 81. Artic. 2. And Michael Aiguanus the Carmelite, lib. 4. Sententiarum,
distinctione 12. Quaestione Vinea, page 385.

PAR 12.
CYprian Sermon de Coena Domini, prope initium. Vbi sacrum cibum men's perfida
tetigit, and scleratum os, panis sanctificatus intravit parricidulus animus
Judae, vim tanti Sacramenti non sustinens, quasi paleam de area exufflatus est,
and praeceps cucurrit ad proditionem, and pretium, ad desperationem, and
laqueum; Cyprian in his Sermon of the Supper of the Lord toward the beginning,
thus: as soon as the traitorous mind touched the sacred meat, and the
sanctified bread entered the profane mouth: the traiterous mind of Judas,
being not able to endure, the virtue of so great a Sacrament, was blown away
like chafe from the floor; and run headlong to Treason, and the reward of
it, to desperation and the halter. Where Cyprian seems to esteem the Sop to
be the holiest Sacrament; contrary both to truth and more authority. For he
went out immediately after the Sop, Ioh. 13.30.

Augustine in Enarratione in Psalm. 10. which with us is Psalm. 11. on the third,
verse. What has the righteous done? Christus traditorem suum tanta patientia
pertulit, ut ei primum Eucharistiam confectam manibus suis, and Ore suo
cammendatam sicut caeteris Apostolis traderet. Christ suffered his betrayer
with so great patience, that he vouchsafed to give unto him, as well as unto
the rest of his Apostles, the first Eucharist, made by his own hands, and
commended by his own mouth. The words Ore suo commendatum, may signify either
that Christ praised the holy Eucharist, when he gave it to his Apostles,
perhaps preferring it before the Paschall Supper, or their Old Sacrament. Or
that Christ himself did first eat, and not by speech only, but by deed, and
by his own eating of it, commended it to his Apostles, and among them to
Judas. Augustinus Epistola, 163. De Concordia facienda Scelerati ab
innocentibus fuere tolerati; Traditorem enim suum, qui jam pretium ejus
acceperat usque ad ultimum pacis osculum, intra innocents secum esse perpessus
est Christus. The wicked were suffered by the innocent; for Christ suffered his
betrayer, who had already received his reward, to be present with him, amongst
his innocent Apostles, even so far forth as that he vouchsafed him the kiss
of peace. How did Judas go forth then? How gathred he his troops to take
Christ? How came he to Christ? How did Christ go to meet him? He proceeds.
Quibus non tacuit, esse inter illos tanti seeleris hominem, and tamen primum
Sacramentum corporis, and sanguinis sui, Nondum ipso excluso Communiter Omnibus
dedit. From whom he did not conceal; that there was among them so wicked a
Villain, as he was; and yet notwithstanding, he gave the first Sacrament of
his body and blood generally to all; He (to wit) Judas) being not as yet
excluded out of their company.

Theophylact, has a wild crotchet, on Mat. 26. That Judas drank Christ's
blood: but reserved, and hid the body of the Lord of show it to the Jews.

This is rather Divinatio quam opinio, says Barradius, rather a conjecture
than an opinion: Somnium potius quam Divinatio, say I, rather a dream than a
conjecture.

The Prayer.
MOst merciful Savior thou were very merciful unto Judas himself; and did
use many ways to work his conversion: but he did harden his heart the more in
evil obstinacy: and played the part of a stout hypocrite, and he would not
be reclaimed, but upon his detection, he grew more desperate: O father of all
consolation, give me a tender heart and keep it so still, that I may be
terrified with thy threatenings, and comforted by thy promises, and may
effectually be moved with those means, which thou have ordained to bring me
to Salvation. Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XIV. The Contents of the foureteenth Chapter.
1. Authorites, that Judas did not receive the blessed Eucharist. Hilarious,
Rupertus, Innocentius, 3. Theophylact, Tatianus, Alexandrinus, Gregorius
Pachymeres, Turrian, Maximus, Ludolphus, Barradius, Beza.

The ground of S. Augustines, and many other famous men's errors concerning
this point.

Reasons to prove that Judas did receive the blessed Eucharist.

2. The 1. Reason.

3. The 2. Reason.

4. The 3. Reason.

5. The 4. Reason.

6. The 5. Reason. Christ never showed any extraordinary favor to Judas. S.
Augustine reports strange courtesies of Christ to Judas. Judas borne at
Marmotis, as says S. Bernard. Much holiness required to the participation of
the body and blood of Christ, Notorious wicked men not to be admitted to the
Communion.

7. The 6. Reason, when the Devil first entered into Judas. The prime
intentions of the Compilers of our Liturgy concerning those words -- Lest the
Devil enter into you, as he did into Judas, etc. Satanentred into Judas at
several times.

PAR. 1.
AUthorities that Judas did not receive the Sacred Eucharist are many. Clemens
Apostolicarum Constitutionum. 5.13. Mysteria pretiosi corporis, ac sanguinis
sui nobis tradidit, absente Judah. He gave unto us the Mysteries of his precious
body and blood, in the absence of Judas. Hilarious. Canone. 3. in Matthew. Sine
Iuda^, Pascha (spirituali) accepto Calice, and fracto pane conficitur: dignus
enim aeternorum Sacramentorum Communione non erat: The (spiritual Passover
was instituted by the taking of the Cup, and the breaking of the bread without
Judas, for he was unworthy to be partaker of the everlasting Sacraments.

Rupertus in Johan. Cap. 6 Diligentius Evangelistarum narratione, doctorumque
confiderata diversitate, citius deprehendi potest, Iudam huic Sacramento
(Corporis and Sanguinis Christi) nequaquam interfuisse. If we will diligently
consider, the History of the Evangelists; and diversity (of the opinions) of
diverse Doctors, we may easily perceive, that Judas was not at all at this
Sacrament, of the body and blood of Christ; Innocentius tertius; patet quod
prius exiit Judas, quam Christus traderet Eucharistiam. It is plain to be
seen, that Judas went forth, before Christ delivered the (blessed) Eucharist.

Theophylact. on Mat. 26. cites others for this opinion; with a good reason
annexed. Quidam dicunt quod, egresso Judah tradidit Dominus Sacramentum aliis
Discipulis. Proinde and nos sic facere debemus; and males arcere a Sacramentis.
Some say that when Judas was gone forth, the Lord delivered the (blessed)
Sacrament to his other Disciples. And therefore we also ought to do the like,
and to put back the wicked from the Sacraments.

Tatianus Alexandrinus, places Judas his Egresse, before the Sacred Mystery
was consecrated.

Gregorius Pachymeres, the Scholiast of Dyonisous Areopagita, Excludit Dominus,
and segregat justissime Iudam, qui non sancte Convivio interfuit. The Lord does
exclude and separate Judas, and that most justly, because he was not present at
the banquet, so holily, and religiously, as he ought to have been. Indeed he
imagines that Christ gave panem, and Vinum mysticum Iudae and post discessum
ejus, Eucharistiam praebuisse Apostolis. Mystical Bread and Wine to Judas, and
that after his going forth, he gave the (blessed) Eucharist to his Apostles. If
he mean the dipped sop, which had in it a Mystery; all this may be granted:
and yet our Conclusion is constant from him, that Judas partaked not of the
Eucharist.

Turrian proves from Dyonisius Areopagita, that Judas are not the blessed
Sacrament.

Maximus an old Greek interpreter of Dionysius Areopagita, expounds him, as
denying that Judas took the Eucharist. But suppose I grant that Dionysius his
own words be dubious, yet Pachymeres, Turrian, and Maximus say, Judas was
excluded.

Ludolphus the Carihusion, Cap. 55. places the separation of Judas, before the
administering of the Sacrament: and Cap. 57. Post egressum Iudae, after Judas,
was gone forth, when the clean remained with their cleanser; Christ comforted
his Disciples, and made a Sermon unto them full of sweetness, and love: honied
with heavenly honey, enlightened with light from God. Corruptus ille uter, for as
missus fuerat; Judas that corrupt vessel, was sent forth, whom Christ knew to
be unworthy, etc.

Barradius is express, that Judas was excluded from the Sacred Body, and Blood
of Christ.

The worthy Hierome Zanchius, whose Authority may pass for many. Tom. 2. in
quartum praeceptum: Lib. 1. page, 762. truly opineth, that Judas his receiving
of the holy Eucharist, aperte pugnat cum historia Johannis Evangelii, is clean
contrary to S. John's Gospel, and says expressly, Lucam fecisse (...) in his
narration that Judas his hand was with him on the board.

Beza on John 13.30. from the words, (...), presently went forth, gathers a
good argument, that Judas was not at the sacred Supper. Quum igitur non nisi
Mensis secundis sublatis, Dominus Sacrosancta sua Mysteria instituerit, Luke
22.20. Since Christ began not his Sacred Supper, till the two former suppers
were ended, and since John says, after the sop, Judas went out (...),
continuo, statim: immediately; they have the more certain opinion, who think
Judas not present at the Eucharist: why S. Luke says, as if after Eucharist,
Christ said, Luke 22.21. Behold the hand of him, who betrayeth me, is on the
board with me: we must explain by the other Evangelists: from whom it is
apparent, that this speech was made, before the Eucharist, which was the last
close of this feast.

The same Beza on Luke 22.21. on the word (...) or caeterum But; Apparet omnino
ex aliis Evangelistis, it is very plain by the other Evanglists, that the
words, But behold, etc. were spoken in Secundis mensis coenae Legalis, at the
second course of the Paschall Supper; which being taken away, and Supper being
ended, as S. Luke says in the precedent verse; Christ administered the sacred
Supper. Let this authority be noted; for upon the mistaking of those words as
spoken after the holy Supper, grew the erroneous opinion of S. Augustine, and
many other famous men, That Judas received the Eucharist.

PAR. 2.
REasons proving Judas to have eaten the holiest Mysteries are these, First,
after the blessed Sacrament, Christ says: Ecce manus tradentis me est in
mensa: Behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is on the table, Luke 22.21.
Therefore Judas was present also after the institution, and so received it; for
none present at it were excluded. This was the great stumbling-blocke, at which
the Divine S. Augustine, and many others both stumbled, and fell. Barradius
answers that S. Luke used a recapitulation. So Innocentius expounds it, S.
Luke diverse times, tied not himself to the order of things done: Apparebit
(says Maldonate) on Matthew. 12.43.) non Lucam, sed Matthaeum rerum gestarum
ordinem tenuisse. It is apparent that not S. Luke but S. Matthew, followed the
order of things as they were done, so is it also in this place.

I say, S. Matthew, and S. Mark, have the words in effect before the
Consecration. Secondly, take the words as they lie in terminis, and in the
History according to the letter; there follows this notable inconvenience;
that after the third Supper the most blessed Eucharist, or Lords Supper; Judas
was eating with Christ still at the same Table: which upon mature
consideration, no Christian will admit.

PAR. 3.
IVdas sat down with the twelve, and did eat, of the Cup it is said,
Biberunt ex eo omnes, Mark. 14.23, And it was the Eucharisticall Cup, as is
apparent. If none be excepted, and if we must not limit things, where Scripture
does not, then Judas received the Divine Eucharist. I answer, S. John relates
that Judas went out immediately after, after the sop. But that sop was not the
Sacrament, but given before the Sacrament: as follows, ex ordine gestorum and
verhorum Christi, according to the order and deeds of Christ, says Barradius.
Again, the word Omnes, All, must necessarily be restrained ad omnes qui
aderant, to all that were present. For shall we think the absent did receive?
Then must the 70. Disciples: and all in the house be included, and said to
receive it, which is false. Therefore, Omnes, All, involveth only Omnes
praesentes. All present.

PAR. 4.
THirdly, Psalm. 109.8. Let another take his office, charge, or Bishopric. But
he was made Priest, and Bishop at this Supper; therefore was he present:
therefore he received it. I answer, this Prophecy was fulfilled in due time,
when Judas was dead, and not before. Again, Judas was made an Apostle, long
before this, Matthew 10.4. He is reckoned as one though the last of the
Apostles. And the Apostle-ship comprised within it self, (as being the
chiefest and greatest power) all inferior authority. And S. Matthias was not
chosen in his room, as he was Priest only, or Bishop only, (the Apostleship
being set aside.) But he was chosen the twelfth Apostle, with all its Rites,
privileges, and authorities.

PAR. 5.
FOurthly, none of the Disciples, knew the secret sin of Judas, so he was not
deprived of the sacred Eucharist, for this cause. I answer, when the sop was
given, and taken, all the Disciples knew him to be the Traitor. If not, yet
Christ knew him to be unclean, Ioh. 13.10. and 11. verse. and knew him to be a
Devil. Ioh. 6.70. and 71. verse. Therefore though Christ admitted Judas into
his company; and to the dying transient Passover, and to the second Supper,
though he washed and wiped his feet; yet it stands with no likelihood, that
our holy Savior, would admit so sinful a soul, to so heavenly a banquet. If
in defense of the Prime part of this objection it be said, that no man at the
table knew for what intent Christ said unto him, That thou do do quickly,
John 13.28. Till I come purposely to handle the point, let this answer serve;
All the Apostles might both know the traitor expressly, and yet be ignorant,
what was the meaning of those words of Christ, for they little imagined, that
Judas would have betrayed Christ so soon, even that night, and they did then
little imagine, that then Christ gave the Devil full power over him.

PAR. 6.
FIfthly, Christ admitted Judas to the Paschall, and to the Common Supper; then
why was he not admitted to the Holy Eucharist? I answer, favor has its
latitude: even among us, we admit some, and not others, into our company; and
among them, some into our friendship, others into familiarity: to some we show
curresies ina mean degree, to other in an higher degree. Judas was chosen as
well as the rest to be an Apostle. I know whom I have chosen, says Christ,
John 13.18. But he is named in the last place, Matthew. 10.4. And though he
carried the bag, and kept the money, John 13.29. I account that was no favor
unto him. It was not in it self, but to his courtuous soul as a snare, and
stumbling block. Nor do you ever find any steps of extraordinary favor of
Christ unto him. He singled out sometimes two, and sometimes three, unto
especial Services, and to be personal beholders, of his more secret, and
Divine affairs. Peter, and John were sent by Christ to prepare the Passover,
Luke 22.8. Peter and John waited on him, John 21.20. He took Peter, James, and
John, as witnesses of his transfiguration, Mat. 17.1. He suffered no man to
follow him, save Peter, James, and John. Mat. 5.37. When they came to
Gethsemani, Christ said to his Disciples, sit ye here while I shall pray; and
he takes with him Peter, James, and John, Mark. 14.32. and 33. verses He never
showed Judas any such token of familiarity, so far as Scripture records but
kept him at a distance. Yet I confess I have read in S. Augustine Sermon. 28.
Tom. 10. folio. 276. strange courtesies (if truly undoubted) of Christ to
Judas: he delivered him often from death: for Judas his sake, he healed his
father of Leprosy; his Mother (with whom Judas had been incestuous) of the
Palsy: he found him often stealing, and always pardoned him: he most an end
honored Judas next to Peter: he gave him his holy body, he kneeled before him;
he washed his feet, he kissed him. From whence S. Augustine had all this, he
reveals not: nor is it de fide: any Article of our Christian faith. I come to
my old business. S. Bema^d in Sermon. 1. de Coena Domini, page 1347. says,
Judas was borne in a Village called Marmotis, sive malamors. Evil death.

Besides, the partaking of the Common Supper, yea and of the Paschall also,
required not so sanctified thoughts, so devout a Soul, so pure a spirit, as
the receiving of the blessed Eucharist does; therefore was he admitted to them,
but not to this, by reason of his uncleanness. Both the Godly, and the wicked
were to eat the Passover, and after it, the second Common Supper: and many
thousand wicked men did eat the Passover that year; even they, who crucified
Christ; and the worser sort of the Jews: therefore Judas might well be
partaker of such a feast, where sinners were frequently participants. The old
Passover was kept, (says Theophylact on Luke 22.) for their deliverie from
Egypt, and the blood of the Lamb for the preserving of their first borne. The
new Passover for the Remission of sins, and Sanctified thoughts. But because
the betrayer of Christ, was not clean, John 13.11. as being the true
hypocrite, washed only outwardly, not inwardly: only bodily not spiritually;
and because much holiness is required to the receiving of the Body, and blood
of Christ; therefore was he justly excluded from pertaking of the substance,
though he fed on the type, as other wicked men did also.

Any one might come into the Temple; but into the Sanctum Sanctorum or holiest
of all, none but the High Priest, nor he without blood, which he offered for
himself, and for the errors of the people, Heb. 9.7.

The gifts, and Sacrifices (whereof the Paschall was one, and that a prime
Sacrifice) could not make him, that did the Sacrifice, perfect, as pertaining
to the Conscience, which carnal Ceremonies were imposed on the Jews, until
the time of reformation, Heb. 9.10.11. verses. But Jesus was made a surety of a
better Testament, Heb. 7.22. And our high priest is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, verse. 26. Therefore did Christ most justly,
when before the most holy Communion, he separated Judas the defiled, from
himself, and from his other Sanctified Apostles. Augustine says excellently,
de Civitate 18.49. Christus habuit Judam inter Apostolos; quo malo utens been
-- Ecclesiae tolerandorum malorum praebebat exemplum. Christ had Judas amongst
his Apostles; whom being ill, he using well, has left an example to his
Church, to suffer evil men among them. Let me subsume; but before he came to
administer the blessed Sacrament, he removed that sinner of sinners; to give us
also an example, not to admit wicked men, (notoriously so known) unto the same.

PAR. 7.
SIxthly, in our English Liturgy, there is a specious Objection for Judas his
receiving the blessed Eucharist, in these words, If any of you be a blasphemer
of God, an hinderer or slanderer of his word; an adulterer; or be in malice, or
envy, or any other grievous crime; bewail your sins, and come not to this
holy Table, lest after the taking of that holy Sacrament, the Devil enter into
you, as he entered into Judas, and fill you full of all iniquity, and bring you
to destruction both of body and soul.

Whence the inference seems fair, Therefore the Devil entered into Judas
after the partaking of the holy Sacrament. Therefore he took it.

Dr. Mocket translating the words, adds one word too much, viz. simul,
Together, Ne post acceptum illud salutare Sacramentum, simul, intret in eum
Satanas, sicut in Iudam. Lest after the receiving of that saving Sacrament, the
Devil Together, enter into him, as he did into Judas. But how can it be
Together and yet after the Sacrament: neither is the word Together, in the
Liturgy, and therefore he did ill to put in the word simul; by which his
opinion is discerned, that he thought Judas received the blessed Eucharist, and
with it the Devil.

I answer, the words, As he entredinto Judas, make not, and evince not a
perfect similitude in every particular, extending to the very circumstances of
time, or designing our, at what Supper, this was said, or done, or when the
Devil first entered into Judas. For the holy compilers of our Liturgy, could
not be ignorant, both that Judas entertained, and hugged the pretended treason,
before he came to Supper; Mark. 14.10. and 11. verse. And S. John speaks as of
a thing passed, even before or at the beginning of the second Supper, Job.
13.2. The Devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot to betray
Christ; which word (now) is not to be taken exclusively, as if it were not in
his heart before, or else after, for even before the Passover, Satan entered
into Judas, compare Luke 22.3. and 7. And before men receive the consecrated
bread and wine: the Devil enters into sinful men, who have no touch of
Repentance. Let others say or think what they will, I will not lay an
aspersion of nesciencie, in so high a degree, as to say or think; that those
holy fathers and framers of our Liturgy, did imagine, that the Sop was the
Sacrament, or that Satan entered not into Judas till he had taken the Sop, and
did enter after he had received the blessed Sacrament, which points may seem
to result from the Lyturgie, if the words be thoroughly stretched and tentred.

Again, I suppose that the Liturgicall exhortation, is to be taken in sensu
diviso, non in sensu composito; attingens rem ipsam, non express signans, aut
comparans moment^ temporum. In a divided not in a compounded sense; touching
only the matter it self; not expressly signing out, or comparing the minutes
of times. I explain my self thus;

The prime intentions of those blessed moderate Saints the makers of our
Lyturgie, were these.

First, that unrepentant men should not dare to aproach to the Sacred
Eucharist. Secondly, that any man continuing in any mortal sin, eats and
drinks his own damnation. Thirdly, that a preparatory clensing is necessary,
ere a man receive. For the soul of the comparison consists in this; that
wicked men, in flagrantia delictorum, presuming to receive, whilst they lie or
sit on the dregs of their sins, shall be plagued and punished, as Judas was
both in body and soul; by the entrance of the Devil into them. Fourthly, and
lastly; that this is to be feared and may come to pass, in the time after the
blessed Sacrament, taken by unfaithful, and uncharitable Christians. This is
sufficient to be believed; this is sufficient to prepare, warn; admonish and
terrify the wicked; this is sufficient to be practiced. For God punishes not,
before the sin committed: yea seldom does God punish, but he gives a space
to repent, between the sin and the punishment.
But in my opinion, the Lyturgie never intended to define the time, when the
Devil entered into Judas, (which was more than once, as I proved before) and
neither expressed nor meant, that the time of the Devils entering into Judas:
and the time of his threatened entering into hardened Christians, were just, and
exactly the same time, namely, after the receiving of the blessed Sacrament.
For the Sop was not the Sacrament, and immediately after it, the devil went
in, and Judas went out.

Heinsius, page, 465. Veteres notant Dominum hac offa: (...): hoc est, ab
scidisse, separasse, divisisse, a Sacro choro, traduxisse quoque Iudam in
potestatem Diaboli: the Ancients do note, that the Lord by that sop, did cut
off, separate, and divide Judas, from the holy Quire (of the Apostles) and did
deliver him over into the power of the devil. This proves, that Judas went
out, before the holy Sacrament was administered. And how could he then partake
of the Eucharist?

Moreover the words (As he entered into Judas) may be as a parenthesis, having
an entire sense of it self, though the word of similitude reaches not to
identifie the times; but only compares the entrances themselves: and the
words are full of Divine sense, though they were read; Come not to this holy
Table, lest after the taking of that holy Sacrament, the Devil enter into you;
and fill you full of all iniquities.

Moreover the Lyturgie may truly be said, to compare the sins, and following
punishments; though it compared not the times; who offend like Judas, shall be
punished like Judas, though the Devil entered into Judas, even before the
Paschall Supper: and does enter into Christians, after they have received: the
punishment shall be all one, though inflicted at several times.

Before the Passover Judas sought how he might conveniently betray him: Mark.
14.11. And before the Passover Judas sought opportunity to betray him, Mat.
26.16. Yea before he trafficked for blood; and before he communed with the
chief Priests, and Captains, Satan entered into Judas, Luke 22.3. For he had
resolved for the sin before, and then Satan entered. He entered also into him
after he had received the sop: and this was at the second Supper. Which of
those two extremes did the Lyturgie intimate?

Again, when Satan entered into Judas, is no matter of faith: or of any great
consequence; nor is so propounded to us in the Lyturgie.

Last of all, the Lyturgie does not say, that Judas received the Divine food,
of the most Sacred Eucharist, nor can the sense of those words be deduced
thence. But it says at the utmost extension, that the devil entered into
Judas, after he had received the holy Sacrament. Which holy Sacrament may very
well be understood of the Passover; which was an holy Sacrament of the Jews:
and which Judas questionless did take; and after which he took the Sop, at
the second Supper, and then the devil entered into him. And yet for all this,
Judas did not partake of the body and blood of our Lord, which he was justly
separated from, because he had sinned, and betrayed the innocent blood, as
himself confessed of himself, Mat. 27.4. And this I hold to be the most
satisfactory answer, to that specious objection, from the Lyturgie: the word
Sacrament being applyable both to the Jewish and Christian Sacrament: Judas
taking the former, the other Disciples taking both.

The Prayer.
OEternall God, in Wisdom great, in greatness powerful, in power infinite
in judgment most just, and yet such a gracious God, whose mercy is over all
thy works, and therefore much more over all our works; have mercy upon us,
deliver us from being the sons of perdition: keep Satan from entering into
our hearts: but rather tread him under our feet, and lift us up to thee, and
fix our scules on thee, for Christ his sake. Amen.

CHAP. XV. The Contents of the fifteenth Chapter.
1. Reasons proving that Judas was not present at the Eucharist. The 1. Reason
drawn from Christ's own Example. Examples pierce deeper than words. Legal
Conjunction.

2. A 2. Reason drawn from the Leviticall Leper, Leviticus 14.46.

3. A 3. Reason drawn from the Leviticall Priests, Ezekiel. 44.23.

4. The 4. Reason drawn from Christ's purging the Temple, from profane things,
Mark 11.11.

5. The 5. Reason drawn from David's example, Psalm. 26.

6. The 6. Reason, Judas a Devil. John 6.70.

7. The 7. Reason drawn from 1 Corinthians. 10.20.21. The Cup of the Lord and the
cup of Devils opposite.

8. The 8. Reason drawn from Christ's washing the Apostles feet, John 13.2.
The Schoole-mens opinion.

9. The 9. Reason drawn from, Heb. 10.26.

10. The 10. Reason, from Judas his being excluded from Grace, at the end of
the second Supper.

The fourth General point.

11. The Subsequent or Concomitant occurrences after the Traitors detection.
The 1. Occurrence, Satan's entering into Judas. When Satan entered into Judas. How
Satan entered into Judas.


S. Augustine says Affectu tantum and Voluntate.


Ludolphus. Essentially Not into his Soul. But into his Body.


Tolet not Corporally; but taking a quiet possession of him. Theophylact:
Occupavit Cor ejus. Cyrill: praecipitem egit. Origin: Egit ut Ascensor equum.
Item. Judas totum Satanam suscepit in se: After the Sop.

12. How Judas was tempted:

Temptations are either 1. Ascendentes Inward. 2. Obrepentes Outward. 3.
Immissae Darted in by Satan himself.


13. Three Conclusions 1. Conclusion, the Temptations of the world are several
from the Devils. Three kinds of Tempters
1. The World. 2. The Flesh. 3. The Devil.
2. Conclusion, The temptations has 3. degrees 1. Beginning. 2. Proceeding. 3.
Consummation.
Or thus, Consider
1. The Primitive Motion. 2. The Assisting Commotion. 3. The Plenary Agreeing.
Or thus,
1. Suggestion. 2. Delight. 3. Pleasure.
3. Conclusion. The Devil is the Author and Cause of all, and every
temptation. The Devil a tempter. The World, and Flesh the Devils Instruments.


14. How the temptations of the Devil be known: from the temptations of the
World. Flesh.


15. Satan's temptations are Many. Manifold.
Which temptations are grievous, and fiery: Which temptation is the worst, and
most dangerous? How the World Flesh Satan tempts. The same sin may be of
the World. Flesh. Devil.

16. The Creatures of God tempt us not primarily, but by casualty: the stars,
and heavenly influences tempt no man to sin, No more does any earthly thing
in its own Nature. What temptations be from Satan: the variety of Satan's
Temptations.

17. All men have been Tempted, even the Spiritual: Not Christ himself, nor
his Apostles free from Temptations. The manner of Satan's Temptations.

18. Satan may enter into a man often times. Judas his state after Satan's
second entrance into him.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
THe Reasons also hold fairly, that Judas was not present at the Eucharist.

First, whatsoever the Lord commanded, himself fulfilled; for Act. 1.1. Christ
began both to do, and teach. His first teaching was his doing: no teaching is
compared to the first practicing: Examples pierce deeper than words: he was
first baptized by John, before either he baptized and, or gave authority to his
Disciples, or Apostles that they should baptize any.

But the Lord commanded the giving of holy things to holy people only; when he
did say; Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast your pearls
before swine, Mat. 7.6. Therefore he himself gave not the holy Sacrament unto
Judas.

PAR. 2.
SEcondly, Levit. 13.46. The Leper is unclean, he shall dwell alone, without
the Camp shall his habitation be. Numb. 5.2. Put out of the Camp every Leper,
and every one that has an issue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead:
accordingly, Azariah, though he were a King, yet because he was a Leper, he
dwelt in a several house, 2 King. 15.5. And his Kingdom was ruled by his
son Iotham, as follows. If so strict a Command was to separate such as had
only bodily infirmities, and such sickenesses as are Natural; even though
they were no notorious sinners: we may not imagine, that Judas, (whose sin
was above all bodily, and ghostly spots) was admitted to the most Holy of
Holies.

PAR. 3.
THirdly, Ezech. 44.23. The Priests, the Levites, the Sons of Zadock, that
kept the charge of my Sanctuary, shall come near to my Table, to minister unto
me; they shall teach my people, the difference between the holy and profane,
and cause men to discern between the unclean and the clean. Therefore much
more did Christ, ((...)) The Minister of holy things, and the true tabernacle,
which the Lord pitched and not Man, Heb. 8.2.) By the separation of Judas,
teach the Apostles, and all the world, the differences between the holy and
profane; between the holy Apostles, and profane Judas; and caused men to
discern between the unclean, and the clean; when he said, Ye are clean but
not all, not Judas the traitor, John 13.10. and 11. verses, and therefore he
sent him forth suddenly, That thou do do quickly: and Judas went out
immediately, Judas being as it were excommunicated and gone, there followed the
Most Sacred Supper.

PAR. 4.
FOurthly, did Christ when he came into the Temple look round about all
things; Mark. 11.11. Did Christ cast out all them who bought and sold in the
Temple, and overthrow the Tables of the money changers, and the seats of them
that sold Doves, Mat. 21.12? Did Christ (more than ever he did before) make a
scourge of small cords, and drive the prophaners of the Temple, all of them out
of the Temple, and the sheep and the Oxen, Ioh. 2.15? Was Christ so zealous
for the purification of the material Temple; and shall we not think he did
look round about, before he admitted any to his most sacred Table: In this
circumspection he saw Judas, and cast him out.

They who bought, and sold in the Temple, are held by diverse, to have meant
well; and to prepare the businesses the better, for the sooner and better
accommoding of the sacrifices, for the service of the Temple; yet did Christ,
cast out all these. Now let any man say, if he can, that Christ admitted Judas,
to better things than the Temple, even to his own sacred body and blood, that
Judas who had no intentions, even Judas, whom the devil before had entered
into, even Judas, who had sold innocent humane blood: or rather, the blood of
the Son of God. Would Christ suffer the first institution of his last Divine
Supper, to be polluted, by the presence of a Traitor? Or did Judas eat of that
body, which he murdered? Or drink of that blood which he caused to be shed?
-- Procul, o proculite profani. Away, away, far hence depart,
Each one that harbors a profane heart.
Profane Judas was executed.

PAR. 5.
FIfthly, I have not sat with vain persons; neither will I go in with
dissemblers: I have hated the Congregation of evil doers. Gather not my soul
with sinners, nor my life with bloody men; in whose hands is mischief, and
their right hand is full of bribes, Psalm. 26.4.5.9.10. verses. I will wash my
hands in innocence; and so will I compass thy Altar, O Lord, ver, 6. Shall
Judas, who washed his hands, and bathed his soul in blood, partake of Christ,
who is our Altar? Or would Christ administer the blessed Sacrament to Judas,
who was a vain person; a dissembler: an hated evill-doer; a sinner, a bloody
sinner; in whose hands were mischief and bribes? far was it from him.

PARA. 6.
SIxthly, Have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil? And he
spoke of Judas Iscariot, Ioh. 6.70. But Christ would never suffer a devil to
be partaker of the blessed Sacrament of his body and blood. Therefore before he
administered that, he separated Judas Iscariot. Suppose the word Devil be
taken for the instrument, and agent of Satan: and not the proper name of him,
whom we call the devil Antonimastiee, figuratively: grant it also that Judas
is called a devil, because he imitated the works of the devil, Ioh. 7.44. Ye
are of your father the devil: the lusts of your father you will do; he was a
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth: yet we shall
derogate from the purity of the first institution to imagine that Christ
would, or did admit Judas to taste of the Super-coelestiall Manna, even while
Judas had the thoughts of murder in his soul.

PAR. 7.
SEventhly, 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. verses. I would not that ye should have
fellowship with devils; ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of
devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and the Table of devils.
God, and Satan, have several, distinct, both Cups, and Tables opposite one to
the other. Every man receives, either the one, or the other; none partaketh
both. He, who does partake one, does not, may not, cannot (says the Apostle)
partake of the other, There is a wall of partition, of separation, between
those two Tables. Judas was discarded, ere they began to take the Lords Supper,
at the Lords most sacred Table. See the Schoolemens opinion, concerning Judas
his eating, or not eating.

PAR. 8.
Eighthly, Maldonate on John 13.2. says, Propteria pedes discipulorum lavit, ut
externe illo doceret Symbolo, non debere homines impuros, and illotos, ad
sumendam sacrosanctam, ac divinam Eucharistiam accedere. Christ did therefore
wash his Disciples feet, that by that external sign, he might teach us, that
impure, and unwashed men ought not to be admitted to the participation of the
sacred and Divine Encharist. And when all Christ's washing and wiping, made not
Judas clean, is there any likelihood, Christ would admit, the defiled Traitor,
to the most pure Supper of his Body and Blood?

PAR. 9.
NInthly, Heb. 10.26. If we sin wilfully, after we have received the
knowledge of the truth (as never man after so much knowledge sinned so wilfully
as Judas did) there remains no more sacrifice for sin., but a certain
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour
the adversaries, ver. 27. Therefore the holy Sacrament being a means of
remission of sins, remained not for Judas to take.

PAR. 10.
TEnthly, and lastly, Since Christ said, What thou do, do quickly; by which
words, he did, as it were bid him be gone before Grace was ended for the common
Supper; and that the graceless Traitor went out immediately; unless he came
back again presently, which could not be, because he went to the High
Priests, and gathered a band of men, he could not possibly be, at the
participation of the holy Eucharist.

PAR. 11. The fourth General point. The 5. Subsequent Occurrences, after the
Traitors detection.
I am now come to the last point of my Method, namely the subsequent
Occurrences, after the Traitors Detection, and they aptly spread themselves,
into these several branches.

1. Satan's entrance into Judas. After the Sop, Satan entered into him, ver. 27.
2. Christ's sentence of separation of Judas. That thou do do quickly, ibidem.
3. The Apostles Nesciency. 4. Their misunderstanding of Christ's words, verse.
28, 29. 5. Judas his egresse, ver. 30. 6. The giving of thanks at the end of
the second Supper, according to the usual fashion of the Jews in those days.
7. Cum libamine vini. 8. Et Psalmodia, Concerning the first point, viz. Satan's
entering into Judas.
Augustine Sermon 28. adfratres in Eremo. Christus Iudae panem intinctum
porrigere voluit, ut cor intinctum veneno significaret -- Omnino (fratres)
Satanas ante buccellam, cor Judae intraverat, sed affectu, and voluntate
tantum. Christ would therefore deliver the Bread (or Sop) that thereby, he
might intimate (unto us) that the heart of Judas was dipped in poison. Believe
it (brethren) that Satan was entered into the heart of Judas, before the Sop;
but conceive it in desire, and will, only. This distinction is more nice, than
pithy: for he was in him before, Effectu, and opere really, and indeed; when
he had compounded to betray Christ; Post buccellamintravit Satanas, effectu,
and opere. After the Sop, Satan entered into him really, and indeed. And it may
also be truly said, that before the Sop, Satan entered into Judas, effectu, and
opere, really, and indeed. The devil now put into the heart of Judas to
betray Christ, Ioh. 13.2. but this was before the giving of the Sop. More
especially, Luke 22.8. Satan entered into Judas: before he communed with the
Highpriests, before they came to the Paschall Supper.

Ludolphus Carthusianus 2. Part. cap. 52. Satan entered, not forcing the door,
but finding it wide open; not by his Essence, or essentially, gliding, or
sliding into Judas his soul. For so, (according to Augustine) God alone, who
made the soul, enters into it: but suggesting to Judas, the selling, and
betraying of Christ, he entered into him, by the effect of that suggestion: and
after the Sop, subjugating Judas to his servitude, by the effect of a more full
possession.

The same Ludolphus, cap. 55. Satan enters into man's body essentially, as in
the possessed with devils; God alone enters into the soul; and essentially
gets into the mind; for the soul has no dimensions of quantity, that any
thing can be said to be in it, as contained within those dimensions; and so
nothing can be in it, but that which gives it his being; and that is there by
its virtue: but where Gods virtue is, there is his Essence: both of them are
all one in him; therefore God alone is essentially in the soul; for he alone
fills the nature, or substance, by him created: yet Satan is said to creep
into men's minds, per affectum, and effectum malitie; by affecting of malice,
and by effecting of it; in as much as man is seduced by him, and proceeds to
commit the evil which Satan suggesteth.

Tolet says, that Satan did not enter corporally into Judas; as he does into
Damoniacks nor to put a new, more ill thoughts into him; for before he
consented to those temptations. I answer, it seems to me, Satan possessed his
very body, and that fully after the Sop; and that Satan hurried him at his
pleasure: he was led captive according to Satan's own will. I doubt not, but
Satan did strengthen the old suggestions; and withal put fresh, and new
temptations into his soul, for he caused him to hang himself. But (says
Tolet) Judas taking high displeasure to be revealed to be the Traitor, he
opened his whole heart to Satan, and Satan entered into him, taking a firm and
quiet possession of him. For man sins more licentiously, when he knows,
that the sin which he committed secretly, is known publicly: Per scelera
simper sceleribus tutum est iter, said a wicked one: Sin once known is made
more sinful.

Theophylact, on John 13. says Satan; Occupavit cor ejus; sicut aliud est
percutere quempiam manu foris; and aliud est, confodere gladio viscera. Satan
took full possession of his heart; as it is one thing to give a man a box on
the ear, and another thing to thrust him through with a sword. Whilst Judas was
one of the holy company of the Apostles, Satan had not so free access unto
him; when Christ did divide, and separate him; then Satan invaded him, as
forsaken of the Lord: Et ingressus est interiora cordis ejus, and occupavit
animam ejus. And he entered into his very heart, and took quiet possession of
his soul.

Cyrill in Iohannem 9.19. Timens Diabolus (ut credo) ne morando locus
poenitentiae detur -- Iudam magna praecipitem agit celeritate, and cap. 17.
Judas non ut consiliatorem, sed ut cogitationum suarum Dominum, in cord
Diabolum retinet. The Devil (as I suppose) fearing lest by delay Judas should
find Repentance, drove him on furiously. And Judas entertained the devil, not
as a Counselor, but as a commander of his cogitations.

Origin in Exodi cap. 15. Homilia sexta, page 75. Tomiprimi, on, Equum and
ascensorem projecit in Mare. They are horses, upon whom the Devil and his
Angels do ride -- Post buccellam ascensor Iudae factus est Satanas: after the
Sop, the devil became Judas his rider -- Omnes mali habens ascensores, quibus
aguntur, Angelos malos; and ideo feroces sunt. All evil men have evil Angels
for their riders, by whom they are managed, at their pleasure; and that is the
reason, why they become so furious.

Origin de principiis seu (...). 3. in the Tract. de contrariis potestatibus;
Judas, cum jam Diabolus misisset in cor ejus ut traderet Christum, postea etiam
totum Satanam suscepit in se. Judas, after the devil had put into his heart to
betray Christ, received him on his back, with a full careere; namely, after
the Sop.

PAR. 12.
BUt leaving other men's opinions, let me say somewhat of mine own. The manner
how Judas was wrought to be the Traitor, may seem to be this.

Temptations are of diverse sorts. 1. Ascendemes, Luke 24.38. Why do thoughts
ascend, or rise in your hearts; these are inward. 2. Obrepentes, Creeping upon
us, from the creatures, and they are outward: called Mendaces vanitates, Lying
vanities, Jonah, 2.8. which by their false colors; insinuate themselves into
our favor. 3. Immissae; darted in by Satan himself. Satan injecit se, in cor
Iudae; as it is in the Syriacke, Satan did as 'twere dart himself into the
heart of Judas.


From Judas his foul, and corrupt heart did arise, and ascend many confused
cogitations of the sinful betraying of his Master.

After them came creeping into his graceless soul, Desire of gain, and
faultfinding, with the loss of the rich, and costly ointment; ambition to be
in good esteem with the chief Priests, and the Rulers of the people, by doing
them such service, as no man else would do; and these, and other circum-repent
temptations found an open entrance, and pleasing intertainment in him.

In the third place, Satan confirms all the precedent evils of sin by his
own proper suggestions: Every one ( Veluti contorta phalarica -- as an engine
of war, carrying wild-sire in it, where with timber-works were burned) was
violently hurled into each corner of his heart. The devil having put into the
heart of Judas to betray Christ, Ioh. 13.2. (...): Cum diabolus jam immisisset
in cor Judae; as both the Vulgar, and Beza has it, when the devil had now as
it were darted himself into, or taken violent possession of the heart of
Judas; the words ((...)) may very well signify, both passed and present
suggestions. These were Immissae or Contortae tentationes, with speedy
violence, like fiery darts, inflamed his soul unto such a wickedness, as man
durst not own, but as animated by Satan. And to the furious instruments of
war, may the word Immissae allude: as the Apostle also more evidently seems
to do, Ephesians. 6.16. when he says, That by the shield of faith, we may be able
to quench all the fiery darts (...), Maligni illius (says Beza) of the wicked
one: Nequissinii illius, as it is in the vulgar, of that most wicked one. If
our last Translation had expressed the name of the devil, no exception could
be taken; if a man look up to the 11. and 12. verses.

Or else the Metaphor in the words. Satan put it, or cast it, or thrust it,
into the heart of Judas, may be taken from the command of God, that whatsoever
touched the border of the Mountain, were he man or beast, he should surely be
stoned, or shot through, Exodus 19.12. and 13. verses; which the Apostle, Heb.
12.20. divinely varieth; He shall be thrust through with a dart. So was Judas
his heart transpierced by Satan.

PAR. 13.
LEt me insert a little ragge of a Sermon, which I made before the most
learned, and holy Prelate, our right reverend Diocoesan, now Lord Bishop of
Bath and Wells, concerning these temptations.

I take three Conclusions as granted;

The first Conclusion presupposed, as a known truth, is, That the temptations
of the world, are sometimes several temptations, from those of Satan. If God
withheld Satan from tempting of a man; yet must we be also unspotted of the
world, James 1.27. For there are pollutions of the world, 2. Pet. 2.20. Beware
of men (says Christ) Matthew. 10.17. well expounded by S. Paul, Phil. 2.3.
Beware of evil workers. Lastly, the ranking of our enemies, under the distinct
Ensigns of the Flesh, the World, and the Devil shows there are diverse, and
divided temptations.

Sunt trio qua tentant hominem, mundus, Caro, Demon, Three things there are
which do tempt man,
The world, the flesh, and old Satan.
This proves the second truth also, which I assumed as granted; That the
Temptations of the flesh, are oftentimes several from the assaults of the
devil. If there were no devil at all (says Origin) (...), secundo; we yet
should find unlawful desires, and appetites; The flesh would lust against the
spirit, James 4.1. Wars and fightings come even of your lusts, that war in
your members: wars upon wars; and James 1.14. Every man is tempted, when
he is drawn away of his own lusts and intised; which temptation, is there
declared, by these three degrees; the Beginning, the Procedure, and the
Consummation. Or thus; the Primitive Motion, the Assisting Commotion ( Mota
facilius commoventur) when things are once moved, they move the faster.) The
Plenary agreeing, begetting death. S. Augustine varieth the phrases, though not
the sense, de Genes. contra manicheos, 2.14. that the temptation of the flesh,
is accomplished, by Suggestion, Delight, and Pleasure.

The third Conclusion presumed, as undeniable, is this; The devil may be said,
to be author, and cause of all, and every temptation, nor directly, but
indirectly, not always immediately, but principally, and occasionally; Since
we have never known, the lusts of the flesh; or the baytes of the world, if
he had not been. I am loath to go so far as Hierom, on that of the
Psalmograph, Eschew evil, and do good; who says; Omnia mala ab instinctu
diaboli procedunt; sicut bona ab instinctu Dei; All evil proceeds from the
instinct of the devil as all good from the inspiration of God; for from God
flow all graces directly: yet Satan, (...): most properly is called the
Tempter, Matthew. 4. and is meant, where it is said; Lest the Tempertempt you, 1
These. 3.5. He begat in mankind, a disposition to sin, as a Cleaver of wood
prepares it for burning. He ministers present matter, and concurreth in most
temptations, as the Fueller lays sticks upon the fire, and blows the
coals, using both the World, and the Flesh, as his instruments, to set us, in
Comburo (as the Spaniard phrazeth it) and to seduce us. In which regard, when
we overcome the World, or the Flesh, we may be said in a sort to resist the
devil; and yet he has peculiar Temptations, by us to be opposed, Resist the
devil, and he will fly from you. So much for the three Conclusions.

PAR. 14.
THe Question is, How shall we know the Temptations of the Devil, from the
temptations of the World, and the Flesh? Some think they cannot be known. I
never read them distinguished aptly enough.

I wish men would rather labor to avoyde all: yet I answer; The Obrepentes, or
creeping Temptations, are more slow; The Ascendentes, or arising Temptations
more inward, and more natural, yet more sinful; as Selfe-sowne, Selfe-growne,
in the corrupt mass of Mankind. The third sort are more quick, more sharp,
or less thought of: and these proceed from Satan more immediately.

Once again thus; The temptations of the World, properly are, when men and
women are drawn unto sin, by other folks flatterings, persuasions, threats,
fashions, evil examples, or customs of the world, because of these scandalls.
The temptations of the Flesh, are not only carnal lusts, but all inordinate
concupiscence of any wordly things. The Apostle reckons, even some spiritual
offenses among the sins of the flesh, Gal. 5.19. For the concupiscence, even
of the Regenerate, has its seat; not in the sensitive appetite, so much, as
in the reasonable soul.

PAR. 15.
THe temptations of Satan are many: He has Mill nocendi arts; and we may be
sure, those are his, which do most cunningly, and fiercely tempt us; for there
is no head to the head of the Serpent; no cunning to his cunning; his strength
is in his loins, Job 40.16. There is (...), the working of Satan, 2 These. 2.9.
He spreads sharpe-pointing things upon the mire, Job 41.30. And we are that
mire, or earth, upon earth, There is not his like, Job 41.33. aut potestate,
aut nequitia; either in power, or in malice; says Nicetas, whither his
temptations be in ward, or ourward; whither he works by himself; or works by
the world; or use our own flesh against us. Amongst Temptations, those are
very grievous, and fiery, when internis oppugnans, de nostro; contra nos
roboratur; when Satan works with our lusts, is strengthened by our own
corruption fights against us, with our own weapons. But the most dangerous,
and worst temptation of all, is, when the world allureth; when the flesh
concurreth; when Satan spurreth on; and all three, Iunctis umbonibus facta
testudini; with might and main, fight against us; for the triple cord will
scarce be broken: and he is a rare man, that can withsland all three. Yet once
more, the world tempts outwardly, the flesh inwardly, respectu fomitis, for
Matthew. 15.19. Out of the heart proceed (not only) evil thoughts, but, false
witnesses, blasphemies, and the defiling sinfulness of the mouth, yea thefts,
murders, and other abominations. The works of the hands; Satan tempts, both
inwardly, and outwardly; jointly, and severally; All is fish that comes to his
net: the same sin is Earthly (that is of the world) Sensual (and that is of
the flesh;) Devilish (that is from Satan) James 3.15. I will not end this point
yet.

PAR. 16.
THe creatures of God, ( quatenus tales, as they are mere creatures) are good
and tempt us not; yea cannot tempt us. If they be stumbling-blockes to the
souls of men, and a snare-trappe or scandal; it is to the unwise, Wisdom
14.11. God intends not primarily, it is by casualtie, and the depravation of
our nature: the stars, and the celestial Influences, tempt no man to sin;
if they work on our bodily humors; and if man will be inclined (for his will
cannot be forced; and the inclination may be bent contrarily) it is a branch of
the fleshly temptation; meat, drink, beauty, silver, and gold, have not
inwardly, nor outwardly, in their own nature, any tempting quality; the
immoderate desire, or use, of these, are boughs growing from a fleshly root.

Actus activorum sunt in dispositione patientis; every thing is, as it is
taken: If they were such, we may choose, whither they shall work upon us, to
our hurt; we may use them without sin. A beaten soldier, an holy resolved
man will not stoop to such lures. The continual provocation; as well as the
perseverance, in any sin, has his heat, or vigor, renewed fom Hell, or
Satan. I conclude summarily; the sudden, cunningest, fiercest, strongest,
lastingest temptations, are from Satan.

More concerning the temptations of Satan; Cyprian in his Sermon, de Zelo, and
livore, excellently handles diverse temptations. Augustine in his narration, on
the 106. Psalm, reckons up other sorts: the first of Error; the second of
Difficulty, to overcome our lusts. The third of tedious Dullness; all cannot be
numbered in a small time. He tempts us in our meat, drink, sleep, in body,
and soul; in our thoughts, words, and actions.

PAR. 17.
WHo dares say, he was never tempted, as he was in his devotion? He tempts us
in our best endeavors; he buffeteth Saint Paul; would winnow the Apostles; the
very spiritual man must consider, he may be tempted, Gal. 6.1. They of whom
the world was not worthy were tempted, Heb. 11.37.

The first Adam tempted, and over-tempted; the second Adam vehemently tempted:
He was in all points tempted, like as we are, Heb. 4.15. Satan hindered the
Apostles from doing good, 1 These. 2.18. He put into the heart of Judas, and all
wicked men, to do evil; He walks about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet.
5.8. And this, as a roaring Lion. The roaring of the Lion, both proves he
has a prey, Amos 3.4. and yet in the word Roaring, is also employed, hunger,
and earnest desire, as in Peter; and Esaias 5.29. They shall roar, and lay hold
on prey; and the words ((...)) denote his cunning sedulity.

By being a Lying spirit, he drew Ahab into error: He tempted Ananias, and
Sapphire, To lie to the holy Ghost: As a hunter he lays his snares, 1 Timothy
3.7. Every temptation is a snare, 1 Timothy 6.9. Rosist the wiles of the Devil.
Ephesians. 6.11. He tempts the out ward senses, by presenting unto them exterior
sensible objects; sometimes real, sometimes illusive, bringing into error,
and deception, our very senses; the touchstone of natural verities. Sometimes
he disturbeth the Organs, of the outward senses, inwardly, that the sensible
objects appear other than they are; accordingly as it is in mad men: he
tempts the Vegetative saculties, and the sensitive, both appetitive and
apprehensive powers, by stirring the homors, residing in their bodily Organs;
and working on the virall Spirits, in which the sensible species are contained;
semblably as is done in our sleep. He tempts the understanding, suggesting
some sensible signs, or rather shadows of the truth to be understood; that
is, framing either inward phantasmes, or outward shapes, the breeders of
fantasies; hence the Intellect glideth into an error, and the Will is
directly seduced by the inveigling suggestion.

PAR. 18.
YEt for all this, somewhat more may be said, concerning Satan's temptations of
Judas: for the Scripture says, Satan entered into Judas, and that more than
once. For it is the fashion of the Evil spirits, to enter into their
possessed; and to go out; and then to get in again. Wherefore Mark. 9.25.
Christ says, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, come out of him: and
enter no more into him. But Satan entered into Judas, and came forth; and
re-entred into him. First, Luke 22.3. Namely at the consultation of the chief
Priests, and Scribes; when they sought how they might kill Christ, verse. 2. And
this was two days before the feast of the passover, Mat. 26.2. and 3. verses.

This entrance was more effectual to Judas his hurt, than Satan's common
temptations: yet here Satan stayed but a while; and went forth again out of
him, playing with him as a Cat plays with a Mouse; as an Angler does with a
fish; on which the hook has fastened. For if he had not gone forth, some way,
it would never have been said: After the Sop, Satan entered into him, John
13.27.

Behold a second entrance; and that more forcible than the first. And now it
seems to me, that Christ prophesied of Judas, and the words were certainly
exemplified, and actuated by Judas, or upon him, which Christ spoke, Mat.
12.43. etc. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through
dry places, seeking rest and finding none: then he says, I will return into
my house, from whence I came out; and when he is come, he finds it empty
swept and garnished: then goes he and takes with himself, seven other
spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the
last stare of that man is worse than the beginning. Beza says, that the last
words seem to him to be very obscure: let us apply them to Judas, and they are
plain enough: It is true that Christ verse. 45. Even so shall it be also to
this wicked generation, which Prophecy concerning the Jews, or the sinful
men of that generation, excludes not Judas, from being here fore-prophecyed
of, but rather includes him: Christ speaks principally of one man, When the
unclean spirit is gone out of a man: and the last state of that man is worse
than the first: What particular man should he point at, if not at Judas?
though like unto Judas; the Jews of that generation were called the Synagogue
of Satan, Revel. 2.9.

Augustine Tractatu 62. in Iohannem. Thus, Intravit Satanas post buccellam in
Traditorem, ut sibi jam traditum before possideret: in quem prius intraverat,
ut deciperet. Satan entered into the Traitor, after the Sop, that he might take
more full possession of him, that was now delivered unto him; into whom he had
formerly entered, that he might deceive him. And again, Intravit nunc Satanas
in Iudam, non ad hoc, ut dienum tentaret, sedut proprium possideret. Satan now
entered into Judas; not that he might tempt him as a stranger, but to take
possession of him, as of his own proper goods. He was as other people,
possessed with, and by the evil Spirit.

I conclude, when Satan entered first into Judas, he had a great hand upon him;
and overruled him; yet Satan's power was stinted and confined, and limited. At
the second entrance, Judas was wholly given over to Satan, soul and body;
traditus ei ut inemendabilis: he was delivered over unto him, as one past all
hope of amendment, says The ophylact, traditus ei, ut tortori, ut carnifici,
say I; he was delivered over unto him, as to a tormentor, hangman, or Iaylor:
nor did he come out of him till he had brought Judas to hang himself; but
hurried him (as a Coach is drawn by wild horses) to the Gallows, and to hell.

Julius Firmicus 8.19. expresses a Natural death thus; sua morte morietur:
he dyed a natural death: and the violent and sudden death, of the
conspirators against Julius Caesar, Suetonius describes in the end of Julius
his life in this sort. Nemo eorum sua morte defunctus est. None of them died a
natural death: among violent deaths, there are few so bad, and desperate as
the hanging of ones self. For in most other deprivations of life, either by
sword or poison, or drowning, or the like, many thoughts of repentance have
interceded, and doubtless many a sinful soul, has been truly sorry and
contrite, and reconciled to God after a fatal blow, or inter pontem and
fontem; between the bridge and the river, and the like; but he who hangs
himself, is so suddenly strangled, and his breath stopped, that he cannot call
upon God, after the deed done, and has not time to have a repenting heart,
but the end of his life is the beginning of his damnation, and is taken in
flagrantia facti; in the height of his unrepentable sin, especially if the
knot hit right enough. Me thinks I see Judas after the taking of the sop, with
hollow eyes, ghastly countenance, trembling joints, unsteady motions, overcome
with covetousness, fleshed with malice, clothed with darkness, and led by
the Prince of darkness, posting to the house of the chief Priests, and of
the Pharisees, and Captain of the band, that he might and did betray his Lord
and Master. So did that Monster of men that Terrae odium; hatred of the world,
walk forward, and backward, from the feasting to the Higst Priests, and from
them to the Garden.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, I prostrate my Soul and body before thee, humbly imploring thee
that thou would send thy light, and truth before me: oh let them lead me
and bring me unto thy holy mountain, and to thy Tabernacle: Let not Satan trip
me up, nor cast me down; nor lead me into temptation; not allure me into
error; for Christ Jesus his blessed merits and meditation. Amen.

CHAP. XVI. The Contents of the sixeteenth Chapter.
1. Christ's sentence of separation of Judas, That thou do, do quickly:
Whither those words were spoken to the Devil, or to Judas. Origin Cyrill
Ambrose thinks they were spoken Either to the Devil, or to Judas.



Augustine says it was Verbum Non Imperantis sed Exprobrantis.


The Apostles thought them spoken to Judas.

2. The Apostles Nesciencie Christ himself knew Judas also knew And some
think S. John knew
Wherefore Christ spoke these words, That thou do, do quickly.

3. The Apostles Misunder standing Christ's words.

The words were spoken not privately, but openly.

4. Christ needed nothing: for Himself. his Apostles.
Christ would have the Church plentifully provided of Temporalls.

5. Cooks Reports censured. Judas carried the bag. The money in the bag to
be employed for Christ. Apostles. Poor.


6. Judas his speedy Egresse. His receiving the Sop imports Orall manducation.

7. Lanthornes, and torches import Outward light. Inward darkness.
Judas his Egresse at night. At what hour of the Night Judas went forth.
Selneccerus his Distribution of the Night-watches. What was done in every
several watch. Selneccerus censured. The crowing of the Cock about what hour
of the night.

8. Two questions concerning this Cocke-crowing. 1. Question, Whether this
Cock did crow Naturally or by Divine Motion.
Christ's look upon Peter was operative, and Virtuous, Corporal and
Spiritual. S. Augustine censured. Peter's three denialls, when, and where.

9.2. Question concerning this Cock-crowing. How the different Relations of the
several Evangelists may be reconciled. Here are handled 4. Quaeres. 1. Quaere,
whether Christ said as S. Mark or as S. Matthew and S. Luke have it.

10. The 2. Quaere, whether S. Peter's threefold denial was accomplished,
before the Cock crowed at all, or, before it crowed twice.

11. The 3. Quaere: How often S. Peter was questioned, or by others affirmed to
be Christ's Disciple.

12. The fourth Quaere: How many times Peter denied Christ.

13. Answer to the 1. Quaere.

14. Answer to the 2. Quaere.

15. Answer to the 3. Quaere. Cajetan thinks S. Peter was 7. times examined:
thrice by Women, four times by men.

16. Answer to the fourth Quaere. Cajetans frivolous objection.

17. Three sorts of people questioned Peter. Peter's threefold denial, and the
manner thereof.

18. The Diverse Relations of the Evangelists reconciled.

19. The Paschall Supper lasted about 1. quarter of an hour. The Common Supper
lasted about 3. quarters of an hour. All the Leviticall Ceremonies performed,
between 6. and 7. a clock at Night.

PARAGRAPH. I. The second Occurrance of the fourth General.
I Am now come to Christ's Sentence and separation of Judas. That thou do,
do quickly.

Some there are indeed, who do question, whether these words were spoken to
the Devil, or to Judas: the Greek, Latin, and English words will admit both,
or either. Origin in Evangelium Johannis: page 419. Tom. 33. Vel Iudae, vel
Satanae, potest dixisse Dominus; Quod facis, fac ocyus: Those words of the Lord
when he said; That thou do do quickly, might be spoken either to Judas or
to the Devil.

Cyrill in Evangelium Iohannis: Lib. 9.17. capite, says; Many think it unfit,
that Judas who before was many ways dehorted, should now be animated, by this
speech: That thou do do Quickly: Or, why does he incite Judas, who was
inflamed of himself, and needed good counsel, rather to quench the fire? But,
says Cyrill, If we profoundly, and diligently consider it, the speech is not
incongruous; for Satan had entered into Judas his heart, and Christ spoke them
to Satan; That thou do do quickly: (To betray me) it is thy work which
thou delightest to do always; do it quickly, O Satan. Thou have slain the
Prophets; entered into the hearts of the Jews; stoned Gods Messengers; and
spared none. I know thou can not be quiet; wherefore what thou wast wont to
do, now do. Unto the Devil who knew not the great good which should come to
mankind, by the passion of Christ; who was ignorant that Christ's Cross should
break the Devils back, and power; unto him did Christ say; That thou do
do quickly: and fit it was that Christ who knew the great and many benefits,
which would redound unto mankind by his precious death, and was a well-wisher
of our Salvation, should hasten the time, and spur on Satan, to the
accomplishment of his cursed designs: That thou do do quickly: so much in
effect, Cyrill.

Ambrose lib. 2. de Cain, and Abel, says, the words were spoken to Judas; and
it was Sententia praecipientis, non ut malum faceret, sed ut a consortio suo
recederet. It was the sentence of one who did command him, not to commit evil,
but to depart out of his Company. And because he could not be now with Christ,
who was with the Devil, he had him be gone quickly. Judas by all likelihood
was going away from Christ of his own accord, so soon as he saw himself
fully descryed; the motion of him seemed slow; and therefore Christ said; That
thou do (in the present tense) do quickly. And Augustine in Tract. 62. in
Johan. says; that Christ commanded not the evil; but foretold evil to Judas,
good to us. The distinction of Augustine; is not so quick, vivid, and
punctual, as that of Ambrose. Or thus; illud verbum (fac citius) non
imperantis est, neque consulentis, sed exprobrantis, and Revocantis ad
emendationem: that saying (That thou do do quickly) is not the saying of
one, that commands, or advises, but of one that upbraydeth, and calls to
amendment of life, as Mat. 23.32. Fill ye up the measure of your fathers:
Likewise Judges 10.14. Go, and cry unto the Gods which ye have chosen, let
them deliver you in the time of tribulation. So, 1 King. 18.25. Call on the
name of your Gods, says Eliah: so, Eccles. 11.9. Rojoyce (O young man) in thy
youth, and let thy heart cheer thee, in the days of thy youth, and walk in
the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: yet the words
immediately following show, it was no sad and serious counsel, but an
Ironicall exprobration, and holy Revocation; But know thou that for all these
things; God will bring thee to judgment.

This is a most apparent truth, that some of the Apostles, believed it to be
spoken to Judas only; and not to the Devil: for some of them thought, because
Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said unto him; buy such things as we have
need of against the feast: or that he should give something to the poor; John
13.29. which cannot be applied to Satan.

Quod facis fac cito, O verbum libentius parati ad passionem, quam irati ad
vindictam: Augustine Tract. 62. in Iohannem. That thou do do quickly; O
word of one more willingly prepared for his passion, than provided to revenge!
O verbum non tam poenam exprimens venditoris, quam mercedem significans
proditoris: O word that does not so much express the punishment of the seller;
as it does intimate the reward of the redeemer, says the same, S. Augustine,
ibidem.

PAR. 2. The third Occurrence of the fourth General.
NOw succe^edeth the Apostles Nesciencie, and misunderstanding of Christ's
words: No man at the Table knew, for what intent Christ spoke this unto him.

Here you must except our blessed Savior himself, (who was more than mere
man) for he knew for what intent he spoke, you must also except Judas, who knew
our Saviors meaning, and his own corrupt intendments: and therefore
accordingly, he went out immediately; no man at the table knew, for Judas was
gone from the table; and as he was bidden did quickly go forth: and so he
must be excepted. All the rest of the College of the Apostles were ignorant,
what Christ did primarily and particularly mean under those General words;
That thou do do quickly. Some think that S. John is also to be excepted,
because he knew the Traitor, by the answer of Christ, and the real delivery
of the Sop, according to the answer. Barradius buildes upon this, as the truer
answer; that S. John himself, though he knew the Traitor, did little imagine
that Christ did then voluntarily desire to dye: but the Traitor would have
betrayed him, at some other time, and not so soon. At the first hearing of
them, the Apostles thought, they were words rather of command (which they could
not conceive) than words of permission. The innocent and most holy souls of
the Apostles, not knowing then the entrance of Satan into Judas, did not think
that Judas should fall so suddenly, from one extreme to another. It seems to
me that after the giving of the Sop, and after Satan's entrance into Judas,
Christ said; That thou do do quickly: that Judas received it, and
receiving it swallowed it; for though it be not said, that Judas ate it, yet if
we consider Christ dipping it, we may well think, it was that Judas might eat
it. After the Sop, Satan entered into him: the sop found the first entrance,
Satan the next, and that immediately after.

So all these things concur in a very short time.

Christ's giving the Sop.
Judas his Receiving it.
And his eating it.
Then Satan enters.
Then Christ says; What thou do, do quickly.
Then Judas his speedy Egresse.
So short was the time, that the holy Scripture says, John 13.30. as if
nothing had interceded; He then having received the sop, went immediately out:
he made no stay in the Supper-roome, or in any part of the house, he went
hastily out. Needs must he go, whom the Devil drives. So much of the
Apostles Nesciencie.

PAR. 3. The fourth Occurrence of the fourth General.
COncerning their mis-interpreting the saying of Christ, two things are
apparent.

1. That the words were not spoken privately in the ear of any one alone; for
some of the Apostles thought one thing, some another, concerning the
understanding of them; which they could not do nor judge, if they had not
heard them.

PAR. 4.
2. SEcondly, though Christ needed nothing, for himself or his Apostles, but
was Lord of all the creatures; and all things in heaven, air, water, and
earth, would have ministered unto him, according to his pleasure, though when he
sent them, without Purse, and scrip, and shoes, they lacked nothing, Luke
22.35. though if he would have prayed for help, God would have presently given
him, more than 12. Legions of Angels, Mat. 26.53. which number is a complete
Army: and every one of them able to overcome a contrary complete Army: yet
Christ for his Churches sake, and to show that it should ever be plentifully
provided for, both to abound themselves, and to help others, and to manifest
in his own presence and by his own example, that they who partaked of our
spiritual, were bound in reason and Conscience to impart unto us, their
Temporalls; therefore did our most wise, and holy Savior, (when he had healed
certain women of evil spirits and infirmities; Luke 8.2. etc. As Mary
Magdalen, and Ioanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's Steward, and Susanna, and many
others) permit them to be a pattern unto the world, to minister unto him of
their substance, and to be a pattern to all succeeding ages, what they should
do for the Church.

PAR. 5.
LEt them who think no good Clergy man good, unless he be galled and gelded
in his tithes; no evil Clergy man to be evil, if he suffer them to swallow
the sacred morsells; let them consider (I say) by what law their souls shall
be judged? Divine, or profane? for so the most learned M. Seldom calls that
Quod fari religione non tenetur. It was indeed Judas who carried the bag.
But these two reasons are specialized, wherefore the money was to be employed;
to buy these things, which Christ, and his Apostles had need of against the
feast, or to give something to the poor, John 13.29.

PAR. 6. The fifth Occurrence of the fourth General.
THe next point to be handled is, Judas his speedy Egresse: He then having
received the Sop went immediately out; Joh. 13.30. Whither Judas his receiving
the Sop, be meant of, or in his hand: of, or in his mouth; or of, or in his
stomach may be questioned. I do guess it is to be interpreted; after he had
eaten the sop or mouthfull; to which the hand and mouth were but instruments,
yet necessary; There is scarce an Author who does not profess his opinion,
that by receiving is meant the Orall manducation accomplished, and that Judas
did really eat the sop.

John 18.3. The Lanthornes, (though lights were in them) and Torches (though
flaming) showed outward light, but inward darkness. And it was Night. This
deed of darkness carried darkness with it, all the way to the end. For
this was their hour, and the power of darkness. Luke 22.53. and his heart
and ways, did rule the Prince of darkness. Occubuer at Iustitiae sol; and
fulgentissima claritas sapientiae: ideo crassissima caligine complebatur, says
Justinian. The Sun of righteousness, and the most shining brightness of
wisdom, was now set; and therefore was he filled with a most thick Egyptian
darkness. Judas ipse nox erat. Says S. Augustine. Judas was night himself.
Judas his going forth, potuit esse hora circiter tertia Noctis; says Faber
Stapulensis, on the place. It might be about three a clock at Night.

PAR. 7.
QVando Judas exivit fuit Nox: quod notari solet in principio Noctis; non in
medio, (says Suarez) When Judas went forth it was night; which is commonly
taken for the beginning of the Night, not for the middle thereof.

Coena legalis, and lotio pedum, ad Summum, per duas horas durare potuerunt:
and statim secutaest institutio Eucharistiae; says the same Suarez in Thomam.
page 487. The Passover, and washing of the Apostles feet, could last at most
but two hours; and then immediately followed the institution of the blessed
Eucharist. Stapulensis is much awry, to allow about three hours to the
Paschall, and to the usual Supper; for the Paschall was but as a running
banquet, quickly performed. And the ordinary Suppers of holy men extended not
to that length of time. Suarez better observes, at the utmost, they could be
but two hours, Supping and washing; and then presently followed the
Institution of the Eucharist. I met not with any, who ever said, it was
midnight, when Judas went forth.

Selneccerus de passione Christi, page 442. thus stemmeth, and distributeth the
times, by the night-watches.

In the first Watch of the night, in Crepusculo, in the twilight, from the
beginning of six of the clock, till the end of eight (three whole hours)
were they Supping, washing, and Christ's Preaching.

In the second Watch of the night (which he calls Canticinium, which word is
mis-printed, or otherwise Selneccerus was very ignorant to use that word
instead of Galli Cantus; or Gallicinium; or for Conticinium, which is the first
part of the night; from the crowing of the Cock, which he places in the
second part, or Watch in the night. Circiter mediam noctem, Galli primum cantum
edunt; says Barradius, Tom. 4. page 268. The Cocks do use to crow, first of
all, hard about midnight.

In the beginning of the ninth hour, he went to Mount Olivet: about an hour
after, between ten and eleven of the clock, he prayed, sweated, and was
comforted by an Angel.

After eleven of the clock, Christ was betrayed, and taken; S. Peter cut off
the ear of Malchus; the Disciples fly.

In the third Watch of the night, about twelve of the clock, Christ was
brought to Annas, and was boxed with the hand, or beat with the rod of an
Officer, which stood by, whom Christ reproved.

About one of the clock in the morning, he was brought to Caiaphas; where
being bound, he was examined; and confessed himself to be God.

About two of the clock in the morning, was Christ more strictly interrogated.
And now the Cock crew; and Peter denied him thrice: and Christ pitying Peter
looked back on him; and he repented, went forth, and wept bitterly. In mine
opinion here Selneccerus might better have placed his Canticinium, or rather
the Gallicinium, or Cocke-crowing: Selneccerus is in one extreme, and would
have the crowing of the Cock in the second Watch, before midnight: Others hold
the Gallicinium, or Cocke-crowing, to be only in the fourth Watch of the
night, between the hours from three to four: four to five; five to six:
and they are in another extreme; for Cocks crow not so much in the second
Watch of the night, as in the third. And I confess, not so much in the third,
as in the fourth Watch; yet seldom or never do they crow before midnight,
unless it be at Christmasse, as the good huswifes say; or upon some
extraordinary occasions, as when they be troubled with noise, or moved; or when
they happen to see any accidently light, by fire, torch, or candle; or unless
it be against change of weather. But most commonly, and ordinarily, and
properly, at the latter end of the second Watch, or in the third Watch, and
before three in the morning is the beginning of the Chaunticleering, or first
crowing; which is more and more reiterated, and louder, or shriller till day.
It seems to me, that the word of God distinguishes, and divides the crowing
of the Cock, from the even, midnight, and morning, Mark 13.35. Ye know not
when the Master of the house comes; at even, or at midnight: (...), or at the
crowing of the Cock, in the morning.

In the fourth Watch of the night, Christ was delivered to the servants of the
Highpriests to be mocked, spit upon, and many ways abused; and beaten; and
this continued three hours, till six of the clock in the morning: and then
was Christ condemned by a decree of the Consistory, Luke 22.66. For they came
together as soon as it was day. And when the morning was come, all the chief
Priests and Elders of the people, took counsel to put Jesus to death, Matthew.
27.1.

PAR. 8.
COncerning this Cocke-crowing; two not unnecessary Questions may be mooted.

1. Whither, the Cock did crow naturally of himself, or was by means Divine,
spurred, stimulated, or pushed on unto it? 2. How the Evangelists different
variations may be reconciled? In which, many other Quaeres are inwrapped.
Concerning the first, some may probably think, that our blessed Savior
(being Valde Naturae mystes, acquainted exactly with the course of it; and
divinely foreseeing, and fore-knowing what would come to pass in an usual,
and ordinary way) was content to let the creatures, Exercere actus suos
proprios; to exercise their proper acts: S. Peter to deny his Master for fear,
yet voluntarily; and the Cock to crow at his usual times. So that the Cock
did not crow, because Christ had foretold so much; or because he was provoked
otherwise, than of himself to crow: but because Christ fore-knew that S.
Peter's denial would be about the crowing of the Cock; therefore did Christ
foretell it. But I may more probably think, the whole course was above the
level of Nature, and that Satan desiring to winnow S. Peter. put a great and
sudden fear into him, and that Christ for a little time did desert S. Peter;
and turned, as it were his back unto him. That afterward, Christ pitying S.
Peter, did inwardly, and tacitly command the Cock to crow; as he in all
likelihood, forbade the fish by some hidden motion, or instinct, to approach
nigh the ships, where S. Peter and the Apostles toyled all the night, and took
nothing, Luke 5.5. and precepted the fish, extraordinarily, and immediately, to
come in troops, in obedience to Christ's Will, to this end, that his miraculous
power might be the better seen, when they let down their Net for one draught;
and the great multitude of fishes break their net, Luke 5.6. and began to
sink their ships, ver. 7. And all this astonishing wonder was but divinely
preparatory to make Peter believe the words of Christ, who promised, that
thenceforth Peter should catch men, Luke 5.10. and as he commanded again, in a
way best known to himself, the fish to bring a stater, or half a crown of
silver in his mouth, unto the same S. Peter; and yet to bite at the bayte,
which was fastened on the hook, which S. Peter cast into the sea, Matthew. 17.27.
For I will not think that Peter cast in an hook without a bayte; or if he
did, it was the greater wonder. All which are things above the bounds of
Nature. Likewise, when at the crowing of the Cock, Peter remembered the words
of Jesus, Mat. 26.75. My opinion is, the Cock might have crowed for tie times,
and S. Peter never a whit the rather have remembered the words of Christ; nor
repented; but that our merciful Savior, even in the midst of his own
sufferings, remembered, and pitied S. Peter: for the Lord turned and looked
upon S. Peter; and Peter remembered the words of the Lord, Luke 22 61. When
Christ turned his face to Peter, and looked on him; it was an operative look,
and piercing eyes, virtue flew from them; and with divine power reached to
turn Peter: now Peetr saw Christ, as well as Christ looked on Peter: Peter did
read his own fault in his Masters countenance; the language of Christ's looks
did Peter understand; and it was not a natural, but a divine motion, which
made him remember the words of Christ. Augustine de gratia Christi. 1.45.
says, That Christ's looking on Peter, was spiritual; with the spiritual eyes
of mercy, reducing Peter to repentance. He looked not on him with bodily eyes;
Sed hic Augustinus non tenetur: Here S. Austine was awry. I doubt not, but
Christ beheld Peter both corporally, and spiritually. Indeed, it is said,
Mark 14.66. Peter was beneath in the Palace warming himself. And Peter was
without in the Palace, Matthew. 26.69. and he was gone out into the Porch, ver.
71. which imply, that Christ and Peter were in several rooms; Christ within,
and above; Peter without, and beneath. I answer, that they were in several
rooms at first, none can deny: but that Peter went not up where Christ was; or
that Christ was not brought down after judgment; so that he might see Peter,
can never be proved: for Peter went in, and sat with the servants, to see the
end, Matthew. 26.58. A poor sight could he see, if he stayed still without. The
first denial of Peter, was by the fire in the Hall; the second in the Porch,
when the Cock crew first. No reason can evince, but at the second crowing of
the Cock, both Jesus and Peter might be in one room. I am sure, it was above
the space of an hour, between the first and third denial, as it fully
resulteth, from Luke 22.59. And upon Peter's first denial the Cock first crew.
And, Then they led Jesus from Caiphas unto the Iudgement-hall. At which time,
he might very well look upon Peter, if Peter himself had not followed, into
the room, where Christ was condemned, as it is most likely he did.

PAR. 9.
THe second point; and an hard one it is, to reconcile the different relation
of the Evangelists.

Herein will I first lay open to the full, their several variations. The words
of Jesus were; Before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice, Matthew. 26.75.
And the same words are repeated, Luke 22.61. But it is in S. Mark. Peter
called to mind the words, that Jesus said unto him; Before the Cock crow
twice, thou shall deny me thrice.

Hence arises, The first Quaere; whether Christ said, as S. Mark has it; or
as S. Matthew, and S. Luke have it?

PAR. 10.
THe second Quaere is, Whether S. Peter's threefold denial was accomplished,
before the Cock crew at all, or before he crowed twice? For three Evangelists
say in effect, the Cock should not crow at all, till the threefold negation
of Peter was passed: And immediately the Cock crew, Ioh. 18.27. But it is in,
Mark 14.30. Before the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice: which is
repeated, verse 72. Accordingly the Cock did first crow, when Peter was in the
Porch, ver. 68. And after his threefold denial; The second time the Cock
crew, verse. 72.

PAR. 11.
THe third Quaere is; How often S. Peter was questioned, or by others affirmed
to be Christ's Disciple; since the Evangelists much vary therein?

S. Matthew relates, two several maids avouchments, that Peter was with
Christ; and thirdly, the bystanders affirmation of the same, Matthew. 26.69.
etc. And with S. Matthew does S. Mark agree, Mark 14.66. etc. S. Luke thus
varieth it. A maid first affirmed it, Luke 22.56. Secondly, a man said, Thou
art also of them. For Peter said, man, I am not, ver. 58. In the third place;
Another confidently affirmed it, and Peter answered, Man, I know not what thou
say, ver. 16. S. John storieth it differently from all, The Damsel which
kept the door, first questioned Peter; Art not thou also one of this man's
Disciples? And he answered, I am not, Ioh. 18.17.

In the next place more interrogated the same thing. How many more, is not
expressed; but more: Peter denied, and said, I am not, ver. 25. In the third
place, Malchus his Kinsman said; Did not I see thee in the Garden with him?
ver. 26.

PAR. 12.
THe fourth Quaere is, How many times Peter denied Christ, since from S.
Matthew it may be collected, he denied it two several times, to two several
maids, and once more to standers by. And S. Luke confesses his general
denyalls, to two several men, S. John acknowledges his denial to diverse at
once.

PAR. 13.
I Answer briefly to the first; the words of Jesus were spoken, as they are in
Saint Mark; and the word twice is to be understood, and by way of sense, is to
be included in the other three Evangelists. For the holy Ghost spoke a fuller
truth by S. Mark (for truth has its latitudes) and no Evangelist did, or
could lie; and what is set down, is expressly to be believed: but the other
three Evangelists might omit, and otherwhere have omitted, many several words,
many several matters; and some write more largely, some more briefly; some
omit more, some less: and wheresoever any affirm, what others omit, we must
believe what is affirmed by any one, though all the rest pass by it. Neither
Matthew, Luke, nor John, say negatively Christ spoke no other words, but these;
if they, or any of them had so said, there had been an irreconcilable
contradiction unto S. Mark. But they saying only; These were the words of
Jesus. Before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice; they might understand
the word (Twice) Before the Cock crew twice; which they lawfully omitted, as
not being bound to express every particular: and S. Mark (who could not err
in writing) has directly taught us so to expound them. And for confirmation
hereof, S. Mark names the several places, S. Peter was in, when the Cock
crew twice, which they all also omitted, as being points of the By, and not on
necessity to be particularly specialized: Quod subintolligitur, been
omittitur: quod subauditur, sine causa exprimitur. That which is necessary to
be understood may be well omitted; That which is understood, is needelessely
expressed.

PAR. 14.
IN this answer, you have another involved resolution to the second Quaere. The
Cock crowed first, when Peter was in the Porch; and this did not strike to
Peter's heart. Nor can it be proved, that Peter heard the Cock crow the first
time; or, if he did hear, he might think it an ordinary Natural crowing
without any reference to himself. But when his Trina negatio was passed;
immediately the Cock crew the second time; and Christ turned himself to Peter,
to make Peter return to him; and looked upon Peter, as if he had said, Peter
I, I thrice foretold thee, thou would deny me thrice, before the Cock crow
twice. Thou have denied me thrice, and the Cock has now crowed twice; I have
been a true Prophet; be not hereafter too confident of thy self: Remember my
words, repent, go forth, and weep bitterly; and so he did.

PAR. 15.
TO the third Quaere. How often S. Peter was questioned, or vouched to be
Christ's Disciple.

I answer, It seems clearly by the Evangelists; that S. Peter was doubted of
by some; and affirmed by others to be Christ's Disciple, diverse times; but they
must be reduced all to three only; for you are to consider all four
Evangelists agree; The first, who spoke of Peter, was the Maid, the
doore-keeper. The other Maid spoke of Peter, not to him, but upon her speech,
a man said; Thou art also of them (says S. Luke.) The Maids talking, and the
Man's accusing, are to be held, as one enquiry, or affirmation. Then not one,
after one; but diverse almost at once fell upon S. Peter. They said unto him,
Art not thou also one of his Disciples? Ioh. 18.25. who those (They) were, S.
Matthew. sets down; viz. They, that stood by: which might be the very same
men, that S. John means; though first they interrogated, as it is in S. John;
and after bluntly, and boldly affirmed it (as it is in S. Matthew.) and
particularly among that company might be the confident-affirmer in Luke: and
Malchus his cozen, in John. So he was questioned, or affirmed to be a Disciple;
once by the Doore-keeper; once by a Man from another woman's words; and the
third time by Troops, or Routes; or many together; three times in all.

Cajetan, on John 18. thinks, that he was seven times under the file of
examination; thrice by Maids, or Women; four times by Men. But the witty
Cajetan might have considered, the Apostles relate the same thing, though in
diverse manners, some inhering in one circumstance, some in another: and as I
said; The several relations may design out the same persons, and did; as
several sayings of S. Peter, made up but his thrice denial. If he had well
weighed this, he would not also have determined as he has done; That S. Peter
denied Christ seven times, thrice to the Women, four times to the Men; which
reaches home to --

PAR. 16.
THe next Quare; the fourth in number: How many times Peter denied Christ?

Whatsoever Cajetans account is, I believe that S. Peter denied our Savior but
Thrice. First, because our Lord three times insisted on that fixed number of
thrice; Thou shall deny me thrice.

The first time was upon this occasion: Zachary foretold, and Christ points at
the place; I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep of the flock shall be
scattered. S. Peter professed he would not be offended; Christ replied, S.
Peter should deny him thrice, Matthew. 26.34. S. Peter says, he will not; and
did out-argue Christ in words.

A second occasion was this. Satan had winnowed Indas, and prevailed; and would
have winnowed S. Peter, but Christ prayed for him, and Satan prevailed not, to
his final overthrow. But when Christ said to Peter; When thou art converted
strengthen thy brethren; his fall was foreseen, employed, and foretold,
before his conversion. Yet again, when the forward undertaking S. Peter
avouched the contrary, Christ replied, Luke 22.34. Thou shall deny me thrice.

A third occasion was this. S Peter would know whither Christ went; Christ
answered, S. Peter could not then follow him, Why cannot I follow thee now? I
will lay down my life for thy sake, quoth the great Presumer or Promiser.
Christ answered him a third time, Ioh. 13.38. The Cock shall not crow (or the
ordinary time of Cocke-crowing shall not come) till thou have denied me thrice.
Hence I frame mine Argument,

PAR. 17.
IF Christ three times, so solemnly, upon so many several provocations, when
his Apostle did out-crow him; did foretell, That he should deny Christ thrice,
not six, not seven times, not more, not less; but only thrice: The Triple
diction of Christ, was seconded with a Triple denial of his Apostle, and with
no more. And the threefold cord will hardly be broken, Heaven, and earth shall
pass; but Christ's word shall not pass away, Matthew. 24.35.

Cajetan replyeth, If Peter denies Christ seven times, he did deny him thrice,
as he who pays seven pieces, pays three.

I answer, Christ's intent was to humble S. Peter, and to make him see his own
frailty, in his over-forwardnesse. Therefore if Christ had known Peter would
have denied him seven times, he would not have lessened the number of his
denyalls, but have named all his seven denialls; the rather to beat down his
self-love, self-conceit, selfe-assurance. But Christ foretelling only three
denyalls, we may not forge more, which Christ could not be ignorant of, if such
were to have been, and would not have spared to tell Peter so.

To the Question, or affirmation of three sorts of people. First, of a Maid:
to it was made the first denial. Secondly, of a Man, upon a Woman's
asseverations, was made the second denial. Thirdly, to the manifold
searchings, or avouchments of the confused Multitude; and of other two
particular men, was made one entire, and full denial.
Though diverse did interrogate, or affirm the same thing; yet was the answer
but one, and the same. I end, as I said before.

The first denial accomplished was to the Maid, the doore-keeper. The second
denial, was to a single several accuser, a Man, Luke 22.58. A little while
after, upon a Woman's suggestion (for though S. Matthew speaks of a second
Maid, or Woman, yet the second Maid spoke not to Peter, but of Peter to
others, Matthew. 26.71. and Mark 14.69. This is one of them: and then, and
thereupon) a Man charged him home; and so indeed the second denial. About an
hour after one confidently affirmed (as it is in S. Luke 22.59.) and others
interrogated, Ioh. 18.25. and the Bystanders avouched. Matthew. 26.73. and
perhaps Malchus his cozen might be one of those troops; though poynted out
singly; and they all in likelihood, came upon S. Peter so fast, one in the
neck of another, as is usual when many talk together, that he answered All,
and each of them, with this third resolute denial.

The first, was a simple denial, I know not what thou say, Matthew. 26.70.

The second denial, upon a man's direct accusing him, Luke 22.58. After a
Woman's confident avouchment, Matthew. 26.71. was not single, and simple, but
Juramentall, Verse 72.

The third denial, upon the charge of so many, some single, some in a route,
was imprecatory, and made him both curse and swear, Matthew. 26 74. and Mark
14.71. though neither S. Luke, nor S. John mention his swearing, or cursing.

PAR. 18.
TO conclude; though many sifted S. Peter; and though many answers, or excuses
be particularly discribed after his second denial; yet they are to be
esteemed, and accounted, but as one only; and being conjoined, must go, only
for Peter's worst, greatest, third denial.

That in the intention of Scripture, S. Peter's diversified answers; both to the
standers by, in Matthew, and Mark, and to the confident Affimer in Luke; and
to the others in S. John; and with them to Malchus his cozen, are accounted but
one, whole, full denial, appears by this, that both Matthew, Luke, and John,
upon their several relations conclude in the same words, Immediately the Cock
crew; for upon his denial to Malchus his cozen, Immediately the Cock crew,
Joh. 18.27. And upon the denial to the confident Affirmer, Immediately, while
he yet spoke, the Cock crew, Luke 22.60. --

-- Thirdly, upon his denial, cursing, and swearing, to the Bystanders,
Immediately the Cock crew, Matthew. 26.74. And you are further to know, that at
his first denial, the Cock crowed once, Mark 14.68. and after his third
denial with Oath, and Imprecation, The Cock crowed the second, ver. 72.

I have not heard, nor read, any man avouching, more than two crowings of the
Cock. But you must of necessity establish four several crowings of the
Cock, before S Peter's Repentance, unless you agree with me, in making his
forecited last excuses (though veriously Historified) to be but one only
denial, his third and last denial immediately, whereupon the Cock crew. The
Cock cannot crow immediately, upon several occasions, but there are several
Cocke-crowings.

PAR. 19.
ALL this discourse hinders not me from embracing my former opinion; viz. that
the Judicial Paschall, was about one quarter of an hour in transacting and
the usual Supper annexed unto it, was about three quarters of an hour; and so
all Ceremony Leviticall was accomplished, between 6. and 7. or there-abouts in
the night: whilst of the two, by the word (about) I incline rather to the more,
than to the less. For now when the even was come, he sat down with the 12.
Mat. 26.20. Yea he came in the Evening with the Twelve, Mark. 14.17. It was the
time of Twilight, or Twiter-light, when the light is mingled with darkness,
and day with night. (...) duy vespra. (...) vespa, quoth lux and tenebra er
tempore permisceantur. v. Pagin. lex in Rad. (...)
In the Hebrew it is, (...) GNARBAIIM, by which Hebrew Duall are meant two
distinct things, at the same time, viz. A mixture and partaking both of day and
night, that men cannot then distinguish (as Lucas Brugensis has it) a dog from
a Wolf, which we call Owle-light.

Now reckon one hour after this, or somewhat more, (for less time the two
Suppers did not take up, a little more they might and did in all likelihood)
than within one hour, or more, after the night had usurped on the day, and
light was gone to bed till the morning: may that be fully accomplished which
was said of Judas, He went out and it was Night.

In no place of the world when it begins to be dark, but somewhat an hour
after it is Night.

The Prayer.
Merciful Lord God, I give^ thee most hearty thanks, for all the favors that
thou have conferred upon me, upon my Soul, my body, and my fortunes: and I
beseech thee make me use them as I ought, to the glory of thy Great Name, and
the eternal good of my self, and others. Lord Jesus let my cry come unto thee,
and hearken unto the prayer of a poor penitent soul. Amen.

CHAP. XVII.
PARAGRAPH 1. The sixth particular of the fourth General.
The next point is the giving of thanks, at the end of the second Supper,
which certainly was done according to the Order of those times.
CHrist was more holy, more frequent in Benedictions or giving of thanks, than
the Jewish observances, usances, or Rites commanded, or practiced, on any
occasions; especially now at the end of this Second Supper; I have read that
they had a Grace, and Responsall; and that they were these.

The Master of the feast brake forth into these words, first:

Benedicamus, sive gratias agamus ei, qui de suo nos cibavit, and cujus
bonitate vivimus. Blessed, or thanked be God, who has fed us, and by whose
goodness we live. The rest of the guests answered: Benedictus sit ipse: Let
him be blessed, or praised.

PAR. 2. The seventh particular of the fourth General.
SCaliger de Emend. Temp. Lib. 6. page 573. thus relates the Jewish
Paschalizing ceremony. After the Supper the Cup went round. The first
delivered it to the second; the second to the third; and so till every one of
the company received it. And herein did both Jews and Gentiles symbolize
(says he.) See a footestep hereof amongst the East Indians, who were wont to
have a friendly Cup, called Tantali poculum (says Philostratus) in vita
Apollonii Tianaei) Tantali poculum bibendum nobis est, inde Somno indulgemus
(quoth their great Jarcas to Appollonius) we must first drink round Tantalus
his cup, and then we go to bed. Et amicitiae firmandae causa, hujusmodi
compotatio, apud Indos est inventa, (says Philostratus) And this kind of
drinking round, was invented by the Indians, for the continuing, and confirming
friendship among them, Yet perhaps taken from the Jews, for diverse
Gymnosophists did travail through diverse Countries; and like bees gathered
the honey from whatsoeve^r they liked. A Gymnosophist came to Athens, and
confounded Socrates in his discourse.

Beda speaking of the Cup, which after thankesgiving Christ bad them take, Luke
22.17. thus has it; Hic Calix ad vetus illud Pascha, cui finem desiderabat
imponere, pertinet. Et hoc fuit quasi libamen Sacrificii Agni Paschalis. This
Cup belongs unto that ancient Paschall Supper, unto which he desired so much to
put an end: and this was the tasting (as it were) of the Sacrifice of the
Paschall Lamb. So the two Suppers conjoined; and the flesh of the Passover
not removed until the, end of the second Supper, they ended the second Supper,
with Poculum Charitatis, or Grace-Cup, which was divided among them; and
presently began the Lords Supper, nothing being mentioned by S. Luke, to be
between the end of the second Supper, and the beginning of the third. Beda,
says more; So let enim cum sacrificiis fere conjungi libamen vini, they were
wont (for the most part) to drink wine with their Sacrifices: nor was this
Cup, the Sacred Cup of the blessed Eucharist, which was afterward administered,
as Burgensis from Hierome, and Thophylact well observes, but it was that
Poculum Charitatis, or Cup of Charity, which Christ, after the second, and
before the third Supper gave unto his Disciples, and bad them divide it among
themseves, Luke 22.17. And this Cup says Scaliger ibid. was called (...). Et
poculum hymnesecos ideo vocabatur, quo^d hymno post potationem decantato
abibant: The Hymne-Cup; and it was therefore called the Hymne-Cup, because when
they had drunk round, they sung a Hymn, and so departed the room.

PAR. 3. The eighth particular of the fourth General.
DEnique (says Scaliger ibid.) post poculum Hymnus cantatur ex ritu Paschali.
To conclude, after the (Grace) Cup, there was according to the Rites of the
Passover, an Hymn Sung. Et pagina, 571. In the second Supper, they did say,
certain (...). Intercessions, and giving of thanks.

Caelius Rhodiginus says, Hymns were used to be sung to their false Gods, at
their festivalls. Antiquit. 5.3. Jtem. 11.19. And Alexander ab Alexandro
Genialium dierum. 4.17. Jnter vescendum, lauds Diis canere assuerant, his,
quibus sacrum fieret. Pedibusque circum ar as psallere, ad numerum; carminaque
and hymnos canere. Hymnorum plures species fuerunt, quibus psallebant Diis,
tamen hi fuere in usu frequentes. Hypingos Dianae; Apolloni Paean; and
Prosodia. Dionysio Dithyrambus. Cereri Iulus. Veneri Eroticus, seu Amatorius.
Before they departed, or whilst they were continuing at their festivals, they
were wont to sing praises to their gods, to whom they Sacrificed and dance, and
chant verses, and Hymns: there were many sorts of Hymns but these more
frequent: the (...), a song so called as proper to Diana, Paan, or Song of
praise made to Apollo. Yea not only one but (...), verses well tuned were song
unto him. The Dithyrambus a kind of Meter song in the honor of Bacchus who
was called (...): as being borne between the Twinedoores (as Sommerset shire
does phrase it) also the Iulus, a Dittie to Ceres. A love-song to Venus.

Certainly the Jews after their second Supper, did sing an Hymn called the
great Hymn, containing six whole Psalms, from Psame 113. to Psalm 119. But
if Christ and his Apostles sung an Hymn, at the end of the second Supper, it
was not that Long-one; for this being no fixed rite, no commanded ceremony,
Christ and his Apostles were not tied unto it: and it may be thereupon Christ
put it over to the end of the most Sacred Eucharist, and to the end of his
Divine Sermons in Coenaculo. For I take these two things, as confessed
principles. Whatsoever Christ omitted was of Transient usances; or of the
traditionary Sumpsimus, which the Jews undertook more than they needed.

Secondly, whatsoever he performed in the two Suppers, was of the durable
Paschall Rites, or answering them some way; for when they had sung an Hymn or
Psalm, They went out into the Mount of Olives, Mat. 26.30. So the Hymn was
after the Sermon; the Sermon after the third Supper. For he celebrated no
supper after he was in the mount of Olives.

PAR. 4.
AND Joseph Scaliger excellently averreth, that the Legal Paschall kept by the
Jews the next day, was the first needelesse Paschall, that ever was offered.

The Prayer.
THy Judgment is not as man's judgment, O Lord God, the supreme Judge of
Judges, and of all things; I fear I am full of errors, though I know not any
one that I have written, if I did I wound amend it. Grant good Lord, in such
matters as thou see amiss, thy pardon unto me, confirm me in all goodness,
and make me a partaker of thy manifold graces, whilst I live on earth, and then
I doubt not but I shall be glorified in the other world, for his sake who is
the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, even Jesus Christ the
righteous, to whom with the holy Father, and blessed Spirit, be ascribed all
power, all thanks, all wisdom, and all other good things for ever, and ever:
so be it. Amen.

The Synopsis or sum of All.
And now having ended the second Supper, give me leave, as it were in a
Picture, to present it unto your eyes; as I did the first Supper.

1. THe same fair Upper-chamber was well furnished still.

2. The same Table was in it almost foure-square; decent, adorned, where they
took their common repast.

3. Three bed-steds still with good furniture, incompassing three sides of the
bed; on which they might either sit, or lie down for their greatest and best
ease.

4. Great store of water standing by.

5. Unleavened bread sufficient.

6. The Remainders of the Paschall-Lambe not removed.

7. Store of wine, salt, and other sauce, in all conveniencie still on the same
Table, and Table-cloth. Then --

8. Roast meats, sod meats, baked meats, stewed meats, as I said before;
Esculenta, Poculenta; Condimenta of great variety, brought in by the same
Administrants for the second Supper. The 2. Supper began --

9. Christ and his twelve Apostles eating frugally, and discoursing heavenly
about one quarter of an hour.

10. Contentions arising among the Apostles for superiority.

11. Christ then arose from the second Supper: put off his clothes: girded
himself: washed, and wiped his Apostles feet; All of them.

12. Put on his clothes again; lay down, and preached humility to them; both
by word and deed.

13. This Pedilavium, or washing; with the discourse concerning it, took up
another quarter of an hour and upward.

14. The third quarter of an hour or more, before the end of the second
Supper, was spent in the further detection of Judas, and sealed up with an
exact demonstrative discovery of the Traitor, by Christ's delivering of a sop to
him, and his taking of it.

15. This Sop was not the blessed Eucharist.

16. Here the second and usual supper ended.

17. Satan entered into Judas.

18. Christ separated Judas.

19. The Apostles were ignorant what Christ meant by those words to Judas; What
thou do do quickly.

20. They mis-interpreted them.

21. Judas his Egresse when it was Night.

22. They gave thanks at the end of the second Supper:

23. They had a Grace-Cup.

24. And if they sung an Hymn, it was a short one.

25. Thus about six of the clock they began to eat the Paschall Supper;
which lasted not much above one quarter of that hour.

26. The second Supper lasted above three quarters of an hour; and about one
quarter of an hour after seven in the Night, both the Paschall and usual
Supper, were fully and perfectly dispached, and transacted.

When I have handled the third Supper, I hope in God, to remove the curtain of
obscurity, and folded preplexities: and to show you a true picture drawn
almost to life, of the things done, and appeartaining to that Most Sacred
Supper of the Lord.

Deus in adjutorium meum intend. Lord be thou my helper.
Amen.
FINIS.
TRICOENIUM CHRISTI. WHEREIN THE THIRD AND LAST SUPPER OF OUR LORD IS HANDLED.

LIBER TERTIUS.

Manu ducat me Jesus. Christ juva: Ignoto feror aequore, plenaque ventis Vela
dedi: totus langueo: Christ juva. Aut doce,
Aut disce,
Aut cupientem prodesse, patere,
Monuit Robertus Cenalis Episcopus Abrincensis.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook at the green Dragon in Saint Paul's Church
yard, 1641.

This third Book is the third General part of my propounded method. Wherein is
contained
1. A Preface. 2. A Tractate wherein is showed 1. Reasons of the word
Tricoenium: and why I call this work Tricoenium Christi. 2. Diverse differences
between the Agapae, and the Third Supper, or Supper of the Lord. 3. The use of
the Holy Kiss at the Lords Supper. Chap. 1. 4. Certain Reasons, why the
Sacred Eucharist was substituted to the aetetnall disannulling of the
Passover, Chap. 2. 5. What course our Savior took in the perfecting of his
Third, or Last Supper. And therein is showed 1. After what words Christ began
this Third, or Last Supper. A digression
1. Concerning the division of the Bible into Chapters. Verses.
2. Against filthy prophaners of Churches. Churchyards.
3. Against Conventicles. Chap. 3.
2. It was instituted in the same large, upper room, wherein they ate the
Paschall; and Common Supper.
3. It was not whilst the Apostles were eating the Second, or Common Supper:
but After That Supper. 4. It was instituted on a Table. 5. On a distinct Table.
Chap. 4.
6. Whether Christ himself received the blessed Eucharist. 7. What posture
Christ used when he consecrated the Eucharist, Chap. 5. And therein I consider
his
1. Actions. 1. He took bread. 2. He blessed it. 3. He brake it. 4. He gave it
to his Disciples,
2. Words employed in these words And said, 1. Take. 2. Eat. 3. This is my
Body, etc. Chap. 6:

8. What Gesture the Apostles used in Receiving the holy Eucharist. Chap. 7. 9.
What Gesture we are to use at the receiving of it. 10. What Names have been
given to the blessed Eucharist. 11. What Speeches were spoken by our Savior
after the Third Supper, before he departed out of the Coenaculum. Chap. 8.

A PRAYER.
Eternal and only wise God, because on the one side Satan stands with danger
in his hands, and labors to inveigle us to search into curious and needless
matters: and on the other side stands our natural laziness, with distrust
making men believe they can never find out such truths, as indeed may be
found: I humbly beseech thee (O gracious God, and giver of all good gifts) to
preserve me from both of these extremes; and grant unto me (good Lord) that I
may abhor to look after things unsearchable, super subtle, and above my
reach, which lie hid within the closet of thy breast; and yet may with all holy
and reverent industry proceed to the finding out of Thee, Thyself in, and by
thy Truth, even Jesus Christ my alone Savior, and Redeemer. Amen.

TRICAENIUM CHRISTI.
LIB. III. CAP. I. Which contains the first, second, and third Generals.
Wherein is showed 1. Reasons of the word Tricaenium. 2. Differences between the
Agapae, and Third Supper. 3. Use of the holy Kiss.

1. A Praeface by way of Admonition to the Unlearned. Invocation of the Learned.


2. Reasons of the word Tricaenium, and, why I call this Work Tricaenium
Christi. A threefold Supper farther proved. The Papists offended for calling
the third Supper, the Supper of the Lord. A deviation concerning Maldonat the
Jesuit his Life, and Doctrine. The ancient Fathers both Latin and Greek,
call the third Supper, the Supper of the Lord.

3. A discourse concerning the Agapae, or Feasts of Charity. They succeeded in
the place of the Chagigah, or second Supper. When Eaten. The Eucharist before
Tertullians days eaten in the Morning: the Agapae in the Evening. The
Eucharist and Agapae in the Primitive Church were kept near about the same
time. Christians falsely accused for eating Infants at their Agapae. The Agapae
kept on the Lords day. What scandals were taken by the Gentiles against the
Christians Agapae.

4. The sacred Eucharist, and not the Agapae (as the Papists think) is meant by
the Supper of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.20. The Agap^e never practiced before Christ's
Ascension. The Agap^e at first were used holily and religiously: sometimes
Severally from Jointly with the Lords Supper. The Corinthians did eat them
before the Lords Supper. They were celebrated by the Corinthians in the Church.
Each Schism of the Corinthians supped a part, by themselves. The poor
neglected by the Corinthians in their Agape. The primary end of the Agap^e, the
releife of the poor.

5. Charity modestly covers a multitude of Sinners. The ill fashions of the
Corinthians in receiving the Lords Supper reproved. Casaubone censured in two
points. First, that the Corinthians received the Eucharist in the Morning.
Secondly, that the Eucharist ought to be called a Dinner or a Breakfast,
rather than a Supper. The Churches both Western and Eastern, did receive the
Supper of the Lord Fasting in the fourth Age. On Good Friday the Church used to
receive it Thrice. That use broken by Pope Honorius, and the Council of
Tarracon. Pope Eutichianus, his Decretall against such as received the
Sacrament Not-Fasting. Some Churches of Africa, and some Egyptians received it
about Eventide Not-Fasting. In the second Age of the Church, in Tertullians
time they received it, some at Night, some at Mealetime, and some ere Break of
day. We receive the Holy Communion in the Morning in remembrance of Christ's
Resurrection.

6. In the Primitive Church they did lie on beds, when they did eat their
Love Feasts. Love Feasts forbidden to be kept in the Church by the Laodicean
Council, ancient Fathers, and later Divines. Kneeling in the time of solemn
Prayers, and administration of the Lords Supper, commended by Calvin.

7. In S. Cyprians and S. Augustines days, some received the Eucharist every
day, others at certain times only. S. Augustines Rule, Let every one follow
the Customs of the Church, wherein he lives. Eudemon Johannes by Casaubone
reproved. A Christian (...), or holy complying to avoid Schism, and for
concords sake was practiced by the ancient Fathers, by other Christians, and by
Calvin himself: And commended by Casaubone, Rigaltius, and others. Calvin's
good advise to Farellus. His divine temper against Luther.

8. The holy Kiss usual at the blessed Sacrament. Forborne on Good Friday.
The Kiss of Charity, why so called. It Is called Holy, to discriminate it, from
false, amorous, and civil Kisses. Why the holy Kiss was omitted on
Good Friday. Diverse kinds of Kissing. Some of Salutation, some of Adoration.
Diverse manners of Kissing. Some kiss the lips, or mouth, former parts and
hinder parts of the shoulders, cheeks, hands, back of the hands, the feet, and
the toe. The reason of Kissing the Popes toe. The Penitents in Tertullians
days did kiss the very footsteps of other Christians. Kissing of a Tablet,
or holy Board. The reason thereof. Holding by the ears in kissing used among
Heathen, and among Christians. The reason thereof. Joah held Amasa by the
beard, and kissed him. The custom of kissing one another at the receiving of
the Sacrament continued till S Augustines days. The manner of kissing in
Prester John's Country, and among the Persians.

9. When the Agapae began and ended, uncertain. Not to be eaten in the
Church, and in the Chancell. The Use and Abuse of them, even in the Apostles
times. The Abusers of them termed Spots and Blemishes in the Abstract. The
words Breaking of bread, and breaking of bread from house to house, Act. 2.
verse 44, 45, 46. interpreted. The degrees by which Abuses crept into the
Agapae.

PARAGRAPH. 1.
IN things unrevealed, in circumstances omitted, a wide window, yea a door is
open for diversities of opinions; and variety of opinions proves there is
obscurity in those things, about which they differ: In this obscurity we are
left to doubts, and doubts are determinable by the fairest proofs. Knowledge
is not so common a matter as is esteemed; many may light on a good belief, who
have not any divine knowledge. Cognitio fieri non potest, nisi cognoscenda
praecedant. Augustine de Genest ad litteram, Cap. 32. De non intelligibilibus
non est intellectio. Doubting it self is not wholly void of all knowledge; nor
does any man know any thing truly of which he never made any doubt before,
says Petrus Pomponatius de Incantationibus, cap. 9. Plato his young youth was
to be (...), inquisitive: Name qui nil dubitat, nil capit inde boni. For he
that reading makes no doubt,
Does little profit get thereout.
A sign to a nimble wit is as persuasive as a sentence to a dull brain.

The institution of the venerable Eucharist, is for the substantial part
thereof, set down at large by three Evangelists, and by S. Paul. But for the
time, place, and manner of administering: what preparatives were used by word,
or deed; with what gestures Christ did celebrate: and the Apostles receive that
blessed Sacrament: what Reverence was showed; what Prayers Precedent,
Concomitant, or Subsequent were made, is not directly expressed in holy
Scripture. Scarce ever was there an holy subject more subject to various
constructions. For we are forced to seek for the light without any shine of it:
the ashes must be blown away, and hidden corners searched. Fire is produced by
a strong applying of the flint to the steel; and we must be as tinder dried,
and apt to entertain the least flying spark: points unwritten must be
extracted, and distilled out of things written.

Wherefore (good Christian people whosoever you be that are unlearned, and can
talk only of our English original, forbear censure in these dubious points:
be willinger to follow, than to lead: to learn, than to determine.

But come you hither, (O ye inquisitive, and learned Conjecturers.) Here is
work for you; and in this work, let me entreat you rather to build, than to
destroy: to cut of, rather than multiply perplexities. And you (dainty
Critics) the sweet Children of the Arts, and Muses; you mines, and minters of
Invention, come with your nimble fancies, and pricking apprehensions, towering
beyond sight: fetch light out of darkness, add improvement to learning, and
truth; and strength of reason to conjecture.

And you especially, (most Reverend and Holy divines) the true Epoptae,
Stewards of the mysteries of God, and beholders of his secrets, who daily
converse with God, and his blessed Angels: who spend not your thoughts on the
stinking trash of this filthy world; whose death to the world, is life to
Godward: and who are, Finita divitiarum cupiditate divites, rich, in that you
covet not riches: Whilst an earthworme, or muckworme is, Medias inter opes
inops, poor (like Tantalus) in the midst of his riches. You, who bury your
selves among your books, and joy more to illuminate obscurities, than to find
treasures; who pity the vanity of such as set their hearts on beasts, to keep
them company, and think themselves great by daily conversing with their
Inferiors; You learned souls, embelisht with grace, and goodness, feeding on
content, and a good conscience in this world; Reversioners to Heaven; Come, o
come, bring forth your treasures both new and old; You are the Lights of the
World, Heirs of Grace, having Glory in reversion, and shining as Lights in
dark places; Come (I say) and further this work. Scientia fit per additamenta.
Science grows by steps and degree. Timotheus had never been so excellent a
Musician, unless Phrynis had been before him, says Aristotle in the 2 of his
Metaphysics. And so God bless our endeavors.

PAR. 2.
I Hold it not amiss, here in the forefront, to show some reasons, why I
term this work of mine Tricaenium. True it is, I have not read the word any
where. But as true it is, I never met with Author, but he frames some words to
his present occasions; every wit inventing and adding somewhat.

Horace de Art Poetica, almost in the beginning, concerning the inventing of
new terms, intimates there is given, and expresses there shall be granted
a power to invent new terms. -- Dabiturque licentia sumpta pudenter:
Et nova, fictaque nuper habebunt verba fidem, si
Graeco font cadant, parc e detorta. --
You leave may have new-coyned words to choose,
If that you modest liberty will use;
If from the Grecian fountains they do flow,
And keep the Latin cadence all a row.
Let me say of my self, as Horace does there of himself. -- Ego, cur
acquirere pauca
Si possum, invideor? cum lingua Catonis, and Enni
Sermonem patriam ditaverit, and nova rerum
Nomina protulerit? Licuit, semperque licebit
Signatum praesente nota procudere nomen.
If I by chance a few new words can coin,
Why should a man my liberty purloyne?
Since Cato rude, and Ennius harsh, of old
T'inrich their mother tongue were very bold,
And stamped new-words. Which for to do they saw,
Both ever was, and ever would be law.
I will be brief in some particulars. Pererius in Theatro rerum creatarum,
cap. 19. p. 145. says thus: Lycophron Poeta vocavit Herculem Tri-esperum,
quasi Trinoctem, propter triduum, quo necando pisci intra ejus alvum immoratus
est. The poet Lycophron called Hercules Tri-esper: as if he had called him,
Three-nighted Hercules, by reason of the three days and three nights, which he
stayed in the fishes belly, which he killed. Divinely is the story of Jonas
recorded in the old Testament. In reference to which the Heathen fabulously
ascribe some such thing, to one of their Hercules; for they had many so called.
And in the new Testament the history of Jonas is confirmed by the mouth of
Truth it self. For Christ said, Mat. 12.40. Jonas was Three days, and Three
nights in the Whales belly.

Naevius terms Nestor Tri-saeclum, because he lived toward Three hundred
years. Usual in antiquity are the words of Bi-clinium, and Tri-clinium; why
not Bicaenium, and Tricaenium? Martial. 12.78. mentions Trinoctiale
Domicaenium. Tricaenium is not farther fetched. Ludovicus de la Cerda, on
Tertullians first Book de Pallio, Numero 252. uses the word Antecaenium, The
word Pocaenium is commonly used, where a Third Supper is; shall we exclude
Tricaenium?

The Latins did Graecize. All nations under the Roman Empire did Latinize. And
composition of several words was most frequent in both languages. It were
loss of time to enlarge such a confessed truth. I deny not, but in classical
authority, the only word Coena is extended to comprize the Ante-past, the
Supper it self; yea, and perhaps the Post-past also. Macrobius Saturnal. 3.13.
thus. Coena haecfuit. Ante coenam echinos, ostreas crudas, quantum vellent,
peloridas, sphondylos, turdum, asparagos, subtus gallinam altilem, etc. The
manner of the Supper was this. Before supper, Urchins, (the now meat of
vagabond Gypsees) raw Oysters in abundance, Palours, the roots of Angelica,
Thrushes, Sperage; covering under them a crammed Hen, with other strange
delicates.

Macrobius adds, In coena, at Supper; Sumina, sinciput aprugnum, patinam
piscium, patinam suminis, anates, querquedulas elixas, lepores, altilia assa,
amylum, panes Picentes. The sowsed hinder teates of newly farrowing Sows, the
cheeks of a wild Bore, or Brawn; a great platter of fish; a charger of fat
Ducks; Teals boiled, Hares, fatted fowls roasted; wafers, loaves of bread
fetched from the people dwelling about Rubicon and Ancona. Yet of both these,
of all, he says only, Caena haec fuit, this was their Supper. And the divine
Apostle (though there was nothing else or eaten, or drinken, save only the
consecrated bread and wine, at our blessed Saviors receiving and administering
the holy Eucharist) calls this heavenly refection, the Supper of our Lord 1
Cor. 11.20.

And behold whilst I was writing of this passage, I received a gratulatory
letter from that Mundus eruditionis, that living Library, the most eminent
Regius professor of Divinity, Doctor Collins Provost of our Kings College in
Cambridge, in these very words; So wishing you Tri-Nestora (...) to your
Tricaniums happy accomplishment (for he had heard of it) fearing no Martha's
obstreperousnesse, while you play both Martha and Mary in one: I crave your
good prayers to God. Accordingly I have prayed, and do pray to God, to bless
us with increase of Grace, and guide us to his Glory. Amen.

Therefore I have presumed upon the Triple Supper at which our Savior was
present in one night, the last night that he lived in this world a natural
common life, viz. The Paschal solemnity, the ordinary Supper, the
thrice-sacred-Supper of our Lord and Savior, to term all three joined
together, or continued, Tricaenium, the threefold Supper of Christ. To the
proofs in the second book for a threcfold Supper, let me now add the words of
Justinian the Jesuit on 1 Corinthians. 11.20. Solet triplex caena distingui;
Legalis seu typica, qua agnus Paschalis comedebatur: Mystica, seu nova, quae
spectat ad Sacramenti institutionem: tertia communis, quae ad azymorum usum
inchoandum instituta erat. The threefold Supper is usually distinguished into
the Legal or Typical, wherein the Paschal Lamb was eaten: the Mystical or new
Supper, which belongs to the institution of the Sacrament: and the Third or
common Supper, which was ordained to begin the use of unleavened bread. Though
Justinian err in the order, placing the Supper of the Lord before the Common
Supper; and though he err in the reason, because the Jews did eat their
Paschal Supper with unleavened bread, before the Second Supper was brought in,
and so the Second Supper did not begin the use of unleavened bread: yet in the
maine, for Three Suppers he is in the right.

Nor can I well digest, that the Papists are so vehemently offended with our
men, for calling the Third Supper, the Supper of our Lord. Estius, Franciscus,
Lucas Brugensis, especially Maldonate (if the words be not fathered on him.)
Any name almost better pleases them, than that (the Supper of our Lord.)

In my Miscellanies, and in the second book of this Tricaenium, I have been
very bitter against the maledicency and scolding of the Jesuit Maldonate. And
in truth the words in his book deserve sharp reprehension, and recrimination,
as being too full of spleen, partiality, calumny, and base untruth. That I
wrote so eagerly against the person of the man, I am sorry: For I have been
credibly informed lately by one (who in all likelihood knew the inside of such
business) even my very learned good friend Mr John Salkeld, that Maldonate in
his life was esteemed a moderate Papist, yea a favourer of our Religion; and
after his death, that his Commentaries on the Gospels did suffer, by diverse
other more factious Jesuits both dispunctions and additions, with strange
alterations. Da magistrum, give me my master, quoth Cyprian of Tertullian.

The right reverend father in God, Richard, now Lord Bishop of Norwich, was
sometimes my President, whilst I was chamber-fellow with him in the Kings
College in Cambridge. His writings have I delighted in. His most learned
Apparatus was I (on other occasions) reading: when unexpectedly (as I was
writing my excuse of Maldonate) I found the same opinion confirmed by him,
another way. I rather think (says he) Apparatu 7. Paragrapho 16. that other
Massipontane Jesuits did intersert into Maldonate his Commentaries when he was
dead, the railings against our men; since (...) Historicus Thuanus, that most
true historian Thuanus relates, that Maldonate was a most modest man. But in
his Commentaries are most scurrilous revilings, which could never proreed from
Modesty, I date say. The same day also, I overviewing (upon other occasions)
the learned Casaubone, found to my hand as casually as Abraham found the Ram,
and Isaac the venison (as he said) that Exercitatione 16. cap. 32. he says of
Maldonate that he was a learned man, and sine controversia, acerrimi ingenii:
Now, whether he meaned that out of doubt, and confessedly he was of excellent
parts, and of a most keen sharp wit: or that he was a sharp-witted man, except
when he meddled with controversies, I did somewhat doubt. For Casaubone could
not but have read (and perhaps to it he alluded) what Aulus Gellius lib. 10. c.
15. has written, viz. that when Antonius Julianus the Rhetorician, had heard a
rich ill-bred Gentleman too too talkative in a doubtful, if not unexplicable
controversy; he said privately, most facetiously, and with an exceeding bitter
irrision, Adolescens hic, sine controversia, disertus est: If he meddle not in
hard points, he is an eloquent young man.

But passing by the man, let us come to the matter: the ground why I call it
the Third Supper, is, because when the Paschal and the Common Supper were eaten
before: the blessed Eucharist was instituted in the last place; and the same
holy Eucharist is termed by the Apostle St. Paul 1 Corinthians. 11.20. The Supper
of the Lord: this is not to eat the Lords Supper.

Concerning the Third Supper, it is nowhere in Scripture called a Supper, says
Maldonate on Matthew. 26.26. and in this point falls a scoffing thus. The
Calvinists without authority of Scripture, without example of old writers,
without reason, without judgment, call it a Supper, when they ought rather to
call it Merenda, a bever, if they take it after dinner: a dinner, if they take
it at noon: a breakfast, if they take it in the morning. Yet Maldonate himself
calls it so: his fellow Jesuits call it so: Cyprian and other Fathers call it
Canam Domini, the Supper of the Lord. Caena Dei, the Supper of God in
Tertullian. The same Maldonate on John 13.2. Tres caenas Christus (ut nonnulli
authors observarunt) illa nocte fecit: Christ (as some authors have observed)
made Three Suppers in the same night (in which he was betrayed.) The first was
the Legal Surper of the Paschal Lamb. The second was the Common Supper (the
paschal being ended, which was not ordained so much to satiate and nourish
nature, as to keep the Legal Ceremony) that they, who had eaten the Lamb, if
they wanted more meat to satisfy themselves, might be filled with ordinary
meats. Consider (Reader) if these two testimonies from him do not hack one
another.

If it be objected, that Bellarmine says, Dominus post ceremoniam agni
Paschalis continuo subjunxit celebrationem Eucharistiae; nec distulit in aliud
tempus, aut locum, ut aperte ostenderet, se nova ista coremonia coremonia finem
imponere veteri. The Lord after the Ceremony of the Paschal Lamb, did
presently subjoyne the celebration of the (blessed) Eucharist: neither did he
put it over till another time or place, that he might plainly show that he did
impose an end to the old (Law) by that new ceremony. From which words it may
seem to result that there was no second Supper.

I answer: Bellarmine speaks not of the Sacrificium agni, the Sacrifice of the
Lamb, but of the Ceremonia agni Paschalis, of the ceremony of the Paschal Lamb;
which may very truly be extended to the end of the second Supper. The second
Supper treading (as itwere) on the heels of the first, and the Paschal Lamb or
the flesh thereof standing still on the table unremoved, till the end of the
second Supper. And thus Bellarmine may seem to be rather for us, than against
us.

PAR. 3.
The Greek Fathers style it (...); yea, most expressly it is called the Lords
Supper, 1 Corinthians. 11.20. and though Maldonate interprets the place of the
Agapae, which out of doubt were not rightly used in those days, and were
reprehended by St. Paul: yet at those Agapae was the Lords Supper eaten: or
they a little before, or after it. And St. Paul divinely teaches them, first
negatively, that they eat not the Supper of the Lord, when they eat their own
supper one before another, verse. 20.21. or when some were hungry, some drunken;
and that in the Church of God: whereupon he tells them, they had houses to
eat and drink in, and will by no means praise their doings, ver. 22.

Secondly positively; that they truly eat the Supper of the Lord, who follow
Christ for their pattern, and imitate his example: and so by consequence
shows the right institution of the Lords Supper, which was his maine intent
fully to declare against all concomitant abuses, to that end that they might
follow it accordingly.

As the Eucharist came in the room of the Paschal, so the Agapae after Christ's
time succeeded in the place of the Second Supper of the Jews.

Alba-spinaeus observationum 1. observatione 18. page 58. speaks timorously. I
will not deny, in the Apostles time, but that the Agapae were made perhaps at
or with the celebration of the Eucharist. He might have spoken boldly. Three
things are certain.

First, before Tertullians time the Eucharist was given and taken in the
morning. Secondly, The Agapae were in the evening. Thirdly, Yet at the first
they were both about the same time. Let me say a little of each point.

1. For the receiving of the Sacrament in the morning, Tertullian ad uxorem
thus: Non sciot maritus quid secreto ante omnem cibum gustes? Shall not thy
husband know what thou do eat in secret, before thou do cast a bit of any
other meat? And after him Saint Augustine would have the Eucharist eaten
fasting, propter honorem Corporis Dominici, out of a religious reverence to the
Lords Body. More plainly the same Tertullian in lib. de corona militis;
Eucharistiae Sacramentum -- etiam antelucanis coetibus, nec de aliorum manu,
quam de prasidentium sumimus; we receive the Sacrament of the blessed Eucharist
even at our morning meetings, and that at the hand of no other but of our own
Ministers. And Pliny, who was Rationalis Trajani, Trajans Receiver and
Accountant, did certify the Emperor, that the Christians were wont to meet
before day light, ut sua sacra facerent, to perform their divine service. 2.
Concerning the second point, namely the Agapae, that they were kept in the
evening, is as apparent. Coena nostra de nomine rationem sui reddit. Vocatur
enim (...), id quod Dilectio penes Gracos est. The name of our Supper shows
its nature, that it is a Love-feast: yet a Supper it was, and so he called it.
Otherwhere he says, Coenulas nostras sugillatis, you scoff at our Suppers;
where, the Agapae are not wholly excluded. Otherwhere, Coena nostra vocatur
(...) our Supper is called a Love-feast. Quantiscunque sumptibus constat,
lucrum est pietatis nomine facere sumptum: siquidem inopes quoque isto
refrigerio juvamus. How costly soever our Love Feasts be, expense for piety
sake is gain; for the poor are refreshed with it. Augustinus contra Faustum
20.20. Agapae nostrae pauperes pascunt, sive frugibus, sive carmbus: Our
Love Feasts do feed the poor, either with bread, or meat; one way or other.
3. The third point is as evident from 1 Cor. 11. that the Primitive Christians
kept no great distance of time between the sacred Eucharist and the Agapae:
For the Apostle proceeds from the abuses of one, to prevent the abuses which
might fall in the other, and speaks as of things almost conjoined. And from
hence the Gentiles objected, that Christians at their Love Feasts did eat an
Infant; because the blessed Eucharist was in the same Agapae, or near the time
administered; and it being called spiritually the Flesh, and the Blood of
Christ, the Christians were accused that they did eat man's flesh, and drink
man's blood.
Alba-spinaeus does answer very shallowly, That this crime was forged, even
from the days of Tiberius, as Tertullian says in his Apologetick.

I reply. All this is true, that it was a most horrid falsehood, an affected
Lie, coined in Tiborius his time. But the question is not, Whether the same
were true, or false; (to which only Alba-spinaeus supinely but idly
answers) but from what ground or probability the rumor did arise, or how we
may trace the report home to its own form, to the bed from whence it first
started. I say again, It was because the Eucharist and the Agapae were
conjoined, and were then kept at Night-season: thereupon they found fault with
the Suppers of Christians, as sated with blood and humane flesh. And perhaps in
after times this was one true reason why they are the blessed Sacrament in the
morning, and the Agapae at night, to remove that objection; That in the night
they feasted not themselves with the blood of an Infant. Which practice, though
it staggered the report, and someway diverted it, and the Christians absoluti
sunt, were acquitted; yet litura manebat, the spot was not clean taken away,
as Claudius was wont to say in another case and aliquid haerebat, but something
still remained behind, because the accusation was boldly vouched. Inveterate
rumors are not easily wiped out.

If Alba-spinaeus had observed, that at their single separated Agapae there was
no possibility of suspicion of Infanticide, or feeding on man's flesh, or
drinking of man's blood, but that the words of the body and blood of Christ
eaten, and drunken, might in the carnal mis-interpretation be Caput famae, a
ground (though slippery) for report, and for such a report, through their
malice and infidelity; he would then have said (without a perhaps) that for a
good while after Christ's time both the Eucharist and the Love Feasts did touch
or kiss each the other; and that thence arose the horrid imputation, that
their Suppers were accused as sceleris infames, infamous for villainies, to use
Tertullians phrase. Weigh this farther circumstance. The Agapae were kept on
the Lords day: Diebus Dominicis celebrabant Agapas, they celebrated their
Love Feasts on the Lords day, says Alba-spinaeus himself, observat. 18. and
then was the most blessed Eucharist administered; that day above all other
days, that time of the day, even about Supper time, in imitation of our Lord.

Tertullian ad uxorem 2.4. speaks of Pagan husbands suspicion of their
Christian wives: Quis ad Convivium Dominicum illud, quod infamant, sine sua
suspitione dimittet? Who can endure to let his wife go to that infamous
banquet of the Lord without jealousy? What this Convivium Dominicum, this
Banquet of the Lord is, falls under enquiry. Pamelius interprets it, de
Missa Christianorum, of the Christians Mass. Rhenanus, Junius, Mornaeus,
Casaubonus Exercitat. 6. page 512. interprets it of the Eucharist.
Alba-spinaeus in his notes on this place of Tertullian, thus far concludes
wittily and truly, That Tertullian speaks of that Banquet or Feast that was
infamous among the Gentiles. Convivium illud, quod infamant, are the very words
of Tertullian. But they were not suspected of any incest at the Eucharist,
says Alba-spinaeus, or of any unlawful lust then, as from Pliny junior and
others may appear. Therefore those scandals were only taken against the
Agapae, or Love Feasts. What things are objected against the Christians, in
Justin, adversus-Judaeos Apolog. 2. In Tertullian Apologet. and ad Scapulam, De
cultu foeminarum, in Minutius Foelix, in Eusebius 4.1. and 4. capitibus,
concerning their Suppers, and Infanticide, they are to be referred to the
Agapae, in which the Eucharist was neither consecrated, nor received. Thus
far White-thorne, or Alba-spinaeus.

But if he had observed, either that at their Agapae only there was no
possibility of suspicion concerning Infanticide, and that at the Eucharist a
carnal man might so interpret it; or that the Eucharist was held by the
Gentiles worse than the Agapae, so much worse, as Infanticide, and devouring
humane flesh and blood, are worse than the sins of the eighth Commandment; or
that the holy Eucharist and the Agapae were kept both at one time, about Supper
time, in the days Apostolical: and the Eucharist being first dispatched, the
suspicion for lust was laid upon the Second Supper, where they did feast, sing,
and were merry: and that Tertullian Apologetico cap. 39. mentions the
Triclintum Christianorum, the Supping-beds of the Christians, and their
discumbing thereon, both men and women: I say again, he would have concluded
without a perhaps, that the blessed Eucharist and the Agapae were not
dis-sundred by much time, but rather were united; and he would not have
rejected, as he did, both his own and our Heroes, Pamelius, Rhenanus, Junius,
Mornaeus, Casaubone, to whom let me add that learned Jesuit Ludovicus de la
Cerda, who interprets Dominicum Convivium, the Lords Supper, thus; Convivium
Domini peragebatur, celebrabaturque sacra Eucharistia: ac tunc menticbantur
Gentiles, ac dicebant, Christianos panem sacrum Eucharistiae edere intinctum
sanguine jugulati Infantis: So far Cerda. The Banquet of the Lord was kept
and celebrated at the sacred Eucharist: and then did the Gentiles falsely
report, and say, that the Christians did eat the sacred bread of the Eucharist
dipped in the blood of a butchered Infant. I may not omit it is called Dei
coena, the Supper of God, in Tertullian ad uxorem 2.6. And that Alba-spinaeus
in all his Observations observed not that the Agapae or Love Feasts did succeed
the Second Supper of the Jews, at all their great feasts: which Suppers were
for the most part contiguous, and never far dis-sundred. Julian the Apostata
taxed the Christians for these three altogether, (...), as it is in Petavius
his Edition page 588. Chrysostom Homilia 27. on the Epistle to the
Corinthians, Statis diebus mensas faciebant communes, on set and certain times
they kept common feastings: and peracta synaxi post Sacramentorum communionem,
omnes commune inibant Convivium: and when the Congregation was dismissed, after
they had communicated of the Sacraments, they all met together at a common
Banquet. Thus did the Agapae, or Love Feasts, succeed in the room of the
Second Jewish Supper. After the Sacraments were administered they feasted
altogether.

PAR. 4.
THe Papists say, That the Apostle speaks of the Agapae, or Love Feasts, and
not of the sacred Eucharist; as I proved before. Suffer me, I pray you, to
clear the text concerning the Agapae.

1. First, I would know where any, or whoever called the Agapae, or
Love Feasts, the Supper of the Lord. Tertullian indeed Apologetic. cap. 39.
calls their Love-feast, Coenam, a Supper; but that ever he or any other
called it, singled by it self, Coenam Domini, the Supper of the Lord, with
reference to the Sacrament, I remember not. As Agapae were doled to the poor
(and what is given to them is lent to the Lord) so it may be called the Lords
Supper.

2. Secondly, the Agapae, or Love Feasts, were never begun or practiced by
Christ, never in use whilst Christ lived on the earth, in likelihood not till
after he was ascended into heaven, some short time after: so they were of a
latter institution than the blessed Sacrament, though they were holy, just,
conscionable, and founded on sufficient good authority, viz. Divine.

3. Thirdly, if there had been no abuse In or At the Agapae, or Love Feasts
among the Corinthians, yet the rightest use of them could never produce this
Consequent; That, that was to eat the Supper of the Lord, which must be the
resultance from the opinion of the Papists. For none can deny but the Church
did sometimes use the Agapae, or Love Feasts, holily and heavenly; And yet it
was a different thing, To eat the Lords Supper. Both the Supper of the Lord,
and the Agapae, or Love Feasts, might be, and have been perfectly administered,
severally, and at several hours and watches of the day, or night: also
jointly, and contiguously, one presently after the other: sometimes the one
first, and sometimes the other.

4. Fourthly, the Agapae, or Love Feasts, succeeded indeed in the room of the
Second, or Common Supper. And it is as clear as the light, that the
Corinthians did first eat their Agapa's, or Love Feasts: Every one takes
before his own Supper, 1 Cor. 11.21.

5. Fifthly, These Corinthian Agapae, or Love Feasts, were celebrated in the
Church. For the Apostle reprooveth them, because they did not eat at Home,
before they came to the Church. What, have ye not Houses to eat and drink in?
or despise ye the Church of God? ver. 22.

6. Sixthly, There being divisions among the Corinthians, v. 18. it is more
than likely, that the maintainers of each Schism supped Apart, by Themselves;
thereby fomenting divisions, and cherishing factions.

7. Seventhly, It is probable, that the Rich supped by Themselves: For certain
it is, that the Poor were neglected. Ye shame them that are poor, or that
have not, ver. 22. (...), subaudi (...), that have no part of Supper. And this
neglect was against the primary end of these Agapae, which was, principally, to
comfort and refresh the Poor.

Tertullian speaks much in commendation of these Love Feasts. Inopes quosque
refrigerio isto juvamus: we relieve every Poor body by that refection of ours
(says he Apologet. cap. 39.) And the Confessors in Prison had not only part
of the Collections of the Christians (says Tertullian ibidem) but had part
also of their Love Feasts. Tertullian ad Martyrs cap. 2. what is fit for the
bodies of Martyrs, they want not; per curam Ecclesiae, and Agapen fratrum,
through the care of the Church, and the charity of the Brethren.

PAR. 5.
EIghthly, as by the words, One is hungry, we may not imagine, that the Apostle
confined his meaning to singly One, to Only One, and no other: so when he
says, Another is drunken, he appropriateth not the fault to meer-One-alone, as
if no more were drunken; but modestly covering their faults, and charitably
casting, as it were, a mantle over their nakedness, what was too common among
them, he qualifieth, modifieth, and diminishes, by reducing all to the
singular number, One is drunken.

9. Ninthly, Though the Maine abuses, if not All, reprehended by the Apostle in
these Corinthians, were committed in Agapis, Before the receiving of the Lords
Supper; yet because these disorders were ill preparatories unto the heavenly
food of their souls, wicked in themselves, and scandalous to others; though
they did receive the Lords Supper afterward, yet this was not the way to eat
the Lords Supper. (...). Some interpret it, (...), nonlicet, ye may not eat it
So. Others say, that the Apostle by an usual hyperbole precisely denies That
to be done, which was not well done of the most. I like the former exposition
of Vatablus and Erasmus, because the Apostle finds fault with the Corinthians
for eating the Lords Supper with those precedent ill fashions, and reduces
them to Christ's own institution of his Third and last Supper, without
mentioning any thing concerning the Agapae. Neither is there involved an
express denial of their receiving, but they received in ill Fashion, and
after an ill Manner.

10. Tenthly, Casaubone, Exercitatione 16. cap. 31. thus. Peccatum
Corinthiorum, quod reprehenditur ab Apostolo, etsi proprie ad Naturam, and
substantiam hujus Sacramenti admittebatur, and erat conjunctum cum venerandi
mysterii contemptu, and contumelia: in iis nempe conviviis, quae Sacramento
adjicere moris erat, exercendae charitatis ergo, propterea Paulus totam illam
Corinthiorum actionem, quae sacro, and communi convivio constabat, a potiore
part vocat Coenam Dominicam. The sin of the Corinthians, which the Apostle
finds fault withal, though it belonged not properly to the nature and
substance of this Sacrament: yet because they committed it by occasion of the
Sacrament, and was accompanied with the contempt, and shame of the venerable
Eucharist: namely in those Feasts, which custom added to the Sacrament, to
exercise their charity; therefore Paul called all that action of the
Corinthians, which consisted of a sacred and common Banquet, from the better,
and nobler part thereof, the Supper of the Lord. But that great scholar is
miserably deceived in this following thing. Mane, sine dubio (says he)
Corinthii Eucharistiam celebrabant, quam sequebantur postea epulae Communes.
Out of doubt the Corinthians received the Eucharist in the morning, and the
Common Feast followed after. Yet the Apostle fully intimates, that the
Corinthians kept their refections in the Church, Before they received the
blessed Eucharist; and some of them were kept with great excess, as I proved
before. Casaubone his Sine dubio (out of doubt) is but a fancy, of which
himself made no doubt; others do. Another error is in the same chapter. That
what S. Paul calls (...), a Supper, should rather be termed (...), prandium,
a dinner, if we respect the time, or (...) a breakfast. And he alleges this
reason out of Chrysostom, according to the Churches usage, which the Apostles,
out of doubt, instituted of receiving of the Sacrament Early and Fasting; that
Heavenly banquet, may be termed a breakfast, or a dinner. Suppose this were
so, that the holy Communion of the Corinthians may be, ought rather to be
called, in respect of the time of taking it, a breakfast, which they took only
Saliva virginea, with Virgin spittle, or fasting (as it is apparently false)
yet ought it to be termed the Supper of the Lord. For the Lord took it, not at
breakfeast, or at dinner, but at night only, at the Third Supper; And this is
enough to justify the title of Tricoenium. Justinian the Jesuit near the
place above cited, says, the words, Postquam coenavit, after he had supped,
may be expounded not only of the Paschall Lamb, but also of the Common Supper.
Nam sub finem coenae communis instituta est Eucharistia: for about the end of
the Common Supper, (which was the Second Supper) Christ did institute and
celebrate the Eucharist (which is the Third and Last Supper of our Lord) called
by S. Paul. (...): called by Dionysius Areopagita, (...). The most Heavenly,
and Archi-mysterious Supper, as Casaubone well observed; called by other
Fathers, and by Baronius and Justinian, Coena Domini, The Supper of the Lord,
as you may see the proofs at large in Casaubone. Dei Coena, Gods Supper (says
Tertullian ad uxorem, 2.6.) Augustines appellation is, Communio Coenae, the
Communion of the Supper, de Anima cap. 6.

11. In the eleaventh place, I think the words of Casaubone, require more
proof, or are to be distinguished upon, when he says. Out of doubt the
Apostles did appoint the Church to receive the Sacrament Early, and Fasting.

That the Churches did so, and did well, to do so, in later times, is confessed.

That some Churches did take the holy Communion, Early, and Fasting in the
fourth Age, is also confessed. It was a fault objected against Chrysostom that
he gave the Communion Post sumptum cibum, after the Christians had broken their
fast. The Romans used this peculiar king of action; when they swore, they took
up a stone, and did fling it from them, and prayed; May Jupiter throw me away,
as I fling away this stone, if I speak not truth. The good old father S.
Chrysostom, was much moved, with that false suggestion: and thereupon, with
enough, if not too much, earnestness, He perhaps alluded, to the oaths of the
Gentiles, but certainly swore in Christian terms, If I have done so, let
Christ cast me out of his Kingdom. In his seven and twentieth Homily in 1
Epistolam ad Corinthios, he says, you, before you receive (the holy Eucharist)
do Fast: that you may some way, or other, seem worthy to Communicate: and if
that be a sound Rule in the Decretals, that None should bear witness, but
Fasting: whereby they may the better consider what they swear: I judge that
propter dignitatem corporis Dominici, for the honor of the Lords body no
sustenance should be taken, before the blessed food (which strengthens our
souls) be taken by us. And yet if Chrysostom had administered the Sacrament
after meat, he instanceth in the example of our blessed Lord. (...) Who
administered the Communion after Supper. S Augustine himself took it Fasting,
propter honorem corporis Dominici, for the honor of the Lords body; yet he ad
Januarium confesses, some Churches of Africa received the Sacrament in the end
of the day; others received it, both in the Morning, and in the Evening.
Augustines ad Januarium Epist. 118. cap. 4. is sufficient authority, that on
Good Friday anniversarily the Church received the blessed Sacrament twice; once
in the Morning, once in the Evening. Et cap. 7. Plures, and prope omnes in
plerisque locis eo die Coenare consueverunt; Most, and almost all used to take
it at Supper. And the privilege of this day, viz. to receive the blessed
Eucharist at night, continued till the days of Pope Honorius, who brake it
off. And though Augustine himself with his, were wont to fast; Then
tocelebrate the Communion; Then to sup, cap. 5. yet the same Augustine ibid.
cap. 6. Liquido apparet, quando primum acceperunt discipuli corpus, and
sanguinem Domini, non eos accepisse jejunos. It is a plain case, that when the
Disciples did first receive the body and blood of the Lord, they did not
receive it fasting: The Apostles at first are not the Eucharist, Fasting. But
we must not therefore calumniate the Universal Church, because they always
take it Fasting. For it pleases the holy Ghost, that for the honor of so
great a Sacrament, the Lords body should be eaten before other meats; and
therefore, per universum orbem mos iste servatur; this custom is kept over the
whole world. And the contrary custom of receiving the Eucharist after supper,
was forbidden by the third Council of Carthage, Canone 29. except only on the
Anniversary day of the Supper of the Lord. Yea, that very permission and
indulgence of receiving the Sacrament at night, only on Good Friday at night,
was disannulled, and antiquated by the Council of Tarracon in Spain. So much
for the Western Church. But the Eastern Church forbade Night-offerings in the
Laodicaean Council; Canon 5. and in the sixth General Council, cap. 79. So
Pamelius on Cyprian.

Euthychianus the Pope (you shall find it in Ivo part 2. cap. 45.) was so
strict for the receiving of the Sacrament Fasting, that he Decreed, whosoever
took the Sacrament after meat, yea though it were but a petit refection, if
they were youths, they should repent three days: if they were of perfect age,
they should do seven days penance: if they were Priests, or Clergymen, they
should be punished for it, twenty days together. Goulartius on the same
Epistle affords a liberty to the Pastors of the Churches; That for the
circumstance of times, and places, both of old, and in our Age, they did, and
may appoint the Communion to be kept, either at early Morning, or in the Day,
or at Night. Adding, they were forced in time of persecution, to celebrate the
Communion, not once only, but many times in one day. And some Egyptians (says
Socrates, lib. 5.) supped liberally, before they received the Sacrament, and
yet did eat the holy Communion, about Eventide. Some of these have I cited out
of Casaubone, against himself. For in the Morning, (says he) it should seem,
by the authority of the Universal Church, Jam inde a principio, it was a
custom almost every where, to take the Eucharist Fasting. That it was so about
Augustines, and Chrysostomes days, I confess, with some limitation. But that
it was so, jam inde a principio, is hardly, or not at all to be proved. Let me
ascend higher, to Tertullians time; and even here in the second Age of the
Church, he is pregnant enough, that the blessed Sacrament was taken by the
Christians, Fasting. Non sciet maritus, quid secreto ante omnem cibum gustes?
shall not your husband know what you take secretly before any meat is tasted
by you? Tertulliam ad Vxerem 2.5.

The same Tertullian Apolegetic. cap. 2. witnesses that Plinius Secundus wrote
to Trajan; that the Christians had coetus Antelucanos ad canendum Christo, and
Deo: Early meetings before day to sing to Christ, and to God. But sing they did
at their Communions. And they did (says Pliny) seipsos Sacramento obstringere;
Bind themselves by the Sacrament; which was the Christians receiving of the
Sacrament, (as Baronius opineth ad annum Christi, 104.) for they bound not
themselves to any evil, but from doing evil (says Pliny;) And this was ante
Lucem; before day (says the said Pliny.) And yet the same Tertullian de Corona
militis, 3. cap. says, Eucharisiiae Sacramentum, and in tempore victus, and
omnibus mandatum a domino etiam antelucanis coetibus sumimus. Some received it
at Night, some at Meale-time, some ere Break of day. Rhenanus on the place of
Tertullian; Non solum victus tempore erant soliti accipere Eucharistiam. sed
etiam in congregationibus, quae nonnunquam ante exortum diem fiebant. An
ingenuous confession, That the primitive Church in the second Age was wont, at
Meale-time (that is not excluding Supper) to receive the Sacrament: and yet
that some times they received the same before the Dayspring. Radevicus
relates of Constantine, that either alone, or with very small company or
retinew, he beheld the meetings of the Priests in the Churches before daylight.

Cyprianus Epistola, 63. ad Coecilium Paragraph, 12. acknowledges the use of
receiving in sacrificiis matutinus, in their morning sacrifices: yet faulting
such as received the Sacrament with water only, as fearing least through the
sent and taste of wine, they might smell of the blood of Christ; and confuting
those, who receiving the Communion with water only in the Morning, yet when
they came to supper, they offered mixtum Calicem, the sacred Cup with wine and
water: Cyprian adds ibid. Christ ought to make his offering about Eventide;
that the hour of offering might show the Eventide of the World. I answer, The
hour of the Paschall offering was exactly praescribed: But the hour, or time
of administering the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist was free, and arbitrary;
yet the Prophet might fitly allude to Christ, Psalm. 141.2. when he said; Let
the lifting up of my hands, be as the Evening sacrifice. But we (says Cyprian)
do celebrate the Lords Resurrection in the Morning: The sense is; we offer the
holy Communion in the Morning in remembrance of the Lords Resurrection. For
certainly (say I) he Arose in the Morning, Mat. 28.1. as it began to dawn: that
is, very early in the Morning, Mark. 16.1. Early, when it was yet dark, John
20.1. and yet even Then, was the stone taken from the Sepulcher; the undoubted
sign of Christ's Resurrection: and by his Arising, buried the Jewish Sabbath,
which by his death was dead before.

The custom of receiving the holy Sacrament at Night continued, in some
places, even unto the days of Augustine, (says Pamelius on the forecited
place of Cyyprian.) So was it observed by the Egyptians near Alexandria: and
by them of Thebais (says Socrates;) and Thebais was a whole region, bounding
on Aethiopia, Plinius, 5.9.

Gregorius Nazians. Oratione in sanctum Baptisma, says; Christ observed the
Mystery of the Paschall, After Supper, and in the House: -- We in the
Churches, and Before Supper: And the Mystery of the Paschall, I take to be
nothing else, but the holy Eucharist. For what have we to do else with the
Paschall Mstyeries? The Paschall was a type: The Eucharist, the mystery
typified: the Paschall, the Ceremony, and shadow: the Eucharist, was the
substance, and body.

Leo Magnus in an high strain, thus; The old observance in the Judaicall
Passover, is taken away by the New Sacrament: Sacrifice is translated, and
passed over into a Sacrifice: Blood excludes blood: And the legal Festivity,
whilst, or, as it is changed, is fulfilled.

PAR. 6.
IT is clear from Tertullian, that the Primitive Church had their Triclinia,
as I proved before: and did lie along, or discumbere, when they did eat their
(...). It is also as evident, that because it was irreligious to use such
gesturesin the hurches, that the Laodicaean Council forbade any to Feast, or
to eat their Love-Suppers in the Churches, or in the Temples of God to make
beds to lie on. Justin Martyr also is punctual, both that the people sat in
Sermon time, and prayed standing: in Apologia 2. These were changeable Rites,
and not observed a like in the Churches.

Before I leave this place, it is considerable what Augustinus Januario
Epistola 118. cap. 6. teaches us; That the Corinthians, whom the Apostle
reproved, and amended, did at their tables, mingle the Sacrament with their own
meat, which was a gross abuse. And the same abuse is remembered, by Gregory
Nazianzene Oratione in Sanctum lavacrum. By Epiphanius toward the end of his 3.
Book of the Fashions of the Primitive Church. By Chrysostom Homil. 27. on the
1 Epist. to the Corinthinans, cap. 11. By Isidore de Divinis Officiis. By Bid
on Luke, 22. By Paschasius de corpore Domini, cap 19. and most amply handled by
Walafridus Strabo de rebus Ecclesiae, cap. 19. So far Pamelius on Cyprian. That
ill Custom is condemned by Calvin, Institut. 4.10. But the kneeling in prayers
with our hats off, he there commends; and the administration of the Lords
Supper, not fordidly and unmanerly; but sollemnly, and reverently. More
particularly concerning Kneeling in the time of solemn prayers he says ibid.
Parag. 30. That it is so an Humane tradition, that it is also a Divine
tradition: And it proceeds from God, as it is part of the Decency which the
Apostle commends to us; but of this more hereafter.

PAR. 7.
I Now proceed to the twelfth point.

In the Epistle of Cyprian, and of the African Synod to Cornelius, as it is in
the first volume of the General Councels printed at Venice, page 381. Nos
Sacerdotes sacrificia Des quotidie celebramus: we Priests do daily celebrate
the service of God. And Augustine in the forecited Epistle to Januarius, thus;
Alii quotidie co^municant corpori and sanguini Dominico, alii certis diebus
accipiunt, etc. Some every day receive the Eucharist, some at certain times
only. In one place they receive it on the Sabbath, and on the Lords day; in
another they take it only on the Lords day. Neither does Saint Augustine
condemn those who take it daily; nor them who choose Set-daies: nor them who
receive After Supper: or Sup After their receiving. Faciat ergo quisque quod in
ea Ecclesia, in quam venit, invenerit. Let every one (says he) follow the
Custom of that Church in which he lives; Which is an holy advice in it self;
but thrusts through the loins of all selfe-conceited Singularists, who know
not, or use not that holy (...) that pliable condescent, that humble yielding,
that charitable, peaceable, and candid exposition of things either unknown, or
doubtful; which the Fathers of the first Christian times both practiced, and
taught.

Casaubone commends the Fathers for it: and wished to find it among the
Jesuits; and I for my part, rather prefer a supple accordance, a reconciling,
and uniting of differences, before the drawing, and stretching of the rope of
Contention by both ends, and before the multiplying of alienations, or
divisions; which S. Basil calls (...), an Over-earnest desire to draw all
things to the contrary part. Eudemon Johannes, that fierce fiery Devil, holds;
That healing virtue, that balm for scissures or ruptures, that mild and
moderate (...), to be little less than the betraying of Truth, than the
abjuration of all Christian Religion. Casaubone justly reproves the eager, and
fiery Jesuit, Exercitatione, 16. cap. 32. And not Casaubone only, but the
great, and learned Rigaltius in his Observations on Tertullian de Oratione,
commends in the same word (...) of Tertullian, as well as of other Fathers.
Tanta fuit patribus charitatis cura, ut plerosque ritus ratione non bona
receptos, tolerarent potius quam rigida censura vel minimam scissurae
occasionem praberent, page 40. The Fathers (says Rigaltius) had so great a
regard unto, or care of Charity, that they did rather bear with diverse Rites,
though instituted, and received upon no good ground; than they would by rigid
censure, administer the least occasion of scissure or division.

Yet there were ever some, who, whereas they ought to esteem, or labor to
make indifferent things good; and good things, Better; do yet endeavor to make
good things, but Indifferent; Indifferent matters, to be bad; and bad to be
worse. But, as Rigaltius truly observes; Hac erat, illo aevo, Christianoruni
(...). In those days, not only the Fathers, but other Christians also used
that modest, holy complying, and condescent. Neither (God be blessed) has
this latter age had all, and only rigid and inflexible Lutherans, Jesuits, and
Puritanes: but God has given unto the Church moderate men, of softer metal.
Calvin himself gives good advice to Farellus; Though (says he) we be free in
all things, yet let us be servants to peace and concord. I cannot but add that
most divine temper of Calvin, (if the same flowed from his heart which flowed
from his pen) that though Luther called him a Devil a thousand times, yet he
would never say otherwise of Luther, but that he was a chief servant of God.
And I hope the best, because in another case, where he was much abused, yet his
complaints were moderate and modest. To establish his newfound Presbytery,
which was falling to the ground, he became the busiest Polypragmon that ever
was in the world of his means. He cries down Tithes, gives all power
(almost) to the Lay-Magistrates of Geneva, upholdeth usury, culium obsequio
petens, by flattery and beggary, seeking to be reverenced; accepts a slipend
of forty pounds annually. And when the fixed honorary of Tithes was taken away,
the unfixed humors of the Laics appeared. They cared not to pay him his ten
pound quarterly; and if the silly man had starved for his pretty new invention,
they had not much esteemed. Yet does not he play the Boutefeau, he animateth
none to rebellion, he seeks not the change of estate, though the penurious
man in his Commentaries on Genesis 47. and Gal. 6. could not but complain how
slowly and ill he was paid.

When they received the blessed Sacrament on Good Friday, they did forbear to
kiss one another, as it was usual at other times.

For the Apostle commands it Romans 16.16. 1 Cor. 16.20. and 2 Cor. 13.12. in
all three places not a Lustful but a Peaceful, An Holy kiss is appointed.
Greet ye one another with an Holy kiss, as it is in all three places. But 1
These. 5.26. it is varied, Greet ye All the brethren with an Holy kiss. Lastly,
the Apostle Saint Peter shows what manner of Kiss this ought to be: Greet ye
one another with a kiss of charity: peace be with you all that are in Christ
Jesus, 1 Pet. 5.14. (...), a kiss of Charity; perhaps because it was given and
received when they went to their Agapae, or Feasts of Charity; a Kiss to
manifest true Charity, a Kiss to settle peace, a Kiss to seal up the prayers
of Christians one to another; and practiced duly and reverently it was, as
appears both by the Greek and Latin Liturgies.

Origin says, this Custom is delivered to the Churches, that After prayers,
fratres suscipiant se invicem osculo, the Christian brethren kissed one another.

Saint Augustine thus divinely, and always like himself; After the Lords
prayer they say, Pax vobiscum, peace be with you; and then the Christians
kiss one another with an Holy Kiss, which is the sign of peace. As thy lips
approach to the lips of thy brother; so let thy heart come nigh his heart;
Sermon 83. de diversis. So this kiss is called Holy, to discriminate it from
False, Amorous, Civil Kisses. A False Kiss, Joah gave to Amasa, with a deadly
stab, 2 Samuel 20.9. A more False Kiss Judas gave to Christ; Betrayest thou the
Son of Man with a Kiss? (says Christ to the Traitor) Luke 22.48. Amorous
Kisses, some of them, are wholly unlawful, such as are obscene and incite to
swelling Lust: Oscula qui sumpsit, si non, etc. As it is in that voluptuous,
profane, and Epicurean Poet. I forbear to English. Et quae sentiri non esse
Sororia possent; says the same experienced Leacher. Such as lewd wantons, not
dear Sisters, give.

For the Kisses of Sisters ought to be modest, cold, and civil: The Kisses
also of kindred, and of friends, ought to be civil, and shamefaced; Someu sed
them dimidio labro: with a touch of the lip only. Martial, 2.10. Persians,
Jews, Graecians, and Romans kissed their friends, when they met them. And
Polydor Virgil de Jnvent. rerum. lib. 4. cap. 1 3. says, Consuetudo nunc
ubique gentium servatur, and praesertim apud Anglos, quorum mulieres, non
cognatos modo, sed quoscunque generatim osculo tantum salutant resalutantque,
and illud quidem primoribus (uti dicitur) labris, tam decentissime, quam
honestissime faciunt. It is a common fashion now adays almost through the
whole world, but especially among the English; whose women do use to salute,
and to resalute by way of Kissing; not their kindred alone, but generally all
others, as occasion serves; and that they do in a most comely, and civil
manner, only with their former lips, as the proverb speaks.

Plato his verses, ascribed to him by Laertius, cited by Aulus Gellius, Noctium
Atticarum, 19.11. smell too much of paedaristia, unfit for so great, Divine,
and ancient a Philosopher.

Socrates was not void of fault in Kissing fair youths, which Agesilaus is
noted to have avoided. Virgil was set on fire by his beautiful Alexis. Even
the friendly civil kissing grew through too much use, troublesome; and was
forbid by Tiberius. Yet wonderfully both practiced and complained of long
after, even by Martial; lib. 7. Epig. 94. against Linus; See the insatiable
Martial; 11.9. of his over-valewing the salacious kisses of his lewd boy; and
the general abuse of the City in their Kissing at meetings, Martial. 11.99. It
was wont to be In foro inter omnes amicos. In the market, between All
acquaintance, when they met: Et levi basio; by a touch only, when it was used
at the best.

S. Augustine in questionibus super Genesim: quaest. 87. upon these words,
Jacob kissed Rachel, Genesis, 29.11. thus; Consuetudinis fuit, maxim in illa
simplicitate antiquorum, ut propinqui propinquos oscularentur; and hoc hodie
fit in multis locis. It was a custom of old, especially in those days of
simplicity of the ancients, for Kinsmen to kiss Kinsmen, and this is practiced
yet in many places. Saint Augustine had come nearer to the point, if he had
said, It was the fashion for Kinsmen to kiss Kinswomen; for so did Jacob here
kiss his Cousin Rachel. Yet I deny not but it was the fashion then to salute
men also: Genesis 29.13. Laban kissed Jacob. Joseph kissed All his Brethren, Genesis
45.15. yea, even his dead Father, Genesis 50.1.

Samuel the Prophet kissed Saul, 1 Samuel 10.1. Jonathan and David kissed one
another, 1 Samuel 20.41. Let me be bold to say, The kisses of Samuel, Jonathan,
and David, were not only Civil and Reverend kisses, as the former were, but
Holy kisses, figures perhaps of what was to be in the law of Grace. For the
Christians kisses were terminated in Honesty, and modest Civility, in peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost; and their greetings were with Holy kisses, as I said
before, different from the best and c^vilest kisses of other Nations, and much
more holy.

The omission of the Holy kiss on Good Friday may be thought to be grounded on
this, because Christ was betrayed by the Kiss of Judas. See Tertullian de
oratione cap. ultimo: Die Paschae, quo communis, and quasi publica jejunii
religio est, merito deponimus osculum; we do for very good reason forbear the
Holy kiss on the Paschall day, because we do then religiously observe, and
keep the Common and Public Fast. Let no man understand it of Easter day, for
then they might not Fast; but of Good Friday. For Paschae, passio Domini est:
and elegit Dominus diem Paschae, quo pateretur; says Tertullian otherwhere, as
Heraldus, Cerda, and Pamelius have judiciously observed. The Pasch, or
Passover, is the Passion of the Lord: and the Lord has chosen the day of the
Passover to suffer on.

Ignatius in his Epistles to those of Antiochia, and Tarsus, has these words
toward the end of both of them. (...), Salutate invicem in osculo Sancto;
salute one another with an Holy Kiss; non subdole, vel ficte, quale Judas
tradidit Salvatori (says Hierom. on Romans 16.16.) not a Traiterous, or False
Kiss, such an one as Judas gave to our Savior. And still remember, there is a
great distance, and difference between Kisses of Salutation, and Kisses of
Adoration; of which hereafter. Nor did they kiss only the Lips and Mouths, but
both the Fore-parts, and Hinder-parts of the Shoulders, the Cheeks, the Hand,
the Back of the Hand, even the very Feet. See Ritterhushius on Salvianus, page
379.

Baronius ad annum Domini 294.8. Relates of one Praepedigna, that she fell at
the feet of Caius the Pope, and according to the custom of those times, Kissed
them, as it is in the Acts (says Baronius, Numero. 10.) Claudius kissed the
feet of Gabinius the Priest with joy: Maximus also kissed Caius his feet,
Numero 12. Who so desires to see more concerning this point, or to know the
reason, and original of Kissing the Popes Toe; Let him read Polydor Virgil. de
invent. rerum, lib. 4. cap. 13.

E're since our blessed Savior was betrayed
With a Lip-Kisse, his Vicar is afraid:
From whence, perchance, this common use did grow,
To kiss his the other end, I mean, his Toe.
Quarles Divine Fancies, lib. 3.22.

Tertullian de pudicitia, cap. 13. is plain, that the poenitents did lambere
omnium vestigia, did omnium genua detinere, Kiss the knees, yea the very
footsteps of other Christians; and were wont to fall down in the congregation
conciliciati and concinerati, in sackcloth and ashes; which is better than
conciliati, as I suppose.

Yea the very precept of Kissing one another, was used more warily afterward.
For the women were kept apart from the men in the Church, and so did not
promiscuously kiss: and yet for all this caution (says Baronius, ad annum
Christi 45. Numero 26.) because by the Devils cunning, deceit crept in, among
the mutual kisses of them, whether men, or women: It was a laudable fashion in
some Churches to kiss a Tablet, or sacred Board. And indeed by that means,
many sins might be prevented; whilst by kissing, as Plato speaks
hyperbolically, the soul of one comes to the door of the lips: and by it,
is united to another soul, and some times infused into it: and so poison is
sucked in, say I.

The Heathen were wont to take boys by the ears, when they kissed them. But he
spoke more philosophically, who said, In osculo effunduntur spiritus ex cord:
In a kiss, the spirits come forth from the heart. Plautus in Poenulo, sine, te
prehendam Auriculis; sine, them snavium. Let me hold thee by thine ears, Whilst
thy lip my kisses bears. The young Sons were wont to take their parents by
their ears, when they kissed them, Tibullus lib. 2. Elegia 5. -- Natusque
parenti
Oscula comprensis auribus eripiet.
Which Scaliger in his notes on Tibullus page 159. says, he found, and amended
from a place of Aristophanes. -- The little lad,
Holding his Fathers ears, shall Kiss his Dad.
Yea, even Christians, and those, prime teachers, and instructers of youth,
taught the children so to do. Clemens Alexandrinus Stromatum 5. page 402.
stands in defense of it. (...). etc. We do not inconsiderately charge children
to hold by the Ears such friends as they kiss; secretly signifying, that love
is engendered by Hearing. Yet indeed, I esteem it as a wanton toy in children,
and indiscreet fondness of parents: unfit for Christians to teach, or
practice. And with reverence to Clemens Alexandrinus be it spoken; The kissing
of people whom they hold by the Ears, has not so much as a shadow of
signification, that Love is ingendied by hearing: but (perhaps) rather the
contrary.

The Scripture points at another kind of Kissing, Ioab took Amasa by the
Beard with his right hand to kiss him. 2 Samuel 20.9. In S. Augustine his time,
the custom of kissing One another at the receiving of the Sacrament, yet
continued, and was not found fault withal, so much as among the Schismatics
themselves, but practiced by them. Augustinus Tomo. 7. contra literas
Petiliani. lib. 2.23. page 22. says to Petilian, concerning one of his
Factionists; Cui pacis osculum inter sacramenta copulabatis, Whom you gave
conjoined kisses unto, whenever he received the blessed Sacrament.

In the Country of Prester John, the ordinary custom which all Christians,
Noblemen and Gentlemen use at all times of the year of saluting one another,
is, when they meet together once a day, if they be almost equals, they kiss
their shoulders, and embrace one another, and one kisseth the right shoulder,
and another the left.

Only in the week before Easter, they speak not one to another, but pass by
without lifting up their eyes, much less do they kiss each other. See
Purchase his Pilgrims, from Francis Alvarez a Portingall, lib. 7. of Africa,
cap. 5. Paragrapho 16. pagina 1096.

If Persians of equal degree did meet, they kissed one another lips. If a
superior met an inferior, he gave the inferior his cheek to kiss. But a mean
Persian falling down, did worship his Better, says Brisonius page 241. de
regno Persarum, as Drusius cites him.

PAR. 9.
BUt to return to the Agapae, from whence I have digressed. I cannot exactly
find out, neither when the Agapae did first begin, nor when they wholly ended:
when it was sin to omit them; when to take them.

The Trullane Council in Constantinople, Anno 692. Canon 74. says, Men must
not keep their feasts of charity in the Temples, nor eat them there. Zoraras
on that Canon explaineth it; that they might not feast in the Churches, or
within the bounds of the Chauncells, but in proauliis, in the Church-porches
they might.

Casaubone Exercitatione 16. Numero 31. in fine, Haec coena (that is the
Agapae) a mysteriis toto genere fuit diversa: and postea Templis est ejecta,
actandem penitus sublata. This Supper (that is to say, the feast of Charity)
being altogether diverse from the mysteries (of the holy Eucharist) was
afterward abandoned out of the Churches; and at length, (like an old Almanac)
grew clean out of date. But at what Time, he mentions not.

Sure I am, they were instituted by the Apostles, and practiced in their times.
But what year they began, or what month they were first practiced, I would
feign learn. Yea, the right use of them, was much abused whilst the Apostles
lived: For diverse Apostles found great fault with their disorders in their
Agapae: The ringleaders to evil in them, are called (...), Maculae, and
vituperia; Spotts and Blemishes whilst they feast with you, 2 Pet. 2.13. Saint
Jude also in his Epistle, verse 12. (...), These are spotts in your feasts of
Charity; (...). Luxuriantes vobiscum, says S. Peter: ( coepulantes says
Augustine) feasting with you without fear. For it seems to me, that (...)
does fitlier cohere with the precedent, than with the subsequent words: yet
both readings are good. They were not only spotted (for alas who is not so
someway?) but very spotts, in the Abstract. Abominable in themselves, and
withal defiling and bespotting others, even in those banquets of charity,
where should have been, and was at first much holiness.

If any desire to know more exactly when the Agapae first began: I answer; It
cannot be certainly known. Yet I think it probable to say, They were
celebrated the first Eucharist that the Apostles took after Christ's death; or
a while after, about his Ascension; When, and Where, the Church of God, had
ease and rest: For Nature requires, that the being of things precede the good
or bad use of them: and when they once Are, then follows the right, or the
ill Applying of them. And the Right use, most commonly, if not always, is in
time, before the Abuse; But Toward the beginning were Abuses: and At the
beginning they were in Right use. Sure I am, three thousand Converts continued
steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in Breaking of bread,
and in prayers, Act. 2.42. And All that believed were together: and had All
things common: and sold their possessions, and goods: and parted them to All
men, as every man had need. And they continuing daily with one accord in the
Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, or, at home, did eat their
meat with gladness and singleness of heart. So far the Scripture speaks,
Acts 2.44, 45, 46. verses.

The words, Breaking of bread, and breaking bread from house to house, are
diversely interpreted. Some restrain them to the Eucharist. So the Syriack and
Arabic Translators. Montanus wholly consorteth with them. But this opinion
Beza disliketh: The Greek Scholia gather from thence, that the Primative
Church used sparing diet, and lived frugally. Beza wittily distinguishes; that
the good Christians did so indeed: but that it resulteth not from this place;
because the same form of words is used by the Hebrews, in their solemn and
greatest feasts, as Genesis 43.25. They should eat Bread there.

The truth is, Beza, and the rest might have observed, that there is not only
mention of Breaking of Bread: but they did also Eat their Meat with gladness:
and, as by the first words the Eucharist may be well understood: ( For the
bread which we break, is it not the communion of the Body of Christ, 1 Cor.
10.16? That interrogation, is in effect, a doubled affirmation) so by the
phrase of (...), capiebant, or, sumebant cibum, they did eat their meat,
their (...) or Love Feasts, are apparently signed out.

I say with Montanus, that in those times, Eucharistiae Sacramentum repetebant
assidue: They took the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist daily: and with
Beza, that by the word (Bread) the Hebrews understood all kind of meats: and
will not deny, but the Hebrews did make their bread broad and thin, that they
were rather broken than cut. But since there is mention both of Breaking of
Bread, and eating of Meat: I shall appropriate the first to the holy
Sacrament; the second, to their feasts of charity: and be bold to aver, that
these words in the cited places, design both. And I wish, that Beza had noted,
that though the Corinthians did abuse both, their blessed Sacrament, and their
Love Feasts also by mingling one with another, and profaning the Churches in
making them places of common repast: yet this was somewhat After this story in
the second of the Acts; when the Agapae succeeded the blessed Sacrament; as the
second Supper of the Jews succeeded their Paschall. For their Breaking of
Bread, was before their Eating of Meat. And I think the degrees were these.
They daily continued in the Temple; There was the place of prayer, Act. 3.1.
They are their Bread, their sacred Bread, Domatim, at Home, or from house to
house; or, at one time in several houses. For in the Temple they could not do
so: persecution, and the sword hung over them.

A private house could not afford competent room, and decent spaces for above
three thousand to receive day by day. And therefore they employed diverse
houses to that purpose. Though it be said, they were All together, verse 44.
yet, (says Chrysostom) not in One place, or room; but All together in Grace,
faith, charity, unity of the Spirit, and singleness of heart, verse. 46. All of
them having but One mind, One heart.

After this, in the third place, were their Love Feasts carefully tended, and
ordered by the Apostles themselves at first; and then was no abuse. But when
the number of the Disciples increased, the Apostles applied themselves to
Better things, and left the guidance of Love Feasts in part to others. Then
crept in partiality and discontent; and there arose a murmuring of the
Grecians, against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected, in the
daily administration, Act. 6.1. Their Love Feasts were daily administered, as
well as the blessed Sacrament.

Whereupon the twelve Apostles called the multitude of Disciples unto them, and
said; It is not reason we should leave the word of God, and serve Tables, verse.
2. (...), Ministrare mensis (i) conviviis, or in conviviis, (says Beza) to set
forth the Love Feasts, or attend on them.

And most divinely (to cut off all cavills) they appointed all the Disciples to
choose out of themselves, Seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost
and wisdom, Act. 6.3. to present them to the Apostles, both for that, and
other services. The Disciples chose them: the Apostles prayed, and laid their
hands upon them.

Yet neither the care of the Apostles, nor the deputed authority of the Seven
Deacons, whom the Apostles did appoint over this business, Act. 6.3. could
keep the Christians in due course, but Satan did sow his tares, and bred
divisions, and introduced innovations, so that they ate the body of our Lord,
and drank his blood with Other meats: and that in the very Temple, most
intemperately, and partially, Not discerning the Lords body: to the great
scandal of others: so that the Apostles were feign to take notice of them, to
reprove, and reform them.

The Prayer.
GRacious God, fountain of light, we miserable men are led in darkness: and
wander up and down in it: we stumble, and fall, and run into an hundred
bypath, rather than in the way of truth. We see not so well as we ought. Our
intellect is mistaken: our will is perverse. O thou, who inlightnest one way or
other, all men that come into the world; show me thy brightness: Guide, and
govern me. Into thy hands do I commend my poor spirit, with all the
faculties both of my soul and body: Let thy holy rays incompasse me: deliver
me from both outward and inward darkness: and bring me to see thy face, for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Chap. II. and fourth General.
Wherein are demonstrated, certain Reasons, why the sacred Eucharist was
substituted, to the eternal disannulling of the Passover.
1. Diverse Ends, why the Third holy Supper was instituted. 1. Reason. To
substantiate the praeceding Type. The difference between Fulfilling of a Law,
and realizing or consummating of a Type. Tertullian censured. Hierome
applanded. The Passover was a figure of the Eucharist, and of Christ's Passion.
All figures are not Antitypes.

2. 2 Reason. To confer more grace upon us by It, than was given unto the
Jews. The figure must come short in excellency to the thing figured. The
virtue and effect of the Lords Supper in us.

3. 3 Reason. ^o praefigure Christ's death, and going out of the world. All
Sacraments of the Old Law, were figures of the Eucharist: and did finally
typifie Christ's death.

4. 4 Reason. To be a Remembrance to us of Christ's death, till his coming
again. The holy Eucharist not only seals, and signifies Grace; but also
conferreth and exhibiteth it by it self in the true use thereof. How far
forth this effect is to be understood. Why Christ received the blessed
Sacrament before he went into the Garden. Christ had degrees of devotion. Not
to faint in Prayer. The blessed Virgin Mary not so full of Grace, but that she
was capable of more latitude.

5. 5 Reason. To unite us to Christ. 6 Reason. To breed brotherly Love; and to
unite us one to another. Hence
the Communion of Saints. the Eucharist called the Communion.
7 Reason. To be an Antidote against daily sins. The Eucharist called Panis
supersubstantialis; and by S. Ambrose, Panis quotidianus. 8 Reason. To further
our Spiritual Life. 9 Reason. Because it is the Sacrament of supernall
charity, and filiation.


PARAGRAPH 1.
YEt because it is a vanity to institute any new matters, unless men be moved
to it by very good reasons, and lawful inducements: Let us now examine, Why
this Third holy Supper was instituted: and we shall find, that the Ends were
diverse. I will instance in some: and, 1. First in this; It was Appointed to
this purpose, viz. to Substantiate the Preceding Type. There is great
difference between Fulfilling of a Law, and Realizing, or Consummating of a
Type. By Eating the Paschall Christ did as the Law commanded, and in that point
fulfilled the Law: but if he had not Superinduced a Third Supper, nor given us
the most blessed Eucharist to be our Evangelicall Pasch, or Passover, he had
not actuated the Type, nor accomplished the Figure, nor established the new
light, and present truth, in stead of the precedent shadow. For when Christ was
circumcised, though he was obedient to the Law, and thereby fulfilled that Law:
yet till he instituted Baptism to be in the room of Circumcision, he did not
Realize, or Substantiate the Figure: But when he had appointed new Sacraments,
more full of Grace, and every way more excellent, more easy, and parable, and
fewer in number, which were presigned, and fore-destinied, and presignified by
the Types; Then indeed, and not till Then, were the Figures substantiated. And
to return homeward, by the Eating of the most blessed Eucharist in Christ his
Third and Last Supper, is Christ become Our true Paschall Lamb; Pascha nostrum
immolatus est Christus, 1 Cor. 5.7. Christ our Passover is slain. I grant
that S. Paul speaks of the Crucifixion, and the Lamb was a Type of his
death, and the manner thereof in many things, as I instanced in before. Yet was
the Paschall Lamb a figure also of the sacred Eucharist: Magis immediate, and
principaliter ceremonia agni paschalis fuit figura Eucharistiae, quam
Passionis, (says Bellarmine de missa. 1.7.) The Ceremony of the Paschall Lamb
was more immediately, and more principally the figure of the blessed Eucharist,
than of Christ's Passion. Hierome on Matthew. 26. and upon those words, verse. 26.
commenteth thus: Postquam Typicum pascha fuit impletum, and Agni carnes cum
Apostolis comederat, -- ad verum Paschae transgreditur Sacramentum: After that
the Typical Passover was fulfilled, and (Christ) had eaten the flesh of the
Lamb with his Apostles, he passes over to the True Sacrament of the Passover.

Tertullian almost at the end of the fourth Book against Marcion, has an odd
Crotchet, That Christ desired not to eat the Jewish Passover, but the
Evangelicall. Chrstus non concupivit vervecinam Iudaeorum, cum ait se
desiderare Pascha edere. He desired not to eat of a Jewish Wether, Lamb, or
Sheep. But that Father did little consider Luk 22.24. I have desired to eat
This Passover; This; and verse. 13. They made ready the Passover, (that
Passover; to eat which, he purposely went up to Jerusalem) for which purpose
he sent this word to his Host, Matthew. 26.18. I will keep the Passover at thy
house; which are spoken all of them, of the Jewish Passover. For all these
Passages were spoken before the Supper of the Lord, yea before the Second
Supper.

Besides, when Christ had desired to eat the Jewish Passover, he did not long
to eat it, qua caro, as it was flesh; but qua Sacramentum erat v^teris legis;
as it was a Sacrament of the old Law, which he was bound to do whosoever would
fulfill the Law, as Christ did: and so he did eat it, not as common profane
meat; but as a sacred duty which could not be performed without eating of it.

Hierome writ more soundly on Matthew. 26. toward the beginning, Christus finem
carnali festivitati volens imponere, umbraque trarseunte Paschae reddere
veritatem, dixit: Desiderio desideravi. Where he excludes not (as Tertullian
needlessly did) the first Supper, but distinctly expresses it; and does more
than include the Last Supper. For he says, Christ being willing to abrogate,
disannull, and set an end to the Carnavalls, or carnal Festival of the Jewish
Passover, and to make the Type appear in substance, and verity, he said,
Desiderio desideravi, I have much desired to eat thereof.

The Passover was a Type of the Eucharist; and principally figured out It.
Bellarmine de Sacramento Eucharistiae. 4.9. A Type, but not an Antitype, (says
he,) Agnus paschalis erat figura evidentissima Eucharistiae. Ibidem. lib. 4.
cap. 18. For the flesh was eaten, and the blood sprinkled upon the doore-posts
signified the blood of the Eucharist, as may be gathered from Gregory: Homilia
22. It was also in another degree a Figure of Christ's Passion (says he, ibid:)
For, if the Paschall Lamb was a Figure of the Eucharist; and the Eucharist
does lively represent the Passion, it must needs from thence result, that the
Passover was a Figure of Christ's Passion.

The Eucharist is not only the figure, or type of the body and blood of
Christ, but the Antitype; because all Figures are not Antitypes; but only
those, quae nihil fere differunt a veritate: which very much resemble the
Substance. Bellarmine de Sacramento Euchastiae. 2.15. Thus have I presumed to
mend Bellarmine in this place.

PAR. 2.
A Second Reason of the Institution of the Eucharist, was to confer more
Grace upon us by it, than was given unto the Jews. Figuratum non debet esse
figura vilius (says Bellarmine de Missa. 1.7.) yea (not to cloak the truth)
the Figure must come short in excellency to the thing Figured: as the shadow to
the body; the Type to the thing typified.

Galat. 4.3. When we were children, we were in bondage under the rudiments of
the world: And verse. 9. How turn you back to the weak and beggarly elements,
whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage: And this the Apostle spoke of the
Jewish Ceremonies. So, Colos. 2.17. the Ceremonies of the Law are said to be
the shadow of things to come; but the body is Christ. And Heb. 10.1. The Law
had a shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image of the things. But
he terms the Law of Grace, the time of Reformation, Heb. 9.10. And the
Tabernacle thereof, a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, verse. 11. And Christ
a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the True Tabernacle, which the Lord
pitched, and not Man, Heb. 8.2. Christ, not Moses.

Christ has obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also he is the
Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon better promises, Heb.
8.6.

Augustine in Psalm. 73. Our Sacraments are pauctora, salubriora, faciliora,
foeliciora; fewer, wholsomer, easier, happier.

Look unto Bellarmine the Master of Controversies, and to the Canvasers of
him, and they confess unanimously (what Saint Augustine taught) the fuller,
and more gracious power of our Sacraments. The quarrell-picking niceties on
both sides I dislike. Let one instance serve for all.

Whereas in the old Law, The Sacrifices sprinkling the unclean, sanctified to
the purifying of the flesh. Heb. 9.13. Ours s^nctifie to the purifying both of
bodies and souls.

Baptismus facit animam pulchram, Deo dilectam, haeredem Dei, and aperit regnum
coelorum: Baptism makes a white soul, beloved of God, the heir of God, and
opens the kingdom of heaven; as the Fathers phrase it. Christ sanctifies
and cleanses the Church with the washing of water by the word, That he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle; (...), or
any such thing: no (...): not inclining to a spot, but that it should be Holy,
and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Aqua, quae benedicitur, purgat and
illuminat hominem; The water, which is blessed, does purge and illuminate man
(says Gregory Nyssen in lib. de Baptismo.) Caro abluitur, ut anima emaculetur;
the body is washed, that the soul may be made clean (says Tertullian de
resurrectione carnis.) From whence in all likelihood Augustine tract. 80. in
Johannem, propounded that assevering interrogation, unde tanta vis aquae, ut
corpus tangat, cor abluat? from whence is that powerful virtue of water, that
the body being touched, the soul is washed? The blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist is more powerful than over Paschal was. Tertul. de resurrectione
carnis, thus, Caro corpore Christi and sanguine veseitur, ut anima de Deo
saginetur; our flesh feeds on the body and blood of Christ, that our souls
may be filled, and fatted with God.

Bernard in primo Sermon de coena Domini, page 145. Who can quell so fierce
raging wild motions of concupiscence? who can bear the itchings, bitings, or
akings of this wound? Believe, Gods grace is sufficient for men. And that ye
may be secure (says Saint Bernard) you have the investiture, that is, a new
acquist and possession of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. For
that Sacrament works two things in us. Et sensum minuit in minimis, and
ingravioribus peccatis tollit omnino consensum: it infeebleth and diminishes
sin in the smallest matters, but in more grievous sins it wholly takes away
our consent.

If any of you find not so sharp motions to anger, envy, luxury, or the like,
let him thank the body and blood of our Lord; because the virtue of that
Sacrament works effectually in him: and let him rejoice that the fowlest
ulcer begins to heal. I conclude this passage with the memorable words of
our Savior, at the institution of the holy Eucharist, Mat. 26.28. This is my
blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.
Thus do the Sacraments of Grace remit, quell, and mortify sin: whereas the
divine Apostle speaking of the Sacraments of the old Law, is express, Heb.
10.4. It is not possible that the blood of Goats and Bulls should take away
sins.

PAR. 3.
A Third Reason for its Institution, was, to prefigure Christ's death, and going
out of the world. John 13.1. Jesus knew his hour was come, that he should
depart out of the world unto the Father; (...) ut transeat, that he might Pass
out of the world, having apparent reference both to the old and new Passover
on the Cross. All Sacraments of the old Law were figures of the Eucharist. And
they did also finally design and typifie Christ's death. Therefore the blessed
Eucharist must needs adumbrate Christ's death also. Indeed the Egyptian
Passover, by the sprinkling of whose blood the Israelites were freed from the
exterminating Angel, does most lively typifie Christ slain, and his blood
delivering us. But the Paschal Lamb, which afterward was yearly slain, did
more resemble the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood: and yet both the first,
and the succeding yearly Passover, may all of them, and each of them, in a
true and fitting sense, be said to prefigure, not only the Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ, but the very Crucifixion of our blessed Savior Jesus
Christ.

PAR. 4.
A Fourth Cause of Christ's superinducing of the blessed Eucharist was, to be a
remembrance to us of Christ's death till he comes again: 1 Cor. 11.24. Do
this in remembrance of me: so verse 25. As often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come, ver. 26.

The Paschall was a memorial of their deliverance from Egypt, and of their
passing the Red Sea, without danger, whilst the Sea stood, as two Crystal
walls, on the right hand, and the left, and they passed through dry-footed,
Exodus 14.22. Again, when in after times their children were to ask, What mean
you by this service? Ye shall say, It is the Sacrifice of the Lords Passover,
who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote
the Egyptians, and delivere dour houses, Exodus 12.26. etc.

But the Eucharist is a memorial of our deliverance from Sin, Hell, and the
power of Satan. Therefore so far as spiritual deliverances are above
temporal, as the souls are above the bodies, heaven above earth; so far
does our holy Eucharist antecede their Paschal, and brings with it more
certain fruit, and fuller Grace infused; not only Sealing and Signifying
Grace, but Conferring and Exhibiting it by it self in the true use.

I urge not this effect so far, as to exclude Baptism from working remission
of sins; nor as if the sacred Sucharist did remit the Same Individual sins
which were Before remitted by Baptism, or as if it did remit sins that never
were Repented of. God does not so much. But the Sacrament of the body and blood
of our Lord forgiveth such sins as have been committed between the receiving
of Baptism, and it; and such sins as have overborne us, since our hearty
Contrition and Repentance: yea, where sins are perfectly forgiven before the
holy Communion; yet does the Holy Communion Enseale and Ratify the former
remission (if I may so speak) and the Eucharist (in the right use) makes an
Attrite man, a Contrite One; A Contrite man, to be Justified; A Justified man,
to be Holy; An Holy man, to be More holy; and the Holiest One, to be more
lively, spiritfull, and prompt in religious services, than (I think) he would
have been, if the Sacrament had been omitted.

Thus I doubt not but if the Thrice-blessed Virgin Mary had received the
consecrated Eucharist (as in likelihood she did) though she were full of Grace,
according to the Angels salutation, when she received it; yet it would not have
been uneffectuall to her Good: for she was not so full of Grace, but that she
was still capable of more and greater additaments of Grace.

Many more Reasons there are, why Christ Jesus did superinstitute the blessed
Eucharist, destroying and abolishing thereby the old Passover. I will instance
only in some of them: and that very briefly.

PAR. 5.
A Fifth Reason why Christ did institute this Sacrament, was, to unite us to
Himself, 1 Corinthians. 10.16. The cup of blessing, which we bless, is it not
the Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread, which we break, is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ? The cup is so necessary, that the Apostle
places it before the bread.

6. To breed brotherly love, and to unite us to Christ and one to another. For
we being many, are One Bread, and One Body; For we are all partakers of that
One Bread, 1 Cor. 10.17. Hence flows that great Article of our Creed; The
communion of Saints. Hence is that Sacred Eucharist called Communio, A
Communion. John 6.56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells
in me, and I in him.

7. To be an antidote against daily sins. Panem nostrum, (...) Give us this day
our daily bread. Here the Eucharist is called Panis supersubstantialis, our
supersubstantiall, or Heavenly bread: yea (says Ambrose) it is called Panis
quotidianus, our daily bread, because it is a medicine, and a remedy, against
daily sins, de Sacramentis: 5.4.

8. To further our spiritual Life. And therefore it is not only set down
negatively. John 6.53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
blood ye have no life in you: but it is further positively averred, I am that
bread of Life, ver. 48. and ver. 50. This is that bread which comes down
from Heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not dye. And ver. 51. I am the
living bread. -- The bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for
the Life of the World. And most apparently in the 54. ver. who so eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has aeternall Life. For my flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed; ver. 55. and ver. 57. as the Living Father has
sent me, and I live by the Father; so he that eats me, even he shall live by
me.

Lastly, Cardinal Cusanus Exercitationum; 7. Eucharistia est supremae
charitatis Sacramentum; The blessed Eucharist is the Sacrament of the most
heavenly gift of charity. When Christ had loved his unto the end, because all
the rest did not suffice to perfect Charity, unless he gave himself for all,
of which the Eucharist was the wonderful mystery: Recipit se in manus suas,
and in Sacramento fregit, and distribuit: He takes himself into his own
hands, and in the Sacrament brake and distributed himself. Like as if bread
were alive, and should break and distribute it self, that they might live, to
whom it was distributed; and it self should dye by being distributed; So
Christ gave himself to us, as if he did so distribute himself to us by dying,
Nota.
that he might give life unto us. In the same place he calls it the Sacrament
of Filiation, all doubt being taken away concerning the Filiation of God. For
if Bread can pass over into the Son of God, therefore Man may, who is the end
of bread. Vide Dionysi. Carthus. in Luc. 22. fol. 258. Much more may be said;
but other points draw me to them.

THE PRAYER.
I Am not worthy (O Lord, holy Father) of the least of thy benefits, yea I have
deserved that the full vyals of thy heaviest wrath should be powered down upon
me: for I have many ways offended thee: and after manifold, both vows and
endeavors to repent; after tears, sighs, groans; and my contrite heart has
been offered on thy Altar; yet I arknowledge my relapses and recidivations.
Good God, let thy goodnesses strive against my wickedness, and fully overcome
it. Cleanse me, though thou slay me: and though thou should condemn me,
who wholly trust in thee, yet Sanctify me thy Servant for Jesus Christ his sake
my blessed Redeemer. Amen.

CHAP. III. and fist General. Which is divided into 5. Sections or
particulars. The first whereof is contained in this Chapter. And therein is
showed 1. After what words Christ began this Third or Last Supper. 2. A
Digression 1. Concerning the division of the Bible into Chapters and Verses. 2.
Against filthy prophaners of Churches, and Churchyards. 3. Against
Conventicles.


1. What course Christ took in the perfecting of this Third, or Last Supper.
First he removed Judas. The ceremonies of the Grecians at their Sacrifices. S.
Augustines error, who thought Judas did eat the bread of the Lord
Sacramentally. A more probable opinion, that Christ did not institute the
blessed Eucharist till Judas was gone forth. After what words Christ began his
Third Supper. The word When, does not always note the immediation of times, or
things consequent.

2. A discourse (by way of digression). The first part thereof. Concerning the
division of the Bible into Chapters and Verses. Neither the Evangelists nor the
Apostles divided their writings into Chapters and Verses. Neither Christ nor
his Apostles in the New Testament cited Chapter, or Verse of the Old Testament.
Probable, that the Books of the Old Testament were from the beginning
distinguished and named, as now they are. And began and ended as now they do.
The Jews of old divided the Pentateuch into 54. Sections, Readings, or
Lectures. The Jewish Section is either Incompleate; termed Parashuh, or
Distinction, signed with three P. P. P. Complete, styled Sedar, an Order
marked with three S. S. S.
All the Jewish Lectures read over Once a year. The first Lecture, what time
of the year it began. At what place of Scripture every every one of the 54
Lectures begins, and ends. Six books of Psalms according to the Jewish
division. Every Lecture of the Law consisted of 136 verses. Antiochus rent the
Law in pieces. God more regards every Letter of the Law, than the Stars of
Heave.

3. Puritans taxed, who taxour Church for mangling the Word of God, and
patching up a Lesson. The books of the Bible, were not at the first divided by
Chapters; nor the Chapters by Verses, as now they are. The Jews had by heart
all the Old Testament.

4. Traskites censured. The Jews shall be converted to Christians; not
Christians to Jews. Secondly, the second part of the Digression. Against ^lthy
prophaners of Churches and Churchyards; more especially against them of the
City of Exeter, Nero bepissed Venus tomb. The Heathens very zealous against
such profanation. Caecilius his opinion concerning it Vespasian forbade it.
The Authors Apology. His petition both to the Clergy, and Laity of Exeter.
Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 23.12. against filthiness. The Cats, and the Birds
cleanliness. God, and his holy Angels walk in the midst of our Temples. That
Law of God, not Ceremonial, or Judicial, but Moral. The Esseni diligent
observers of it. Cleanliness a kind of Holiness. Uncleanness in the Camp was
an uncleanness in the Jews themselves. God commands Cleanliness, and
Sweetness for man's sake, not for his own. Vncleanlinesse makes God turn away
from us. God a lover of internal and external Cleanness. The Abrahemium the
first Churchyard in the world. Jacobs reverence to the place where he slept.
Some places more holy than other. The Authors exhortation in this respect to
the Magistrates of Exeter.

5 Campanella the Friar examined, and censured. He learned Art magic of the
Devil. Every one has his Tutelary Angel, as Saint Hierome and Campanella are
of opinion. Campanella healed of the spleen (as he says) by Charms. The
name of a Friar more scandilous than of a Priest. Proverbs and Taunts against
Friars and Monks. A Friar, A Liar. Friars railed against both by Ancient and
Modern Writers. Priests and Jesuits at debate who shall be the chiefest in
authority. Friars Deifie the Pope. Friars lashed by Pope Pius the second.
^ampanella a prisoner for twenty years together. The Jesuits nipped by the
Sorbonists: banished by the Venettans: scowred by Peter de la Marteliere in the
Parliament of France.

6. The third part of the Digression concerning Conventicles. The usance of the
Zelotes at their Conventicles. The effects of them. None of Gods children in
ancient time ever practiced them unless in the days of persecution. Jews to
be imitated in Sabbath Lectures. Every one must labor to be Christiformis.
Tertullian short of the truth concerning the force of Laws. Reason and
Religion must be regulated by Authority. General Rules must be stamped by the
approbation of public Authority. Order must over-sway Subjects, and their
Religion. Singularity condemned. Guides of the Church a gift of God.

7 The law of Moses anciently divided into Books, but not into Chapters and
Verses. Elias Levita says, it was first divided into Chapters and Verses by
the Jews of Tiberias. The New Testament divided by the Ancients otherwise than
now it is both in Chapters and Verses; witness Caesarius, ^uthymius, Heinsius,
Nonnus, Suidas, Cyrill, Sixtus Senensis, the Arabic Translators, and Junius.
Heinsius and Junins opinion concerning the ancient divisions. The Syriack
translation of the New Testament disliked by Bellarmin, and others. In all
probability not delivered by S. Mark to the Churches of Syria, and Egypt. How
the Acts of the Apostles; the first and second Epistle to the Corinthians, are
divided into Chapters by the Arabic translation. How the four Evangelisis are
divided into Chapters by Ammonius. The division of the four Gospels not of
divine institution; but of the Churches or dination.

8 The blessed Excharist instituted immediately upon Judas his Excommunication.
The Sacrament of the Lords Supper instituted, not whilst the Apostles were
eating the Second or Common Supper: yet before they departed out of the
Coenaculum. Estius in this point taxed. The practice of the Eastern Churches
at the time of the Celebration of the Lords Supper, and the Reason thereof.
Salianus taxed Profane persons to be excluded from the very beholding of holy
Mysteries.

9. When Christ was about to celebrate the Sacrament of the New Law, what Order
he used; How he began: How he proceeded. Certain things may be determined
certainly: probable things can be resolved on but probably. Aristotle's sayings
preferred before other Philosophers. Small degrees of knowledge that are
agreeable to reason, are to be embraced; From small beginnings many times
follow strange Conclusions. Plato's divine History of Socrates, and
Alcibiades. Homers Story of Minerva, and Diomedes. Salt Seawater may be made
fresh diverse ways. Diverse curious instances to this purpose. Art may imitate
Nature. Diverse rare instances to this purpose. The Island Arethusa near
Hispaniola; and diverse Rocks near the Island Navazza on the borders of
America, being in the midst of the Salt-sea, send forth fresh waters. The
reason why the Salt-sea sends forth fresh fish. New Inventions are to be
admired. Many things may be perfected, which yet seem Incredible. Gunpowder
may be made of River-water. The Turks have found it. Of oil distilling from
Alume-hills: the Spaniards have practiced it. Why not of our Bath waters? More
benefit by this Invention, than by the discovery of the man in the Moon: or
the Lord Verulam's new Atlantis: or Campanella's Northern Island. The best
Loadstones in the East Indies, in China and Bengala. The art of flying thought
possible by Campanella. The man in the Moon added much to this Invention. Two
ships of equal burden and shape, yet of unequal sailing: Two clocks of the
same making, yet not of the same running: Campanella's reason thereof. Light
will peep in at a little hole. The West Indies found out per minima indicia.
Matters of greatest moment have many times the smallest beginnings: diverse
dainty instances to this purpose; especially, the discovery of the Gunpowder
Treason. Where evident Scripture fails* strong Presumptions, or Tradition, or
Reason may carry it. Truth (said Democritus) is hid in a deep well. Matters of
Faith are not to be grounded upon the bare opinions of men. The Church not
bound to do many things which Christ did, especially in circumstance of time.
They who defer Baptism till thirty years of their age (as Christ did) are
taxed. Christ had many reasons so to do. Christ's Administration of the
Eucharist a Pattern not for the Circumstance, but for the Substantial form
thereof. Diverse Circumstances wherein we differ from Christ in Administering the
blessed Eucharist. Altars in Scripture sometimes called Tables; Tables
sometimes termed Altars.

PARAGRAPH 1.
LEt us now consider what course Christ took in the perfecting of this his
Last Supper.

First say I, he removed Judas; and gave not the holiest Mysteries to that dog;
nor cast that pearl before swine. The Graecians, when they began their
Sacrifices, cried out, (...); who is fit to be present here? To whom answer was
returned (...): Honest, good, and harmless men. And to the same sense, they
again cried out; (...): Holy things are for holy people. Did Nature teach them
good things? and shall the God of nature practice the contrary? S. Augustine
indeed Tractat. 26. in Johannem, says; Caeteri Apostoli manducaverunt panem
Dominum; Judas autem panem Domini: The other Apostles did eat Christ their
Lords body; Judas did eat the Bread of the Lord Sacramentally only; not
Spiritually. I hope I shall not offend, if I dissent from S. Augustine, and
others in this point; because I have contrary both Authorities, and Reasons.

Well then, this being presupposed, that Judas was first removed; Let us now in
the first place, (according to my propounded Method) examine, After what words
Christ began his Third and Last Supper.

Tatianus Alexandrinus in his Harmony, thinks Christ began to institute the
Eucharist when Judas was gone out, After those words, John 13.32. God shall
also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him. This seems
the more probable, because, when Judas was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the
Son of man glorified, etc.

The Jesuit Barradius, is of the same opinion. Yet I hold it more probable,
that Christ did institute his blessed Eucharist so soon as Judas went out. And
it may be, for that cause chiefly, if not only, Christ said to Judas, That
thou do, do quickly, verse. 27. because he would not have Judas, who was a
devil, to partake of that heavenly banquet. And then the entire discourse
continuing from John 13.31. and so forward, immediately followed, After the
receiving of the divine Eucharist with the blessed Apostles, when the Traitor
was gone. For though it be said, when Judas was gone out, Jesus said this, and
this; yet it is not said, Jesus immediately said this, When Judas was gone out.
And it does not exclude, but some thing might intercede: and that must then be
the Eucharist. For the word (When) does not always note the Immediation of
times, or things consequent, but fairly admits, that such, and such words
may be said; such, and such works may be done, in a competent distance.

Dub. Yea, but why did S. John, mention no such matter, nor the holy Third
Supper of the Lord, nor the Eucharist, nor name the Sacrament, of which
himself was partaker?

Resp. I answer, the other Three Evangelists had fully enough described that
Last Supper of the Lord for the Substantial parts of it: and S. John would not
actum agere, do that, which was done to his hand before; but wholly skipped it
over; describing that, which the rest of the Evangelists, and what S. Paul
omitted, namely, that heavenly discourse, which he uttered to his Disciples
alone in the upper chamber.

Ob. If any man say, It had been fit, that so great matters should have been
distinguished by a new Chapter.

Sol. I answer; O man, what art thou, who think thy fantastical wit, is
able to direct the wisdom of the eternal Spirit; I would not have thee
(...): Not to think of thy self more highly, than thou ought to think; but
to think soberly; or to be wise unto sobriety, Romans 12.3.

PAR. 2.
BEsides for ought that any man knows; the 31. verse of the 13. of S. John,
might be the beginning of a new Chapter, Long since.

For neither Evangelists, nor Apostles, divided their Writings by Chapters, and
Verses; nor did our Savior, nor any of his Apostles, in any of their citations
of points from the old Testament, punctually insist on Chapter, Verse, or fixed
number of the Psalms.

Indeed it is probable, that the Books of the old Testament were from the first
divided, and distinguished, as now they are, by their several names: as
Genesis, Exodus, and the like: and that they began and ended, as now they do.

Yet I want proof to say, They were at first so divided into Chapters and
Verses.

The Jews of old time, divided the Pentateuch, or the Law of Moses, or rather
the first five Books of Moses, into Fifty four Sections: you may better call
them Readings, or Lectures, if you please. Of these Lectures, some were
greater, or longer; others, shorter, and less. Heinsius mentions that among
the Hebrews, there was Major and Minor parascha; the greater and the lesser
distinction.

Another distinction is observed by skillful Hebritians, When the Section is
not so full and absolute, they phrase it a Parashah, or Distinction: and this
in the Hebrew is signified by the prefixing of three P. P. P. But when the
Reading is more complete, it is called or styled Seder, an Order: and it is
distinguished from the former, by the trebled letter of S. S. S. And they were
All read, once a year, in the Jewish Synagogues. Yet because there were but
Fifty two Sabbaths, and Fifty four Readings; twice in a year, they conjoined
two of the shortest Sections together: and so all were exactly and entirely
read over, within the compass of one year. The Fifty second Section is a very
short one; and so are diverse of the later Sections.

The First Lecture was usually read on the first Sabbath after their great
feast of Tabernacles; and they called it Bereshith: And it began from Genesis,
Chap. 1. Verse 1. and continued without interruption, to the end of the Eighth
Verse of the sixth Chapter of Genesis. The Second Lecture began at Genesis 6.9.
and ended Genesis 11. verse. 32. inclusive: and this they called Noah. The third
Reading began Genesis 12.1. Now the Lord said unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy
Country: and because they are the first words that ever God spoke to Abraham,
so far as is recorded, this third Lecture is called Lec Lera, or Go thou: And
this ended with the last word of Genesis 17.27. The fourth Parasha of the Law
began Genesis 18.1. called of the first word Vajera; that is, And the Lord
appeared: and ended Genesis 22. at the end of the 24. verse. The fifth Reading
of the Law began Genesis 23. and ended Genesis 25. at the 18. verse
inclusively. The sixth Lecture began Genesis 25.19. and ended Genesis 28. at the
last words of the 9. verse. The seventh at Genesis 28.10. and had its period
Genesis 32. at the end of the 2. verse. The eight at Genesie 32.3. ending
Genesis 36. with the 43. verse. The ninth Lecture began with Genesis 37.1.
closing with Genesis 40. at the last verse. The tenth began Genesis 41.1. and
ended Genesis 44.17. The eleventh Section began Genesis 44.18. and ended
Genesis 47.27. The 12. has but one S. to distinguish it: when some others have
three S.S.S. This Lecture some have thought to have been read, and joined with
the precedent Lecture: and so make but 53 Lectures in the Law. Others invent
other mysteries; This 12 Reading begins Genesis 47.28. ending with the end
of Genesis. The 13. Paragraph began Exodus 1.1. and ended Exodus 6. with the
second verse. The 14. began Exodus 6.3. ending Exodus 9. at the 35. or last
verse. The 15. Section of the Law began Exodus 10.1. and was accomplished
Exodus 13. at the end of the 16. verse. The 16. Lecture began Exodus 13.17.
running out Exodus 17.16. The 17. Section began Exodus 18.1. breaking out with
Exodus 20. ultimo. The 18. began Exodus 21.1. and expireth Exodus 24. at the
end of the 18. verse. The 19. Lecture began Exodus 25.1. expiring Exodus 27.
with the last word of the 19. verse. The 20. Section began Exodus 27.20. ending
Exodus 30.11. The 21. Reading was initiated Exodus 30.12. ceasing Exodus 34.35.
The 22. partida, or division, began Exodus 35.1. ending Exodus 38.20. The 23.
Lecture began Exodus 38.21. ending with the end of Exodus. The 24. Lecture
began eviticus 1.1. and ended Leviticus 6. with the 8. verse. The 25. Reading
began Leviticus 6.9. ended Leviticus 8. with the last verse. The 26. began
Leviticus 9.1. ending Leviticus 11. with the last words of that Chapter. The
17. began Leviticus 12.1. ends Leviticus 13. at the last words of that
Chapter. The 28. began Leviticus 14.1. ending Leviticus 15. at the end of the
Chapter. The 29. Lecture began Leviticus 16.1. ends Leviticus 18. with the
Chapter. The 30. Lecture began Leviticus 19.1. ending Leviticus 20. with the
last verse. The 31. Lecture began Leviticus 21.1. and continued three whole
Chapters; ending Leviticus 24. in the last verse. The 32. Section began
Leviticus 25.1. ended Leviticus 26. with the second verse. The 33. Lecture
began Leviticus 26.3. and ended Leviticus 27. with the last verse. The 34.
Section began Numbers 1.1. ended Numbers 4.21. The 35 began Numbers 4.22. ended
Numbers 7. at the last verse. The 36. began Numbers 8.1. ending Numbers 12.
with the last verse. The 37. began Numbers 13.1. and ended Numbers 15. in the
last verse. The 38. began Numbers 16.1. ended Numbers 18. in the close of that
Chapter. The 39. began Numbers 19.1. ended Numbers 22. at the first verse. The
40. Lecture began, Numbers 22.2. ended Numbers 25. at the 10. verse. The 41.
Section began Numbers 25.11. ended Numbers 29. at the last verse. The 42. began
Numbers 30.1. ended Numbers 32. at the last verse. The 43. Section began
Numbers 33.1. ended Numbers 36. at the last verse. The 44. Section began
Deuteronomy 1.1. ended Deuteronomy 3.22. The 45. Lecture began Deuteronomy
3.23. ended Deuteronomy 7.11. The 46. Lecture began Deuteronomy 7.12. ended
Deuteronomy 11.25. The 47. Section began Deuteronomy 11.26. ended Deuteronomy
16.17. The 48. Lecture began Deuteronomy 16.18. ended Deuteronomy 21.9. The 49.
Reading began Deuteronomy 21.10. ended Deuteronomy 25. at the last verse. The
50. Lecture began Deuteronomy 26.1. ended Deuteronomy 29.9. The 51. Lecture
began Deuteronomy 29.10. ended Deuteronomy 30. with the last verse. The 52.
Lecture began Deuteronomy 31.1. ended Deuterenomy 31. with the last verse. The
53. Section of the Law began Deuteronomy 32.1. ended Deuteronomy 32 with the
last verse. The 54 and last Section of the Law began Deuteronomy 33.1. ended
with the last words of Deuteronomy.
This is transcribed from the Jewish Doctors, and Englished by Aynsworth: and
it is observable.

I might proceed to other their Readings, out of the six Books of the Psalms,
as the Jews divided them, though the holy Spirit by S. Peter calls it in the
singular number, The Book of the Psalms, Acts 1 20. having reference to the
first composure, and united body of them.

And out of the Prophets, they had another distinct Reading, Acts 13.15. After
the reading of the Law and the Prophets, Acts 13.27. The Rulers knew not
Christ, nor yet the voices of the Prophets, which are read every Sabbath day.
And yet by reason of one Spirits dictate, and one unity and uniformity of them
all in one truth of doctrine, the holy Ghost says, Acts 3.18. God showed by
the Mouth of All his Prophets, that Christ should suffer.

But now (says Cornelius Cornelii a Lapide on that place) they are accustomed
to sing that part, which they call Haprathah, Propheticam Missionem, the
prophetical Sending; because that being ended, the people are sent home. See
Elias Levita, in his Thisbi.

The Jews deliver traditionally that every of the Lectures of the Law, or
Pentateuch consisted of one hundred thirty six verses. And when Antiochus had
rent the Books of the Law in pieces, which they found, and (to make sure work
as he imagined) burnt them also with fire: (and this, the instruments of
Antiochus did monthly: 1 Macchab. 1.56, and 58. verses:) To supply this, the
Jews (says Lapide) took as many verses agreeing in sense with the former, out
of the Prophets, and so read them united in the room of the other; and we may
not think any one verse has perished, much less, so great variety. The Jews
say confidently, that the Lord God more regards, and respects every
syllable, and letter of the Law, than he does the Stars of Heaven.

PAR. 3.
THese their Deuteroseis or Traditions, I will not strictly, and rigidly
examine, though the number of verses in several Lectures differ. Only I will
observe these things, in, or from their former good courses.

First, against the malevolent, maledicent, recalcitrating, ignorant Puritans,
who reprove our Church for mangling, and cutting in pieces the Word of God:
because we read in our Service one piece of one Chapter and another piece of
another; and so patch up a Lesson, as they term it.

I answer, In many of these Lectures of the Law, Gods chosen people did do so,
as appears in their very first Lecture, which ended at Genesis 6 8. and their
second Lecture began not at a new whole Chapter, but at Genesis 6.9. verse. And
the like is in diverse other Readings, as by the divisions plainly appears.
Therefore if our Church (led by such a President, and by that, which is to be
preferred before any humane president, Wel-grounded Reasons) does sometimes
begin toward the middle of one chapter, and end toward the middle of another
chapter, it is not to be disallowed. We aremore to be guided by matter, than
by Numbers. And if any new matter of moment do occur, (as often it does)
about the midst of a chapter, this new notable emergent point (wheresoever
arising) may well begin a Lesson appropriat for that time, and occasion: as the
Sunshine always appears most welcome from what part of Heaven soever it
breaks from under a cloud.

Secondly, as I hold it most certain, that the names of the Books Divine, were
called even from their very beginnings, as now they are, Genesis Exodus, and
the like: So I have not seen it proved, that at the first the books were
divided by Chapters; or the Chapters by Verses. Sure I am, wheresoever the holy
Spirit of God, in the New Testament points at, or cites any passage from the
Old Testament; though the Prophet be named, or the Law (that is, one Book of
the Pentaeteuch) be mentioned: or the Book of Psalms be particularly
expressed: yet never in any one of all these places, is the chapter, much less
the verse specialized. Neither was there any need in those days. For the Jews
got by heart, as we say, all the Old Testament: and upon the least intimation,
or inckling of any matter, they as readily could recite it, as many of us can
the Lords Prayer, or the Ten Commandments.

PAR. 4.
THirdly, whereas diverse people of our Western parts have horribly Judaized
of late, and have run on madly, in the bypath of Trask, though it be
generally both known, and confessed, that the Jews shall be converted to us,
and not we Christians to the Jews: Yet I would advise them, and all other
English Christians whatsoever, to beware of these horrid abuses following.

It is, alas it is, too common a fault for Women to hold their children out to
defile the Churchyards; more usual, and common for men to bepisse the corners
of our Churches, and make them their voyding vessels, whilst some wash the
filth down into their parents mouths buried nigh that place.

More especially and as a wicked wonder, let me with grief, and indignation of
heart ^ecount, that, whereas the City of Exeter is, by its natural situation,
one of the sweetest Cities of England: and by the ill use of many, one of the
nastiest, and noysommest Cities of the Land: whilst not only their by-lanes,
but the High-faire street yields many offensive both sights, and savours, to
the eyes, and noses of the Passers by: whilst the polluted corners of the
^athedrall are almost dyed by their urine into another color: whilst the
Churchyard has been the draught unto many: and the very C^oysters the
receptacles of their ordures. Sacrilegi in Sacrario faciunt oletum. I write no
more than what I have seen; and God thou know, I know there, in that kind,
worse than what I have now written, which for my love to that City, I do
forbear.

For, in truth, it is an honorable City, and the Corporation a choice
Fraternity of worthy good wealthy men. Yet let me take leave humbly to
advertise them, that their holy Predecessors went not to Heaven by opposing
that ancient well-founded Cathedral; but by Reverencing of It, and of their
Canonical Clergy, the guides of their souls, and their Ghostly Fathers. Let
them know, the Stones ought to be privileged from such filth. The Churchyard
is a consecrated piece of ground. The ground is holy. Hic locus hie sacer est;
hic nulli mingere fas est. The Churchyard is a sacred place;
Who pisseth There, is void of grace.
Extramejite, was said of old; Make water further off, and out of this place.

Of all the Heathen, I never read but of Nero only, who in anger bepissed
Venus, whom principally before he seemed to affect. Other Heathen were
exceeding devout in their kind. For it was usual among them, not only to
worship the Gods, to whom the Temples were dedicated, but they did adore the
very Temples themselves. Valerius Maximus 6.6. instanceth in one adoring Julius
Caesar: Tuas aras, tuaque sanctissima Templa veneratus oro. I humbly beseech
your most excellent Majesty by your Altars and by your most sacred Temples,
which I have always worshipped. And Josephus lib. 13. speaks of such, who did
(...) The Temple and the Sacrifice. Minutius Foelix in Octavio shows the
Pagan Caecilius his opinion, that Antiquity Ceremoniis atque Fanis sanctitatem
tribuere solebat; accounted their Ceremonies and Temples Holy. And Apuleius
Apologia 1. says of one averse from Heathen Religion, si Fanum aliquod
praetereat, nofas habet adorandi gratia manum labris admovere. If he passed by
chance by any Temple of the Idols, he would not so much as kiss his hand,
least he should be accounted as one of the profane Idolaters. Vespasians
forbidding the Temples to be defiled with urine of people, I pass by; because
he did so for gain. And when Titus his Son, the Mirror of the World, disliked
it, the Emperor his Father brought him the silver and gold, the revenew of that
stinking commodity, and asked him, if that did smell ill?

Too many, alas, too many of that City, daily defile that glorious Fabric:
and let fly against it, as if they were sons to the Edomites, who said of
Jerusalem, or Temple, or City, or both; Down with it, down with it even to the
ground. I have seen the gutters reeke with their urine; whilst the generality
of the offenders makes the sin more passable, or esteemed as no sin, and no man
seeks for remedy.

So that I may very well take up the complaint of Minutius Foelix in Octavio.
Ipsa errantium turba mutua sibipatrocinia praestat; and defensio communis
erroris est furentium multitudo. The very troop, and numbers of erroneous
people, affords mutual patrociny of one toward another: and the defense or
excuse of the common fury or madness is, the multitude of mad men.

And now judge me, and punish me, O Lord my God, if I write these things in
spleen to that civil Corporation, or to any of them: or if only the Zeal of
thine house has not at diverse such ill sights and smells troubled my spirit;
and enforced me now to write in hope of amendment.

Never did our most holy Savior show his just anger more in deeds than when
Matthew. 21.12. He went into the Temple, and cast out all them, that sold and
bought in the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the
seats of them that sold doves, and esteemed it (for the abuse) A Den of
thieves, verse 13. and would not suffer that any man should carry any vessel
through the Temple; Marck 11.16. Though most, if not all these things, were
intended for the service of the Temple, and for the supply of the sacrifices,
oblations, and gifts, by a ready and present exchange; Yet Christ made a
scourge of small cords, and drove them all out of the Temple; and Sheep and
Oxen, and powered out the Changers money, ando verthrew the tables: and said to
the sellers of doves, Take these things hence; make not my Fathers house an
house of merchandise, John 2.15. etc. And it may be thought if Christ had found
one defiling the Temple, as our Cathedral has been defiled, he would have
struck him dead with thunder, and lightning.

Wherefore I humbly desire all, both of the Clergy and Laity, to prevent that
odious, rammish, and stinking custom, and now to Iudaise in This point, and
to follow Gods own Precept, when he gave this Law to the Jews, Deuteronomy,
23.12. Thou shall have a place also without the Camp, whither thou shall go
forth abroad. And verse. 13. Thou shall have a paddle upon thy weapon, (or a
spitstaffe, as is usually called with us) and it shall be, when thou shall ease
thy self abroad, that thou shall dig therewith, and shall turn back, and
cover that which comes from thee. Observe; The easing of their bodies was not
to be done, no not in the Camp: much less near the Sanctuary: least of all
In it, or About it. Yet have the enemies to our Church, emptied and eased their
bodies of filth, and filled their souls with sin, by defiling that fair
Cathedral, even to the great scandal of the passers-by. Again, even without
the Camp, they must not leave their Ordure Above ground (as they do in too
many places both of the Close, and City, and in other Towns and Villages, but
especially the greatest Cities) but first with their paddle-staffe they dug
a place, or an hole so big, that they might bury their filth therein. Thou
shall turn back; Though it be noisome, and though thou would fly from the
uggly sight; yet to prevent a greater harm, thou shall look on thine own
corruption, and shall cover that which comes from thee, least it be noisome
to others, when thou art gone.

The earth is best manured when such filth is covered; the lying of it open may
engender infection. Go to the Cat, ye filthy Ones, and behold her ways: she
seeks a secret place to unloade her self: and when she has done, hides,
and covers her natural uncleanness; as ashamed of that which our beastly
Stinckards lay open to infect the air.

Examine the Birds of the air, and they will tell thee; They defile not their
nests, nor let their excrements lie to be offensive. Will thou, who desire to
be like Angels in obedience, saying daily, Thy will be done in earth, as it is
in heaven; be worse than Birds or Beasts in civility, and cleanliness?

Lastly, consider the reasons annexed, and they are of great consequence. For
the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy camp: to deliver thee, and to
give up thine enemies before thee: Therefore shall thy camp be Holy, that he
see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee. Deuteronomy, 23.14.
Did God walk in the midst of their Camp? and walks he not in the midst of
our Temples? Are not with us Angeliorationis astantes, Angels that are present,
and hear our prayers? that I may speak in Tertullians phrase: In regard of
which divine presences, we are bound in conscience, when we go to Church, to
prepare our selves, as if we were climbing into heaven, to converse with God,
and his holy Angels: God is there to deliver us from Sin, Satan, and the
World, worse enemies by far than the Israelites had any. There God walks,
not only to give up our enemies before us, but to tread down Satan under our
feet, or bruise him, Romans 16.20.

Psalm. 91.13. Thou shall tread on the Lion, and Adder, or aspe: the young
Lion, and the Dragon shall thou trample under feet. All this cannot choose but
have a spiritual reference to the Triumph of a Christian over Satan.

Neither let any man say. This was a Judicial or Ceremonial Law. The annexed
reason of equity, and avoiding of inconvenience, may plead for the continuance.
But it was ordained only in their journyings. I answer; Had God more care of
their handsomnesse, and cleanliness in their encampings, where they rested one
night, and departed in the morning, than he had of their cleanly behavior in
their Cities, and settled habitations? It is not denied, but after they were
fixed in Villages, Towns, and Cities, yet when their Armies were in which they
might most conveniently observe, and perform in their back-sides, gardens,
hortyards, and other by-places? Josephus de Bello Iudaico, 2.7. relates, of
that most strict, and religious Order of their Esseni, that they, even in
Iudaea, were diligent observers of the Law in this point.

Therefore shall thy Camp be Holy: And in these words, Cleanness is held to
be a kind of Holiness; as the near good housewife holds cleanliness to be a
virtue. That God may see no unclean thing in Thee; no faedity, no uncheannesse
in Thee. The uncleanness within the Camp, is an uncleanness within them. The
Sunbeams are not defiled with looking on such filth: much less is the most
pure eye of the Lord offended at it, in regard of himself: but God respecting
the health of man, exacteth cleanliness, and sweetness from him, as
preservatives thereof, and inhibiteth stinking nastinesse, as the ingenderer
of sickness, and poison of the good spirits.

Further, the sight of any one unclean thing, may make the Lord turn away
from thee. The resultance is enforced much more from us, by how much our
Temples are more holy, and God appears a more saving way amongst us, than
among them. Nitoris tam Interni, quam Externi, amator est dous; qui est fons
omnis puritatis, spiritusque purissimus, (says Lapide) God is a lover of all
Inward and Outward neatness, comeliness, and trim handsomnesse; he is the
fountain of all cleanness, and purity: and is a most undefiled pure Spirit.

Oh heaken unto this all ye who have forgot God: and have discovered your
nakedness, and d^filed the holy Temple, and daily pollute the oursides of it:
which God abhors.

Sepulchers, many Sepulchers, and choice of them, were among the Heathen of
old, Genesis 23.6. But in the first Churchyard, that ever is recorded, to have
been in the world, for so is the Abrahemium, or burial place, which Abraham
bought of Ephron called; how careful is the Scripture to preserve even the
utmost bounds thereof from profane uses? The field, and the cave which was
therein, (above-ground, and underground) and all the trees, which were in the
field, that were in all the borders round about, were made sure unto Abraham
for a possession. Genesis 23.17. Not a Tree throughout all the borders, but was
consecrated from profane intrusion. More nearely to the purpose, Genesis 28.11.
etc. Jacob came to the City Luz: and in some by-place thereof, lay down to
sleep: and because God appeared to him in a dream, and spoke to him, Jacob
said, Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not. And he was afraid,
and said; How dreadful is this place? This is none other but the house of God;
and This is the gate of heaven. Where God gave Jacob some comfortable promises,
even There how full of reverence, modesty, fear, and awful regard is he? But
in these our Churches, and Cathedralls, unto which you come, and where you have
the presence of God, and his holy Angels, and all the promises of this life,
and the life to come; Some of you show all immodesty, and incivility. Jacob did
not piss against the stones in That place, nor empty his excrements in That
sacred Churchyard (for it was no other at that time.) It was not the actual
house of God Then: But this stone which I have set for a pillar, shall be Gods
house (says Jacob, Genesis, 28.22.) And in the mean while, he powered not
urine, or seige at the bottom of it, as some of you do, but he powered oil
upon the top of the pillar, verse. 18. and so with humble devotion did anoint,
and so consecrate it.

The Chaldee thus, Non est locus communis, sed locus in quo beneplacitum est
coram deo: This is no common place, but a place wherein God is well pleased.
Let those suffer according to their deservings, who pollute the places
consecrated to God.

That there is a great difference between several grounds, some more holy
than others, is apparent: Exodus 3.5. Where God said to Moses, Draw not nigh
hither: put off thy shoes from thy feet: for the place whereon thou stand,
is holy ground. No not Moses himself, though a very holy man: No not Joshuah
his successor, whom the Captain of the Lords Host commanded, Josh. 5.15. Loose
thy shoes from off thy feet: for the place whereon thou stand, is holy: and
Ioshuah did so. Might not such holy and heavenly men wear so much as their
shoes, because the ground was sacred: And shall profane wretches squeeze out
their filth in places Consecrated? Moses and Ioshuah knew not at first that the
ground was Holy: but the beastly ones with us do know that the Churchyard has
been separated and singled from profane abuse. The more is their sin.

This fault is somewhat mended by the preaching of the Lord Bishop of that
Diocese since I wrote this.
And you Reverend and right Worshipful Magistrates, neglect no longer to
sharpen your censures, and powers, to punish the rebellious-sordid slovens,
these workers of iniquity, which stink in the sight of God, and of all good
people. Cause to be provided public draught-houses, jakes, privies, vaults,
voyders, or voydances. The charge is small; the remedy easy: The delight will
be great, commendable, and a removal, or preventer of evils, perhaps of
plagues and pestilences. Let not the spirit of Uncleanness be in the midst of
you, but rather the God of Holiness, who can abide no unclean thing. Let all
be covered; Let nothing be left open. Follow the godly Jews: follow Gods
precept. Be ye cleanly I thus conclude this digression.

PAR. 5.
THomas Campanella, De sensu rerum, and Magia 4.2. thus. The time is nigh, as
by the dispositions of heaven and earth I gather, or consider, in which the
whole World shall return to the worship of the true God, and be the child of
Abraham: not a bastard, as Macon was. (But who (say I) ever read of Macon his
being the base child of Abraham?) Not the carnal child of Abraham, as the
Hebrews. (Here-against say I, Is not a Base child, a carnal child? And the
Jews not so properly called Hebrews from Abraham, as from Heber, who lived
long before Abraham? Genes. 11.16. And they are termed Jews from Judah
Abraham's great Grandchild:) but the world shall be the Spiritual Son of
Abraham, because God promised Abraham, that he should be heir of the world. So
far Campanella. Indeed, the promise is Romans 4.13. That Abraham should be the
heir of the world. Do those words evince that, The world shall be the
Spiritual Son of Abraham? Have they no reference to Christ, who is a greater
heir, Psalm. 2.8. and 72.8. and Heb. 1.2. God has aptointed Christ Heir of
All things. And if ye be Ch^st's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and Heirs
according to the promise, Galat. 3.29. Again, what dispositions of Heaven, and
especially of the Earth, could he consider as prognosticall, that shortly the
whole world shall turn to the worship of the True God?

Perhaps the Friar Campanella believed, That the world would be shortly at an
end; and that God is able to graffe not only the Jews in again into the good
Olive tree. Romans 11.23, 24. but that All Israel shall be saved, verse. 26. Nor
will we deny this: but only find fault with him for avouching he read so much
in the book of the Creatures, and found Heaven and Earth so disposed. And if
the Earth had sense as he fancieth: yet it has not REason: and if it had
Reason, it had no Religious Disposition. Neither can he find any prophetical
disposition in Heaven to that end. He would seem to be expert in the divine
Magic, as he calls it, lib. 4. cap. 2. page 269. and cap. 3. page 276. I
know (says he) by experience, that the devils do feign, That God is subject
to Fate; that when they cannot answer satisfactorily to the questions
propounded to them, they do from thence snatch at an excuse. Which words, and
the like of his, have given occasion to the report that Campanella was taught
by the devil. I am sure himself confesses, lib. 4. cap. 1. from Porphyry,
and Plotine, that good and evil Angels are found, as daily experience
teaches: Et Ego quoque manifesto experientiam cognovi, non quando
investigatione avida id tentavi, sed quando aliud intendebam. And I also (says
he) have manifestly known the Experience: not when I greedily, and curiously
searched after it; but when I thought of other matters. Belike then he did
sometimes try by an earnest investigation to find good and evil Angels; and
when he looked not for them, found them: and as it sh^^ld seem, was conversant
with them; as Hierom Cardan reports that his Father had (...), A Devil
assisting him.

Idem, Libro 1. cap. 6. page 20. he acknowledges Angelos custodes singularum
specierum, and nostrorum individuorum, the Angels to be Keepers of every
several species, and of every one of us in particular, as S Hieome teaches.
And I have found it by trial, which I never understood before. Perhaps he
means, that the Angels did teach him, and that he understood so much by the
Angels themselves. I am sure that Campanella de sensu rerum 1.8. in the
Appendix to that Chapter, says boldly. The soul of man, by the voice calls
unto it self even Devils and Angels.

That Devils have been at thy call O Campanella, I do believe. That ever the
good Angels were so familiar with thee, I will not believe. The Priest, or
rather the Be, which has a sting, had not thus stung Campanella, if he had
not compared Priests to Drones.

Campanella 4.18. confesses he was in his youth healed of the disease of the
spleen, the Moon being in the wane, by the words and prayers of a woman, and
that Andrew Zappavigna his Prior gave him License. It should seem the Prior
and the Friar trusted more in Charms, than in other remedies appointed of God
to that use. I am unwilling to instance, and to confute all his exorbitances;
but because he being a Friar, abuses the Priests, saying, lib. 2. cap. 23 page
139. That among the Bees the Priests are the Drones; let others of his faction
know, that the name of a Friar has been more scandalous than the name of a
Priest.

The Diverbia and taunts were too bitter to be said of All, and Every of them.
A Monk is a carcass come forth from the grave, wearing his Grave-clothes,
hurried up and down amongst mankind by the Devil. When a Friar is shaven, the
Devil enters into him: and Friars wear crosses on their breasts, because
they have none in their hearts, as the people use to say.

The common Proverb is known; He is a Friar, therefore a Liar. Ancients have
writ purposely against Friars. Of late one Watson has laid an indelible
Character of wickedness upon them. And, as it were but yesterday, Paul Harris
complained to the Pope against them, and their incroaching usurpations, whilst
an indifferent reader may most plainly see, That the strife between the
Priests and Jesuits is not so much to save souls, as to be in chiefest
authority, as to milk and stroke the poor people, and as to pick their
purses by a religious Legerdemaine. To these ends do the Friars claw the Pope,
and almost deifie him. Ex Papae Majestate Dei Majestatem intuemur, faith Friar
Tom Little-bell. (For Campanella may pass for a little bell, as well almost as
Campanula, de sensu rerum lib. 2. c. 21. page 129) When we see the Majesty of
the Pope, we behold Gods Majesty: And yet Pope Pius the Second had desperately
lashed them, when he said, A vagabond Monk was a slave to the Devil. And yet
all this could not keep that active wit from the prison, or deliver him when he
was in Jayle. For twenty whole years together he was a prisoner, and often in
exquisite torture, or torments, as it is in the Epistle Dedicatory. And
himself says, lib. 4. cap. 16. page 328. Vitam in vinculis perpetuis
miserrime ago: I live most miserably in perpetual prison. Which sore
punishment (say I) without some precedent great enormous sins would never have
been inflicted, if justice was observed there, if the Clergy men had been in
any regard. The College of Sorbon has often nipped them, the Jesuits. Venice
has excluded them out of their Territories. Peter de la Martiliere scowred
them in the great Parliament of France about twenty six years since. The
Pyramid raised to disgrace them, will never be forgotten, though it be
demolished.

PAR. 6.
ANother error of these times is this: (I wish it were not (in some people)
more than an error) that after Sermons ended, the giddy people flock together,
and under the specious title of Repetition (forsooth) they repeat only their
vanity. They do indeed keep Conventicles contrary to the Law; stow themselves
in the house of one of the most furious Zelotes, make long prayers, filled up
with their professed Repetitions; censure, rail, mis-expound Scriptures,
propound foolish and curious questions, and receive back ridiculous answers;
gather up sums of money to uphold faction, and to animate the obstinate Ones;
breed up youth to boldness, fierceness, selfe-conceipt; and to swallow down
a presumption of their own salvation. Then they proceed to declare Who shall
be saved, Who shall be damned (which is more than Men or Angels, good or bad
do know till toward death.) What scandalls have been offered, what sins,
under that Cloak, committed, every great Town knows; and every Christian
heart lamenteth that knows this.

But I would fain learn of these false Breehren, or their false guides, Where
ever, since the beginning of the world, or by Whom Such Conventicles were
practiced, by any of Gods people, unless it were in the days of persecution,
or where the Churches were shut up from the true service of God. When Satan was
let loose, when the raging sword was drunk with blood, we read Heb. 11.37. etc.
They wandered about in sheepskins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented: Of whom the world was not worthy; They wandered in deserts, and in
mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth. This did they do also after
S. Paul's death, during the Ten great Persecutions. But never was there heard of
one Conventicle of Orthodox Christians, when religious Princes favored the
Church (as Gods holy Name be blessed they do, and long time may they prosper)
and whilst the Gospel flourished (as these thousand years it never prospered
more.) And will our people be wiser than all that ever went before them? or
dare their profane mouths accuse our most sacred and holy King, as an enemy to
the true Professors, and doctrine of Christ? than whom (God be blessed) we
never had a more religious, favorable, gracious, temperate, chaste, and
sanctified Prince, since England embraced Christianity.

Rather than they should mis-spend their time in their own will worship, edify
unto evil, give scandalls to the Church, call themselves weak brethren, whilst
they think themselves the most learned Doctors, and devoutest part of Gods
militant Church: I could wish them each in their private houses (if our Liturgy
and Church Service be not savory enough, that is, not long enough for them) to
do as the Jews did. As they on their Sabbaths had a long Lecture, or Lectures
every Sabbath day, one of which you may see before: so let these on the Lords
day, or each day of the Lord, when our Church Service is ended, read the same
Lecture, or Lectures, and another (if they please) out of the New Testament.
Let them read, with hearty precedent prays unto God for a blessing; Read,
not to prate, and to dispute, but to practice holy duties: Let them remember
Psalm 25.9. The meek will God guide in judgment: to the meek will he teach his
way. Let them be assured, Saving knowledge goes up and down our streets, and
there is none of years of discretion but knows enough to be saved, even
Jesus Christ, and him crucified. There remains nothing but that each man
labor to be Christiformis, and, as far as our weakness will permit, to
imitate Christ in holiness of life, and to be conformable to him here, in
lowliness of mind, that he may perfect us hereafter.

Oh, but the people judge, and say, It stands with Reason to serve God more
than the Magistrate appoints; and whatsoever is reasonable, may pass for a
Law. For Tertul, de corona militis cap. 3. says, if the Law consist of reason,
then every thing, by whomsoever brought forth, which partaketh of reason, shall
be a Law. But say I, Tertullian here fell short of the truth. For the cause why
Laws are in force, is, not only because they accord with Reason (though no Law
ought to be unreasonable) but because the Laws are made by such as have
authority to make Laws; and it opens too great a window unto
licentiousness, that every thing shall be held a Law, which every one thinks
is consonant to Reason. Rather observe this distinction. If any man, whosoever,
finds any Rule, running along with Reason and Religion, if it be not crossed
by his superiors, let that be, if he will, a Law to him; let him be guided by
it, till he find a better Rule, or be taught otherwise by Authority. But a
General Rule it must not be, till he who has a Law-making power, do stamp it
with the approbation of public authority. Order commands a subjection of
the Inferior to the Superior. Order is relucentia sapientiae, a bright shining
ray of wisdom; and participateth of the light of wisdom (says Cusanus de
venatione sapieutiae cap. 31.) Let Gods people beware of will worship, though
gilded with religious pretenses. Let them remember what Calvin in his Epistles
says: When men desire to worship God as themselves please, whatsoever they
aver of their own, is a stinking profanation. And still (I say) Nesutor
ultra crepidam; A Cobbler must not go beyond his Last. The temptation of the
Serpent, ( Dit eritis, yet shall be as Gods) is to this day a temptation, which
Satan uses, and by it seduceth many thousands, who think they know Good and
Evil; and therefore will run on in their own bypathes, forsaking the Kings
highway, the good and dangerlesse Highway; and by their Singularity do
favor of arrogance, and pride. For it is agrecable to prudence, and humility,
ad Majorum and Peritiorum consilia recurrere, to trust to learned Counsel; as
may be gathered from Aquinas, 2 a, 2 ae, Quast. 49. Artic. 3. as it is
arrogance and pride, to trust too much to a man's own self, God gave guides
unto the Church, he left not every one to guide himself wholly. Whost faith
fellow ye, says the Apostle.

PAR. 7.
LAstly, as I said before (that I may return to my old matter:) Though the
heads of the Books might have been the same from their first being written, yet
the division by Chapters and by Verses is not so ancient. Elias Lovita in the
preface of his book called Massoreth Hammossoreth affirms with the Rabbis,
that the whole Law of old was but one Pasuk, or one sentence in one; all did
stick fast one to another, without any distinction of verses. And that four
hundred and six years after the final destruction of the City, they were
divided into Pesukim, that is Verses, and Sentences, a Judaeis Tiberitis, by
the Jews of Tiberias.

Here let me say somewhat concerning the New Testament, and its division by the
Ancients differing from what is now.

The learned Caesarius, brother to Saint Nazianzen, in his Questions says, we
have four Gospels, which consist of eleven hundred sixty two Chapters.

Euthymius on John, brings the sixty sift chapter of Matthew, which is now
but the six and twentieth with us.

The most learned Heinsius proceeds, Exercitationum Sacrarum cap. 13. p. 254.
etc. and by diverse evident proofs evinceth, that the more ancient division of
our Gospels by chapters and verses, much differs from ours. And that the
Syrian Translator yet differed from all, as dividing one chapter into sour
chapters; another, or the second chapter, into three chapters.

Nonnus observes not our chapters, much less verses. Suidas does otherwise
distinguish the chapters. Cyrill makes twelve books on Saint John, as if all
were concluded in twelve chapters. Who desires to see more, let him have
recourse to the cited place of that rare Scholar, and he shall find admirable
curiosities concerning chapters and verses of the New Testament, and he shall
not repent him of his labor. And let him consult with Sixtus Senonsis
Bibliothecae Sanctae, 3. page 157. etc.

Let me add somewhat more. The Arabic Translator is much different from all
others. Francis Junius in his preface before the Arabic translation of the
Acts, Arabs noster capita (nec sine judicio) aliter plane distinguit, atque in
libris nostris distincta sunt: and consimiliter versus alios dividit in nostris
confusos. Alios conjungit disparatos, and sua compositione, id quod fuerat
obscurius, tanquam adunatis stellis illuminant. Our Atabick Interpreter (says
Iun^us) distinguishes, not without cause, or reason, the chapters otherwise
than they are distinguished in our books. Likewise concerning the verses, he
divided some, which are confounded together in our books; and joyneth others
together, which were disparate, and sundred. And by this his Composition, that
which was more obscure, he ilustrateth and illuminateth as by a conjunction of
stars.

Heinsius in the forecited place concurreth with unius, that some others
divisions are better than those which we now have in use (in some things.) His
words are; Intelligimus eos nonnunquam melius, quae non haererent, divisisse:
where some chapters or verses had little dependence one upon another, they
sometimes better distinguished them than we do now I answer, if in some few of
their variations they come nearer to convenience than ours do (which I will
not wholly deny;) yet, if I have any judgment, they have strayed worse than
the Greek divisions have done in other places, whilst they strive to be
menders, that ought to be but Translators. Indeed, if Saint Mark had delivered
the Gospel to the Syrians (as themselves say he did;) and if their
distinguishments be now such as Saint Mark left them, it would make much for
their authority. Or if any of those Arabians Acts 2.11. who were at Jerusalem
at Pentecost, had in the days of the Apostles translated the Gospels, and kept
them since from alteration, we might ascribe much to it. But concerning the
Syriack translation; Non desunt etiam quaedam in ea editione quae viris doctis
and piis non admodum placent: There are somethings in that edition which holy
and learned men are not well pleased with, says Bellarmine.

And I cannot easily be brought to believe, that S. Mark delivered to the
Churches of Syria and Egypt, the Syriac edition of the New Testament; since
neither Clemens Alexandrinus, nor that living Library Origin (who labored more
about the Editions, than ever any other did.) Nor Eusebius, nor Athanasius, nor
Dydimus, nor Theophilus, nor Epiphanius, nor Hierom, nor Cyril, nor Theodoret,
nor other Fathers, who were Bishops or Priests in Syria, or Egypt, since none
of these Fathers, who lived there, mentioned any such Edition, or Translation,
it shall pass with me, as a work of later times.

The same Arabic translator makes fifty chapters of the Acts of the Apostles;
whereas we have only 28. chapters.

The first Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians in the Arabic has 21.
chapters, having only 16. chapters with us.

The second Epistle has only 12. chapters in the Arabic, and yet we have 13.
chapters in the Greek.

Ammonius divided every one of the four. Evangelists into many chapters: S.
Matthew into 355 chapters. S. Mark into 135 chapters. S. Luke into 344
chapters. S. John into 232 chapters. So Sixtus Senensis Bibliothecae sanctae,
lib. 3. page 160. relates.

If such difference be in chapters, which is the mainer division; there must
needs be more variant diversity in the verses; which are the subalternate
differences depending on the chapters. Much more might be said, but I have
wandered too long: and return to what I handled before; namely, That we have no
reason of necessity, to expect, that Christ's administering of his Third and Last
Supper should be distinguished by the beginning of a new chapter. For it is not
so in any other of the Three Evangelists.

Nor are the chapters, and verses of Divine institution, but servient to the
Churches ordination, varying according to the opinions of diverse ages, and in
the opinion of Junius and Heinsius may be better than now they are. And yet
there might be a new chapter in ancient times, when Judas went out; the old one
ending, John 13.30. at these words, And it was night. For presently thereupon,
in all likelihood, was the blessed Eucharist administered; and the Evangelist S.
John wholly omitted what the other Three Evangelists had so fully described:
And a new chapter might begin, John 13.31. Or if not, a new matter; namely, our
thrice blessed Savior his holy, heavenly, last Sermon (Sermo Domini in
coenaculo,) which the other Three Evangelists very briefly touched at: but S.
John declares at large, from John 13.31. to John 18.1. Four whole chapters,
and more, in a continued, and uninterrupted manifesto, or declaration.

PAR. 8.
LAstly, since it is apparent even to sense, and rectified reason, that Christ
mingled not his most sacred Third Supper and holy Eucharist with ordinary
meats; but took it by it self; as a distinct Sacrament of the New Testament,
and as a glorious testimony of the Law of Grace; there is no place, in my
opinion, so likely to establish our Saviors administration of it, as
immediately upon Judas his excommunication, and secession. And when the holy
administration was ended, to the joy of the Apostles, and to the glory of God;
Our divinest Savior brake forth into this Jubilee, and exultation of joy; Now
is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in him, viz. when his Flesh
and Blood were made a glorious Sacrament of the New Law; then Christ was
glorified and God in Christ. How was Christ, at that instant, glorified above
other times, if not by Judas his departure, and Christ giving the holy
Eucharist to his holy Apostles? Or where could it be given more commodiously?

As for the words, Edentibus ipsis, I have heretofore cleared them by good
authority, that they are not to be taken strictly, as if, whilst meat was in
their jaws, and whilst their mouths were full, and their teeth champing,
Christ gave them the Supper of the Lord; nor as if we were not to receive the
hallowed food, but as we are eating of some other things: nor, as if it were
essential to have a co-eating: No Christian heart can think so. For it were an
undervaluing of the Body and Blood of the Lord: and little, or no discerning of
the Lords Body from other common meats: yea, indeed an horrid mingle-mangle.
But the words are to be expounded at large. For Convivantibus ipsis, Before
they had ended their Feasting: Before that nightly Festivity was broken up:
Before they went out of the Coenaculum, that Supping room, Christ administered
the holy Eucharist.

Estius on 1 Corinthians. 11.20. says, they are not to be heard, who thought the
Corinthians did in the midst of their banqueting take the holy Communion. For
this were a confounding of things sacred with profane (says he;) And that is
altogether unrighteous (say I) I retort the same on Iacobus Salianus, the great
Annalist of the Old Testament, who in his last Tome page 454. conjoyneth in a
sort, the washing of the Apostles feet, and the Institution of the Eucharist:
after both which (says he) Secuta est Coenacommunis, Followed the Second
Supper. He forgot that after the pedi-lavium, or washing of the Apostles feet,
Christ sat down again: and gave Judas a Sop, which was in the Second Supper:
and discoursed, and marked out Judas for the Traitor: whereupon he departed:
and then Christ took, and gave the blessed Sacrament, and did not take another
Supper after it.

In the Eastern Churches there was a Traverse drawn between the people, who
were employed in praying, and hearing: and those Priests or Deacons, which were
preparing. And whilst they were preparing the bread and wine for consecration,
when all was in a readiness, they drew the veil, folded up the curtains: the
Priest did consecrate the heavenly Eucharist: did receive it himself: did give
it to the people: One cried Sursum corda; Lift up your hearts: And the sudden
rushing open of the Traverse, at the beginning of the sacred celebration, was
to strike Reverence into them.

(For -- Segnius irritant animum dimissa per Aures,
Quam quae sunt Oculis subjecta fidelibus. --
Things by the ears, do less the soul affect,
Than by the eyes, what on it does reflect.
Strange sights prepare the soul for Devotion. Sudden extraordinary sights do
pierce the soul to the quick.) And this was also to admonish them, that Then
Heaven was open, and the Angels descending, to be present at the holy mysteries
with all possible Veneration (that I may not say, co-adoration) of Christ. This
may be gathered from S. Chrysostom in his third ^omily upon the Epistle to the
Ephesians, and diverse other places of others. If the Church of Christ, in
succeeding ages did divide the holy things from the most holy, and gave most
reverence to the divine Eucharist; we cannot well say, that Christ did mingle
sacred things with profane (as Salanius fableth.) And, that Judas was admitted
to partake of those Heavenly mysteries, which the Christian Church would not
suffer profane persons so much as to behold them; but kept them hid within the
veil, till the Faithful were to participate of them, as the notorious wicked
ones were to be excluded.

PAR. 9.
When Judas was gone out, the Second Supper ended, and thanks given; And when
Christ went about to celebrate the blessed Sacrament of the New Law, what order
did he take? How began he? How proceeded he?

Here I had need to have especial care to lay a good foundation. Nam ex
principiis veris non possunt sequi falsa: cum ex veris; nil nisi verum
sequatur: (says Petrus Pomponatius de Incantationibus, page 318.) From True
principles flow no false conclusions: Truth produces Truth; therefore let us
determine certain things certainly: probable, probably.

I answer, we have no exact proofs, or demonstrations to insist upon. Sense,
Reason, and Probability, must be our best guides. What is most remote from all
Absurdity, is principally to be insisted upon. Petrus Pomponatius de
Incantationibus, cap. 10. page 131. Supponitur, quod in rebus difficilibus and
occultis, responsiones magis ab inconvenientibus remotae, ac magis Sensatis,
and Rationibus consonae, sunt magis recipiendae, quam oppositae rations.
Suppositio patet ex tertio Topicorum; Minus malum praeeligitur majorimalo; cum
quoquo modo minus malum, sit magis bonum. This is always to be supposed, That
in difficult and abstruse matters, those answers, which are most congruous,
most sensible, and most consonant to reason, are rather to be approved, than
allegations to the contrary. The supposition is plain in the 3. Book of
Aristotle's Topics, The lesser evil is to be chosen before the Greater evil:
since the lesser evil is by all means the greater good.

Again ibid. Averroes 2. de Coelo, says from Alexander; That Aristotle's
sayings are preferred before other Philosophers, because His are more remote
from contradiction.

Aristotle has a divine saying, de Coelo, secundo, cap. 12. textu. 60. (...):
Let us try to speak what seems best to us. He is rather held to be
venerable, than rash, who in thirst after Philosophy, can find but small
proofs sometimes in difficult matters. (...); It being a good thing, both to
seek further knowledge, and to embrace small hints, or degrees of knowledge,
that are comfortable to Reason, as Aristotle has it in the next Text. Oh how
divine Conclusions did some Heathen draw from that small knowledge, which they
had! Plato in his Book called Alcibiades Secundus: Or, de Voto; set forth by
Jodocus Badius Ascentius, with Marsilius Ficinus his Arguments before many
books, Folio 19. brings in Socrates teaching his Alcibiades (for indeed (
leanthes did commonly, and usually say, That Socrates only held Alcibiades by
the Ears, and that Alcibiades stood in awe of Socrates above all others, as
Plutarch has it in Alcibiade) How to pray; or rather, How not to pray vainly,
since folly was discernable in the prime prayers, and devotions of those times.
And thence Socrates collecteth, and concludes thus. It is necessary to wait,
or expect, till it may be learned, How we may behave our selves (as we ought)
both to God and Man. Alcibiades roundly replieth; When will that be, o
Socrates? and who is that Teacher, or Instructor? For I would most willingly
know, and acknowledge that Man, whosoever he shall be. Socrates most divinely
answers, (if his words be weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary) He is he,
who has a care of thee. And afterward; He wonderfully provideth for thee.
Whether Plato learned these truths of the Egyptian Priests, Or Jewish Doctors;
Or whether he had them inspired from God; Or whether from natural Reason he
collected, That good God would not leave his creatures in perpetual darkness,
but would send One to teach them, to guide them, to reform their ignorances,
and instruct them in their duties to God and Man: since He is He, who has a
care of us, and in a wonderful manner watches over us, for our Good; I say,
whence he had those beams of the divine light, is hard to determine. I am sure
the Scripture faith, Esaias 54.13. unto the Church of the Gentiles. All thy
Children shall be taught of the Lord. And Act. 3.22. A Prophet shall the Lord
your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto Moses; Him shall ye
hear in All things, whatsoever he shall say unto you: and verse. 26. God sent
Jesus to bless you, turning away every one of you from his iniquities. And in
Heathen phrase, Plato implies no less. For Homer said, that Minerva took
away a cloud from Diomedes his eyes, that he might discern God from Man. So
said Socrates to his Alcibiades, Darkness must be removed from your eyes,
which now blindfoldeth you: Then other things must be presented to you, by
which you may distinguish Good and Evil. For now you are unfit for such
matters; And says not the Scripture, that the Spirit of the Lord sent Christ
to preach Recovering of sight to the blind, Luke 4.18? And Christ is the true
Light, who lightneth every man that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9.
Alcibiades hoping to learn better things than he had before, humbly
professes: Let that great Teacher, Rabbi, or Instructor, remove from me,
either that cloud (if he will) either the Festucam in mine eye, or the Trabem
(if so he vouchsafe) or any other impediment (if he please.) For I am ready to
omit nothing, what he shall command, whosoever he shall be, so I may grow a
Better man. -- And we will offer our Crown, and all other decent things then,
when I shall know That day is come, and it will not be long ere it come by the
will of the Gods. So Alcibiades. Me thinks, I hear him speak like one of the
Magi in the East, and profess to do, what they did, Matthew. 2.11. Or like the
woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4.25. I know, That Messiah comes, who is called
Christ; when he is come, he will teach us All things. If Plato had not thought
of a Mediator God and Man; what needed that comparison from Homer, to
distinguish one from the other? If he had not known him to be God, Plato could
not have writ, He has a care of thee, and does wonderfully provide for thee;
and yet Shall come Hereafter, and must be Waited for. If he also had not
thought him to be a Man, (who was to come,) he would never have ascribed unto
him such offices, of a Teacher, a Reformer, an Inlightner. I think I shall not
err, if I say, Plato his thoughts accorded in substance with what Zacharias
said, Luke 1.74. etc. And what holy Simeon, Luke 2.32. and with what the
Prophets prophesied of Christ. And this Digression have I insisted upon, to
show, that Great doors hang on small Hinges: and from a Little crany of light,
momentuall matters may be found. That we are not to give over mining, though
the vein seem to be shrunk, and shut up; and that we cannot come to the
fullness of knowledge, but by degrees: and that a small degree must serve, and
content us, when we can attain to no more. That the Salt water of the Ocean
may be made fresh, and wholesome, and nourishing, is apparent by that excellent
liquor being in Oysters, at their first taking up: than which juice the art of
the Cook, or the Apothecary cannot make a compound of a more delicate taste
and relish, and more grateful, and acceptable to the stomach. Whether Art can
imitate Nature in this, or how far it may proceed, let others of less
employments search. This I will say; If a way were found to correct the Salt
water, to separate, and remove the brackishnesse from it, to reduce it to the
taste, and temper of fresh waters, it would be most useful, and profitable for
navigation, and abundance of people might live, and do well, which for want of
it do perish. Some of our men have found the way of distillation good, as
Purchase has it in his Pilgrims.

Secondly, If you object, The liquor of the Oyster to be salt: I reply, it is
rather saltish, seasonably brackish, to sharpen the stomach, every way
inoffensive. Again; What say you to this? That the best of waters which rise
on high hills and fountains, were once Salt waters; but by running thorough
the veins of the earth, become so sweet, so refreshing, so wholesome; And may
not the percolation by Art take its ground and example, from the power of
Nature, as it were strayning the Salt water in the earth, till it be purified,
sweet, and wholesome? Again; does not the Sun, and divine powers, exhale up
vapors, even out of the Salt Sea? Did not a little cloud out of the Sea like a
man's hand, become rain, a great rain, that the heaven was black with clouds,
and wind, 1 Kings 18.45? And will any man doubt, but these showers of Rain
waters which fell, were as sweet, fresh, and wholesome, as ours? Again, I have
heard that toward the bottom of the Sea, is fresh water; if the bed of the Sea
be very deep. And I have read of a River or two which keep their freshness,
though they flow or run into the maine Ocean a great way: the waters being
unmingled, and easily distinguishable by the freshet.

Moreover, Aristotle in his Problems, Section 23. Question 30. acknowledges
that the upper part of the Sea is more salt and more warm than the lower
parts. And it is so also in Pits, or Wells of water, whose thinner, lighter,
and sweeter parts are exhaled up, or alembecked by the air, and the Sun,
whereby both most saltness, yea, and heaviness it self, contrary to nature,
floateth in the uppermost superficies of the water. And in the next question he
takes as granted, that That part of the Sea, which is nearer the Land, is
sweeter than the more remote parts of it. Therefore, where Nature makes such a
diversity, and separation, and percolation; I doubt not, but Art may follow
her, and extract much good out of this disquisition. Some have said, that Clay
well tempered, is very effectual to addulce Salt waters. Yea, I have heard,
that our Seamen have searched, and found by a brazen, iron, or wooden vessel
(with a close and heavy cover, which will shut of it self, but open with a
vice, and descends naturally by its own weight) that it being let down
empty, about three or four fathoms into the Seawater, and then and there the
vessel being opened, according to Art, and filled, and shut again, and by
ropes drawn up, brings within it, and up with it, water useful, potable,
and healthy: though not so perfectly fresh as our Rivers, or Springs: but
somewhat resembling the taste of the liquor in the shell of the Oyster,
salso-dulce, and wholesome.

What has been invented, I know not certainly; but that Salt water may be made
sweet and wholesome, I doubt not. The means may be various to the same end.

Those vast Cakes of Ice, you may call them little mountains (if you please)
which are seen floating in the Northren frozen parts, toward the Spring, are
not above three or four fathom thick. No cold can congeale, or condensate
deeper: Nor did ever Ice in deep Rivers, or Seas, reach down, and touch the
earth: but other waters, some think, fresh waters did glide along between the
ice and the ground; both by reason of springs, whirlpooles, and other
ebullitions of waters, arising in the deeps from the veins of the earth at the
bottom of the Sea, or deep Rivers; and by reason of the inflowings of those
many natural Aquaeducts, which tumble from our mountains, our freshets,
fountains, and rivers, which do not presently lose their pleasing taste, and
sweet savor, but Arethusa-like retain it for a while.

Likewise, though we cannot deny, but the virtue of the Sun pierces sarre
deeper than four fathomes, even to the bottom of the mineralls, and mines,
and much below them, even perhaps to the center of the earth; yet his rarifying
power, by which he exhaleth up still the lighter and thinner water, and leaves
the heavier, and salter parts in the Sea, is contained within four fathoms
depth, from the upper superficies of the Sea, that is, the Sun has work
enough, to draw so much sweet water, as to make the Sea salt for four fathoms
deep.

There is an Island a little from Hispaniola (the Spaniards call it Arethusa)
which has a fountain in it coming by secret passages under both Earth and
Sea: and arises in that Island: For it brings with it the leafes of many
trees which grow in Hispaniola, and not in that Island. Oviedo mentions a
little Island called Navazza, half a league from which, are many rocks in the
Sea, five foot deep, covered with water: out of which issues, and shoots up
above the water of the Sea, a spout of fresh water, as great as a man's arm,
that it may be received sweet and good. This was seen by Stephano della Rocca,
a man of good credit. See Purchase his Pilgrim, 9.14. The fresh waters below
the deep Sea, may be a partiary cause, that all the fishes of the Sea be
fresh; none so much as saltish: For to those sweeter waters they can quickly
descend: though the salt water affords them more prey, and more desire to
multiply; and perhaps more desire to play therein. Thou-hast formed Leviathan
to play in the Sea, Psalm. 104.26. When fishes are dead, how little salt, in a
short time, salteth them, whom the whole Sea could not season, or reduce to a
relish of saltness whilst they lived.

New Inventions which are profitable, I admire: and the Inventors, I do adore.
Certainly, many things may be perfected, which yet we will not believe. Who
would have thought, that the River-water should be the chief ingredient to
make Gunpowder? The Turks have found it. Or, that Alum hills should distill a
liquor like unto oil, and sulphur, or brimstone, whereof the Spaniards make
excellent Gunpowder: as Purchase relates, page 16.6. Our brackish fountains;
our Bathes; our Brimstony springs, or rivelets, may perhaps do the like.

The Lake Mardotis, or Maraeotis, now called Buchira, (says Master George
Sandys in his Journey, Lib. 2. folio 112.) by the City of Alexandria, was by a
narrow cut, joined unto another Lake far less, and nearer the Sea; which at
this day too plentifully furnishes all Turkey with Saltpeter. (says Purchase
in his Pilgrims, part 2. chap. 8. parag. 1. fol. 900. from the said Master G.
Sandys, loc. cit. fol. 113. and 114.) Whereupon I could wish that the sons of
Art would make experiments in some of our Lakes, or Rivers, or Fountains,
which taste of brimstone, or are likely to yield such effects, though
messengers were sent both to taste of that Egyptian Lake, and to see their
manner of making Saltpeter there.

If there may not be more profit and benefit to mankind, if this Invention
were perfected, and in use, than by the wild discoveries of the Man in the
Moon; or the fancies of the Lord Verulam in the New Atlantis; or the Northren
Island all made of Loadstones, found only in the brains of Campanella De sensu
rerum, 1.8. (for the best Loadstones are in the East Indies, in China, and
Bengala, says our Doctor Gilbert de Magnete, 1.2, pagina 9. Who also is
confident, that the Loadstone does eat the filings of iron; and is nourished
with it; as he experimentally tried and saw:) then am I much deceived. Yet give
Campanella his due, lib. 4. cap. 19. from whom the Fabulous Man in the Moon
took the Art of Flying.

The Art of Flying seems possible to me (says Campanella.) The Dancers on
ropes seem to fly. If therefore a man use fit meats, and get the agility of
such as walk on ropes, and procure wings like to Cranes, and knows how well to
imitate them; if arms, thighs, and legs be fitted with wings, he may perhaps
fly. The Man in the Moon adds much to this Invention; yet is but a Fable.

But that two Ships of equal both burden and shape, one should be yare of
sailing, because he consents to such an end; and the other slow, and unfit
for sailing, because it is more against it, and unwilling to consent unto
sailing; I say, these are strange forms of expression used by Campanella, 3.
in fine. As for the makers of Clocks, complaining of the same point, I say, the
temper of mettalls is not so exact, but there may be some predominant purity in
some part rather than in other.

In darkness, a little hole affords light. The West Indies were found our,
per Minima indicia, by very small discoveries. One is the beginning of number.
The least weight is the beginning of weighing: and the least measure the
beginning of measuring, (says Cusanus.) A minimis maxima oriuntur. The
greatest things in the world, have but small beginnings.

A spark may kindle a fire. A little sprig may save a man, who is upon
drowning. Statesmen have found the greatest mischiefs that ever were intended
to subvert any State, by small beginnings, obscure words, and indifferent
actions. Yet from These have they sought and wrought out, more hidden evils;
Fear and Doubt sharpning suspicion: Suspicion animating them to a more in ward
Disquisition, either by that multiplex interrogatio, the evidencer of Truth in
Examinations; or by Torture, if occasion be.

Where evident Scripture fay leth, strong Presumption, or Tradition, or Reason
may carry it.

Tertullian de Corona Militis; Si Legem unsquam reperio, sequitur, ut Traditio
consuetudint morem hunc de dederit, habiturum quandoque, Apostoli authoritatem
ex interpretatione Rationis. If I find not a Command, or Law (that women
should be vayled) Tradition has made it a custom, which sometimes shall have
Apostolical Authority, because it stands with Reason. If we cannot have
infallible proofs, yet such proofs as shelter themselves Sub patrocinio
Rationis, under the protection of Reason, must not be rejected.

If we cannot find Verum, the Truth, (which Democritus said was hid deep, as
in a Well:) yet let us take hold of verisimile, of that which has some color
of Truth, and make much of It. I care not, if I be found fault withal, when I
determine things probable, probably. I press no man to believe points of
opinion, as points of Faith: nor do I go about to build Infallibility upon
the sands: nor labor I to make firm conclusions upon infirm and feeble
premises: or to collect certainties, from uncertainty: but let each Argument
rest upon his own proper place, and own center: Every tub on his own bottom.

If we cannot come to see his Sacred Majesty's own face: Let us reverence and
honor it, in his stamped Image. The tribure which Christ gave of but one piece
of silver, and that fetched out of the deep, suffised for that time.

Gregory Naziazen Oratione in Sanctum Baptisma, teaches, That the Church is
not bound to do diverse things, which Christ did. Particularly, not in the
circumstance of Time: and he taxes them, who deferred their Baptism, till the
thirtieth year, because Christ did so. Christ had many Reasons, which we know
not, moving him to do, as he did: which are no grounds for our proceedings.

Concerning the Deferring of his Baptism, He had these causes, which we have
not. He was circumcized on the eight day; we are not, and therefore we do well
to haste to Baptism. He was so free both from Original, and actual sin, that
he needed not at all to be Baptized. But to institute a Sacrament, and for our
good, he was content to be Baptized by his servant John: Thus it becomes us
to fulfill all righteousness (says Christ to John, Matthew. 3.15.) So
concerning the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist.

All men, of all sides, confess, that Christ never intended, that His
administration of the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist should be a pattern
for the circumstances thereof, but only for the substantial form of
consecration. He who will wholly conform himself to Christ's actions; yet,
shall fail in many things now ingood use. Christ, and his Apostlestook the
blessed Eucharist after other meats. S. Paul changes the order; and wills
the Corinthians to eat first at home. Christ took it with his, at Night. The
Primative Church guided by the Apostles, and they by the Spirit (says S.
Augustine ad Januarium) appointed it to be taken in the Morning; and that
Fasting. Christ received it in an upper Chamber: We in Churches. Christ did
celebrate it only on Thursday, and about seven of the clock in the Night; But
S. Paul consecrated it on the first day of the week, and about Midnight, Acts
20.7, etc. We on any Day, or Hour. Christ's Sermon in Coenaculo, was after the
Communion; Ours, before it. Christ had only Men in the company: we both Men and
Women. Christ communicated with Priests only: we with the Laity. Christ with
himself had only Twelve: we have Scores, and Hundreds. Christ on the
Fourteenth day of the First month: We may at all times. Christ administered it
not on an Altar. (For what should an Altar do in a private man's Guest chamber,
or Feasting room?) but on a Table. But the whole Church since the times of
persecution, used Altars, both names and things; and called those Altars,
Tables sometimes: as Malachy did the Jewish Altars before them, Malachy 1.7.
And sometimes they termed their Tables Altars. So, at our first Reformation in
Edward the sixth, his Injunction the third, it is called both the high Altar
before the Sacrament; and Injunction the 9. the blessed Sacrament of the Altar,
and Gods board; that we may learn not to set them so far at variance, as some
have done; that we may not seek for knots in bulrushes, or rixari de lana
caprina, pick quarrels for straws, or seek the Raising up of one, according to
our fancy, by the destruction of the other. He consecrated Unleavened bread;
which we are not absolutely bound to do. And whether he drank pure wine, or
water mingled with wine, he has left us free. If that our blessed Saviors
manner of consecration, for the minuter circumstances was to be our pattern
only, why did S. Paul set some things in order, contrary to Christ's manner of
receiving? and promised he would set other things in order, when he came, 1
Cor. 11.34. We sing a Psalm before the Communion: Christ and his Apostles did
sing an Hymn after it. Bishop Morton in his defense of the innocence of Three
Coremonies of the Church of England, page 246. thus; what the express form of
Christ's Gesture was, is left by the holy Evangelists in such an uncertainty,
that we may justly collect from thence, that Christ intended not to make his
Gestures to be an exact pattern of necessary imitation to be continued in his
Church.

THE PRAYER.
O Incomprehensible God and most heavenly Father, I a poor blind sinner
prostate my self before thee, confessing my manifold ignorances, wherewith I
am beset. Grant me therefore, Good Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake, that I may
avoid all singular presumption; that I may be as ready to be recalled, as I
have been to stray: that I may humbly give way to my Superiors; and may be
wise to Sobriety; and yet in the mean time, may modestly inquire into such
things as are necessary, and may be found. Amen. Amen.

CHAP. IIII. Wherein are contained the second, third, fourth and fifth
Sections, or Particulars of the fifth General.
1. The second Particular of the fifth General; Wherein is showed, That the
blessed Eucharist was instituted in the same room, wherein they are the
Paschall, and Common Supper. That room was a large upper Chamber, well
furnished, and prepared. In that room, the 120 Disciples Acts 1. were gathered
together.

2. The third Section or Particular of the fifth General, shows, That the
most holy Eucharist was not instituted whilst the Apostles were eating the
Second or Common Supper: but After that Supper. The Inadvertency of this Point
has bred many Errors. Aquinas his gross opinion disliked by Estius. Both the
Bread and the Wine were alike administered After Supper.

3. What Gesture, or Posture our Savior used at the Institution of the blessed
Eucharist, uncertain. Ludolphus twice taxed. Hugh Broughtons wild Irish
opinion touched at. More probable he did institute it on a Table, than on the
Pavement. 'Twas not the usual fashion in Christ's time for the Jews to eat
their meat on the Floor.

4. The fashions of diverse Nations in taking their Suppers, were diverse.

The fashions of the Turks, and Eastern parts of the World. Ancient Romans.
Their three sorts of Tables, Cylibantum. Cartibulum. Urnarium.
Jews. Who had also diverse kinds of Tables.
A Round Table. Aretius his story of King Herod; and of the precious Charger
which Christ used at his Supper. Sermo Domini in Coenaculo. A Table at the
consecrating of the blessed Eucharist not of absolute necessity. Most probable,
the Table, Christ used, was a square table. Beza taxed for expounding the word
(Table) metaphorically. Origin buried the Scriptures in Metaphors, and
Allusions. King David's Table, Psalm. 23.5. what it was. The Jews made much use
of Tables.

5. The Fourth Section, or Particular of the fifth General. Which shows, That
the blessed Eucharist was instituted on a Table. What manner of Table it was,
our blessed Savior instituted the blessed Eucharist on, is uncertain. The
Table of Shittim wood, Exodus 25.23. What allegorically it signified. The
Administering, and Receiving of the Eucharist called the Supper of the Lord.
Christ's Table in his Kingdom. The Jews Tables in Christ's time were not on the
Ground: but standing Tables. The use of Tables is to eat and drink on them. To
serve Tables, what it is. The most holy Eucharist in Ignatius his days was
celebrated on Tables. Christ given: For us, in the Sacrifice; Per modum
Victimae. To us, in the Sacrament; Per modum Epuli.
Banquets most commonly set on Tables. Altars are for Offerings, and Tables for
Eating. Christ the Altar, Offering, and Priest. Christ used a Table at the
first Consecration. The Christians in the Primitive Church in times of
Persecution used Tables, where ever they came. They made use of unconsecrated
Tables, Cups, and Vessels. The name and use of Altar vindicated. The Devil had
Tables erected to him by the Gentiles. God had Tables erected to him by the
Christians.

6. The fifth Section or Particular of the fifth General, wherein is showed,
That the holy Eucharist was administered by Christ on a distinct Table. Truth
commanded; not forbidden to be searched out. A sting at Campanella, who
ascribes sense to stocks and stones; and Reason to bruit Beasts. Of two
opinions, the most probable is to be preferred. Most probable, the Deifying
Sacrament was celebrated at a distinct Table. Proved by Arguments. 1. With
reference to the Parties Recipient. De maximis maxima cura est habenda.
Domitians folly.
Nothing equal to Christ's Body, and Blood. 2. Inregard of the party
Administrant. Christ rose up from the Paschall Table to wash the Apostles feet.
Probable, he did the like to wash their Souls. Christ's humility at his
Prayers. A Story of a devout Cardinal. Christ's holy Gesture when he blessed
any thing. At the first Institution of any great matter mor ereverence is used,
than afterward. Diver se instances to this purpose. All Christ's Actions, as
well as his person, pleased God.


PARAGRAPH I.
FIrst, therefore I resume that, which before I proved, and no man can justly
deny, that the upper Chamber wherein they are the Paschall, and the Common
Supper, was a well furnished Chamber. For it was a Guest-Chamber Mark 14.14.
which always uses to be best adorned. It was a large upper room; so large, (if
Dionysius Carthusianus opine not amiss) as that it received the 120 Disciples
mentioned Acts 1. verse. 15. vide Dionys. Carth. in Luc. 22. fol. 257. and Act.
1. fol. 76. Furnished, and prepared; not with meat, but with all other
necessary utensils. For the Apostles themselves were commanded, There to make
ready, verse. 15. and they did make ready the Passover, verse. 16.

Therefore the Table was not furnished with meat to their hands: but the room
with decent household stuff. It was (...): yet (...). It was not only Mensa
strata, a spread Table. The whole upper Chamber was Coenaculum grande stratum,
a large well accommoded room. And in it might well be lesser Tables, round
Tables, Livery Tables, Tables to be used, if need were, with their fair
furniture.

It had been a simple, poor room, if there had been nothing else, but only what
was for present use, or what is particularly specialized: were there no
chayres, no stools, no cushions, no water, no linen to be spread, or spread at
other boords.

PAR. 2.
Secondly, I hold it safest to say, Christ did not institute his most holy
Eucharist as they were eating other meats; nor mixed Sacred things with Civil.
For in the Law of Moses, he forbad such medleyes; Deuter. 22.9. Thou shall not
sow thy Vineyard with diverse seeds -- Lest the fruit of thy Vineyard be
defiled. Thou shall not plough with an Ox and an Ass together, verse. 10. Thou
shall not wear a garment of diverse sorts, as of woollen and linen together,
verse. 11. And can you think, that the most Holy of Holies, the immaculate Jesus
Christ would make a mingle-mangle of Sacred and Common meat, of Sacred and
Common wine, and whilst they were eating common food, did consecrate the
blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood?

Obje. Yea, but it is so, according to the letter; As the^ were eating.

Sol. If you will go strictly according to the letter, you must also say,
whilst meat was in their mouths, whilst they were chewing it with their teeth;
Before their mouths were empty, Christ gave them the Eucharist. Now, let any
Christian heart judge, whether it were not an indignity to the Sacrament, to
be at such time administered: whether the Letter be always strictly to be
insisted upon.

Repl. If yet again you urge the Letter.

Resp. I answer, that S. Luke and S. Paul say expressly, Christ gave the
Eucharist After Supper, Luke 22.20. Likewise, 1 Cor. 11.25. (...). Which may be
more largely interpreted, than thus, When He had Supped; as our last
translation has it: even thus; After they all had Supped. Therefore it was not
done in Supper time, or whilst they were eating. And upon comparison of those
four places, tell me now, which stands with most reason, That he gave the
blessed Eucharist, as they were chewing their meat; or that it was done after
Supper? especially, S. Paul writing last of them, and being taught of the Lord
Jesus himself, the manner how it was administered. I received of the Lord, 1
Cor. 11.23. Again did Christ say, Matthew. 9.16. No man puts a piece of new
cloth unto an old garment: neither do men put new wine into old bottles: -- but
they put new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved: verse. 17. And can
we think himself would put the New sanctifying food of Grace and of his Body
and Blood, into those mouths, which were eating, and feeding upon the Common
food of the Old Law, even as they were Eating? Or is it likely, Christ gave
Thanks, whilst they were Eating? But Thanks he gave, as many Greek copies have
it, Matthew. 26 26. And this Thanks began the Eucharist. Or consecrated he the
New Sacrament whilst they were eating their Ordinary food? Christ blessed the
bread ere he brake it, Matthew. 26.26. Did they eat whilst he was blessing the
bread? Ezechiel 44.23. The Priests shall teach my people the difference between
the Holy and profane; and cause men to discern between the unclean and the
clean.

Wherefore let no man imagine that Christ would make a mingle-mangle of earthly
and heavenly matters, of bodily and spiritual food; and give them his Sacred
Body and Blood, As they were eating a Common Supper. Edentibus illis, may
signify (...), properly; That the Apostles were eating, whilst Christ was
discoursing: That Christ ate little, and conferred much: and rather tasted
meat, than continued Feeding, as the Apostles did. Consider these points:
First, He took bread, 1 Cor. 11.23. Secondly, He gave Thanks, verse. 24.
Thirdly, He blessed the bread, Matthew. 26.26. Fourthly, He brake the bread,
ibid. Fifthly, He gave it to them, Luke 22.19. Sixthly, He said, Take, Eat,
Mark. 14.22. Were the Apostles eating all this while?

The Inadvertency, or not distinguishing of this one point; That the Supper of
the Lord was instituted (...). After Supper; as both S. Luke and S. Paul have
it in the same terms, and letters, has bred many great errors; As, That
Christ Sat at the Eucharist, which indeed (if at all) was at the Paschall:
That he took and gave the Eucharist Sitting, or Leaning, because at the Second
Supper they did All Discumbere: and Christ Rose up, and Lay down Again. That
the most Holy and Common food, were eaten together, and promiscuously: And that
gross opinion of Aquinas, justly disliked by Estius on 1 Cor. 11.25. That
Christ gave his Body, in Supper-time: and his Blood, After Supper; though
Aquinas seek to give a mystical reason of it.

But had Aquinas considered the force of the word ((...), Similiter, Likewise)
he would have been of another mind. The word (...), Likewise, twice used; Luke
22.20. Likewise also (he took) the Cup After Supper; and 1 Cor. 11.25. After
the same manner also he took the Cup. In both places (...). Which does
demonstrate, Not, that Bread was given them Before Supper was ended; and the
Cup, After; which is Aquinas ill-hanged conclusion; but the (...) o^ the word
Likewise, extends fully, and fairly to this point; That both the Bread and
the Wine, were Alike, and in the Same sort given, and administered, After
supper: And this S. Paul did learn of the Lord himself, and he received it of
the Lord, verse 23.

And this also (which others misunderstanding, and misapplying some words of S.
Luke, have held) That After the thrice blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist
given, and received, they fell Again to their victuals. But in Luturgico
Canone, (says Estius) absolute dicitur, Postquam coenatumest, instead of the
Vulgat, postquam coenavit: post coenasse, as others have it: post cibos (says
Augustine.) Not in meal time; but After, was the Holiest of Holies
administered. Consider, I pray you, these two propositions cannot consiste
together, but are Contradictory.

1 Christ administered the Sacrament As they were Eating; At Supper. 2. Christ
administered the Sacrament to them, After Supper. Which is most likely?
PAR. 3.
THirdly, it must be acknowledged, that whatsoever Gesture, or Posture, our
blessed Savior had used, if it were certain that he used it, it had been
Approveable, Holy, and Divine. His exemplary beginning might justly give a
form to After times: And whatsoever he had done, had been admirably good.

But oh the vain thoughts of men, loosing themselves in unlikely conjectures!

Ludolphus, without any good ground, says, That Christ went with his Apostles
into a Lower Chamber to wash their feet: which has not so much as a foot-step,
or shadow of reason. Nearer to the purpose.

The same Ludolphus the Carthusian, cap. 55. is too peremptory. Mensa erat in
Terra; and more antiquo in Terra sedebant ad coenam in coenaculo strato, quasi
jacendo recumbentes. The Table was on the earth, and according to the Old
fashion^ they Sat at supper on the earth as it were Lying, and Recumbing in
the Furnished Room. Perhaps, Hugh Broughton from hence took his wild Irish
opinion.

Concerning the discumbing of Christ with his Apostles, and their Tables, see
what I have written lib. 1. Tricoenii, cap. 21. Let me add my opinion (for all
the world is full of opinions in so unexpressed a matter.) That they Sat not
at the Sacred Supper, on Couches, or Carpets spread on the ground, or such like
things; though a very learned man, my honored old acquaintance (quem honoris
causa nomino) is a little too resolute in the point. For it is not probable,
much less very probable, that our Savior did institute this Sacrament (of the
blessed Eucharist) potius supra Pavimentum, quam supra Mensam; rather upon the
Pavement, than upon a Table. For if he had instituted it Supra Pavimentum, upon
the Pavement; yet had he instituted it also Supra Mensam, upon a Table: For the
earth adorned with Carpets, or other furniture supplied the room of Tables.
Coenaculum stratum, A well prepared Chamber employed more, than Mensam stratam,
A spread Table; Mensa strata, a Table spread, is involved in coenaculo strato,
in a well prepared chamber; not e contra.

Certainly in so dubious a point, I heartily could have wished a more timorous
kind of assertion. Christ (says he) did administer the same, not sitting at a
Table, but Lying on the floor on Couches. I answer: They never lay on the
floor (at repast) but they had Tables also of one form, or other, or spread
Carpets instead of Tables; for that couches were on the floor, without any
Tables, seems strange to me. It is impossible to prove this Negative; Christ
administered the Eucharist, not sitting at a Table: or this Affirmative, he
administered it Lying on the floor on Couches. Couches were above the floor;
if not always, yet most an end. And the Tables and Couches were answerable in
convenience one to another, that there might be a delightful and convenient
repast with all possible ease.

But it is little ease (if you make trial) to lie on Couches above ground, and
to stoop for your meat and drink down to the earth or pavement, and take them
from thence. Tables, that are for ease, delight, and convenience, are, and must
be, as high, if not higher, than the beds on which guests lie, or feats on
which they sit. Experience daily teaches so much.

The very forms of the old Triclinia, kept as venerable Monuments to this day,
do prove, Christ Sat not on the Ground; nor Lay on a low couch near the
Ground. Nor was it the fashion of that Nation, in those times, to eat their
meat on the Pavement spread with Carpets. Nor can it be proved that in any of
all those great Feasts in the Jewish Law, whether they were sacred or profane,
they did eat their meat on the Floor, or Pavement. That they did Discumbere,
vest stragula, Sit on Carpets being uppermost: in Stratis tapetibus, with
covered Tapestry, I will not deny. Juvenal Satyra 5 verse. 17. goes further.

Tertia ne vacuo cessaret culcitra lecto
Vna simus, ait. --
On my third pallet take you a place;
Lest on one bed there be a void place.
Horace, Sermonum 1. Satyra 4. Post medium, more fully; Saepe tribus lectis,
videas coenare quaternos. Twelve sup together often, as you may see,
Four on a bed; and so the beds are three.
Nor had they Beds only, and Arras; but Cushions, or Pillows. Seneca in lib. de
Ira. Quid interest quam lecti partem premas. Hone^^iorem te, aut turpiorem
potest facere pulvinare? It mattereth not on what part of the Bed you lie; can
a Boulster, or Pillow make you ever a whit the better, or worse? That these
Beds were immediately upon the Floor, or Pavement, or near it, I deny: They
were raised above the ground: and the Tables were raised decently, aptly, and
for easiest use, above them.

Indeed, when a great multitude followed our Savior, and were fed miraculously
by him, because it was in a desert place, and there were no beds, no rooms, no
tents, no tables, Christ commanded the people to sit down on the Grass, Matthew.
14.19. And there they did eat as they might, sitting down by companies, on the
green Grass; For there was much Grass in the place, John 6.10. But I read
not, that ever any of those times, having plenty of necessary utensils, well
adorned, did eat their meals on the Earth, Floor, or Pavements: or that at
any time, Christ did eat on the Ground, plain Floor, or Pavement.

Nor was Queen Vashti her feast said or likely to be on the ground, Esther
1.9. In the Kings feast, The beds were of Gold and Silver, upon a pavement, of
red, blue, black and white Marble, Esther 1.6. and all these above the ground.

Nor can it be proved, that Esthers banquet was kept by lying on the Floor, on
Couches. It is said, Esther 7.8. The King returned out of the palace garden,
into the place of the banquet of wine: and Haman was fallen upon the bed whereon
Esther was. For Haman to have fallen on the Earth, it had been convenient enough
to his desparate estate. But to fall upon the Queens bed, was high
presumption. And to think there was no banqueting Table near that bed, is to
establish an uneasy kind of eating, or drinking. Most sure it is, as in
Ahashuerus his great banquet, the beds are described as raised above the
Floor, and the Floor above the Earth; so the Tables must be thought some way
proportionable in height to the beds, for the fitter accommodation of eating or
drinking.

Concerning the hitching up from the bosom to the breast, the distance is so
small, that we may say it was a poor hitch. And if S. John did so ascend, and
if such ascending does prove a discumbing, yet might the discumbing be (and in
all likelihood it was) not on low beds, near the Earth; having only a
pavementall Table; but as the fashion was, both of Jews and Romans in those
times, on raised triclinary Bedsteds, with Tables somewhat higher.

Though Judiths maid went and laid soft skins on the ground for her, -- for
her daily use, that she might sit and eat on them, Judith 12.15. Yet to say,
Christ did likewise, there wants proof. Judith did so at her ordinary
refections in time of persecution. Is it fit Christ should conform himself to
her in his Paschatizing? or in the great Feast of the Eucharist? For even so
may the blessed Eucharist be called, as well, if not fitlier, than the
Paschall, or Common Supper, or other ordinary repasts. Judith and her maid
only sat together at meat, if the maid did sit. But Christ instituted his
Sacrament in the presence of Eleven Apostles. Iudiths was a kind of fast: in a
place ill fitted and little prepared. Christ's Supper was in a Room well
furnished, large, and above ground.

If (...) and (...) strongly infer, that the posture was Leaning or Lying
flat along; yet they infer not, that this must be on low Beds, or Couches on
the Floor; but according to those times, it was on high Beds. They infer
not, but some Sitting might be used sometimes; as at large they infer not,
that there were there no Tables; or that the pavement was the Table, as I
averred from good authority before.

But supposing all this true, concerning these Two words; and that they hold
strongly for Leaning or Lying at the Paschall Supper, and at the Ordinary
Supper: yet it will never be proved, that either of these words are used of
Christ's Third, and Last Supper, the blessed Eucharist of the Lord.

And I could heartily wish, that my most learned good friend had discriminated
the Third Supper from the other Two: he would then have said, it had been
administered at a distinct time and place perhaps, from the former: And it will
never be proved, that any of the Three was taken on the Floor, or on Couches
in the Floor without Tables.

PAR. 4.
IT is apparent that the fashions of taking their Suppers were diverse. That
sometimes, some men of several Nations did eat their meat sitting on the
Ground, or on Carpets or Cushions upon the ground, cannot be denied. That the
Turks, and more Eastern part of the world uses it, even to this day, is
granted.

The ancient Roman Beds were made ex ulva palustri, of Sea-grasse, straw,
stubble, or turffes, (says Alexander ab Alexandro Genialium Dierum. 5.21.)

Afterward, the Romans made Square feasting Tables, then Roundish: and their
Beds at first were Low and Short; Afterward, their Beds, their Cupboords,
their Triclinia, and Tressels were of Brass, and far both larger and higher.
Then had they Round Tables of the Citron Tree, supported with feet made of
Elephants teeth. Tully himself bought a goodly one, at an unreasonable price.
Seneca had many of them.

In their Supping Parlours, they had Triclinia strata Tribus Lectis, Couches
furnished with Three Beds; and in them were Three Tables (as Varro signifies.)

One Table was Roundish: on which they placed their Wines; This they called
Cylibantum, from the Pots and Cups which the Graecians call (...).

Another was of Stone, upheld with, or resting upon a long little pillar, which
they termed Cartibulum.

The Third Table was Square, which held the vessels and platters: this they
called Vrnarium. Heliogabalus was the first who had Silver Tables. Most an end
to this effect. Alexander ab Alexandro.

The Jews in their full adorned rooms had diverse sorts of Tables.

The Round Table: 1 Samuel 16.11. We will not sit Round, or sit down. Non
Circumsedebimus, as Vatablus translateth it, and so the Interlineary; and this
was before Rome was hatched.

Another Round Table you shall find, Cant. 1.12. While the King sits at his
Table; usque quo re^ in Circuitu suo; as the Interlineary truly and literally
expounds it. And least you might misapply this, to the marriage bed, as
Kapnion does, or to the sleeping beds, on which they were wont to rest in the
night. Martin Delrius will tell you, the word is Mesebi, from the root Sabab,
Circuire, to Compass: and signifies accubationem Epularem, a Feasting
accubation, the Beds being fitted Round to the Tables. He excellently adds;
The Hebrews were wont to have their Parlours, or Triclinia adorned with many
such little Beds about their Tables. And the Coenaculum, or Supping room was
called Domus Lectulorum, Beth-Hammittoth, The house of Beds; and that in the
form of a Crown or Circle. Discumbentes sedebant in Circuitu, ut qui edunt in
mensa Rotunda: The Feasters sat in Compass, as they that did eat at a Round
Table (says Pagnine.) I dare not say, that the Psalmist did not allude in some
degree or other, to Christ and his Apostles; Psalm. 128.3. Thy children like
Olive plants round about thy Table.

I am sure, Nonnus on Joh. 13.12. thinks, that at the Second Supper, when our
Savior washed the Apostles feet, they sat as it were in a Circle. His words
are these, -- (...), he went about the Circle of his Twelve guests; And the
same Nonnus, the fourth verse after, has it, (...). Circulus mensae, the
Circle of the Table; And what is that but a Round Table.

I wish the excellent Heinsius had taken occasion from these words to have
enlarged the point.

This I say; I shall hardly be persuaded, if our Savior did institute his
blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, and eat it on the Paschalizing Table
(which is most improbable) that he ever intended to make that an eternal
pattern, or president for us, which he performed on such an occasion, (of the
Passover) as never should be in use again.

As before I referred it to thy judgment (Good Reader) whether were most
probable, that Christ should mingle his sacred Eucharist with Common meat, or
take them dividedly: So here also (Christian Reader) be thou Judge, whether it
be likeliest that when an upper Chamber was exquisitely furnished, with
convenient, or desired utensils, with several Tables (as you have heard was
the fashion) Christ would on the Floor administer that heavenly food, or else
go to one of those Tables, fit it, call his Apostles, and There administer it?
Let it not be forgotten, that Christ foreknew, the upper Chamber was decently
adorned, and purposely sent to have none other but it, as fittest for his
turn. And if he had not made use of the things there, if he had fate upon the
Ground, or on the Pavement, or lain on a poor low Couch at the sacred food: a
meaner house, a worse fitted room, higher or lower, might well have served
their turns. But he would have a goodly Chamber, prepared, furnished, and
large: and therefore we may well think, he made some use of the things There.

Sure we are, he made use of the Water-pots, and Water-Basins, and Towell: for
he powered water (which was in other vessels) into the Basin, Joh. 13.5. And
when he put off his Clothes, we may think, he laid them on a Table, Bench,
Stools, or Chayres, rather than on the ground, or pavement.

Aretius on Math. 26.17. says, that Herod the King appointed to have rested in
that house: and at it were hosted with him, to whom Christ sent. But when Herod
was otherwise diverted, as some conceive, Christ invited himself to the same
house: Fitted you may be sure, to entertain a King: and so royally furnished.

For among the rest, it is reported by Aretius in the same place, that either
out of Herod's, or the housekeepers apparatus or preparation, Christ used Catino
ex Smaragdo, quo nullus pretiosior visus est unquam, nulla gemma nobilior,
nulla species vasis mirabilior: Than which Catinus, none ever was seen more
precious: no gemme more costly, or noble; no vessel more wonderful.

The Smaragdus is an Emerald of a green color, making the air green about
it, and by its greenness, comforting the eyes of men; it preserves the wearer
from the falling sickness: Eight grains of it drank, expels poison (as
they say.) The Genoists in Liguria show it to this day. And the Monks of Lions
in France, show the precious Charger which Christ used in his Supper. But
(says Aretius) let a man believe what he list.

But because the consecrating of it upon a floor, was not impossible: and such
a thing might perhaps be, as that they might receive it on their Beds or
Couches; yet since they were wont sometimes to sit up, and upright on their
Beds, Pro re nata, as occasions led them: I shall never be otherwise persuaded,
but if they received the holy Sacrament on their discumbing Couches, they did
arise in their several turns, and kneel, and pray, and worship; and Then
partaked of the heavenly food: and then reposed themselves to hear our
Saviors Sermon; which is properly distinguished from Other his Sermons: and is
justly called Sermo Domini in coenaculo; Christ's Sermon in the Supping Chamber.

It must also be acknowledged, that a Table was not of absolute necessity. For
the Table was to do service for the Food: not the Food for the Table. And the
Supper caused the use of the Table: the Table did not cause the Supper; though
the Supper, by a Metonymy, is called a Table, 1 Corinthians. 10.21.

Lastly, though we cannot say expressly, whether the Table were Round or Square,
on which Christ did eat his Second Supper, or his Paschall; or determine
undoubtedly to which it was most inclining, yet I opine, (as it is in my First
Book,) it approached nearer to a Square Table, having Three sides encompassed
with Three Beds: the fourth side Open for the Servitors, to bring, change, or
carry away such things as they were directed: and so for the third Table, it is
likely it was on a Livery board or Table which stood in the same room, square
rather than round.

Luke 22.21. The hand of him who betrayeth me, is with me on the Table. And as
expresses, Joh. 13.28. No man at the Table, knew for what intent Christ spoke.
Which places, drawing no inconvenience with them, are literally to be
expounded. And if Beza deliver them over to a Metaphor, I value not his
judgment, so much as I do the judgments of a thousand Heroes, holy and
learned Divines, which have been, and are in our Church of England. And let
Beza take heed; for if the word (Table) be sometimes used improperly, must it
therefore be so in This place, in All places? This manner of expounding, is
accompanied with desparate absurdities. For why may not another expound any
other words (though they handsomely answer the letter) by a Metaphor, if so be
they be used metaphorically, in any one other place? And so we shall be
deluded, as Origin was, and sink and bury the holy Scriptures in Metaphors and
Allusions.

Concerning King David, before whom God prepared a Table in the presence of his
enemies, Psalm. 23.5. I answer, this was not in the Wilderness: for his enemies
were present; but they were absent from him in the Wilderness; nor was it a
Metaphorical Table, where his head was anointed, and where his cup did
overflow. Or if these Two last things were done really in the Wilderness (as
they were not) why might not a light small Table be also brought forth among so
many hundreds, as followed him. And yet this place is not a Record what was
done, when he fled from Absalon. Neither are the words, Psalm. 78.20. Thou will
prepare a Table for me in the Wilderness: as my learned friend cites, and
mistaketh: But the mutinous, and rebellious Israelites spoke against God,
saying, Can God furnish a Table in the Wilderness? And this was long before
David was borne: and no way concerned him. Again, my worthy good friend has
only conjecture, That the Earth was David's Table. And this comparative
inference is worse by far; as the Floor was our Saviors Table.

For if David did so in urgent and extreme necessity; and in the desolate
inhospitable Wilderness: is it likely Christ would do so where all necessary
utensils were prepared for a Feast?

Nor are the words of David, in Terminis, (as my learned friend supposes)
though they approach to the sense; He that sits at Table with me, Psalm.
41.9. And if they had been so; from the correspondence between the Type and
Substance, I should rather have concluded; As Achitophel did eat at David's
Table: so did Judas at Christ's Table. They both did eat at a Table, and both
were notorious traitors. If Beza say, Such a Table as our Savior did institute
this Supper on, or That Table was no Table indeed, but in name only, or not a
Table framed of wood; I must tell Beza, that none is able to prove his
Negatives: and the contrary is evinced by their common usance. And the word
(Table) does (...), and most properly signify, somewhat to eat upon, raised
from the ground. Nor can I find in any place of S. Augustine, any inclination
of him to this; That the earth, ground, plain floor, or pavement, was the
Table on which Christ instituted the holy Eucharist.

So much against the opinion, that Christ celebrated his blessed Supper and
Sacrament on the pavement, with humble subjection of my Writings to the Church
of England, the uncorruptedst part of Christ's Militant Church: and with this
solemn protestation, that though I differ in judgment, in this point, from
the learned Doctor; yet I shall never differ from him in affection: but be
ready upon better proofs to change somewhat of my opinion; and still to love
him.

Lastly, I shall fling water into the Sea, and mispend time, to prove that the
Jewish people made great and much use of Tables, long before Christ's
Incarnation, and so down to his death.

PAR. 5.
COncerning the blessed Eucharist, it cannot be certainly known, on what
special Table it was administered; or what was the form or fashion of That
Table. Two points are considerable; The first seems more than probable to me;
That it was administered, or celebrated on a Table. Secondly, I hold it likely,
it was administered on a Table distinct from the Paschall, and ordinary-Supper
Table.

Concerning the first:

In the Temple at Jerusalem, they had a Table of Shittim wood; two cubits the
length thereof, and a cubite the breadth thereof, and a cubite and an half the
height thereof, Exodus 25.23. And thoushalt set upon the Table Shewbread before
me always, verse. 30. There was no Long-square Table of Incense; but the Altar
to burn Incense upon, was also of Shittim wood, foure-square. A cubit the
length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, Exodus 30.1. And it was two
cubits high. The former Table, allegorically did signify the Table of the body
and blood of Christ, as Cornelius a Lapide on Heb. 9.2. avoucheth from Cyrill,
Hierome, Damascene: Therefore the Substance of the Type, was also a Table: and
Christ celebrated the I ords Supper on a Table.

Secondly, 1 Corinthians. 11.20. it is called the Lords Supper.

The Administering and Receiving of the Eucharist, is called the Supper of the
Lord. Augustine ad Januarium Epistola 118. cap. 5. affirms, that the Apostle
calls the very Receiving of the Eucharist, the Dominicam coenam, the Supper
of the Lord; So Ambrose, Pelagius, Glossator, Lombardus, Hervaetus, Aquinas,
Rickelius, (says Estius on the 1 Corinthians. 11.) Theodoret and Oecumenius call
Dominicam coenam The Lords Supper, Domini Sacramentum, The Sacrament of the
Lord: though Estius minceth the point.

But they were wont in those times, to eat their Suppers on Tables, Ioh. 12.2.
Lazarus was one of them who sat at the Table with Christ, when Christ said;
Luke 22.30. Ye may eat and drink at my Table in my kingdom; he draws the
Metaphor, from the Tables, on which he and others were wont to feed on in those
days. Ioh. 12.2. etc. Matthew. 15.27. The dogs eat of the crummes which fall
from their Masters Table. Therefore there was a distance between the Tables
and the Ground. S. Mark. 7.28. varieth it thus; The dogs under the Tables eat
of the childrens crummes. Therefore the Tables were not On the ground; when
dogs could be under them. The rich man had a Table, from whence such crummes
fell, as would have fed Lazarus, Luke 16.21. Therefore the Table was not On the
ground, floor, or pavement, but Above it; and from it the crummes fell lower.
So, Tables being in viridi observantia, in ordinary use among the Jews in
those days: and Christ avoiding factious singularity, and running fairly with
the stream of those times in things indifferent, we may conclude, Christ fed
not from the pavement at any time, for ought that is recorded, or involved; But
it is very likely, our Savior on a Table did celebrate the holy Eucharist.
Tables were principally ordained to be eaten and drinkt upon, whether at sacred
or common Feasts: Take this and eat it (as from a Table) and Christ took the
cup (as from the Table) and gave thanks (as they used to do at the Table) and
gave it to them (as they were at Table) Drink ye all of this (as was wont to
be done at the Table) Matthew. 26.27. Act. 6.2. It is not reason we should leave
the Word of God, and serve Tables. And these Tables were for the poor, or for
their holy feasts of charity; if not for the receiving of the most holy
Eucharist also.

For it may be well observed, Men were chosen to serve Tables, full of the holy
Ghost; of honest report and wisdom; as Stephen was a man full of faith, and of
the holy Ghost, verse 5. full of faith and tower, verse 8. consecrated to that
work by prayer, and imposition of hands, with as much ceremony and solemn
majesty, as others were chosen to be Presbyters; nay more, viz. with the
general consent, and joint action of all the Apostles. To serve at Common
Tables alone, such worthy Heroes were not fittest to be destinated, or
appointed, that I may use the Scripture phrase; meaner people might, and would
have served the turn. But these sanctified Deacons, did not only take care of
the poor, but administered at the most holy Tables, on which the Eucharist was
celebrated. Ignatius Epistol. ad Trallenses, almost in the beginning; (...):
Ye ought to please the Deacons, the ministers of the mysteries of Christ in
all things; for they are not the servitors of meats and drinks, but (...), the
Ministers of the Church of God: do you reverence them as Jesus Christ, whose
Vicars they are.

My collection is; Sacred things, yea the most holy Eucharist was celebrated
Then on Tables. And in all likelihood, from the example of Christ, who
consecrated the blessed Sacrament on a Table. Nor do the Apostles think it
unreasonable to serve Tables, either common, or sacred, simply and absolutely:
(for the works were devout) but comparatively, and referentially. They would
not neglect the preaching of the Word of God, nor exclude themselves from It to
serve Tables: In this sense, S. Paul said, 1 Corinthians. 1.17. Christ sent me not
to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel: yet both Baptising, and Serving at
Tables, especially the Sacred Ones, were divine offices.

Christ was given for us, in the Sacrifice; was given to us, in the Sacrament.
In the first, per modum victimae, as an offering; in the last, per modum epuli,
(as Bishop Andrews has it) as in a Banquet. Who knows not, Banquets are
commonly set on Tables? In the Feastings of our great Ones, you may perhaps,
find out the Jewish fashion of Feastings. For as often times our people arise,
when the first and second courses are removed; and other meat, and messes
carried away: and go to another Table, and Banquet of Sweetmeats, as the close
of all: So very well may it be, that when Judas was excluded out of that room,
and gone down stairs, and forth of doors, Christ and his Apostles might arise
from their former Feasting, and at another Table apply themselves to this
Sacred banquet of the Holiest, Heavenliest Sweet-meat: since more devotion was
required at this most Sacred food, than at their other repast: of which
hereafter.

Besides, I desire to see one proof where ever any of Christ's Apostles, or any
Jew of those times, did feed from the Ground, Floor or Pavement, when they did
eat in any house well-furnished.

I cannot omit another place, 1 Cor. 10.21. Ye cannot be partakers of the Lords
Table, and of the Table of Devils. That the Apostle speaks of the sacred
Eucharist in the first place, appears by the precedent verses. The Cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The
Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? verse.
17. Here are both Species, both Kinds. Christ blessed the Cup, and so do we,
before, and in the Consecration: and this is the Communion of Christ's blood.
Giving of thanks preceded consecration.

The Heathen had Altars, on which they made offerings to their Gods, the Devils:
and they had also Tables, from which they did participate of things Offered.

It was lawful to go to the Tables and Feasts of the Gentiles, and to eat
whatsoever was set before them. 1. Cor. 10.27. But they might not approach to
the Pagan Altars, to partake of them; Nor eat any thing in Idolio; in the Idols
Temple: Nor, (...), As a thing offered to Idols; no though a man did but say so,
verse. 28. Yet Christians partaked even of the Sacrifices, which were upon, and
taken from the Heathen Altars, on which they were Sacrificed, if they knew it
not; as the Gentiles and Jews also: Deuteronomy 18.1. etc. though not Altars,
but Tables were principally ordained to eat upon; Yet they, who waited at the
Altar, are partakers with the Altar, 1 Cor. 9.13.

Christ could not expect an Altar in an upper chamber, of a private man. Altars
were no part of chamber-furniture. The Jews might have no other permanent
Altars, after their setting in Jerusalem, bu two; The Altar of Incense, and
the Altar of Sacrifice.

Christ may be said, in a sort, to be the Altar, the Offering, and the Priest,
when he was Sacrificed on the Cross. Other than a Metaphorical Altar he used
not, he was not.

The poor man's box or chest shall be set near to the high Altar. Injunction
the 29.

But he consecrated the saving Eucharist on a Table; and therefore is it called
the Lords Table. And because Christ did so, all other Christians were the apter
to do so, and for a while called the Church-Altars, Tables, in reference to
Christ's first Institution upon a Table.

For in times of persecution, they could well use none, but Tables: and
therefore does the Primitive Church often call them Tables: and seldom Altars;
unto which they were not admitted, to administer the Sacrament of the body, and
blood of the Lord. Nor did they carry Altar or Altars from house to house, from
City to City, from Country to Country, as they Communicated in several
Houses, in several Cities, and Countries, and for a while, daily so
communicated; but used the Tables such as they were, made by Art, wheresoever
they came. Nor perhaps, did they stand on the particular consecration, either
of Tables, or of Cups, and Vessels to hold the Body and Blood of Christ; but in
the fiery furnace of persecution, were content sometimes to make use of such
things as could be had, and rather made them holy, than found them holy.

But he who from hence will think that the name of Altar is unlawful, or of a
late invention: or that they were excluded from Christian Churches: or that
there were Tables allowed, and every where set up in the Churches: Or that
Altars were destroyed generally, or for the most part: Or that even Altars
themselves were not sometimes called Tables, with an eye to Christ's first
institution: Or that will cry-up Tables, to cry-down Altars: He knows not the
different usances of the Church in times of persecution and cut of it; but
takes advantage of words, to set asunder things, which well may stand
together; and runs with a strong by as to his own works. Neither would I
have my special friend to precipitate himself into the other extreme: or so
to fix his mind on Altars, so to undervalew Tables, as to maintain, or publish
that Christ did not celebrate the Heavenly Eucharist on a Table; and that he
instituted it on a plain Floor, or pavement: which opinion I think was scarce
ever heard off, a thousand years after the first Institution of the Sacrament.

The extract, or exempt especially appropriated to our purpose, is this; Not
only the Devils in a kind of imitation of God Almighty this worship, had by the
Heathen, Tables erected, and consecrated to them, of which they took part, and
were allowed their divident or portion, on which they fed sometimes in the
Temples of their Idols, sometimes at home. But even the holy Christians in
their best perfection, had diverse Tables, on which they did administer the
Lords Supper, and partaked of the holy Communion, and they were called the
Tables of the Lord. For the Lord himself, and his holy Ones, a long time after
him, administered the blessed Eucharist on Tables.

PAR. 6.
THe second point, held probable, was, and is; The holy Eucharist was
administered by Christ on a Table different and variant from the Paschall, and
Ordinary Supper-Table.

Object. Yea, but what proofs have you for that?

Sol. I answer; what proofs have you to the contrary? And why was not the
Heavenly food consecrated on a distinct Table? Or which opinion is like-liest?

In this so uncertain a point, we are not forbidden, but rather commanded to
search for the truth, 1 John 4.1. Believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits, whether they are of God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. Be not soon shaken in mind, or
troubled. But, 1 Thessalonians. 4.21. Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.
Search the Scriptures, John 5.39. Our love must abound more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment, that we may try, or approve things that are
excellent. Philip. 1.9. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18. I can say it by experience; He who diligently searches
for the revelation, and inlightning of the Truth, though he find not sometime
that particular, for which he inquired, he shall find many excellent things,
for which he did not seck; and perhaps of more force and worth, than the thing
searched for: And so, O Truth

-- Tu, non inventa, reperta es. Remember withal, that no beast under Heaven
(though never so great, and vast) has so great and large brains as man has,
nor broader allies, lanes, or cells for the animal spirits of man to walk, or
rest in; which may serve for the disquisition of deep, or higher knowledge. Yet
I would have no man so given to novelty, as Campanella, who ascribes Sense to
the earth, and dry sticks. 3.14. Reason to beasts: with an hundred other vain
imaginations. The craft of the Spider, says he, de sensu rerum, 2.23. is
wonderful, or stupendous; by reason she makes her net, frames the attractory
threads of her web -- and egreditur ad captionem musce cum multis syllogismis;
Comes forth to catch the fly with many syllogismes. And, Canes exmotu sylvae
latitantem syllogisant bestiam: saepe arguto syllogismo Leporem insectantes.
And the Dogs by the motion of the wood, do reason concerning the hidden beast:
often chasing the silly Hare with witty and subtle syllogismes. And the Ants
of necessity speak, or use their voices; and many the like uncouth positions,
which he is glad at the end of that Chapter, to temper, and modifie with a
Quasi; Discursiva dicenda sunt rationalia. The creatures, which can discourse,
are said to be Reasonable: yet so, that Man is said to be Reasonable, and not
Brutes; not because Brutes do not at all use Reason: but for that they use
Reason but a little. As Plants are not called Animals, because they have but a
little sense. And thus will we speak (says he.) But we understand a Man
Rational in his mind; and do give Brutes only Reasonable sense; which Aquinas
calls Estimative. Is this, all this discourse come now to this? I will take a
liberty to speak as I please: and so I will set up new positions, and
contradict all in my way that ever was said before: and then I will so qualify
it, that I will have only new terms, new expressions, and yet but old matter:
that all the Reason of Beasts be but the Estimative faculty (as Aquinas calls
it.) Affected novelty, be thou humble.

And though we must be humble, and Scepticall, where we have no firm footing;
yet if we put into the weights two opinions with their best circumstances, we
are not forbid upon a diligent trial, and search of them (not in the Bakers
balance, but in the exacter scales of the Goldsmiths) to say such an opinion
is so many Grains, Scruples, Dramms, Ounces, or Pounds better, and heavier
than the other.

Proceed we then to examination, whether it were a distinct Table, or no?

That it was celebrated After Supper, no man can contradict. If it had been at
the Paschall, or at the Common Supper, or during their turns or times, no man
could deny but it had been administered at the same Table. And too many
Christians not observing that point, have run into many errors, and let slide
from their pens apparent mistakings. But at that Table it could not be
administered conveniently. And herein again I appeal to any learned man, or
good Christian soul: Which is fitter of the two? That the most wonderful
Sacrament should be celebrated, as the Recipients Lay along, or Sat at a Table
encompassed with Three beds? Or at another Table, better accommoded for their
devout participation, and graced with Diviner food?

With reference to the parties Recipient, these may be the Arguments.

In Naturals, Morals, Politics, these Axioms hold. De minimis minima cura est
habenda: and de maximis maxima cura est habenda. Of least things the least care
is to be taken: and of greatest things, the greatest care. Upon this ground, we
prefer the Body before Raiment: the Soul before the Body; the joys of
Heaven, above the pleasures of Earth; the love of God, above the love of Men.
Charitas est ordinata: Charity proceeds by Order; and chieflyest looks to
things most necessary. When Martha was careful, and troubled about many
things, Christ said to her, One thing is needful, and Mary has chosen that
good part, which shall not be taken away from her, Luke 10.42. Seek ye First
the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 6.33. Take no thought for the morrow.

I have seen a natural fool hold up his arm to receive a blow, which was
aimed at his head. And he is little less than an Idiot, who bestows more
care on small, or poor things, than he does on great and better things.

Domitian was a fool to bestow his time in killing of Flies, when the care of
the whole Roman Empire lay on his shoulders. The Roman Empire was not disturbed
by a Fly.

The particular nature will destroy it self, to preserve the General: Fire
will descend, rather than there should be a Vacuum: Things will rather suffer
any evil, than vacuity. All, and every particular nature by it self, and with
others, does so abhor vacuum, vain emptiness, that they all concur to
remedy it against their own private inclinations, and dispositions; to keep
as it were their Commonwealth whole and sound. For they Themselves are
preserved, when the Generality is preserved.

Air has been seen impetuously, and forcibly to leap down into the bottom
of the gaping Seas, and into cavernes of the earth, against nature descending
to inhibit Inanity. To this effect excellently Campanella de Sensu Rerum. 1.9.
though I like not his Collections or Diductions therefrom.

Concerning Christ's Body in the first place.

And shall we think, that any thing in the earth, is equal to the precious
Body and Blood of Christ? We are not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, -- but with the precious Blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.19. Heb.
9.14. The Blood of Christ purges our consciences from dead works, to serve the
living God. 1 John 1.7. The Blood of Christ cleanses us from All sin. He
washed us from our sins in his own Blood, Revel. 1.5. and has made us Kings
and Priests unto God, as follows. His Blood was, and is of infinite merit.
And if there should be created as many worlds of people, as there are now
people in this world, and if God had made the like covenant with them, as he
has done with us; though every one of those were great sinners, yet if they
did repent, and believe in Christ, every one should be forgiven, and saved; and
for all this God should remain a debtor to the Cross. For between Finite and
Infinite, is no preportion.

Will not the thought hereof stir us up to more solemn devotion, when we
receive It, than when we take our common repast? I shall never be persuaded the
Apostles were so regardlesse, so uncivil, as to take so heavenly a benefit,
without humble thanks, prayers, and sublimated devotions. And what is held
sordid, and slovenly among us, to lie along, or sit, when people receive it
from us ordinary Ministers; must it not needs be much worse, when the Lord of
heaven admini^red his own Blood, in his own Person, if the Apostles did so?
Therefore I shall hardly believe the Apostles partaked of that heavenly food
either sitting or reposing themselves on their discubitory beds.

Concerning his Body: How admirable things are spoken of it, Joh. 6.50? This is
the Bread; and it is very likely, he pointed at his own Self, when he said
Those words. And the Antithesis following evinceth, he spoke not of Temporal
food. But above all, the declarative positive Asseveration, in verse 51.
seems to prove so much, etc. to the fifty-ninth verse. This is my Body which
is Given for you, Luke 22.19. This is my Body, which is Broken for you, 1 Cor.
11.24. He eats and drinks Damnation, who discerns not the Lords Body,
verse 29.

A poor discerning there is of the Lords Body, if they shall ear It with no
more preparation, no more devotion, than they do Other meat in the same order
and manner, and at the same Table sitting, or discumbing. Let me empty my soul
into thankful humble prayers; and my body be powered out as water on the earth
by lowest prostration: yet I shall think I am not enough dejected, or
mortified. Luke 5.8. Peter fell down at Jesus knees, saying, Depart from me,
for an a sinful man, O Lord. Did he so, when he faw but a great draught of
fishes, and was astonished at it? verse 9.

Therefore let no man imagine, he would sit, or lie along, in a careless,
indevout posture, when he Beheld, and Received the food of his soul, by which
his sins were remitted, and the sinful old man pardoned, and sanctified.

S. Paul, when he administered the holy Communion, preached unto the Disciples,
and continued his speech until midnight, Act. 20.7. And when they had received
the Sacrament, S. Paul talked a long whole, even till break of day, verse 11.

That the Breaking of Bread, was the Giving and Receiving of the holy
Communion, is proved; First, because it was on the First day of the week; that
is, the Lords day. Secondly, And the Disciples were gathered together to Break
Bread: which in the Scripture phrase, is the Eucharist. Thirdly, S. Paul
preached before, and preached after, which was not usual at common meals, if
the Eucharist had not preceded. Fourthly, he preached till Midnight. But then
they were wont to fall to their common meat. Fifthly, it was a sacred Farewell
of S. Paul with the Disciples; and so in likelihood, he both took the heavenly
Viaticum himself, and imparted it to Others.

Beza on the place acknowledges, That after the mysterious celebration, they
used to eat common food. So the Eucharist (in his opinion) was first. But
Augustine Epistola 86. says, The bread videtur esse Eucharisticus, seems to
be Eucharisticall, or the bread of the Lords Supper. And this exposition is
confirmed by Act. 2.42. They continued in Breaking of Bread, and Payers. For
though they were not sparing of their material bread and meat one to another,
yet this place seems spoken of Spiritual food only. So the Syriac
translation; using in this Chapter, the Greek word (...); with whom agrees
the Arabic Interpreter (says Beza) in sense, though not in the same words.
Which Syriac Interpreter Beza assenteth not unto, for restraining it to the
Eucharist. But Beza might have considered, that the communication of things
Temporal, or of both Spiritual and Temporal mixed together, follows at
large, verse 44. etc. Lorinus, Luther, Calvin, Gagneius, Salmeron, Gaspar,
Sanctius, Montanu: therefore better interpret it of the Eucharist. Lorinus
proves it by Luke 24.35. He was known of them in Breaking of Bread. Which
Cajetan wittily, but groundlesly says, was a wonderful Breaking of Bread,
without hands or knife; For, it should seem he forgot, it is said, verse 30.
As he sat at meat with them, He took Bread, and blessed it, and Brake it,
and gave to them. Again, it is (...). Which may be translated, In the breaking
of That bread; even the Bread Eucharisticall: For of it do Augustine de
Consensu Evangelistarum, 3.25. Chrysostom Homilia 9. ex variis Matthaei locis,
and many others, both Fathers and new Writers expound it.

In all the Communions recorded in Scripture, either more apparently pointed
at, or more reservedly described, not One was celebrated on the Ground; not One
upon an Altar; What then remains, but they were celebrated on Tables? And to
return to the old place; When S. Paul preached in an high chamber, even three
stories high, could you there look for an Altar? or could they there, and
then, so many as they were, sit, or lie on Couches on the Floor, and take that
saving food from the plain floor, or pavement? No man will imagine it.

Did S. Paul fall on Eutychus to recover him, Act. 20.10? and did he use no
humble Gesture when he gave and received the blessed Eucharist?

In regard of the party Administrant, thus we may proceed to argue.

Did Christ rise up, to wash their feet? and did he not rise up when he washed
their Souls, and gave them heavenly food, food better than Manna?

Oh how reverend, lowly, and humble was Christ, when he was at his prayers?
When he prayed, he kneeled down, Luke 22.41. (...), pitched, or settled on both
his knees. He fell on the Ground, and prayed, Mark. 14.35. He fell on his Face,
and prayed, Matthew. 26.39. His Face adored of men and Angels. He fell so for us,
and that we may learn so to do; since the Disciple is not above the Master.

And can we imagine, that He, or his Apostles sat, or lay reached out at
length, when he gave them the saving food of his Body and Blood? Credat Judaeus
Apella, non ego. Beleev't Apella of Jewish seed;
It never shall come into my Creed.
I have read of a late devout Cardinal, who being on his deathbed, and almost
dead, yet did strive to go out of his bed, and to kneel on his knees, because
he judged it sinful to receive the food of his soul lying all along; and so
by others he was helped up, and staying till he had communicated kneeling on
both knees This is an example worthy to be imitated, though he were a Cardinal.

When Christ blessed any, his Gesture was most holy, with eyes and hands
elevated. Did he bless and consecrate the holy Bread no otherwise than if it
had been to have been still but ordinary bread?

When he consecrated the heavenliest Food, can we think he sat still?

At the first institution of any great matter, is more reverence exhibited,
than afterward. Abraham made a Great Feast that day, that Isaac was weaned,
Genesis 21.8.

When Christ received his Baptism, how humbled he himself to John the Baptist;
the Creator to the creature, the Master to the servant? And he took a long
journey, even from Galilee to Jordan to be Baptized of him. Matthew. 3.13. and
questionless put off some of his cloths, if not all, and descended into
Jordan; and by his own flesh sanctified the River Jordan, and all other waters
to the mystical washing away of sin: as (before our Communion book was made)
Ambrose and Beda, on Luke 3. and Chrysostom and Hierom have it on the 3 of
Matthew.

Christ's Actions, or Passion at Baptism, were ratified for good from Heaven.
The Heavens were opened, the Spirit of God descended like a Dove, and lighted
upon him (on him alone, and not on any others) to show there was no mistake.
And a voice from heaven was heard, saying; This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased; Matthew. 3.16. and 17. verse. Both his Person, and all his Actions,
well pleased God.

Let us therefore parallel the Sacraments, and consider but the first
Institution of the sacred Body, and Blood of Christ; and let any
Christian-devout-soule judge whether Common, and ordinary posture befitted it;
and not rather a more Solemn, Divine, Devout, and Heavenly gesture? And, that
in likelihood to be rather on another Table, than as they Sat, or Lay on their
discubitory beds. So much be said to probabilize that the holy Eucharist was
celebrated not on the same Table where the other Two Suppers were eaten upon,
but on another Table.

Thus, Christ being in all likelihood come to another Table, prepared, and
well-furnished with Bread and Wine; am I brought home to the next point of my
propounded method.

The Prayer.
MOst blessed Savior, who damnest no man causelessly, who Redeemest, and Savest
great sinners most mercifully; who make them gracious and good in this life,
whom thou intendest to make glorious in the life to come: Oh prepare my heart
to serve thee here, to fear and love thee, that through all worldy affairs, I
may look up still to thee with whom only true joys are to be found, for thy
glorious names sake, O heavenly Lord Jesus. Amen.

CHAP. V. Which contains the sixth General, wherein is examined Whether
Christ himself received the blessed Eucharist? And first Section of the
seventh General; wherein is showed, what Posture Christ used, when he
consecrated the Eucharist.
1. In the first point, Bellarmin is silent; Aquinas affirms it; Soto seems
to incline to the contrary opinion; Luther resolves, he took it not.

Many Canons of the Church command the Priests to receive first. So does the
Council of Toledo. So did the Law of Moses. Soto his proof is ridiculous. S.
Hierom is express for the Affirmative that Christ did Receive first. So is the
Gloss on Ruth, 3. So is Soto in his answer to the Objection to the contrary.
So is Barradius. So is S. Chrysostom. So is Titus the Abbreviator of him. So
is Isychius, and the old Rimer.

2. A double eating of the Sacrament, Spiritual, and Sacramental. Christ
received Himself both ways. So thinks Aquinas, Soto, and Alexander Hales. To
receive Sacramentally without increase of Grace, how it happens. Incapability
of Grace happens two ways.

1. When a Sinner puts an Impediment against it. 2. When one is full of Grace
before hand. So Christ. Dominicus Soto Confessor to Charles the fifth. Christ
might take the blessed Eucharist for example sake. Gregorius de Valentia
treads in Soto his steps.
Durandus says the Apostles did Con-coenare, but not Con-celebrate cum
Christo; whom Cajetan approves. Lucas Burgensis is express, that Christ did
receive first. So are many of the Fathers. Diverse collections for the
Affirmamative. Bishop Lake puts it out of question.

3. The first Section of the seventh General: Wherein is declared what Posture
Christ used when he consecrated the Eucharist.

All Gestures in Religious worship reduced to two heads. Some belong to Hope.
As the lifting up of the Eyes and Hands. Humiliation. As the uncovering of the
Head, beating of the Breast, bowing of the Knee.


Some Gesture, or other, is necessary at the receiving of the holy Sacrament.
What Gesture Christ used, cannot be demonstrated. Certainly the devoutest.

In old time they used to pray sometimes Kneeling, sometimes falling down on
their Faces, sometimes Standing, and sometimes Bowing down their Heads.

4. According to the degrees of Hope, or Fear, there are degrees of Worship.

The Publicanes Gesture, Luke 18. descanted on. God gave to Man a lofty
countenance. Whence called in the Greek (...). Foure-footed beasts have seven
Muscles in their eyes: Man but six. Why the Eyes are called by the Hebrews
Oogon. Naturally what one Eye does, both do. Eyelids, and the differences of
them in Men, Beasts, and Birds. One Eye in the singular number often used in
Scripture for both.

5. Falling on the Face, and Kneeling in Divine worship. Examples thereof. And
diversity of Opinions concerning the same. Men have Kneeled unto Men. Examples
thereof. In Thangesgiving, and Blessings they ordinarily stood up, with Hands
and Eyes lifted up to Heaven. Variety of Gestures according to the variety of
affairs, commendable and necessary. A fixed Gesture is not essential to a
Supper. Feasting, not Gesture, makes a Supper.

6. Adoration, and the Degrees thereof. 1. Degree, Uncovering of the Head. 2.
Degree, Bowing of the Head and Face. 3. Degree, Kneeling. 4. Degree, Falling on
the Face. 5. Prayer. Kneeling, Prostration, Rising again, Standing in
Adoration, what they signify. Jacobus de Valentia his Degrees of Adoration
rejected. Others preferred. 1. Reverence, and us Act. 2. Veneration, and us
Act. 3. Worship. 4. Adoration.
Adoration produces 1. An Act of the Intellect. 2. An Act of Will. 3. Bodily
Acts. Bending, Kneeling, Prostration, etc.
Probable, when Christ instituted the blessed Eucharist, he Prayed and Kneeled.
Prayer, and Thankesgiving, almost one. Two motives to Prayer, Feate and Hope.
The Fruits and the Gestures thereof. Both joined together in Prayer.


7. By the ancient Heroes, and Semidei, are meant famous Men and Princes of
renown. Secundei (says Trithemius) successively rule the World. Pagan Gods
were very Men. Arnobius, and Minutius Foelix do mention the places of their
Births, Countries, etc. Alexander wrote unto his mother De Diis Hominibus.
Tertullian wrote of Saturn that he was a Man, the Father and Son of a Man. The
Heathen Gods were borne and died. The Heathen to preserve the memory of their
Heroes, made Statues and Images of them. Minutius Foelix reproves their manner
of Deifying Men. The ancient Romans made an absurd Decree, that the Emperor
might not consecrate a God without the consent of the Senate. The very people
did one day Deify a God, and the next day Vndeified him. Tiberius the Emperor
approved Christ to be a God. The Senate reject him.

8. The Pagans had several kinds of worshipping their Consecrated Gods. First,
they did lift up their eyes unto them. Secondly, they blessed them. Thirdly,
they did Sacrifice unto them. Fourthly, they did set their Idols upon their
Beasts, and Cattle.


The lepid story of the Image of Isis set upon an Asses back. They made
Caroches, and Carts to carry their Images upon. They made Beds in their Temples
in honor of their Idols. They dawbed them over with silver and gold. They
clothed them with costly garments. The story of Dionysius his sacrilege. The
story of the Knave that stole away Jupiters golden Eyes out of his head.

9. Another kind of Adoration of Idols, at distance. To kiss the hand in
passing by the Idol. So did Cecilius worship the Image of Serapis. A Creditor
by the Law of the 12. Tables might cut in pieces his condemned Debtor, who was
not able to pay him. The rigor of that Law commuted into shame. The manner of
shaming such Debtors. There is a Civil death of a man's Honor, and Good name;
as well as a Corporal death of the Body.

10. Their fashion of Adoring their Idols, was either at Distance, or Close by.
Adoration at distance was diverse, either of Idols in Heaven, or on Earth. If
they adored the Celestial bodies, 1. They looked up toward the Heavens. 2.
They did in heart give the honor to the Creature, which is due only to the
Creator. 3. Their mouths did Kiss their hands. 4. They prayed unto them,
either audibly, or tacitly.
If they Adored their Images on Earth, 1. They stood before their Images,
somewhat off. 2. They solemly moved their right hand to their ^ips. 3. They
kissed the forefinger joined with the thumb. 4. They turned about their body on
the same hand. 5. They did draw nearer, and kiss the Images.
They kissed not only their Lips, and Mouths: but other parts of their bodies
also.

11. The manner of saluting one another among the Persians. The story of
Polyperchon. Adoration whence so called. The reason why in Adoration they did
both Bend and Kiss. The reason why they put their Hands to their Mouths in
Adoration. The ancient Romans had a house dedicated to the Sun. A greater
Obeliske dedicated to the Sun. meaner to the Moon.
Kings Adored before either Sun or Moon. The Persians worshipped the Sun. The
manner how. The Buckler of the Sun, what it is. Servius Tullus built a Temple
in Honor of the Moon. The Manichees Adored the Sun and the Moon.

12. The original of Adoration. Kings and Princes, had not their original of
worship from the Adoring of Idols, or Images: as M. Seldom opineth.

But Statues, and Images had the beginning of their Adoration from the
exemplary worshipping of Kings, and famous Heroes: as Geverard Elmenhorst
proves from S. Cyprian, Athenagoras, and Alexanders letter unto his mother.

About Serug his time, they began to draw the pictures of Magistrates, Tyrants,
etc.

About Terah's days, they made Statues and Images.

Statues were made 1. Of Clay, by the Potter. 2. Of Stone, by the Mason. 3. Of
Silver, Gold, etc by the Goldsmiths. 4. Of Iron, by the Blacksmith; and other
Artificers.
The diverse Apellations of Images made for Gods. Heroes. Kings. Wisemen.
Well-deserving men.
The cause of Adoration sometimes Greatness. Goodness.
Adoration, a Reward for the dead. Illective for the living.


Both Men and Women for some evident privilege of Virtue, were deified. The
first Inventors of every thing profitable for men, Deified. Jupiter so called a
juvando. Jovis, Jovi, Jovem, Jove, corrupt derivations from Jehova.

13. The Cities, Countries, and Places of the Heathenish Gods are known, where
they were Borne. Lived. were Buried.
The great variety of Gods and Goddesses, among the Heathen. Saturn the
Ancientest among the Heathen Gods. Jupiter borne and buried in Crete. 300.
Jupiters. The famous Heroes, and Princes were in the World before their Images.
Statues were at first Comforts. are now sacred Relics.


Common people pray unto, and publicly consecrated Images.

The mouths of the Image of Hercules many Images at Rome worn bare by Kissing.

14. In ancient times, living Kings were Worshipped, and Adored. Sons of God,
Genesis 6.2. were Sons of Princes. Elohim, the name of God; appliable to Princes.
Great men in ancient times Adored for their wickedness. Men Reverenced, and
Adored for their Name. In ancient time great store of Kings. Nine in one
Battle. Genesis 14. Usual in India for Subjects to Kiss their Kings by way of
Worship. Some Kissed their Hands, yet did not Adore. Adored, yet Kissed not
their Hands.
Adorare, to worship, used for Orare, to pray, both in Scripture, profane
Authors, and Fathers. Praying to an Idol, makes it a false God. The True God
only must be prayed to. Prayer used for Adoration. Adoration for Prayer. The
story of the Father ( Wisdom the 14.) for the untimely death of his Son.

15. The story in the Mr. of the Ecclesiastical History, concerning the
Original of Idols. Idolatry had diverse Inventors. The Egyptian Idolatry the
worst.

That place of Scripture; Then began men to call on the Name of the Lord, Genesis
4.26. vindicated from the misinterpretations of Bellarmine and Waldensis; who
apply it to a Monastical life. Others, who gather from hence the Original of
Idolatry. Examined at large, and truly Interpreted. No Idolatry before the
Flood. Enos was Called a God. Held a God for his admirable Virtue and Justice.
His Sons called the Sons of God, Genesis 6.2. So Adam: so are Kings, and their
Officers; so are Christians. Enos the first who called upon God, by the name
Jehovah. How God was not known by the name of Jehovah to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. Two Conjectures of the Author. Many words in the Hebrew Bible signify
contrary things; to excite our minds to a diligent search of the right meaning.
Authorities that Idolatry was not before the Flood: Salianus, Cyrill, Irenaeus,
etc. The first Idols had their primitive Adoration from the Adoration of Kings.

The latter Kings, etc. have had Adoration from some kind of Adoration derived
from Idols.

When Christ celebrated the holy Communion, it is probable he fell down on his
Face.

Falling on the Face is the most forcible Gesture exciting to Devotion.

The prostration of the Body, is the Elevation of the Soul.

Christ in the celebration of his Last Supper varied his Gestures as occasion
required.

The Church ought to imitate Christ in those things which she commands.

PARAGRAPH 1.
1.WHether Christ himself received the blessed Sacrament?

I answer.

Here cannot choose but be diversities of opinions, Bellarmine de Sacramento
Baptismi. 1.23. thus; Dices, potuit Christus accipere sunm Baptisma, non ad
effectum Regenerationis and Adoptionis consequendum, sed aliqua alia de causa,
etc. You will say, Christ might be Baptized with his own Baptism, not to work
Regeneration, or obtain Adoption, but for some other cause. As Christ was
Circumcised, which he needed not: and was Baptized by John, to the Baptism of
Repentance, though Christ had no cause to Repent: and lastly, as he took the
Eucharist, which likewise he did not need nor want. To this last point, he
either answers nothing (which he seldom does) or else it was suppressed by
higher authority: or his answer is involved in these words; Quicquid de hoc
sit, and in this sense, whether Christ received the blessed Sacrament, or
received it not, I will not now speak, I will pass it over, or the like.

Aquinas Part 3. Quaest. 81. Articulo 1. handles this point scholastically;
Whether Christ took his own Body, and Blood? And with his authorities and
reasons is for the Affirmative; though he says, Others think the contrary.

Soto likewise 4. Sententiarum, Distinctione 12. Quaest. 2. Articulo 1.
propounds the same quick question. Whether Christ did Receive his own Body
and Blood? And he answers (stealing almost all from Aquinas) There have not
been wanting, who have said, Christ gave his Body to his Disciples, but
himself took it not. Luther de Abroganda Missa privata resolves, Christ took
not that blessed Sacrament; and thence collecteth (if Soto belie him not) that
other Priests ought not to take it, but to give Both kinds to the Laity. If
Luther so said, Soto well reproves him, and confuteth him; because by Luthers
argument, the Priests are of worse condition and in a worse state than the
people. Which none, but a popular Claw-back, or Calfe of the people will say.
Aquinas his Inference is much sounder. Because the Ministers with us, receive
it first; therefore we conclude Christ first took it. For (say I) Christ
commanded us, to do as He did. And the Church evermore since Christ's time doing
so, that is, the Priests not giving the blessed Sacrament, till themselves had
first received, it follows unforcedly, that Christ took it first.

There be many Canons of the Church, which command the Priests, first of all to
receive: So is it in the Council of Toledo. If they that Sacrifice, eat not,
they are guilty of the Lords Sacrament: 1 Corinthians. 10.18. Are not they which
eat of the Sacrifices, partakers of the Altar: For if to participate, be to
eat, and the Sacrificers be the chief partakers; it resulteth, They must
first eat. The like was practiced in the old Law. The Priest was served even
of the peoples offerings, before the people themselves, 1 Samuel 2.13. etc. If you
say, that was but an usurpation, and profanation of Ely his sons, then see
the Law it self.

Leviticus 6.25. Where the burnt offering is killed, shall the sin-offring be
killed before the Lord: it is most holy: and verse 26. The Priest that offers
it for Sin, shall eat it. Leviticus 7.29. etc. You may see the Priests
portion of the Peace-offrings, by a statute for ever.

Numbers 15.20. Ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough: Of the
first of your dough, ye shall give unto the Lord, Verse. 21. But especially see
Deuteronomy. 18.3. and 4. verses: and Numb. 18.9. etc. What God reserved for Aaron,
his sons, daughters, and household that were clean. All the best of the
oil, All the best of the wine, and of the wheat; the First fruits of them
that offer: and whatsoever is First ripe in the Land. The people of the old Law
shall rise up in Judgment against Our people, who think the least and worst
things, are too good for the Clergy, though God has committed to us the word
of Reconciliation: and given us a power, above Angels and Archangels, in those
most powerful, un-metaphoricall, proper words, John 20.23. Whosesoever sins
ye Remit, they are remitted unto them: and whosesoever sins ye Retain, they
are retained.

The people of the Law enjoyed not Their part, till the Priests had first Their
parts; not ought Our people to participate of our sacred offerings, Till the
Priests have taken Their parts.

Soto his proof for the Affirmative, is a ridiculous one. David fuit figura
hujus: David was a figure hereof, who, 1 Samuel 21.13. etc. before Achish, Suis
se manibus referebat: sic Christus suum corpus suis tenebat manibus, and suo
sumebat ore: So Christ held his own body in his hands: and received it with
his mouth. I answer, there are no such words, nor words tending to that
purpose, in the Vulgar, either of Hentenius, or Saint-andreanus; or in
Vatablus, or the Interlineary, nor in the Greek, or Hebrew. Nor can I judge
from what words in that Chapter, Soto did gather his wild protasis, or first
part of the typical comparison. A weak proof does harm to a good cause; and
so has Soto done in this point.

The authority of Hierom in his Epistle to Hedibia, de December quaestionibus;
quaestione 2. Tomo. 3. fol. 49. reaches home, Dominus Jesus, Ipse conviva, et
convivium; ipse comedens, and qui comeditur; The Lord Jesus was himself both
guest, and feast: He was both eater, and thing eaten. Act. 1.1. Jesus began to
do, and teach: his actions led the way: his voice followed. He first Received,
then Administered. He first celebrated the Eucharist, then made his Sermon in
coenaculo: or Sermon in the Supping Chamber.

Before be Instituted his Baptism, he was Baptized. When he said to his
Apostles, Do this in remembrance of me; if follows, he did take it First
Himself.

The Gloss on Ruth 3. says, Christ did eat and drink That Supper, when he
delivered the Sacrament of his Body and Blood to his Disciples.

Soto brings this objection, When Christ said; Take and Eat; the question
is; Whether He did eat or no? If you say, He had eaten, this is against that
opinion, because he had not Then consecrated the bread. For by the subsequent
words, he did consecrate and say, This is my body. If He had not eaten then, it
is apparent, He did not before his Disciples: For reaching it to them, he said,
This is my Body. I answer (says Soto) He first broke the bread into Thirteen
pieces; which when he had in a dish together in his hands; He said, Take, eat,
this is my body, receiving his own part First.

For he kept Feast with them: and the nature of a Feast requires, that the
Inviter feed with the Invited; He fed with them in the First Supper: He drank
with them in the Second Supper. In the Best Supper, and the Supper which was
most properly his Own, did he nor Eat nor Drink?

Barradius, thus; Accepit ex mensa panem azymum: benedixit: in parts Duodecem
fregit, eas consecravit: unam sumpsit, reliquas distribuit: He took from the
Table unleavened bread: He blessed it: He brake it into twelve parts: He
consecrated it: One He took; the Other he distributed. Therefore even our
adversary being our judge, He was at a Table. Judas was not present: for then
there should have been Thirteen pieces or morsels: Christ himself received
himself. So they cannot tax me for these opinions; or these opinions for
novelty, but they must needs condemn Barradius, and diverse others of their
own side.

Chrysostom homilia 83. on Matthew 26. Christ drank himself, when he said,
Drink ye all of this; lest the hearers should say, Why drink I blood and eat
flesh? To keep them from being troubled at it, as they were troubled when many
fell off from him, he drank his own blood first himself. So Titus has it,
the Abbreviator of him.

Isychius on Leviticus 8. (as I guess) verse 23. Moses took of the blood of
the Ram and put it upon the tip of Aarons right ear; and on the thumb of
his right hand: and upon the toe of his right foot. And verse 24. He did the
like afterward to Aarons Sons, Not only on their thumbes, but verse 27, He
put oil upon Aarons hands, and upon his Sons hands: Not only on his hands;
But verse 30. Moses took of the anointing Oil, and of the blood which was on
the Altar, and sprinkled it upon Aaron (first) and his garments: and upon his
Sons, and his Sons Garments: and sanctified both Aaron and his Sons, and
their Garments.

Isychlus adds; Christ in that Supper first drank his blood, Then gave it to
his Disciples.

Yea, but it is not read, that he ate his Body, and drank his blood. Soto
answers; It is read, that He Took the bread, He Took the Cup: and though it
must be expounded, He Took them into his hand, or hands: yet it is not said,
He took them into his hands only; but He took them himself, as he commanded
his Disciples to take them. Therefore when he said to them, Take, eat, drink;
so when He took them, it is deducible, He did after the same manner eat and
drink.

The old Rimer before cited, is authentic enough in this last point. Se tenet
in manibus; se cibat, Ipse cibus. Christ in his hands Himself did bring:
The Food and Feeder being one thing.


Soto brings another objection: Between the Receiver, and the thing
Received, there is a Division. But Christ is not divided from himself:
Therefore he could not take himself.

It is answered (says he) Christ is not compared to the place by his proper
Dimensions; but by the Dimensions of the several Species; so that wheresoever
They are, there is his body and blood: Therefore because he had the bread and
wine in his mouth and stomach, when he ate Them, he did eat himself. And to
this there needs no division, between the receiver, and the received.

PAR. 2.
A Third Objection by him urged, is this: There is a double eating of the
Sacrament Spiritual. Sacramental.
Christ needed not the spiritual receiving, for he received no Grace from the
Sacrament. The Sacramental reception is improper: proper to sinners only, and
so unfit for Christ. He answers with Aquinas; Christ received himself both
Spiritually and Sacramentally: And so before Aquinas, Alexander Hales settled
at last in that opinion. For though Christ received no increase of Grace or
Charity by the Sacrament, because he needed none, yet he received a spiritual
Taste, and sweet enjoying of Delight, which are effects of this Sacrament. So
he took it also Sacramentally. To take it Sacramentally without increase of
Grace, happens from hence; that the Receiver (Then) is not capable of Grace.
And this may come to pass two ways: Either because he puts an impediment or
block against it, as he is a sinner; or because a man is so full of Grace, that
he cannot receive an Increase of Grace, as Christ was.

Much of this discourse proceeded from the learned Dominicus Soto, Confessor to
Charles the Fist, which, because he most inlargeth Aquinas, I have translated,
and cleared: and enlarged him.

To conclude; let me add, that Christ might well take the blessed Eucharist
himself for example sake, to Teach us what we should do; who may recieve much
good by taking it; and should imitate him, by taking it first our selves,
before we administer it unto Others. For thus did he do diverse Actions in his
life, to Teach us to do the like.

Gregorius de Valentia, Tom. 4. in Tertiam partem Thomae: Disputat. 6.
Quastione 9. Puncto 1. page 1095. agrees with Soto, and uses most of his
arguments, producing nothing of his own.

Cajetan in his Commentaries in Tertiam partem Thomae, Quaest. 82. seems to
approve Durand for saying. That the Apostles, though they did concaenare cum
Christo; yet they did not concelebrare. Christ did it by himself; the Apostles
did not assist him in Consecration: but he leaves Aquinas without exposition
in the maine point, Whether Christ are his own Body, and drank his own Blood?

Franciscus Lucas Brugensis on Matthew. 26. says in these words; Christus ipse
comedit, priusquam discipuli ejus: qui tamen non comedit, priusquam
pronuntiasset haec verba; Hoc est corpus meum: Christ did Eat before his
Apostles did; yet did he not Eat before he had said, This is my Body.

Lastly; all the Fathers, who say, Christ communicated with Judas, are clearly
for the Affirmative.

If by these words; My Fathers Kingdom, Matthew. 26.29. and these; The Kingdom
of God, Mark. 14.25. the blessed Eucharist be pointed at, and meant, (as is
likely:) then apparent it is, Himself drank of his own blood in the sacred
Eucharist; for he professed, He would drink no more of the fruit of the Vine,
but only in the holy Eucharist.

Bishop Lake in his Sermon upon Matthew. 26.26. etc. says; It may well be
presumed, that Christ did receive it Himself. For in his own person he did
sanctify and honor, both Circumcision and the Passcover. Also he was baptized
and sanctified the water of Jordan: Why should we question his Taking of the
Eucharist? That he did so, needed not to be expressed, because of the
correspondency of This Sacrament to That of the Passover.

Indeed Christ needed not partake. But by his own participation, he gave
virtue to all the Sacraments: So he needed not to die for Himself; but he dyed
for us; To this effect, that holy and learned Prelate, now a great Saint in
heaven.

PAR. 3.
I Now come to the next points, unexpressed.

1. What Posture Christ used when he consecrated the Eucharist. 2. What Gesture
They used when they Took it.
Of which in the seventh Chapter.

Some there are who say, That all the Gestures which we use in religious
worship, may be brought to Two heads. Some belong to Hope; as first the Lifting
up of the eyes; which do crave or expect some good thing. Secondly, the
Lifting up of the hands to reach at mercy offered, or set forth. The other
Gestures belong to Humiliation; as the Uncovering of the head, is as the laying
down of the crown glory, and majesty that Man has; and a baring of Man's
merit, or emptying himself of worth, to give it to the party worshipped.
Secondly, the beating of the Breast: showing that in it is sin, which ought to
be expectorated. Thirdly, Bowing of the Knee; which is a great token of the
hearts contrition. But somewhat is defective in this Dichotomy; of which more
fully hereafter. I return to the Queres.

Concerning the first; Remember what I writ in the last point save one,
concerning our Saviors extraordinary devout Gestures at his Prayers, which are
not like to be unbended or slackned, in matters of as high, if not an higher
strain: and yet, as I opine, accompanied with divine prayers also, which in
Christ were very frequent.

Some Gesture or other, is absolutely necessary, at the Receiving of the holy
Sacrament. By a moral necessity, Comeliness and Decency is commanded: though
the natural necessity descends not to the individuality of the particulars;
but is content in general, that there be some Gesture, as it is also with
other Circumstances, viz. that there be some Persons, some Place, some Time,
some Preparation, some Comeliness.

What the particular Gesture or Gestures, or How, or When they varied, or how
Long each continued, cannot be demonstrated. Yet it is most certain, he used
the devoutest, and most fitting Gesture or Gestures; none could go before him,
or beyond him in choosing the best way to serve God. Men are not at their
Common refections, and especially at Feasts, tied, and bound to keep one
posture; and do they not now and then stand Up, then Sit, then Bow, and use
several decent behavior? Let not that be denied to Christ and his Priests in
the administration of the holiest Supper, but with all convenient variation of
posture, Prore nata, as occasion served; and most answerable, and conducible to
devotion.

They were wont in old time to bow down the body, then kneel, and pray; And
from bending they descended to kneeling: From kneeling, they fell down on
their faces and prayed; then rose up again on their knees, and prayed again:
then did stand up, and prayed also.

Daniel 6.10. He kneeled upon his knees, and prayed, and gave thanks also. 1
Chronicles 6.13. Solomon kneeled down on his knees, before all the
Congregation of Israel: and spread forth his hands toward heaven. And, 1 Kings
8.54. Solomon arose from kneeling on his knees, with his hands spread up to
heaven.

No man doubts, but in prayer time they most commonly kneeled: In worshipping
God, they sometimes bowed their heads down, 1 Chronicles. 29.20. Sometimes fell
down: Sometimes kneeled. O come let us worship and fall down, or bow down,
and kneel before the Lord our maker. Psalm. 95.6.

PAR. 4.
ACcording to the Degrees of Hope or Fear, there are Degrees also of Worship:
The lifting up of the Eyes to Heaven in Prayer, is the most usual, common,
though the least kind of Adoration. To lift up the Hands to Heaven, is a more
solemn service. The Publican (...). Luke 18.13. would not lift up, Not so much
as his eyes to Heaven. (...), Not so Much; as if that were a mean, if not the
meanest Degree. The Publican lift up his Heart. That is most true: for the
devout Prayer, which he emphatically couched in those few words, proves it;
God be merciful to me a sinner. But for his bodily Gesture, he lifted not up
his Head, or his Face to Heaven, which is an expression of greatest hope: nor
did he lift up his Hands to Heaven, or spread them abroad, which is also a
solemn sign of spiritual rejoicing. Nay he did not so much as lift up his
hands in a mean degree. Which Tertullian advises us to do. He lift them not
up at all, but let them fall, or hang down, as almost out of hope, or perhaps
beat his breast with them. I think I may also truly infer hence, he did not
lift up his very voice to heaven: but with Anna, 1 Samuel 1.13. spoke in his
heart: his lips only moved, but his voice was not heard, his sorrowful spirit
pouted out his soul before the Lord, in the language of the heart, as in a
silent murmr. He did not so much as lift up his eyes, much less his voice:
so that any man could hear it, or know it. If Christ, God and Man, had not
related it, we had not known it. Not so much as his eyes. Nothing is sooner
performed than the lifting up of the eyes: Nothing easier dispatched; Nature
inclining us to it; and God framing our countenance to that end. Os homini
sublime dedit; coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
He gave to Man a lofty look, the Heavens to behold;
And to outface the Starry Sky, he bade him to be bold.
Man in the Greek tongue is called (...), quasi (...), sursum aspiciens,
looking upward: or as Athanasius has it in his Tractat of Definitions, (...).
From lifting his face upwards.

The Publican offered violence to Nature by his resolute dejectednes. God would
have man look up; the Publican would not so much as lift up his eyes.
Foure-footed beasts have seven muscles in their eyes; Man has but six. Man is
not hindered from looking upward. But that seventh muscle is found only in such
beasts, quae prona terram spectant, which look downright to the earth, (says
Laurentius in his Historia Anatomica, 11.5.) The first muscle of the eye
lifts up the eye; and from his office, is called Attollens, and Superbus,
(says the same Laurentius) who also adds, that the eyes are called by the
Hebrews Oogen, which signifies High, and Lofty; to put us always in mind to
contemplate High and Lofty things.

It is not said in the singular, He would not lift up an eye to Heaven; but His
eyes. God has so created and framed the eyes of men, that naturally what
below, or on the right hand, or on the left hand, or directly forward, so does
the other; though the muscles serve to move the eyes on every side. But if one
eye did look upward, and the other downward, the object would appear double,
and the sight be uncertain. Therefore to perfect the sense of seeing, both
move together and alike; and most harmoniously consort to the equal beholding
of the same object. Yet if the eye in the singular be used (as it is full
often) it does not denote a several operation of one eye, different from the
work of the other: but two are accounted as one, because the effects of both
are only one, and the same.

The eyelids (though in men the upper only moves) are two, and are so called;
Birds have only one eyelid moving in the lower part. Foure-footed beasts have
only the upper eyelid. The higher eyelid is greater in Men; the lower eyelid
is greater in Birds. In Men the higher eyelid moves both upward and downward,
the lower moves not, nor needs move. And yet the higher only moving, they
are called palpebrae, eyelids. Contrary, the conjoined and indivisible
rolling, or moving of both eyes, is ascribed as the operation of one eye in
particular, 1 Cor. 15.52. in the twinkling of an eye; though they twinckle
both together. Job 24.15. The eye of the Adulterer. And Jeremy 13.17. Mine eye
shall weep: Yet both the Adulterers eyes are equally sinful. And Jeremy wept
not with one eye only: Oh that my head were waters, and my eyes a fountain of
tears, Jer. 9.1. His head in the singular, were waters in the plural; and his
eyes in the plural, were a fountain in the singular. Perhaps, this fountain
of tears descended so fast upon the poor mortified Publican, that he would
not, because so conveniently he could not lift up his eyes to Heaven, drenched
in his own tears.

PAR. 5.
DANIEl, 10.9. Daniel was on his face: and his face on the ground: and an hand
touched him, and set him upon his knees and the Palms of his hands.

The Samaritan, who was healed of his Leprosy, Fell down on his face at
Christ's feet, giving him thanks, Luke 17.16. A Leaper kneeled unto him and
besought him, Mark 1.40. as S. Luke has it, fell on his face, and besought
Jesus, Luke 5.12. 1 King. 18.42. Eliah cast himself down upon the earth, and
put his face between his knees. Prayers, Supplications and Thankesgiving are to
be united in every matter. Philip. 4.6. The giving of glory, honor and
thanks, are conjoined, Revel 4.9. The 24 Elders fell upon their faces, and
worshipped God, saying, we give thee thanks, Rev. 11.16. An unbeleever will
fall down on his face, and worship God, 1 Cor. 14.25. John 11.41. Jesus lift up
his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee. Many fell down at Jesus his feet,
John 11.32.

The diversity of opinions is very great. Some think that from the adoring of
men, and the bodily prostration to them, true Adoration of God is transferred
to the mind. Others more probably, and sensibly, thus. When the great Heroes,
and good benefactors to mankind did live, they were in great esteem, honored
of all, and worshipped above others, Kneeled unto, Kissed, Worshipped, and
Adored; yea when they were dead, the surviving did continue to their Images and
Statues that reverence, which their persons enjoyed in their lives. Many knees
kneeled to Baal, and many mouths Kissed him; 1 Kings 19.18.

Even men have kneeled to men. Cornelius fell down at Peter's feet, and
worshipped him, Acts 10.25. The Captain fell on his knees before Eliah, and
besought him, 2 King. 1.13. The Shunamite fell at Elisha's feet, and bowed her
self to the ground; 2 King. 4.37. Esther 8.3. She fell down at the Kings feet,
and besought him with tears. A servant fell down at his fellow servants feet,
and besought him. Matthew. 18.29. The crafty widow of Tekoah fell on her face to
the ground, and did obeisance to David, 2 Samuel 13.4. And Absalom bowed himself
on his face to the ground before the King, 2 Samuel 14.33. The complementall
Abigail fell before David on her face, and bowed her self to the ground, and
fell at his feet, 1 Samuel 25.23, 24.

In Thankesgivings, and Blessings, they ordinarily stood up, with lifted hands
and eyes to Heaven.

And Solomon stood, and blessed all the Congregation of Israel, with a loud
voice. 1 King. 8.55. The Levites were to stand every morning, and evening to
thank and praise the Lord. 1 Chro. 23.30. The Pharisee stood, and prayed (Luke
18.11.) thus within himself, Lord, I thank thee. Jesus lift up his eyes to
heaven and said, Father, Glorify thy Son, John 17.1. Jesus lift up his eyes,
and thanked God John 11.41.

Variety of Gestures according to the variety of Affairs, is not only
commendable, but necessary. He who made all things in number, weight, and
measure, will proportion his Behavior, and Gesture to devout harmonious
holiness; who orders all things sweetly; and has commanded that we do all
things orderly: his deportment was correspondent to such heavenly mysteries.

Any fixed Gesture is not essential to a Supper: nor essentially contrariant
to it. It is the Feasting makes the Supper, not the Gesture; and in some
regard, it may be said, The Supper makes the Feasting; and just Occasion
Leads all, and Guides all.

PAR. 6.
IN Adoration, the bowing of the head and face after the uncovering of the
head, was the meanest and first degree of Bodily Humiliation; and then nothing
bowed but the head, and face. The bowing of the body was, when not only the
head, and face, but the entire bulk of the body did holily stoop down; and
chinne and knees did almost meet, and kiss; and this was the Second Degree.

The Third Degree of Adorative deportement was Kneeling; and that upon both
Knees, like Christ, who prayed (...), pitched on both knees, fixis interram
poplitibus, as the Fathers have it.

The Fourth Degree of Adoration was, when they cast themselves down to the
Earth, with their faces grovelling on the ground. And therefore what S. Matthew
terms Worshipping, Matthew. 8.2. S. Luke describes by Falling on the face,
Luke 5.12. Some do add, with Hands spread abroad, and Feet dispersed far
asunder. But I want proof for their striding feet; though there is proof
enough for expanded hands in Adoration.

The Fifth and highest and most devouted part was Prayer, both as they lay
Prostrate; and when they Rose again on their Knees; and when they prayed again
Standing Upright.

Kneeling betokened fearful Humility: Prostration on the Ground, the
Hyperbole of Devotion, if I may so call it. Rising again, signified an
undaunted Hope, or hoping Charity; Standing prepared a man for Praising, and
Thanking of God by an unfeined Faith.

Jacobus de Valentia super Psalm. 104, Hac habent se per ordinem; These things
are thus in their right order. First to Reverence or Revere, is to think of
somewhat better in another, than we find in our selves. To Honor it, is to
have an high conceit of the party for that Good. Then follows Praise to
commend the thing honored. After it, we do as it were Glorify it by public
Encomiums, and Laudatories. To Confess, is to Affirm before men, that God is
Lord of all things. To Adore, is to Worship the Honored, Reverenced, and
Glorified God, for his excellent Omnipotency, and Holiness; and setting all
other hopes aside, wholly to submit himself unto Him; and this belongs only
to God. So Valentia makes Adoration contain within it self All the other
Steps, and Degrees. In that his opinion, there is much Coincidency of matter.

Rather therefore thus:

Reverence does eye directly the Excellency of a person: and as one is more, or
less excellent; so is the Reverence more or less. In which regard, it being
certain, that Christ knowing the Excellency of his Father, more than other men
did, or do, Revered, or Reverenced him more than other men do.

Veneration resideth not in the soul alone, but shows outward good respects
to the things Venerable; implying, and including a Civil, and excluding a
Religious and Superstitious deportment.

Worship is one Degree higher, more Obedient, more Pious, more Devout, both
Inwardly, and Outwardly.

Adoration is the Highest step, including all the rest within its verge:
producing, first an Act of the Intellect, by which we apprehend and know the
Supereminency of the thing Adorated; firmly believing that he is all Good, and
no Good comes, but from him, and without him we can have no Good. Secondly an
Act of the Will, by which we inwardly bow and subject our selves, and are ready
to do any thing inward or outward in testimonial of its Excellency, and our
submissive subjection. Thirdly, Adoration rises not only in a pronenesse, and
obsequious intentions, but produces the bodily Acts of Bending, Kneeling,
Prostration, or any other honorary and holy gesture. I stand not on strictness
of terms, but use them promiscuously.

I conclude thus, as most agreeable with convenience, reason, and devotion.
When our blessed Savior prayed at any time, whilst this holy work was in hand
(as I doubt not but he prayed) he may be thought to kneel, yea on both his
knees, as he was wont. Sure I am, S. Paul, 1 Timoth. 4.4. and 5. verses, says,
Every creature is good, if it be received with Thankesgiving: For it is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer.

If at ordinary meals, Prayer and Thankesgiving were usually conjoined, to
sanctify their meat; we may not imagine, that in so sacred a banquer, Christ
did give Thanks without Prayer. Though Christ's prayer or praying be not
expressed. And yet, Quod subanditur, and subintelligitur, non omittitur: That
which is understood, is not omitted. The great connection and conjunction, of
Prayer with Thankesgiving; and Thankesgiving with Prayer, shows that they are
almost all one. What the Apostle called Thankesgiving, 1 Timoth. 4.3 and 4.
verses: he calls Prayer, verse 5. Qui unum norit, ambo norit, Know one, know
both.

When we pray, there are Two Motives, though in some degree contrary, yet
always conjoined, Fear and Hope. The fruits of Fear, are, the humiliation
both of soul and body; with casting down of our Eyes; with Smiting of the
Breast, like the Publican, Luke 18.13. With tears confessing out sins, and
humble petition, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. When our prayers are ended,
and we reconciled, the gestures of Hope are these, or the like: Arising from
the ground; Lifting up both of hearts, eyes, and hands to heaven. Christ
himself, Joh. 11.41. Lift up his Eyes to his Father. Without some kind of
Fear, we need not pray: and without some Hope to obtain, none would pray.

PAR. 7.
BEfore I examine what particular Posture, Gesture, or Behavior Christ used,
when he Received and Administered the holy Eucharist; I must needs say somewhat
more of Adoration in General. The farthest way about, is sometimes the nighest
way home.

The Heroes, and Semidei, the Heroical Ones, and Half-gods, were sometimes Men
with great and vast bodies (says Arnobius adversus Gentes, lib. 2. toward the
end, page 119.) Trithemius mentions Secundeos, which successively rule the
world. May not famous Men and Princes be meant thereby? Certainly, the Pagan
Gods were very Men; both the same Arnobius and Minutius Foelix in Octavio do
declare it; mentioning their places of Birth, Countries, Parents, Dwellings,
Deaths, and Burialls. Alexander wrote to his Mother, that the Priests of
Hammon, for fear of his power, had revealed this secret, De Diis hominibus;
That their Gods were but men. More particularly, Tertullian in Apologetico, and
the said Minutius Foelix, write of Saturn (from Neros and Cassias his History;
from Thallus and Diodorus) that Saturn was a man that fled from Crete for
fear of his Son, and came to Italy, and was hosted by Janus, and being
Graeculus and politus, a neat Greek, did teach them many fine new devices.
Homo igitur utique qui fugit: Homo utique qui latuit, and pater Hominis, and
natus ex Homine; Therefore he who fled was a man; he who lay hid, was a man,
and both Father of a man, and Son of a man. So of the rest; Manifestum est
Homines illos fuisse, quos and natos legimus, and mortuos scimus: It is
manifest, they were men, whom we have read to be borne, and know to be dead.
But of this more hereafter.

That they did preserve the memory of these dead men, by making Statues,
Images, and Resemblances of them, is most evident, and beyond denial. The same
Minutius Foelix divinely reproves their manner of deifying men; And it seems
he took it from Esaias 44.10. etc. His discourse is thus: When is a God borne?
Behold he is cast and powered out in metal; he is framed and fashioned, he is
scraped and polished; but is not yet a God. Behold he is sodred with lead, he
is wholly and fully wrought, and is set upright, nor is he as yet a God. Behold
he is adorned, dressed, and trimmed up, consecrated, and prayed unto: Now at
last he is a God: When Man would, and when he did Dedicate him: Man had a power
to make, or unmake a God. The Romans went farther; Vetus decretum erat (says
Tertullian in Apologetico) ne qui deus ab Imperatore consecraretur, nisi a
Senatu probatus: It was an ancient decree, that the Emperor might not
Consecrate a God, without the consent of the Senate. Absurd, Absurd. Unless
God please Man, he shall not be God; Man must be propitious, and favorable to
God. The very people did one day deifie a God, and the next day undeifie him.

-- hodie tu Jupiter esto;
Cras mihi truncus eris, ficulnus inutile lignum.
Thou shall a God be unto me to day:
To morrow a stock, a worthless Castaway.
I was about to say, Tiberius hearing from Pontius Pilate, his Procurator and
Rationalis for Judea, and from diverse others, such records and monuments as
proved Christ to be a God, referred it to the Senate, with the prerogative of
his Own voice first. But because the Senate had not beforehand approved Christ
to be God, they now reject him. Yet Caesar continued constant to his own
sentence and decree; menacing the accusers of Christians.

PAR. 8.
WHen their Gods were now borne, and acknowledged as consecrated, they fell
unto several kinds of worshipping them. That they did Lift up their Eyes to
their Idols, is proved, Ezechiel 18.10. etc. And they blessed their Idols, Esaias
66.3. Though indeed, both the Idols and themselves were the more Accursed by
that Blessing: They did Sacrifice to their Idols, Psalm. 106.38. And served
their Idols, verse 36. They did offer sweet savor to all their Idols, Ezech.
6.13. and 2 Kings 23. They did set their Idols upon their Beasts and Cattle,
Esaias 46.1.

The Image of Isis was on an Asses back; the people kneeled and fell down to
it; the Ass grew proud, as if the Honor had been done to him; The people
(which was a greater Ass) spoke to his brother Ass, Non tibi, sed Religioni;
We worship not thee, but Isis; And yet it stood with more reason, to worship
the Ass, which had sense, rather than the Image which had no sense. They made
Caroches, Carts, and diverse other such moveable Instruments, to carry their
Images upon; especially upon Holydaies, they made beds in the Temple in honor
of their Gods, Tacitus Annal. 14.3. They carried tidings to their Idols, 1 Chronicles. 10.9. though the Gods could neither lie down, nor rise up. They were
madd upon their Idols, Jerem. 50.38. and under the word Madness, all their
frantic Idolatry, with their several senses, forms and fashions, may be
included. He falls down to the graven Image, and worshippeth it, and prays
unto it, Esaias 44.15. and 17. The mean man Boweth down, and the great Man
Humbles himself, Esaias 2.9. He humbles himself even unto the Ground; such
was the worship of their Idols. They dawbed them over with silver and gold.
Opinio, and men's Imperitorum artis concinnitate decipitur, auri fulgore
perstringitur, argenti nitore, and candore eboris hebetatur: The opinion and
judgment of unlearned men is deceived by the exquisiteness of Art, by the
shine of Gold, and is dulled by the brightness of Silver, and whiteness of
Ivory. They clothed them with costly Garments; Dionysius his sacrilegious
violence, taking away Jupiters golden coat, upon pretense, it was cold in the
Winter, and too heavy in the Summer, and putting on a woollen coat, as warmer
in the Winter, and lighter in the Summer, is known to children. The knave that
stole away two eyes of pure gold, massy gold, out of Jupiters Image, knew
Jupiter could see as well without eyes, as with eyes; or rather that he did not
see, either with them, nor without them. But of the Adorning of their Images I
have spoken before; and yet the very Robbing of them, proves the precedent
Adorning of them. These things they did, when they came near to Worship them,
and Adore them.

PAR. 9.
BUt there was another kind of Adoration of them, when they passed by the
Images, and stood at distance from them.

Minutius Foelix in Octavio, toward the beginning, sets it down by the
actions of Cecilius, who seeing the Image of Serapis, Vt vulgus superstitiosum
solet, manum ori admovens, osculum labiis impressit: As the superstitious
people is wont, putting his hand to his mouth, he Kissed it. This was a kind of
Honorary salutation of Devotion: a Running Adoration, a Worship at Distance:
But that his hand did kiss his Lips, or fasten a kiss on them (as the phrase
may seem to import) and not rather, his Lips did kiss his Hand, is
observable, as an Heterogeneall kind of expression: For it is proper for the
Mouth and Lips to kiss, when the other parts of the body do touch or rub, but
not kiss. Yet if the words be read in the Ablative case, he printed a kiss on
his Hand, by, or with his lips, we may give it the privilege of an African
phrase: And yet in the Hebrew, the phrase is reciprocal; My Mouth has kissed
my Hand, or my Hand has kissed my Mouth. See our last Translation, Job 31.27.
and the marginall note. In Adorando, dextram ad osculum referimus; When we
worship, we kiss our Right hand. Apuletus lib. 4. Millesiarum, as Elmenhorst
quoteth him.

Let me also defend the African Optatus against Rigaltius, who in his
Observations on Tertullian, toward the end of them, page 119. among the
Inserenda, cites a place of Tertullian in Apologetico, cap. 4. The purport is
this: The laws were of old, that the Creditors should cut in piecest he
condemned Debtors, who were not able to pay; and every Creditor might have a
portion of his flesh.

See Aulus Gellius 20.1. who has that Law of the Twelve Tables at large. In
which place Caecilius says, Nothing is more cruel, and vastly extreme,
unless (as it seems) this Law was made so cruel, to this end, that no man
should ever venture to endure it. For (says he) many debtors are adjudged to
their Creditors, and bound, or imprisoned: But that ever any was cut into
pieces, and each Creditor had several gobbets, or portions, I never heard or
read; though the rigor of the Law ran so. If there were more Creditors, to whom
the indebted man was adjudged, the Law permitted them to cut in pieces and
divide the body of the Debtor among them.

Iunius Rabirius in his Tractat called Hastarum and Auctionum Origo, ratio, and
sollemnia, has the words of that Law, page 7. in Terminis; and more succinctly
than Gellius. Which cruelty by a general consent was taken away: Death was
turned into Shame: the Proscription of their goods, did rather make them blush
than bleed. For must they not needs blush, who when they parted from all their
goods by Proscription, were to sit on a Stone bare-breeched, with naked and
seen, and showed buttocks; also with their uncovered podds, to strike or run
at a Marble Lion set before the gate of the Capitol (for that purpose?) See
Cerda on the place of Tertullian. Pamelius cleared the way to Cerda, though he
complain of Zephyrus his obscurity in this point. And yet I wonder, why nor
Gellius, nor the accurate Rabirius, do mention the manner of the Commutation
in their punishment, unless modesty deterred them.

Rigaltius says nothing to the maine matter, but picks a quarrel, and finds
fault with Optatus for the like phrase.

Suffundere maluit hominis sanguinem, quam effundere, said Tertullian. Optatus
lib. 2. Fundentes sanguinem, non corporis, sed pudoris. At quis alius pudoris
sanguis, quam corporis? says Rigaltius. As if there were some other blood of
shame, which was not of the body. Wittily enough, if it be wit to find Nodum in
scirpo, a knot in a bulrush. For Optatus in the cited book has it otherwise.
Episcopos gladio linguae jugulastis, fundentes sanguinem, non corporis, sed
honoris. You have slain the Bishops with your tongues, as with swords,
shedding the blood of their honor and credit, though sparing the blood of their
Bodies. And this reading, and exposition, is confirmed by the words, one leaf
before. Linguas vestras acuistis in gladios, quas movistis in mortes, non
corporum, sed honorum: Jugulastis, non Membra, sed Nomina. Quid prodest, quia
vivunt homines, and occisi sunt honores a vobis? Valent quidem membris, sed
ereptae portant funera dignitatis. You have sharpened your tongues as swords,
which you have moved, and thrust into the death and destruction, not of Bodies,
but of Goods; you have killed, not their bodily Members, but their Names, and
Credit; what boots it that they live, when their honors are destroyed by you?
They are healthy, but they carry about the carcass of funeral exequies of
their Dignities and Honors. He speaks of a Civil death Metaphorically, when a
man's good Fame is blemished, wounded, or destroyed. Honores occisi sunt: Their
Honors were slain, as it is in the Margin. He does not oppose Sanguinem
corporis, sanguini pudoris; the blood of the body, to the blood of shame, sed
sanguini Bonorum, or Honoris; to the blood of Goods or Honor. In the opposition
of the bodily blood, to the blood of shame, is no good sense; the resultance of
it being, that the blood of Blushing, is not of the Bodily blood; but it
stands with fair reason to say, ye shed the blood, not of their Bodies, but of
their Goods or Honors. Howsoever, Rigaltius was supine.

For if his copy had the words as he cites them (which is the best excuse) yet
the unlikely hood that so great a Scholar as Optatus, would speak so
improperly, might have made him to distrust his own Copy; and to make search
after other Copies: and he might have found the truth in the Copy of
Albaspinaeus, as I have cited the words. Neither needed Rigaltius to have
inquired far off. For Optatus with the Notes, and Observations of Albaspinaeus,
were Printed at Paris three years before Rigaltius Observations on Tertullian
came forth in the same City under his nose.

PAR. 10.
THeir fashion to Adore their Images, or false Gods, either Eminus or Cominus,
either Aloof off, or Close by; but especially Aloof off, as they followed
other businesses; their casual saluting Adoration was manifold, and of diverse
forms: See our accomplished Mr. Seldom (who is impense Doctus) in his Titles
of Honor, and in his Syntagmata de Diis Syris, toward the beginning. They did
Kiss their Images; (that must be when they are close by them.) Their Kissing
he proves from Cicero, Act. 5. in Verrem: from Lucretius libro 1. And ere they
Kissed, they looked up to Heaven with Hands spread abroad (say I,) and after
they Bended down, and sometimes Kneeled. Many Knees bow to Baal, Many mouths
kissed him, 1 King. 19.18. So Hosea 13.2. They kissed the Calves, or molten
Images. The good man did wiser, when he kissed his Cow.

Concerning the Heathens Adoration at Distance, it was diverse: if they Adored
the Celestial bodies.

First, they looked up toward the Heavens, For they beheld the Sun, when it
shined: and the Moon walking in brightness, Job 31.26. Secondly, their Heart
was secretly enticed to give the honor due to the Creator, to those his
Creatures. Thirdly, their mouths did Kiss their hands, verse. 27. which was not
without some Bendings of their bodies. Fourthly, they Prayed unto them, either
audibly, or by a more secret murmur. Remember the place of Tertullian
(concerning which by and by) Ad Solis inititium Labra vibratis. Ye wag your
Lips at the rising of the Sun.
-- Bona pars procerum tacita libabit acerra.
Haud cuivis promptum est, murmurque, humilesquesusurros
Tollere de templis: Et aperto vivere voto.
Men's bona, Fama, Fides, haec clare, and ut audiat hospes;
Illa sibi introrsum, and sub lingua immurmurat; o si
Ebullet patrui praclarum Funus: and o si, etc.
Persius Satyra secunda.

The greater part of Noblemen their Tacit censers bring
Unto the Gods, when they from them some shameful boon would wring.
It Is not, o it is not for each one to banish far away
Their Secret muttrings from the Church; and make them loud to pray.
If they, for a sound mind do pray, for Fame, or Credit: then
The'll pray alowd; and make their vows ring in the ears of men.
If for rich Nuncles death they wish, that once 'twould bubble out,
They Will pray so soft, that none shall hear, that stands them round about.
The like they did, when they prayed to the Sun.

Secondly, concerning their Worship or Adoration of Images on Earth at
Distance, it is thus, for the most part, branched by the glory of our Nation
for all humane literature.

1. They stood somewhat off before their Images. 2. They solemnly moved their
Right Hands to their Lips. 3. They Kissed the Forefinger joined with the Thumb.
4. They turned about their Bodies on the same hand, as Mr. Seldom alleges
from diverse Authors. 5. Let me add. They then lifted up both their Eyes, and
Hands spread abroad to Heaven. When they swore by Jove Capitoline, they looked
not so much to Jove in the Capitol, as to the Heavens. Yea their backs were
sometimes toward the Capitol. 6. They did draw nearer, and did Kiss oftimes
the Images themselves, as I said before.
That this was a Kiss not like the Humane Ambulatory Salutation, only done for
Complement; but of deep, and real Adoration of false Gods, as is evidenced;
Because I should have denied the God that is above, says Job verse. 28. For
Worshipping of Idols on Earth by Kissing them, is a denial of God in Heaven.
Which mutual Kissing of one another is not, nor can be.

Nor did they Kiss the Lips only of their Idols, and their Mouths; but both
the Fore-parts, and the Hinder parts, and their Shoulders, the Cheeks, the
back of the Hand, even the very Feet. See Ritterbusius ad Salvianum, page 379.
Perhaps they might kiss some other Hinder parts in humiliation. And I do
verily think they left not the Knees unkissed.

PAR. 11.
AMong men, if Persians of equal Degree, did meet, they Kissed one another
Lips. If a Superior met an Inferior, he gave the Inferior his Cheeks to kiss.
But a mean Persian, falling down did worship the Better, or more Ronowed;
(says Brissonius, page 241. as he is cited by Drusius.)

The story of Polyperchon falls in here very fittly: A Persian worshipping
Alexander, fell on his face before him, and with his chin touched the ground:
Polyperchon in a floute, exhorted the Persian to shake his chin lustily against
the ground: Alexander thereupon drew Polyperchon from the banqueting bed, and
tumbled him down, and arietated him to the earth, and made his head knock the
ground: and bitterly taunted him saying: Now Polyperchon, thou see thy self
do that, which even now thou did laugh at in another. See Curtius, 8. page
245.

Mr. Seldom very probably adds, It was called Adoration, or they were said to
Adore; Quod ad Ora, sive ad Os manum admovebant; because they moved their Hands
to their Mouths; or rather the Forefinger joined to the Thumb, as he before
explained it. His proof from S. Hierom, is most punctual; who do Adore, do
Kiss their Hands, and Bow down their Heads, (says Hierom;) And in the
propriety of the Hebrew tongue, Kissing is used for Worship or Adoration. Psalm.
2.12. The vulgar of Cajetan, Hentenius, and Santandrianus, have it,
Apprehendite disciplinam, Apprehend discipline, agreeing with the Chaldee. The
(...). Lay holdfast on Discipline. Osculamini Filium, says the Hebrew; which
Vatabus does well enlarge, saying, Osculo manuum testamini vos Dei Filium
habere pro Rege: By Kissing the Hands, that is, by Adoration, witness that ye
esteem the Son of God as King. Geverard Elmenhorst in his notes on Minutius
Foelix, cites to the same purpose both Pliny and Apuleius: whom Mr. Seldom
insisteth in.

One reason, why they did both Bend and Kiss, may be, because both Head, and
Mouth with it, did stoop down toward the Hand; and the Hand did mount up to
meet the Mouth. The joint correspondence, the concurring to the same action,
makes the Sense appliable, either to Hand, or Lips. Perhaps, the reason why
they put their Hands to their Mouths in Adoration, might grow from hence.

When they worshipped the Sun and Moon, and the Host of Heaven, or Coelestem
Africae Deum; The heavenly God of Africa, as Tertul. Apologet. 33. or rather
Coelestem Illum, That heavenly One, as Salvianus, lib. 8. They had not always
their Images below to Kiss them, and Worship them, and therefore looking up
and kissing their hands they so adored them.

Tertullian contra Nationes, 1.13. thus expresses it, Plerique affectione
Adorandi, aliquando etiam Coelestia, ad Solis initium labra vibratis. Most of
you, when you mean to Adore things heavenly, move your Lips toward the rising
of the Sun, or rather you shake, quaver, and often move your Lips Forward, and
Backward.

Indeed the Romans had an house dedicated to the Sun: Tacitus toward the end of
the 15. Book of his Annals says, Proprius honor Soli, cui est vetus aedes apud
Circum: Especial honors were decreed to the Sun, in the house dedicated to him
of old. Solis Effigies de Fastidio Aedis emicat, says Tertullian de
Spectaculis, cap. 8. yea they placed it above the Top of the house. And indeed
an Huge great Obcliske was sacred in his honor: Obelisci enormitas Soli
prostituta, was consecrated to the Sun, says Tertullian ibid. And this was a
very High one. Cassiodorus lib. 3. Epist. 51. speaks of more Obeliskes. A
greater was dedicated to the Sun; a meaner to the Moon. Ammianus lib. 17.
adds, That which was devoted Deo Soli, to God the Sun, had in it the Rays
gracilescentes, growing less and less, and did resemble the Sun.

That the Heathen worshipped or kissed, or fell down before the Images of the
Sun, Moon, or Stars, Before Kings were Adored, I remember not to have read. The
Persians worshipped the Sun, as he was pictured, or painted on Napery, and
Linning, or their Banners, whom we behold in his Buckler (says Tertullian
Apologetic. cap. 16.) Many mistake what the Buckler is. I take it to be his
round Circle, Orb, or Globe; He remaining, or residing bodily within the
compass of his Orb, or Round-Buckler, as the Poet calls it. Ovid Metamorph.
15. verse. 193, etc. Ipse Dei Clypeus terra cum tollitur ima,
Mane rubet, terraque rubet cum conditur ima.
The Buckler of the Sun looks red,
When he does rise, and go to bed.


Dei Clypeus, the Buckler of the Sun; that is, Solis orbis, the round Circle of
the Sun, as Greg. Bersman, has expounded it in his Marginall Annotation, on
that place.

But in the Houses of the Sun, no doubt he was Adored with Divine Worship.
Servius Tullus also built a Temple in honor of the Moon (says Tacitus,
Annalium, 15.9.) And in it, no doubt but She also was honored, as the Sun was
in the House to Him dedicated.

Augustine Tom. 6. page 75. Contra Faustum Manichaeum, 20.2. The Manichees
Adored the Sun; Ad cujus gyrum oration eorum circumvolvitur; They turned their
Prayers to Him, and to the Moon (as they moved any where in their Orbs) upon
two false suppositions, or rather misinterpretations, that the virtue of God
did dwell in the Sun; and wisdom in the Moon; and the holy Ghost in the Air;
and that God dwells in the Light, as all confess, Faustus little remembered
that God said He would dwell in the thick Darkness, 2 Chro. 6.^. And 1 King.
8.12. And not only said so, but Darkness was under his Feet. Psalm. 18.9. And
he made Darkness his secret place: his pavilion round about were Dark waters
and thick clouds, verse. 11. Soli huic Genu flectitis, says Augustine, de
Moribus Manichaeorum, 2.8. Tom. 1. page 164.

PAR. 12.
MAster Seldom in his Titles of honors, page 38. says; It grew by custom,
that Princes being next to Deities, and by some accounted as Deities, had the
like honor done to them, (that is to be Kissed or Adored) in acknowledgement of
Greatness: But I should rather think, That Statues, and Images had the
beginning of their Adoration from the obsequious Exemplary Worshipping of
Kings, Princes, and famous Heroes, either living or dead; more probably than
that Kings and Potentates had their Adoration from Images, or Idols.

Geverard Elmenhorst in his notes on Minutius Foelix, says; Because the memory
of the Ancients, and of Kings was observed: thence grew into custom the rites
of Worshipping and Sacrificing: He proves it by Cyprian de Idolis, and
Athenagoras his Apology, and Alexanders letter to his mother.

Tertullian de Idololatria, cap. 3. Idolum aliquando retro non crat. Idols were
not always or at all times. The Alexandrian Chronicle to this effect. Grecisme,
and Gentilisme began about Serug his time (who was the third Father, or great
Grandfather of Abraham, Genesis 11.22, etc.) Then did they take out to life the
Pictures of Magistrates, Tyrants, and others. After these Effigiations by
Paintings, about Terah's days (who was Father of Abraham) they spread and
increased their Idolatry by Statues and Images; which were first made of Clay,
by the help of the Potter in memory of those who were dead. And then, Dibutades
(says Pliny 35.12.) invented Red-oker, Rade, or Red-chalke; and they did paint
these Images with Vermilion, and Red-lead. Tarquinius Priscus his Jupiter was
of Earth; and therefore was wont to be dawbed over with Red-lead: So far
Plinius. And Pausanias in Achaicis, says; Bacchus his Image was dyed and
colored with Red-lead. The Chronicle of Alexandria thus proceeds. After, the
Masons prepared the Stone: Then the Silver-smiths, and Goldsmiths framed their
Images: and the Copper-smiths, Carvers, and Gravers at their pleasure varied
their work. Last of all the Blacksmith and other Artificers. This is cited by
Cerda, or Tertullian, who excellently observes in his Notes on that chapter of
Tertullian, that the Images made for Gods, were called (...): For Heroes,
(...): For Kings, (...): For Wisemen, (...): for Wel-deserving men, (...).

That, not only, nor perhaps principally, Greatness was the cause of their
Adoration; but diverse others as effectual motives, and inductives, is plain
from Minutius Foelix in Octavio. Vnaquaeque Natio Conditorem suum aut Ducem
inolytum, aut Reginam pudicam, sexu suo fortiorem, aut alicujus Mun^ris, vel
Artis R^portor^m venerabatur, ut civem Bonae m^^oriae. Sic defunctis (...), and
futuris dabatur exemplum. Every Nation did worship his Founder, either some
famous Captain, or chaste Queen, eminent above other women, or the Inventer of
beneficial things and Arts, as unto Citizens of happy memory. So was there
both Reward for the Dead, and an Illective for others after, to do the like.

From Historians he adds. Ob merita Virtutis aut Man^ris. For their Virtues,
or Gifts, and Good-works, they were accounted Gods. H^lco^ on Wisdom, 14.15.
says, Both Men and Women for some evident privilege of Virtue, as Strength,
Chastity and Knowledge, began to be Deified. Exho^^^ believed diverse were
assumpti in Deos, esteemed Gods, for finding out new kinds of Grain, or Corn
profitable for mankind: And both the Inventos, and things Invented, were called
by the same names. For --

Sine Libero, and Cerere, friget Venus. Without meat and drink, Lust waxes
cold. As Perseus did Philosophize in the records of Minutius Foelix.

Some hold that Jupiter was so called a juvando: But Mr. Seldom more
excellently to this effect, Jovis, Jovi, Jovem, Jove, are but derived
corruptions of the most sacred name of Jehova.

Generally it is confessed, men were Deified, not so much in acknowledgement of
Greatness, as of Goodness, and doing of Good. And yet perhas Mr. Seldon does
measure Greatness only by Goodness. It was wont to be his old position; None
Great but Good: Deus Optimus, the Best God, running in title, before Deus
Maximus, the Greatest God; and so we may say they were Deified for Greatness,
next after Goodness.

PAR. 13.
SEcondly, it is apparent that the Heathen Gods were but Men, as I proved
before. Let your Conscience condemn us, if it can deny, that all your Gods
were Men. (quoth Tertullian in Apologet. cap. 10.) He proceeds; We know the
Cities wherein they were borne, and the Countries wherein they left footsteps
of their works: In which also they were Buried. Nor will I instance in every
one of your Gods, being so many and so great. New Gods, Old Gods: Barbarous
Gods, and Greek Gods: Roman Gods, and Strange Gods. Gods whom you have taken
Captive, and Gods whom you have Adopted; your own Country Gods, and Common
Gods: He-Gods, and She-Gods: Clownish Gods, and Civil Gods: Sailing Gods, and
Fighting Gods.

Tertullian ad Nationes 2.12. varieth the couples thus; Greater Gods, and
Lesser Gods: Old Gods, and New Gods: Unmarried Gods, or Married Gods: Gods
Artificers, or Lazy Gods: Citty-Gods, or Peregrine Gods: Rustic Gods, or
Urbane Gods.

He adds, you had no Gods before S^turne, and no Historian has divulged him
other than a Man. Latinus Pacatus thus, Terra Cretemsis parvi J^vis gloriata
est cunabulis. Creet gloried that Jupiter was there Borne; or that they had the
Cradle of the child Jupiter.

Know with all, that diverse Fathers both Greek and Latin, and most Historians
say, that Jove was Buried also in Creet, and a Temple there built to him, with
this Epigram (says the Alexandrian Chronicle) (it might rather have said,
Epitaph) Here lies Picus dead, whom also they call Jupiter, or Jove. Yet there
being 300 Jupiters, we had need to have a truer man, than a Cretan, to show us
which of the 300 Jupiters it was, who was there Intombed.

Prudentius wittily reproves them;

Miror quod ipsum non sacratis Mentorem,
Nec templum and aras ipse Phidias habet,
Fabri Deorum, vel parents Numinum.
Qui si caminis institissent segnius,
Non esset ullus Jupiter conflatilis.
I marvel that you do not consecrate Mentor, and Phidias,
The God-makers, and Fathers of your deities;
For if they had not heated thoroughly their furnace,
No Molten Jupiter had nourished impieties.
Thirdly, the Famous Heroes and Princes were in Rerum Natura, in the world,
before their Images. The Statues being Statues of such and such eminent Men.
For the Represented must be before the Representor; and the Similitude
begins in time after that to whom it is like: Exemplar est prius exemplato,
the Example is before the thing Exemplified: As Vnio est rerum praeexistentium
unio: as things must preexist and have a being, before they can be united, and
joined together. Graven Images were not the Chimeraes and wild Anticks, or
mere Fancies of men's brains, having reference to Non entia, not beings (if
such a reference be to be had) but were Remonstraces of things that had been
extant, and were now out of sight and passed. Minutius Foelix in Octavio, Dum
Reges suos colunt religiose, Dum Defunctos eos desiderant in Imaginibus videre,
Dum gestiunt little memorias in Statuis detinere, sacra facta sunt, quae fuerant
assumpta solatia. While they religiously do worship their Kings; Whilst when
their Kings were dead, they desired to see them in their Images; Whilst they
rejoice to keep their memories in their Statues; What were at first Comforts,
are now Sacred Relics. And afterward. Quis dubitat horum Imagines
consecratas vulgus orare, and public colere: Who doubts that the Common
people does pray unto these consecrated Images, and publicly worship them?

I must add out of Cicero against Verres; That the Mouth and Chin of the
brazen Image of Hercules, were more worn than other parts thereof; because in
their prayers and gratulations they were wont, not only to worship, but to
kiss them also. And thus it is seen in many Images at Rome, where massy stones
are worn bare by the kisses of Adorers. Woe worth the time when Rome Christian
affected to be like Rome Ethnic or Pagan.

Cyprianus thus, Si aliquando Dii nati sunt, cur hodie quoque non nascuntur?
nisi forte Jupiter senuit, and partus in Innone defecit. If Gods were sometimes
borne, why is it not so now? unless Jupiter be grown Old, and Juno past
Childbearing.

PAR. 14.
FOurthly, Even in the more ancient times, Living Kings were Worshipped, and
Adored. In the Infancy of the world, Caine built a City, and called it after
his Sons name, Genesis 4.17. Before the general undage were Giants, and their
children became Mighty men, Men of Renown, Genesis 6.4. Whereas we read it Sons of
God, ibid. verse. 2. Others read it Sons of Princes: So the Chaldee. And indeed
that one name of God, viz. Elohim, is ascribed and applyable to men, Psalm.
82.1. Exodus 21.6. So before the Flood there were Giants, Mighty men, Men of
Renown. Princes, and the Sons of Princes: and these doubtless were much
Honored by the people, if not Adored, according to the great wickedness of
those days, When there was not a good thought in the heart of man, Genesis 6.5.

Within a while after the Flood, Nimrod began to be a Mighty One in the e arth:
He was a mighty Hunter: and the beginning of his Kingdom was Babel, or
Babylon, Genesis 10.8. etc. So he was a King, and the people testified their
subjection unto him, and homage was tendered by Kissing, Kneeling, or Falling
down to him. For he was a mighty Hunter, which words point at his Tyranny and
Oppression, Before the Lord, as it is in our translation; Against the Lord, as
Agustine has it, De civitate, 16.4. The word (...), being like a Sandall
fitted to either foot, signifying both Before and Against.

The builders of Babel aimed eagerly at Renown; Let us make us a Name, Genesis
11.4. Reverence, Honor, Worship, Adoration, did attend on such as made
themselves a Name, or Famous, even whilst they lived. Unto those days Josephus
does refer the beginning of Idolatry.

In Abraham's days is mention made of nine Kings at one battle: one of them was
Tidal King of Nations, Genesis 14.9. How many more Kings were there then afar
off? And how long before, had the Old World their Kings.

1 Samuel 10.1. Samuel powered a Vial of Oil on Saul's head, and Kissed him.
Drusius on the same place says, The Kiss of Dignity or Greatness is meant in
this place of Samuel.

Master Seldom observes well: It was usual in India also for subjects to
kiss their Kings; and not only so, but to fall down and worship them. I
Adore thee, O King, after the fashions of the Barbarians, by falling down
before thee. So far in effect Master Seldom himself: So that I may repeat
and resume my former Opinion; That Statues and Images had the beginning of the
Adoration, from the obsequious exemplary Adoration of Kings or Great Men,
either Living or Dead, rather than that Kings and Potentates had their
Adoration from Images or Statues.

Lastly; Though it is a very probable Etymology, which Master Seldom has,
that Adorare, to Adore, is derived from putting the Hand or Forefinger to the
Mouth, which was a solemn custom in many of their Adorations: yet neither did
All kiss their Hands always who Adored; nor did All that kissed their Hands,
always Adore. Let us hear what others hold. 1 Samuel 1.3. Elkanah went to
Worship, and to Sacrifice. Drusius in his Commentary on the place expounds,
Vt Adoraret, ut Deum Oraret, eumque precaretur; To Worship, that is to Pray
unto God: for so the word signifies, says he. He does not only say it, but
proves it, thus. Adorare pro Orare, legitur apud Virgilium, Propertiuns, and
Ovidium; Virgil, Propertius, and Ovid, use the word Adorare for Orare; Worship
for Prayer. In the Margin of Drusius it is well added; that sometimes they Prayed
Standing; and that Adorare is not simpliciter Orare, sed Orare Prostratum in
terram, ut adorantes solent: To Adore, is not simply to Pray, but to pray
Prostrate on the Earth, as Adorers use.

Tertullian often uses the word Adorare for Orare, in his book de Oratione.

John taught his Disciples to pray; He turns it Adorare. And again, Non
extat, in quae verba docuit Johannes Adorare; Where fair probability, if not
necessity, inforceth Adorare to be taken for Orare. No man will deny but
Praying is the chiefest kind of Worship or Adoration. Esaias 44.17. The residue
of the wood he makes a God, even his graven Image; He falls down unto it,
and worshippeth it, and prays unto it, and says, Deliver me, for thou art my
God. The Praying unto the Idoli, makes it a false God. It is the true God
Only, who must be Prayed unto. Call upon Me in the day of trouble, says God
Almighty, Psalm. 50.15.

See the forecited testimonies of Minutius Foelix, and of him who prayed to
Julius Caesar, and you will confess, that Prayer is used for Adoration;
Adoration for Prayer. Martial his testimony is as obvious as punctual.

Qui fingit Sacros auro, vel marmore, vultus,
Non facit ille deos: qui Rogat, ille facit.
Not He that for a Portraiture does Gold or Marble Take:
But He that does Adore the same, He does the Idol make.
And in 1 Samuel 2.36. He shall crouch to him for a piece of silver, and a
morsel of bread; Where Hentenius and Santandreanus have it, Vt Oretur pro eo,
that he may be prayed for; the Seventy have it, (...), to Worship him. The
Thargam of Jonathan, Vt Humiliet se coram eo, That he may Humble himself
before him. Vatablus, Vt Incurvet se ei; And he expounds it, That he Cast
down himself before him, when he Prays. Veniet ad Incurvandum se; as it is
in the Interlineary, He shall come to Bow down himself. And unto his Action
is joined his express. Prayer; Put me I pray thee, into one of the Priests
offices. Adorare and Orare have near conjunction. And Adoratio may be derived
from the other; Curtius, lib. 6. page 153. says of Alexander, Iacebant humi
venerabundi ipsum: They did Prostrate themselves on the ground when they
worshipped Alexander.

The learned Ludovicus de la Cerda, on Tertullian de Orat. cap. 7. heapeth up
proofs, that Adoro was used for Oro. Arnobius lib. 1. Deum quotidianis
supplicationibus Adoratis: Ye Pray to God with daily Prayers: Apuleius lib. 3.
Senior exurgit, and populus Adorat: The Elder stands up, and the people Pray.
Cyprian de Oratione; Christ went alone, Adorans, Praying. Ovid 4. Fast.
Hetruscus Turnus Adorat opes; id est, Precatur: Turnus the Hetrurian Prayed for
riches. Tacitus used Vulgum Adorare, Adoring of the people, Pro salutare, aut
Precari: for Salutation, or Praying unto them. So he concludes, Adorare, to
Adore, is nothing else but Orare Ad, to Pray unto. And de Idololatria cap. 7.
His manibus Adorare; Cerda expounds Proprie, (...), properly, to Pray To. And
is resolute, Adorare, est Orare Ad; To Adore, is to Pray To; As Adprecari, est
precari Ad: And yet he modestly confesses, that other expressions or notions
pari veritate constant, are alike true. Among which I do reckon that good
Etymon of Master Seldens. The Rites to be observed in Adoration, See in
Apuleius, libro 4. de Asino; and Pliny lib. 11. So far Cerda. I am now almost
at an end. Wisdom 14.15. There is a story of a Father afflicted with untimely
mourning. When he had made an Image of his Child, soon taken away, now
honored him as a God, which was then a dead man, and delivered to those that
were under him, Rites and Ceremonies. See farther in the 16, 17, and 20 and 21
verses. The Father here pointed at, was one Syrophanes (says Holcot on the
place) and he had this from the Master of the Scholasticall History: From
Fulgentius Mythologiar. lib. 1. cap. 1. From Alexander Nequam, in scintillario
poetarum, cap. 1. And the said Fulgentius had the History from Diophantes, a
most ancient Author. Holcot adds, Syrophanes was a very rich man in Egypt:
and that he set up his Sons Image in his house: And the Family of Syrophanes,
to flatter their Master, offered up Flowers to the Idol, platted Crowns,
burnt sweet smells; and the delinquents, or guilty servants, fled to the Image,
and then were pardoned.

PAR. 15.
HOLCOT yet proceeds; The Master of the Scholasticall History, tells
another Story of the Original of Idols. Ninus King of Assyria (when Belus his
Father was dead) made the Image of his Father, which was an Asylum, a Sanctuary
to faulty persons. Whereupon Men gave divine Honors to that Statue. Others
likewise dedicated Images to their dead friends. Gregory has this Story on
Luke 11.15. Nor is there repugnancy in these Stories, says Holcot; because
Idolatry had diverse Inventors; and the Book of Wisdom insisteth in the
Egyptian Idolatry, as being the most, and worst. Likewise in other parts of the
world, as he there evinceth at large, Idolatry sprung from diverse other
motives: and Adoration with it, say I. It is most certain, The worship
exhibited to false gods, was called Adoration: and it is very likely, because
they did Orare, and Orare ad Deos, it was termed with a little and easy
inversion, Adorare.

I conclude; Since men of Great Renown were before Kings: and Kings were
Adored whilst they breathed; and preceded their Counterfeits, Pictures or
Images, the Statues had Adoration derived unto Them from the Adoration of those
eminent Men: who being but Men, were by Men made such Gods as they were, for
doing of good: and for those men's sakes, and in memory of them, were their
Semblances, or Portraytures, and Statues made, Adorned, Prayed unto or Adored.
Genesis 4.26. Then began men to call On the Name of the Lord; or, to call
themselves By the name of the Lord; as it is in the Margin of our last
translation.

It is true indeed, that some learned men, and Master Seldom among them, De
Diis Syris in his Prolegomena, cap. 3. page 28. read it, Tunc coeptum est
profanari in invocando nomine Jehovae; because (say they) Chalal is interpreted
both to Begin, and to Profane. But the reason is shallow, and may be thus
retorted; Because Chalal is interpreted, both to Begin and to Profane; it
cannot signify, Coeptum est Profanari; but either, Coeptum est, or Profanatum
est. That Chalal signifies sometimes to Profane, is confessed on all sides. But
it oftener signifies to Begin. See the great Pagnine, page 699. etc. on the
Arabicks Chalal. The Interlineary renders Hochal, by Coeptum est. Some of the
Jewish Doctors are for Profanare, and some for Incipere.

Aben Ezra upon a most true and sound foundation, against all other Jews of
the other side, says; If it did here signify to Profane; Nomen, non verbum
cum particula cohaereret. Such is the relation and judgment of Iunius and
Tremelius on the place; in which I rest.

Bellarmine Tomo 2. de Monachis, lib. 2. cap. 5. is in one extreme; A
Religious life (says he) is so ancient, (he must mean a Monastical life, if
he will confute Melancthon and Calvin, (as he there pretends to do) that
there was an adumbration of it in the law of Nature before the Flood; for Enos
began to call on the Name of the Lord. From whence Authors do gather (says
he) that Enos did institute some particular Worship, and Higher and Better than
the Religion of the people. If he mean of the people that were of the cursed
seed of Cain, I will confess it. If he mean Enos, as a Patriarch or chief
head of a Family, instructed the people, and prescribed them their Duties, both
to Believe and to Practice; and that the people did not right to regulate or
frame a Religion to Themselves, or their Superiors; I will say, as he says.
Let ignorant, presumptuous, and frantic Rebels, who will Guide both King and
Kirk, think of this. I say, God defend me from a Religion compiled and made by
the Ignorants, or by the Vulgar: though two or three factious Superintendents,
as Thomas Muncer, Buchanan, Knox, or the like, do either lead them, or be led
by them.

Bellarmine cites Waldensis, as one of the Authors: yet he is a party, not a
legal witness, and more suspected than Bellarmine himself, as living in more
ignorant times. Yea Bellarmine himself might as well have said, that Adam's
and Eve's manner of life, before they had any Child, did adumbrate, effigiate,
or afford a pattern or patrociny, for the solitary life of the married
Hermites: for some such they have had, and one of late.

If Enos did prefigure then a Monastical life, it was of married Monks also;
For he begat sons and daughters eight hundred and fifteen years, Genesis 5.10.

Lastly; If it must be read, Profanatum est nomen Domini, as is possibly
verifiable; Then from this place no Monkery can be adumbrated.

Others are in Another extreme, and gather from hence, That now was the
public Breaking-in of Idolatry; and Gods Name now began to be profaned. So
far was that time from establishing any extraordinary way of religious
service of God in their judgments. And therefore they read it, as I said
before; Tunc coeptum est profanari in invocando nomine Iehovae. But, I say,
First for the Reading, they translate the Hebrew amiss; for (...) Hochal
cannot be expounded, both Coeptum est, and Profanari also in the same place;
though in several places it may signify, sometimes the one, and sometimes the
other; and perhaps both together, if Hochal were doubled, or repeated. Master
Seldom in the place above cited, says; Diverse Rabbis have read it, Tunc
profanatum est in invocando nomine Jehovae; where he might have observed, that
coeptum est, was, and must be left out. Vatablus averreth, that another learned
Jew expounds it, Tunc Inquinatum, sive profanatum est nomen Domini; but
Vatablus himself renders it best of all; Tunc coeptum est Invocari nomen
Jehovae.

Profanatum est nomen Domini, may possibly be a good reading. Coeptum est,
Invocari, is far more probable, in my judgment. But single Hochal cannot be
rendered Coeptum est profanari; if it were true, that it might be so at large
justifiably expounded from the sense.

The Interlineary has it literally, and truly; Tunc coeptum est ad invocandum
in nomine Domini. Indeed in the Margin, it is Invocari nomen, vel pollui; where
the word (...) Likra, is made appliable either to Invocation, or Profanation.
But the word is tortured; and though the Interlineary cites the reading so, it
does not therefore approve it. But (...) Hochal is rendered most properly,
Coeptum est; and in some other place, Inquinatum est: yet it does not, nor
cannot in this place, comprehend within its signification any of These two
readings; either Coeptum est Invocari, or Coeptum est Profanari, as I said
before. I say, Hochal by it self cannot signify so.

Lastly, I, for my part, will adhere to the translation of our Church, who have
it in the Bishops Bibles: Then began they to make Invocation in the Name of the
Lord; or in the last Translation, as is before recited. God grant me to avoid
unnecessary crochets or strains of singularity with any earnestness; by
following the major part, and by using the commonest notions of the words.

Though the first Edition of Tremelius had it, as Drusius says; Tunc coeptum
est Profanari: the later has it, as a palinody, say I, Tunc coeptum est
Invocari; And truly I was glad, that after I had uttered and pend my settled
single judgment, I found Drusius on the place concurring with me. Si Hochal
hoc loco significat coeptum est, non significat Profanatum est; and contra, si
significat profanatum est, non significat Coeptum est. If Hochal in this place
do signify, They Began: it does not signify, They Profaned: and contrarily,
If it signify here, They Profaned; it cannot signify, They Began; So Drusius
has it in his Commentary, Ad difficiliora loca Geneseos Cap. 15. page 30.
where he handles the words more at large.

Secondly, concerning the matter it self, which nearer concerns the point in
question; Whether Worshipping of Idols, preceded Worshipping of Kings, or Men
of Renown; and so Kings came to be Worshipped, because Idols had been so; or
rather contrarily, that Idols had their Worship from the preceding Adoration of
Kings, and Eminent people? Let me follow Aquinas, saying, 2 a 2 ae quaestione
94. Art. 4. and 2. Idolatry was not before the Flood, for so his words,
(inprima aetate) are to be understood, as appears by the second objection, In
secunda aetate. Idololatria legitur esse adinventa, vel a Nembeoth, qui (ut
dicitur) cogebat homines Ignem Adorare: vel a Nino, qui imaginem patris sui
Beli Adorari fecit; And both those were After the Flood: There was no Idolatry
in regard of the fresh memory of the Worlds Creation; so that the knowledge of
the true God, did flourish in their minds (says Aquinas) though they abounded
in other sins, say I. The affections of Cain, and his descendents, were most
perverse: but their understandings were not so darkened, but they remembered the
Creator of all things; with whom Cain had personal conference, (if I may so
say) as well as Adam had. If you sharpen an objection, that within a while
after the Flood the people forgot both the gracious Creation, and their as just
as terrible inundation, and fell to Idolatry, and so they might in the law of
nature. As quickly I answer; Though they had some few good men after the Flood,
to live among them, as Noah, Sem, and Abraham, and to keep them from Idolatry:
yet neither did the righteous men live so long, nor were so many, or near the
Creation as the first Patriarks were, or as our Enos, who lived nine hundred
and five years, nor as Seth, who lived nine hundred and twelve years; much
less as Adam, who lived nine hundred and thirty years. About six hundred
years after Enos was borne, as some say; Enos lived with Adam six hundred
ninety five years (says Salianus;) yea some account, that Adam lived within a
hundred and thirty years of the birth of Noah, and Eve ten years longer than
her husband. These propagated the true Religion, and somewhat restrained the
stigmatized Cain, and his irreligious posterity, from extremity of sinning, by
their holy lives, sanctified precepts, and divine both reprehensions and
exhortations. Indeed Cyril in the beginning of his third Book de Genesi,
relates, that Enos was called a God, and held a God for his admirable virtue
and incredible justice. Theodoret proceeds quaestione 47 in Genesin; By his
kinsmen was Enos called a God, from whence even those that were borne of him,
and other holy men, were called the Sons of God. It seems to be confirmed
by Genesis 6.2. The Sons of God saw the daughters of Men: So Adam was called the
Son of God, Luke 3.38. So Kings and their Officers are termed the Sons of
the most High, Psalm. 82.6. and Christians are called the Sons of God, 1 Ioh.
3.1. and are the Sons of God, verse 2. But none of this was Idolatry, nor did
they make these men false Gods, nor worship their Statues, for they were called
Gods no otherwise than in the Scripture Magistrates and Great Men are called
Gods, Psalm. 82.6. Ioh. 10.34. I said ye are Gods.

The Skillful in the Hebrew (says Augustine de Civit. 15.17.) avouch, though
the names of Adam and Enos, do both of them signify a man, yet under Adam, is
comprehended both Man and Woman: But Enos designs out man alone. Yet those,
whom he esteemed expert Hebreitians, deceived S. Augustine; for Psalm 103.15.
it is said, As for man, his days are as grass (and are not Woman's so too?)
(...) Hominis sicut herba dies. Enos, and homo, being common names, both to
Man, and Woman. So Psalm 8.4. What is (...) man, or mankind, that thou art
mindful of him? Which is a false exposition, if we exclude all womankind from
Gods merciful remembrance of them.

Enos began to call on the name of the Lord; perhaps because he first began to
call upon God by the name Jehova. For though God was not known by the name
Iehova unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Exodus 6.3. Yet he might be known by that
name unto Enos. I am sure, Genesis 4.3. Cain brought an offering unto Iehova; and
verse. 4. Iehova respected Abel, verse. 6. Iehova said to Cain. So again verse. 9.
and 15. And Cain said to Iehova, verse. 13. And Iehova set a mark on Cain, and
Cain went out of the presence of Iehova, verse. 16. Can you now say, God was not
known unto Cain by the name Iehova? therefore much more should I think, He was
known to the righteous Abel, to Adam the Protoplast, and to the repentant Eve,
by that Name of Names. Eve confessed ingenuously, Genesis 4.1. I have gotten a man
from Iehova; And indeed Iehova is often mentioned in Genesis 2. Though till man
was created, and the Creation perfected, the Name of Iehova is forborne; And
(which is admirable to be considered) In the story of Abraham, Genesis 12.1.
Iehova said to Abram, Iehova spoke to him, verse. 4. and Iehova appeared to him,
verse. 7. And most remarkably, Abram builded an Altar to Iehova, and called upon
the Name of Iehova, verse. 8. And he called a place Iehova-jirith, Genesis 22.14.
God said I am Iehova; who brought thee out of Vr of the Chaldees, Genesis 15.7.
And Abraham said, ^ehova, God, what will thou give me? verse. 2. Yea Abraham's
servants said, Genesis 24.27. Blessed be Iehova, god of my Master Abraham.
Likewise the name of Iehova is often used in the Hebrew tongue, in the
particular stories of Isaac, and Jacob; How then, and why does Moses bring in
God saying, as before is recited, God was not known by the name of Iehova, to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob?

I answer; It is a very difficult place, where all answers are easier to be
confuted, than established, or demonstratively proved. Consider favorably of my
two Conjectures. Though each crosses other; yet if either give content, or
satisfaction, I shall be glad. May I not then in the first place say, that the
holy Spirit of God, which dictated unto Moses what he should write, might, and
perhaps did resolute, that Moses should show his joy and delight, which he had
for first knowing God by the name of Jehovah, by using and frequent repeating
that Name, and applying it to the Actions, Relations, Passages, or Sayings,
which were long before, though not exactly by the name of Iehova, but by some
other convenient Attribute of God? As for example; Abraham called upon the name
of Iehova. The meaning may be; Abraham called on the name of him, whom I knew
to be Iehova, though Abraham knew him not by that name, but by some other.
Again, where it is, I am Iehova (in the conference with Abraham) Moses wrote in
the language of the later and better relation, though long before God might
speak to Abraham in other words to that effect. For Moses does not, would not
contradict Moses; And the truth being but one, Abraham did not know the name
Iehova before, which was first revealed to Moses; and therefore first spoken by
Moses, and applied by Moses to the first times so soon as Man was created, and
so continually dispersed into the History of the other Patriarcks; Moses
delighting in his prerogative of first knowing the the name of Iehova; as
Lawyers may more eloquently utter the Laws of the 12 Tables which were in rude
Latin long before, in the more refined, and fuller expressions of latter times:
Or like Historians, and Poets who ascribe the name of Jove, and Jove's words and
deeds, to the first beginning of times; though Jove had no being till after the
Flood of Noah; and therefore no name. So Moses might write according to the
most clear Revelations of his time, what was done, and said, in other terms
not so energeticall, long before to the Patriarcks.

If this please you not; what say you to a second way? May not the words be
read by way of Interrogation, which is as good as a strong and vehement
affirmation? By the name of Iehova, was not I known to them? As if he had said;
yes, certainly I was; as may be seen in their particular stories and passages
of their time. And I have elso established my Covenant with them, Exodus 6.4.
Even by that name Jehova, Genesis 15.1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, verses. For I pray you
consider, God here speaks not to diminish the reputation of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob: but to the great glory of their names and persons, with whom first
he established the Covenant made with them for the Jews. And therefore
Ignorance of God, or nesciency of his great Name, cannot be handsomely ascribed
to those Patriarcks in this place, where the knowledge and ratification of Gods
Covenant, and Gods familiarity with them, are reckoned as their glorious
privileges above all other men of those times.

Did not Abraham see Christ's day a far off? Did he not rejoice at the sight of
it? Was God the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, above other men? and they
esteemed as the Living, and not as Dead; and shall we rest in Abraham's bosom,
and eat and drink with Abraham, in the Kingdom of Heaven; than which
prerogatives, none ever had greater, and more, except our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, who also came of Abraham, and was promised particularly
to Abraham, that in his seed, that is, as the Apostle says, not in his seeds,
but in Christ, all the Nations of the World should be blessed: and shall
Abraham be ignorant of the name Jehova, which both Caine knew at first, and
every Jew, and Christian now knows? I cannot so undervalew those Patriarcks
majorum Gentium.

Besides, though not a Sentence, not a Word, not a Letter, not a jot of
Scripture, can now be lost or perish: yet the note of an Interrogation, or a
Comma, a Colon, a Mark, or a Pause might be omitted long since. For was not all
Scripture written without both points, and vowels at first? If you say, the
mark of an Interrogation being wanting, leads us to perplexities, to
diversity, yea contrariety of senses. I answer. Do not full many words in the
Hebrew Bible signify contrary things, exciting our studious minds to a search
of the most probable matters, and meaning, whilst the truth is known to God
alone? Even thus might it be with this passage. Where the note of an
Interrogation might either be wholly omitted at first, or casually unobsetved,
and left out by the first Transcribers, or Translators; and this might lead men
into Ignorance ever since; and yet no imperfection is to be imputed unto Gods
Word; nor is it blameable for any deficiency. And therefore I conclude,
according to the Rules of Aristotle, Top. 6. cap, ult. Let this exposition
stand, and be believed, till better be invented, and come in place. And then
let the clearest light of truth have his due; that is persuasion. And let the
less yield, and obey the greater.

If you expect authorities averring, that Idolatry was not before the Flood; I
refer you to the learned Salianus, in diverse places, especially in anno Mundi
250, and to the learned Scholia ibid. who cites for me, and for the negative,
Cyril Alexandrinus contra Julianum libro primo. Irenaeus 5.29. and diverse
others. Besides such, whom my weariness commands me to omit, that I may
return from extravagances to the right way, and method propounded by me. And
so because there was no Idolatry before the Flood: and Kings, at least eminent
men of high renown, and worth, were long before the times of the Flood, or
Idolatry: I conclude, Kings, Princes, Dukes, and other men of venerable account
for their goodness, in making Cities, governing of Nations, and founding
Commonweales, had not the beginnings of their Adoration from the worship
exhibited to Idols, Statues, Images, or Pictures: but rather, those Simulacra
were Adored, because they were the representations of Kings, Princes, or other
people, beloved, and revered; who both in their lives, and after their deaths,
were Adored. And yet to make the best interpretation that I may, of Mr. Seldens
words; whom for his depth, and variety of learning I admire: Let my consent run
along thus far by his side; That the later Kings, and Heroes might perhaps have
had their Adorations from some kind of Adoration derived from Idols; and yet
the first Idols had their primitive Adoration from the Adoration of Kings, and
other people of esteem, which were before Idolatry.

When Christ Worshipped and Adored God, as doubtless he did full often, I
think, He fell down on his Face. No Gesture could be more convenient at the
celebration of the holy Sacrament. For we cannot think otherwise, but that
Christ used almost all possible means to make the Apostles attentive to him:
and stirred them up, to the consideration of so stupendous mysteries, that
they might be better prepared to the holy receiving of them. Among Gestures
exciting, and raising up of Devotion, the falling down upon ones Face, is most
forcible, either in seeing it so done by others, or in practicing it our
selves. The dejection and prostration of the body, is the elevation of the
soul, and a means to sanctify and quicken the spirit.

When he took the bread, and gave thanks (for thanks he gave) Luke 22.19. I
cannot think otherwise but he lifted up his Eyes, and Hands to Heaven. So did
he in lesser matters; for when he multiplied the five loaves, he looked up to
Heaven, and blessed, and brake, and gave the loaves to his Disciples. And can
we now think, He looked on the Earth, and not up to Heaven, when he gave Thanks
and blessed the Food of life for us?

When he brake the bread, and gave it, It is likeliest he stood on his Feet,
and might move from one to another; or reach it to every one severally. So did
the Pater familias, or chief of the Feast among the Jews stand, and distribute
the bread at their sollemne meetings as the Rabbis affirm.

When he consecrated the Bread, saying; Take, eat, this is my Body, which is
given for you; Do this in remembrance of me, Luke 22.19. and hallowed the Cup
with its proper consecration: His countenance was divided between the Sacred
Eucharist, and his Disciples: Sometimes he beheld one, sometimes another: as the
matter required. He viewed the bread, when he began to say, This is my Body,
which is broken, or given; When he proceeded, It is given, or broken for you,
he earnestly beheld his Apostles, and the whole Church in Them, Idealiter,
Likewise when he said, concerning the Cup, Drink ye all of it, etc. His Eyes
passed along with his Words, his Words with his Heart: viewing the varied
objects, as was meet, flitting, and moving from the Apostles, when he
commanded, All of you drink; or Drink you All: But when he added, Drink ye all
of it; for this is my blood of the new Testament; it cannot be, but he
earnestly beheld the consecrated Wine, or his own Blood.

All this I likewise suppose to be done by our Heavenly Savior, as he stood on
his Feet; And this does the Church, or ought to do, imitating him, and
fulfilling his commandment. Do this in remembrance of me: which he spoke not
only of the Bread, and the form of its consecration, Luke 22.19. and perhaps
of Identity of Gesture: but also of the Cup, and the Consecrating of the Wine
in its proper form, as himself had done, 1 Cor. 11.25. And either in Heaven,
or from Heaven taught his Apostle S. Paul. Whilst each of them did eat, he
beheld the Eater severally: and when they drank All of it, (as they All drank
of it, Mark 4.23.) So he beheld them especially, and singly one after another.

The Prayer.
I Must needs acknowledge (O all-knowing God) that the humblest way that I can,
I do Worship thee both in soul and body; and yet I apparently discern, I do
not sufficiently Adore thee. Accept (holy Father) my devout wrestling rather,
than performances: Pardon my imperfections; confirm, and increase in me all
goodness; and give, O give me such a taste of thee in this life, that I may
be filled, and satisfied with thee, and by thee in thy glorious Kingdom. Amen.

CHAP. VI. And the second Section of the seventh General: Wherein is showed,
what Actions and Words Christ used in the Consecrating of the blessed Eucharist.
1. The first Action, He Took Bread.

Christ never took any thing into his hand in a religious manner, but it was
bettered. Ignatius was (...), or the child whom Christ took in his arms.
Christ's S^^urge had more virtue, than an ordinary whip. Christ's Touch
impar^^^^th virtue.

2. The second Action, He Blessed the Bread. What it is to Bless. Many kinds
of Blessings. Gods Blessing what it is. The effects of Gods Blessing. Joseph a
Prophet. Christ's Blessing of the five loave caused their multiplication, not in
Number, but in Magnitude. Christ's Blessing is like Gods Blessing; it consists
not in mere words. It is effectual in operation. Christ's Blessing of the
bread, was not the Consecration of his Body.

Parents Blessing. Priests Blessing; and the effects thereof. Illyricus would
have altered the doctrine of the Keys. Christ's Benediction consisted partly of
Prayer. Tankesgiving.
Giving of Thanks, and Blessing, sometimes used promiscuously. Piscator's
observation

How God Christ blesses.

How Man blesses God. Why the blessed Sacrament is called the Eucharist.

In the Celebration of the blessed Sacrament Blessing Giving of Thanks all one.

The power of Blessing greater than the power of Nature. Man's blessing of God,
a superlative kind of Thankesgiving. Christ's blessing of God, what it is. The
virtue of Christ's blessing. Man's blessing of Man, what it is. Christ's
Thankesgiving, and blessing in the Sacrament, what it was. The Jews had
distinct Graces for their Suppers. Christ's Benediction of the Bread in ihe
Sacrament, not the Consecration of it.

Lyranus, Hugo, Innocentius, and S. Ambrose taxed in this point. The properest
use of (...) amongst Men.

How Christ in the blessed Sacrament did (...); Bless. (...). Give thanks.


Probable that Christ's blessing was not without Imposition, or lifting up of
his hands. Heave offerings in the old Law, types of this. Wave offerings in the
old Law, types of this.
Possibly Christ might use Elevation and waving of the Bread at the Benediction.

3. The third Action, He Brake it.

The end, why he Brake it. Maldonat (saying Breaking of the bread, and Giving
of it, is all one) is exploded. Christ in Breaking the bread, followed the
Hebrew custom. Breaking of the bread did properly signify the breaking of his
body on the Cross. How Christ's body was broken. Breaking of the bread shows
the ancient custom of Imparting the Sacrament to the Standers-by. Lorinus, in
saying the bread was cut with a Knife, is against three Evangelists, and S.
Paul.

The ancient Fathers do not use the term of Cutting, but Breaking of bread.

The Not-Breaking of the bread in the Sacrament, is a transgression of the
first Institution. The Church of Rome herein censured. The practice of the
Primitive Church: both in receiving of the Bread and Wine. The Papists taxed
for Barring the Laity the Cup. Broken, and Divided, not all one, as Gaspar
Sanctius ridiculously thinks. The Rabbin, that taught Baronius, Direct against
Lorinus. The form of bread at the Jews ordinary Feasts, described by Baron. cut
Lozinge-wise. The form of the Panis decussatus, religiously used among the
ancient good Christians. A Cross, or Christ crucified on the Cross, was in
ancient times impressed on the mystical bread. The picture of a Dove, of the
Holy Lamb, and of a Shepherd with a sheep at his back; and the mystical
signification of them.

4. The fourth Action. He gave it to his Disciples. He Himself gave it to
every of his Disciples particularly. The consecrated bread given by Christ, was
unleavened bread. We may consecrate either Leavened, or unleavened bread.

It is probable, Christ gave the Cup Himself to every of his Disciples.
Musculus censured therein. Aquinas saying. The Sacrament is many things
materially, but one thing formally. He gave it to his Disciples. The
Communicants at this Eucharist, were none of the Common Disciples, but only
the Eleven Apostles. They in some sort represented the rest of the Priesthood
only. Christ never gave power to any Layman to administer his sacred Body.
Common persons are not to meddle with holy things. Gods judgments upon such
profane persons. Christ at this Eucharist gave his Apostles power to
Consecrate the sacred Eucharist. After his Resurrection, and before his
Ascension, he seconded this power. The Apostles in another regard represented
the whole company of all his Disciples Christians in general.

Christ when he Consecrated the blessed Eucharist, represented the body of the
Clergy Idealiter. But when he received it, he represented the whole body of
the universal Church, both Clergy and Laity.

The Apostles, qua Apostoli Discipuli represented the body of the Clergy.
Laity.


5. Secondly, His words. First word: Take. He said, or Saying, were not spoken
by Christ: neither are they part of his Consecration. The words of Consecration
were only these; This is my body, etc. Innocentius the third, his opinion
concerning Christ's Consecration of the blessed Sacrament, censured. A second
and third opinion related by Aquinas, censured. Lucas Brugensis thinks Christ
used more words in the Consecration. When, or at what Time Christ said those
words, Take, etc. Christ gave the hallowed bread, not in Promise, but in
Exhibition. John the Baptist called a fool. Epictetus saying. Christ put not
the blessed Sacrament into the Disciples Mouths, but into their Hands. In the
Primitive Church the Christians received it into their Hands. So did they in
Tertullians time. So did they in Cyprians days. Taking is by the Hand. Cases
may fall out, wherein the hallowed food may be put into the Recipients mouths.
We are not bound to do All, whatsoever Christ did at the first Celebration. We
must do All, whatsoever he commanded us to do. Authorities for Taking the
blessed Sacrament into our Hands. The Tripartite History. Chrysostom. Cyprian.
Tertullian. The Schismatics in old time divided not themselves from the
Catholic Church in this respect; as S. Augustine witnesses. Nor Novatus; as
Ruffinus records. The Christians in ancient time Reserved the Sacrament. Some
Reject things really Tendered unto them.

6. The second word: Eat. It is probable that Judas did receive the Sop into
his Hand. Mouth.
Many of the Fathers did think so. Sins revealed grow more sinful.
Carolostadius his fancy by most Divines disliked, disploded. The Future tense
is never used for the Present tense, but the Present tense is often used for
the Future in Scripture.

7. The third word: This is my Body, which is given for you, etc.
Transubstantiation roved at. The farther Disquisition thereof wittingly and
willingly forborne. The Authors Apology for the same. His Valediction to the
Remainder of his Miscellanies. Resolves to spend the remainder of his days in
holy Devotion, and continual Praying. The Moors of Morocco Pray six times
every twenty four hours. The Lords Prayer highly commended, and preferred
before all other Prayers. It ought to be used by every Christian at least
seven times a day. The Church of England commended: Unto which the Author
submits himself, and all his Writings. Bishop Jewel, Bishop Andrews, Bishop
Morton, Bishop White, and incomparable Master Hooker, have written Polemically
the Controversies of the Lords Supper: unto whose unanswerable Writings the
Author refers all scrupulous Christians for their better satisfaction.

PARAGRAPH 1.
THe accursed Gnostics have fained abominable blasphemies, and ascribed them
to our holy Savior in his first Institution. Sixtus Senensis in my opinion,
deserves a very sharp censure, for the bare reciting and recording such damned
horrid lies, though his soul detested them. May they never more be thought
upon.

Let us consider the Actions in order in the same manner as Christ performed
them.

First, He took bread; and so the Cup: he might have bid them take it
themselves, as in the Second Supper he bade them Divide the wine among
themselves, Luke 22.17. But he himself now Took the bread, and by Taking it,
shows he would do somewhat more by It, than by other bread, which he took not
into his hands. So John 6.5. Jesus lift up his eyes: and he took the loaves,
and when he had given thanks, he distributed to the Disciples, ver. 11. So he
took the seven loaves, and fishes, and gave thanks, and brake them, and gave
them to the Disciples, Mat. 15.36.

Neither did he ever take Any thing in a religious form into his hands, but it
was bettered, and changed from its old nature some way or other. Simeon took
Christ up in his arms and blessed God, Luke 2.28. for Christ needed no
blessing. Christ took a child into his arms, Mark 9.36. And some think this
child was Ignatius, who says of himself, that he was (...), borne or carried
of God. But whosoever he was, certainly he was blessed of Christ more than
others, whom he took not into his arms. When little Children were brought to
him that he might touch them, Christ was much displeased with his Disciples,
because they rebuked them who brought them; he took the children up in his
arms; but what followed? He put his hands upon them, and blessed them, Mark
10.16. If I should say, that when Christ made a scourge of small cords, John
2.15. and drove all the faulty ones out of the Temple, no doubt that scourge
had more virtue than an ordinary whip. If virtue went out of him, when a woman
touched but the hemme of his garment, Mat. 9.20. questionless, when in a
religious way he touched other things, he imparted virtue to them. So when he
took the bread, you cannot but think, He put his hands upon it, and blessed it:
blessed it above other bread which he touched not. Saint Matthew says
expressly, He took bread, and blessed it, Mat. 26.26. So it is also Mark
14.22. confirmed with a back of steel. It is varied Luke 22.19. Christ took the
bread, and gave thanks, and brake it. And this is also doubled or redoubled, 1
Cor. 11.23. etc. Christ took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it.
Hence arises the next point, the Second point worthy the disquisition.

PAR. 2.
AFter he took bread, he blessed it, Mat. 26.26. What it is to bless? All
words, names, voices, and things whatsoever which are applied to God, are more
significant than if they be referred to ordinary matters. When God blesses, he
gives, bequeatheth, exhibiteth blessings. He does good, and prospers the
parties blessed. Gods Benedicere, is his Benefacere; imparting to the creature
some real benefit, efficacious blessing, Genesis 12.2. I will bless thee, and
make thy name great.. That was one effect of Gods blessing; but many more
concurred with that, both Temporal. The Lord has blessed my Master greatly,
and he is become great: he has given him flocks, and herds, silver, and gold,
etc. Genesis 24.35. What need have we to cite more particulars? when God blessed
Abrahaem in all things, ver. 1. And God blessed Abraham not in Temporal things
alone (for they many times are the portion of the wicked) but even in Eternal
and Spiritual blessings, Gal. 3.14. It follows, Thou shall be a blessing;
or, as the Interlineary has it rightly from the Hebrew, Be thou a blessing,
Genesis 12.2. He spoke the word, and it was done. By the word of the Lord were the
heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. Psalm. 3.6.
Abraham became a blessing to us. The faithful alive are the children of
Abraham. The blessed who are dead, are in Abraham's bosom.

It yet follows, I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that
curse thee: that is, who do good for thee, I will do good for them; who do ill
to thee, I will do ill to them. God said to Kings, Touch not mine Anointed,
and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.14, 15. One of the Kings was Pharaoh,
whom the Lord plagued, and his house with great plagues, because of Sarai
Abraham's wife, Genesis 12.1^. though Pharaoh had committed no evil with her. The
other King was Abimelech, to whom God came by dream in a night, and said, Thou
art a dead man, for Sarah whom thou have taken, Genesis 20.3. Yet Abimelech had
not come near her, ver. 4. Abraham is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee,
ver. 7. And Abraham prayed unto God, and God healed Abimelech and his wife, and
maidservants: and they bare children. For the Lord had fast-closed up all the
wombs of the house of Abimelech, ver. 17, 18.

The like may be said of Isaac, whom Abimelech so revered, that he charged all
his people, sayin, He that touches this man, or his wife, shall surely be put
to death, Genesis 26.11. And both he and his people confessed that Isaac was now
the blessed of the Lord, ver. 29. God has the like care of Joseph: and he was
a prosperous man. And Potiphar saw that the Lord was with him; and, That the
Lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand, Genesis 39 3, 5. And the Keeper
of the prison looked not to any thing that was under his hand, because the Lord
was with Joseph: and that which he did, the Lord made to prosper, ver. 23.
Pharaoh made much of Joseph, and God prospered both Pharaoh and his kingdom
through Joseph's means. And Joseph may well be accounted a Prophet; for Joseph
had a Cup, by which indeed he divineth (says the Steward of Joseph's house,
Genesis 44.5.) And if indeed he did Divine, he was a Prophet; yea one of those
Prophets pointed at by the Psalmograph, as follows in Psalm. 10.^. in the next
verses where Joseph is particularly named. He was blessed in himself, and a
real blessing to others. When Christ blessed the five loaves and two fishes,
Luke 9.16. Benedictione augebat eos, and multiplicabat; by the blessing he
increased, and they began to multiply, immediately upon Christ's benediction of
them: increased more at his fraction: multiplied yet more as he gave them to
the Disciples: ascended to a greater augmentation, as the Disciples gave them
to the people: growing still in quantity, as the people held, or beheld them.
Lastly, it is like also they did increase even in their mouths, and as they
did eat them. Nor were the five loave made more loaves, or the two fishes
increased in number; for then it had been improperly said, that they all did
eat, and were filled with five loaves and two fishes, if the loaves and fishes
were more in number: as if from every stalk seven ears came up full and good;
so from every loaf more loaves did arise, and from every fish more fishes. But
each piece or mouthfull of every one of these did grow greater. And as some
wells do fill the rather, and swell the more, by ha^ing water often drawn from
them; or as fountain water continually flows, and what you take up from it,
fills again with a kind of usurious increase: so every parcel of bread or
fish did grow (as Butchers say of young fat meat) did plim, or grow till it
came to their eating.

As God Blesses: so Christ Blesses. For his Blessing never consisted in mere
words, but was effectual in operation, conveying real good unto the blessed.
For though the Blessing of the bread was not properly the Consecration of his
body; yet it was an antecedent Preparative; a dispositive Adaptation: not void,
or vain, or inefficacious: perhaps accompanied with prayers, perhaps with
thanksgiving, perhaps with both. The Benediction of Parents, though it be but a
prayer most times, yet it returns not empty; but many times imparteth
blessedness: yea, Always if the Recipient be well prepared. The Sacerdotall
Benediction is not Only a plain good prayer; but wholly, and altogether has
a certain power and efficacy of the Key, Loosing and Absolving, (says
Illirycus.) Who would have invocated the doctrine of the Keys, if he could
have found but a little hole Open, or a little crack or flaw? But Christ's
Benediction, as it was mighty in operation, so it consisted in part as well of
Thankesgiving, as of Prayers. For though S. Matthew and S. Mark, have the word
(...), and apply it to the Bread only, Matthew. 26.26. Mark. 14.22. And though
S. Paul, 1 Corinthians. 10.16. calls the Sacred Cup, the Cup of Blessing, which
we Bless: yet S. Paul, 1 Corinthians. 11.24. uses the word (...), in stead of
(...): and so does the Evangelist, Luke 22.19. He took bread, and gave
thanks, and brake it. Giving of Thanks, and Blessing, are sometimes of one
and the same signification; as is evidenced, 1 Corinthians. 14.16. When thou shall
Bless with the Spirit, how shall he who occupies the room of the unlearned,
say Amen, at thy Giving of thanks, where Blessing, and Giving of Thanks, are
confounded. Piscators observation on the 1 Corinthians. cap. 10. verse. 16. is good.
Poculum illud Benedictionis: (...): That cup of Blessing. The words in the
Syriac are, (...): Coso hau dothauditho: id est: Poculum illud Gratiarum
actionis: That Cup of Giving of Thanks. And so it is read in Tremelius Syriac
translation of the New Testament. Vbi observa; Syrum, nomen (...) exponere per
nomen (...). Et sane in Institutione sacrae Coenae, duo ista verba (...), and
(...), uno eodemque sensu accipiuntur: Where observe (says Piscator on that
place) that the Syriac expounds the word which signifies Blessing, by a word
which signifies Giving of Thanks. And verily, in the Institution of the holy
Supper, those two words of Blessing, and Giving of Thanks, are to be taken in
One and the selfsame signification.

God does not bless with Giving of Thanks or Prayers to man.

Christ blessed creatures reasonable and unreasonable, sometimes with Giving of
Thanks; sometimes with Prayer: Thanks to God: Prayers for the things to be
blessed.

Man may be said, in a nice way, to bless God; yet not Give him Thanks Then:
but God may be blessed by prayer alone: At another time he may be blessed by
Thankesgiving alone without Prayer. Commonly it is done by the coadunation of
both duties. For no otherwise can we bless God, or confer good on him: But
we can Thank him, and Pray to him, and keep his Commandments.

The Jews did use the word Benedicere, to govern both a Dative and an
Accusative case; As Benedicere Deo; and Benedicere Deum. The Romans do
restrain the use more to the Dative. The Graecians construe it with the
Accusative.

As the blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord, is called the
Eucharist, from Christ's giving of Thanks, when he did institute it: and Justin
Martyr in his second Apology, terms the Sacrament Eucharistizatum panem, the
bread which is sanctified by Giving of Thanks, or rather cibum (...), the
bread of nourishment. And Irenaeus, 4.34. Ille panis, in quo gratiae actae
sunt, est corpus Domini, that bread In which, or On which, or Over which Christ
gave Thanks, is the Body of the Lord. So was both Bread and Wine blessed, even
the very materials: and the Fathers insist more upon the Benediction, than on
the Thankesgiving.

In Celebration of the blessed Sacrament, the duties of Blessing and
Thankesgiving, seem to be all One, though they may, and are at other times
divided. In giving of Thanks, Christ blessed: in blessing the bread, he gave
Thanks.

Eusebius Emissenus, Homilia 5 de Paschate, Quanta vis divinae Benedictionis,
ut in Christi substantiam divina elementa mutentur? Oh, how great is the power
of Christ's divine Benediction, that changes the divine Elements into Christ's
substance? Ambrose de iis qui initiantur, cap. 9. answers in a sort. Greater
is the power of Blessing, than of nature; because by the Blessing, Nature her
self is changed. Bless me (sweet Lord) and change my Nature into Grace.

He blessed some bread to multiply it, and it did multiply; as if it had had
vegetation, sense, or reason. Neither was the Crescite and multiplicamini,
Increase and multiply, so fruitful. For of five loaves and two fishes, which
he Blessed, Matthew. 14.19. All did eat, and were filled, above five thousand in
all, and there was more left, than was in store before they fed. But here
Christ blessed the bread, separating it from common use, elevating it above its
nature, and imparting to it spiritual virtue.

When Men bless God, it is but an higher degree of Thankesgiving, if I may so
call it.

For our Goodness reaches not to him, we can convey no good to him; we may by
blessing God, and thanking him, do good to our own souls, bodies, and
estates; to our children, kindred, friends, and benefactors.

The Greater properly Blesses the Lesser: Not the Lesser the Greater.

Whenever either Christ blessed God; or Man did, does, or shall bless him,
Benediction is nothing else but Thankesgiving, and praising, and speaking good
of him. And, of the two, rather Giving of Thanks is comprised in Benediction;
and (...) may be called (...); than Benediction is all one with Thankesgiving;
or Benedicere, be interpreted, Gratias agere.

Christ never blessed any Creature, but it received good by him, in one kind
and degree, or other; But Benedicere nostrum non est causale, (as Christ's
blessing was) sed recognoscitivum seu expressivum; We Thank God, and utter
our desires.

Man never blessed man or Creatures so, that the very Benediction was not a
Thankesgiving to them; but rather a Prayer for them, and a Thankesgiving to God.

Christ's Giving of Thanks when he administered the Sacrament, was Thanks to
God alone, not to Men, not to the Sacrament: And the Benediction did not only
bless God: but blessed the subject matter, the Bread, and the Wine contained
in the Cup: the Cup it self being said to be blessed, by the Metaphor of
continens pro contento. The elementall Sacramentals had an induing, some way or
other, with heavenly virtue.

The Jews had distinct Graces for their Suppers. And no doubt, Christ was more
devout in Thankesgiving to God, than the Jews were. He is a Jew, who denies
this truth. Therefore Christ's Thankesgiving in the Celebration of the
Eucharist, was not an Ordinary Giving of Thanks, as is before all other
meals: but more Divine, and Operatively energeticall, suting with so heavenly
mysteries.

Christ's Benediction of the bread, was not principally the Consecration of it,
but a kind of preparative prayer before the Consecration.

Lyranus, Hugo, Innocentius, say, the Benediction was the Consecration.
Benedixit ipsum panem, says Maldonate. Ambrose, Hic est panis, quem Benedictio
consecravit: This is the bread consecrated by the Blessing (says he, in Libro
de iis qui initiantur, cap. 9.) Barradius (says Ambrose) takes Benedictionem
Late: and infers, If after Blessing Christ instituted the Sacrament, then
the blessing was not the Consecration.

Truly may I say, the Blessing and Thankesgiving was not the full entire
Consecration, but only the former part of it. Amongst men (...) is a Blessing
before eating, sanctifying the meat, ere it be taken, by prayer to God: and
daily do we bless the Table (as our phrase is) that is, the meat on the
Table, or the whole Meal, though all the dishes be not brought in: and this is
the properest and best use of (...). But (...) After meat, is a Thankesgiving
rather for the Creatures received, than a Sanctification of them. And it may
be, Christ did both Bless Before he did eat and drink: and gave God Thanks
After: one time (...): another time (...).

Though the manner of Christ's Benediction be not recorded in Scripture, yet we
cannot well think it was in words only: Excluding all solemnity of Ceremony,
denying his Ocular Elevation, rejecting the Imposition of his Hands, which he
was wont to do in Benediction. He laid his Hands on little children and
blessed them, Mark. 10.13. So did he in healing the sick, Mark. 6.5. He laid
his Hand on a few sick folk, and healed them. So Luke 4.40.

Sure I am, that he lift up his Hands, when he Blessed his Apostles, Luke
24.50. And his Apostles were wont to consecrate people to divine services by
Imposition of Hands. 1 Timoth. 5.22. Lay Hands suddenly on no man. He does not
speak in Sensu forensi, of Laying on of hands; as he Laid his hands on me;
that is, he struck me: But in sensu Ecclesiastico, as the Holy Spirit teaches
us, for Consecration, as Timothy himself was used, who received a gift by
prophecy, With the Laying on of Hands, 1 Timoth. 4.14.

In the old Law they had diverse Heave offerings, or Wave-offrings: As they did
wave other things: So they did wave a loaf of bread, and a cake of oyled
bread, and a wafer out of the basket of unleavened bread, Exodus 29.23.
Vatablus reads it, Exaltabisque Illa Exaltationem: Thou shall wave them for a
Wave-offring. This was first Lifted up, or Heaved up; Then was it waved, or
shaken to and fro, as it is in the Margin of our last Edition. Vatablus in his
Comment, says it is Ad verbum, Agitabis illa agitatione: yet the Interlineary
has it, Agitabis Ea agitationem. I conclude; Lifted up the bread was, and
shaken to and fro it was after it was Lifted. So far have we Scripture to
guide us. Vatablus does more particularize the manner of the waving. The
Heavedup. Sacrifice they did shake, or wave; moving it first from the East to
the West; then from the North into the South; signifying thereby that God was
Lord of the whole earth (says he.) The signification is good and proper, if it
were grounded on Scripture, which it is not. That the heaving up of the
offering did manifest It appertains to God, is a fair resultance; but though
Rabbi Solomon, and Vatablus after him, may safely conclude, it was moved or
shaken round about, yet which quarter of heaven they began at, and which they
ended at, wants proof: and the Rabbis differ in judgment one from another.

I will not say, but it is possible, Christ at the Benediction, might use
Elevation; in signification that he should be Lifted up to the Cross: yea,
waving of the bread in the sight of his Apostles: and toward them, or toward
heaven: and if he did, he did it with a divine signification, that God
commanded this, and that this ordinance was from heaven, perhaps with more than
one only. But it seems not probable to me, that when and where he abrogated
part of the Leviticall Law; Then and There he used the Ceremony of the said
Leviticall Law: or that his Offering was not every way perfecter than the
Oblations of the Old Law, which savoured more of the Terrestrial than
Celestial Canaan. Sed quisque abundet sensu suo: Let every one opine as he
pleases: yet thus conclusively I shall never believe, but the Benediction was
with some sacred extraordinary Solemnity, Ceremony, or Action, more, than if
it had been used, or was used at an ordinary refection. For by the breaking of
ordinary bread, Christ was not known, nor was discerned, nor could be
discerned from any other man: But when he (so solemnly) Took bread, and
Blessed it, and Brake, and Gave it them (just as he did before in the
Eucharist) by his Actions, and the devout manner of them in their
Circumstances, were their eyes opened to know him, Luke 24.30. etc.

PAR. 3.
WHen Christ had Taken the bread, he Blessed it, He Gave thanks, He Brake it.
His Breaking of it is now to be considered. If the Priest alone had been to
take it, there needed little breaking: or rather none, unless the Priest are
all the broken pieces. The Breaking implies it is so done for more than one:
and for this end was Fractio panis; The Breaking of bread.

It is ridiculous, what is in Maldonate, Matthew. 26.26. on the word Fregit; It
is called the Breaking of Bread; not because it is truly Broken; but because
it is Given: As if Bread could not be Broken, and yet not Given. As if they
could not also Give whole loaves. Did whole loaves, and not rather Broken bread
signify Christ's body, which was Broken for us? And did not Christ Give his
Disciples the Sacred Bread after it was Broken? How then is Breaking all one
with Giving? He says, our reasoning proceeds from great Ignorance. Judge
(Reader) if this supervice exposition do not arise from pride, and presumptive
confidence, that he can cast dust, and blind the eyes of the world.

Even in this particular also, it seems Christ followed the Hebrew custom:
For the Talmudists report, that at their Home-feasts among the Jews, the Head
or Father of the Family, Took Bread, Gave Thanks, and Brake it.

And in truth, Breaking had a proper signification to demonstrate That his Body
should be Broken on the Cross. For though a Bone of him was not Broken, John
19.36. yet were they Out of joint, Psalm. 22.14. yet his Flesh was Broken in
many pieces. His holy Temples and Head pierced with many thorns: thorns beat
in with a Reed or Cane, Matthew. 27.30. His tender back so cruelly whipped,
that the Psalmist, Psalm. 129.3. compares the executioners to ploughmen: the
dints, ruptures, and slices, made by the Roman rods, to no less than furrows,
than long furrows. The ploughers plowed upon my back, and made long furrows.
I know no interpretation of this Scripture so proper as this, that I have
delivered. His innocent hands and feet, they bored thorough with great vast
nails, so great, that a bridle was made of them, as Eusebius records. The
Psalmist says, Psalm. 22. verse. 16. They Dug my hands and my feet: as the
Hebrew well bears it, intimating the wide orifices of the wounds: Lastly, so
great an hole was made in his side, that Thomas thrust his hand into it, Joh.
20.27. in sign of these Breakings, well might he Break the Bread.

The word of Breaking, shows the ancient custom of Imparting the Sacrament
to the Bystanders; And it was Broken by the Hand of the Breaker: or rather
with a Knife (says Lorinus on Act. 2.) because unleavened bread is glutinous,
or clammy; and so is easier divided. That a Knife shall be said so propely to
Break bread, as an Hand, I cannot believe. And I discern no such clamminesse,
or cleaving of the Unleavened Bread, above the Leavened, as should cause a
Knife to be used, rather than an Hand: and the Hand may easily enough divide
it. And if the Knife did prepare it, yet the often repeated word of Fraction,
induces me to think, the Fingers did Break the divided Bread into less and
fit pieces. But Lorinus brings in that invention of the Knife, and prefers
it before the Breaking with the Hand, contrary to three Evangelists, and S.
Paul, who name not Cutting, but Breaking of bread: Nor do the ancient Fathers
name the Cutting, but urge the Breaking. And when Christ said, Do this; It is
as clear as the light of the Sun, he meaned, Take the bread, Give thanks,
Break it, etc. And so the not Breaking of the Bread is a trangression of the
first Institution.

How ill then does the Church of Rome, to leave off Breaking of the Bread (as
it has done for a long time) and to consecrate Singulos panes, seu minores
hostias, ad vitandum periculum decidentium micarum; the loaves by themselves,
or lesser hosts, or sacrifices, to avoid the danger of the crumbes falling
down; and that the Laics and other sacred Administrants must be contented
with a lesser host than the sacrificer has, (says Lorinus;) Yet Christ Brake
the Bread, without fear of crumbes falling, say I: and the Primitive Church
appointed men to receive the sacred bread into their Right hands, with their
fingers close and not open, and the women to receive it in clean Linen, so to
prevent the falling of the crumbes.

Likewise concerning the sacred Wine: The Laics were wont of old, Canna
haurire Dominicum sanguinem e calice, with a Cane to drink out of a Chalice the
Blood of our Lord: (and so was no danger of spilling one drop.) Pelican
calls it, argenteum calicem, and Fisiulam qua Laici Dominicum exorbeant
sanguinem. A silver Mazor, or Cup, or Chalice, and a Pipe, Reed or Cane, by
which the Laics sucked, and supped the Blood of our Lord. See Beatus Rhenanus
in his preface before Tertullian de Corona Militis; and Tertullians testimony
in his book de Corona Militis, is express, that they had a great care of the
sacred Mysteries. Calicis, aut Panis etiam nostri aliquid decutian terram,
Anxie patimur; We are soretroubled, and passionately suffer if one drop of the
sacred Wine or one crumb of sacred Bread fall to the ground. Which in despite
of some novellists, I will apply to the Sacramental morsel.

Bucan in his 48 Common place, page 658. seems to slubber the matter over,
thus, Si in terram forte cadat per imprudentiam, vel mica panis, vel vini
gutta, non amplius Sacramenti rationem habet: If by chance there fall to the
ground a crumb of bread, or drop of wine, it leaves off to be part of the
Sacrament.

Further observe, that the Papists have kept away the sacred wine from the
Laity, and now they pare them and mince them, and say they must be content with
a lesser consecrated Host, than the Priest has: So that the Laity may fear
the Romanist will, ere long, take wholly from them the lesser Host also. They
shall give me leave to think, if they had kept the old Institution; if they had
continued in the plain way: if they had not mingled Policy with Divinity, and
preferred gainefull Imaginations, and Worldly Ratiocinations before the
evidence of Scriptures, there had never been a Session from that Church.

Some think, that to be Broken, is all one with to be Divided. So Gaspar
Sanctius on Acts 2. But he is much deceived. For after it was Broken, it was
Divided: and it might have rested Broken, and yet Undivided: Undivided to
Christ himself, or to his Apostles: though when it was Broken, it was Divided,
one piece from another, and not till it was Broken. Yet he well resolves;
Panis hoc loco Frangi dicitur, non Scindi: it is said to be Broken, not to be
Cut or Sliced with a knife. He might have added out of Baronius (whom he cited
in Anno Christi, 8. which should have been 58. Numero 64.) that the Rabbin
skillful in Judaicall Antiquities, taught Baronius, when the bread was Cut at
their Common Feasts, into such shape as hereafter is expressed, they did cook
them so, that they needed not to Cut them when they ate them, but only to Break
them; This is direct against Lorinus before cited. The form of civil morsels,
at ordinary Feasts, is thus described by Baronius, not much differing from our
March-panes or Sweetmeates cut lozenge-wise.



The form of the Panis decussatus or bread made in likeness to a Cross, or
an X, was in this wise, as the same Baronius there has it, from the old
monuments yet to be seen.



That the good Christians made a religious use of this form, because it did in
some sort resemble a Cross, Gregory proves, Dialogorum 1.11.

Yea even the unleavened bread, of which they made the Eucharist, was by the
Ancients framed to such a quadrangular form in a Circle, whose parts being
divided by Breaking, were called morsels. And the Cross not only stood upon
the Altar, (which Chrysostom avoucheth:) but also was drawn upon the
Eucharist; and afterward on the same mystical bread, Christ crucified was
formed. So far Baronius.

Let me add from Johannes Stephanus Durantus de Ritibus Ecclesiae. cap. 34.
that the holy Eucharist was kept, and reserved in a vessel made in the form
of a Dove, which is a token or badge of Charity, or of the holy Spirit in that
wise descending and lighting upon Christ. And I have otherwhere read (if my
memory deceive me not) that the sign of the Holy Lamb was sometimes printed on
the Sacred Eucharist, as I have seen it graven on some Chalices remaining to
this day.

Or rather, to speak according to Baronius his relation, ad annum 216. Numero
15. The Image of a Shepherd carrying a Sheep at his back, was wont to be
effigiated in the Chalice, and on the Episcopal Cloak, or Pall.

I have the rather transcribed these things, because they are not quotidiani
commatis, obvious and ordinary; but carry with them a new delight.

PAR. 4.
THe next words are, He gave it to His Disciples. In which words, at the first
sight of them, is plainly evidenced, That Christ gave not the blessed bread to
One alone; and that One Apostle gave it so to Another; and he to a Third, etc.
But that Himself gave it to His Apostles: Himself, and no other: it was His
Immediate gift; to Each, to All of them.

That the Consecrated Bread given by Christ to his Apostles, was unleavened
bread, is most certain: To say peremptorily, that we may not use leavened
bread: Or that we must use leavened bread only, savoreth of two extremes: What
Alphonsus de Castro says of the Greek Church, that they are Schismatics, not
because they used leavened bread in the Sacrament of the Eucharist: but because
they think, that only leavened must be used; I say on the other side, If any
maintain that the bread of the Sacrament must be only unleavened bread, and
that it is sin to consecrate any Other bread; I shall think him to be in this
point little less than a Schismatic. A liberty is left to the Churches of
God: which no way gives room to the unbridled license of the giddy people
against their Pastors. Though at the delivery of the Wine he said, Drink ye
All of this: and at the delivery of the Bread, did not say Eat ye all of this:
it is likely he did it for this cause, because he gave the Broken bread to
every one Himself, by Himself; but they gave the Cup One to the Other (says
Musculus.) Yet I hold it far more likely, that as immediately he gave to every
one of His Apostles the consecrated bread; so he did also deliver the Cup to
Every one; and was more distinct, and punctual in administering the Holy
Sacrament, than at common refection. The word, (...), proves it; As he gave
One Species, so he gave the Other; yet was not this Another Sacrament, though
it was a distinct Action, and a distinct Material. Both Eating and Drinking
make up but One Sacrament. Aquinas part 3. Quaest. 73. Artic. 20. This
Sacrament is many things materially; but One thing only formally, as it makes
one integrall refection Only.

In the First or Second Supper, I confess, he said, Accipite, and Dividite,
Luke 22.17. He took the Cup, He gave thanks, and said, Take this (Wine) and
divide it among your selves; for they did not divide the Cup; So, He did not
divide. the Wine; but They: And yet at the holy Institution of the Eucharist,
the same Evangelist says, He gave the bread to Them: Likewise The Cup:
versibus 19.20.

In the First or Second Supper he used no Benediction extraordinary: They did
eat, and drink promiscuously, and as is usual in such Feasting, one Disciple
might help another.

But in this Sacred Banquet, the Consecrant and Administrant, was Christ only,
lest any man should challenge superiority or equality of concurrence in the
Institution.

A second rivelet from this fountain, He gave it to His Disciples, may thus
flow.

Four times S. Matthew names Christ's selected company Disciples; S. Mark,
Thrice; S. John, Thrice; S. Luke, Once only, called them Apostles: Luke 22.14.
and Once Disciples. Now as the once-named word (Apostles) shows, That the
Communicants, were then no part of the Disciples in General; but those very
especial Twelve or rather Eleven, ( Judas being gone forth) which were an
exempt out from the rest: employed above the rest, more inwardly and familiarly
conversing with Christ, than the rest of the Disciples: So since they are so
often called Disciples, we may think it teaches us probably, That the Apostles
represented at this Eucharist, in this regard ( viz. as Christ was the
Administrant) the rest of the Priesthood only; not the Body of Christ's Church;
not the whole and entire company of all the Faithful Disciples that then were,
or were to be unto the Worlds end: Lay, and others: but the Clergy,
Presbyters, and Ministers, who are here called Disciples: though the word
(Disciples) be also often of a larger extent. And this may be a reason hereof.
No man can imagine that Christ gave power to the Laity, and Common Disciples,
Men and Women to consecrate his Sacred Body and Blood. If they should offer to
do such an Act, they should be more guilty than rash Vzzah, who for but
touching the Arc, was stricken dead by God, 2 Samuel 6.7. Than foolish Saul, who
for offering a burnt Offering, lost his Kingdom, 1 Samuel 13.13. Than
presumptuous Nadab, and Abihu, who offered strange fire before the Lord, Lev.
10.1. and were consumed with fire from Heaven. Than wicked Jeroboam, who by
raising up two Calves, made Israel, the greatest Calfe, to sin: and made of the
lowest of the People Priest of the High places; now the Calfe was grown to to
an Ox. Any one that would, or whosoever would, Jeroboam consecrated him, 1
King. 13.33. which thing became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it
off, and to destroy it, from off the face of the Earth, verse. 34. It were an
horrid intrusion on Sacred offices; and a Nullity in the fact it self. Not
Angels or Archangels, nor any of that Heavenly spiritual Host: Not Kings, nor
Princes (unless in Orders) not any under Heaven, except the Clergy, have power
to Consecrate the most holy Eucharist. To whom he said, Hoc facite; which he
said not to others.

Indeed it is true (as is in my Miscellanies) that Saint Peter represented
sometimes all the Apostles: sometimes the Apostles represented all the Clergy:
But in this place toward his death, Christ gave his Apostles (representing the
whole body of the Priesthood) a power to consecrate the Sacred Eucharist; and
gave it to them only: So after his Resurrection, when he had overcome actually
Death and Sin, Hell and Satan; when he had fully satisfied to the utmost
farthing, for all our offenses, and had an over-merit left; even before his
Ascension, he gave again, when he had most and properest power for to give, to
the Apostles (representing the Church for ever, that are in holy Orders)
another power and authority, distinct from the former, yet conducing some way
to it, in these words, John 20.21, etc. As my Father sent me, so send I you.
Then he breathed on them, and said; Receive ye the holy Ghost: Whosesoever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them: Whosesoever sins ye retain, they
are retained. Let the ill-bred ignorant Clown jeere at the power of the Keys,
he shall never find Heaven gates open, but by these Keys; And to the Clergy
only were thy given, maugre all the enemies of the Clergy.

In one respect it has been maintained, that the Apostles did at the Eucharist
represent the body of the Priesthood; viz. as the Sacrament wholly, and only
was to be Instituted and Consecrated by them, by whom the Bread must be Taken,
Blessed, Broken, Distributed and Hallowed, with the right form of
consecration. But in another regard, the Apostles, even Then, may be said to
represent the whole company of the Disciples, in the largest signification;
namely, as All, and Every Christian was to Receive it: for so were Themselves,
Then, Recipients; and as Recipients (as well as in other regards Administrants)
were these words said to them, Do this in remembrance of me; and All of you
drink of this: which last words cannot be restrained to the Ministers only,
but involve within their circumference, the whole round World of devout
Christians: Else none might Communicate but Priests only; which to say, is
accursed. Perhaps I may say inoffensively, Christ represented the Apostles, and
stood for them, and the body of the Clergy Idealiter, when he consecrated the
blessed Eucharist, and gave it to them. But, as Christ himself Received it,
and in both kinds, he may be called their Symposiarchon; and I am sure, I may
say truly, and therefore boldly, Our most blessed Savior represented the whole
body of his universal Church, both Clergy and Lay People, if so he did Receive
it, as is most probable. In imitation of him, I say likewise, that the Apostles
(qua Apostoli and Sacerdotes) did celebrate the Divine Mysteries, and
Administer them; So, representing the Clergy: but as they received the Divine
Food, they were Participants, (qua Discipuli,) and so stood in the room of the
whole Christian Laity.

PAR. 5.
THe words of Saint Matthew, and Mark, and S. Paul, do follow after, He gave
it to them: And said. S. Luke varieth it thus; (...), Saying. It is all one in
sense.

Here let me tell you, These words, He said, or Saying; were not spoken by
Christ, nor part of his Consecration: But they are the words of the
Evangelists, and Apostles recording and coupling Deeds and Words at Christ's
Institution. Christ's Consecration consisted of Actions and Words: His Actions
were, He Took Bread, Blessed it, Brake it, and Gave it to his Disciples. His
words were not these, Saying, or He said; They are the Historical copulative
narrative of the Heavenly Penmen: but his words were only these, This is my
Body, and so forth.

Aquinas tertia part, Quaestione 78. Aritic. 1. ad primum, relates, That
Innocencius the third opined, Christ first perfected the Eucharist by Divine
power; and Afterward expressed the form which others should follow. But this
is express against the Evangelists, who say; Christ did bless it; which was
not without some form of words: yet, in favor of Innocentius, he says, The
words were spoken Opinative magis, quam determinative. Rather by way of
Opinion, than of determination.

Others (quoth he) say, the Benediction was made with certain other words, to
us unknown; but he replyeth wisely; This cannot hold, because our Benediction
of Consecration is now perfected by reciting what was then done: (Let me add,
and Said also.) And if it were not done by those words, Then; it would not be
done by these words, Now.

A third sort say, Christ spoke the words of Consecration twice: Once secretly:
the second time openly to instruct others how to do so. But this cannot stand;
because the Priest does consecrate, uttering these words, as publicly spoken
by Christ, not in a secret Benediction. Whereupon since the words have no
force, but as Recited by Christ, it seems Christ consecrated the Eucharist,
by manifest uttering of them. More he may read at large in him, who so
pleases.

To conclude, he says not, nor can say, that Christ himself pronounced this
Participle (...), Dicens: or this Proposition, Et Dixit, And Said.

It is true, such a Consecration compounded of his Reception of it into his
hands, of Benediction, of Fraction, of Distribution, and lastly of the
Consecratory and Operatory words themselves, cannot handsomely be registered in
particular, without the Addition, Saying; or And he said: yet this evinceth
not, That Christ pronounced those words, or in the consecration needed to
pronounce them, but they are only the convenient, if not necessary expressions
of the Relators.

Diverse think, that Christ used more words in the Consecration; and among
these the learned Franciscus Lucas Burgensis, on Matthew. 26.26. Non est
verisimile, tam paucis verbis Dominum usum esse, quam scribunt Evangelistae. It
is not likely, that Christ used so few words, as the Evangelists write. Thus
far I agree with him; that whether the Benediction were of God, Christ blessing
God: or a benediction upon the Elementary materials; or of both (as I judge
likeliest:) some other words were used by Christ, not made known to us: fit
for Christ on such an occasion to speak, not necessary for us to know or
speak: Brugensis scarce probably insisteth upon One. Of which hereafter.

Between Christ's Offering, and giving the blessed bread to his Disciples, on
the one side: and the consummate Consecration, on the other side, Christ held
out his hand, and reached the bread, and said (not the words And Said) Take ye,
or Take.

Take. Some would Give, but others will not Receive; Thus God would Give much
unto Millions of people, if they were willing or prepared to Receive it. And
gifts there are, which come off kindly from the hands of the Donor, yet fall
short of the hands of such to whom they were Destined, because they clutch
their Fists, and ponunt Obicem, lay a Block in the way.

Christ gave the hallowed bread, not in Promise, but in Exhibition: He
commanded them to Receive it.

When he wished Thomas to thrust his hand into Christ's side, John 20.27. it is
irreligious to think, that Thomas disobeyed, or refused to do so, though it be
not expressed.

That late Writer was a Fool, who said, the Holy Baptist was a fool, for not
doing at first, as Christ willed him. God grant me to be as humble, and as
well accepted by Christ, as Saint John was, even when Christ the second time
spoke to the Baptist, and overruled him to baptize our Savior. And let the
haughty German keep his wisdom to himself. The Baptist was wise to Godward;
though esteemed a fool by him.

Epictetus said of old: (...): Every matter has two Handles. Whereas it is
said, (...), Take; because an Handle, and every thing else by which we Receive,
and Handle, and Hold a thing, is called (...). And because Taking into ones
hand, is more proper than to take it into ones mouth; I resolve, Christ put not
the blessed Sacrament into their mouths, but into their hands: and they did as
they were commanded, that is, Take it: For in the Primitive Church the good
Christians received it into their hands.

Tertullian de Corona Militis; Eucharistiae sacramentum non de aliorum Manu,
quam praesidentium, sumimus: We give it not one to another, but each of us
takes it from the hand of him who is set over us. And into their hands did
they take it at first (as Maldonate confesses.) And the story in Cyprians
book de Lapsis, page 284. proves. For one who took the blessed Sacrament
unworthily, Cinerem far se apertis manibus invenit, found embers in stead of
it, in his hands, and was not able to handle it, or eat it.

When Christ said, Take, Eat, the taking was with the hand; as the eating was
by the mouth; and if the Apostles had Taken it from Christ's hands immediately
into their mouths, this one word (...), Eat, would have served for all: and
Christ had had no need to say, (...), Take. For, from bidding them Eat,
flows this sequel necessarily, that they were to receive it into their
mouths: since otherwise they could not eat. Therefore the two words, Accipite,
Manducate, are two diverse commandments to be performed by two distinct
instruments, of Hand and Mouth. Nor otherwise to be lawfully administered (as I
judge) unless to such as are too weak and sick to receive it with their
hands; or have lost the use of their hands; or have no hands at all: Which
cases sometimes have, and sometimes again may fall out; and then the hallowed
food may be put into the mouths of the Recipients; Otherwise, not. For Christ
did both practice it, and command his Church to do the like. Do This, This,
as well as the other things. And therefore the delivery of the heavenly Manna
into the hands of the Communicants, is necessary, except in the before excepted
cases.

Indeed we are not bound to do whatsoever Christ did at the First celebration;
For he did it at night, and but to a few, and with unleavened bread, which are
left at liberty to us. But we are bound to follow whatsoever he both did and
commanded: as he did in this point. For he both Took the bread into his hands,
and bidding them Take it, he put the consecrated bread into their hands: and
charged them to do after the same manner.

And if we go to Reason, The washed hands and lips are as clean, as the
inside of the mouth: and therefore it may be put into their hands, as well as
into their mouths. Let humane discourse give way to Authority.

Tertulliane de Idololatria, cap. 7. says, they did Manus admovere corpori
Domini; put forth their hands to receive the body of our Lord.

The Tripartite History, 9.30. How will thou hold out thy hands, from which
unjust blood yet droppeth? How will thou take with such hands the holy body of
our Lord? Chrysostom in his third Homily to the Ephesians; How will thou
appear before the Tribunal seat of Christ, who with unclean hands and lips
dare touch Christ's body?

Cyprian de Lapsis, page 281. speaks of some, who offered violence to the
body and blood of Christ: and then sinned more with hands and mouths against
the Lord, than when they denied the Lord. And page 283. he instanceth in a
sacrilegious wretch, who was angry with the Priest, because the Priest would
not suffer him presently with defiled hands to Take the body of Christ; or with
polluted mouth to drink his blood.

Tertullian in lib. de Idololatria, Faulting such as promoted the makers of
Idols, to the Orders of Priests, or Deacons, cries out; Proh scelus! O
abomination! The Jews Once laid hands on Christ; these Daily offer violence
to his body, by unworthy Giving and Taking of it. O manus praecidendae! O hands
worthy to be cut off!

Yea, the very Schismatics in old time divided not themselves from the usance
of the Church in this specialtie. For Augustine, Tom. 7. contra literas
Petiliani, 2.23. page 22. says to Petilian, and his adherents, I do instance,
and make rehearfall unto you of a man who lived with you -- into whose hands
ye placed, or put the Eucharist. Ruffinus Ecclesiastica Historiae 6.33. says
of Novatus, or Novatianus; That when he divided the Sacrament to the people, he
held the Hands of the Receivers, till he made them swear by what they held in
their Hands, and then they did Sumere. They did accipere manu; Sumemere ore:
Took it with their Hand; and received it with their Mouth: And I doubt not,
but these holy ancient Fathers followed Christ's celebration, in such things as
he commanded.

When they did Reserve the Sacrament, and carry it to their houses, I hope they
took it not into their Mouths, they carried it not in their Mouths, but took
it in their Hands.

Accepto corpore Domini, and reservato, says Tertullian in the end of his
book de Oratione. It was first received (and this was not within their Mouths)
but with their Hands. If it had been in their Mouths, it was not so fit to be
Reserved. And how vain had it been, to take it out of their Mouths, and to
reserve it to that end, that they might put it another time into their own
Mouths? or into other folks Mouths either? If you plead, it was reserved for
the sick; Gregorius Nazianzenus Oratione 11. in laudem Gorgoniae, says; If
Gorgonia's Hand treasured up any part of the Antitypes of Christ's honored body
and blood, she bedewed it, or mingled it with her tears. The word (If) not
betokening any doubt, but implying a certainty, that sometimes she did weep
over the consecrated mysteries, which her Hand had Reserved. The word If, being
taken for When. So it is used, 1 King. 8.46. If they sin against thee, for
there is no man that sins not. I conclude with the binding Rubric of out
Lyturgy, that the Priests, or Priest, must deliver the Communion to the people
in their Hands, Kneeling.

Maldonate on Matthew. 26. confesses it: further proof needed not. Yet was
Maldonate too blame to say, The same Church with better Counsel begins to give
the Sacrament not into their hands, but into their mouths: because there was
both more reverence, and less danger. To call that better Counsel which
varied from Christ's Institution, I like not. Nor does Maldonats similitude
hold. For, if the Churches are the Eucharist fasting, varying from Christ; yet
they had Apostolical Authority to guide them, which the Handlesse and
Mouthlesse Receivers wanted.

Some Reject things really Given, and Tendered. Matthew. 7.9 Ye Reject the
Commandments of God. Jeremy 8.9. Some rejected the Word of the Lord. Luke
7.30. The Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the Counsel of God against
themselves. 1 Samuel 10.19. The Israelites rejected their God. Is not in those
words included a plain offer, and withal a Not-accepting of the Tendry?

Remarkably is it said, Joh. 12.48. He that rejects me, and receiveth-not my
words, the same Word shall judge him at the last day. Rejecting, is expounded
by Not-receiving, if it signify not worse also.

So some Refused to hear Gods Word, Jeremy 13.10. Ammon refused to eat, 2 Samuel 13.9. though the cakes were powered out before him. Elishah though he was
urged to take a gift, yet refused, 2 Kings 5.16.

Yet for all this, I cannot think, but when Christ said to his Disciples, Take;
they did Take it: and when he said, Eat; they did Eat. For it argues
Obedience to their Master: and their conformity, to partake of the mysteries of
Christ.

PAR. 6.
THe next part of our Saviors words, is, (...), Eat.

That Christ gave Judas a Sop, is clear, a dipped Sop, Joh. 14.26. that Judas
received it, I hold as clear, John 14.30. He then having received the Sop,
went immediately out.

That Judas did eat it, is not expressed, nor so clear. He might possibly
Take it, and not Eat it, but let it lie on his trencher. Besides, the Sop
being given for a Manifesto, that Judas was the only Traitor, perhaps he was
not willing to swallow the Disgust, as he accounted it, and the Sop also. But
it may be well answered; Judas was so surprised with the unexpected Offer; his
reason, wit, and senses so clouded: his soul amazed with such arisings, and
fumes of his treasonable plot: in one word, so given over to Satan, that what
another man, yea what he himself would have done at another Time, either not
Receive, or not Eat, he certainly received, and in likelihood swallowed.

If the words of Scripture be closer followed, and more forcibly urged, That
Judas having received the Sop, went out immediately: and therefore he did
receive it only, but not Eat it. I answer: The end of his Receiving, was
only to Eat it: and there was no great distance of time between the
Receiving and Eating of the Sop: but he might put his hand to his mouth even
almost in an instant, or in tempore pene imperceptibili, in the twinkling of
an eye, and swallow, without chewing, a moystned, soft, little glibbery Sop,
that his going out immediately excludes not his Eating. Besides, the word
Receive, may extend, not only to his Taking of it with his hand, but to the
Eating of it also. For there is a receiving into Ones mouth: and it is not
possible to be proved, that Judas did not So receive it, nor Eat it.

And it may be well believed, because so many holy Fathers have declared
themselves to think, He did Eat the Sop. I know but few that deny it; but many
affirm it. Some indeed say, He carried away the Sop, and showed it to the High
Priests, and thence framed a forged accusation against Christ: or an excuse for
his own treachery; as if without cause he would not have betrayed him. A man
having his hidden sins revealed, grows worse, and more madd in sinning: Per
scelera semper sceleribus tutum est iter, said One.

The safest way to commit sin;
Is by new sins still to begin.
Lucas Brugensis on Matthew. 26. says; That after the word Eat, the reason was
given. And the word (Enim) is to be understood: Indeed it may well be
understood, because at the delivery of the Cup, it is expressed, Matthew. 26.28.
For this is my blood of the new Testament: And yet the sense seems to me as
full, Take, Eat, This is my Body: as if it had been written, Take, Eat; For
this is my Body. I would not willingly add any new sense to Scripture, no more
than I would diminish a letter from it: especially, if, as it is, the sense may
be well accepted.

Carolostadius (and never any before him, that I have read of) fancieth; That
when Christ said these words, This is my Body; he put his finger to his breast,
showed himself, and meaned thus: Here sits my Body which shall be given for
you. This Sleidan reports in the Fifth book of his Commentaries. And this may
seem to favor him; Jesus said to the Jews, Destroy This Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up, Joh. 2.19. And the holy Apostle expounds it; Christ
spoke of the temple of his body, verse 21. Tolet in his Commentary on the
place, says; It is certain, that when Christ said, This temple, he did by his
Gesture, and the motion of his hands, demonstrate Himself, and pointed not at
the material Temple built of stone; so might he here do.

Tolet his Collection is but probable. For Christ might point at either, at
neither, but leave them in suspense. Many times did Christ use verbal
aequivocations, as I have proved in my Miscellanies; that is, he so spoke, that
his words might have a double Construction; though he adhorred mental
Reservation.

Concerning Carolostadius, I must needs say, he was one of them, who in those
precipitious and whirling times, did strive to raise his own name, by
inventing most new devices: And this was one of them, which is not seconded by
any other Christian Divines, which I have seen; but disliked by many: For when
Christ said, This is my Body, which shall be given for you; (as Carolostadius
has it) is as if he pointed at, and did mean his natural passiive body. What
did they eat? They did eat none of That body, nor was it Broken, till, after
the Celebration of the holy Eucharist, he did suffer. But the holy Scripture
has it in the Present tense, Luke 22.19. This is my Body which Is given for
you: And verse. 20. This Cup Is the new Testament in my Blood, which Is shed for
you. Can you think (O Carolostadius) that when he gave them the Cup, he touched
his breast, and pointed at, and meaned the blood in the veins, lanes, and
hidden alleys of his mortal body? So, 1 Corinthians. 11.24. This is my body, which
Is broken for you. And, this Cup Is the new Testament in my blood, verse. 25.
Likewise Matthew. 26.28. This is my Blood which Is shed: and so Mark. 14.24. For
though it be a truth most certain, that Christ his natural body and natural
blood was broken, given, and shed afterward in his Passion: yet Carolostadius
was too blame, to change the Tense, to invent an imagined gesture of Christ,
which is impossible to be proved.

Lastly, to broach a new opinion contrary to all Divines; from which refulteth,
That they did eat only bare Bread, but no way the Body of the Lord: and
drank only the fruit of the Grape; but no way drank the Blood of the Lord.
Indeed the Vulgate has it, Frangetur, in the Future tense; is Shall be broken
for you: But it starteth aside from the Original. Nor stands it with sense,
reason, or example, that the Future is taken for the Present tense: since it is
a retrograde course against nature. But the Present tense is often used for the
Future, foreshewing the infallible certainty of what will, or shall come: both
in Prophetical, and Evangelicall Writings. Esaias 60.1. The glory of the Lord Is
risen upon thee: And yet he speaks of Christ, and his coming. And Revel.
22.12. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me: And Yet he comes not,
though it were said above fifteen hundred years passed. But most undoubtedly
He Shall come quickly: Celeritate motus, though not celeritate temporis, when
he begins to come, he shall come speedily; though he shall not quickly begin
to come.

PAR. 7.
IT succeeds, This is my Body, Matthew. 26.26. which is Given for you, Luke
22.19. Which is Broken for you: 1 Corinthians. 11.24. This do in remembrance, or
for a remembrance of Me: as both S. Luke and S. Paul have it.

And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drinkeyee
All of it; for this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many,
for the remission of sins: Matthew. 26.27. etc. It is thus changed; Mark.
14.23. He gave it to them; and They all drank of it. And S. Mark leaves out
these words, For the remission of sins. S. Luke makes the alteration, thus;
Likewise also (he gave them) the Cup after Supper, saying; This Cup is the New
Testament In my blood, which is shed for You, Luke 22.20.

Another diversity is yet, 1 Corinthians. 11.25. Likewise after Supper (he took)
the Cup, when he had supped, saying; This Cup is the new testament In my blood:
This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. Matthew. 26.29.
Christ says, I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine: And this
was After the sacred Supper. But (says Adam Contzen) A Matthaeo non suo ordine
ad finem coenae recitantur ea verba de Genimine vitis. S. Matthew recites not
in Order the words concerning the fruit of the Vine; nor were they spoken After
Supper. Perhaps (say I) they were spoken Twice.

Here (if ever) is an ample field to expatiate in; these words have tortured
the wits of the learned men since the days of the Apostles; Et adhuc sub
judice lis est; And yet they are not determined. And as the Areopagites in an
inexplicable perplexity, deferred the final determination till the last day;
so the Roman Church might have deferred their definitive sentence, and
over-hard censure, even till then; especially since they confess, that the
manner of Transubstantiation is inenarrable. Whereupon I am resolved, to
forbear farther disquisition, and to lose my self in holy devotion and
admiration, that I may find my Christ. The sail is to large for my boat: This
Sea is too tempestuous for my Shallop: The new Cut of Erasmus Sarcerius in his
Scholia, on the place of S. Matthew, thus shuffleth it. The Material causes
are Bread and Wine, and the things under them understood, and present, the Body
and Blood. The Formal causes, are to Eat, and to Drink. The Efficient causes;
Christ, who did institute it: and his Word. The Effectual causes, to have
Remission of sins. I say, this may rather go among the final causes. And to
make Effects to be Effectual causes, introduces new Logic, new Terms into
Logic: Besides, he omitteth the Final cause, which is the first mover to the
rest. Divinity and the mysteries of it are not to bow down to any ones Logic.

Oh! but will you now say leus in the last Act? in the last Scene? Will you be
silent, where he and she Apprentices, where Women and illiterate Tradesmen
raise themselves upon their startups, prick up their ears, and tire their
tongues?

1. I answer, If I should enter into the lists of controversy, and take upon
me to decide and determine all the doubts, which concern the holy Sacrament of
the Eucharist; and to untye all the knots, which may be made from those words,
I am persuaded, you might, sooner see an end of me, than I of this Work. For I
am wearied, and tired already. This toil, which I have performed, and the
labor which I have bestowed, has cost me full dear: My sedentary life has
made my reins as quarries of stones; my parents knew no such disease, though
they lived long: my right hand heretofore carelessly unfenced and undefended
from the cold (alas for the time!) has swelled with the gowt, as if it would
break; I have been often sick, always weak, yet have I prevented antelucanam
opificum industriam; and nox ad diem accessit: Early, and late have I performed
my hard task. Yea Midnight has conceived full many of the days expressions,
and often have I arose from my bed, and meals with a Conclusum est, to prevent
forgetfulness. But the manifold avocations by my own private affairs, and
especially by public employements, both in Ecclesiastical, and Civil
Justice, have, after their dispatch, set an edge, and sharpened the appetite of
my endeavors. The unbent bow has prepared it self for the stronger shooting,
or delivery: Yet now my senses decay; my memory fails me; I have no courage
or encouragement; I am out of heart: I am worn to the stumps, and spent: I
must imitate old Ennius his race-horse, to whom age afforded quiet, and
exempted from more active exercise: craving pardon, if my book in some passages
have partaken of my weakness, and infirmities, or languishing. And now, thou
great Work of mine, concerning the Estate of humane souls from their creation
to the day of the general Judgment exclusively: on which I have bestowed
thousands of hours; Lie still and sleep. S. Hierom did seem always to hear,
Surgite Mortui, and venite ad Judicium. Arise you dead, and come to Judgment.
And me thinks, I hear the repeated precept, as spoken to my self, and such
only as are in my case. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. pray without ceasing: pray always, Luke
21.3^. Yea though I be enfeebled and faint, wronged and distressed, as the
widow was; yet the rather ought I always pray, and not faint, Luke, 18.1.

The very Mcores of Morocco pray six times in 24. hours; And thinck he is not
held worthy to bear witness to a truth, who has not said his prayers six
times in a natural day. Seven times a day did David praise God, Psalm. 119.
verse. 164. Some have held; and sure that Christian does best, who says the
Lords Prayer at least seven times in a day. There never was composed a
perfecter and sweeter prayer. To what prayer shall God give ear, if not to the
prayer composed by his own son? which the extravagant bablings of Pharisees and
battologies of those, who Longum precantur, love long prayers (as Tertullian
phraseth it:) and the sudden extemporary ebullitions of Lip-holy seeme-Saints
are as far inferior, as Hell is to Heaven: which no men, no raptures of Angels
or Archangels can mend.

O Lord, prepare my heart to continue in Prayers; and guide my prayers to
please thee, through him, in whom thou art well pleased, Jesus Christ our
blessed Savior and Redeemer.

2. I will go briefly to work. Concerning the divisions of these times, and the
scruples from these words, I wholly put them off to the Masters of
Controversies, and the Anti-Bellarminian Canvasers: and I refer my self and my
belief to the Doctrine of the Church of England: assenting to her wholly, so
far as my knowledge reaches: and in other things, beyond my capacity,
implicitly believing in her.

For I see no reason but in such things, as the Layman and Ignorant must trust
in his Priest, by an implicit Faith: so the Clergy man ought to trust in his
Church. It is no false ground (whatsoever the ignorant Zelotes do say, or
write) but fit to be embraced; To confess and follow Scripture express, in
things apparent, and to believe such senses thereof as may be, though to us
unrevealed. Not can it be amiss to subscribe to our Church in points beyond
our Sphere, Needle or Compass, but to Follow the Faith of our Governors,
Overseers and Pastors.

That which I know, is good; what I know not, I believe to be better, said
Heraclitus of old. To her I subject, in humblest manner, all my Writings, with
my self: professing in the sight of God (who searches souls, and tries
consciences) that I believe the Church of England to be the purest part of
Christ's Militant Church: -- pro qua non metuam mori, as one said, in another
case. In the defense whereof I could be well content, if occasion served, to
sactifice my dearest blood.

In a more particular expressing, I unbosome my thoughts thus. We have had
four right Reverend and most learned Lords Bishops. Bishop Jewel, Bishop
Andrews, Bishop Morton, and Bishop White, who have written polemically and
unanswerably of this subject; and may give content to any indifferent Reader.
Many other Heroes of our Church of England, have also done excellently well;
but the incomparable Mr. Hooker exceeds them all. Let them, who have him not,
buy him: who have him, study him: and who is scrupulous concerning these words,
This is my Body, etc. let him read, and diligently consider, and he may safely
believe what Mr. Hooker writes in his Ecclesiastical Polity, lib. 5. Par. 67.
I cannot but transcribe part. Thus then divinely he proceeds, p. 179.

Variety of Judgments and opinions argues obscurity in those things,
whereabout they differ. But that which all parts receive for truth, that which
every one having sifted, is by no one denied or doubted of, must needs be
matter of infallible certainty. Whereas therefore there are but three
expositions made of This is my Body. The first, This is in it self before
participation really, and truly the natural substance of my body by reason of
the coexistence, which my omnipotent body has with the sanctified element of
bread; which is the Lutherans interpretation. The second; This is in it self
and before participation, the very true and natural substance of my body, by
force of that Deity which with the words of Consecration abolisheth the
substance of bread, and substituteth in the place thereof my body; which is the
Popish construction: The last, This hallowed Food, through concurrence of
divine power, is in verity and truth, unto Faithful receivers, instrumentally
a cause of that mystical participation, whereby as I make my self wholly
theirs, so I give them in hand an actual possession of all such saving grace,
as my sacrificed body can yield, and as their souls do presently need, this is
to them, and in them, my body. Of these three rehearsed Interpretations the
Last has in it nothing, but what the rest do all approve, and acknowledge to
be most true; nothing, but that which the words of Christ are on all sides
confessed to enforce; nothing, but that which the Church of God has always
thought necessary; nothing, but that which alone is sufficient for vvery
Christian man to believe concerning the use, and force of this Sacrament;
finally, nothing, but that wherewith the writings of all Antiquity are
consonant, and all Christian Confessions agreeable. And as truth in what kind
soever, is by no kind of truth gain-faid; so the mind which rests it self
on this, is never troubled with those perplexities, which the other do both
find by means of so great contradiction between their opinions, and true
principles of reason grounded upon experience, nature, and sense. Which albeit
with boisterous courage and breath they seem oftentimes to blow away, yet who
so observes how again they labor, and sweat by subtilty of wit, to make some
show of agreement between their peculiar conceits and the general Edicts of
Nature, must needs perceive they struggle with that which they cannot fully
master. Besides, since of that which is proper to themselves, their discourses
are hungry, and unpleasant, full of tedious and irksome labor, heartlesse, and
hitherto without fruit; on the other side, read we them, or hear we others,
be they of our own, or of ancienter times, to what part soever they be thought
to incline, touching that whereof there is controversy: yet in this, where
they all speak but one thing, their discourses are heavenly, their words sweet
as the Honeycomb, their tongues melodiously tuned instruments, their sentences
mere consolation and joy; are we not hereby almost even with voice from Heaven
admonished which we may safeliest cleave unto? He which has said of the one
Sacrament, Wash and be clean; has said concerning the other likewise, Eat and
live. If therefore without any such particular and solemn warrant as this is,
that poor distressed woman coming unto Christ for health, could so constantly
resolve her self, May I but touch the skirt of his garment, I shall be whole;
what moves us to argue of the manner, how life should come by bread; our duty
being here but to take what is offered, and most assuredly to rest persuaded of
this, that can we but Eat, we are safe? When I behold with mine eyes some small
and scarce discernable grain or seed whereof Nature makes promise that a tree
shall come; and when afterward of that tree any skillful artificer undertaketh
to frame some exquisite and curious work, I look for the event, I move no
question about performance either of the one, or of the other. Shall I simply
credit Nature in things Natural? Shall I in things artificial rely my self
on Art, never offering to make doubt? and in that which is alone both Art and
Nature, refuse to believe the Author of both, except he acquaint me with his
ways, and lay the secret of his skill before me? where God himself does speak
those things, which either for height and sublimity of matter, or else for
secrecy of performance we are not able to reach unto: as we may be ignorant
without danger, so it can be no disgrace to confess we are ignorant. Such as
love piety, will as much as in them lies, know all things that God commands,
but especially the duties of service which they owe to God. As for his dark,
and hidden works, they prefer, as becomes them in such cases, simplicity of
Faith before that knowledge, which curiously sifting what it should adore, and
disputing too boldly of that which the wit of man cannot search, chilleth for
the most part all warmth of zeal, and brings soundness of belief many
times into great hazard. Let it therefore be sufficient for me presenting my
self at the Lords Table, to know what there I receive from him, without
searching, or inquiring of the manner how Christ performs his promise; Let
disputes and questions, enemies to piety, abatements of true devotion, and
hitherto in this cause but over patiently heard, let them take their rest; Let
curious and sharp-witted men beat their heads about what questions themselves
will; the very letter of the Word of Christ gives plain security that these
mysteries do, as nails, fasten us to his very Cross, that by them we draw
out, as touching officacy, force and virtue, even the blood of his goared side,
in the wounds of our Redeemer; we there dip our tongues, we are died red both
within, and without; our hunger is satisfied, and our thirst for ever quenched;
they are things wonderful which he feels, great which he sees, and
unheard of which he utters, whose soul is possessed of this Pascall Lamb, and
made joyful in the strength of this new Wine: This Bread has in it more than
the substance which our eyes behold; this Cup hallowed with solemn
benediction, avails to the endless life, and welfare both of soul and
body, in that it serves as well for a medicine to heal our infirmities, and
purge our sins, as for a sacrifice of thankesgiving; with touching it
sanctifies, it enlightneth with belief, it truly conformeth us unto the Image
of Jesus Christ. What these Elements are in themselves, it skilleth not; it is
enough that to me, which take them, they are the Body and Blood of Christ; his
promise in witness hereof suffices; his word, he knows which way to
accomplish. Why should any cogitation possess the mind of a Faithful
Communicant but this, O my God, thou art true; O my soul thou art happy? So
far M. Hooker.

The Prayer.
THou art merciful, oh Heavenly Savior, thou art merciful to Mankind,
against the fiery and furious temptations, and assaults of spiritual powers,
sometimes alluring, sometimes haling, sometimes leading men captive unto sin,
and under it. Thou most graciously have ordained an Host of Holy Angels, to
help us, to suggest good thoughts unto us, to free us, to streng then us: that
we shall not so much as hurt our foot; and there are more on our side, than
against us. But in opposition of the allurements from the wicked world, and the
insurrections, and ebullitions of the skittish civil war between the flesh
and our soul, thou have provided both preservatives that we fall not, and
redemptives if we fall: even thy powerful Sacraments replenished with Divine
virtue. For thine own sake, most holy Mediator, and Advocate, let thy blessed
Sacraments work effectually in us, be conduitpipes of grace, and conveyers of
goodness into our souls. Let them nourish us up unto true Faith, Hope, and
Charity; and let thy sacred Eucharist be our spiritual Food, both in Life, and
Death.

Amen Lord Jesus, Amen.

CHAP. VII. And the eight General. Wherein is questioned, what Gesture the
Apostles used in Receiving the blessed Eucharist.
1. The Word of God has omitted to set it down in particular.

It Is probable, they did Kiss their Right hand, and so receive it.

An evil custom of False complementing by Kissing the hand in Jobs days.

In Adoration our hands must be lifted up. Our voice lowly, and submisse.

In great Agonies it is lawful to Cry alowd, and Roar.

Probable it is, the Apostles received the heavenly Sacrament humbly Kneeling
on both their Knees. Tertullian is punctual against Sitting, even after prayer.

The Heathen after their prayers, and some even at their prayers, did use to
sit upon their Altars. Their Servants had three Sanctuaries to fly unto from
their angry Masters. Numa's Law, to sit at the time of Adoring their false
Gods. A reason, why no passage either in the Evangelists, nor Apostles,
commands Adoration at the Sacrament. How the Ancient Fathers are to be
understood when they say, The holy Eucbarist is to be adored.

2. Reasons proving that the Apostles received the blessed Eucharist Kneeling.
1. Reason. Most sacred Reverence is to be exhibited to most sacred things. 2.
Reason. The Fathers of the Primitive Church received it Kneeling. 3. Kneeling
does edify the simple. 4. It is an Ecclesiastical custom.
The manner of Reverence used both by Priests, and Lay people in S.
Chrysostomes days. God will be worshipped as well in our body, as in our Spirit.

The Penitents in Tertullians time did Kneel down at the receiving of
Absolution.

And it was the common practice of all other Christians in his days to worship
God Kneeling: Except from Easter to Whitsontide, and on the Lords day.

Diverse of holier times, had Knees as hard as horn by their continual
Kneeling at Gods worship. An adminition to stiffe-kneed Pure-trants.

3. Reasons why the devouter sort did forbear Kneeling betwixt Easter and
Whitsontide. 1. The Church did so appoint it. 2. Hereby the people did show
themselves thankful. Whitsunday, whence it has its denomination. Kneeling
imports Repentance, and Sorrow for Sins.
Standing implies Thankesgiving for the pardon of our sins. The diverse usances
of diverse Churches in the Primitive times concerning Fasting, and Feasting on
the Lords day: Kneeling, and Standing at the time of Prayer: and the Reasons
thereof. In the Primitive Church, they baptized not any except the Sick, but at
Easter and Whitsontide. The newly baptized stood, to express their
Thankfulness to God for their baptism. The people in some Churches Stood
praying at the Altar (on every Sunday between Easter, and Whitsontide) in
remembrance of Christ's Resurrection. The Christians in the Primitive Church
prayed Recto vultu ad Dominum; to confront the Heathen, who fell down flat on
their Faces, when they adored their false Gods.

4. The great variations of the Primitive Churches concerning the Eating, or
not Eating of flesh offered to Idols. A just discourse to that purpose. A good
Rule for the peace of the Church. Why our Church has commanded Kneeling at the
receiving of the blessed Sacrament: when the Primitive Church has commanded
Standing. Churches have great power committed unto them. The Church upon just
motives may change her Orders. The meaner sort of all people, Ecclesiastical
and Civil, are bound to obedience; are not to Order.

Peter Moulin found fault with the precise Ministers of our Church of England.
The day of Christ's Resurrection the first day of his Joy after his Dolorous
passions. Why the Fathers made Sunday their Holy Day. Why they forbade Kneeling
and Fasting upon that day. What Indifferency is, according to S. Hierome. A
thing Indifferent in it self, being commanded by the Supreme Magistrate or
Church, is no longer Indifferent to thee. Variety of Ceremonies, not hurtful,
but beneficial to the Church of Christ. The Bishop of Rome taxed; by Cardinal
Palaeotus excused. Rome Christian in too many things imitateth Rome Heathen: In
public prayer, comes short of it. Heathen Rome began all their business in
the world with this Prayer, Quod foelix faustumque sit, etc. The greater power
the Pope and his Cardinals have; the more need they have to pray to God before
their public meetings in their Consistory. Kneeling at receiving the holy
Eucharist, never disliked as a thing of its own nature evil or unlawful. In
the Primitive Church After Whitsontide they used to kneel. Kneeling at the
blessed Sacrament, not prescribed by Scripture; but authorized by Tradition;
confirmed by Custom; observed by Faith. In the Primitive Church when they
received the Sacrament Standing Kneeling they Prayed Standing. Kneeling. Our
Factionists would follow the Primitive Church in one thing; but leave her in
another.

5. A third Reason. At the first Institution of things Sacred, Profane, the
solemnity is greater than in the sequel. Every New thing has a golden tail.
Proverb. Popular Lecturers have sunk even below scorn. All sins of former
times have descended down upon our days. An Epiphonema, or Exclamation
against the profane pretenders of Devotion now adays. The lowest humiliation
is too little for the house of God. They cried Abrech, or, Bow the knee, before
Joseph. He that boweth himself most before men, is most right in the sight of
God. Diverse examples of Prostration and Geniculation, both out of the Old, and
New Testament. A Viceroy of Ireland devoutly fell on his knees, and asked an
Archiepiscopall Benediction. The Heathen kneeled down to worship their very
Idols. S. Hieromes saying. By Kneeling we sooner obtain what we ask at the
hands of God. Not lawful for Any to sit in the porch of the Temple, but only
the Kings of David's loins. The humble Gesture of the Jews, when they came In
went out of the Temple.

The Primitive Church Kneeled to the Altars. Altars the seats of the body and
blood of Christ. The Cross in Chrysostomes days did always use to remain
upon the Altar. An Angel an assistant, when Christ is offered up. Ambrose. To
this day we Worship the Flesh of Christ in the Sacrament. Idem. No man eats
the blessed Sacrament, before he have Worshipped Christ in the Sacrament.
Augustine. Constantine the Emperor in his Soliloquies with God, pitched on his
knees, with eyes cast down to the ground. K. Charles partaketh of the body and
blood of Christ, with as much Humility as the meanest penitent amongst his
Subjects. His holy and devout Gestures at the participation of the Lords
Supper, turned the heart of a Romanist to embrace the truth on our side. In
Origens, Arnobius, and Tertullians days, the Saints never met in holy places
about holy things, without decent reverence. The Papists in Kneeling, adore the
very materials of the Sacrament. Yet the Abuse of a thing, takes not away the
right use. Proved by diverse curious instances. Christians may lawfully use
many artificial things, though invented by Heathenish Gods. Goddesses.

To argue from the Abuse of things to the whole remooving of the use, is
ridiculous. Illustrated by some particulars. Veneration of the Sacrament, is
accorded on all sides. In the very Act of Receiving it, it is lawful to Kneel
down and worship Christ In it. Calvin himself holds That Adoration to be
lawful. The Lutherans are divided in this point. Illyricus denies Christ to
be Worshipped in the Eucharist, Brentius and Bucer hold, That then we must
worship Christ's body. Luther himself styleth the Eucharist, Sacramentum
venerabile, and Adorabile. Chemnitius says, None, but Sacramentaries, deny
Christ to be Adored in the Sacrament. Chemnitius acknowledges these Theses. 1.
Christ God and Man, is to be Adored. Only Arrians deny this. 2. Christ's humane
nature for the hypostaticall union with the Divinity, is to be Adored.
None but Nestorians will deny this. The Apostles worshipped the Humane Nature
of Christ. Adoration proceeds Cemmunication; by the judgment of S.
Chrysostom, and S. Augustine. Christ's Flesh, as made of Earth, may be said to
be Gods footstool. So is the Arc. All the Angels of God do Worship Christ.
Christ is to be Adored always, and everywhere. Augustine, Ambrose, Nazianzene,
and Eusebius Emissenus are Chemnitius Co-opinionists. Not the material
Elements, but Christ only In them, is to be Adored. If We must adore Christ
when we celebrate the divine Sacrament; much more did the Apostles. Habitual
not (always) Actual Adoration of Christ was required of the Apostles.

The Apostles worshipped Christ: 1. When he had newly performed any
Super-humane work. 2. When they begged great matters of him. 3. When he did
heal some who were vehemently afflicted. 4. When he conferred any
extraordinary blessing on their souls: As he did when he instituted the New
Sacrament.
Master Hooker terms Kneeling an Adorative gesture. No kind of Worship
accepted, that is not sometimes conjoined with Kneeling. Gregory Nazianzens
Story of his Sister Gorgonia. Eusebius Emissenus, and Origin say, Christ is
worshipped in the Sacrament. Kneeling at the Communion, commanded by the book
of Advertisements, set forth by Queen Elizabeth; by the Laws of the Realm,
and the Queens Majesty's Injunctions. They defraud the Knees of their chiefest
office, and honor, who refuse to Bend them at the receiving of the blessed
Sacrament.

PARAGRAPH 1.
THe next point of my propounded Method leads me to enquire, With what kind
of Gesture the Apostles Received from our blessed Savior, his sacred body and
blood in the holy Eucharist.

1. I answer; the Word has omitted to set it down in particular, and there is
no absolute unquestionable certainty hereof; Therefore look not for
Mathematical Demonstrations, which are (says Orantius Finaeus) purae,
fideles, and in primo certitudinis gradu constitutae, most certain, and
Infallible.

It is well, if our Collections may in secundis, tertijsve consistere, find
place in a Second, or Third Degree of Truth. If out of that which is written,
we can extract that which is not written: if we avoid all absurdities on the
one side, and be guided by the best and most probabilities on the other side.

It is a custom among many of us, when we receive a courtesy of an high
nature from our Superiors whom we reverence, we kiss our Right hand first, and
Then receive it. That such was the old guise of the Romans in their
Adorations, Pliny in his Natural History, 28.2. averreth. In Adorando dexteram
ad osculum referimus; When we Worship, we kiss our Right hands. Perhaps the
Apostles might do so, and devoutly kissing their Right hands convery Reverend
Love from their Lips to it, and bring back with their Right hands, the
Consecrated and Adored Body and Blood of our Savior unto their Lips and Mouths.

In Jobs time, there was such an evil custom of false Complementing, which he
found fault withal. Job. 31.27. If my mouth has kissed my hand: or it may be
read, If my hand has kissed my mouth. But if the Apostles did so, they did it
devoutly, truly, and most piously: And so let this rest upon Conjecture only.

Tertullian de Oratione, cap. 13. thus describes the Gesture of such as
Worship God: Cum modestia and humilitate adorantes, magis commendamus Deo
preces nostras: nec ipsis quidem manibus sublimius elatis, sed temperate ac
probe elatis: When we Adore God with modest humiliation, our prayers are the
rather accepted: nor must we Lift up our hands Too high, but indifferently,
decently, moderately, measurably. Yet David Lifted up his Hands, Psalm. 28.2.
and 63.4. And Solomon 1 King. 8.22. spread forth his hands toward heaven: and
Christ lifted them up, Luke 24.50. Ne vultu quidem in audaciam erecto (as he
proceeds) not with a bold face, but shamefast countenance. Sonos etiam vocis
subjectos esse oportet; The voice also must be Lowly and Submisse. The Devil
that uttered the Pythian Oracles, could say; Et mutum intelligo; and non
loquentem exandio: I both understand the dumb; and hear him, who says
nothing. And shall Gods ears expect a noise, a voice, or a sound? How then was
Jonas his prayer heard from the belly of the Whale, through the bowels of so
great a beast, from the depth of deepes, through so vast a compass of the sea,
and yet ascended up to heaven? It was not by virtue of his loud voice. If a
clamorous voice were best accepted, happy were Stentor, that thunder of humane
Voice, that monster of Roaring.

And yet in great Agonies, it is lawful, it is fit to Cry, to Cry aloud. I
cried with my whole heart, (says David, Psalm. 119.145.) The Levites cried with
a loud voice, Nehemiah 9.4. Mordecay cried with a loud and bitter cry, Esther
4.1. Christ himself cried with a loud voice, Joh. 11.43. Matthew. 27.46. I have
roared by reason of the disquietnesse of my heart, Psalm. 38.8. He roared all
the day long. Psalm. 32.3. He deserves not much pity, who by a small, low,
heartlesse voice, as if things concerned him not, coldly expresses his souls
sorrow.

My opinion therefore is, that the Apostles received the heavenly Sacrament,
not supinely, not slovenly, not lying, leaning, or sitting; but humbly, and
devoutly, most thankfully, and joyfully; piously kneeling on both their knees,
if not with greater Adoration.

Tertullian de Oratione cap. 12. is punctual against sitting, even after
prayer; which though we use, and lawfully use, yet they in Tertullians time did
so in imitation of the Heathen, who closed their prayers, and sealed them up
with sitting; as if without sitting they had not been made perfect; And this
made Tertullian find fault with them for it.

But if he reprove them for sitting after prayer, would he not much more have
censured them, if during their prayers they had sat? But the Heathen after
their prayers, did sit upon their Altars. Plautus in Mustell. Ego hanc aram
occupabo; I will sit on this Altar: for so it is to be understood: which though
it be somewhat obscure, yet it is cleared by Tibullus lib 4. toward the end.
Sed Veneris sanctae considam vinctus ad aras. But I being bound will on the
Altar sit
Of holy Venus.


Joseph Scaliger on the place observes, that servants with whom their masters
were offended, had three Refuges or Sanctuaries; though he accounts them but as
two: The Altars of the Gods, the Statutes of the Mediation of Friends. Nec hic
tibi Aram aliquam, nec Deprecatorem paraveris: Thou have neither Altar, nor
friendly Mediator to fly unto. Terence in Phormione calls him Precatorem, a
Spokesman. I return.

Pindarus O de 6. Istm. (...). When he said these things, or ended praying, he
presently sat down. Pausanias in Laconicis records Orestes sitting about
holy businesses, even when he was out of his mad humor.

Let Numa Pompilius praescribe what law he will for worshipping his false gods;
Deos adoraturi sedeant; let them who adored their gods, Sit. It was casually
wise. For indeed they were not worth the rising up unto: much less deserved
they to be adored with bended knees, or face prostrate. Our God cannot have
reverence enough. If we could in humility cast our selves down to the bottom
of Hell, we do but our duty: and God would the more love us, and sooner, and
higher lift us up.

Whosoever desires proofs from the ancient Fathers, that the holy Eucharist
is to be adored, let him read Bellarm de Sacramento Eucharistiae, 4.29. toward
the end; but expound them so, as if Christ were to be worshipped in the
Sacrament, and not the mere Elementary part. When they lifted up their hands
in adoration, they were wont also to spread them abroad.

PAR. 2.
COngruentiall reasons hereof do follow.

First, To most sacred things most sacred reverence is to be exhibited. But the
blessed Eucharist was, and is a most divine gift; and kneeling is a sacred
reverence. Therefore was it received with kneeling. The greatest care is to be
had of heavenly matters.

This is confirmed by Tertullian in lib. 1. ad uxorem. Saecularibus satis
agentes sumus, and utrique nostrum consultum volumus; si talibus tabulas (as
Rigaltius well reads it) ordinamus: cur non magis de divinis atque
coelestibus posteritati nostrae prospicere debeamus? We are wise enough in
worldly businesses, and will look well enough to our selves; and make our
Wills and Testaments concerning these lower and meaner affairs: why then ought
we not rather to provide for posterity in things divine and heavenly?

Secondly, The Fathers of the Primitive Church received the holy mysteries with
kneeling; And though the true Geniculation be of the mind, so that one were
better to have an humbled mind, and stand upright; than to kneel often, and
be proud withal: yet if we worship God in our hearts, our hearts will command
the humble Bowing of the knees. Besides, Geniculatio corporis aedificat
simplices; the bodily kneeling does edify the simple. Therefore Moris
Ecclesiastici est Christo genuflectere, says Hierom on Esaias 45. It is an
Ecclesiastical custom, to Bend the Knees (when Christ is named.)

When the Corinthians did meet at the receiving of the Eucharist, we may
safely pronounce, they lay not on Beds: but, as they might Sit at their feasts
of Charity; so we may presume, they kneeled when they partaked of the Sacrament.

Rhenanus in his Annotations before Tertullian de Corona Militis, page 413.
Propter crebram Sacramentorum tractationem, inolita fuit illis religio quaedam,
etiam vulgarem panem and vulgar poculum reverenter tractandi: They were so
religious when they took the Sacrament, that they did transfer some
reverence also even unto their common meats.

The fifty-two Injunction of Queen Elizabeth, commands her people to make a
lowly courtesy, answerable to antiquity, which used a modest and humble
Bowing of the body. But more of this by and by.

Yea, the Priests were wont (...): Three times to bow down, as it is in
Chrysostomes Liturgy: And the like was appointed to the Lay people in his
Homilies. The more devout (as I take it) did Bend and Bow their Bodies very low
Thrice, even almost to the Earth, which was the Greater Reverence: and the
Lesser Reverence (which was a Bending of the head and shoulders only) they
performed Twelve times; as a late learned Writer affirms.

If he pick out such kind of Reverences, in which, by his description, there
was no Kneeling, nor Bending of the Knee: He might countenance Geniculation,
and bring proofs for it. In the worship of God, Body and Soul being united
together, there ought to be a sympathy betwixt them. And since the Body
expects to be Lifted up to Heaven hereafter, it must Kneel here on Earth.
God loves not half-worship: and God will be glorified as well in our Body; as
in our Spirit, 1 Corinthians. 6.20.

Textullian witnesses, That the Penitents did Adgeniculare, Kneel down at
the receiving of Absolution: And indeed, both the Baring of men's heads, and the
Kneeling on Bare and Bended Knees, are both of them gestures of humbled and
mortified minds, worshipping God. Not-Kneeling and coveted heads argue men's
pride.

The Ancients were wont with Bended Knees, piously to worship God, except from
Easter to Whitsontide, says Tertullian. And on the Lords day we account it
unlawful to fast, or geniculis adorare, to Kneel. Other where, Tertullian
esteems and reckons, the Not-kneeling between Easter and Whitsontide, an
Immunity or Privilege: But at other times, Kneeling was their Ordinary pious
practice. For Histories make it plain, that diverse of those holier times, had
knees as hard as horn, by their often and continued praying in that gesture.
Therefore let such deluded Pure-trants, who come into the Church, as if they
had no joints, as if they had swallowed two bars of iron, or as if two stakes
were fallen into their legs, so that they will not, or as if they could not
stoop, learn more piety and devotion: and not deny That Reverence to God,
which they give to temporal Princes.

PAR. 3.
IF any ask the reasons, why those Primitive devout Ones, did forbear
Kneeling betwixt Easter and Whitsontide? I answer. First, the Church did so
appoint it: and they were the obedient children of the Church, and would not
teach their Teachers, or spiritual Fathers. When our Church commands thee so
to do, do so. Yea but why did the Church appoint it so? I say, they might
have, and I believe they had many powerful Reasons inducing them Then so to
do, which we know not now. I answer secondly; This might be one Inductive;
Because it was fit the people should show themselves Thankful for the great
and blessed gift of Baptism, which at Easter and Pentecost they received most
commonly: For it seems, as the newly-baptized washed not for a whole week
after sacred Baptism, and did wear only White clothes; whence the Sunday
called Dominica in Albis, or Whitsonday, had its denomination: Which Ceremonies
had their fair significations: So the Church of the Newly-Baptized, gave God
Thanks for the Remission of their finnes, and the grace conferred on them by
Baptism, Standing rather than Kneeling; as may be collected from Rhenanus: His
words are these in his Annotations before Tertullian de Corona Militis:
Geniculari in adorando, velut poenitentis est: Quistans adorat, tanquam jam
veniam consecutus, Gratias agit: In the worship of God, Kneeling is the sign
of a Supplicant or suppliant, or as it were of a Penitent: Who worshipped God
standing, gives Thanks, as having then received pardon of his sins. When
any of our un-kneeling Schismatics are new-baptized (as none are:) Or if they
have not sinned again since the forgiveness of their sins; or if they need
no pardon: Or if they were so holy every way, as the Primitive Church was, we
will indulge somewhat unto them.

And let them consider whether Tertullian, or other Fathers did not speak in
the persons of the Newly-baptized only, and represented them, when they
pleaded the privilege of Standing, and not Kneeling, at some certain times.
Tertullian de Corona Militis, cap. 3. From the day of Baptism we abstain a
whole week, Lavacro quotidiano, From our daily washing. For, as I dare say,
that diverse Churches did Fast on the Lords day, and others Feasted on it:
whence Ambrose gave the Counsel, and Augustine, both himself, and his Mother
practiced it, and counseled it to others, that people should fast or not fast,
according to the custom of those Churches, to which they then came: and with
whom they conversed. See Augustine Epist. 118. ad Ianuar. So the Standing
between Easter and Whitsontide was not in use with All the Primitive Churches,
nor with All the people. The Council of Nice (the first General Council)
confessed, That some did Kneel on the Lords day between Easter and Pentecost,
and forbad them; and if any other people did, as the New-baptised did, they did
it to countenance the neophyte. Christians, rather than as if it were
necessary: but in some times, places, and with some people only.

See Cerda on Tertullian, and he assures us, that of old in the Church, they
baptized not any except the sick, but at those Two solemn times, or Feasts of
Easter and Pentecost: and therefore all That time they did rejoice. The Church
having changed that Constitution, and the Cause being removed, why are people
now so desirous to continue the Effect? Certainly, Tertullian himself was not
to be baptized, nor tasted milk and honey, nor abstained from washing a whole
week, when he writ thus: We are thrice drowned over head and ears, then we
taste of mingled milk and honey, and from the day of Baptism we abstain a
whole week from washing: but he speaks in the persons of the Newly-baptized:
De Corona Militis, cap. 3. So ibidem, when he says; They take the Eucharist
antelucanis coetibus, at their morning-prayers before day; Nec de aliorum manu
quam praesidentium; and that not at the hands of any, but of their chief
Ministers; he speaks in the person of the Receivers only, not of the
Administrants. And examine whether he speak not of such only, as did then
first of all receive the holy Communion; as well as before he spoke of the
then-Newly-baptized. Examine also whether the not-Kneeling on the Lords day was
forbade on all Sundays of the year: or on Easter-Sunday, and Whitsunday, and
the Sundays between them.

If it be objected, that on these Sundays also, yea on All the Sundays of the
year they forbore Kneeling, which excludes the reference to the
newly-baptized. I answer, Sub Iudice lis est, that is more than they can prove;
They did not Stand All the time of divine Service in all Churches; or All the
time that they were in the Churches; but sometimes they somewhere Sat,
sometimes they Kneeled, sometimes they did Prostrate themselves, as is
generally confessed. But at the Altar indeed, the people in some Churches
stood; Stantes oramus, quod est signum Resurrectionis; We pray Standing,
because Standing is a resemblance of the Resurrection. Vnde etiam omnibus
diebus Dominicis id ad Altar observatur: Hence every Sunday, at the least
between Easter and Pentecost, and on those Sundays themselves, we Stand
praying at the Altar, (says Augustine ad Ianuarium, Epistola 119. cap. 15.)
Also they might stand at some Set prayers, as we Stand at the Te Deum, the
Magnificat, at the Three Creeds, and at the Gospel: and yet in other parts of
prayer they did Kneel: when they asked forgiveness they did Kneel: and who
needed not ask forgiveness? I would feign see such a Pharisee. At prayers of
Thanksgiving they did Stand, as before I proved out of Rhenanus. Again, the
Council of Nice appointed, Vt Stantes ad orationem vota Domino reddamus, that
when we pay our vows unto the Lord, we should Stand in prayer, as Gratian has
it, Folio 441. Columella 1 a. So in bringing of Tithes and Offerings, they
might do it standing.

Moreover, the Heathen were wont to fall down flat on their faces, and adore
their false Gods; and therefore to confront them, some Churches might ordain
their public Service to be performed Recto vultu, ad Dominum orationis,
Standing and Praying to God on all Sundays, and on every day between Easter
and Whitsontide: because in these days we celebrate the joyful time of our
Lords Resurtection.

PAR. 4.
COnsider, I entreat you, the great variations, yea the seeming contrarieties,
that the Churches of Christ made and practiced, concerning the eating, and
not-eating of flesh, and meat offered to Idols, at several times, and all to
good ends.

Holy men feasted the people holily: So did David, 1 Chronicles. 16.3. But Balaam
taught the people to eat of things sacrificed to Idols, Revel. 2.14. Whereupon
in the Law of Grace, Act. 15.20. it was ordained by the Hierosolymitan
Council, that the converted Gentiles should abstain from pollutions of Idols,
or things offered to Idols. For otherwise the weak Jews (who abhorred such a
sin) would have been offended. Among the Jews, none but the Priests, or his
attendants and family, might eat of some sacrifices, or things offered, viz.
of the Shewbread. But among the Gentiles, on extraordinary Festivals and times
of joy, they did promiscuously partake of things offered to Idols; except This
case only; Whosoever had slain a man, he might not partake of the Pagan
sacrificed meat, as being reputed holy: and in this case it might be said,
Procul, o procul este prophani. Whereupon that Council forbad the Ethnic
Converts to eat of things offered to Idols promiscuously with other meats,
least that might breed an exulceration of mind, between the Jews and
Gentiles, if they used contrary ceremonies. For the Jews before abstained from
such things, though offered to the true God. After this, S. Paul's opinion was
asked by the Corinthians, or cause given him to explain his opinion; And
because the Corinthians vainly imagined, That an Idol was something in the
world; otherwise the meat offered to Idols would be indifferent, and as
nothing, like the Idol it self: The Apostle to remove this scandal for a
time, in a sort cancelleth the decree of Council, though made by the holy
Ghost, and the Apostles, and seems to deny that the Idol is any thing; or
that which is offered to Idols is any thing, 1 Cor. 10.19. etc. and in plain
terms, 1 Corinthians. 8.4. As concerning the eating of things offered unto Idols,
we know that an Idol is nothing in the world: though made of matter, wood,
stone, brass, silver, or gold, yet it is nothing, In genere signi relati ad
rem significatam, because the thing signified by the Idol, is nothing; nothing
real in the world. And so the Apostle permits the eating of things
sacrificed to the Idols; Provided, that first it be done without scandal to
others, 1 Cor. 8.9. etc. Secondly, We must not eat it, if we know that it has
been offered unto Idols, or eat it (...), As a thing offered to an Idol,
verse. 7. as he most acutely and divinely distinguishes; Neither must it be
done in the Temple of the Idol, 1 Corinthians. 8.10. Otherwise, neither if we
eat, are we the better; neither if we eat not, are we the worse, verse. 9. But
whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question for
conscience sake, 1 Cor. 10.25. Yet if any man say unto you, This is offered in
sacrifice unto Idols, eat not for his sake that showed it, verse. 28. and 29.
About this time, because as it was an abomination to the Egyptians to eat
bread with the Israelites, Genesis 43.32. So the Jews abhorred not simply to
eat, but to eat such forbidden things with the Gentiles: Whereupon, as it is
most likely, S. Peter did forbear to eat with the Gentiles, and S. Paul
blamed him for it, Galat. 2.12. and he was justly to be blamed, or else S. Paul
would never afterward have recorded it.

Yet upon further disorder, and abuse of the holy Apostle S. Paul his
heavenly-inspired doctrine, the wisdom of God to set a final determination to
this seeming difference, to accord both Jews and Gentiles, and to build the
Church upon one corner stone, elect, and precious, again renews the
Apostolical sanctions and holy decrees of the Jerusalem Council; and
notwithstanding S. Paul's indulgence and determination, which in the right use
was most holy; I say, the blessed Spirit of God most justly finds fault both
with the Angel of Thyatyra, Revel. 2.20. Because he permitted Jezabel to teach,
and to seduce Gods servants -- to eat things sacrificed unto Idols: and also
reproves the Angel of Pergamus, Revel. 2.14. because there were among his
Church They who held the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a
stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto
Idols.

According to which Dictate of the Spirit, being the last book of Scripture,
and was written by S. John, did the Church of God guide it self a longtime
after, nor did eat of things sacrificed to Idols. And it was so strictly
observed; that the cursed Apostata Iulianus, who for his abominable Idolatry
was termed Idolianus, took it to heart, and resolved to break them off from
that point of Religion, whether they would or no; and therefore to vex the
Christians, caused all the meat in the Pagan Markets to be mingled with things
offered unto Idols; so that the Christians must either eat no flesh, and be
ready to starve; or else eat of such things as were offered unto Idols. But an
holy Martyr admonished the Christians to live by boiled wheat and furmenty, and
so deluded his politic irreligion.

Julianus being thus rancountred and undermined, he fell to a countermine, and
the rage of that Renegado Emperor so increased, as Theodore Historiae 3.14.
says, At Antioch (the then most flourishing seat of Christians) and in other
places, he mingled both the fountains (their then drinking places) with some
part of the Heathen sacrifices, and their markets with meats offered unto Idols.
In this commiserable estate, some were starved, rather than they would eat or
drink: and questionless died most holy Martyrs. Other dovout men did eat and
drink of the creatures, which were before them, grounding their practices on
the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 10.25. Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, that eat,
making no question for conscience sake. And Romans 14.3. Let not him that eats
despise him that eats not: and let not him that eats not, judge him that
eats. Again, v. 6. He that eats, eats unto the Lord, for he gives God
thanks; and he that eats not, eats not the Lord, and gives God thanks.
Some may think the Eaters and Drinkers of those mingled waters and meat, did
sin against S. Paul's directions, because they knew that some things were
purposly offered unto Idols, and mingled with other meat and drink.

But I judge charitably, that they might lawfully eat, because they did not eat
the meats (...), As things offered unto Idols: Neither did know which was
offered to Idols, which not: and if they had known, they would have refused the
things sacrificed. Yet for all this, S. Augustine in his 154, Epistle is enough
severe in this point, saying, If a travailer being extremely hungry, finds no
meat, but such as has been offered to an Idol, though no other man be present
to see him eat, yet let him not eat (says he.)

Lastly after this, the Church mitigated the severity in this point. So still,
for the good of peace, for the bettering of the Churches estate: for avoiding
to give offense to the weak brethren: the same thing may done, or not done:
concealed or revealed; There is nothing that may be omitted without sin, but
must be omitted, rather than the Sin against the weak brethren should be
incurred. And this I hold to be a safe Rule.

And now in further answer to my learned and laborious Friend, who was a little
stumbled, because our Church has commanded Kneeling, when the Primitive Church
appointed Standing; I say, Churches have great power committed to them, of
which I spoke at large in my first book; Yet now will add, that though the
Church has established such and such good Orders: Yet upon abuses, or other
just motives, she may mutare velificationem, and change the Orders. And why
should any of the people, or any inferior Minister take upon them to guide or
govern the Churches, or to pry into the Reasons, and Consultations
Ecclesiastical, why the Governers have appointed such observances, or have
Abrogated them? The meanner sort are bound to Obedience. The Foot must not
usurp the offices of the Head, or Eyes. Peter Moulin, whom Balzack compares
to a brave Seaman, in a single small Brigandine, daring to affront a great
Fleet, found fault with such Ministers of ours, who for a Cap, and a Surplise
would leave their Ministry, and disobey our Church; professing, that if his
King would permit him to preach in Paris, though he were enjoined to do it in a
blew Cap, he would be content to do so. In honor of Christ's Resurrection, and
to testify the joy of Christians for that great blessing; the holy Church then
forbade Kneeling at some times: Now, since that irreverence, and contempt has
grown among the people, our Church has justly commanded kneeling in
prayer-time.

The Fathers esteemed the day of the Lords Resurrection to be the first day of
Christ his Joy, after his Passions being dolorous; His descent into Hell; His
victory over Satan; His ascent, and His Resurrection being active, or
laborious. Heaviness might endure for awhile, but joy comes in the morning.
So the Fathers joying not so much in their own joy, as in Christ's joy, which on
Sunday morning was least clouded, and least annoyed, they made that Day their
Holyday: and Kneeling being held by them to be a symbol of Sorrow, they
forbade that sign of Sorrow; and Fasting being a token of Humiliation, they
forbade That also; though some Churches did Fast on That day, as I proved
before; and the people of some Churches might, and did Kneel.

Excellently writes S. Hierom, That is indifferent which is neither good, nor
evil: which if you do, you are not the more righteous; or if you leave it
undone, you are not the less righteous. But if the Supreme Magistrate, or the
Church command a thing indifferent, it is no longer indifferent to thee; it is
now a binding precept upon the injunction: and that must make thee yield
Obedience upon the Ecclesiastical Magistrates authority, which binds not
others, in other places.

Variety of ceremonies, is not hurtful to the Church of Christ, but rather
beneficial; for out of them we may choose those for practice, which are best,
and most agreeable to our Times and Congregations. If thou find any thing,
any where, that more pleases God, select that to the use of the Church, says
Gregory the Great, to our Augustine of Canterbury, as it is in Beda, cap. 27.

What Gregory appointed, I wish the now Bishop of Rome practiced. In all our
solemn Ecclesiastical meetings we begin with public humble prayer unto God
to bless and guide us. Yet in the Popes Consistory at Rome, there is not heard
the voice of public prayer. And the learned Cardinal Palaeotus De Sacri
Consistorii Consultationibus, p. 373. goes about to excuse it, saying; The
Pope and the Cardinals were at their Devotions, before they came to the
Consistory; and there commended themselves heartily to God. I answer, Every
one, I presume in our Convocation-house do pray to God heartily before our
going to that meeting: yet public prayers are also thought necessary: because
of meeting in an holy place; and because holy matters are there to be handled;
and we seek to obtain a blessing from God: and we must not be weary in
well-doing, Gal. 6.9. but must pray always, that is upon all fair occasions.

In too too many things, the Church of Rome has followed and imitated the
fashions of Heathen Rome: In this point, Pagan Rome is holier than our late
Christian Rome. No man doubts but the Senators did after their sort, pray in
their Houses, or Capitol, or Temples, before they came into the Sentate house:
yet before they began any business of the World, this kind of prayer was
publicly recited. Quod foelix faustumque sit, etc. God bless and prosper us
in our undertakings.

His Second subterfuge, that they pray not, because the Pope is present, who
has so great power, is most ridiculous: for supposing him so holy, and to have
all the pretended power; He and they should the rather pray together to God,
and would the sooner be heard.

I return to the old matter.

Concerning Kneeling at the Receiving of the holy Eucharist, it was never
disliked as a thing of its own nature evil and unlawful, but as inconvenient
for such times, and not simply inconvenient, but because the Church so judged.
From Easterday not only unto Whitsunday excluding it, sed eadem immunitate in
Pentecosten usque gaudemus, says Tertullian de Corona Militis, cap. 3. They
kneeled neither at the feast of Easter, nor at the feast of Pentecost, nor
between those times; but after both feasts were ended. If you look for
Scripture to command this: No Scripture prescribes it as a Law. Tradition is
the author: Custom the confirmator: Faith is the observer, says Tertullian
cap. 4. And there was some reason for it, to which thou owe obedience, says
he, ibid. Whenever they received the blessed Sacrament standing, they prayed
standing likewise: when they Kneeled at one duty, they Kneeled at the other:
yet diverse of the factious ones will kneel at Prayer; who will not kneel
when they are partakers of the Communion; and are faulty therein, which
themselves find fault withal; contemning the ancient Churches practice in the
one half, whilst they are eagerly bent for the other part.

Thirdly, at the first institution of things, both sacred and profane, the
solemnity is more, than in the sequel of them.

Abraham made a great Feast, the same day that Isaac was weaned, Genesis 21.8.
When Christ weaned the Apostles from the World, and made them an Heavenly
banquet, we must think, their Joy and Thanks was great, and their devotion did
strive to correspond unto the gift.

At the receiving of the Law, the Israelites sanctified themselves two days,
and washed their clothes, and did not come to their wives, Exodus 19.14, and
15. yet was the Law but a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ; and brought not
with it that benefit to them, which the sacred Eucharist does to us. Therefore
the greatest and devoutest solemnity of Gesture can be but too little.

When Christ was in his swadling-bands, The wisemen fell down, and worshipped
him. Matthew. 2.11. and gave gifts unto Him. And can we think the Apostles lay
all along or sat unreverently, when Christ gave Them better gifts than Gold,
Franckincense, and Myrrh: when he gave Himself to them? Absit; God forbid.

If we have but new clothes, we will not suffer a spot upon them: but we wipe
them, brush them, and put them on, more carefully, than when they are
threadbare and worn out.

It is an old Proverb, Every new thing has a Golden tail, is much loved,
admired and desired: and yet within awhile, it falls into neglect; and sometimes
into contempt, and malam caudam trahit, that I may use Calvin's phraze in his
Epistles, Colum. 478. it smells ill, like the candle going out. I have lived
to see popular Lectures sinck below scorn, who were formerly admired: and both
undeservedly, as the humors and passions of the people move, which is by
Levaltoes.

The diseases of the body, and the humors thereof, commonly fall into the legs;
all sins of former times have descended and rolled down upon and into our
days: and now the feet swell, and we proud, that they are full of corruption;
and a curing hand, they will not hear of.

O my God! into what dregs of time are we fallen, that they, who pretend most
Devotion, and think themselves to be the purest Christians on the earth, do
account it Indevotion to be humble and reverent, and will not come into the
house of prayer, till prayer be ended, that they may hear a Sermon? Who will
not Kneel, when they enter into the Church, nor show any reverence at their
going out of it: nor bow at the sacred mention of our Savior Jesus Christ; but
come boldly, impudently and most irreverently into Gods house, and stay there:
and return, as if it were an ordinary room or Townhouse to meet in. Is this
to reverence Gods Sanctuary? Is the fear of Superstition become the mother of
Atheism? Has liberty been turned into licenciousnesse? Because some Kneel to
Idols, shall we not Kneel to the true God? Because some creep to the Cross,
shall not we worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker?
This is such a mark of the dear children of God, of the Elect, and the
Generation of the Just, of the Plants for Heaven, of the Holy Ones that are
sure to be saved, as former times never heard of. How has my soul abhorred to
see some men labor to gain reputation upon God, and by being irreverent in
the Church to magnify themselves, as they think, above the people; who keep
off their hats whilst the Atheists are covered, and kneel, whilst they most
profanely do sit. The lowest humiliation is too little in that sacred place.

They cried before Joseph; Abrech or bow the Knee, Genesis 41.45. Esaias 46.23 I
have sworn by my self: the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness,
and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow: which is explained,
That they shall Kneel before prayer. Every knee shall bow to me, and Every
tongue shall swear; or as S. Paul Roman. 14.11. expounds it, Every tongue
shall confess to God.

The Apostle S. Paul, Phil. 2.9. enlarges it thus; God has highly exalted
Christ, and given him a name, which is above every name: that at the Name of
Jesus every Knee shall bow, of things in Heaven, of things in Earth, and things
under the Earth.

Humiliari, est ad humum inclinare. It is a sign of humbleness, to bow toward
the Earth. Neither he who stoopeth to take up one fallen, nor he who prostrateth
himself and falls down for dovotion sake, amittit statum rectitudinis,
grows ever a whit more crooked: Yea, when he is most down, he then stands
up Rectus, and rectissime, in curia Coelesti. Who humbles himself, shall be
lifted up of God. Psalm. 119.25. My soul cleaves to the dust. How? if not by
bodily prostration? Abraham bowed himself to the ground, Genesis 18.2. The great
observer of the Commandments, Kneeled to Christ, Mark. 10.17. Act. 21.5. S.
Paul and the company, rather than they would not Kneel, did kneel on the
shore.

And I have heard of a late Viceroy of Ireland, who going to take ship, and
return to England, devoutly fell on his knees, and asked, and had an holy
Archiepiscopall Benediction, and it prospered divinely.

They worshipped their very Idols; Shall not we worship God? The mean man
bowed down, and the great man humbled himself: which Worship being due to God
only, because they gave it to Idols, it is said, Esaias. 2.9. Therefore forgive
them not: Which was an usual and terrible imprecation. The father of the
Lunatic, Kneeled down to Christ, Mat. 17.14.

The Leper kneeled down to Christ, Mark. 1.40. 2 Chro. 7.3. The people bowed
themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped:
when they saw the fire come down, and when the Glory of the Lord was upon the
house. And shall not we do the like, when we feel the grace of God sanctifying
our souls, descending upon our spirits; and Christ the Glory of his Father
inhabiting in our hearts, and feeding us? When Solomon and the people began
their public devotions, He kneeled on his knees, and spread his hands to
Heaven, 2 Chro. 6.13 And all the Congregation worshipped until the burnt
offering was finished, 2 Chro. 29.28. And when they had made an end of
offering, Hezekiah, and all they that were with him, bowed themselves and
worshipped, verse. 29. At all times: In the beginning, middle and end of Divine
service, God is to be humbly worshipped.

S. Hierom, on Ephesians. 3. Fixo in terram poplite magis, quod ab eo poscimus,
impetramus; We do the rather obtain what we desire, when we kneel.

Constantine l' Empereur, says, It was not lawful for any to sit in the porch
of the Temple, except the Kings of David's loins. They fell on their faces,
when they came into the Temple. And they went backward out of the Temple
(others say sideward) with their faces still looking toward it: So great
reverence did the very Jews show toward their Temple; Neither is it shame for
us to imitate them in our Ingresse and Regresse.

The Primitive Church did Kneel to the Altars. Aris Dei Adgeniculari, est
Adorare sacro-sanctum Altar. Adoremus primum, says an holy Father. If at
their first approach near the Altar, they Adored It: do you think they did
not adore Christ, when he was to be taken at the Altar; whose blessed Sacrament
was left upon the Altar?

Optatus Milevitavus in his sixth Book against Parmenian. In Altaribus votae
populi, and membra Christi portata sunt; In the Altars the prayers of the
people and the members of Christ are carried: God is called upon: and the
Spirit being requested, descends on it to the Consecration, as Bellarmine
holds. What is the Altar, but the feat of the body and blood of Christ? Whose
body and blood dwelt there for certain times or seasons. Chrysostom in his
Oration, that Christ is God, witnesses, That the Cross did always use to
remain on the Altar. Ambrose lib. 1. in Lucam, Doubt not but an Angel is
assistant, and Christ assistant when Christ is offered up. And more fully, De
Spiritu Sancto 3.12. Carnem Christi hodie in mysteriis adoramus; quaem Apostoli
in Domino Jesus Adorarunt: To this day we worship that Flesh of Christ in the
Sacrament which the Apostles adored in Christ Jesus. Augustine on Psalm. 98.
Nemo illam carnem manducat nisi prius adoraverit: No man eats the blessed
Sacrament before he has worshipped; not the Sacrament it self, but God, or
Christ in the Sacrament.

Ensebius in vita Constantini, 4.12. (...), etc. He had Soliloquies with God;
and being pitched on his knees, with eyes cast down to the ground, he was
earnest with God by humble prayers, to obtain those things which he needed.
When he received our blessed Lord himself, did Constantine sit on his royal
Throne, and keep state, or rather descended to the gestures of a thankful
suppliant, and humble receiver?

To the eternal glory of King CHARLES, be it known unto the remote people,
who cannot come to see him; when he partaketh of the body and blood of our
Savior, He does it, not sitting, not lying all along, not standing, but with
as much humility, as the meanest poenitent amongst his Subjects; He kneeleth,
he worshippeth Christ; he prays, he gives thanks; and his gestures are so
holy and devout in that sacred participation, that (as I have been informed)
God by him, has turned the heart of a Romanist, to embrace the truth on our
side. And if his enemies did truly take measure of him, they would fear his
prayers as well as his Arms, and his devotion with his power.

Genua flectimus orantes, In prayer-time we kneel, says Origin on the fourth
Chapter of Numbers, Homil. 5. Arnobius in his first Book, uses this phrase,
Genu nixo procumbere, to pitch on the bended knee. The Saints never meet in
holy places about holy things, without decent reverences expressed by their
bodily gestures. Detur (...) -- in contrarium.

The poenitents cast themselves down, ad fratrum genua, to their Brethrens
knets, says Tertullian; which they could not do, without Kneeling themselves.
And did they not kneel when they received Christ?

But you will say, the Papists in Kneeling, do adore the very Eucharist it
self, viz. the materials.

I answer: Abuses take not away the right use of things. If Mercury first
invented Letters (says Tertullian de Corona Militis;) yet I will use them as
necessary both for commerce and divinity. If he used Music, so did David.
Aesculapius first cured Diseases; yet this did not hinder Esaias to apply a
medicinal plaster to Ezechias: And S. Paul knew a little Wine was good for
the weak stomach of Timothy. Though Minerva made the first ship, yet the
Apostles (yea Christ himself) refused not to sail in ships. If you name some
Heathen god, as Author, Founder, and Inventor of all and every utensils and
vessels: I will also say, Christ did recumbere in lectulo, lay on a small
discubitory bed, and was girded with a Towell, Propria Osyridis vest, with a
vestment appropriated to the service of Osyris, both when he took the Basin,
and washed the Apostles feet; and when he put water into it, ex urceo, out of
the waterpot or pitcher.

Remove the Abuse; keep still the right Use. To argue from the abuse, to the
wholly removing of things in their right use, is as childish and ridiculous, as
if another should say, The Vines and the Corn are to be spoiled and cut down,
because some are drunk, and do surfeit: and all creatures, and all the world
to be destroyed, because Man abuses them; yea men's souls and bodies to be
annihilated, because there are none, but sometimes and some ways, do abuse
both their souls and bodies.

Concerning the veneration of the Sacrament, it is accorded on all sides, That
in the Act of Receiving, or whilst we are participating of it, it is lawful to
Kneel, yea to fall down and worship Christ in it.

Calvin who is most vehement against Adoration, when the Host is carried up and
down in state (as often it is under a great goodly costly Canopy) is express,
Institutionum 4.17. Parag. 37. If Christ be adored in, or at the receiving of
the Supper, I will say, that that Adoration then is lawful, if it resideth not
in the sign, but mounteth up, and is directed unto Christ sitting in Heaven.

The Lutherans run with divided streams: Illyricus denies Christ to be
worshipped in the Eucharist, (says Bellarmine de Sac. Eucharistiae, 4.29.)
Others hold, That when we are busied in the real present partaking of Christ's
body, we must then worship it. See Brentius in his Apology for the confession
at Wittenberg: and Bucer in the Acts of the Conference at Ratisbon. Their
leader Luther (cited by Chemnitius in his Examen of the Decrees of the
Tridentine Council, the second part, page 151. of Sarerius his Edition)
styles the Eucharist Sacramentum venerabile, and Adorabile, A Sacrament to be
worshipped and adored. And none, says Chemnitius, denies Christ to be adored
in the Supper, but Sacramentaries, or such as deny Christ to be truly and
really present in the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Chemnitius himself acknowledges these Theses. 1. Christ God and Man is to be
adored. Only Arrians deny this. 2. Christ's humane nature; for the
hypostaticall union with the divinity is to be adored. None but Nestorians
will deny this. The Apostles worshipped the Humane nature; Matthew. 28.17. When
they saw him, they worshipped him. Let me add, Adoration praecedeth
Communication; for, Adora and Communica, says Chrysostom, Homil. 21. ad
populum Antiochenum. And, Nemo illam carnem manducat nisi prius adoraverit: No
man communicates of those heavenly morsels, who has not first adored. 3. The
adoration of God, is not confined to time or place. S. Augustine on those
words, Worship at his footstool, Psalm. 99.5. reads it, Adorate scabellum
pedum ejus, (...), Suppedaneum, Worship his footstool. S. Augustine his
opinion is express, That Christ's Flesh as made of Earth, may be said to be
Gods Footstool: That That Footstool is to be Worshipped: and therefore
Christ's Flesh is to be Worshipped: And when we eat his Flesh, we do not only
not sin in Worshipping it; but we sin, if we do not Worship it: yet if the
Prophet and Psalmist aymeth not (...), principally at the Adoration of Christ's
Flesh in that place, but commands their prostration before the Temple, and
before the Sanctuary (which was holy) and before the Arc, in it: as in my
judgment he does: For the Temple was the place both of Gods throne (in some
regard) and the place of the soles of his feet (in another regard) Ezechiel
43.7. And God says, He will beautify the place of his Sanctuary, and make the
place of his feet glorious, Esaias 60.13. And in the verse following, he
expresses how it shall be glorious; They shall come bending unto thee, and --
they shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet: a very low
prostration. The Arc also is called the Footstool of God, and there God was
to be worshipped, not the Arc it self but God: 1 Samuel 1.19. They worship
before the Lord. We will go into his Tabernacles: We will worship at his
Footstool. Arise, O Lord, into thy rest, Thou and the Arc of thy strength,
Psalm. 132.7. and 8. verses; I resume and say, if the Israelites were commanded
to worship God before the Temple, before the Sanctuary, before the Arc: O
come, let us worship and fall down and Kneel before the Lord (which I have
forealleaged;) We cannot think that God would have Christians less devout
toward his only Son God and Man; than the Israelites were to the Temple,
Sanctuary* or Arc: and therefore, I hold it a probable inference, The Apostles
Adored Christ whilst he was facially present, and presenting his most sacred
Body and Blood to them: which was a most gracious gift and blessing, more of
value than the Temple, and all the holy things contained in it.


Did God, when he brought in the First-begotten into the world, say, Heb. 1.6.
Let all the Angels of God worship him? And when the same Savior of Ours, was
going out of the world, and was present with his holy Apostles, and gave them
his own Body and Blood with all needful graces, and among them even this
grace, to know Whom to adore, and When (which are parts of his Worship) can we
think he was not worshipped by them?

Always then, and everywhere is Christ to be adored: Fieri nec potest, nec
debet, quin fides Christum in action coenae praesentem veneretur: It cannot
be, nor ought to be, but that our Faith must worship and adore Christ present
in the Sacramental distribution and reception.

And the same Chemnitius brings in Augustine, Ambrose, Nazianzen, and
Eusebius Emissenus for his Co-opinionists; yet thus he expounds himself; That
not the material Elements are to be adored, but Christ only.

But my inference and collection from these passages, is only this; If we must
adore Christ, when we celebrate and take the divine Sacrament; then it behoved
the Apostles much more to do so, when They beheld Christ, (...), visibly,
personally, and bodily present, conferring those hallowed Blessings unto them.

I do not say, I do not think, that the Apostles did always, at all times,
and in all places adore Christ, by bodily prostration, after they knew he was
humanatus-Deus, the Son of God, yea God in our Flesh. He expected it not. The
occasions did not so permit it. He sent them, He sat with them, He did eat
and drink ordinary food with them, He washed their feet: At which times,
bodily adoration was not, could not be well performed. Christ held it worship
enough, at some times, that they did confess him to be God and Lord: My Lord,
and my God, (says Thomas) Joh. 20.28. Thou art Christ, the Son of the living
God, says Peter, Matthew. 16.16. We believe, and are sure, Thou art That Christ,
Joh. 6.69. It was well accepted from them, That they did worship him in Spirit
and Truth, Joh. 4.24. If their minds and souls had gotten an habitual
adoration of him, the expression of it by continual prostration was not
necessary.

1. But first when Christ had newly performed some superhumane works, they did
as they were bound, Worship him, Matthew. 17.6. At the Transfiguration when they
heard a voice from Heaven, They fell on their faces. At the great draught of
fishes, overlading their ship, Peter fell down at Jesus knees, Luke 5.8. And
others might do so, at other times, though it be left unmentioned.

2. When they begged great matters, They worshipped him. The woman of Canaan,
seeking for help, Worshipped him, Matthew. 15.25. The mother of Zebedees
children craving a boon, Worshipped him, Matthew. 20.20.

3. When Christ did actually heal some, who were vehemently afflicted, They
did adore him. The healed Samaritan, fell down on his face at Christ's feet,
Luke 17.16.

4. Lastly, it was fit to adore him, when he extraordinarily conferred on their
souls greater blessings, to the saving and enriching them with all necessary
graces; At such times and seasons, did they, ought they too, Adore him. And
thus did he do to them, when he gave them the consecrated food of his Body and
Blood, when he instituted a new Sacrament for the good of their souls. And
therefore I doubt not, but they did Then Adore him, according as the excellency
of the gift required.

Therefore, Kneeling being a Gesture of Piety, as M. Hooker fitly terms it,
an Adorative Gesture, and above all Gestures most frequent in use to worship
God; I conclude, with some degree of certainty, and with the cleerest
probability: That when Christ administered the consecrated Eucharist unto his
Apostles, they Kneeled at least, if they did not fall down on their Faces, and
worship him.

And yet if they did fall down to the Ground, they first fell on their Knees:
and Kneeling was the way and means of their prostration, and they arose not
up, without Kneeling.

Let any one, give me one instance where ever any Church at any time did like
or prescribe, that any one might receive the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist
Sitting, or Lying all along, except such as were unable to kneel, till these
later times of Singularity, and Innovation, and I shall give them thanks.

Tertullian de Oratione, cap. 12. Irreverens est, assidere sub conspectu,
contraque conspectum ejus, quem cum maxim reverearis ac venereris; quanto
magis sub conspectu Dei vivi, Angelo adhuc Orationis astante, factum istud
irreligiosissimum est, nisi exprobramus Deo quod oration nos fatigaverit. It is
irreverent among men, to sit in his sight, and against him, face to face, whom
you do most revere and worship. But this is more, a most irreverent fact, to
Sit in the sight of the living God; the Angel (that hears and offers up
our prayers) Standing still there: unless we object it against God, that
prayer has tired us. And is it likely, that the Apostles, at the Receiving of
the stupendous mysteries from the hands of their Savior then present,
blessing the Elements, giving Thanks to God, working miraculously,
fore-signifying his Death and Crucifixion with the breaking of his Body and
pouring out of his Blood, and giving himself unto them, after a new way;
lastly lifting them up then from consideration of things earthly, to the
enjoying of things heavenly: I say, is there so much as a shadow of likelihood,
that they did not worship him? Even Balaam advised Balack to stand at his
Burunt-offering, whilst Balaam met the Lord further off, Number. 23.15 and Balak
obeyed him: for, Behold he stood by his Burnt-offering, verse. 17. And yet it is
likely that Balak did sometimes Sit; for verse. 18. It is in the Hebrew (...)
Surge; not (...), as it is in the Septuagint; Balaam as it were dislikeing
Sitting in sacred offices. Even the unweildly Eglon arose out of his seat, when
Ehud said to him, I have a message from God unto thee, Judges 3.20. And he was
another King of Moab.

Gregory Nazianzen in his Oration of the death of Gorgonia his sister, says,
When she was afflicted with an incurable disease, by night she hastened to the
Church, and lying Prostrate before the Altar, so earnestly prayed before the
venerable Sacrament, that she was presently cured, calling upon him who is
Worshipped on the Altar: And can we think she did not fall down on her knees at
least when her self received the sacred Food of her soul?

Eusebius Emissenus, Homilia 5. de Paschate, says, The Sacrament was
instituted, ut coleretur Christus jugiter per mysterium, That Christ might be
continually worshipped by the mystery.

Origin Homilia 13. in Exodum, Nostis qui divinis mysteris interesse
consuevistis; you who use to be present at the Divine Mysteries, do know, that
when ye receive the Body of the Lord, ye heed unto it with all fearful
cautiousnesse, and worship, least any thing of it fall.

Again, Contra Celsum, 8. about the middle of the book; With prayers and
thanksgiving for the benefits received, do we eat the sacred Bread. And did
they not neele either when they prayed, or when they received?

In the next place follows the binding argument from the book of
Advertisements set forth by Queen Elizabeth's command 1584, and printed by
Thomas Dawson, in the Articles for administration of Prayers and Sacraments (We
appoint) Now follow the words, That all Communicants do receive Kneeling, and
as it is appointed by the Laws of the Realm, and the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions.

Lastly, let men consider themselves, and their own natures, and they shall
find, that the body of Man was not ordained of God to serve only, nor
principally for natural necessities: It is indeed, as a stranger to percolate
our Bread, Meats, and Drinks; but it has many fair offices, and more
spiritual. The Face framed with erected eyes to look up to Heaven. The Heart
to meditate on it. The Hands being (...), the instruments of instruments, to
work righteousness; and are not the Knees Omni cardine versatiliora, more
pliable, flexible and turning, than any hooks or hinges, whereby we may easily
fall down and worship God: and easily arise to praise him and do him service?

Let me speak in Tertullians phrases De corona cap. 5. Deus auditum in auribus
fodit visum in oculis accendit, gustum in ore conclusit, odoratum in naribus
ventilavit: contactum in manibus astimavit: per haec exterioris hominis
ministeria, interiori homini ministrantia, fructus munerum divinorum ad animam
deducuntur a sensibus. God has bored hearing in the ears (because into them
it descends as into an hole) He has kindled sight in the eyes (for the eyes
do sometimes sparkle with fire, and are of a fiery nature.) He has shut up
tasting within the mouth (for he has bounded it within that compass.) He has
winnowed, or vanned smelling in the nostrils (by the playing of the wind.) He
has made the hands the judicatories of touching: (which touching being
diffused over all the body, yet is more used by the hands.) He concludes
divinely: By these ministerial bodily Organs, serving the inner Man, the
blessings and fruits of heavenly gifts are from the Senses conveyed to the
soul. Much more might be added of other parts, I will end all in this addition.

They defraud their Knees of the chiefest office, and greatest honor, who
refuse to bend them, in holy times and places: especially at the receiving of
the blessed Sacrament: which I would take, after I had fallen on my Face, and
used grovelling Adoration, if the Church so appointed me: or if scandal would
not arise, from such extraordinary Gesture.

THE PRAYER.
O Lord, thou know my heart, and that with Soul and Body I Reverence and
Adore thee in thy divine Eucharist: I humble my self, as much as I can: and I
would humble my self lower, even unto the gates of Hell, if I could:
confessing my worthiness in nothing, but that I am worthy to be condemned. In
such contemplations, quakeing and terror take hold of my heart; and I am
horribly afraid of thy Judgment. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob shall be in a sweat
at the day of Judgment, as good children shall be in a dread to see their
father angry with his rebellious children. The earth shall melt away like wax;
the heavens shall tremble, and the pillars of Heaven shall shake: to whom shall
I fly? to whom shall I say, Cover me? but unto thee most compassionate Savior:
for thou art my rock, thou art the buckler of my defense, under the shadow of
thy wings do I desire to rest: as thou were superexalted, because thou did
humble thy self; so grant good Lord, I may so fall down before thee, that I
may be taken up by thee, and that the greatness of my humility may bring unto
me, by thy favor, the riches of thy glory, the exaltation both of my soul
and body. Lord, hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee, for Jesus his
sake. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. Which contains the ninth, tenth, and eleventh Generals. Wherein
is declared, 1. What Gesture we are to use at the Receiving of the blessed
Eucharist. 2. What Names have been given to it. 3. What Words were spoken by
our Savior, after the Third Supper, before he departed out of the Coenaculum.

1. What Gesture we are to use at the Administration of it to others. Receiving
of it our selves. Both handled promiscuously.

The English Liturgy our best guide.

At the Repeating of the Law, the people must Kneel. Receiving of the same,
the Israelites did no less.


Never Patriarck, Prophet, Evangelist, Apostle, nor holy Man, nor Christ
himself prayed Sitting, when there was opportunity of Kneeling.

The Monks of Egypt did pray Sitting.

The Rule of Saint Benedict mentions Sitting at the Reading of three Lessons.
Rising up at Gloria Patri, etc.


Several Gestures are to be used both by Priest and People, upon several
occasions. The Priest never Kneeles, while the people stand; but he may stand,
when they kneel. Great reason why the people should kneel at the Receiving of
the Body and Blood of Christ. No superstition, nor Idolatry, then to Kneel:
But obstinate Irreverence, if not blasphemy, not to Kneel. Prayer most an end
used with b^nding of the Knees.

The Pharisee Stood Christ Kneeled when he prayed.

The Rubric of the Communion Book is to be followed by all obediently.

2. The Minister is to deliver the Communion to the people Kneeling in both
kinds. into their Hands.


Maximus would have Men to wash their hands Women to bring clean linen that
will Communicate.

The Nicity of former times questioned. The sixth Synod, Canon 3. against it.
The consecrated bread must be carefully delivered, and received.

To let any crumb, or particle thereof fall to the ground, accounted a great
sin by Tertullian and Origin. Pope Pius the first, punished those who let any
of the Lords blood fall upon the ground or Altar. S. Cyril of Jerusalem gives
a Cave at to this purpose. Little Tables set before the Communicants in former
times: as now we hold Linen clothes, says Baronius. The usual fashion of
receiving the Consecrated bread between the Thumb and a Finger or two, disliked.

Receiving the holy bread in the Palm of the hand, a safer way.

In Tertullians days, the Christians did stretch abroad their hands like
Christ upon the Cross, in their private prayers. Damascene would have us
receive the Body of Christ crucified with our hands framed like to a Cross.

The right Hand being upward open, and hollow to receive the bread.

This accounted the safer way. S. Cyril commands the same kind of usance.

Other manners of Taking it, not sinful. In things indifferent we must not
love singular irregularity. All unseemely Motions and Gestures are so many
profanations of the Lords Supper. Seven General Rules to be observed against
the profanation of the Lords Supper. The word (Amen) explaned: and Kneeling at
Receiving the blessed Sacrament, pressed.

3. Tenth General. What Names are given to the blessed Sacrament by the
Scriptures and Fathers, the Latin and Greek Church.

The hallowed Bread is called in the Scriptures 1. The Lords Body, Broken for
us. 2. The Communion of the Body of Christ. And the Reasons thereof. 3.
Breaking of Bread from house to house. 4. Holy Bread, Blessed Bread,
Eucharisticall Bread, Heavenly Bread: Joh. 6.


In the Fathers. 1. Taking of the Lords Body, Tertullian. 2. Earthly Bread,
sanctified by prayer, consisting of Earthly and Heavenly things. Irenaeus.


A Medicine of immortality, an Antidote against death, procuring life, purging
sin, driving away all evils: idem.

3. Christ's Dole to his Church, Tertullian. The Plenty, Abundance, and
Fatness of the Lords Body.

The Wine is called in the Scriptures 1. The New Testament in his Blood. 2. The
Blood of the New Testament. 3. The Cup of the Lord. 4. The Communion of the
Blood of Christ.


The blessed Eucharist consisting of both kinds, is styled In Scripture

1. The Lords Supper. And in what regards it is so called.

The Papists dislike the frequent use of this Phrase.

Casaubone confutes Justinian and Maldonate the Jesuits, and calls it The Great
Supper. The most Divine Supper. The Arch-Symbolicall Supper.


2. The Table of the Lord, 1 Cor. 10.21.

With Us, it is commonly called Christ his Last Supper.

And the Reasons why it is called the Last Supper.

In the Fathers it has these titles. 1 The Communion of Saints, in the
Apostles Creed. 2 Peace of Christ, Ignatius and Cyprian. 3 A New Oblation,
Irenaeus. 4 Mystery, is a common appellation. Augustine. 5 Life. So called by
the Affricans. Augustine. 6 The Oath, and strictest band of Religion.
Augustine. 7 The Mystical Bread. Augustine. 8 The holy Offering, in regard of
the offerings for the poor. Augustine. 9 The Supper of God, and the Lords
Banquet, Tertullian. 10 The Lords Testament or Legacy. 11 A Communion,
prohibiting Schism, and Division; and inclining to Peace and Union. 12 A
Blessing. 13 A giving of Thanks. 14 The Authentic performance of the Type,
Theodoret. 15 The Latins name it Missah, the Mass; which word some derive
from the Hebrew or Chaldee, and say, it signifies A Tribute of a Free Will
offering of the hand. Cevallerius dislikes that derivation. The Heathen Greek
Priests dismissed their people with (...). The Pagan Romans with these words, I
licet, Missa est. Whence the Christian Roman Church borrows their Mass. 16 The
Greek Church calls it (...), or Ministration. 17 Sacramentum Sacramentorum,
etc. Nicolaus de Cusa. 18 God. Tertullian.


4. Eleventh General. Wherein is inquired, what Speeches were used by our
Savior in the Coenaculum After the Third Supper was administered.

The gracious Sermon of Christ.

His Prayer to God. An Hymn.

PARAGRAPH 1.
NOw follows, What Gesture we are to use at the administration of the holy
Eucharist to others. At the Receiving of it, our selves.

Take then thus together in a Mass or lump, from the best authority under
Scripture.

The English Liturgy or Common Prayer, is our best guide. We begin it first
with the Lords Prayer, and the succeeding Prayer; Almighty God unto whom all
hearts be open, etc. And this is performed at the Lords Table, the Minister
standing, and the whole Congregation Kneeling: And at the Collect the Minister
stands: At the rehearsing of the Commandments the Minister stands as
speaking in the person of God, and commanding by authority. The people hearken,
pray, and kneel, at the Recital of every Commandment. Nor did the Israelites
do less, if they did not do more, at the first receiving of the Law. When the
Second Commandment said expressly, Thou shall not bow down thy self to them;
may well be inferred, they did Then bow down to him.

Never did Patriach, or Prophet, never did Christ, Evangelist, or Apostle,
never did holy Man pray sitting, when there was opportunity of Kneeling. Yet I
confess that Cassian 2.12. reports that the Monks of Egypt did sit praying:
yet he adds, insidentes sedilibus humillimis.

The rule of S. Benedict. cap. 9. mentions their sitting at the Reading of
three lessons, and their rising up at Gloria Patri.

For at the reading the Collect for the day, and the Collect for the King, the
Priest stands up and the people kneel still.

The Epistle, the Gospel, the Nicaene Creed, the Sermon or Homily, and the one
or more Sentences following, may be officiated, the Minister and people
standing.

The prayer for the whole state of Christ's Militant Church, must be done, every
one Kneeling.

The one, two, or three Exhortations following, and the short Invitatory advice
to the Communicants, may be read to them, either the Minister, and they
standing, or he standing, and they sitting, or approaching.

The general Confession is to be read, both Priest and People humbly Kneeling
on their knees.

The hearty prayer following, conjoined with the Operatory Absolution, is to be
done by the Priest or Bishop (if he be present) standing: and the people
kneeling. And in that posture may continue, till the Laudatory, with Angels and
Archagels be performed.

Then shall the Priest kneel down praying in the name of all the Communicants;
The people also kneeling, and saying Amen to the prayer. For I do not remember
that ever the Priests did kneel, when the people stood: but the Priests many
times stand, when the people kneel: As in the words of Prayer and Consecration
following the Priest stands up, and People kneel. When the Minister or
Ministers do participate, they kneel. When they Distribute, and Administer to
the People, the Priests stand, the People receive it kneeling, as the Rubric
appoints.

And great reason is there people should then kneel, at the Divine prayers,
The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy body
and soul unto everlasting life: and a like prayer is devoutly powered forth at
the delivery of the Cup. And will they not kneel when the heart says Amen to
these holy prayers? It is so far from being Idolatrous to kneel before God at
these prayers, that it is obstinate Irreverence, Contempt of the Sacrament, yea
of Christ himself, Not to kneel, for such as are well before instructed.
Furthermore, are we not at that instant advised to be Thankful? which seldom
is well performed without Prayer; and Prayer is to be said, as with lifting up
of holy hands, 1 Timothy 2.8. so most wise with bending of humbled knees. It was
also the wicked Pharisee who stood, and prayed, Luke 18.11. But Christ himself
kneeled down and prayed, Luke 22.41.

Oh that such wretches, as do beat their servants if they be not reverent,
humble, but disrespect their Masters, and little esteem of their kindnesses
bestowed, would but make the comparison between their heavenly Master, and
themselves.

After the participation ended, every one solemnly kneeleth down on his knees,
and says the Lords Prayer. And in that Gesture continue, whilst they say the
next prayer, or the next save one.

The Gloria in excelsis Deo, by reason of the Praise, Blessing, Adoration, and
Thanksgiving included in it, and by reason of the Divine prayers made to the
Father, and the Son: with the coequally-glorious holy-Spirit, may well be said,
or sung, All Kneeling.

The Blessing at their parting, is to be performed by the Bishop, or Priest
standing, and by the People Kneeling.

The Collects after the offertory, are to be read, all parties Kneeling: for
every one of them is a powerful prayer.

What the Rubric directly appoints, ought to be answered with full and
obedient performance: And since I have spoke my mind in some points
unspecialized, in or by the Rubric; I submit my judgment, (as I do in all
other things) to the judgment of the Church of England. And thus I proceed.

That the people are most an end to Kneel, but especially at the Receiving of
the holy Communion, is so clear, that all see it, except such, whose eyes
Satan has blinded. And if they do not repent, he will lead them blindfolded
into the Lake of fire and brimstone, which never shall be quenched.

PAR. 2.
THat when the people Kneel, the Minister is to deliver the Communion in both
kinds into the hands of them, is as clear.

Maximus a great enemy of the Monothelites, says, All men that will
Communicate, must first wash their hands, that with a pure mind, and neat
conscience they may receive the Sacrament. Likewise let the Women bring clean
Linen, that they may receive Christ's body. Baronius, Tom. 1. Anno. 5. Numero
148. observes, men might take it into their bare hands. Women might not take
it but in Linen, which was called Dominicale.

Hence first the nicity of former times, may be questioned, Why the Women were
to receive it in pure linen, and white: but the Men into their bare hands?
Have not the Women as clean and white hands as Men? If the Women's hands were
unworthy to receive it, how are the Men's hands more worthy? If linen be to
cover, or adorn the Women's hands: Why will not such an ornament befit Men's
hands also?

In the sixth Synod, Canone 3. celebrated Anno Domini 681. there seems to be a
Plea against that custom. We do not admit those who make receptacles of gold,
or of other matter, to receive, in stead of their hands, the Divine mysteries;
for they prefer the livelesse subject matter before the Image of God. If any do
so, let both the Administrant, and the Communicant be separated.

Again, it is the fashion both for Men and Women, to receive the sacred Bread
from the hands of the Minister, some with the thumb and one finger; some with
the thumb and two fingers: and this is not sinful, nor to be condemned in it
self, as it may be carefully delivered and received. But if any crumb or
particle fall to the ground, it is a greater sin, than people imagine.
Tertullian took it very grievously, when any such thing was. Origin accounts
it a sin, and a great sin, and told the people they did well to think so of
such as let any part fall to the ground.

The words are; Tom. 1. p. 102. in Eusebius, Episcopius his edition. Nostis qui
divinis mysteriis interesse consuevistis, quomodo cum suscipitis Corpus
Christi, cum omni cautela, and veneratione servatis, ne ex eo parum quid
decidat, ne consecrati muneris aliquid dilabatur. Reos enim vos creditis, and
recte creditis si quid inde per negligentiam decidat. Circa Corpus Christi
conservandum (magna) utimini cautela, and recte utimini. You who are usually
present at Divine services, do know, with what wariness, and reverence you
preserve the Body of Christ when you receive the same; least by chance some
small parcel or crumb of the Consecrated gift, should slip out from between
your fingers, and fall to the ground. For you do believe, and rightly believe,
that you are guilty of the Body of Christ, if any part or parcel thereof
should through your negligence fall to the ground. And therefore you do use,
and rightly use, a great deal of cautelousnesse in the preservation of the
Body of Christ.

Pope Pius the first, who lived in the days of Justin Martyr, between 100, and
200 years after Christ, punished those by whose negligence any of the Lords
Blood did fall upon the ground or Altar: The like we imagine of the sacred Body.

Sanctificatis ergo oculis tam sancti corporis contactu, communica: Cave, ne
quid excidat tibi. The very eyes being sanctified by the touching of so holy a
Body: receive the blessed Eucharist; but take heed, that no part of it fall
from thee, says Cyril of Jerusalem.

Baronius, Tom. 1. anno 75. Numero 146, says, that when they took the
Eucharist in former times, certain little Tables were set before the
Communicants; as now (says he) we hold Linen cloths before the Receivers.

And all this was done, and is done out of doubt, least any particle should
fall to the Ground.

Indeed, there is more danger in the nice receiving with the thumb, and a
finger or two; for the Bread is made of many corns, and every corn yields
such mealy stuff, as may easily by breaking, or in the acts of delivery, and
receiving, moulder into crumbs, and fall down: There is much more care to be
had of the keeping whole of such mouldring soft food, than if silver, gold, or
precious stones (from which nothing can drop away) were to be consigned over,
or delivered to others. Nor is there danger in the fall of them; But danger
there is in the fall of the Consecrated Bread.

Wherefore I doubt not, but as the words of the Liturgy command not, to put the
holy bread into the peoples fingers, or between their thumb and fingers, but
into their hands; so the meaning is, it ought to be delivered into the palms
of their hands, as a safer receite, and as a safer conveyer unto their mouths,
than the use of thumb and fingers.

Tertullian de Oratione, cap. 11. Nos non Attollimus tantum (manus) sed etiam
expandimus, and Dominica passions modulantes and ^rantes confitemur Christo.
When we pray, we do not only lift up our hands, but we spread them abroad like
to the Cross, conforming our selves to the Passion of our Lord. For (say I)
his hands were stretched out. But this was done in private prayers. In public
prayers, they lifted them up but a little way; as before I noted out of
Tertullian.

Johan. Damasc. Orthodoxae Fidei 4.14. Accedamus ei desiderio ardenti: Manus in
crucis modum formantes, crucisixi corpus suscipiamus: and apponentes oculos,
and labra, and frontem, divinum carbonem concipiamus. Let us come to the
Sacrament with an earnest desire; And framing our hands like to a cross, let
us receive the body of Christ crucified; and laying our foreheads, eyes, and
lips nigh to it, conceive it as a divine coal to burn our sins. To conclude,
in my opinion, the left hand bearing up the right, and especially in some
Paraliticks, one hand had need to stablish another, and both crossing about the
wrists, and the palm of the right hand being upward, and open, at the
receiving of the bread, the blessed Sacrament of Christ's body may be received;
But at the taking of the Cup, there is no need, or cause that the palm should
be upright; yea it cannot be so with convenience; and this does no way
enterfeere with Damasc^n, or our Lyturgy; and let the Christian heart judge, if
this be not the safer way. And thus, for ought that I can object to the
contrary, the Apostles themselves might receive the Sacrament, and perhaps did.

I was overjoyed when I found this proof following, agreeing both to my
practice, and opinion.

Cyrillus Hierosolymit. in Mystag. 5. Come not to the Communion with the palms
of thy hands spread all abroad, nor thy fingers severed, and open: but putting
the left hand under thy right, to settle and establish it, in the hollow of thy
hand receive the Body of Christ.

I will not say that any other course of taking is sinful: but I have spoken
my opinion for the Convenience. The liberty granted by Christ, is not to be
curbed, or Ephorized by us. But let us take heed least our liberty grow to
licentiousness, or that we love singular irregularity.

For, if one should receive the blessed Sacrament sitting, or leaning on his
elbow, or halfe-sitting, halfe-kneeling, or looking on the one side, or
smiling, or using unseemly motion, though those Gestures be not in singled
particularities forbid: yet they are a profanation of the Lords Supper; as
being forbidden in the General Rules.

First, That comeliest, and devoutest Gesture be used in holiest matters.
Sancta sancte. Secondly, Let all things be done to edifying, 1 Cor. 14.26.
Thirdly, Let all things be done in order, verse. 4. The rest will I set in
order, when I come, says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.34. Fourthly, Romans 14.17. The
Kingdom of God is not in meats, nor drinks: but righteousness and peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost: For he that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God, and approved by men; let us therefore follow after the
things, which make for peace, as there follows. Fifthly, Let all things be
done decently, 1 Cor. 14.40. A comeliness is commended, Ecclesiastes 5.18. 1
Cor. 11.13. It is comely that a women pray unto God uncovered: Comeliness is
taught by nature, as it there follows. Sixthly, The meetings in sacred
convocations are for good, nor for evil. We are come together for the better,
not for the worse. And the contrary is reproved by Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11.17.
Lastly, God rules things Inferior, by Superior; things farther off, by things
nearer to him. The people must not prescribe to the Magistrates, nor to
themselves Laws, in things indifferent; but the Governors, and Pastors to the
People.
Whosoever therefore at the receiving of the blessed Eucharist, does any thing
misbeseemingly, sins against these, or some of these Rules, and so sins
against Christ.

I proved before, that at the holy Receiving, a prayer is preparatory, and made
for every one of us. And as the Minister devoutly prays, does not thy heart
say Amen? and is not Amen truly explaned and enlarged thus; O Lord, I confess,
this is thy Body, this is thy Blood, yea it is thine own Self which thou
vouchsafest unto me, and I do now Receive: Oh preserve my body and soul unto
everlasting life; I eat in remembrance that thy Body was broken, and that thou
dyedst for me: I drink in remembrance that thy Blood was shed and powered out
for me. Lord, I am thankful, and I feed on thee in my heart by Faith. Lord, I
believe, pardon my wandering thoughts: unite me unto thee: make me from
henceforth holy, and conformable to thy self, and let this spiritual food
strengthen me in the way to Heaven. To conclude in the Divine M. Hookers words;
Oh my God, thou art True. Oh my Soul, thou art blessed.

He who uses not these, or some of these, or the like faithful thankful
precatory ejaculations, both at the instant act of receiving of the sacred
Communion, and presently after, yea and whilst the Minister is praying for him,
he has an obdurate heart, he discerns not the Lords Body, but eats and
drinks his own damnation. Now, Reader, judge again, if a man will not kneel
when the Minister prays for him, and that openly? If he will not kneel, when
he powers out his hearty prayers unto God, whether he sins not haynously?
Certainly, God condemns his foolish obstinacy; and so I pass to another
point.

PAR. 3.
THe next is; What names are given unto the holy Sacrament. And here I will
first speak of the Bread, and of the Wine severally, and show you what names
have been given them both in the Scriptures, and by the Fathers: and then will
I speak of them jointly together.

The hallowed Bread, in the sacred Word of God, is called the Lords Body broken
for us, 1 Cor. 11.24. discernable to be the Lords body, verse. 20. styled also
the Communion of the Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. which Communion is not in
the use of Scripture a proper name of the Eucharist; but a declaration of its
power, and efficacy, by making us one with Christ, and by partaking the
Sacrament with our brethren, being a special means to the Communion of
Saints; though the Fathers make it a proper appellation (says Casaubone.)

Act. 2.46. it is said; They continued Breaking of Bread Domatim, (...) at
home, or from house to house. In which place it is varied, Communicabant in
fractione Eucharistiae. They did Communicate in breaking of bread; where the
Translator makes use of a Greek word, which he does not often.

It is farther called Panis Sanctus; Panis Benedictus: Panis Eucharisticus:
Panis Coelestis. Holy Bread; Blessed Bread; Eucharisticall Bread; Heavenly
Bread, John 6.32.

The Fathers appellations for it. Oration solvenda est Corpore Domini accepto.
Tertullian de Oratione, cap. ultimo: Upon taking the Lords Body, we end our
Prayers.

The same in lib. de Idololatria; cap. 7. says, some did Manus admovere
Corpori Domini, move their hands to take the Lords Body.

Irenaeus, lib. 4. cap. 34. E terra panis, percipiens invocationem Dei, non jam
communis panis est, fed Eucharistia, ex rebus duabus constans, terrena and
coelesti. Earthly bread Sanctified by prayer, is not now common bread, but the
Eucharist, consisting of earthly and heavenly things. It is a Medicine of
immortality; an Antidote against death: procuring life; purging sin; driving
away all evils.

Tertullian, Adversus Judaeos, in fine, calls the Eucharist Dominicae gratiae
quasi viscerationem. Christ's Dole to his Church. And least you may think it to
be a poor Dole, a Lean, Thin, Hungry gift; the same Tertullian in lib. de
Pudicitia, expresses it better thus, Opimitate corporis Domini vescitur. He
eats of the Plenty, Abundance, and Fatness of the Lords Body: and our Soul
is fully satisfied, fatted, crammed with God: of which testimony hereafter.

The Cup is the new Testament in his blood, 1 Cor. 10.25. This is my blood of
the new Testament, Matthew. 26.28. and it is termed The Cup of the Lord, verse. 7
So it is also called, 1 Cor. 10.21. Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord. The
Cup of blessing which we bless, is the Communion of the Blood of Christ, verse.
16.

The blessed Eucharist consisting of both kinds, has these glorious Tittles.

In the Scripture it is termed the Supper of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.20. And the
Lords Supper, in all these regards. First, because the Lord did Institute it.
Secondly, did Take it. Thirdly, did Administer it to his Apostles. Fourthly,
did appoint the Church to do the like in remembrance of the Lords death.

The Papi^^s, as before I observed, dislike the frequent use of this phrase.
See Casaubone confuting Justinian the Jesuit in that point: and against
Maldonate; whilst Casaubone from the Ancients calls it (...) The Great
Supper, the Most Divine and Arch-symbolical supper.

By a Metonymie of the subject, a Table, that is, the food set on that Table.
(...): the Table of the Lord, 1 Cor. 10.21. (...) the Lords Testament or
Legacy: (...), Communion, as prohibiting Schism and Division, and inclining to
Peace, and Union: (...), Blessing: (...), a giving of Thanks.

With us it is commonly called, Christ his Last Supper; which word Last, not
only signifies that he ate no supper any day, or night for ever After, with a
mortal, passible body; but, (...) Last, includes, and involveth the two
precedent Suppers of that night, as if it had been said, This Supper is the
Last of the Three; and Last of All.

It is also termed Communio Sanctorum, in the Apostolical Creed. The Communion
of Saints.

In the Fathers are found these Titles. Pax Christi: The Peace of Christ, by
Ignatius, Epistola 14. And Dare Pacem Lapsis: to give Peace to them that have
fallen; is all one, with admitting people to the holy Communion, in Cyprian,
Epistola 10.

Iren^us says; It is Nova oblatio, a New oblation, 4.32. (...), a Mystery, is
a common appellation.

Augustine de peccatorum Meritis contra Pelag. 1, 24. says, The Aff^icans do
most significantly call Baptism nothing else but Salutem, Health, or
Salvation: and the Sacrament of the Body of our Lord nothing else but Life. And
himself contra Faustum, 20.13. says, It is Sacramentum Religionis; the oath,
and strictest bond of Religion; and the Mystical bread, in the same place.
(...), an Offering, in regard of the Offerings made for the poor. And
Sacrosancta oblatio, by Augustine, contra Faustum, 20.18. The Consecrated
oblation. Dei Coena, and Dominicum Convivium. Gods Supper, and the Lords
Banquet; by Tertullian ad uxorem, 2.4.

Theodoret terms it Verum typi archetypum: the authentic performance of the
Type. The Latins call it Missah, which some derive from the Hebrew, or Chaldee.
For what is in the Vulgat, Spontanea Oblatio, a sufficiency or tribute of a
Free Will offering of thy hand: Deuteronomy 16.10. The Chaldee has it, Missath. In
the Interlineary it is translated, Sufficientia Spontis manus tuae: or
Spontanea manus tuae: Which for substance divinely agrees with our Eucharist.

Juxta sufficientiam donarii spontanei manus tuae, erit quod dabis, as Vatablus
well interprets it. Thou shall offer according to the worth of the voluntary
gift of thy hand, as much as thou well art able.

Some say that Missath (...) is an offering made to God, and due for a
perfonall duty or service; But (says Cevallerius) in Pagnine his great
Lexicon, I do not think so, because none of the Hebrew Doctors, which I have
read, use it so.

And well might he dislike it. For the Hebrew phrases, or words, did not per
saltum skip over to the Romans, but were derived to them by the Greek Church.
Therefore since none of the Greek Fathers did ever use the word Missa, I cannot
think the Latins borrowed it from the Hebrews. The Heathen Greek Priests
dismissed the people, saying, (...). The Pagan Romanist gave the parting blow
to the people by these words: I, licet: Missa est. And the Christian Roman
Church, which has imitated too many of the old Romes customs, has not done
amiss in this, to use the like things and words.

The Greek Church calls it (...), which had its ground from Acts 13.2. (...).
The Prophets and Teachers in the Church of Antioch did minister to the Lord.

The holy Eucharist is called by Nicolaus de Cusa Sacramentum Sacramentorum,
Exercitationum 6. page 532. and in ipso est consummatio Fidei, says he; and a
little before, Hoc est Sacramentum consummatae Vnionis ad vitam aeternaliter
vivificantem: It is the Sacrament of Sacraments, in it is the consummation of
Faith: It is the Sacrament of the most perfect Union to the life which
quickneth us eternally.

Lastly, Tertullian de Resurrectione carnis, cap. 8. says: Our flesh is fed
with the Body and Blood of Christ: ut Anima Deo saginetur, that our Soul may
be filled, Sated, Fatted with God. The Eucharist being called God: which is an
high Expression.

He who will see more attributes of Hallowed Supper, let him have recourse to
Cyprian de Coena Domini, page 500. Casaubone Exercitatione 16. c. 30, etc.

PAR. 4.
IT follows in my Method, to inquire what speeches were spoken by our Savior
after the Third Supper was administered. S. Paul mentions none. The gracious
Sermo Domini in Coenaculo, was after Supper, after the Third and Last Supper;
beginning John 13.3. continuing to John 16.33. Then, as he had made a long
Sermon to his Apostles, so he continues with a Prayer to God, in part of the
seventeenth chapter of S. John. Then did they sing an Hymn, Matthew. 26.30 what
it was is unknown. In likelihood, after the Hymn, they departed the house;
and then fully ended the Third Supper. Then they went over the brook Cedron,
over the Mount of Olives.

David when he fled from his unnatural and rebellious son Absolon, went up by
the ascent of Mount Olivet, and wept as he went up, 2 Samuel 15.30. No doubt also
but our Saviors heart was full of sorrow. For in the way, as he went to the
Mount, He foretold that all the Apostles would be offended, Matthew. 26.31, etc.
and that Peter would deny him, howsoever he promised the contrary.

Hence in some likelihood proceeded the strife, (when S. Peter was curbed by
our Savior) which of them should be accounted the greatest, Luke 22.24. Which
was determined by Christ from the 25 verse, unto the end of the 30. Though some
think the strife was at the Second Supper. Whereupon Christ to teach them
humility, washed their feet, and became as their servant.

When he came to the Mount, he prayed: When he came down from the Mount, he
still had more conference with his Disciples, and comforted S. Peter in
special, and all the Apostles in general. We cannot think, but he passed all
the time in holy devotions, and heavenly discourses. About half an hour
before midnight, he came to the village Gethsemane situated at the foot of the
Mount of Olives: and there the Apostles did sit, and stay by his command,
except Peter, and thetwo sons of Zebedee, and they went with Christ: and Christ
prayed thrice, Matthew. 26.36. Then might he conclude, and seal up all with a
prayer for his Church, John 17.9. For when he had spoken these things, John
18.1. Then did he pass the brook Cedron, where was a Garden into which he
entered, and his Disciples, as he was wont: and Judas knew the place, Joh. 18.1.
etc. and Judas came thither, v. 3. and there was Christ betrayed, and bound.
From thence was he carried and recarried unto manifold examinations, and more
revilings: He was hurried to judgment, to sentence all along the dolorous way
to the shameful death of the rosse.

THE PRAYER.
BY the virtue and merits of which crucified Jesus, good Lord, free me from all
sin passed, prevent me from sinning hereafter; guide me by thy Grace, confirm
me by thy Goodness, and leave me not, O leave me not, most gracious Lord, till
thou have brought my soul to my desired haven, thy bliss in heaven, through
Jesus Christ my only Savior and Redeemer: To whom with thee, and the blessed
Spirit, three persons, and one God, be all possible praise and thankesgiving
ascribed for prolonging my life, for strengthening my feeble body, for giving
me power to end this Work, and for all other favors vouchsafed to me a poor
sinner for Christ his sake. Amen, Amen, Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo, cum Gratiarum actionibus.
Trin-uni, and Vni-trino Deo, Sacrum.
Malim Deo placere, quam aliis omnibus.
Malim mihi ipsi placere, and nonnullis aliis:
quam solummodo nonnullis aliis, and non mihi.

Explicit in Vernali Aequinoctio 1637 hic liber tertius.
Siquid hic verum, ac non incommode dictum inveniatur, illud non humano
cujusvis ingenio, sed Deo omnis veritatis auctori, (ut scripsit S. Augustinus)
omnino, ut par est, ascribendum est. Simendum aliquod, vel erratum inciderit,
id meae imbecillitati tribuendum est: Cujus (coeles^i misericordia) veniam
humiliter precor. Gabriel Palaeotus in fine libri, de Sacri Consistorii
consultationibus.

Vt principio Finis cohaereat, Omnia haec in his tribus libris de Tricoenio
Christi in nocte proditoria, Ecclesiae Anglicanae Judicio submissa sunto.



An Advertisement to the Reader.
REader, I may not conceal, that after I had fully ended, though (I confess)
not thoroughly transcribed my Tricoenium, there were brought unto my hands by
the means of M. John Tournay the Works of two Jesuits, who have written of
this self same subject, that I have He who wrote lately, is one Theophilus
Raynandus, an eminent man, full both of quick wit, much reading, and great
schollership. The title page of his book wears this superscription: Optimae
vitae finis pessimus. The sum is almost comprised in his 8. and 9. chap. The
other did write de Triplici Coena Christi: Agni, Vulgari, Eucharistica, 22
years since. His book printed at Antwerp, by the heirs of Martin Nutius, and
John Meursius. I never saw, nor heard of any of them, till my Work was
accomplished. Nor since took so much as one line, or any one testimony from
either of them. In most things and in the maine they agree with me, and I with
them: in something we dissent. The Jesuit Johannes Walterius Viringus, who writ
so long since, amasseth strange testimonies, not commonly heard mentioned in
our Schools, pulpits, or Masters of controversies. The Jesuits have run their
way: I mine. They might have done me much service, and pleasure, if I had seen
them soon enough. I commend them in very many things: and they shall wipe of
the aspersion of Novelty from me, in most matters, if any Romanist shall charge
me with it. Compare the Work, who will: And so God bless their labors, and
mine, to the benefit of thy soul (Good Reader.) So hoping for thy prayers, I
bid thee farewell in Christ Jesus, our gracious Redeemer.

Thine in the Lord, EDWARD KELLET

FINIS.

