ELIZABETH Late Countess of Kent.



A Choice Manual, Or Rare SECRETS IN PHYSIC AND SURGERY: Collected, and
practiced by the Right Honorable the Countess of Kent, late deceased.

Whereto are added several Experiments of the Virtue of Gascons powder, and
Lapis contra Yarvam by a Professor of Physic. As also most exquisite ways of
Preserving, Conserving, Candying, etc.

The Nineteenth Edition.

London, Printed for H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1687.

To the virtuous and most Noble Lady, Laetitia Popham, Wife of the Honorable
and truly Valiant Col. Alexander Popham.
Thrice Noble and truly Virtuous Lady.
AFter mature deliberation, what to tender unto your acceptance worthy your
Patronage, not^ing occurred more probable than this small Manual; which was
once esteemed a rich Cabinet of knowledge, by a person truly Honorable. May it
auspiciously pro^ure but your Honorable friendly Estimation, and then I doubt
not, but it will find an universal acceptance amongst persons of greatest
Eminency. Sure I am, it may be justly deemed as a rich Magazine of experience,
having since taught the world its approved excellency, yea, even in many
dangerous exigencies. All I humbly crave for the present is, my boldness may be
favorably excused; since 'twas my lawful ambition, thereby to avoid
ingratitude, for the many singular favors I have already received from your
endeared truly Honorable Husband, my always true noble Friend, and most happy
Countryman. God multiply his blessings upon all your noble Family, and make
you no less honorable here on Earth, than eternally happy hereafter; which
shall be the daily prayer of him: whose highest Emulation, is,

In all due ways, abundantly to Honor and serve you, W. J.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
WELL remembering that we are all born for the weal-publick good: I here tender
to thy perusal this small, and yet most excellent Treatise, Entitled, A Choice
Manual of Rare and Select Secrets in Physic: If thereby thou suck abundance of
Profit, I shall be superlatively glad, but if any, or perchance many unlooked
for mistakes, for want of a due application, bid thee entertain contrary
thoughts, the effect not answering thy curious expectation, upon a most serious
reflex, know, that nothing is absolutely perfect, and withal, that the richest
and most sovereign Antidote may be often misapplied: wherefore the fault not
being mine, excuse and cease to censure: For which just, and but reasonable
favor, thou shall deservedly oblige me,

Thine, W. J.

A Table of the Contents.
A
FOR an Ague, page 27. 64. 137. 146 For an Ach 28. 39. 59. 62. 120. 127 Aqua
Composita 115. 126. 136 For an Ach in the Back 128 For a tertian Ague 155 For
the stinging of an Adder 156 Mr. Ashleys Ointment 162 For an Ach in the joints
164 The virtue of Aqua Bezar 191 Spirit of Confection of Alkermes its Virtues
196 Extract of Ambergreece ibid.
B
For a Bruise 10. 30. 56. 77. 95 104. 110 For restoring breath 110 A
strengthening meat for the same 29 A Cordial for a breakfast 22 For the
griping of the Belly 22 To clear the Blood 31 For burning of the back 33 For
weakness of the back 34. 103 For a sore Breast 38 For a stinking Breath 39 For
one that pisseth blood 48 For the Bone-ach 63. 149 For a burning by lightning
83 To stanch blood 85 For the black Jaundies 89 For burning with Gunpowder 96
A Plaster for the Back 115 To make Balm-water 144 For an inward bruising 110
For a blast 169 Balsamum 170
C
For a Consumption and Cough of the Lungs 1. 20. 25. 133. 179 To make a Jelly
and Glister for the Cough 51 For an extreme Cough and Cold 11. 34 China broth
for a Consumption 23 Another broth for a Consumption 25 For Corns 51 For a
Canker 52. 103. 118 For pain after Childbirth 68 For swollen Cods 69 For the
Cholick 81 For all manner of Cuts 86 For a dead Child in a Woman 91 To Deliver
a Child in danger 133. 157 To cool Choler 136 For the Cholick passion 137 For
Children that are troubled with an extreme Cough 143 For a Cold 168 Powder of
Crabs claws 186 The Virtue of a root called Contra Yarva 188. 189. 190 Virtues
of spirit of Clary 191 Virtues of spirit of Comfrey 196
D.
For the Dropsy 31 For the biting of a mad Dog 63. 70. 157 Virtue of spirit of
Diasatyrion 194
E
For all infirmities and diseases of the Eyes 30. 49. 50. 148 For a pin, and
web, and redness in the Eye 36. 75. 147. 148 For the Emeroids 95. 128. 152 For
Rheum at the Eyes 127. 131 For sore Eyes 172. 174. 175 Several Experiments made
of the Countess of Kents Powder 198
F
For Faintness 4 For Phlegm 11 To know whether he that has the Flux shall live
or die 47 For the falling sickness 56. 172 For the bloody Flux 56. 174 To kill
a Felon 65 To break a Felon 65. 122. 129 Oil of Foxes its Virtues 104 Jelly of
Frogs 178 For a red Face 182
G
For the Gout 43. 91. 92 For the green sickness 84 Gascons powder 198 Gascons
powder by the Apothecaries 185
H
To make Horse-Raddish drink 7 To take away Hoarsness 13 To take away Headache
ib. A Cordial for the Heart 16. 17 For coldness in the Head 34 For the Hearing
44. 91. 122 For the breaking out of Childrens Heads 55 For the swelling of the
Head with a fall 70 For a new Hurt 72 To cleanse the Head 74 For singing in the
Head 91 For a heat or burning, or scalding 125 Oil of Hypericon 170 For a scald
Head 173 For heat of the soles of the Feet 193
I
For the Itch 10. 174 Oil of St. John's Wort 80 For a strain in the Joints 161
K
For Kibes 26. 112 The Countess of Kents powder 187
L
For the Liver 11 For a Lask 69. 95. 112. 118 Against grief of the Lungs 73 To
cause easy Labor 77 To keep ones body Loose 181
M.
Against Melancholy 113 Aqua Mirabilis with the Virtues thereof 4. 5 To prevent
Miscarrying 10 For the Mother 119. 153 The Virtues of Aqua Mariae 192 The
Virtues of spirit of Mints 193 The Compositum of Oleum Magistrale. 204
P
For the Plague 9. 154. 155. 180 For the Pleurisy 26. 74 For the dead Palsy
38. 102 A good Purge 59 For a pricking with a Nail or Thorn 96. 107. 117 To
make the leaden Plaster 105 The virtue of the Plaster 106 For the Phthisick
121 For pricking and burning in the soles of the feet 125 For a Push 130 The
best Paracelsus Salve 158 An excellent Plague-water 167 A Defensive Plaster
against the Plague 168
R
Running of the Reins 35. 68. 82. 125. 168 Pectoral Rowls 37 For the Reins of
the Back 61 For Rheum in the Head 95 For one that has a Rupture 99. 100. 117
Virtues of flowers of Rosemary 192 Virtues of Spirit of Roses 194
S
For Stone in the Kidneys 75. 94 For a Stitch 62. 99 For Scabs 10 For the
Scurvy 31 To strengthen the stomach 33. 150 For Sun-burn 35 For a Swelling 39.
51. 52. 53. 72. 115 For Spitting of blood. 46. 71 Against Surfeiting 60. 111.
175 For Sinews that are shrunk 93 Dr. Stevens Water. 65. 144 To cause one to
sleep 71. 103. 119. 122 For pain in the Stomach 75 A Cordial for the Sea 78 For
the Stone 81. 88. 94. 112. 134. 135 For an old Sore 89. 90. 101. 109. 128. 145
To make oil of Sage 87 For a Scald 97. 123. 152 To make oil of Swallows 116 A
water for the Sight. 121 For the stiffness of Sinews 138 For the Spleen 151
Virtues of spirit of Saffron 103 Virtues of spirit of Strawberries 195
T
For stopping in the Throat 11 To distill Treacle Water 12 For a Tetter 97. 181
To keep Teeth clean 86 To cure the Gargee in the Throat 90 To quench thirst 120
For the Toothache 88. 170 To fasten the Teeth ibid. To make one take their meat
179 The Virtues of Aqua Theriacalis 193
V
How to stay Vomiting 33 How to stop the bleeding of a Vein 47 For a Vein ill
smitten 48 For Ulcers 55 Flos Unguentorum 57 Against biting of venomous beasts
70 Against falling of the Uvula 183
W
A Cordial for wind in the stomach 147. 156 Restoratives for the same 16. 17.
18 For a green Wound 27. 54. 69. 70. 83. 109. 128. 132 For one that is Weak 42
To stanch bleeding of a Wound 46. 96. 168 For a Woman traveling with Child 48.
79 For a Wen 54 For cankered Wounds 62 Dr. Willoughbies Water 66 To draw an
Arrow-head, or any Iron out of a Wound 69 For a Woman that has her Flowers too
much 91 To cause a Woman to have her sickness 94 To kill Worms. 94. 154 For the
Wind-Cholick 102 For one that cannot make Water 114. 182 To take away Warts 121
Y
Yellow Jaundice 37
A Choice Manual, OR, RARE and SELECT SECRETS IN PHYSIC, By the Right
Honorable the Countess of KENT
A very good Medicine for a Consumption and Cough of the Lungs.
TAke a pound of the best Honey as you can get, and dissolve it in a Pipkin,
then take it off the fire, and put in two penny worth of flower of brimstone,
and a pennyworth of powder of Elecampane, and 2 pennyworth of the flower of
Liquorice, and 2 pennyworth of red Rose Water, and so stir them together, till
they be all compounded together, and put it into a gally-pot, and when you use
it, take a Liquorish-stick, beaten at one end, and take up with it as much
almost as half a Walnut, at night when you go to bed, and in the morning
fasting, or at any time in the night when you are troubled with the Cough, and
so let it melt down in your mouth by degrees.

Sir John Digbies Medicine for the Stone in the Kidneys.
Take a pound of the finest Honey, and take 7 quarts of Conduit-water, set them
on the fire, and when it is ready to sees, scum it, and still as the froth
rises, scum it, and put in 20 whole Cloves, and let them sees softly for the
space of half an hour, and so bottle it up for your use, and drink it morning
and evening, and at your meat, and use no other drink until you are well.

A Medicine for the falling sickness.
Take a penyweight of the powder of Gold, six pennyweight of Pearl, 6
pennyweight of Amber, 6 pennyweight of Coral, 8 grains of Bezoar, half an ounce
of Piony seed, also you must put some powder of a dead man's Skull that has
been an Anatomy, for a woman, and the powder of a woman for a man: compound all
these together, and take as much of the powder of all these, as will lie upon a
twopence, for 9 mornings together in Endive water, and drink a good draught of
Endive water after it.

For Cordials and Restoratives use these things following.
In any faintness take 3 drops of Oil of Cinnamon, mixed with a spoonful of
sirrup of Gilliflowers, and as much Cinnamon Water, drink this for a Cordial.

Against Melancholy.
Take 1 spoonful of Gilliflowers, the weight of 7 Barley corns of Bever-stone,
bruise it as fine as flower, and so put into 2 spoonfuls of syrrup of
Gilliflowers, and take it four hours after Supper, or else four hours after
dinner, this will cheer the heart.

If you be sick after meat use this.
Take of the best green Ginger that is preserved in syrrup, shred it into small
pieces, put it into a gally-pot, and put Cinnamon water to it; then after
dinner or supper eat the quantity of two Nutmegs upon a knifes point.

Aqua Mirabilis.
Take three pints of White Wind, one pint of Aqua vitae, one pint of juice of
Celendine, one dram of Cardamer, a dram of Mellilot-flowers, Cubebs a dram,
Galingal, Nutmeg, Mace, Ginger, and Cloves of each a dram: mingle all these
together overnight, the next morning set them a stilling in a glass Limbeck.
The Virtues. This water dissolveth swelling of the Lungs, and being perished
does help and comfort them, it suffers not the blood to putrify, he shall
not need to be let blood that uses this water, it suffers not the
heart-burning, nor Melancholy or ^egm to have dominion, it expel^eth Urine, and
profits the stomach, it preserves a good color, the visage, memory and
youth, it destroys the Palsy.

Take some 3 spoonfuls of it once or twice a week, or oftener, morning and
evening, first and last.

Another way to make Aqua Mirabilis.
Take Galingal, Cloves, Quibs, Ginger, Mellilip, Cardimomie, Mace, Nutmegs, of
each a dram, and of the juice of Celendine half a pint, adding the juice of
Mints and Balm, of each half a pint more, and mingle all the said spices being
beaten into a powder, with the juice, with a pint of good Aqua vitae and 3
pints of good White Wind, and put all these together in a pot, and let it stand
all night being close stopped, and in the morning distill it with as soft fire as
can be, the still being close pasted, and a cold still.

A Medicine for the Stone in the Kidneys.
Take a good handful of Pellitory of the Wall, a handful of Me^d Parsley,
Saxifrage, a handful of wild Thyme, a handful of garden-Parsley, three
spoonfuls of Fennel seed six Horse-Radish-Roots sliced, then shred all these
together, put them in a gallon of new Milk, and let them stand and steep in a
close pot 1 whole night, and then still them, milk and all together, this must
be done in May or June, for then herbs are in their best state, and when it is
taken you must put two or three spoonfuls of this water, as much White Wind as
Rhenish, and if you please a little sugar, and so take it two days before the
change, and two days after, and two days before the full, and two days after,
continuing taking the same all the year, and the patient undoubtedly shall find
great ease, and void many stones, and much gravel, with little pain.

To make Horse-raddish drink.
Take half a pound of Horse-raddish, then wash and scrape them very clean, and
slice them very thin-cross-ways on the root, then put them into six quarts of
small Ale, such as is ready for drinking, which being put into a pipkin close
covered, set on the embers, keeping it a little more than blood warm for twelve
hours; then take it off the fire, and let it stand to cool until the next
morning, then pour the clear liquor into bottles, and keep it for your use,
drinking a good draught thereof in the morning, fasting two hours after, and
the like quantity at four in the afternoon, this drink is excellent good
against winds, as also for the scurvy and dropsy, being taken in time.

An excellent Syrrup against Melancholy.
Take four quarts of the juice of Pearmains, and twice as much of the juice of
Bugloss and Borage, if they be to be gotten, a dram of the best English
Saffron, bruise it, and put it into the juice, then take two drachms of Kermes
small beaten to powder, mix it also with the juice; so being mixed, put them
into an earthen vessel, covered or stopped forty eight hours, then strain it, and
allow a pound of sugar to every quart of juice, and so boil it to the ordinary
height of a syrrup, after it is boiled, take one dram of the spices of
Dramber, and two drachms of the spices of Diamargariton frigidum, and so sew
the same slenderly in a linen bag, that you may put the same easily into the
bottle of syrrup, and so let it hang with a thread out at the mouth of the
bottle, the spices must be put into the syrrup in the bag: so soon as the
syrrup is off the fire, whilst it is hot, then afterward put it into the
bottle, and there let it hang: put but a spoonful or two of Honey amongst it,
whilst it is boiling, and it will make the scum rise, and the syrrup very clear.

You must add to it the quantity of a quarter of a pint of the juice of Balm.

An excellent Receipt for the Plague.
Take one pound of green Walnuts, half an ounce of Saffron, and half an ounce
of London Treacle, beaten together in a mortar, and with a little Carduus, or
some such water, vapor it over the fire till it come to an Electuary: keep
this in a pot, and take as much as a Walnut, it is good to cure a Fever,
Plague, and any infection.

An excellent Cordial.
Take the flowers of Marigolds, and lay them in small spirit of wine; when the
tincture is fully taken out, pour it off from the flowers, and vapor it away
till it come to a consistence as thick as an Electuary.

For a bruise or stitch under the Ribs.
Take five or six handfuls of Cabbage, stamp it, and strain it, after it is
boiled in a quart of fair water, then sweeten it with Sugar, and drink it off
in a wine-glass in the morning, and at four in the afternoon, for five or six
days together, then take a Cabbage leaf, and between two dishes stew it, being
wet first in Canary wine, and that lay hot to your side evening and morning.

An excellent Receipt for an Itch, or any foul Scabs.
Take Fox gloves, and boil a handful of them in posset drink, and drink of it a
draught at night, and in the morning, then boil a good quantity of the Fox
gloves in fair running water, and anoint the places that are sore with the
water.

A Receipt good for the Liver.
Take Turpentine, slice it thin, and lay it on a silver or Purslane Plate,
twice or thrice in the oven with the bread till it be dry, and so make it into
powder, every day take as much as will lie on a sixpence in an Egg.

For Phlegm, and stopping in the throat and stomach. D. T.
Take oil of Almonds, Linseed oil, buds of Orange flowers, boil all these in
Milk, and anoint the stomach well with it, and lay a scarlet cloth next to it.

For an extreme cold and cough.
Take of Hyssop water 6 ounces, of red Poppy water four ounces, six Dates, ten
Figs, and slice them small, a handful of Raisins of the Sun, the weight of a
shilling of the powder of Liquorish, put these into the aforesaid waters, and
let them stand 5 or 6 hours upon warm embers, close covered, and not boil, then
strain forth the water, and put into it as much sugar of Roses as will sweeten
it, drink of this in the morning, and at four of the clock in the afternoon,
and when you go to bed.

To distill Treacle water.
Take one ounce of Hartshorn shaved, and boil it in three pints of Carduus
water till it come to a quart, then take the roots of Elecampane, Gentian,
Cypress, Tormentil and of Citron rinds, of each one ounce, Borage, Bugloss,
Rosemary flowers, of each two ounces, then take a pound of the best old
Treacle, and dissolve it in six pints of white wind, and three pints of
Rose Water, so infuse all together, and distill it.

It is good to restore spirits and speech, and good against swooning,
faintness, agues and worms, and the small pox.

Treacle-water.
Take three ounces of Venice Treacle, and mingle it in a quart of spirits of
wine, set it in Horse-dung 4 or 5 days, then still it in ashes or sand twice
over; after take the bottom which is left in the Still, and put to it a pint of
spirit of wine, and set it in the dung till the tincture be clean out of it,
and strain the clear tincture out of it, and set it on the fire till it come to
be a thick consistence, it must be kept with a soft fire. And so the like with
saffron.

To take away Hoarsness.
Take a Turnip, cut a hole in the top of it, and fill it up with brown
Sugar Candy, and so roast it in the embers, and eat it with Butter.

To take away the Headache.
Take the best Sallet oil, and the glass half full with tops of poppy flowers
which grow in the Corn, set this in the Sun a fortnight, and so keep it all the
year, and anoint the temples of your head with it.

For a Cough.
Take Sallet oil, Aqua vitae, and Sack, of each an equal quantity, beat them
all together, and before the fire rub the soles of your feet with it.

To make Jelly of Hartshorn.
Take a quart of running water, and three ounces of Hartshorn scraped very
fine, then put it into a stone Jug, and set the Jug in a kettle of water over
the fire, and let it boil 2 or 3 hours until it jelly, then put into it 3 or 4
spoonfuls of Rose Water, or White Wind, then strain it: you may put into it
Musk, or Ambergreece, and season it as you please.

To make a Glister.
Take half a quart of new Milk, or 3 quarters, set it on the fire, and make it
scalding hot, then take it off, and put it into it the yolk of a new laid Egg
beaten, two ounces of brown sugar candy, or black sugar, give it to the party
blood-warm.

Another.
Take the bone of a neck of Mutton or Veal clean washed, set it on the fire to
boil in 3 pints of fair water, and when it is clean scummed, then put in the
roots of Fennel and Parsley clean washed and scraped, of either of them, the
roots bruised, a handful of Cammomil, and Mallows a handful, let all these boil
together till half be wasted, then strain it, take 3 quarters of a pint of this
broth, brown sugar candy two ounces, of oil of Flax seed two ounces, mingle all
these together, and take it for a glister, blood-warm; when it is in your bod^,
keep it half an hour, or three quarters of an hour, or an hour if you can.

A comfortable Cordial to cheer the Heart.
Take one ounce of Conserve of Gilliflowers, four grains of the best Musk
bruised as fine as flower, then put it into a little tin pot, and keep it till
you have need to make this Cordial following, viz. Take the quantity of one
Nutmeg out of your tin pot, put to it one spoonful of Cinamon-water, and 1
spoonful of the syrrup of Gilliflowers, Ambergreece, mix all these together;
and drink them in the morning fasting 3 or 4 hours, this is most comfortable.

A Cordial for Wind in the stomach, or any part.
Take six or eight spoonfuls of Penniroyal-water, put into it four drops of oil
of Cinnamon, so drink it any time of the day, so you fast two hours after.

Restorative.
Take a well flesht Capon from the barn door, and pluck out his Intrails, then
wash it within with a little White Wind, then flea off all the skin, and take
out his bones, and take the flesh, only cut it in little pieces, and put it
into a little stone bottle, and put to it one ounce of white Sugar Candy, six
Dates slit, with the stones and piths taken out, one large Mace, then stop the
bottle up fast, and set it in a Chafer of water, and let it boil three hours,
then take it out, and pour the juice from the meat, and put to it one spoonful
of red Rose Water, and take the better part for your breakfast four hours
before dinner, and the other part at three a clock in the afternoon, being
blood-warm.

Another Restorative.
Take half a pint of Claret wine, and half a pint of Ale, and make a Caudle,
with a new-laid Egg, put in half a Nutmeg cut into two pieces, then take it off
the fire, and put in seven grains of Ambergreece, drink this for two
break-fasts, for it will increase blood and strength.

Another Restorative.
Take two new laid Eggs, and take the whites clean from them, and put the yolks
both in one shell, then put in two spoonfuls of Claret wine, seven grains of
Ambergreece small bruised, and a little Sugar Candy stir all these together,
and make them blood-warm, and sup them up for a breakfast three or four hours
before dinner.

Another Restorative.
Take a young leg of Mutton, cut off the skin and the fat, take the flesh being
cut into small pieces, and put it into a stone bottle, then put to it two
ounces of raisins of the Sun stoned, a large Mace, an ounce and half of
Sugar Candy, and stop the bottle very close, and ^et it boil in a Chafer three
hours, and so put the juice from the meat, and keep it in a clean glass, it
will serve for three breakfasts; or if he will he may take some at three a
clock in the afternoon being made warm.

A Restoring Broth.
Take 2 ounces of China-roots, first slit very thin, then put it in a New
Pipkin with five pints of running water being close covered, and set it upon
embers all night long, where it may be very hot, but not sees, then put to
that water a great Cock Chicken, and when it is clean scummed, put into it two
spoonfuls of French Barley, six dates slit, with the piths and stones taken out,
two ounces of raisins of the Sun stoned, a large Mace, let all these boil
together, till half be consumed, then take out the Cock, and beat the flesh of
it in a clean Mortar, and a little of the broth, then strain it all together
throughout a hair Cullender, then put in two spoonfuls of red Rose Water, and
sweeten it with white Sugar Candy, drink of this broth, being made warm, half a
pint in the morning early fasting, and sleep after it if you can, drink a good
draught at three of the clock in the afternoon, this broth is very good for a
Consumption, and the longer they take it, it is the better.

A strengthening Meat.
Take Potato roots, roast them or bake them, then pill them, and slice them
into a dish, put to it lumps of raw Marrow, and a few Currants, a little whole
Mace, and sweeten it with sugar to your taste, and so eat it instead of buttered
Parsnips.

Broth for a Consumption.
Take 3 Marrow bones, break them in pieces, and boil them in a gallon of water
till half be consumed, then strain the liquor through a Cullender, and let it
stand while it be cold, then take off all the fat clean and put the broth into
a pipkin, and put to it a good Cock-Chicken, and a knuckle of Veal, then put
into it the bottom of a white loaf, a whole Mace, two ounces of Raisins of the
Sun stoned, six Dates slit, let all these boil together till half be consumed,
then strain it, instead of Almonds, take a few Pistachs kernels, and beat them,
and strain with your broths as you do Almond milk, and so sweeten it with white
sugar, and drink half a pint early in the morning, and at three a clock in the
afternoon, and so continue a good while together, or else it will do you no
good.

Another Cordial.
Take a preserved Nutmeg, cut it in four quarters, eat a quarter at a
breakfast, and another in the afternoon, this is good for the head and stomach.

A Cordial for a breakfast, fasting.
Eat a good piece of Pomecitron preserved, as big as your two fingers in length
and breadth, and so at 3 of the clock in the afternoon.

A Restoring breakfast.
Take the brawn of a Capon, or Pullet, 12 Jordan Almonds blanched, beat them
together, and strain out the juice with a draught of strong broth, and take for
a breakfast, or to bedward.

A Medicine for any griping of the Belly.
Take a pint of Claret wine, put to it a spoonful of Parsley-seed, and a
spoonful of sweet Fennel-seed, half a dozen cloves, a branch of Rosemary, a
wild Mallow root clean washed and scrapt, and the pith taken out, with a good
piece of Sugar, set this on the fire, and burn the Claret very well with all
these things in it, then drink a good draught of it in the morning fasting, and
at 3 a clock in the afternoon.

To keep the Body Laxative.
Take half a pint of running water, put it in a new Pipkin with a cover, then
put into the water two ounces of Manna, and when it is dissolved, strain it,
and put to it four ounces of Damask Prunes, eight Cloves, a branch of Rosemary,
let all these stew together while they be very tender, then eat a dozen of them
with a little of the liquor an hour before dinner or supper, then take a
draught of broth and dine.

To make the China Broth for a Consumption.
Take China roots thin sliced two ounces, steep it 24 hours in eight pints of
fair water, letting it stand warm all the time, being close covered in an
earthen Pipkin, or Iron pot, then put to it a good Cockrel, or two Chickens
clean dressed, and scum it well, then put in five leaved Grass two handfuls,
Maidenhair, Hearts-tongue, of either half a handful 20 Dates sliced, 2 or 3
Mace and the bottom of a Manchet, let all these stew together, until not above
one quart remains; then strain it, and take all the flesh, and sweet bones,
beat them in a stone Mortar, and strain out all the juice with the broth, then
sweeten it with two ounces of white Sugar Candy in powder, and take thereof
half a pint at once, early in the morning warm, and sleep after it if you can,
and 2 hours before supper at your pleasure; when you steep the root, slice two
drachms of white Sanders, and as much red Sanders, and let them boil in the
broth.

A Gentle Purge.
Take an ounce of Damask Roses, eat it all at one time, fast, three quarters of
an hour after, then take a draught of Broth and dine.

Another Purge.
Take the weight of 4 or 5 pence of Rubarb, cut it in little pieces, and take a
spoonful or two of good Currants washed very clean, so mingle them together, and
so eat them, fast an hour after, and begin that meal with broth, you may take
it an hour before if you will.

Broth for a Consumption.
Take a coarse Pullet, and sow up the belly; and an ounce of the conserves of
red Roses, of the conserves of Borage and Bugloss flowers, of each of them half
an ounce, Pine Apple kernels, and Pistachs, of each half an ounce bruised in a
Mortar, 2 drachms of Amber powder, all mixed together and put in the belly,
then boil it in 3 quarts of water, with Agrimony, Endive and Succory, of each
one handful, Sparrow-grass roots, Fennel-roots, Caper-roots, and one handful of
Raisins of the Sun stoned, when it is almost boiled, take out the Pullet and
beat it in a stone Mortar, then put it into the liquor again, and give it three
or four walmes more, then strain it, and put to a little red Rose Water, and
half a pint of White Wind, and so drink it in a morning and sleep after it.

To prevent miscarrying.
Take Venice Turpentine, spread it on black brown paper, the breadth and length
of a hand, lay it to the small of her back, then give her to drink a caudle
made of Muscadine, and put into it the husks of twenty three sweet Almonds
dried, and finely powdered.

For Boils, or Kibes, or to draw a Sore.
Take strong Ale, and boil it from a pint to four spoonfuls, and to keep it, it
will be an Ointment.

To make Cammomil Oil.
Shred a pound of Cammomil, and knead it into a pound of sweet Butter, melt it,
and strain it.

A Receipt for the Pleurisy.
Take three round Balls of Horse-dung, boil them in a pint of white wine till
half be consumed, then strain it out, and sweeten it with a little Sugar, and
let the Patient go to bed and drink this, then lay him warm.

For an Ague.
Take a pint of Milk and set it on the fire, and when it boyls put in a pint of
Ale, then take off the curd and put in 9 heads of Carduus, let it boil till
half be wasted, then to every quarter of a pint put a good spoonful of
Wheat Flour, and a quarter of a spoonful of gross Pepper, and an hour before
the fit, let the Patient drink a quarter of a pint, and be sure to lie in a
sweat before the fit.

An excellent Balm for a green Wound.
Take two good handfuls of English Tobacco, shred it small, and put it in a
pint of Sallet Oil, and sees it on a soft fire to simper, till the oil change
green, then strain it, and in the cooling put in two ounces of Venice
Turpentine.

For an Ach.
Take of the best Gall, white wind Vinegar, and Aqua vitae, of each a like
quantity, and boil it gently on the fire till it grow clammy, then put it in a
glass or pot, and when you use any of it, warm it against the fire, rub some of
it with your hand on the aching place, and lay a linen cloth on it, do this
mornings and evenings.

To make a Sear-cloth.
Virgins Wax, Sperma Ceti, Venice Turpentine, oil of white Poppy, oil of Ben,
oil of sweet Almonds.

For Wind in the stomach, and for the Spleen.
Take a handful of broom, and boil it in a pint of Beer or Ale till it be half
consumed, and drink it for the wind and the stomach, and for the Spleen.

A most excellent water for a Consumption and Cough of the Lungs.
Take a running Cock, pull him alive, then kill him, when he is almost cold,
cut him abroad by the back, and take out the Intrails, and wipe him clean, then
cut him in quarters, and break the bones, put him into such a Still as you
still Rose Water in, and with a pottle of Sack, a pound of Currants, a pound of
Raisins of the Sun stoned, a quarter of a pound of Dates, the stones taken out,
and the Dates cut small, two handfuls of wild Thyme, two handfuls of Orgares,
two handfuls of Pimpernel, and two handfuls of Rosemary, two handfuls of
Bugloss and Borage flowers, a pottle of new milk of a red Cow, still this with
a soft fire, put into the glass that the water does drop into, half a pound of
Sugar candy beaten very small, one Book of leaf Gold cut small among the sugar,
4 grains of Ambergreece, 12 grains of prepared Pearl, you must mingle the
strong water with the small, and drink 4 spoonfuls at a time in the morning
fasting, and an hour before supper, you must shake about the glass, when you
drink it.

For a Bruise.
Take six spoonfuls of Honey, a great handful of Linseed, bruise these in a
Mortar, and boil them in a pint of Milk an hour, then strain it very hard, and
anoint your breast and stomach with it every morning, and evening, and lay a
red cloth upon it.

The Eye water for the infirmities and diseases of the Eye.
Take of the distilled water of the white wild Rose, half a pound of the
distilled water of Celandine, Fennel, Eyebright, and Rue, of each two ounces,
of Cloves an ounce and a half, of white Sugar Candy one dram, of Tutia
prepared these ounces, pulverize all these ingredients each by themselves,
saving that you must bruise the Camphire with your Sugar Candy, for so it
breaks best, then mix all the powders together in a Paper, put them in a strong
glass, pour the distilled, waters upon them, and three pints of the best French
white wine that can be had, shake it every day 3 or 4 times long together for a
month, and then you may use it: remember to keep it very close stopped. This is
verbatim as it was had from the Lord Kelley.

A Medicine very good for the Dropsy or the Scurvy, and to clear the Blood.
Take 4 gallons of Ale, drawn from the tap into an earthen Stand; when the Ale
is two days old, then you must put in of Brooklime, of Watercresses, of
Water-mints with red stalks, of each four handfuls, half a peck of
Scurvy Grass, let all these be clean picked, and washed and dried with a cloth,
and shred with a knife, and then put into a bag, then put in the Ale and stop
it close, so that it have no vent, stop it with Ri^ Paste; the best
Scurvy Grass grows by the water side, it must be 7 days after the things be
in, before you drink it. Take two quarts of water, and put in 4 ounces of
Guiacum, two ounces of Sarsaparilla, one ounce of Saxifrage, put it into a
pipkin, and infuse it upon the embers for 12 hours, and then strain it, and put
it into the Ale as soon as it has done working, this being added makes the more
Caudle.

For sore Eyes.
Take half a pint of red Rose Water, put therein 4 pennyworth of Aloe
succotrina, as much Bolearmoniack in quantity, let this lie 24 hours in steep,
then wash your eyes with it evenings and mornings with a Feather, and it will
help them.

A Sirrup to strengthen the stomach, and the brain, and to make a sweet breath.
Take Rinds while they be new, one pound of running water the value of 5 wine
pints, then sees it unto 3 pints, then strain it, and with one pound of Sugar,
sees it to a syrrup, and when you take it from the fire, put to it four grains
of Musk.

For the burning in the back.
Take the juice of Plantain, and Woman's milk, being of a Woman with Child, put
thereto a spoonful of Rose Water, and wet a fine cloth in the same, and so lay
it to your Back where the heat is.

A very good Medicine to stay the Vomiting.
Take of Spear-Mints, Wormwood, and red Rose leaves dried, of each half a
handful, of Rye-bread grated a good handful, boil all these in red Rose Water
and Vinegar, till they be somewhat tender, then put it into a linen cloth, and
lay it to the stomach as hot as you can endure it, heating it 2 or 3 times a
day with such as it was boiled in.

For weakness in the Back.
Take Nep, and Clary, and the Marrow of an Oxes back, chop them very small,
then take the yolks of 2 or 3 Eggs, and strain them all together, then fry
them, use this 6 or 7 times together, and after it drink a good draught of
Bastard or Muscadine.

To make a Cap for the pain and coldness of the Head.
Take of Storax and Benjamine, of both some 12 pennyworth, and bruise it, then
quilt it in a brown paper, and wear it behind on your head.

To make pectoral Rouls for a Cold.
Take 4 ounces of Sugar finely beaten, and half an ounce of fearced Liquorish,
2 grains of Musk, and the weight of two pence of the syrrup of Liquorish, and
so beat it up to a perfect paste, with a little syrrup of Hore-hound, and a
little Gum-dragon, being steeped in Rose Water, then roll them in small Rouls
and dry them, and so you may keep them all the year.

For the Running of the Reins.
Take the pith of an Ox that goes down the back, a pint of red Wine, and
strain them together through a cloth, then boil them a little with a good
quantity of Cinnamon, and a Nutmeg, and a large Mace, a quantity of
Ambergreece, drink this first and last daily.

For Sun-burn.
Take the juice of a Lemmon, and a little Bay Salt, and wash your hands with
it, and let them dry of themselves, wash them again, and you shall find all the
spots and stains gone.

For a Pin, and Web, and redness in the Eye.
Take a pint of white Rose^water, half a pint of White-win^ as much of Lapis
Calaminaris, as Walnut bruised, put all these in glass, and set them in the Sun
o^ week, and shake the glass ever^ day, then take it out of the Sun and use it
as you shall need.

A special Medicine to preserve the Sight.
Take of brown Fennel, Honey suckles of the hedge, of wild Dal^ sie-roots
picked, and washed, an^ dried, of Peal-wort, of Eye-brigh^ of red Roses, the
white clippe^ away, of each of these a handfu^ dry gathered, then steep all
these herbs in a quart or 3 pints of the best White Wind in an earthen^pot, and
so let it lie in steep 2 or ^ days close covered, stirring it ^ times a day,
and so still it with ^ gentle fire, making two distil^lings, and so keep it for
your use^

A proved Medicine for the Yellow Jaundies.
Take a pint of Muscadine, a pretty quantity of the inner bark of a Barbery
tree, 3 spoonfuls of the greenest goose dung you can get, and take away all the
white spots of it, lay them in steep all night, on the morrow strain it, and
put to it one grated Nutmeg, one pennyworth of Saffron dried, and very finely
beaten, and give it to drink in the morning.

To make Pectoral Rouls.
Take one pound of fine Sugar, of Liquorish and Annise seed two spoonfuls,
Elecampane 1 spoonful, of Amber, and Coral, of each a quarter of a spoonful,
all this must be very finely beaten and searced, and then the quantity that is
set down must be taken, mix all these powders together well, then take the
white of an Egg, and beat it with a pretty quantity of Musk, then take a brazen
mortar very well scoure^ and a spoonful or two of the Pow^ders, and drop some
of the Egg (...) it, so beat them to a paste, the make them in little rouls,
and la^ them on a place to dry.

A plaster for a sore Breast.
Take crumbs of white bread, the tops of Mint chopped small; an^ boil them in
strong Ale, and mak^ it like a poultess, and when it (...) almost boiled, put
in the powde^ or Ginger, and oil of Time; so spread it upon a cloth, it will
both draw and heal.

A Medicine for the dead Palsy, and for them that have lost their speech.
Take Borage leaves, Marrigold leaves, or flowers, of each a good handful, boil
it in a good Ale Posset, the Patient must drink a good draught of it in the
morning, and sweat; if it be in the arms or legs, they must be chafed for an
hour or two when they be grieved, and at meals they must drink of no other
drink till their speech come to them again, and in winter, if the herbs be not
to be had, the seeds will serve.

An approved Medicine for an Ach or Swelling.
Take the flowers of Cammomil, and Rose leaves, of each of them a like
quantity, and sees them in White Wind, and make a Plaster thereof, and let it
be laid as hot as may be suffered to the place grieved, and this will ease a
pain, and assuage the swelling.

An approved Medicine for a stinking Breath.
Take a good quantity of Rosemary leaves and flowers, and boil them in
White Wind, and with a little Cinnamon and Benjamin beaten in powder, being put
thereto, let the Patient use to wash his mouth very often therewith, and this
will presently help him.

A good Broth for one that is weak.
Take part of a Neck of Lamb, and a pretty running Fowl, and set them on the
fire in fair spring water, and when it boyleth, scum it well, so done put in
two large Mace, and a few Raisins of the Sun stoned, and a little Fennel root,
and a Parsley root, and let them boil, if the party be grieved with heat or cold
in the stomach, if heat, put in two handful of barley boiled before in two
waters, and some Violet leaves, Sorrel, Succory, and a little Egrimony; if
cold, put in Rosemary, Thyme, a little Marrigold leaves, Borrage, and Bugloss,
and boil this from 4 pints to less than one.

A Receipt for Purging. D. T.
Take the leaves of new Seen 6 ounces, of chosen Rubarb one ounce and half,
leaves of Sage, and Dock roots, of each one ounce, of Barberries half an ounce,
Cinnamon, and Nutmeg of each an ounce, Annise-seeds and Fennel seeds, of each
six drachms, of Tamarisk half an ounce, Cloves and Mace, of each half a dram,
beat them into a gross powder, and hang them in a linen bag, in six gallons of
new Ale, so drink it fasting, in the morning and at night.

To comfort the stomach, and help windiness and Rheum.
Take of Ginger one pennyworth Cloves 4 pennyworth, Mace seven pennyworth,
Nutmeg 4 pennyworth, Cinnamon 4 pennyworth, and Galingal two penni-worth, of
each an ounce, of Cubebs, Corral, and Amber, of each 2 drachms, of Fennel
seeds, Dill seed, and Carraway seed, of each one ounce, of Liquorish and Annise
seeds, of each an ounce, all beaten into fine powder, 1 pound and a half of
fine beaten Sugar, which must be set on a soft sire, and being dissolved the
powders being well mixed therewith till it be stiff, then put thereunto half a
pint of red Rose Water, and mix them well together, and put it into a gally
pot, and take thereof first in the morning, and last in the evening, as much as
a good Hasel Nut, with a spoonful or two of red Wine.

To make a Callice for a weak person.
Take a good Chicken, and a piece of the neck end of Lamb or Veal, not so much
as the Chicken, and set them on the fire, and when they boil and are well
scummed, cast in a large mace, and the pieces of the bottom of a manchet, and
half a handful of French barley boiled in 3 waters before, and put it to the
Broth, and take such herbs as the party requires, and put them in when the
broth has boiled half an hour, so boil it from 3 and a half to 1, then cast it
through a strainer, and scum off all the fat, so let it cool, then take 20 good
Jordan almonds, or more if they be small, and grind them in a mortar with some
of the broth, or if you think your broth too strong, grind them with some fair
water, and strain them with the broth, then set it upon a few coals and season
it with some Sugar, not too much, and when it is almost boiled, take out the
thickest, and beat it all to pieces in the mortar, and put it in again, and it
will do well, so there be not too much of the others flesh.

For the Gout.
Take 6 drams of Ciriacostine fasting in the morning, and fast 2 hours after
it, you may roll it up in a Wafer, and take it as Pills, or in Sack, as you
conceive is most agreeable for the stomach; this proportion is sufficient for a
Woman, take 8 drams for a man, and take it every second day, until you find
remedy for it, it is a gentle purge that works only upon winds and water.

The Poultess for the Gout.
Take a penny loaf of whitebread, and slice it, and put it in fair water, 2
Eggs beaten together, a handful of red Rose leaves, 2 pennyworth of Saffron
dried to powder, then take the bread out of the water, and boil it in a
quantity of good milk, with the rest of the ingredients, and apply it to the
place grieved, as warm as you can well endure.

For them that cannot hear.
Put into their ears good dried Suet.

A Sovereign water, good for many Cures, and the health of bodies.
Take a gallon of good Gascoign Wine, White or Claret; then take Ginger,
Galingal, Cardomon, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Annise seeds, Fennel
seeds, Carraway seeds, of each of them 3 drams, then take Sage, Mint, red Rose
leaves, Thyme, Pellitory, Rosemary, wild Thyme, wild Marjoram, Organy,
Pennymountain, Pennyroyal, Cammomil, Lavendar, Avens, of each of them a
handful, then beat the spices small, and the herbs, and put all into the Wine,
and let it stand for the space of 12 hours, stirring it diverse times: then
still it in a Limbeck, and keep the first water by it self, for it is best,
then will there come a second water, which is good, but not so good as the
first, the Virtues of this Water be these: It comfort the Spirit Vital, and
preserves greatly the Spirit Vital, and preserves the youth of man, and
helps all inward diseases coming of cold, and against shaking of the Palsy;
It cures the contract of sinews, and helps the conception of the barren, it
kills the worms in the belly, it kills the Gout, it helps the toothache,
it comfort the stomach very much, it cures the cold Dropsy, it breaks
the stone in the back, and in the reins of the back, it cures the Canker, it
helps shortly the stinking breath; and whosoever uses this water often, it
preserves them in good liking; this water will be better if it stand in the
Sun all the Summer, and you must draw of the first water but a pint, and of the
second as far as it will run, until the whole gallon of wine and herbs be all
done out, but the last water is very small, and not half so good as the first;
if you do draw above a pint of the best water, you must have all things more as
is aforesaid.

To stench the bleeding of a wound.
Take a Hounds turd and lay it on a hot coal, and bind it thereto, and that
shall stench bleeding; or else bruise a long worm, and make powder of it, and
cast it on the wound; or take the ear of a Hare, and make powder thereof, and
cast that on the wound, and that will stench bleeding.

For spitting of blood after a fall or bruise.
Take Bettany, Vervain, Nose-bleed, and 5 leaved grass, of each alike, and
stamp them in a mortar, and wring out the juice of them, and put to the juice
as much Goats milk, and let them sees together, and let him that is hurt drink
of it 7 days together till the waxing of the Moon, and let him drink also
Osmory and Comfry with stale Ale, and he shall be whole.

For to heal him that spitteth Blood.
Take the juice of Bettony, and temper that with good milk, and give the sick
to drink four days, and he shall be whole.

For to know whether one that has the Flux shall live or die.
Take a penny weight of Tresoile seed, and give him to drink in Wine or water,
and do this 3 days, and if it cease he shall live, with the help of Medicine,
if not, he shall die.

For to stench the bleeding of a Vein.
Take Rue and sees it in water, and after stamp it in a Mortar, and lay it on
the Vein, then take Lambs wool that was never washed, and lay that thereon,
and that shall stench bleeding.

For a Vein that is evil smitten.
Take Beans and peel away the lack, and sees them well in Vinegar, and lay
them on the Vein hot, in manner of a Plaster.

For one that pisseth Blood.
Take and sees Garlic in water, till the third part be wasted away, let him
drink of the water, and he shall be whole.

For a woman travailing with Child.
Take and give her Tittany to drink in the morning; and she shall be delivered
without peril, or else give her Hysop with water that is hot, and she shall be
delivered of the child, although the child be dead and rotten, and anon when
she is delivered, give her the same without Wine, or bind the herb Argentine to
her nostrils, and she shall be soon delivered, or else Polipody and stamp it,
and lay that on the woman's foot in manner of a Plaster, and she shall be
delivered quick or dead, or else give her Savory with hot water, and she shall
be delivered.

Against surfeiting and digesting.
Take the bottom of a wheat loaf and toste it at the fire, till it be brown and
hard, and then take a good quantity of Aqua vitae, and put upon the same
roasted, and put it in a single linen cloth, and lay it at the breast of the
Patient all night, and with the help of God he shall recover, and he shall
vomit or purge soon after.

A water to comfort weak Eyes, and to preserve the sight.
Take a gallon and a half of old wheat, fair and clean picked from all manner
of soil, and then still it in an ordinary Still with a soft fire, and the water
that comes of it must be put in a glass, then take half a pound of white
Sugar Candy, and bruise it in a mortar to powder, and after 3 days, when the
water has been in a glass, then put in the powdered Candy, then take an ounce
of Lapis Tutia prepared, and put it into the glass to the rest of the stuff,
then take an ounce of Camphire and break it between your fingers small, and put
it into the glass, then stop the glass close, and the longer it stands, the
better it will be.

For tender Eyes, or for Children.
Take a little piece of white Sugar Candy as much as a Chestnut, and put it into
3 or 4 spoonfuls of White Wind to steep, then take it out again and dry it, and
when it is dry, bruise it in a clean Mortar that tastes of no spice, then put
it upon a white Paper, and so hold it to the fire that it may be through dry,
and then search it through a little sieve.

For hot and red Eyes.
Take slugs, such as when you touch them will turn like the pummel of swords,
12 or 16, shake them first in a clean cloth, and then in another, and not wash
them, then stamp them, and put 3 or 4 spoonfuls of Ale to them, and strain it
through a dry cloth, and give it the party morning and evening, first and last.

For Corns.
Take fair water half a pint, Mercury sublimate a pennyworth, Alum as much as
a Bean, boil all these together in a glass Still, till a spoonful be wasted,
and always warm it when you use it, this water is also good for any Itch,
Tetter, Ring-worm or Wart.

Searcloth for a Sore, or Sprane, or any swelling.
Take Vervain 7 ounces, of Sires 7 ounces, of Camphire 3 drams, of oil of Roses
ten ounces, let the Wax and this Oil boil till the Wax be melted, then put in
your Sires finely beaten, stirring it on the fire till it look brown, then put
in the Camphire finely beaten, and let it boil 2 or 3 walms and then dip in
your clothes.

A Poultess for a Swelling.
Take a good handful of Violet leaves, and as much Grundsel, of Chickweed and
Mallows, half a handful, cut all these with a knife, and so sees them well in
Conduit water, and thicken it with Barley meal, being finely sifted, and so roll
it sure, and lay it to the swelled place, and shift it twice a day.

To make a strong water good for a Canker or any old Sore, or to eat any lump
of flesh that grows.
Take of Celendine a handful, of red Sage a handful, and of Wood-bind leaves a
handful, shred all these together very small, and steep them in a quart of
White Wind and a pint of water, letting it stand all night, and on the morrow
strain it, and put therein of Borax, and Camphire of each nine pennyworth, and
of Mercury four pen^yworth, and set them on a soft fire, boiling softly for the
space of an hour, and when you will use it, warm a little of it, dip in it a
cloth, and lay it on the Sore, or dip it in any Cotton.

To heal any Bruise, Sore, or Swelling.
Take two pound of Wax, and two pound of Rosin, and two pound and a half of
butter, and four spoonfuls of Flower, and two good spoonfuls of Honey, put in
your Wax, Rosin, and your Butter altogether, boil all these together and
clarify it, then put in two ounces of Carmerick, and when it has thus boiled
a quarter of an hour, put a little water in a dish, and put it in, and let it
stand till it be cold, and when you will use it, you may melt it on a soft
fire, and put in your clothes, and make a Searcloth, and you may spread it
Plaister-wise to heal any wound.

A Medicine for any wound old or new.
Take a pint of Sallet Oil, and 4 ounces of Bees Wax, and two ounces of Stone
pitch, and two ounces of Rosin, and two ounces of Venice Turpentine, and one
pennyworth of Frankincense, and a handful of Rosemary tops, and a handful of
Tutsan leaves, and a handful of Plantain leaves; these herbs must be stamped,
and the juice of them put to the things aforesaid, and let them boil together
about a quarter of an hour, or thereabouts, this being done, put it into an
earthen pot, and when it is cold you may use it as you have occasion, and keep
it a year, a most excellent Medicine.

A Medicine for a Wen.
Take black Soap and unquencht Lime, of each a like quantity, beat them very
small together, and spread in on a woollen cloth, and lay it on the Wen, and it
will consume it away.

For breaking out of Childrens heads.
Take of White Wind, and sweet Butter alike, and boil them together till it
come to a Salve, and so anoint the head therewith.

For to mundifie, and gently to cleanse Ulcers, and breed new flesh.
Take Rosin eight ounces, Colophonia four ounces, Era and Oliva, Ana one pound,
Adipis ovini, Gum Ammoniaci Opoponaci, Ana one ounce, fine Aeruginis aeris,
boil your Wax, Colophoni and Rosin, with the Oil together, then strain the
Gums, being first dissolved in Vinegar, and boil it with a gentle fire, then
take it off, and put in your Verdigreece, and fine powder, and use it according
to Art.

A Fomentation.
Take the liquor wherein Neats-feet have been boiled, with Butter, and new
Milk, and use it in manner of a Fomentation.

For the Falling Sickness, or Convulsions.
Take the dung of a Peacock make it into powder, and give s^ much of it to the
Patient as will lie upon a shilling, in Succory-water fasting.

For a Tetter, proceeding of a salt-humour in the Breast and Paps.
Anoint the sore place with Tanners Owse.

For the bloody Flux.
Take the bone of a Gammon o^ Bacon, and set it up on end in the middle or a
Charcoal fire, and let it burn till it look like Chalk, and that it will burn
no longer, then powder it, and give the powder thereof unto the sick.

A Plaster for all manner of bruises.
Take one pound of mede wax, and a quartern of Pitch, half a quartern of
Galbanum, and one pound of Sheeps tallow, shred them and sees them softly, and
put to them a little White Wind, or good Vinegar, and take of Frankincense, and
Mastick, of each half an ounce in powder, and put it to, and boil them
together, and still them, till it be well relented, and spread this salve upon
a mighty Canvas that will overspread the sore, and lay it thereon hot till it
be whole.

To make Flos Unguentorum.
Take Rosin, Perrosin, and half a pound of Virgin wax, Frankincense a quarter
of a pound, of Mastick half an ounce, of Sheeps tallow a quarter of a pound, of
Camphire two drams, melt that that is to melt, and powder that that is to
powder, and boil it over the fire, and strain it through a cloth into a bottle
of White Wind, and boil it altogether, and then let it cool a little, and then
put thereto a quartern of Turpentine, and stir all well together till it be
cold, and keep it well, this Ointment is good for sores old and new, it
suffers no corruption in the Wound nor no evil flesh to be gendered in it,
and it is good for headache, and for all manner of Imposthumes in the head, and
for wind in the brain, and for Imposthumes in the body, and for boiling ears
and cheeks, and for sauce phlegm in the face, and for Sinews that be knit, or
stiff, or sprung with travel; it does draw out a thorn, or iron, in what place
soever it be, and it is good for biting or stinging of venomous beasts; it
rotteth and heals all manner of Botches without, and it is good for a Fester
and Canker, and Noli me Tangere, and it draws out all manner of a king of the
Liver, and of the Spleen, and of the Mervis, and it is good for a king and
swelling of many members, and for all members, and it cease the flux of
Menstrua, and of Emeroids, and it is a special thing to make a fumed cloth to
heal all manner of sores, and it searches farthest inward of any Ointment.

An Ointment for all sorts of Aches.
Take Bettony, Cammomile, Celendine, Rosemary, and Rue, of each of them a
handful, wash the herbs, and press out the water, and then chop or stamp them
very small, and then take fresh Butter unwashed and unsalted a quart, and sees
it until half be wasted, and clarified, them scum it clean, and put in of oil
of Olives 1 ounce, a piece of Virgins Wax, for to harden the Ointment in the
summer time, and if you make it in the winter, put into your Ointment a little
quantity of foot-fennel instead of the Virgins Wax.

An excellent Syrrup to purge.
Take of Sena Alexandria one pound, Polipodium of the Oak 4 ounces,
Sarsaparilla two ounces, Damask Prunes 4 ounces, Ginger seven drams Annise
seeds one ounce, Cummin-seed half an ounce, Carraway seeds half an ounce,
Cinnamon 10 drams, Aristolochia rotunda, Peonia, of each 5 drams, Rubarb one
ounce, Garlic six drams, Tamarisk two handfuls, boil all these in a gallon of
fair water unto a pottle, and when the liquor is boiled half away, strain it
forth, and then put in your Rubarb and Agarick in a thin clean handkerchief,
and tie it up close, and put into the said liquor, and then put in two pound of
fine Sugar, and boil it to the height of a syrrup, and take of it the quantity
of six spoonfuls, or more or less as you find it works in you.

To make drink for all kind of Surfeits.
Take a quart of Aqua, or small Aqua vitae, and put in that a good handful of
Cowslip flowers, Sage-flowers a good handful, and of Rosemary flowers a
handful, sweet Marjorum a little, Pellitory of the wall a little, Bettony, and
Balm of each a pretty handful, Cinnamon half an ounce, Nutmegs a quarter of an
ounce, Fennel seed, Annise seed, Coriander seed, Carraway seed, Grumwel seed,
Juniper berries of each a dram, bruise your spices and seeds, and put them into
your aqua or aqua vitae, with your herbs together, and put to that 3 quarters
of a pound of very fine Sugar, stir them together, and put them in a glass, and
let it stand nine days in the Sun, and let it be stirred every day, it is to be
made in May, steeped in a wide mouthed glass, and strained out into a narrow
mouthed glass.

A Medicine for the Reins of the back.
Take Housleek, and stamp and strain it, then dip a fine linen cloth into it,
and lay it to the reins of the back, and that will heal it.

A Medicine for the Ach in the back.
Take Egrimony, and Mugwort both leaves and roots, and stamp it with old Bores
grease, and temper it with Honey and Eysell, and lay it to the back.

For a Stitch.
Take Roses, and Cammomile, of each a handful, and oil of Roses, and oil of
Cammomile, of both together a saucer full, and a quantity of Barley flower, boil
all these together in Milk, and then take a linen bag, and put it therein, and
lay the plaster as hot as may be suffered where the stitch is.

To make a salve for wounds that be cankered and do burn.
Take the juice of Smallage, of Morrel, of Waberb of each alike, then take the
white of Eggs, and mingle them together, and put thereto a little Wheat flower,
and stir them together till it be thick, but let it come near no fire, but all
cold, let it be laid on raw to the sore, and it shall cleanse the wound.

A Medicine for a Bone-ach.
Take Brook-lime and Smallage, and Dasies, with fresh Sheeps tallow, and fry
them together, and make thereof a plaster, and lay it to the sore hot.

For Sinews that are shrunk.
Take young Swallows out of the nest a dozen or 16, and Rosemary, Lavender, and
rotten Straw-berry leaves, strings and all, of each a handful, after the
quantity of the Swallows, the feathers, guts and all, bray them in a mortar,
and fry all them together with May Butter, not too much, then put it into an
earthen pot, and stop it close 9 days, then fry it again with May Butter, and
fry it well, and strain it well, when you shall use it, chafe it against the
fire.

A water for the biting of a mad Dog.
Take Scabius, Matfiline, Yarrow, Nightshade, wild Sage, the leaves of white
Lillies, of each a like quantity, and still them in a common Still, and give
the quantity of 3 or 4 spoonfuls of the Water mingled with half a handful of
Treacle, to any man or beast that is bitten within 3 days after the biting, and
for lack of the water, take the juices of those herbs mingled with Treacle, it
will keep therefore from rankling, take Bittany, Egrimony, and rusty Bacon, and
beat them fine together, and lay it unto the wound, and it will keep it from
rankling.

A proved Medicine for any one that have an Ague in their breast.
Take the Patients own water, or any others that is very young, and set it on
the fire, put therein a good handful of Rosemary, and let it boil, then take 2
red clothes, and dip them in the water, then nip it hard, and lay it on the
breast as hot as it may be endured, and apply it till you see the breast
assuaged, then keep it very warm.

To kill a Fellon.
Take red Sage, white Soap, and bruise them, and lay it to the Fellon, and that
will kill it.

To break a Fellon.
Take the grounds of Ale, and as much Vinegar, the crumbs of leavened bread, and
a little Honey, and boil them altogether, till they be thick, and lay that hot
to the joint where the Fellon is, and that will heal it

Doctor Stevens Sovereign water.
Take a gallon of good Gascoign wine, then take Ginger, Galingal, Cancel,
Nutmeg, Grains, Cloves, Annise seeds, Carraway seeds, of each a dram, then take
Sage, Mints, red Roses, Thyme, Pellitory, Rosemary, wild Thyme Cammomile,
Lavender, of each an handful; then bray both Spices and Herbs, and put them all
into the Wine, and let them stand for 12 hours, diverse times stirring them,
then still that in a Limbeck but keep that which you still first by it self,
for that is the best, but the other is good also, but not so good as the first.

The Virtues of this water are these, It comfort the Spirits Vital, and
helps the inward diseases which come of cold; and the shaking of the Palsy,
it cures the contraction of Sinews, and helps the conception of Women that
be barren, it kills worms in the boyd, it cures the cold Cough, it helps
the toothache, it comfort the stomach, it cures the cold Dropsy, it
helps the Stone, it cures shortly a stinking breath, and whosoever uses this
water enough but not too much, it preserves him in good liking, making him
young.

Doctor Willoughbies Water.
Take Galingal, Cloves, Cubebs, Ginger, Mellilot, Cardaniome, Mace, Nutmegs, of
each a dram, and of the juice of Celendine half a pint and mingle all these
made in powder with the said juice, and with a pint of good Aqua vitae, and
three pints of good White Wind, and put all these together in a Still of glass,
and let it stand so all night, and on the morrow still it with an easy fire as
may be.

The Virtue is of secret nature, it dissolveth the swelling of the Lungs
without any grievance, and the same Lungs being wounded or perished it helps
and comfort, and it suffers not the blood to putrify, he shall never need
to be let blood that uses this Water, and it suffers not the heart to be
burnt, nor Melancholy or phlegm to have dominion above nature, it also expels
the Rheum, and purifieth the stomach, it preserves the visage or memory, and
destroys the Palsy, and if this water be given to a man or woman laboring
toward death, one spoonful relieveth. In the Summer time use once a week
fasting the quantity of a spoonful, and in winter two spoonfuls.

A Medicine for them that have a pain after their childbed.
Take Tar; and fresh Barrows grease, and boil it together, then take Pigeons
Dung, and fry it in fresh grease, and put it in a bag.

For the drink: Take a pint of Malmsey, and boil it, and put Bayberries and
Sugar in it, the Bayberries must be of the whitest, and put therein some
Sanders.

Take some fair water, and set it over the fire, and put some ground Malt to
it, when they use these things they must keep their bed.

For the running of the Reins.
Take Venice turpentine rolled in Sugar and Rose Water, swallow it in pretty
rolls, and put a piece of scarlet warm to your back.

For Cods that be swollen.
Stamp Rue and lay thereto.

To draw an Arrow-head, or other Iron out of a wound.
Take the juice of Valerian, in the which you shall wet a Tent, and put it into
the wound, and lay the same Herb stamped upon it, then your band or binding as
appertains, and by this means you shall draw out the Iron, and after heal the
wound as it requires.

A Plaster for a green wound.
Take Flower and Milk, and sees them together till it be thick, then take the
white of an Egg and beat them together, and lay it to the wound, and that will
keep it from ranckling.

For a Lask.
Take an Egg, and Aqua vitae, and boil it with the Egg till it be dry; then
take Cinnamon and sugar and eat it with the Egg.

For him that has a bunch or knot in his head, or that has his head swollen
with a fall.
Take one ounce of Bay salt, raw Honey 3 ounces, Turpentine two ounces,
intermingle all this well upon the fire, then lay it abroad upon a linen
cloth, and thereof make a plaster, the which you shall lay hot to the head,
and it will altogether assuage the swelling, and heal it perfectly.

Against the biting of any venomous Beast.
As Soon as the person feels himself bit with any venomous beast, or at least,
so soon as it is possible, let him take green leaves of a Fig Tree, and press
the milk of them 3 or 4 times into the wound: And for this also serves Mustard
seed mingled with Vinegar.

A perfect Remedy for him that is sore wounded with any Sword or Staff.
Take Taxas barbatas, and stamp it, and take the juice of it, and if the Wound
bleed, wipe it, and make it clean, washing it with White Wind, or water, then
lay the said juice upon the wound, and the herb whereof you take the juice,
upon it, then make your band, and let it abide on a whole day, and you shall
see a wonderful effect.

A Bag to smell unto for Melancholy, or to cause one to sleep.
Take dry Rose leaves, keep them close in a glass which will keep them sweet,
then take powder of Mints, powder of Cloves in a gross powder, and put the same
to the Rose leaves, then put all these together in a bag, and take that to bed
with you, and it will cause you to sleep, and it is good to smell unto at other
times.

For spitting of Blood.
Take the juice of Bettony tempered with Goats Milk, and drink thereof three or
four mornings together.

An Ointment for all sores, cuts, swellings, and heat.
Take a good quantity of Smallage, and Mallows, and put thereto 2 pounds of
Bores grease, 1 pound of Butter, and Oil of Neats foot a quantity, stamp them
well together, then fry them, and strain them into an earthen pot, and keep it
for your use.

Salve for a new Hurt.
Take the whitest Virgins wax you can get, and melt it in a pan, then put in a
quantity of Butter and Honey, and sees them together, then strain them into a
dish of fair water, and work it in your hands, and make it in a round Ball, and
so keep it, and when you will use it, work some of it between your hands, and
strike it upon a cloth, and lay it upon the sore, and it will draw and heal it.

Against the biting of a mad Dog, and the rage or madness that follows a man
after he is bitten.
Take the blossoms or flowers of wild Thistles dried in the shade and beaten to
powder, give him to drink of that powder in White Wind half a Walnut shell
full, and in thrice taking it he shall be healed.

Against the grief in the Lungs, and spitting of blood.
Take the Herb called of the Apothecary Vngula Caballina, in English, Colts
foot, incorporated well with the lard of a Hog chopped, and a new laid Egg,
boil it together in a pan, and give it to the patient to eat, doing this nine
mornings, you shall see a mavelous thing, this is also good to make a man fat.

Against spitting of Blood by reason of some vein broken in the breast.
Take Mice dung beaten into powder as much as will lie upon a groat, and put it
in a half a glassful of the juice of Plantane with a little sugar, and so give
the patient to drink thereof in the morning before breakfast, and at nigh^
before he go to bed, continuin^ the same, it will make him whol^ and sound.

For to cleanse the Head.
Take Pellitory of Spain, and chew the roots three days, a good quantity, and
it will purge the head, and do away the Ach, and fasten the teeth in the gums.

A good remedy against the Pleurisy.
Open a white loaf in the middle new baked, and spread it will with Treacle on
both the halfs on the crum side, and heat it at the fire, then lay one of the
halfs on the place of the disease, and the other half on the other side of the
body directly against it, and so bind them that they loose not, nor stir,
leaving them so a day and a night, or until the Imposthume break, which I have
sometimes seen in two hours or less, then take away the bread, and immediately
the Patient will begin to spit and void the putrefaction of the Imposthume, and
after he has slept a ^ittle, you shall give him meat, and with the help of God
he shall shortly heal.

For a Pin, or Web in the Eye.
Take two or three Lice out of ones head, and put them alive into the eye that
is grieved, and so close it up, and most assuredly the Lice will suck out the
Web in the eye and will cure it, and come forth without any hurt.

A Remedy to be used in a fit of the Stone when the water stops.
Take the fresh shells of Snails: the newest will look of a reddish color and
are best, take out the Snails, and dry the shells with a moderate heat in an
oven after the bread is drawn, likewise take Bees and dry them so, and beat
them severally into powder, then take twice so much of the Bees powder as the
Snails, and mix them well together, keep it close covered in a glass, and when
you use it, take as much of this powder as will lie upon a sixpence, and put
into a quarter of a pint of the distilled water of Bean flowers, and drink it
fasting, or upon an empty stomach, and eat nor drink nothing, for 2 or 3 hours
after.

This is good to cause the party to make urine, and bring away the gravel or
stone that causes the stopping, and has done very much good.

A Syrrup for the pain in the Stomach.
Take 2 good handfuls of young Rue, boil it in a quart of good White Wind
Vinegar till it be half consumed, so soon as it is through cold, strain it, and
put to every pint of the liquor a pound and a quarter of loaf-sugar, and boil
it till it come to a Syrrup, when you use it, take a good spoonful of this in
the morning fasting, and eat nor drink nothing for 2 or 3 hours after. It is
good for pain in the stomach that proceeds of windy vapors, and is excellent
good for the Lungs and obstructions of the Breast.

Receipts for bruises, approved by the Lady of Arundel.
Take black Jet, beat it to powder and let the Patient drink it every morning
in beer till it be well.

Another for the same.
Take the sprigs of Oak trees, and put them in paper, roast them, and break
them, and drink as much of the powder as will lie upon a sixpence every
morning, until the Patient be well.

To cause easy labor.
Take 10 or 12 days before her looking, 6 ounces of brown sugar candy beaten to
powder, a quarter of a pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, 2 ounces of Dates
unstoned, sliced, half an ounce of Annise seeds bruised, a quarter of an ounce
of Cowslip flowers, one dram of Rosemary flowers, put them in a fine lawn bag
with a flint stone that it may sink into a pottle of White Wind, let it steep
24 hours, and after take of it in the morning, and at 4 in the afternoon, and
in the evening, the quantity of a wine glass full.

A Cordial for the Sea.
Take 1 ounce of syrrup of Clove-Gilliflowers, 1 dram of Confectio Alchermes,
an ounce and a half of Borrage water, and the like of Mint-water, 1 ounce of
Mr. Mountfords water and as much of Cinnamon water, temper all these together
in a Cordial, and take a spoonful at a time when you are at Sea.

A Plaster to strengthen the Back.
Take 8 yolks of Eggs new laid, 1 ounce of Frankincense beaten into fine
powder, mingle them well together, put in as much Barley flower as will make it
thick for a Plaster, spread it on leather, lay it to the small of the back,
letting it lie nine hours, use four plasters one after another, you must slit
the plaster in the midst, so as it may not lie on the back bone.

A present remedy for a woman with Child, that has taken harm by a fall, or
fright, or any mischance.
To stay the Child, and strengthen it, take one ounce of Pickerel jaws fine
beaten and searced, of Date stones, and Bole Armoniack, of each one ounce, of
Sanguis Draconis half an ounce, give of these, being well searced and mingled
together, a French Crown weight in Muskadine or Malmsey, and let the woman keep
her self very warm.

For a weak Back.
Take of red lead half a pound, of white lead half a pound, boil these in three
pints of Sallet Oil in a pipkin, stirring them continually with a piece of
Iron, until it be of a gray color, then roll it up in rowls, and keep it for
your use.

Oil of Saint John's Wort.
Take a quart of Sallet Oil, put thereto a quart of the flowers of St. John's
Wort well picked, let them lie therein all the year, till the seeds be ripe,
the glass must be kept warm, either in the Sun or in water all the Summer
until the seeds be ripe, then put in a quarter of St. John's Wort seeds whole
and so let it stand 12 hours, then you must sees the oil 8 hours, the glass
being kept open, and the water in the pot full as high as the oil is of height
in the glass, then when it is cold strain it, that the seeds may not remain in
the oil, then put up the oil for your use.

A green Salve for an old Sore.
Take a handful of Groundsel, as much Housleek, of Marigold leaves a handful,
pick and wipe these Herbs clean, but wash them not, then beat all these herbs
in a wooden bowl as small as is possible then strain out all the juice, and put
in a quantity of Hogs grease, as much as two Eggs, beat all these together
again, then put in the juice again, and put in 10 Eggs, yolks and whites, 5
spoonfuls of English Honey, and as much wheat flower as will make all this as
thick as a salve, and so stir it very well together, and put it close up in a
pot that it take no air, and so keep it for your use.

A most excellent Powder for the Cholick and Stone.
You must take morning and evening before you go to bed, Sperma Ceti one ounce
and a half, Cloves and Mace 1 quarter of an ounce, Annise seeds, and Perstone,
of each 2 ounces, Cinnamon, and small Pepper of each 1 quarter of an ounce,
Date stones a quarter of an ounce, Liquorish, Fennel, and Sage, Bay Berries, of
each three quarters of an ounce, Acorns one quarter and half of an ounce, Lilly
roots two drachms, the white of Oyster-shells burned in the fire one quarter of
an ounce, beat all these into fine powder, and drink as much thereof in Ale or
Beer as will lie on a sixpence, and fast one hour or two after it; if the
party be sore grieved, take one handful of Parsley, and sees it in Ale till
half be sod away with 20 or 30 Prunes therein strained, and put thereto two
spoonfuls of this powder, and drink it mornings and evenings somewhat warm.

A present Remedy for the Running of the Reins.
Take an ounce of Nutmegs, half an ounce of Mastick, then slice the Nutmegs,
and put them in steep in Rose Vinegar all one night, then lay them in a dish to
dry before the fire, then take the Mastick, and lay it in Papers, and beat it
with a hammer very small, and put a little Coral well beaten unto it, and as
much Ambergrease, then mingle these things together with Sugar and make it
pleasant to eat, and so take a good quantity morning and evening.

A Salve for a green wound.
Take 2 handfuls of water-Dittany, 2 handfuls of Rosemary shred very small, a
quarter of a pint of Turpentine, half a pound of yellow Wax, a quart of Sallet
Oil, half a pint of White Wind, boil all these together while the White Wind be
quite consumed, then it will be green and come to the height of a Salve.

A proved Medicine for a burning or scalding by lightning or otherwise.
Take Hogs grease, or sheeps treacles, and Alehoof, beat these very well
together, then take more Hogs grease, and boil it to a Salve.

To use it.
Anoint the place grieved with this ointment, and then lay upon the sore so
anointed, Colewort-leaves, which must be boiled very soft in water, and the
strings made smooth with beating them with a Pestle.

A Powder for the Green Sickness, approved with very good success upon many.
Take of Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, of each one quarter of an ounce, beat them
severally, and then altogether very well, fine sugar very small beaten one
quarter of a pound, and then mix and beat them all four together, Pearl the
sixth part of half an ounce finely beaten, mingle it with the rest, and beat
them altogether again, the filing of Steel or Iron an ounce and a quarter, sift
it very fine, and mingle it with the rest, but if so small a quantity will not
serve, add a quarter more of the mettle, let it be sifted before you weigh it:
but if all this will not serve the turn, put in a little Rubarb, or a little
Aloe succatrina.

The manner of using this Powder.
In the morning when you rise take half a spoonful of it, as much at four a
clock in the afternoon, and as much when you go to bed, walk or stir much after
the first taking of it, I mean every morning and evening, fast one hour after
the taking of it, or more, and then eat some Sugarsops or thin broth.

The Patients Diet.
She must forbear Oatmeal in broth or any other thing, Cheese, Eggs, Custards,
or any stopping meat: take care that this be not given to any woman that has
conceived or is with Child.

A Drink to stench Blood inwardly.
Take the juice of one handful of Shepherds purse, of Parsley, and Five-finger,
of each as much, take five slips of Egrimony, strain all these juices into the
milk of a red Cow, and drink thereof early and late warm.

A Powder to keep the Teeth clean, and from being worm eaten.
Take Rosemary burned to ashes, Cuttles bone, Hartshorn burned to powder, Sal
Gemmae 12 penny weight, the flowers of Pomegranates, white Coral, of each a
six-penny weight, make all these into powder, and with a little Rosewater, and
a Sage leaf, rub the teeth.

A Salve to heal all manner of Sores and Cuts.
Take one pint of Turpentine, one pint of oil of Olives a quarter of a pint of
running Water, nine branches of Rosemary, one ounce of unwrought Wax, 2 ounces
of Roses, sees all these together in a little pan over the sire, let it sees
until there arise a little white scum upon it, then stir it with a stick,
suffering it to boil, until one quarter be consumed, then take it from the
fire, strain it through a coarse cloth, but it must be done quickly after it be
taken from the fire for cooling, after you have strained it in an earthen pot,
let it cool, and keep it for your use.

To make Oil of Sage, good for the grief in any joint, or for any ach.
Take Sage and Parsley, sees them in the oil Olive, till it be thick and green.

A Medicine to purge and amend the Heart, Stomach, Spleen, Liver, Lungs and
Brain.
Take Alexander, Watercresses, young Mallows, Borrage and Fennel roots pared,
Mercury, Hart's-tongue, and Clare, and make of these Pottage.

To drive infectious diseases from the heart.
Take Mithridate and Centory, of each 2 ounces, 8 spoonfuls of Dragon water,
one pint of White Wind, 7 spoonfuls of Aqua vitae, boil altogether a little,
strain it, then set it on the fire again a little while, and drink of it
morning and evening.

For the Toothache.
Take Pepper and Grains, of each one ounce, bruise them, and compound them with
the water of the diseased, and make it of a good thickness, and lay it outward
on the cheek against the place grieved, and it will help it for ever after.

Another.
Take dried Sage, make powder of it, burnt Alum, Bay salt dried, make all in
fine powder, and lay it to the tooth where the pain is, and also rub the gums
with it.

For the Strangullion or the Stone.
Take the inner rind of a young ash, between 2 or 3 years of growth dry it to
powder, and drink of it as much at once, as will lie on a sixpence in Ale or
White Wind, and it will bring a present remedy; the party must be kept warm two
hours after it.

For the Stone.
Take the stone that grows within the gall of an Ox, grate it, and drink of
it in White Wind, as much as will lie upon a sixpence at once, for want of
White Wind make a posset of Ale, and clarify the Ale from the curd, then boil
one handful of Pellitory therein, and drink of the powder with it.

For the black Jaundies.
Take Earthworms, wash them in White Wind, then dry them, and beat them into
powder, and put to a little Saffron, and drink it in beer.

A drawing Salve for an old Sore.
Take Rosin half a pound beaten to powder; Sheeps tallow a quarter of a pound,
melt them together, and pour them into a Basin of water, and when they begin to
cool a little, work them well with your hands in the water, and out of the
water, drawing it up and down the space of one hour till it be very white, then
make it up in rowls, and reserve it to strike thin plasters upon old Sores.

A Water to wash Sores withal.
Take Wormwood, Sage, Plantain leaves, of each one handful, Alum 2 ounces,
Honey 2 saucers full, boil all these together in 3 pints of water till half be
consumed, then strain it, and reserve that liquor to wash the sore withal.

A Medicine to cure the Garget in the throat.
Take a pint of May butter, and put it on the fire in a posnet, and put into it
of the inner bark of Elder one good handful, and some Dasie roots, sees it to
half the quantity, and strain it, and so keep it cool, take this ointment and
anoint your throat, then take the ointment and strike a long plaster with it
very thick of the ointment, then strike upon the ointment the best Jane
treacle, and upon that strew gross pepper very thick, strike it on with a
knife, warm the plaster, and bind it round your throat to your ears, renew it
once a day with the ointment, and the treacle and pepper, and lay it on again,
before you use this ointment, scour your mouth and throat with the powder of
Roch Alum burned, mix it with the powder of Madder or Pepper.

For the Hearing.
Take an Onion, take the core out of it, fill it with Pepper, slice it in the
midst, being first wrapped in a paper, and roasted in the embers, lay it to each
ear.

For a dead Child in a woman's Body.
Take the juice of Hysop, temper it in warm water, and give it the woman to
drink.

For a Woman that has her Flowers too much.
Take a Hares foot, and burn it, make powder of it, and let her drink it with
stale Ale.

A Medicine for the Gout.
Take Tetberry roots, and wash and scrape them clean, and slice them thin, then
take the grease of a Barrow hog, the quantity of either alike, then take an
earthen pot, then lay a lane of grease at the bottom, then a lane of roots,
then the grease again, and so roots and grease till the pot be full, then stop
the pot very close, and set it in a dunghill 21 days, then beat it altogether in
a bowl, then boil it a good while, then strain it, and put in a pennyworth of
Aqua vitae, then anoint the place grieved very warm against the fire.

A diet drink for the running Gout, Ach in the Joints, and for all infections.
Set 7 quarts of water on the fire, and when it boyleth, put therein four
ounces of Sarsaparilla, bruised and let it boil 2 hours very softly, close
stopped or covered, then put in 4 ounces of Seen, 3 ounces of Liquorish
bruised, of Staecados, Hermodactyl, Epithymum, and of Cammomil flowers, of
every one half an ounce, and so boil all these two hours very softly, then
strain it, and keep it in a close vessel close stopped, when it is cold, then
boil again all the aforesaid ingredients in 7 quarts of water, 4 hours, with a
soft fire close covered, then strain it, and keep it as the other by it self,
and take of the first a good draught one hour before you rise in the morning,
and a draught at the beginning of dinner, and another at supper, and going to
bed, and at all other times, drink of the latter when you list, and eat no meat
but dry roasted Mutton, Capon, Rabbet, without salt, and not basted, but to
your breakfast, a poached Egg, no bread but Biscuit, or dried crust, and at
night Raisins of the Sun, and Biscuit bread, drink no other drink but this.

A Plaster to heal any Sore.
Take of Sage, Herb-grace, of each like quantity, Ribwort, Plantain and Dasie
roots, more than half so much of each of them, with Wax, fresh Grease, and
Rosin, make it a Salve, if the flesh grow proud, then put always upon the
Plaster, before you lay it to the sore, burnt Alum, and it will correct the
flesh.

To cause a woman to have her sickness.
Take Egrimony, Motherwort, Avens and Parsley, shred them small with oatmeal,
make Pottage of them with Pork, let her eat the Pottage, but not the Pork.

For the Stone.
Take the green weed of the Sea, which is brought with Oysters, wash it, and
dry it to powder, drink it with Malmsey fasting.

To kill worms.
Take Aloe succatrina 2 ounces, let it stand in a quart of Malmsey eight hours,
drink it morning and evening.

For a hot Rheum in the Head.
Take Rose Water, Vinegar and sallet-oyl, mix them well together and lay it to
the head warm.

For a Lask.
Take the nether jaw of a Pike, beat it to powder, and drink it.

For an Itch or any scurf of the body.
Take Elecampane roots or leaves, stamp them; and fry them with fresh Grease,
strain it into a dish, and anoint the Patient.

For one that is bruised with a fall.
Take Horse-dung, and sheepssuet, boil them together, and apply it to the same
place, being laid upon a cloth.

For the Emeroides.
Take Hops and Vinegar, fry them together, and put it into a little bag, and
lay it as hot as it may be endured, to the Fundament, diverse bags one after
another, and let one continue at it.

For one that is burned with Gunpowder or otherwise.
Take one handful of Groundsel, twelve heads of Housleek, one pint of Goose
dung, as much Chickens dung, of the newest that may be gotten, stamp the Herbs
as small as you can, then put the dung into a mortar, temper them together with
a pottle of Bores grease, labor them together half an hour, and strain it
through a Canvas bag with a cleft stick into an earthen pan, and use it when
need requires, it will last two year.

To heal a prick with a Nail or Thorn.
Take two handfuls of Celendine, as much Orpen, cut it small, and boil it with
oil Olive and unwrought Wax, then strain it and use it.

To stop the bleeding of a cut or wound.
Take Hop, stamp it, and put it into the wound, if Hop will not do it, then put
to it Vinegar with the Hop.

For a Scald.
Take the leaves of ground Ivy, three handful, Housleek one handful; wash them,
and stamp them in a stone Mortar very small, and as you stamp them, put in a
pint of cream by little and little, then strain it, and put it in a pot with a
feather, take of this, and anoint the scalded place, and then wet a linen
cloth in the same ointment, and lay it on the place, and over that roll other
clothes.

An Ointment for a Tetter.
Take Sal armoniack one ounce, beat it into fine powder, then mix it with soap,
and fresh grease, of each two ounces, make an ointment and anoint the place.

For the singing in the Head.
Take one Onion cut out the core, and fill that place with the powder of
Cummin, and the juice of Rue, set on the top again, and roast the Onion in
embers, then put away the outside, and put it in a cloth, wring out the juice,
take black wool and dip it in, put this into thine ear where the singing is,
and if it be on both sides, then serve one after another.

A Drink for one that is weak, and misdoubting a Consumption.
Take 3 handfuls of Rosemary, bruise it a little, and close it in paste, bake
it in an Oven until it be well dried, then cut the paste, and take forth the
Rosemary, infuse it in 2 quarts of Claret wine, with two ounces of good
Treacle, 1 ounce of Nutmegs, of Cinnamon and Ginger, of each half an ounce
bruised; let them stand infused 2 nights and one day, then distill it in a
Limbeck, drink hereof one spoonful or two next your heart.

A Drink for the Plague.
Take red Sage, Herb-grace, Elder leaves, red Brier leaves, of each one
handful, stamp them and strain them with a quart of White Wind, and then put to
it Aqua vitae, and Ginger, drink hereof every morning one spoonful, nine
mornings together, and it will preserve you.

For a bruise or stitch.
Take the kernels of Walnuts and small Nuts, Figs, Rue, of each one handful,
white Salt the quantity of one Walnut, one race of Ginger, one spoonful of
Honey; beat them all together very fine, and eat of it three or four times
every day, make a plaster of it, and lay it to the place grieved.

A Drink for one that has a Rupture.
Take Comfrey one good handful, wild Daisie roots as much, and the like of
knotted grass, stamp all these together, and strain it with Malmsey, and give
it to the Patient to drink morning and evening 9 days, blood warm; if it be a
man, that has been long so, he must lie nine days upon his back, and stir as
little as he can. If he be a child, he must be kept so much lying as you may
for nine days, if you think the drink too strong for the child, give it him but
5 days in Malmsey, and the rest in stale Ale; have care that the party have a
good Truss, and keep him trussed one whole year at the least.

A Plaster for a Rupture.
Take the juice of Comfrey, wild Daisie-roots, and knotted grass, of each a
like quantity, fresh butter and unwrought Wax, of each a like quantity,
clarify them severally, then take of the roots of Comfrey, dry it, and make
powder of it, take the powder of Anniseseed, and Cummin-seed, but twice as much
Cummin-seed, as Annise; boil these powders in the Butter and unwrought Wax on a
soft fire a good while, then put in your juice, let it boil a walm or two, so
take it from the fire, stir it altogether till it be cold, take hereof and
spread it, and lay it to his Cods as hot as he can suffer it, and use this till
he be whole: this plaster is most excellent for a Child that is burst at the
Navel.

GRATIOSA CURA. A Water for a Cut or a Sore.
Take Honey-suckles the knots nipt off, flowers of Celendine, flowers of red
Sage, of each three spoonfuls, Five-finger, Comfrey such as is to knit bones,
Daisies with the roots thereon, Ladder of Heaven, blossoms of Rosemary, Setwel,
Herb-grace, Smallage, red Roses with the knots on, or else red Rose cakes,
Adders-tongue of each of these one handful, sees all together in six gallons
of water that runs toward the East, until two gallons be sod in, then
strain them, and put to the water 3 quarts of English Honey, one pound of
Roch-allum, one pennyworth of madder, one pennyworth of long Pepper, sees all
together until one gallon be consumed, then cleanse the water.

For the Wind Colic.
Take the flowers of Walnuts, and dry them to powder, and take of them in your
Ale or Beer, or in your broth as you like best, and it will help you.

To make a sovereign Oil of a Fox for the nummed Palsy.
Take a Fox new killed, cased and bowelled, then put into the body, of Dill,
Mugwort, Cammomil, Camepites, Southernwood, red Sage, Oliganum, Hop, Staecad,
Rosemary, Costmary, Cowslip flowers, Balm, Bettony, sweet Marjorum, of each a
good handful, chop them small, and put thereto of the best Oil of Castor, Dill
and Cammomil, of each 4 ounces, mix the herbs and oils together, and strew over
them Aphronium a good handful, put them all into the Fox, and sew up his belly
close, and with a quick fire roast him, and the Oil that droppeth out, is a
most singular Oil for all Palsies or numness. Approved.

To comfort the brain, and procure sleep.
Take brown bread crumbs, the quantity of one Walnut, one Nutmeg beaten to
powder, one dram of Cinnamon, put these into a Napkin with two spoonfuls of
Vinegar, 4 spoonfuls of Rosewater, and one of Woman's Milk.

For the weakness in the Back.
Take the pith of an Ox back, put it into a pottle of water, then sees it to a
quart, then take a handful of Comfrey, one handful of knotted grass, one
handful of Shepherds purse, put these into a quart of water, boil them unto a
pint, with 6 Dates boiled therein.

For a Canker in any part of the Body.
Take Fil-bird Nut-leaves, Lavender cotton, Southernwood, Wormwood, Sage,
Woodbind leaves, sweet Brier leaves, of each a like quantity, of Alum and
Honey a good quantity, sees all these till they be half sodden, wash the Sore
with it.

For an old bruise.
Take one spoonful of the juice of Tansie, and as much Nip, two pennyworth of
Sperma Ceti, put it into a little Ale, and drink it.

Oil of Foxes, or Badgers, for Ach in the joints, the Sciatica, diseases of the
Sinews, and pains of the Reins and Back.
Take a live Fox or Badger of a middle age, of a full body, well fed, and fat,
kill him, bowel and skin him, some take not out his bowels, but only his
Excrements in his guts, because his guts have much grease about them, break his
bones small, that you may have all the marrow; this done, set him a boiling in
salt Brine, and sea water, and salt water of each a pint and a half, of oil
three pints, of salt 3 ounces, in the end of the decoction put thereto the
leaves of Sage, Rosemary, Dill, Organy, Marjorum, and Juniper berries, and when
he is so sodden that his bones and flesh do depart in sunder, strain all
through a strainer, and keep it in a vessel to make Linaments for the Ach in
the joints, the Sciatica, diseases of the sinews, and pains of the reins and
back.

To make the Leaden Plaster.
Take 2 pound and 4 ouuces of oil Olive of the best, of good red Lead one
pound, white lead one pound well beaten to dust, twelve ounces of Spanish soap,
and incorporate all these well together in an earthen pot, well glazed before
you put them to boil, and when they are well incorporated, that the soap comes
upward, put it upon a small fire of coals, continuing upon the fire the space
of an hour and a half, still stirring it with an Iron Ball upon the end of a
stick, then make the fire somewhat bigger, until the redness be turned into a
gray color, but you must not leave stirring till the matter be turned into the
color of oil, or somewhat darker: then drop of it upon a wooden trencher, and
if it cleave not to the finger, it is enough: then make it up into rowls, it
will keep twenty years, the older the better.

The virtue of the Plaster.
The same being laid upon the stomach, provokes appetite, it takes away any
grief in the stomach, being laid on the belly, is a present remedy for the
Cholick, and laid unto the reins of the back, it is good for the bloody Flux,
running of the Reins, the heat of the Kidneys, and weakness of the back: the
same heals all swellings, bruises, and takes away ach, it breaks Fellons,
pushes, and other Imposthumes, and heals them, the same draws out any
running humors, without breaking the skin, and being applied to the fundament,
it heals any disease there growing, being laid on the head is good for the
Uvula, it heals the headache, and is good for the eyes.

For a pricking of a Thorn.
Take fine Wheat Flour, bolted, temper it with Wine, and sees it thick, lay
it hot to the sore.

A Medicine for the Plague.
Take a pint of Malmsey, and burn it well, then take about six spoonfuls
thereof, and put to the quantity of a Nutmeg of good Treacle, and so much spice
grains beaten, as you can take up with the tops of your 2 fingers, mix it
together, and let the party sick drink it blood-warm, if he be infected it will
procure him to cast, which if he do, give him as much more, and so still again
and again, observing still some quantity till the party leave casting, and so
after he will be well: if he cast not at all, once taken it is enough and
probably it is not the sickness: after the party has left casting, it is good
to take a competent draught of burnt Malmsie alone with Treacle and Grains, it
will comfort much.

Another Medicine for the Plague.
Take of Setwel grated one root, of Jane Treacle two spoonfuls, of Wine Vinegar
3 spoonfuls, of fair water 3 spoonfuls, make all these more than lukewarm, and
drink them off at once well steeped together, sweat after this six or seven
hours, and it will bring forth the Plague sore.

To break the Plague sore.
Lay a roasted Onion, also sees a white Lilly root in milk, till it be as
thick as a Poultess, and lay it to the same, if these fail, lance the sore,
and so draw it and heal it with salves for Botches, or Biles.

To make a Salve to dress any wound.
Take Rosin and Wax of each half a pound, of Deer suet, and Frankincense of
each one quarter of a pound, of Mastick in powder one ounce, boil all these in
a pint of White Wind half an hour with a soft fire, and stir it in the boiling
that it run not over, then take it from the fire, and put thereto half an ounce
of Camphire in powder, when it is almost cold, put thereto one quarter of a
pound of Turpentine, after all these be mingled together, then put it into
White Wind; and wash it as you wash Butter, and then as it cools, make it up in
rowls.

A most excellent Water for sore Eyes.
Take a quart of Spring water, set it upon the fire in an earthen Pipkin, then
put into it 3 spoonfuls of white salt, and one spoonful of white Coperas, then
boil them a quarter of an hour, scum it as it does boil, then strain it through
a fine linen cloth, and keep it for your use.

When you take it you must lie down upon the bed, and drop two drops of it into
your eye, so rest one quarter of an hour, not wiping your eyes, and use it as
often as need shall require.

If the eye have any pearl or film growing upon it, then take a handful of red
double Dasie leaves, and stamp them, and strain them through a linen cloth,
and drop thereof one drop into your eye, using it three times.

A Plaster for one that is bruised.
Take half a pint of Sallet Oil or Neats-foot Oil, half a pint of English
Honey, 2 or 3 pennyworth of Turpentine, a good quantity of Hogs grease, 2 or 3
pennyworth of Bole Armoniack, half a pint of strong Wine-vinegar, half a dozen
of Egg-shells, and all beaten very small, one handful of white Salt, put all
these together into an earthen pot, stir and mingle them together exceeding
well, then as much Bean-flower, or wheat flour as will thicken it
plaister-wise, then with your hand strike it, on the grieved place once a day,
and by Gods help it will ease any sore that comes by means of striking,
wrinching, bruising, or other kind of swelling that proceeds of evil humors.

Balm water for a Surfeit.
Take two gallons of strong Ale, and 1 quart of Sack, take 4 pound of young
Balm leaves, and shred them, then take 1 pound of Anniseseeds, and as much
Liquorish beaten to powder, put them all into the Ale and Sack to steep 12
hours, put it into a Limbeck and so still it, it is good for a surfeit of
choler, for to comfort the heart, and for an Ague.

A Restorative Water in sickness, the Patient being weak.
Take 3 pints of very good new milk, and put thereto one pint of very good red
Wine the yolks of 21 Eggs, and beat them together, that done, put in as much
fine Manchet as shall suck up the Milk and Wine, then put the same into a fair
Stillory, and still it with a soaking fire, and take a spoonful of this water
in your Pottage or drink, and this in 1 or 2 Months will prevent the
Consumption.

To make a Caudle to prevent the Lask.
Take half a pound of unblanched Almonds, stamp them, and strain it in a quart
of Ale, and set it on the fire, then take the yolks of four Eggs and make it
for a Caudle, and so season it with a good quantity of Cinnamon and Sugar, and
eat it every morning at breakfast.

For one that cannot make water and to break the Stone.
Pare a Reddish root, and slice it thin, and put it into a pint of White Wind,
and let it infuse 6 or 7 hours, then strain it and set it on the fire; and put
thereto 1 Parsley root, and one spoonful of Parsley seed, and half a handful of
Pellitory of the wall and sees it until half be wasted, and give it lukewarm
to drink.

A Diet against Melancholy.
Take Seen 8 ounces, Rubarb six drams, Polipody of the Oak, S^rsaparilla, and
Madder roots, of each four ounces, Annife-seeds, Fennel seeds Epithymum, of
each 1 ounce, Mace, Cloves, and Nutmegs, of each 2 ounces, Egrimony, Scabious,
and red Dock roots of each 1 handful; make them all small, and put it into a
long narrow bag or boulter, hang it in a vessel of Ale that contains 6
gallons, when it is a week old, drink it morning and evening for the space of
one fortnight, keep you all that time warm, and a good diet.

A Syrrup to open the Liver.
Take Lungwort, Maidenhair, Egrimony, Scabious, of each one handful,
Chamepitis, Hysop, of each a dozen drops, Endive and Succory, of each 3 or 4
leaves, of young Fennel and Parsley, of each one root, one stick of Liquorish,
one spoonful of Barberries clean washed, one spoonful of Annise seeds, 20
Raisins of the Sun stoned: boil all these in a pottle of Water to a quart, then
strain it, and put thereto of the best Sugar one quarter of a pound, Conserve
of violets one ounce; and so boil it as long as any scum arise, then strain it
again, and use this very warm.

For one that cannot make water.
Take the seeds of Parsley, of red Fennel, of Saxifrage, of Carraways, of the
kernel of Hip berries, of each a like quantity, put in some powder of Jet,
mingle these, being beaten to powder well together, and drink it in stale Ale
lukewarm.

To make Aqua Composita.
Take of Annise-seeds, and Liquorish, bruised, of each half a pound, Thyme and
Fennel, of each half a handful, Calamint 2 handfuls, Coriander and Carraway
seeds bruised, of each two ounces, Rosemary and Sage, of each half a handful,
infuse these a whole night in 3 gallons of red Wine or strong Ale, then still
it in a Limbeck with a soft fire.

An Ointment for a Swelling.
Take of Marsh Mallows, of wormwood, of Smallage, of each one handful, boil it
with one pound of the grease of a barrow Hog until it be very green, then
strain it and keep it very close. Lady Pawlet.

A Plaster for the Back.
Take half a pint of Oil of Roses, four ounces of white Lead ground into fine
powder, put your oil into a clean Posnet, and set it on the fire, and when it
is warm, put in your white Lead, ever stiring it, then put into it of your Wax
one quart, stir it until it be black, then take it from the fire, and in the
cooling put thereto two pennyworth of Camphire, of white sanders, and yellow
sanders, of each the weight of four pence, fine Bole and Terra sigillata, of
each 2 penniweight, in fine powder all, still stirring it till it be almost
cold, and so make it up in rouls: use it as need requires, for all weakness,
wasting, or heat in the Kidneys. Cranash.

To make Oil of Swallows.
Take one handful of Mother-Thyme, of Lavender-cotten, and Strawberry leaves,
of each alike, four Swallows, feathers and all together well bruised, 3 ounces
of Sallet oil, beat the herbs, and the Swallows, feathers and all together,
until they be so small that you can see no feathers, then put in the oil, and
stir them well together, and sees them in a posnet, and strain them through a
Canvas cloth, and so keep it for your use.

For a Thorn, Fellon or Prick.
Take the juice of Fetherfew, of Smallage, of each one saucer full, put to it
as much of Wheat flower, as will make it somewhat thick, and put to it of good
black soap the quantity of a Walnut, mingle them together, and lay them to the
sore.

A Drink for one that has a Rupture.
Take the Comfit, otherwise called Bonesel, a pretty handful, of Woodbitten as
much, Bread, Plantain, and leaves of Cammock, somewhat more than a handful, of
Vervain, as much as of the Cammock, of Dasie roots a small quantity, of Elder
tops, or young buds, the least quantity, stamp all these together and put unto
them, being stamped, one pint of pure White Wind, then strain it, and drink of
it morning and evening, one hour or more before breakfast or supper, a good
draught blood-warm.

If it be a sucking Child, let the Nurse drink posset Ale of the aforesaid
drink, and let the Child suck immediately, if he be an old body let him take it
lying in his bed 9 days, if it may be conveniently, or otherwise to use no
straining.

For a Lask or Flux.
Take one quart of red Wine, as much running water, one ounce of Cinnamon,
sees these half away, and give the Patient six spoonfuls to drink morning and
evening, if you think it be too harsh put in a piece of Sugar.

A Lotion Water for the Canker.
Take one gallon of pure Water, four handfuls of Woodbine, of Marigolds and
Tetful, of each two handfuls, of Celendine, Rue, Sage, and Egrimony, of each
one handful, boil all these to a quart, then strain it, and put thereto two
great spoonfuls of the best English Honey, and one ounce of Roch Alum, boil
them all again as long as any scum arises, then take it off and put it in a
close bottle, and use it blood warm when need requires.

For the Mother.
Take 3 or 4 handfuls of Fern that grows upon a house, sees it in Rhenish
Wine till it be well sodden, then put it in a linen cloth, and lay it to her
Navel as hot as she may suffer it, four or five times.

A Water for all old Sores.
Take Honey-suckles, Water Betony, Rosemary, Sage, Violet leaves, Elder leaves,
cut them all small together, and sees them in a quart of running water, put
thereto two spoonfuls of Honey, and a little Alum.

For one that has a great heat in his Temples, or that cannot sleep.
Take the juice of Housleek, and of Lettice, of each 1 spoonful, of woman's Milk
six spoonfuls, put them together, and set them upon a Chafing dish of Coals,
and put thereto a piece of Rose cake, and lay it to your Temples.

To quench or slake your Thirst.
Take one quart of running water out of the brook, sees it, and scum it, put
thereto 5 or 6 spoonfuls of Vinegar, a good quantity of Sugar and Cinnamon, 3
or 4 Cloves bruised, drink it l^kewarm.

For one that has a great heat in his hands and stomach.
Take 4 Eggs, roast them hard, peel them, lay them in Vinegar 3 or 4 hours,
then let the sick man, hold in either hand one of them, and after some space
change them and take the other, and it will allay the heat.

Against all Aches especially of a Woman's breast.
Take Milk and Rose leaves, and set them on the fire, and put thereto Oatmeal,
and oil of Roses, boil them till they be thick, and lay it hot under the sore,
and renew it so that it be always hot.

For the Phthisick and dry Cough.
Take the Lungs of a Fox, beat them to powder, take of Liquorish and Sugar
candy a good quantity, a small quantity of Cummin, mix these all well together,
and put them in a bladder, and eat of it as often as you think good in a day.

To take away Warts.
Take Snails that have shells, prick them, and with the juice that comes from
them rub the Wart every day for the space of 7 or 8 days, and it will destroy
them.

A perfect Water for the sight.
Take Sage, Fennel, Vervain, Bettony, Eyebright, Pimpernel, Cinquefoil, and
Herbgrace, lay all these in White Wind one night, still it in a stillatory of
glass, this water did restore the sight of one that was blind three years
before.

To restore the Hearing.
Take Rue, Rosemary, Sage, Vervain, Marjoram, of each one handful, of Cammomil
two handfuls, stamp them, and mould them in Rye dough, make thereof one loaf,
bake it as other bread, and when it is baked, break it in the midst, and as hot
as may be suffered, bind it to your ears and keep them warm and close one day
or more, after it be taken away, forbear ye to take cold.

For a Fellon in the Joints.
Take Rue, Featherfew, Bores grease, Leaven, Salt, Honey, six leaves of Sage,
shred them altogether small, then beat them together, and lay it to the sore
place.

To comfort the Brains, and to procure sleep.
Take a red Rose-cake, three spoonfuls of White Wind Vinegar, the white of one
Egg, three spoonfuls of Woman's Milk, set all these on a Chafing dish of Coals,
heat them, and lay the Rose cake upon the dish, and let them heat together,
then take one Nutmeg, and strew it on the Cake, then put it betwixt two
clothes, and lay it to your forehead as warm as you may suffer it.

A Medicine for a forehead with a Scald.
Take one peck of Shoomakers shreds, set them over the fire in a Brass pan, put
water to them and sees them so long as any oil will arise, and evermore be
scumming off the oil, then take plantain, Ribwort, Housleek leaves, ground Ivy,
knotted grass, wild Borrage, Tutsan, Herb Bennet, Smallage, Setwel leaves, of
every one alike quantity, and beat them in a Mortar and strain them, then take
half a pennyworth of Rosin, half a pennyworth of Alum, a little Virgins Wax,
beat them, and put them into a pan, and set it over the fire, put thereto the
Herbs and the oil, let them sees till all be melted, then strain them into a
pan, and stir them till they be cold, and put it into a box for your use, when
you dress your head, heat a little in a saucer, anoint it every day twice,
pull out the hairs that stand upright, and with a linen cloth wipe away the
corruption.

A Salve for a Green wound, or old Sore.
Take the leaves of green Tobacco two pounds, of Valerian two pound, beat them
very small, then strain them, and take the juice thereof, put one pound of
yellow Wax, one pound of Rosin, one pound of Deer suet, boil them together till
they be very green, and when it is cold, put to it a quarter of a pound of
Turpentine, and keep it for your use.

For the Running of the Reins. Approved.
Take the Roes of red Herrings, dry them upon the coals till they will beat to
powder, then give it to the patient to drink in the morning fasting, as much as
will lie upon a shilling in 5 spoonfuls of Ale or Wine, be he never so weak.

For the burning and pricking in the Soles of the Feet.
Take have a pound of Barrows grease, two handfuls of Mugwort chopped very
small, boil it with the Barrows grease upon a soft fire by the space of 4
hours, then strain it from the Mugwort, and put it up in an earthen thing for
your use, and anoint your feet as you go to bed.

A Medicine for any heat, burning, or Scalding. Approved.
Take half a pint of the best Cream you can get, and set it in a fair Posnet,
upon the fire, then take two good handfuls of Dasie roots, leaves and all,
clean washed, and very finely shred, put them into the same Posnet, and boil it
upon the fire until it be a clear Ointment, then strain it through a cloth, and
keep it for your use.

To make Aqua Composita to drink for a Surfeit, or a cold stomach, and to avoid
Phlegm and glut from the stomach.
Take one handful of Rosemary, one good root of Elecampane, one handful of Hop,
half a handful of Thyme, half a handful of Sage, 6 good crops of red Mints, and
as much of Pennyroyal, half a handful of Horehound, six crops of Marjarom, two
ounces of Liquorish well bruised, and so much of Annise seeds, then take 3
gallons of strong Ale, and put all the aforesaid things, Ale and Herbs, into a
brass pot, then set them upon the fire, and set your Limbeck upon it, and stop
it close with paste, that there come no air out, and so keep it with a soft
fire, as other Aqua vitae.

For an Ach in the Joints.
Take clarified Butter a quarter of a pound, of Cummin 1 pound, black soap a
quarter of a pound, 1 handful of Rue, sheep suet 2 ounces, Bay Salt 1 spoonful,
bray these together, then fry them with the gall of an Ox, spread it on a
plaster, and lay it on as hot as you can, and let it lie seven days.

A Plaster to lay to the Head for a Rheum which runs at the Eyes.
Take the power of Rose leaves, Rose Water, and Bettony-water, of each a like
quantity, and a little Vinegar, put your powders into the Water and Vinegar,
still them and temper them, and make them in a Plaster, and put to it a little
powder of Terra sigillata.

A Water to be used with the Plaster above said for the same purpose.
Take one quart of new Milk, two pound of green Fennel, a quarter of a pound of
Eyebright^ put the herbs and milk into a Stil^latory, cast half an ounce of
Cam^phire thereon, and with this wa^ter wash your eyes and temples.

For the Emeroides, approved.
Take a piece of tawny cloth^ burn it in a Drying Pan to powder, then beat it
in a Mortar a fine as may be, searce it, then la^ it on a brown paper, and wit^
spittle make it plaisterwise, and lay it to the place, and truss it up with
clothes.

To break any Sore.
Take hot bread to the quantity of a farthing loaf, grate it, pu^ thereto
sallet oil 3 or 4 spoonfuls and a pint of Milk, and sees then together to a
good thickness^ spread it on a cloth, and lay it to the sore; instead of
sallet oil yo^ may use Deer suet.

A Bath for an Ach in the Back, and Limbs.
Take Mugwort, Vervain, Fether^few, Dill, Rosemary, Burnet, Tunhoof, Horehound,
and white Mints, Senkel, and sage of each 1 handful, sees all these in 4
gallons of running water, and let it sees till 1 gallon be wasted, then bath
your legs 5 nights together.

A Medicine for any Joint that is numb with any Ach, approved.
Take Virgin Wax 1 ounce, Verdigreece half a quarter of an ounce, Brimstone,
Soap, oil of Eggs, of Alum, of Honey, of each a like quantity, temper them all
together, and lay it upon the place grieved, somewhat warm.

A Medicine for a Fellon of any Finger.
Take as much bay salt as an Egg, wind it in gray paper, lay it in the embers a
quarter of an hour, then beat it in a Mortar very fine, then take the yolk of a
new laid Egg, beat it with this powder until it be very stiff, spread it upon a
cloth, lay it upon the joint grieved 24 hours, and so dress it 3 times.

For a Boil or Push.
Take the yolk of a new laid Egg^ a little English Honey, put it into the shell
to the yolk, put in as much Wheat meal as will make it to spread, then take 1
branch of Rue, and one of Fetherfew, shred them very fine, and put it to the
same medicine, stir them very well together, spread it upon a piece of leather,
and lay it to the place grieved.

An Electuary to cause good digestion, and to comfort the stomach.
Take Setwel and Gallingal, of each three slices, Nutmegs, Ginger, and
Cinnamon, of each two slices, three Bay Berries sliced fine and husked, three
slices of Liquorish, half a spoonful of Anniseseeds clean dusted, one long
pepper cut small, white pepper six grains, as much black pepper, beat them all
into a gross powder, then put thereto two grains of musk, one grain of
Ambergreece, then take Mint-water and Sugar, boil them together, and when they
are come to the right perfection of thickness, put in those powders above
mentioned in the cooling with a little Conserve of Rosemary flowers; of this
take the quantity of a Nutmeg, half an hour before you eat or drink at meals.

A Powder for the Rheum or sore Eyes.
Boil one pint of Hop-water, made when the Hop is in the flour, till it be
scalding hot, then put into it half a pound of Liquorish in very fine powder,
the water being taken from the fire, for the Liquorish must not boil in the
water, stir them together till the water be clean consumed, then add to them of
Annise seeds, and Fennel seeds, of each half a pound made into very fine powder
through a searce, Angelica roots, Elicampane root, and leaves, add flowers of
Eyebright made into very fine powder, of each one ounce and a half, mingle
these together, and so keep it close, and when you eat of this powder, weigh
out of the whole quantity two ounces, whereunto add as much good Aqua vitae as
will moisten it, or Angelica water, or Rosa solis, to keep it from being musty,
set it near the fire, eat of these powders at any time as much as you may take
up with a groat, and it is special good for the Rheum, for cold or for sore
eyes. Mr. Bendlow.

A Salve for any Wound.
Take Rosin, Perosin, Wax, of each eight ounces, of sheeps suet, and
Frankincense, of each four ounces, one ounce of Mastick made in powder, boil
all these in a pint of White Wind half an hour, then take it from the fire, and
put thereto half an ounce of Camphire in powder; when it is almost cold put
thereto 4 ounces of Turpentine, and make it up in rowls, but before it be
rolled you must wash it up in running water. A. T.

How to deliver a Child in danger.
Take a Date stone, beat it into powder, let the woman drink it with Wine, then
take Polipody and emplaister it to her feet, and the Child will come whether it
be quick or dead, then take Centory, green or dry; give it the Woman to drink
in Wine, give also the Milk of another Woman.

A most singular Syrrup for the Lungs; and to prevent a Consumption.
Take Egrimony, Scabious, Borrage, Bugloss, of each twenty leaves, Fole-foot,
Lungwort, Maidenhair, of each half a handful, Succory and Endive, of each six
leaves, of Carduus Benedictus, Horehound, Nip, of each four crops, unset Hop,
half a handful, Fennel roots, Parsley roots, Smallage root, of each 3 roots
sliced, and the piths taken out, Elecampane 4 roots sliced, Iris roots half an
ounce sliced, Quince seeds one ounce, Liquorish three good sticks scraped, and
sliced small, twenty Figs sliced, Raisins of the Sun 1 good handful sliced, and
the stones taken out. Boil all these in a gallon of running water till half be
consumed, then take it from the fire, and let it settle, then strain it, and
boil it again with as much white Sugar as will make it thick as Syrrup, that it
may last all the year.

A Powder for the Stone.
Take Haws and Hips, of each a good handful, Ashen keys half a handful, 3 or 4
Acrons, the shells of three new laid Eggs, Grumwell seeds, Parsley seeds, of
each half an ounce, Perstone a good handful, Camock roots half a handful, make
all these in fine powder, then put thereto two ounces of Sugar Candy beaten
something small, take a six-penny weight of this powder at a time in the
morning fasting, and drink not after it one hour.

For the Cholick and Stone.
Take 1 handful of Fili Pendula, of Rosemary, of Saxifrage, of Ivy growing on
the wall, of Hart's-tongue, of Thyme, of Parsley, of Scabious, of each 4
handfuls, of Marigolds one handful, of Marjorum 3 handfuls, of brown Fennel, of
Londebeese, of Spernits, of Borrage, of each 2 handfuls, of Maidenhair 3
handfuls, still all these in May, keep it in a Glass till you have need of it,
then take of it five spoonfuls, and three of White Wind, and of clean powder of
Ginger half a spoonful, put these together and warm it lukewarm, and let the
Patient drink it in the morning 2 hours before he rise out of his bed, let him
lay more clothes upon him, for it will provoke him to sweat, after the sweat is
gone, let him rise and walk whither he will.

A good water to drink with wine, or without to cool Choler.
Take Borrage roots, and Succory roots of each two, wash and scrape them fair
and clean, and take out their cores, then take an earthen pot of two gallons,
fill it with fair spring water, set it on a fire of Charcoal, put the roots in
it, and 8 pennyworth of Cinnamon, when it begins to sees, put into it 4
ounces of fine sugar, and let it sees half an hour, then take it off, let it
cool, and drink thereof at your pleasure.

How to make Aqua Composita for the Cholick and Stone.
Take strong Ale one month old, as many gallons as your pot will hold, and for
every gallon take two ounces of Liquorish, and as much Annise seeds, and of
these Herbs following two handfuls of each to every gallon, of Birch leaves,
Burnet, Pasphere, Pellitory of the wall, Watercresses, Saxifrage, Grumwell
seeds, Filipendula, Pennyroyal, Fennel, half a root of Elecampane, of Haws, of
Hips, of Berries, of Brambles, and Barberries of each half a pint, still them
as you do other Aqua vitae.

A Medicine for the Cholick passion.
Take the smooth leaves of Holly, dry them, and make them into powder, of
Grumwell seed, and Box seed of each a little quantity, let the Patient drink
thereof.

How to take away the servent shaking and burning of an Ague.
Take of the rind of the Wilding-tree, with the leaves in Summer, of each half
a handful, as much Bettony, 3 crops of Rosemary, sees them in a quart of
posset-Ale to a pint, and let the sick drink of this as hot as he can, and so
within 3 times it will ease him.

For the hardness and stiffness of the Sinews.
Take 12 fledged Swallows out of the nest, kill them, beat them feathers and
all in a Mortar, with Thyme, Rosemary and Hop, then sees them with May butter
a good while, then strain them through a strainer, as hard as you can, and it
will be an Ointment, take the strings that grow out of the Strawberries and
beat them amongst the rest.

How to stay the Flux.
Take white Starch made of wheat 2 or 3 spoonfuls, and take also new Milk from
the Cow, stir these together, and let them be warmed a little, and give it to
the party grieved in manner of a Glister, a present remedy.

An approved Medicine for the Plague, called the Philosophers Egg: It is a most
excellent preservative against all poisons, or dangerous Diseases that draw
toward the Heart.
Take a new laid Egg, and break a hole so broad as you may take out the white
clean from the yolk, then take one ounce of Saffron, and mingle it with the
yolk, but be careful you break not the shell, then cover it with another piece
of shell so close as is possible, then take an earthen pot with a close cover,
with warm embers, so that it shall not be buried, and as those embers do cool,
so put in more hot; and do so for the space of two days, until you think it be
dry, for proof whereof you shall put in a pen, and if it come out dry it is
well, then take the Egg and wipe it very clean, then pare the shell from the
Saffron, and set it before the fire, and let it be warm, then beat it in a
Mortar very fine, and put it by it self, then take as much white Mustard Seed
as the Egg and Saffron and grind it as small as meal, then searce it through a
fine Boulter, that you may save the quantity of the Egg so searced, then take a
quarter of an ounce of Dittany roots, as much Tormentil, of Nuces Vomicae one
dram, let them be dried by the fire, as aforesaid, then stamp these 3 last
severally, very fine in a Mortar, then mix them 3 well together, after that
take, as a thing most needful, the root of Angelica and Pimpernel, of each the
weight of sixpence, make them to powder, and mix them with the rest, then
compound therewith five or six scruples of Unicorns horn, or for want thereof
Hearts horn, and take as much weight as all these fine powders come to, of fine
Treacle, and stamp it with the powders in a Mortar until it be well mixed, and
hang to the pestle, and then it is perfectly made, then put the Electuary in a
stone pot, well nealed, and so it will continue 20 or 30 years, and the longer
the better.

How to use this Electuary.
First when one is infected with the pestilence, let him take so soon as he
can, or ever the disease infect the heart, one crown weight in Gold of this
Electuary, and so much of fine Treacle, if it be for a man, but if it shall be
for a woman or child take less, and let them be well mixed together, and if the
disease come with cold, give him the Electuary with half a pint of White Wind
warm, and well mixed together, but if it come with heat, then give it him with
Plantain Water, or Well water, and Vinegar mixed together, and when he has
drunk the same, let him go to his naked bed, and put off his shirt, and cover
him warm, but let his bed be well warmed first, and a hot double sheet wrapped
about him, and so let him sweat 7, 8 or 10 hours, as he is able to endure, for
the more he does sweat the better, because the disease fades away with the
sweat; but if he cannot sweat, then heat 2 or 3 Bricks or Tiles, and wrap them
in moist clothes wet with water and salt, and lay them by his sides in the bed,
and they will cause him to sweat, and as he sweateth, let it be wiped from his
body with dry hot clothes, being conveyed into the bed, and his sweat being
ended, shift him into a warm bed with a warm shift and all fresh new clothes,
using him very warily for taking of cold, and let his clothes that he did sweat
in, be well aired and washed, for they be infectious; and let the keepers of
the sick beware of the breath or air of the party in the time of his sweating,
therefore let her muffle her self with double old cloth, wherein is Wormwood,
Rue, Fetherfew, crumbs of sour Bread and Vinegar, and a little Rose Water, beat
all these together, and put it into the muffler made new every day while you do
keep him, and let the sick party, have of it bound in a cloth to smell on while
he is in a sweat, then after do it away, and take a new; and because he shall
be faint and distempered after his sickness, he shall eat no flesh, nor drink
wine the space of nine days, but let him use these Conservatives for his
health, as Conserve of Bugloss, Borrage and red Roses, and especially he shall
drink 3 or 4 days after he has sweat morning and evening, 3 ounces of the
juice of Sorrel mixed with an ounce of Conserve of Sorrel, and so use to eat
and drink whatsoever is comfortable for the heart, also if one take the
quantity of a Pea of the said Electuary, with some good Wine, it shall keep him
from the infection, therefore when one is sick in the house of the plague, then
so soon as you can give all the whole household some of this Receipt to drink,
and his keeper also, and it shall preserve them from the infection, yet keep
the whole from the sick as much as you can, beware of the clothes and bed that
the sick party did sweat in.

To make Balm Water.
Take 4 gallons of strong Ale and stale, half a pound of Liquorish, two pound
of Balm, two ounces of Figs, half a pound of Annise seeds, 1 ounce of Nutmegs,
shred the Balm and Figs very small, and let them stand steeping 4 and 20 hours,
and then put it in a still, as you use Aqua vitae.

To make Doctor Stevens Water.
Take one gallon of good Gascoign Wine, of Ginger, Galingals Nutmegs, Grains,
Annise seeds, Fennel seeds, Carraway seeds, Sage, Mints, red Roses,
garden-Thyme, Pellitory, Rosemary, wild Thyme, Pennyroyal, Cammomil, Lavender,
of each one handful; bray your spices small, and chop the herbs before named,
and put them with the spices into the Wine, and let it stand 12 hours, stirring
it very often, then still it in a Limbeck closed up with coarse paste, so that
no air enter, keep the first water by it self, it is good so long as it will
burn.

An Ointment for any strain in the Joints, or any Sore.
Take 3 pound of fresh Butter unwashed, and set it in an Oven after the bread
be drawn out, and let it stand 2 or 3 hours, then take the clearest of the
Butter, and put it into a Posnet, then take the tops of red Nettles as much as
will be moistened with the Butter and chop them very small, and put them into
the Butter, set it on the fire, and boil it softly 5 or 6 hours, and when it is
so boiled, put thereto half a pint of pure oil Olive, and then boil it very
little, and take it off, and strain it into an earthen pot, and keep it for
your use.

If you think good, instead of Nettles only, you may take these herbs,
Cammomil, Rosemary, Lavender, Tunhoof, otherwise Alehoof, Five-finger, Vervain
and Nettle tops.

For an Ague.
Take the inner bark of a Walnut tree, a good quantity, boil it in Beer until
the Beer look black, and then take a good draught, and put it into a pot, then
take six spoonfuls of sallet Oil for an extreme Ague, brew it to and fro in two
pots, then drink it, and let the party labor at any exercise until he sweat,
then let him lie down upon a bed very warm, until he has done sweating, this
do three times when the Ague comes upon him.

A Powder against the wind in the Stomach.
Take Ginger, Cinnamon and Gallingal, of each 2 ounces, Annise seeds, Carraway
and Fennel seeds, of each 1 ounce, long Pepper, Grains, Mace and Nutmegs, of
each half an ounce, setwel half a dram, make all in powder, and put thereto 1
pound of white Sugar, and use this after your meat, or before at your pleasure;
at all times it comfort the stomach marvellously, carries away wind, and
causes a good digestion.

For a Pin and a Web in the Eye.
Take the white of an Egg, beat it to oil, put thereto a quarter of a spoonful
of English Honey, half a handful of Daisie leaves, and in winter the roots,
half a handful of the inner rind of a young Hazle, not above one years growth,
beat them together in a Mortar, and put thereto 1 spoonful of Woman's Milk, and
let it stand infused two or three hours, and strain al^ through a cloth, and
with a feathe^ drop it into the eye thrice a day.

For blood shotten, and sore Eyes coming of heat.
Take Tutty of Alexandria, o^ Lapis Tutty 1 ounce, beat it unto fine powder,
and temper it with a quart of White Wind, put thereto 1 ounce of dried Rose
leaves, and boil them all together with a soft fire until one half be consumed,
then strain it through a fine linen cloth and keep it in a glass and use it
evening and morning, and put it into the sore eyes with a feather, or your
finger.

If the Tutty be prepared it is the better, which is thus done, steep the Tutty
in Rosewater, and let it lie half an hour, then take it forth, and lay it on a
white paper to dry, then take it when it is dry, steep it, and dry it again, as
before, twice or thrice, and then use it as before.

For an Ach in the Bones.
Take Southernwood, Wormwood, and Bay leaves, of each one handful, one Ox gall,
one pint of Neats foot oil, put all these together and let them stand 2 or 3
days, and let them boil upon a very soft fire, then put in of Deers suet a good
quantity, strain them, and put them into a pot, and so anoint the Patient, put
to this a good quantity of Tar, and as much Pitch as the bigness of a Walnut
and of the juice of Pimpernel a good quantity.

For Children that are troubled with an extreme Cough.
Take Hyssop water, and Fennel water, of each half a pint, of sliced Liquorish,
and sugar, of each a pretty quantity, sees them easily over a good fire,
strain it, and let them take a little hereof an ounce, and often; you may
dissolve pellets therein, and you may anoint their chest with oil of Almonds,
and a little Wax.

A Medicine for sore Eyes.
Take red Fennel and Celendine, of each one handful, stamp and strain them,
that done take five spoonfuls of Honey, and white Copperas, the quantity of 1
Pea, Rose Water five spoonfuls, boil all these together in an earthen pot, skim
it well, and clarify it with the white of an Egg, this is an excellent
Medicine to clear the sight of the Eye, if there be any thing in the Eye
superfluous to hinder the sight; but if there be nothing but heat, it is
nothing so good.

To help one that is inwardly bruised.
Take of Borrage and red Sage, of each a handful, stamp these together, and
strain them; and put thereto as much Claret Wine as the juice thereof, and let
the party drink it warm, and if it keep within him 24 hours after, he will
recover; if he be bound in the body, let him take 3 spoonfuls of Syrrup of
Damask Roses, and two spoonfuls of Sallet oil, and drink it fasting, and an
hour after let the party take some warm broth.

For the Spleen.
Take of Lavender, Fennel, Parsley, Cammomil, Thyme, Wormwood, Angelica, of
each one handful, of Sage, and Rue, one handful, of Annise seeds, and Fennel
seeds, of each one handful, of Cummin seeds, two handfuls, of Cloves four
spoonfuls, and of Mace two spoonfuls, gather these herbs in the heat of the
day, and dry them in the Sun two days, laying them very thin on a sheet and
bruise the seed grossly, and steep them in as much Sallet oil as will cover all
these things, and somewhat more, and set them in the Sun ten days, which being
done, strain your oil from your Herbs, and your spices, and then infuse once
again as before with Herbs and Spices in like manner, add to this oil that
infused or strained, and bitter Almonds, and oil of Capers half a pint, then
take a quarter of a spoonful of the said oil, and put in your hands, your hands
being warm, rub them together, and anoint and rub the Patient grieved with
both your hands, the one on the right side, the other on the left, from the
loins down to the bottom of the belly, drawing your hands as hard as you can,
and make them to meet at the bottom of the belly, and continue in continual
rubbing about a quarter of an hour.

For a Burning or Scald.
Take a quantity of sheeps suet, the white of Hen dung, and fresh grease, boil
all these together, strain it, and anoint the party with a feather.

For the Emeroids and Piles.
Take juice of Elder, May-butter, and Deer-suet, melt them, letting the juice
and the butter simper, and then put the suet to them; make them into Pills, and
if you make a Suppository, you must put in more Deers suet.

For the Canker in the Mouth or Nose.
Take the ashes of green leaves of Holly, with half so much of the burnt powder
of Alum: blow with a quil into the place grieved, and it will help man, child,
or beast.

A Remedy for the Mother.
When the Fit begins to take them, take the powder of white Amber, and burn
it in a Chafindish of coals, and let them hold their mouths over it, and suck
in the smoke, and anoint their nostrils with the oil of Amber, and if they be
not with child, take 2 or 3 drops of the oil of Amber in White Wind warm or
cold, but the oil of Amber must be taken inward but once a day, and outward as
often as the fit takes them.

A Medicine for the Worms.
Take one pennyworth of Alloes, with the like quantity of Ox-gall, and
Mithridate, mix them together, and lay them on the Child's Navel upon a Plaster.

A Preservation against the Plague.
Take one dry Walnut, take off the shell and peel, cut it small, and with a
branch of Rue shred fine, and a little wine-vinegar and salt, put all into a
sliced Fig, take it up fasting, and then you may drink a little wormwood after
it, and go where you list.

A Pill for those that are infected.
Taker of Aloes-succatrina half an ounce, of Myrrh, and English Saffron, of
each a quarter of an ounce, beat them into small powder, with Malmsey, or a
little Sack, or Dioscoridon, make two or three small pills thereof, and take
them fasting.

A Poultess to break a Plague Sore.
Take a white Lilly-root, and sees it in a pennyworth of Linseed, and a pretty
quantity of Barrows grease, beat the Linseed first very soft, afterward beat
all together in a Mortar, make thereof a Plaster.

An Electuary for the Plague.
Take the weight of ten grains of Saffron, 2 ounces of the kernels of Walnuts,
2 or 3 Figs, 1 dram of Mithridate, and a few Sage leaves stamped together, with
a sufficient quantity of Pimpernel Water, make up all these together in a mass
or lump, and keep it in a glass or pot for your use, take the quantity of 12
grains fasting in the morning, and it will not only preserve from the
pestilence, but expel it from the infected.

Against a Tertian Ague.
Take Dandillion clean washed, stamp it, and put it in Beer, and let it stand
all night in the Beer, in the morning strain it, and put half a spoonful of
Treacle into it, make it lukewarm, and let the patient drink of it fasting upon
his well day, and walk upon it as long as he is able, this has been approved
good for an Ague that comes every second day.

Against the Wind.
Take Cummin seed, and steep them in a Sack 24 hours, dry them by the fire, and
hull them, then take Fennel seed, Carraway seed, and Annise seed, beat all
these together, and take every morning half a spoonful in Broth or Beer fasting.

Another.
Take Enula Campana, grate it, and drink half a spoonful fasting.

For the sting of an Adder.
Take a head of Garlic, and bruise it with some Rue, add some Honey thereto,
and if you will, some Treacle, and apply it to the place.

For the biting of a Dog.
Take Ragwort, chop it, and boil it with unwasht butter to an Ointment.

A Medicine for a woman that has a dead Child, or for the afterbirth after
deliverance.
Take Date-stones, dry them, and beat them to powder; then take Cummin seed,
Grain, and English Saffron, make them in powder, and put them all together in
like quantity, saving less of the Saffron than of the rest, then searce them
very finely, and when need is to drink it, take a spoonful at once, with a
little Malmsie, and drink it Milkwarm, it is good to bring forth a dead Child,
or for the after birth, or if the woman have any rising in her stomach, or
flushing in her face during her childbirth, the Date-stones with round holes
in the side, are the best; if you put a quantity of white Amber beaten amongst
the powder, it will be better.

To make the best Paracelsus Salve.
Take of Litharge, of Gold and Silver, of each 3 ounces, and put to it one
pound and half of good Sallet oil, and as much of Linseed oil, put it in a
large earthen vessel well leaded, of the fashion of a milk bowl, or a great
Basin, set it over a gentle fire, and keep it stirring till it begin to boil,
then put to it of red lead, and of Lapis Calaminaris, of each half a pound,
keep it with continual stirring, and let it boil 2 hours, or so long till it be
something thick, which you may know by dropping a little of it upon a cold
board or stone, then take a Skillet, and put into it a pound of yellow Wax, as
much black Rosin, half a pound of Gum-sandrach, of yellow Amber, Olibanum,
Myr^h, of Aloes Hepatica, of both the kinds of Aristolochias round, and long,
of every of these in fine powder searced, one ounce, of Mammir one ounce and a
half, of oil of Bays, half a pound, of oil of Juniper six ounces, dissolve all
these together in the aforesaid Skillet, and then put them to the former
Plaster, set it over a gentle fire; and keep it with stirring till it boil a
little. Then take your five Gums, Popanax, Galbanum, Sapagenum, Ammoniacum, and
Bdellium, of each of these three ounces, which must be dissolved in White Wind
Vinegar, and strained, and the Vinegar exasperated from them before you go
about the Plaster, let there be 3 ounces of each of them when they are thus
prepared, then when the Plaster has gently boiled, about half the bigness of
a Nutmeg at a time, continuing that order until all the Gums be in and
dissolved, then set it over the fire again, and let it boil a very little, but
before it boil, be sure that the Gums be all dissolved, for else it will run
into lumps and knots, after it has boiled a little, take it from the fire
again, and continue the stirring of it very carefully, and put it to these
things following, being in a readiness, take of both the Corals red and white,
of Mother of Pearl, of Dragons Blood, of Terra Lemnia, of white Vitriol, of
each of them 1 ounce, of Lapis haematitis, and of the Loadstone, of each of
them one ounce and a half, of the flowers of Antimony two drams, of Crocus
Martis two drams, of Camphire one ounce, of common Turpentine half a pound, mix
all these together, but first let those things that are to be pounded, be
carefully done, and fully searced, then put them all together among the former
things, and again set it over the fire with a moderate heat and gentle, to boil
till it be in the form of a plaster, which you may know by dropping it on a
cold piece of wood, or stone, or iron, you must also remember to keep it with
continual stir^ing from the beginning to the ending, when you make it up, let
your hands, and the place you roll it on, be anointed with the oil of Saint
John's Wort, and of each Worms and Juniper, Cammomil, and Roses together, wrap
it in Parchment or Leather, and keep it for your use.

Memorandum, That the Camphire be dissolved in the oil of Juniper, mix them
together with the Gum-sandrach, and put them in toward the latter end.

An Ointment for any strain in the Joints, or for any Sore.
Take 3 pound of fresh Butter unwashed, and set it into an Oven after the bread
be drawn out, and let it stand 2 or 3 hours, then take the clearest of the
Butter, and put into a Posnet, then take the tops of red Nettles, and chop them
very small, and put so many Nettles to the Butter as will be moistened with the
Butter, and so set it on the fire, and boil it softly 5 or 6 hours, and when it
is so boiled, put thereto half a pint of the best oil of Olive and then make it
boil a very little, and take it off, and strain it into an earthen pot, and
keep it for your use.

Mr. Ashley's Ointment.
Take six pound of May Butter unsalted, one quart of Sallet oil, four pound of
Barrows grease, one pound of the best Rosin, one pound of Turpentine, half a
pound of Frankincense; to this rate take these Herbs following, of each a
handful, videlicet, Smallage, Balm, Lorage, red Sage, Lavender,
Lavender-cotten, Herbgrace, Parsley, Comfrey, called Boneset, Sorrel, Laurel
leaves, Beech leaves, Lungwort, Marjorum, Rosemary, Mallows, Cammomil, Saint
John's wort, Plantain, Alheal, Chickweed, English Tobacco, or else Henbane,
Grunsel, Woundwort, Bettony, Egrimony, Carduus Benedictus, wild Wine, or
White Wind, called Brian, Adders Tongue, Mellilot drink all these Herbs clean,
wash them, strain them clean from the water, all these must be gathered after
the Sun rise, then stamp all these Herbs in a stone or wooden Mortar so small
as possible may be, then take your Rosin and beat it to powder with your
Frankincense, and melt them first alone, then put in your Butter, your Hogs
grease and oil, and when all is melted, put in your Herbs, and let them all
boil together half a quarter of an hour, then take it from the fire, and leave
stirring of it in no wise a quarter of an hour after, and in that time that it
is from the fire, put in your Turpentine, and 2 ounces of Verdigrease very
finely beaten to powder; and when you put in your Turpentine and Verdigrease,
stir it well, or else it will run over, and so stir it until it leave boiling:
then put it in an earthen pot, stopping the pot very close with a cloth and a
board on the top, and set it in a dunghill of horse muck 21 days, then take it
up and put it into a kettle, and let it boil a little, taking heed that it boil
not over, then strain all through a coarse cloth into an earthen or Gally pot,
and when all is strained, put to it half a pound of oil of Spike, and cover the
pot close until you use it, and when you use it, make it warm in winter, and
use it cold in summer.

An approved Medicine for an Ach in the Joints whatsoever.
Take half a pound of Rosin, half a pound of Frankincense, Olibanum and
Mastick, of each one ounce, Wax, Deers suet, Turpentine, of each 2 ounces,
Camphire 2 drams, beat the Olibanum, Mastick, Rosin and Frankincense, and
Camphire into powder, then put it in a brass Pan with a pottle of White Wind,
and put in the Wax and Deer suet into it, and when it does boil, put in your
Turpentine, and let it boil a quarter of an hour, then take it from the fire
and let it stand and cool until the next day, then work it with your hand to
work out the Wine, anointing your hands first with oil, then make it up in
rowls, then as need will serve, take thereof and spread it with a warm knife
upon the fleshy side of a Sheeps skin, and apply it warm to the grieved place,
and take it not off until it fall off of it self, pricking the plaster full of
holes.

A Searcloth to be used against Carbuncles, red Sores, Biles Swellings, or any
hot causes.
Take a wine pint of pure Sallet oil, and put into an earthen pot that is very
large, and set it upon a very soft fire of Charcoal, and when it begins to
boil, stir it with a Hasel stick of one years shooting, then put into it 2
ounces of Venice Soap that is pure white, half a pound of red Lead, one quarter
of a pound of white Lead, letting it boil very softly, stirring it continually
with this Hazel stick for the space of 2 or 3 hours, you shall know when it is
boiled by this; drop one drop thereof on a board, and it will be stiff when it
is enough, then take it from the fire, and put into it half an ounce of oil of
Bays, then let it boil again a little, then let your clothes be but of a
reasonable size to dip them in it, then you must have two sticks, which must be
hollow in the middle, to strip the clothes through, then lay them abroad until
they be cold upon a board, then roll them up and keep them, and when you use
them, lay them upon the place grieved, and let them lie 12 hours, then take it
off and wipe it, and lay the other side, and let that lie as long.

A Plague Water to be taken three times, for the first helps not.
Take a Gallon of White Wind, Ale or Beer, and to that quantity take a quarter
of a pound of each of these Herbs following, Rose Water a quarter of a pint,
Rue, Sage, Vervain, Egrimony, Bettony, Celendine, Carduus, Angelica, Pimpernel,
Scabious, Valerian, Wormwood, Dragons, Mugwort, all these Herbs must you shred
in gross together, and steep in the aforesaid liquor, the night before you
distill it in a Rose Water still, and then keep the first water by it self,
being the weaker, and therefore fitter for Children; it helps all Fevers,
Agues and Plagues, being thus taken, seven spoonfuls or thereabout of the
strongest blood warm, and give it to the party to drink in an Ague or Fever, an
hour before the fit come, and so to sweat, either by exercise, or in your bed,
but your stomach must be empty, and if it be taken for the Plague, then put it
into a little Diascordium or Mithridate.

A Defensive Plaster.
Take the white of an Egg, and Bole Armoniack, spread it on leather.

A Syrrup for a Cold.
Take Colts foot Water, Hyssop water and Honey, put Liquorish, Annise seeds and
Elecampane, put thereto the juice of Fennel, and boil them.

To stay the bleeding of a wound.
Take Charcoal red hot out of the fire, and beat it to powder.

A Poultess.
Take Milk, Oatmeal, and red Rose leaves and a little Deers suet.

For the Running of the Reins.
Take Cups of Acrons, and grate them; and grate some Nutmeg: put this in Beer,
and drink it.

For a Poultess.
Take Linseed and beat it to powder, boil it in Milk with Mallows and Sheeps
suet.

For a Blast.
Take a good quantity of Vervin, and boil it in Milk, and wash the blast
therewith very well, then bind the herb very close to it some few hours, after
wash it again, the Milk being warmed, and so bind it up again, the oftener it is
done the better, and in a day or two it will be well, if it be taken before it
fester.

Another.
Take a good quantity of Vericon being green, with as much Dill, chop them
together, and boil them in Boars grease as much as will cover them, and for
want thereof, so much May butter, and when they be boiled together, let them
stand 2 or 3 days, and then boil it a little, and so strain it through a cloth.

A Balsamum.
Take in the latter end of September good store of Honey suckle berries, and
put them in a body of a glass Still stopped, and set it in hot horse-dung 8
days, distill it in Balneo, then when you have drawn the water forth, pour the
water into the stuff again, stop it close, and put it into the dung 24 hours,
then set it in ashes, and distill both water and oil with a great fire, as much
as will come forth, and at last separate the water from the oil in Balneo.

To make an excellent oil of Hypericon.
Take flowers, leaves and seed of Hypericon as much as you list, beat them
together, and infuse them in White Wind, that they may be covered therewith,
and set them in the Sun for ten days, then put thereto so much oyl-Olive as all
the rest do weigh, and let it stand ten days more in the Sun, but look that you
weigh the Oil to know how much it is, then put thereto for every pound of Oil
two ounces of Turpentine, and 1 dram of Saffron, and of Nutmegs, and Cloves of
each half an ounce, of Myrrh and Rosin of each 1 ounce, and of the root of
Briony 2 ounces, put them all in a Vessel of glass, and mix them well together,
and set them in a Vessel of hot water, and then set thereto a head of glass,
and Receiver well shut, and boil it so long until no more will distill from it,
which will be about 24 hours, then take it out and strain it whilst it is hot,
and keep it in a Vessel of Glass, and when you first use it, heat it well, and
apply it upon a wound without using any tent at all; this is excellent for a
green wound, especially if there be veins, sinews, or bones offended or cut, it
keeps wounds from putrefaction, it cleanses them and eases pain, and does
incarnate and skin them, it helps bruises, pains, aches, or swelling in any
part, and is wonderful good against venom or poison.

For the Falling sickness.
Take the roots of single Pionie, grate them, drink them, and wear some of them
about your neck.

For the kibed Heels.
Take a Turnip, make a hole in the top of it, take out some of the pith, infuse
into that hole oil of Roses, then stop close the hole, roast the Turnip under
the embers; when it is soft apply it plaisterwise warm to the kibe, bind it
fast.

Lapis Prunellae.

A Medicine for sore Eyes.
Take one pound of Saltpeter, boil it in a Goldsmiths earthen pot, with a very
hot fire round about it, let it boil till it be very black and melted, then
take a quarter of an ounce, or 6 pennyweight of Roch-allum, and a quarter of an
ounce of Brimstone, break them and put them in the Saltpeter by little at once
as it boyleth, and let it burn till the flame go out of it self, then pour it
in a brass Ladle, or into a Chafer, and so let it stand till it be cold, and
when you will use it, scrape it very fine with a knife, and put a little of it
to the sore eyes, hold down the eyelids till the pain be gone, then let the
water drop out of the eye: This Medicine takes away the Pearl, Pin and Web in
the eye, and all sores and bloodshed, it also helps the Toothach, being put
into the hollow Tooth, with a little lint, if the Tooth be not hollow, rub it
outward: Finally, it helps a stinking breath, being eaten in the morning
fasting.

For a Scald-head.
Take a handful of Grovers shreds, and a handful of Dock-roots, the pith taken
out, and boil them in strong Ale until they be reasonable thick, and anoint
the head therewith.

For a Bloody Flux.
Take Rubarb and roast it, then grind it to powder, and take as much as will
lie upon a sixpence, and keep warm that day, the next day eat conserve of
Roses, mixed with Coral, and drink that day if you will, posset Ale made of
Cammomile.

For the Itch.
Take a pound of Butter unwashed and unsalted, 3 good handfuls of red Sage, and
as much Brimstone beaten into powder, as a Walnut, boil these well together,
and strain it, and put in half an ounce of Ginger beaten small.

For sore Eyes.
Take new Hens-dung out of the nest, and put it into an Oven almost cold, let
it lie there all night, and take the white of it, and beat it being dried, and
take as much of the powder of Ginger finely beaten, and put to that half in
like quantity of Sugar Candy, all which all which must be beaten very well and
searced, then put it into the sore eyes every night, and in the morning, and
wash it out with water.

A Water for sore Eyes.
Take a pint of fair running water, of wild Dasies, and 3 leaved grace, of each
a good handful, wash the herbs very clean in a Cullender, and put them into a
clean skillet of water, let them boil very well over the fire, until the water
look green, then take a little piece of Alum and put into the water, and when
it is boiling then taste of the water, and when it sticks to the mouth, take as
much honey as will make it very sweet, then after it has boiled a little
while, take it off the fire; strain it and drop a little every night into the
eyes.

An approved application against any Surfeit.
Take the bottom of a Muncornloaf, cut it about an inch thick, and as broad as
the palm of your hand, toast it very well, then take of Sallade Oil and
Claret Wine of each a like quantity, as much as will wet the toast well and
thoroughly, warm it hot, then put the toast into it, when the toast is well
soaked, strew the powder of Cloves and Mace hereupon thick, then apply it to
the stomach of the Patient as warm as he can endure it, it will purge upwards
and downwards as often as you apply a fresh toast made as aforesaid, that may
be applied so often as any one finds their stomach ill at ease, although then
it will not purge, except in case of surfeit.

A Medicine against the Plague.
Take of the root called Set-well the quantity of half a Walnut, and grate it,
of Treacle green, one good spoonful, of fair water 3 spoonfuls, make all these
more than lukewarm; and so drink them off in bed, and sweat six or seven hours,
and in your sweat drink small Posset Ale made of small drink as you need, but
not till an hour and half after, the taking of the Potion, and it will bring
forth the Plague sore. If you cast the Medicine, you may take it the second,
third, or fourth time, by the whole, half, or less measure as your stomach will
bear it: if any do take it and thereupon happen presently amendment, or a
rising or sore, you may think it to be the sickness, for the nature of the
Medicine is to prevent the Plague, and in others to expel the Sore, if it be
not taken too late, in which case the stomch will not brook it easily, and
after two or 3 times taking, if you minister it to any, let it be at their
first sickness, lest if their disease be other, they may receive (...) thereby.

Jelly of Frogs.
Take the Jelly of Frogs in March and still it in a Glass-still, it is a good
medicine to stop blood, and for the heat and redness of the face, and good to
cure green wounds.

For the Toothache.
Take Spearmints, and Ground Ivy, of each a handful, and a good spoonful of
Bay Salt, stamp all these very well together, and boil them in a pint of the
strongest Vinegar that you can get, let these boil all together until they come
to a quarter of a pint, then strain it, and put it into a glass, and stop it
very close, when your teeth do ache, take a spoonful of it blood warm, and hold
it in your mouth on that side the pain is.

To make the Teeth stand fast.
Take Roots of Vervain in cold wine, and wash the Teeth therewith.

For the perilous Cough.
Take white Hore-hound, stamp it, wring out the juice, and mingle it with
honey, and sees it, and give it to the sick to drink, or else Sack, and
Garlic seed, and roast it in the fire, and take away the peelings and eat the
rest with Honey, or else take Sage, Rue, Cummin, and powder of Pepper, and
sees all these together in honey, and make thereof an Electuary, and take
thereof a spoonful in the morning, and another at night.

For a man that has no taste in Meat or Drink.
Take a pottle of clear water, and a good handful of Dandilion, and put it in
an earthen pot, and sees it till it come to a quart, and then take out the
herbs, and put in a good quantity of white Sugar, till you think it be somewhat
pleasant, and then put it into a Vessel wherein it may cool, and then take 20
or 30 Almonds, blanch them and beat them in a mortar, and when the water is
cold put it to the Almonds, and strain it through a clean Cipris bag without
compulsion, and if it be thick let it run through again, and so keep it in a
vessel, and drink of it often, at all times as you please.

To preserve a man from the Plague.
Take Aloe Apaticum, and Aloe Succatrine, fine Cinnamon and Mirth, of each of
them 3 drams, Cloves, Mace, Lignum Aloe, Mastick, Bole Armoniack, of each of
them half a dram, let all these things be well stamped in a Mortar, then mingle
them together, and after keep them in some close vessel, and take of it every
morning 2 penny weight, in half a glass full of White Wind, with a little
water, and drink it in the morning at the dawning of the day, and so may you by
the grace of God, go safely into all infection of the air and Plague.

For a Tetter or Ring-worm.
Take Mercury a quarter of an ounce, Camphire 1 penny weight make them into
powder, and rub them in a fair Porrenger, then take and mix them with the water
of the Wine 4 or 5 spoonfuls, stir them well together, then put as much more
water to that, then strain it through a cloth, and take Poppey seeds one
quarter of an ounce, beat that in a stone Mortar, with a spoonful of water of
the wine, putting a little and a little till you have spent the quantity of a
pint, then put to it half an ounce of the Milk of Cokernut, so mix them well
together with your Receipt, and strain them as you make Almond Milk through a
fair cloth, then keep it in a glass for your use.

To keep ones body loose whenever you need.
Take two ounces of syrrup of Roses, 1 ounces of Seen, one pennyworth of Annise
seeds, one stick of Liquorish, one pint of Posternwater, sees them all
together till it sees to half a pint, then strain them forth, then boil the
two ounces of syrrup of Roses, and drink it warm.

For a red Face.
Take Brimstone that is whole, and Cinnamon of either of them an even
proportion by weight, beat them into small powder, searce it through a fine
cloth upon a sheet of white paper, to the quantity of an ounce or more, and so
by even proportions in weight mingle them together in clean clarified Capons
grease, and temper them well together, until they be well mollified, and then
put in them a little Camphire to the quantity of a bean, and so put the whole
confection in a glass.

For a young Child to make Water.
Boil Organy in fair water, and lay it warm to the child's Navel.

A Medicine for the falling of the Uvula into the throat.
Take a red Colwort leaf, whereof cut away the middle rind, then put the leaf
into a paper, and let it be burnt in hot Embers or Ashes, then take the leaf
out, and lay it hot on the crown of the bare head, and it will draw it up into
his place, and rid you of your pain.

A Medicine for the heat of the soles of the feet, that comes by them or blood.
Take a quantity of Snails of the Garden and boil them in stale Urine, then let
the Patient bathe and set his feet therein, and using that often, he shall be
cured.

Gascon's own Powder.
Take of powder of Pearl, of red Corral, of Crabs eyes, of Hearts horn, and
white Amber, of each one ounce, beat them into fine powder, and searce them,
then take so much of the black toes of the Crabs claws as of all the rest of
the powders, for that is the chief worker, beat them, and searce them finely as
you do the rest, then weigh them severally, and take as much of the toes as you
do of all the rest of the five powders, and mingle them well together, and make
them up in balls with jelly of Hartshorn, whereinto put or infuse a small
quantity of Saffron to give them color, then let them lie till they be dry and
fully hard, and keep them for your use.

The Crabs are to be gotten in May or September, before they be boiled.

The dose is 10 or 12 grains in Dragon-water, Carduus water, or some other
cordial water.

The Apothecaries in their composition of it, use to put in a dram of good
Oriental Bezar to the other powders, as you may see in the prescription
following.

This is thought to be the true composition invented by Gascon, and that the
Bezar, Musk, and Ambergreece, were added after by some for curiosity, and that
the former will work without them as effectually as with them.

The Apothecaries Gascon Powder, with the use.
Take of Pearls, white Amber, Hartshorn, eyes of Crabs, and white Corral, of
each half an ounce; of black thighs of Crabs calcined two ounces, to every
ounce of this powder put in a dram of Oriental Bezar; reduce them all into very
fine powder, and searce them, and with Hartshorn jelly, with a little Saffron
put therein, make it up into a paste, and make therewith Lozenges or Trochisces
for your use.

You must get your Crabs for this powder about May, or in September before they
shall be boiled, when you have made them, let them dry and grow hard in a dry
air, neither by fire nor Sun.

Their dose is ten or twelve grains, as before prescribed in the former page.

The Powder prescribed by the Doctors in their last London Dispensatory 1650.
called the Powder of Crabs claws.
Take the prepared Pearls, eyes or stones of Crabs, of red Coral, or white
Amber, of Hartshorn, of Oriental Bezar-stone, of each half an ounce, of the
power of the black tops of the Crabs claws to the weight of all the former;
make them all into powder, according to Art, and with jelly made with the skin
or casting of our Vipers, make it up into small Tablets, or Trochisces which
you must warily ^ry, as before prescribed, and reserve for your use.

The Countess of Kents Powder, good against all malignant and Pestilent
Diseases, French Pox, Small Pox, Measels, Plague, Pestilence, malignant or
scarlet Fevers, good against Melancholy decoction of Spirits, twenty or thirty
grains thereof being exhibited in a little warm Sack, or Hartshorn Jelly to a
man, and half as much, or twelve grains to a child.
Take of the Magistery of Pearls, of Crabs eyes prepared, of white Amber
prepared, Hartshorn, Magistery of white Coral: of Lapis Contra Yarvam, of each
a like quantity, to these powders infused, put of the black tops of the great
claws of Crabs, the full weight of the rest, beat these all into very fine
powder, and searce them through a fine Lawn searce, to every ounce of this
powder add a dram of true Oriental Bezar, make all these up into a lump, or
mass, with the jelly of Hartshorn, and color it with Saffron, putting thereto
a scruple of Ambergreece, and a little Musk also finely powdered, and dry them
(made up into small Trochisces) neither by fire, nor Sun, but by a dry air, and
you may give to a man twenty grains of it, and to a child twelve grains.

The Virtue of a Root called Contra Yerva, being made into a fine Powder.
1. It withstands the Plague being taken in Treacle-water.

2. It is good in all Pestilent diseases, taken in posset drink with Saffron.

3. It is good against a Fever, taken in Carduus water.

4. It is a great Antidote against all Poisons taken in Sallet oil.

5. It does cure the bitting of a mad Dog, drunk in Rose Vinegar, and then
drink nothing else but spring water during the cure.

6. It causes a speedy delivery, given in Balm-water, Bettony water, or in
burnt wine.

7. It does take away the afterthrows, given in the same liquors.

8. It is good Cordial in all fits of the Mother given in Rue-water.

9. It is very sovereign in swouning fits, given in Sack, or Borrage water.

10. It is very powerful to withstand all melancholy, given in Sack.

11. It does help Convulsions in Children given in spring water.

12. It helps the Worms given in Goats milk.

13. It is good for a short breath, given in Rue-water.

14. It helps the Head-pain, given in Rue-water, or Rosemary-water.

15. It helps the yellow Jaundise, given in Celendine water.

16. It is very powerful in the Palsy, given in Sage-water.

17. It is a good Antidote against the Gout, given in Sage-water.

18. It withstandeth the growing of the Stone in the Reins, given in Rhenish
wine.

19. It causes a good and quiet sleep taken in White Wind.

20. It is a great preserver of Health, and means of long life, taken sometimes
in Mede.

21. It may be used as a Treacle or Bezar against Surfeits.

22. It is a general good upon all occasions, and may be given at all times,
when you do not know what the disease is; in any of the aforesaid liquors.

The Dose for a man or woman is from one scruple to two scruples, and to a boy
or girl twelve or fourteen grains in convenient liquors.

THE EPISTLE.
Friend,
BEing given to understand, that you were Reprinting the Countess of Kents
Manual; I thought good to communicate unto you, for the more accomplishment of
your next Impression, the Virtues of some select Cordial Spirits, of very great
use in weak and sickly Persons, which were first composed by Sir Walter
Rawleigh, during his Imprisonment in the Tower, and dispersed by him to diverse
worthy Personages, in their several occasions and necessities, and were
imparted to me by Captain Samuel King, who lived long time with him in the
Tower, and in his Expeditions; this King being my loving friend, and
School-fellow both in Canterbury and Westminster Schools. I have also inserted
hereunto certain Experiments of Gascons powder, or the Countesses, for their
operations are much of the same nature, which have many times with very happy
success been tried, upon several persons by my self and diverse others by my
directions, assuring my self it will be of very great use and benefit of such
persons as shall have need of such helps and comforts, and so I rest,

Your Friend W. J.

The Virtues of Aqua Bezar.
IT is good against contagious diseases, as Plague, Purples, spotted Fevers,
Smallpox, and Measels.

The order to take it, is with Carduus Benedictus, or Angelica in posset Ale,
and so sweat moderately upon the taking of it. It is good against Surfeits, and
eases the stomach oppressed with wind, crude phlegm, and superfluities, and
helps digestion.

The dose is from two or three spoonfuls at one time.

The Virtues of Spirit of Clary.
It is good to restore one in any weakness, chiefly of the back: It preserves
against the Consumption and Phthisick; it comfort the heart, and increases
radical moisture. It also strengthens Child bearing women after their
delivery.

The dose is one or two spoonfuls morning and evening.

The Virtue of Aqua Mariae.
It is good for all infirmities of the Spleen and to open the obstructions
thereof, it comfort the vital parts, and is good against all passions of the
heart; it preserves the meat in the stomach from putrefaction; it helps
digestion, and expels wind.

The dose is one spoonful at one time.

The Virtues of Flowers of Rosemary.
It is good against all infirmities of the stomach, and to suppress all
offensive fumes rising up from thence to the head, keeping them down, and
helps memory, it opens all stopping of the Liver and Milt, it preventeth
Vertigo, Scotomia, Palsies, Apoplexies, diseases of that kind arising from cold
Humors, it breaks wind, and eases the Cholick.

The dose is 1 spoonful at 1 time.

The Virtues of Spirit of Mint.
It is good for the stomach, and strengthens the retentive faculty, good
against vomiting, and all passions of the heart, it comfort the vital
spirits, and is good against the Consumption, it expels wind, and helps
digestion, and is an infallible help for all Melancholy.

The dose is from one to two spoonfuls.

The Virtues of Aqua Theriacalis.
It is good against all Diseases of the Spleen whatsoever; It preventeth and
helps contagions, and sudden oppressions and qualms of the heart.

The dose is one spoonful to prevent, and 3 to the infected, who ought to sweat
after taking it.

The Virtues of Spirits of Saffron.
It is good to comfort the vital Spirits, passions, trembling, and pensiveness
of the heart, and helps all malignity oppressing it, and expels wind,
suppresseth rheums which arise from the Spleen, and go up to the head, and
opens the obstructions of it: it is excellent against all melancholy, and
very good for women in Travail, so it comfort and hasteneth delivery.

The dose is morning and evening one spoonful, for three days together.

Virtues of Spirit of Roses.
It is good to open the obstruction of the Lungs, and preventeth Consumptions
and other infirmities of that nature; it preserves from putrefaction, and
keeps the breath from being corrupted.

The dose is a spoonful at noon, at four in the afternoon, and as much at bed
time.

The Virtue of the Spirit of Diasatyrion.
The Spirit made of Diasatyrion magis gretum, prescribed in the last London
Dispensatory, comfort and much restores decayed nature, strengthens the
weak back, increases seed, and advances generation, being taken thrice a day
a spoonful at a time, that is, in the morning fasting, at four in the
afternoon, and last at bedward, with this caution, that the weak parties
abstain from venereal acts till after their first sleep.

The dose is one spoonful at one time.

The Virtues of the Spirit of Strawberries.
It is excellent good to purify and cleanse the blood; it preserves from, and
also cures the yellow Jaundies, and deoppilateth the obstruction of the
Spleen; it keeps the body in a sweet temperateness, and refreshes the
spirits.

The dose is a spoonful at a time, when need requires any of those helps for
the aforesaid diseases.

Spirits of Confection of Alkermes its Virtues.
It is an excellent comforter of the Spirits vital, natural, and animal, in
weak and delicate persons, and against all trembling pensiveness, and sudden
qualms of the heart.

The Dose is one spoonful at one time.

The Virtues of Spirit of Comfrey.
It has all the virtues which Spirit of Clary has, only it is of greater
efficacy in inward hurts, bruises and ruptures.

The Dose is one spoonful at one time.

Extract of Ambergreece.
Take a dram of Ambergreece, grind it very small on a Painters stone, then
put it in a boult-head, then take of the best Spirit of Wine, either Canary or
Maliga-Sack, half a pound, of Spirit of Clary two ounces, mingle them well
together, and pour of the Menstrua one pint to this proportion of Amber, see
them to digest in a gentle Balneo about 8 hours, shaking it together 3 or 4
times, then take it out, and being cold, pour it forth, and put almost as much
more of the mixed spirit, digested as before in a gentle heat by Balneo, then
put it forth to the first extracted, and add half as much more Spirits the
third time, and digest it again, and then have you extracted all the special
part of the Amber, and leave nothing but a black dead earth of no value.

Then take a pint of the spirit of what Herb you will use, and dissolve therein
1 pound of pure white sugar candy, or at the least 12 ounces, very finely
powdered and searced through a fine Searcer, for the speedier resolution
thereof. It is best to dissolve it cold; this resolution must be twice filtered
through a thin cap paper to make it very perfectly clear; then take 3 parts of
this dulcified Spirit, to one of your Extracts of Amber drawn with spirit of
Wine, then shake them well together, and let them stand in a square glass very
close stopped, until it shall be perfectly clear, 1 dram of this Extraction of
Amber will serve to dulcifie and make fit 2 quarts of spirits of Mints or
Clary, or the like, and give it a most excellent taste and efficacious virtues.

Several Experiments made of the Countess of Kents, or of Gascons Powder, by a
Professor of Physic.
1. A Child aged about 5 years, troubled much with phlegm, and drawing on (as
the Parents conceived) to his end, with 10 grains of this powder exhibited in a
specifical vehicle to the proportion of 1 spoonful, about 7 of the clock at
night, with the like Dose exhibited the next morning, was within 3 days space
perfectly recovered, and went abroad.

2. A Child aged about fourteen years, being suddenly surprised with dangerous
Fits, and trembling of the heart, with 12 grains of this Powder exhibited in a
spoonful of Aqua Theriacalis, was that very day recovered.

3. A Stationers Child aged about five years being suddenly taken so ill, that
the Parents feared the life of their Child, with ten grains of this Powder
exhibited in a spoonful of Cordial spirit, being laid down, and well covered
(we suspected it would prove to be the small Pox) became within 2 or 3 hours
somewhat cheerful: and with this medicine continued once a day, the Pox broke
forth, and the Child mended.

4. A Boy aged about sixteen, being taken with sudden qualms about his stomach
and heart, with ten grains of this Powder exhibited in a spoonful of Doctor
Mountfords water upon his fit, and the like quantity exhibited again when he
went to bed, was the next day recovered.

5. A Child about three years old, being troubled with grievous torments and
gripings in the belly, with wind, with 9 grains of this Powder, exhibited with
ten drops of special Oil against the Cholick, in a spoonful of stomach Water,
was eased in few hours.

6. A Child about 7 years old, being troubled with Convulsion-Fits, with ten
grains of this powder, mixed with spirit of Castor, in a few spoonfuls of black
Cherry water, anointing the two neck veins near the ears, with a few drops of
oil of Amber and Cloves, was suddenly recovered of his Fit.

7. A Gentlewoman near forty years old, being oppressed with crude and flatuous
humors, so that her friends thought her departing, was with twelve grains of
this powder, and two drops of a Cordial Oil, exhibited in a spoonful of Cordial
water, being had to bed, within three days recovered, and followed her
Domestic business.

8. A Youth about twenty years old, much oppressed with wind and crudities of
the stomach, with 12 grains of this powder, exhibited in 2 drops of specifical
Cholick oil, as in the fifth experiment, with a Cordial water was speedily
recovered.

9. A young Maid about Eighteen years old, troubled with fits of the Mother,
and Convulsive fits, with twelve grains of this powder given her in a few
spoonfuls of Piony water, gathered and distilled in due season, with a drop of
oil of Cinnamon, and two of Amber mingled together being held upright before a
warm fire, within four hours recovered out of her fit, and went up to her
chamber (though her teeth were set in her head, and small appearance of life,
but that only her feet were warm, was discovered in her.)

10. A Gentlewoman aged about fifty, being very much troubled with flatuous and
crude humors oppressing the stomach, with sixteen grains of Gascon powder, and
with 3 drops of oil of Oranges, duly prepared, exhibited in an ounce of Aqua
Theriacalis, being well shaken and mingled together, being exhibited at two
several times, that is at night when she went to bed, disposing for rest, and
betimes the next morning, found much ease and comfort, and gained some quiet
rest that night, and shortly recovered.

11. A young Woman aged about four and twenty, not without some suspicion of
the Plague, having a rumor long while arising on her groin, with 3 several
Doses of Gascons Powder, exhibited at 3 evenings when she disposed for rest; by
12 grains for every dose in a spoonful of Treacle water, drinking every morning
a spoonful of spirit of Saffron for those 3 days together, was perfectly
recovered, and followed her domestic business.

These and many other Experiments have I with good success tried, and with Gods
blessing recovered diverse several Patients.

This Powder is good against small Pox, Measles, spotted or purple Fever,
exhibited in specifical waters fit for their several diseases; It is good in
swoonings and passions of the heart, arising from malignant vapors, or old
causes, as also in the Plague or Pestilent Fevers; always observing to keep the
persons upright warm, and well covered after their taking it.

The Dose of this powder in Children, is from eight to twelve grains, in
persons more aged, from twelve to fourteen grains, but exhibit the Dose twice
or thrice if need require. In the Plague you may use a greater quantity, with
such medicines as are prescribed in the Child-bearers Cabinet, and it will not
be amiss to mingle it with some Aqua Theriacalis.

The Composition of the Oil called Oleum Magistrale, said to be invented by one
named Aparithus, a Spaniard; being special good to cleanse and consolidate
wounds, especially in the Head.
Take a quart of the best White Wind you can get; of pure Oil of Olives three
pound, then put thereto these flowers and herbs following: of the flowers and
leaves of Hypericon half a pound; of Carduus Benedictus, of Valerian, of the
leaf Sage, of each a quarter of a pound; if it be possible, take the leaves and
flowers of every one of these, then let them all steep 24 hours in the
aforesaid Wine and Oil, the next day boil them in a pot well nealed, or in a
copper vessel over a soft fire, until such time as the Wine be all consumed,
stirring it always with a spattle: after you have thus done, take it from the
fire, and strain it, and put to the straining a pound and a half of good Venice
Turpentine, then boil it again upon a soft fire the space of a quarter of an
hour, then put thereunto of Olibanum five ounces, of Myrrh 3 ounces, of Sanguis
Draconis one ounce, and so let it boil till the Incense and Myrrh be melted,
then take it off, and let it stand until it be cold, then put it into a glass
bottle, and set it 8 or 10 days in the Sun, and keep it for your use.

This Oil, the older it is, the better it is, it must be applied to the Patient
wounded as hot as may be endured, first washing the wound with White Wind,
boiled with a handful of Incense to comfort, and wiping it clean with a linen
cloth before you dress it, which must be if it come by any bruisings or bitings
twice a day, that is about eight of the clock in the morning in winter, and at
summer about nine in the morning, and about four in the afternoon, but if they
be green wounds, you shall not need to change it again until the next day,
neither need the Patient to observe any precise diet.

ADDITIONS.
A rare Searcloth, with the Virtues.
TAke of oil Olive one pound and a half, red Lead one pound and a half, of
white Lead one pound, Castle-soap 4 ounces, put your oil Olive in a Pipkin, and
put thereto your Oil of Bays, and your Castle soap: sees these over a gentle
fire of embers, till it be well mingled, and melted together, then strew a
little red Lead and White, being mingled together in powder, still stirring it
with a spatler of Wood, and so strew in more of your Lead by little and little
till all be in, stirring it still by the bottom to keep it from burning, for an
hour and half together, then make the fire somewhat bigger, till their redness
be turned into a gray color, but you must not leave stirring it till the
matter be turned into a perfect black color, as pitch, then drop a little upon
a wooden Trencher, and if it cleave not to the Trencher, nor your Finger, it is
enough; then take the long linen clothes, and dip them therein, and make your
Sear-cloth thereof: they will keep twenty years; let your powder of your Lead
be searsed very fine, and shred the soap small.

The Virtues of this Searcloth, are;
Being laid to the stomach, it does provoke Appetite, and takes away any pain
in the stomach; being laid to the belly it is a present remedy for the Cholick;
being laid to the back, it is a present Remedy for the Flux, and running of the
Reins, heat of the Kidneys, and weakness of the Back; it helps all Swellings
and bruises, takes away aches, it breaks Fellons and other Imposthumes, and
heals them, it draws out any running Humor, and helps them without
breaking of the skin, and being applied to the Fundament helps any disease
there; it helps all old sores, and will be made in six hours.

For a Surfeit.
Take 3 pints of Muskadine, one handful of Rue, one handful of red Sage; boil
these together 3 or 4 walmes, take a quarter of an ounce of Nutmegs, half an
ounce of Ginger, 2 or 3 corns of long Pepper, beat them all together, and boil
them until the 3 pints come to a quart; strain it, and put in it a quarter of
an ounce of Mithridate, half an ounce of London-Treacle, a quarter of a pint of
strong Angelica water, all these being well mixed together, put them up in a
Glass.

It is good for one that has surfeited to take 3 or 4 spoonfuls, keeping them
very warm in bed, the same quantity taken is good against the Smallpox, or
Measles.

It is good against the wind, or pain in the stomach, taking one spoonful in
the morning, or any Infection.

An excellent Receipt against a Cough of a Consumption.
Take a quarter of a pound of the best Honey, a quarter of a pint of
Conduit-water, boil them as long as any white scum arises, and take it off,
then take a quarter of a pound of the best blew Currants, put them on the fire
in a pint of fair water: boil them until they be tender, then pour the water
from them, and bruise them through a hair Sive, and put that Juice, and Honey
together: add to it one ounce of the powder of Liquorish, one ounce of the
powder of Annise seeds; mix all these together, and put them in a Gally-pot,
and when it is cold tie it up; the party troubled may take of it upon the point
of a knife morning or evening, as often as the Cough takes them.

Lucantelion's Balsom, admirable for Wounds, and many other things.
Take of Venice Turpentine a pound, oil Olive three pints, yellow Wax half a
pound, of natural Balsome one ounce, Oil of St. John's wort one ounce, of red
Saunders powdered an ounce, six spoonfuls of Sack: cut the Wax and melt it on
the fire, and then let it catch the fire, take it off, put in the Turpentine to
it, having first washed the Venice Turpentine thrice with Damask Rose Water,
and having mingled your Sallet oil with the Sack, put also the oil to them, and
put them all on the fire, and stir it till it begin to boil, for if it boil
much, it will run over speedily, then suffer it to cool for a night, or more,
until the water and wine be sunk all to the bottom, then make some holes in the
stuff, that the water may run out of it, which being done, put it over the fire
again, putting to it the Balsom and the oil of St. John's wort, and when it is
melted, then put the Sanders to it: stir it well that it may incorporate, and
when it first begins to boil, take it off the fire, and stir it the space of 2
hours, till it be grown thick, then put it up, and keep it for your use as most
precious, for thirty or forty years, or more.

The Virtues.
1. It is good to heal any wound inward or outward, being squirted warm into
the inward wound; being applied to an outward wound with fine lint, or Linen,
anointing also those parts thereabouts, it not only takes away the pain, but
also keeps it from any inflammation, and also draws forth all broken bones,
or any other thing that might putrify or fester it, so that the brains or
inwards, as the Liver, Guts, or heart be not troubled, it will heal it in 4 or
5 days dressing, so that nothing be applied thereunto.

2. It also heals any Burning and Scalding, and heals also any bruise or
cut, being first anointed with the said Oil, and a piece of linen cloth or
lint dipped in the same, being warmed and laid unto the place, it will heal it
without any scar remaining.

3. It helps the headache by anointing the Temples and Nostrils therewith.

5. It is good against the Wind-Cholick, or stitch in the Side, applied thereto
warm with hot clothes, morning and evening together a quarter of an ounce.

5. It helps the biting of a mad Dog, or any other Beast.

6. It is good against the Plague, anointing only the Nostrils, and the Lips
therewith in the morning before you go forth.

7. It also heals a Fistula, or Ulcer, be it never so deep, in any part of
the body, being applied as aforesaid is directed for a Cut.

8. It is good against Worms, or Canker, being used as in a Cut, but it will
require longer time to help them.

9. It is good for one infected with the Plague, or Measles, so as it be
presently taken in warm Broth, the quantity of a quarter of an ounce 4 mornings
together, and sweat upon it.

10. It likewise helps Digestion, anointing the Navel and Stomach therewith
when the party goes to bed, it will stanch any Blood of a green Wound, put in
a plaster of lint on it, and tie it very hard.

11. The quantity of a Nutmeg in Sack blood-warm, and sweat therein, it
brings forth all manner of clotted Blood, and takes away all Aches.

12. It also heals the rose Gout and Scurvy.

13. It helps all pains in Women's breasts, all chops or Wolf that comes with
a bruise.

14. It helps the Smallpox, being anointed therewith without any Scar.

15. It helps all Sprains and Swellings, and indeed I cannot tell what comes
amiss unto it.

A most certain and proved Medicine against all manner of Pestilence and
Plague, be it never so vehement.
Take an Onion, and cut it overthwart, then make a little hole in either piece,
the which you shall fill with fine Treacle and set the pieces together as they
were before: after this, wrap them in a sine wet linen cloth, putting it to
roast, and covered in the embers or ashes, and when it is roasted enough, press
out all the juice of it, and give the Patient a spoonful, and immediately he
shall feel himself better, and shall without fail be healed.

How to make the Ointment of Tobacco, Jobertus.
Take of green Tobacco-leaves two pound, of fresh Hogs grease diligently washed,
one pound, bruise the herbs, and infuse it a whole night in red Wine, and then
let it boil with the Hogs grease with a gentle fire, until the wine be all
consumed: then strain it, and add to the ointment the juice of Tobacco one
pound, good and clear Rosin four ounces, then boil it again till the juice be
consumed, adding toward the end, of round Birth-wort-roots in powder two
ounces, new Wax four ounces, or so much as is sufficient to make it into an
Ointment.

The Virtues of it are these.
It cures all Tumors, Aposthumes, Wounds, Ulcers, Gunshot, Botches, Itch,
stinging with Nettles, Bees, Wasps, Hornets, or Venomous Beasts, Wounds made
with poisoned Arrows, all burnings and scaldings, although it be with Oil, or
lightning, and that without any scar; it does help all nasty, rotten, stinking,
putrified Ulcers, although they be in the legs where the humors be ready to
resort most in Fistula's; although the bone be afflicted, it will scale it
without any instrument, and bring up the flesh from the bottom; your Face being
anointed with it, it takes away suddenly all redness, pimples, Sun-burns: A
Wound dressed with this Ointment, it will never putrify, it will cure a Wound
when no tent can search it; it cures the Headache, the Temples being anointed
therewith; the stomach being anointed with it, no infirmity will harbor there,
no not Imposthumes, or Consumption of the Lungs, the belly being anointed
therewith; it helps the Cholick, and Iliack passions, the Worms (and what
not) too tedious here to relate: it helps the Emeroids, or Piles, it is the
best Ointment in the World for all sorts of Gouts whatsoever, and there can
nothing come nigh unto it.

A very good Conserve for the help of a Consumption and Cough.
Take half a pound of blew Raisins, the blackest sort is the best, and stone
them, and skin them, and two ounces of white Sugar Candy, and two ounces of Oil
of sweet Almonds, and bruise them well, and when they be well incorporated
together, use it to eat morning, noon, and night.

A very special Drink against a Consumption.
Take of Coltsfoot, Hysop, Scabious, and Maidenhair, of each a handful, and a
quarter of a pound of Figs, and cut them in two pieces, and a quarter of a
pound of Raisins, and stone them, and take ten Dates and stone them, and so
boil them in four quarts of fair water, and after it has boiled a little, put
into it half an ounce of Liquorish scraped and bruised, and so let it boil till
one quart be boiled away, then take it off, and when it is cold, strain it into
a pot, and drink half a pint each morning at four of the clock, and so much
after dinner, at four of the clock.

For Worms in Children.
Wormseed boiled in Beer or Ale, and then sweeten it with clarified Honey, and
let them drink it.

How to drive away the Yellows of the Face that is caused by the overflowing
of the Gall. Approved.
Take a great white Onion, and make a hole in the top of it, and then put into
it the quantity of a Nutmeg of good Treacle, and then stop the hole again with
the said piece that is cut out of it, but mingle the Treacle with Saffron
powdered; this being done, roast the Onion in hot Embers, being wrapped up in
wet paper, and when it is well roasted, wring out the juice thereof hard, and
give the party this drink in the morning, and sweat an hour after it, and so
continue for three months together, and then let the party take a gentle purge,
and Fiat.

An excellent Medicine for the Dropsy, made for Queen Elizabeth by Doctor
Adrian and Doctor Lacy. Proved.
Take Polypodium, Spikenard, Squat, Ginger, Marjoram, Galingal, Setwel, ana a
pennyweight Sena leaves and cods, so much as all the rest grossly beaten; put
them into a bag, and hang it in an earthen pot of two gallons of Ale, and every
four days cover the pot with new Barm, and drink no other drink for six days,
and this shall purge all ill humors out of the body, neither will it let the
blood putrify, nor phlegm to have domination, nor Choler to burn, nor
melancholy to have exaltation, it does increase Blood, and helps all evil, it
helps and purges Rheum, it defends the stomach, it preserves the body,
and ingendreth a good color, comforts the sight, and nourishes the mind.

For the Dropsy that swells.
Eat Watercresses, and Raisins, use it often, and it will send down the
Disease into the legs and feet, and when it is there, take the green bark of
Elder in the Winter, and the crops in summer, and boil them well in fair water
and Oatmeal, to a Poultess, and apply it to the grief, and this will heal it.

The Celestial Water the best in the World for the Eyes.
Aqua Celidonia, Aqua Euphrasia, Aqua Fenicula, Of each a quarter of a pint.

Lapis Calaminaris, Lapis Tutia, Of each. a dram.

An Excellent Water for one that is near, or in a Consumption.
Take Milk three pints, red Wine one pint, twenty four yolks of new laid Eggs,
beat them very well together, then add so much white bread as will drink up the
Wine, and put to it some Cowslip flowers, and distill them, and take a spoonful
first and last in broth made of a Chicken, or Mutton, and in one month it will
cure any Consumption.

For to stay vomiting presently.
Take a little Mastick, and (...) it upon a hot coal, and set a Funnel over it,
and receive the furne into your mouth, and let it go into your stomach, Et fiat.

Doctor Turcables green Balsom.
Take in the month of May, Rosemary-crops, Wormwood, Balm and Rue, ana two
ounces, red Sage and Bay-buds, ana four ounces, Sheeps-suet twelve ounces, beat
all these very well together in a stone Mortar, till it be all as a Salve, then
put it into a clean Pipkin well stopped, and set it for eight days in a cold
place, then put it all in a clean brass Chafer, and add to it a pound of sweet
Sallet Oil, and as many of the said Herbs as aforesaid well bruised, and let
them boil over a soft fire very softly, the space of an hour, and stir them all
the time with a wooden Spatula, then take them from the fire, and presently put
into it an ounce of Spike Oil, and stir them together, then with a spoon take
off the oily substance from the Herbs, and then strain it into a Gally-pot and
keep it very close stopped, and set it in a cool place, it will keep good two or
three years.

The Virtues are these.
The virtue of the said Balm is, in all perfection good to cure all that is
here underwritten, and the said oil is good to cure any wounds either inward
or outward, proved. Being inward squirted into the said wounds warm; and
outward, being applied with fine lint or linen, and anointing all the parts
thereabouts.

1. It does not only take away the pain, but it does also keep it from
inflammation, and draws forth also all broken bones, or any thing else that
may putrify or fester, if the Brains, Heart, Guts, Liver be not touched, it
will heal in four or five times dressing, if no other thing be applied
thereunto.

2. It heals any burning or scalding by fire or water, or by any other means,
it heals any.

A most excellent Powder, much used by a Person of Quality, lately deceased,
with the Virtues.
Take Pearl Magistrale prepared, Coral red and white, prepared Amber, prepared
Hartshorn, of each half an ounce, Contra Yarva one ounce; mingle them well
together, then take three ounces of the black claws of Crabs before they be
sodden, they must be taken in June or July, the Sun being in Cancer, mingle all
well together, then put to it four ounces of white sugar candy powdered, and
mingle with the sugar candy, Ambergreece, Musk Citron-seed skinned, ana ten
grains; beat the seeds, Sugarcandy and Ambergreece by themselves, very fine in
a stone mortar, all the rest must be passed through a fine Searce: then make a
strong gelly of Hartshorn being boiled with White Wind, and infuse therein
Saffron powdered, two drams, and with this Jelly perfume the powder, being all
mixed into a paste, so make it up into little balls, and set them in a warm Oven
to dry, and then put them up to your use, the closer they be kept the better.

The Virtue of this powder is most excellent.
1. For to bring out the Smallpox, or if they be come out, take ten grains in
Dragon-water each three hours, for nine hours.

2. For the Plague, take ten grains in Dragon-water each three hours, for nine
hours, and sweat and keep your self warm.

3. For a Hectic, take for nineteen days together, six grains every morning in
Borrage water.

4. For a Consumption, in Agrimony-water, take six grains for 14 days together.

5. For the Cough of the Lungs, six grains, in half Bettony, and half
Hysop-water, for fourteen days.

6. For an Ague or Fever, for three days, every third day take seven grains
every three hours, for nine hours, in Carduus-water.

7. For poison twelve grains boiled in a little Milk.

8. For a Woman that is sick after Labor, take seven grains every three hours,
for nine hours in Agrimony water.

9. There is no Unicorns horn comparable to it in contagious times: it is good
to take five grains every morning in a little Sack.

10. For the passion of the heart, and Convulsion fits, seven grains in
Borrage-water, and it is a great preserver of health, working only as a
Cordial, and you may safely take ten, twelve, fourteen, or sixteen, or eighteen
or twenty grains at once for a full Dose.

11. And if it be a great Fever, Smallpox, Plague, Poison, or for a Woman in
Labor, put into every Dose three grains of Bezoar-Oriental.

How to strengthen the Back, and to make one lusty.
Take half a pint of Malmsey, and a handful of the pith of an Ox back, but take
the pith out from the skin, then take four or five stalks of Artichoaks, and
take the pith out of them, but first cut the stalks into pieces so long as your
finger, and then parboil them well, and then put it to the other things, and
boil it gently to a Jelly, and when you have done so, let it be cold, and then
eat it upon the point of a knife morning and evening, and at any time of the
day, so much as you shall think fitting, and if you would have it pleasant,
make it sweet with white Sugar Candy, but not with Sugar.

For one that cannot make his Water.
Take Thyme, and stop it in Wine-vinegar one night or more, then take of this
three spoonfuls blood-warm, after that you have eaten, at morning, noon, and
night.

How to help a stinking Breath that comes from the Stomach.
Take two handfuls of Cummin seeds, and beat them to powder, and sees it in a
pottle of White Wind until half be boiled away, and then give the party a good
draught thereof first and last, morning and evening, as hot as he can suffer
it, and in fifteen or sixteen days it will help.

For the Sciatica or the Gout, my Lord of Sussex Medicine, called
Flesh-Unguetors.
Take of Rosin half a pound, of Perofin half a pound, of Virgins-Wax four
ounces, of Olibanum four ounces, of Mastick half an ounce, of sheeps tallow, or
of Harts-tallow two ounces, of Camphire three drams, and of Turpentine three
ounces

The way to make it.
First, beat all your Gums aforesaid, every one by themselves, then take your
Tallow and your Wax, and set them together on the fire, that done, put in your
Rosin, then your Olibanum, and last of all your Mastick: and when all is
relented together over a soft fire of Coals, then strain it through a thin
Canvas cloth into a pottle of White Wind, and then let them all boil together
again until half the Wine be wasted and sod away, then take it from the fire,
and let it cool, then afterward when it is almost cold, anoint your hands with
the oil of sweet Almonds, and work it up in rowls like wax rowls, and in the
time of the working thereof, cast in your Camphire, beaten in fine powder by it
self alone: this observed, that before you put in your Camphire into the Mortar
for to be beaten into powder, you must always beat in the same Mortar two or
three Almonds, for else your Camphire will not be made into powder.

The ordering of the same Medicine.
First, you must spread it upon a fine linen cloth, plaisterwise, and so lay
it upon every joint where the pain is, but before the laying of your Plaster,
you must anoint all your Joints with the oil of Roses, and the stuff of your
Plaster must be half an inch thick, and according unto the property of the
same, you must let it stick and cling where you lay it, for the space of 9 or
10 days together, notwithstanding it does put you to some pain or itch in the
mean time, yet you must in any wise let it lie on still, for it will both draw
out the sinews by little small pimples, and also heal it again, and this one
plaster must serve during all the time of your disease without any manner of
renewing. Prob. of witness by my Lord of Suffolk.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THE ADDITIONS.
B.
LUcanelions Balsom, admirable for Wounds, and many other things page 211 The
Virtues 212. 213. 214. 215 Dr. Turcables green Balsom, with its Virtue 224.
225. 226 How to strengthen the Back 22^ How to help a stinking Breath that
comes from the stomach 230
C
An excellent Receipt against a Cough of a Consumption 210 A very good Conserve
for the help of a Consumption and Cough 218 A special drink against a
Consumption 219 An excellent Water for one that is near, or in a Consumption
223
D
An excellent Medicine for the Dropsy, made for Queen Elizabeth, by Doctor
Adrian, and Doctor Lacy 221 For the Dropsy that swells 222
E
The Celestial Water in the World for The Eyes 223
G
For the Gout 231
L
How to make one Lusty 229
P
A most certain and proved Medicine against all manner of Pestilence and
Plague, be it never so vehement 215 A most excellent Powder much used by a
Person of Quality late deceased, with its virtues 226. 227. 228. 229
S
A rare Sear-cloth, with its virtues 207. 208 For a Surfeit 209 For the
Sciatica or the Gout, my Lord of Sussex Medicine, called Flesh-Unguetors, the
manner of making and ordering the same 231. 232. 233
T
How to make the Oointment of Tobacco, Jobertus, with its Virtues 216. 217
U
For to stay Vomiting presently 224
W
For Worms in Children 220 For one that cannot make his Water 230
Y
How to drive away the Yellow of the Face, that is caused by the overflowing of
the Gall 220
FINIS.
A True Gentlewomans DELIGHT. Wherein is contained all manner of COOKERY.

Together with Preserving, Conserving, Drying, and Candying.

Very necessary for all Ladies and Gentlewomen.

Published by W. G. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1687.

To the Virtuous and Most Hopeful Gentlewoman, Mrs. Anne Pile, Eldest Daughter
of the Honorable Sir Francis Pile Baronet, Deceased.
Most Accomplished Lady,
THE many singular Favors which I have received, not only from your worthy
self, but also from your thrice noble progenitors, justly oblige me by all the
duties of gratitude, to tender a just acknowledgment: I wish the same heart,
that for many and just causes truly honors, you, had any present worthy your
acceptance. Now shall it be your singular goodness to patronage this small
Treatise, which (if I mistake not) carries with it two parts, Delight, and
Utility. I doubt not then, but that it will find a general acceptance among all
those who are any way the least lovers of such pleasing and all delightful
studies. I intend not to paraphrase upon its worth, its use, and singular
profit, which abundantly speaks it second unto none that has been published of
the like nature: so hoping you will accordingly esteem of it, I beg pardon for
my boldness, and rest ever,

A true and faithful Honourer of Your transparent Virtues W. J.

To the READER.
Friendly Reader,
HERE thou have a small Treatise, entitled A True Gentlewomans Delight,
presented to thy view; be so courteous as to read before thou censure it. If
then the effect be answerable to its name, I shall be right glad: If here be
any Error, it will be no error, but a singular token of thy exemplar humanity
to pass it by, and sign it with thy pardon, for which I engage my self,

Thine on the like occasion, W. L.

A Table of the Contents.
A
TO make Apple Cream p. 3 To fry Apple Pies 16 To make an Artichoak-Pie 18 To
make Angellets 21 To preserve Apricocks 44. 57 To make Apricock Cakes 44 To
candy Apricocks 50 To make Cakes of Almonds 60 To preserve Angelica roots 68 To
make Almond Butter 75 To make flesh of Apricocks 76 Lady of Arundels Manchet
117
B
To bake Beef like red Deer 19 To make fresh Broth 30 To pickle Broom buds 35
To make Buket-bread 49 To make paste of Barberries, or English Currants 52 How
to make Pap of Barley 59 A Broth to drink 71. 73 A Broth to eat on fasting days
ib. How to stew Beef 75 How to boil Brawn 82 To boil a Gammon of Bacon ib. To
bake a Gammon of Bacon 95 To bake Fillets of Beef, etc, 94 How to souce Brawn
106 How to make Bonny Clutter 114 How to make drawn Butter 117
C
How to make a Crystal Jelly 2 How to make clouted Cream 4 How to make Quince
Cream 5 How to make a fresh Cheese ib. How to make Codling Cream 6 How to make
Cheese-Cakes 9 How to make slipcoat Cheese 11 How to make Cheese-loaves 12 How
to make Curd-Cakes 16 How to make a Chicken Pie 18 A good way to stew Chickens
31 How to pickle Cucumbers 33 To do Clove-gilli flowers up for Salletting all
the year 34 How to preserve Currants 41 How to make a Calves-foot Pie 66 To boil
a Capon with Brewis 69 How to make a Spice Cake 70 How to boil a Chicken, etc.
72 To make a Caudle 74 To dry Cherries 79 To boil a Capon in white broth 81 To
boil Chickens and Sorrel-sops 85 To stew Calves-feet 88 To stew cold Chickens
90 To make paste for a Custard 91 To bake Calves-feet 94. 123 To bake a Chicken
Pie 96. 119 To fry a Chicken 104. 105 To make a tart of Cherries 112 To boil
Cream 116 A Calves-head Pie for supper 124 A Frigasie of Chickens 132 To make a
Cake 133 To souce a Calves-head 137
D
How to make a made Dish 15 How to make a forced Dish of any cold meat 26 How
to make a forced Dish of a leg of Mutton or Lamb 27 How to boil a Duck 28. 139
How to preserve white Damsons 45 How to preserve Damsons 7. 57 How to make fine
Diet-bread 56 How to boil a Duck with turnips 84
E
How to make Essings 65 How to souce Eels 107 How to souce an Eel 136
F
How to make a white Fool 7 How to make a Fool 8 How to make Furmenty 17 How to
Candy all kind of Fruitrage, as Oranges, etc. 64 How to Candy all kind of
Flowers, ib. How to boil Flownders, etc. 76 How to boil diverse kind of Fish 86
To bake a Florentine 98 To make Fritters 105 To marble Fish 110
G
To make a Goosberry Fool 7 To make a Goosberry Custard 8 To make Grout 36 To
make Goosberry Tarts 40 To preserve Goosberries 42 To make Goosberry Cakes 43
To do Goosberries like Hops ib. To preserve Grapes 47 To preserve Grapes to
look clear and green 50 To make paste of Goosberries 52 To souce a Carp or
Gurnet 70
H
To bake a Hare 95 To roast a Hare 99 To make a Tart of Hips 113 An Artichoak
Pie 122
I
To make an excellent Jelly 1 To make a Jelly of Marmalet 37 To make a Junket
114
K
A Florentine of Kidneys 118
L
To make Leach 11 To make yellow Leach ib. To fry a Coast of Lamb 28 To make
Cakes of Lemons 48 To candy Lemons and Oranges 59 To make white Lemon Cakes 61
A Lamb Pie 120 A Lark Pie 125 A Frigasie of Lamb 131
M
To make Sauce for a Shoulder of Mutton 120 To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with
Thyme 20 To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters ib. To boil a Leg of Mutton
32 To preserve Medlers 41 To make Makarooms 44 To preserve Mulberrries 45 To
boil a Mallard, etc. 84 To stew a Mallard 88 To roast a Shoulder of Mutton 100
To roast a Leg of Mutton 101 To roast a Neck of Mutton 102 To roast a Chine of
Mutton ib. To roast a Gigget of Mutton 104 To make a Tart of Medlers 112 To
scald Milk after the Western fashion 113 To harsh a Shoulder of Mutton 133 To
make a Leg of Mutton three or four dishes 134
N
To make broth for a Neats-tongue 70 To roast a Neats-tongue 100 A hot
Neats-tongue for supper 127 A cold Neats-tongue Pie ib.
O
To pickle Oysters 36 How to make paste of Oranges and of Lemons 52 How to
preserve Oranges 78 An Oyster Pie 122
P
How to make a Sack Posset 10 How to make black Puddings 22 How to make white
Puddings ib. How to make Almond Pudding 23 How to make a Pudding to bake 24 How
to make a boiled Pudding ib. How to make a Cream Pudding to be boiled 25 How to
pickle Purslain 34 How to make a Jelly of Pippins 38 To preserve Pippins white
46 To make Paste-Royal in Spice 53 To Candy Pears, Plumbs, etc. 54 To make
Paste-Royal white, etc. 55 How to preserve Pomecitrons 62 How to make a very
good Pie 67 How to make a fine Pudding 71 How to make a Ponado 74 How to souce
a young Pig 76 How to dry Peaches 79 To boil a Pike in white broth 85 To stew a
Pullen or Capon 90 To make Paste for a Pasty of Venison ib. To make Paste for a
Pie to keep long 91 To make Paste for buttered Loaves, 92 To make Paste for
Dumplings ib. To make Puff-Paste 93. 129 To make an Italian Pudding 97 To roast
a Pig with a Pudding in the belly 101 To souce a Pig 106 To make a Tart of
Green Pease 11^ To make a Pippin Tart 113 To make a Pudding in haste 11^ To
make a Pudding in a Dish 11^ To boil Pigeons 11^ A Pork Pie 11^ A Potato Pie
for Supper 12^ Pigeon or Rabbet Pie ib. To make a Pudding 13^
Q
To keep Quinces all the year 32 To preserve white Quinces 40 To make
Quince-Cakes 46 To preserve Quinces red 48 To make flesh of Quinces 77 To bake
Quinces or Wardens, etc. 95
R
To preserve Rasberries 40 To Candy Ringus Roots 63 To boil a Rabbet 83 139 To
stew a Rabbet 89 139 To make a Tart of Rice 111 A Frigasie of Rabbets 132
S
To stew Sausages 28 To make Sugar-Cakes 66 To make Simbals 68 To make a Sallet
of all manner of Herbs 87 To stew Steaks between two Dishes ib. To stew Smelts
or Flounders 89 To bake a Steak Pie 97 To make a Tart of Strawberries 112 A
Skerry Pie 124
T
To make a Tansie 13 To make black Tart stuff 14 To make a yellow Tart stuff
ib. To make gallendine sauce for a Turkey 31 To stew Toruts 88 To bake a Turkey
90 To fry Tongues 105 To souce a Tench or Barbel 108
U
To make Cakes of Violets 48 To make Oil of Violets 62 To boil Veal 80 To bake
chucks of Veal 96 To roast a Breast of Veal 99 To roast a Haunch of Venison 102
To roast a Shoulder or Fillet of Veal 103 To souce a Breast of Veal 108 To
souce a Fillet of Veal 109 To marble Beef, Mutton or Venison ib. A Frigasie of
Veil 131
W
To make a White-Pot 26. 115 To make White-broth with a Capon 29 To preserve
green Walnuts 39 To make a Tart of Wardens III
A TRUE GENTLE WOMAN'S DELIGHT.
To make an excellent Jelly.
TAKE three gallons of fair water, boil in it a knuckle of veal, and two Calves
feet slit in two with all the fat clear taken from between the claws, so let
them boil to a very tender jelly, keeping it clean scummed, and the edges of
the pot always wiped with a clean cloth, that none of the scum may boil in;
then strain it from the meat and let it stand all night, the next morning take
away the top, and the bottom, and take to every quart of this jelly, half a
pint of Sherry-Sack, half an ounce of Cinnamon, and as much sugar as will
season it, six whites of Eggs very well beaten, mingle all these together, then
boil it half an hour, and let it run through your jelly bag.

To make a Crystal Jelly.
Take two Calves feet, slice them and lay them in fair spring water with a
knuckle of Veal, shift it in half a dozen waters, take out the fat betwixt the
claws, but do not break the bones, for if you do, the marrow of the bones will
strain the jelly, when they are soft, and picked very clean, boil them very
tender in spring water; when they be boiled tender, take them up, and use them
at your pleasure to eat, let the broth stand in an earthen Pot or Pipkin, till
it be cold, then take away the bottom and the top, and put the clear into a
fair Pipkin, put into it half a pound of fair Sugar Candy, or other Sugar,
three drops of Oil of Nutmeg, 3 drops of Oil of Mace, and a grain of Musk, and
so let it boil leisurely a quarter of an hour, then let it run through a
jelly-bag into a Gally-pot, when it is cold you may serve it in little careless
lumps being taken out with a child's spoon, and this is the best way to make
your Crystal-jelly.

To make Apple-Cream at any time.
Take twelve Pippins, pare and slit them, then put them in a Skillet, and some
Claret Wine, and a race of Ginger shred thin, and a little Lemon Peel cut
small, and a little Sugar. Let all these stand together till they be soft, then
take them off and put them in a Dish till they be cold, then take a quart of
Cream, boil it with a little Nutmeg a while, then put in as much of the Apple
stuff, to make it of what thickness you please, and so serve it up.

To make a Trifle Cream.
Take some Cream and boil it with a cut Nutmeg, add Lemon Peel a little, then
take it off, cool it a little, and season it with a little Rose Water and Sugar
to your taste: let this be put in the thing you serve it in, then put in a
little Runnet to make it come, then it is fit to eat.

To make Clouted Cream.
Take 3 gallons of new Milk, set it on the fire till it boileth, make a hole in
the middle of the scum of the Milk, then take a pottle or 3 pints of very good
Cream, put it into the hole you made in the middle of the Milk, as it boileth,
and let it boil together half an hour, then put it into 3 or 4 Milk-pans, so
let it stand two days, if the weather be not too hot, then take it up in clouts
with a scummer, or a slice, and put it in that which you will serve it in, if
you like it seasoned, you may put some Rose Water between every clout as you
lay one upon another with your slice in the Dish you mean to serve it in.

To make Quince Cream.
Take the Quinces, and put them into boiling water unpared, then let them boil
very fast uncovered that they may not color, and when they are very tender,
take them off and peel them, and beat the pap very small with Sugar, and then
take raw Cream, and mix with it, till it be of fit thickness to eat like a
Cream, but if you boil the Cream with a stick of Cinnamon, I think it the
better, it must stand till it be cold before you put it to the Quinces.

To make a fresh Cheese.
Take a pint of fresh Cream, set it on the fire, then take the white of six
Eggs, beat them very well, and wring in the juice of a good Lemon to the
whites, when the Cream seeths up, put in the whites, and stir it about till it
be turned, and then take it off, and put it into the Cheese-cloth, and let the
whey be drawn from it, then take the curd, and pound it in a stone-Mortar with
a little Rose Water and Sugar, and put it in an earthen Cullender, and so let
it stand till you send it to the Table, then put it into a dish, put a little
sweet Cream to it, and so serve it in.

To make a Codling Cream.
After your Codlings be thoroughly cooled and yielded, put them into a silver
dish, and fill the dish almost half with Rose Water, and half a pound of Sugar,
boil all these liquors together until half be consumed, and keep it stirring
till it be ready, then fill up your dish with sweet Cream, and stir it till it
be well mingled, and when it has boiled round about the dish, take it up,
sweeten it with Sugar, and serve it cold.

How to make a Goosberry Fool.
Take your Goosberries and pick them, and put them into clean water, and boil
them till they be all as thick that you cannot discern what it is, to the value
of a quart, take six yolks of Eggs well beaten with Rose Water, and before you
put in your Eggs, season it well with Sugar then strain your Eggs and let them
boil a little while, then take it up, put it in a broad dish, and let it stand
till it be cold, thus it must be eaten.

How to make a white Fool.
Take a quart of Cream, and set it over the fire, and boil it with whole
Cinnamon, and sliced Nutmeg, and Sugar, then when it is almost ready, take the
white of six Eggs well beaten with Rose Water, and scum off the froth from
them, and put it into the Cream, and boil it together a pretty while, then
season it, and take the whole spice out of it, and put it up in a broad dish,
and when it is cold, then it must be eaten.

To make a Goosberry Custard.
Take as many Goosberries as you please, boil them till they be soft, then take
them out, and let them stand and cool, and then drain them, draw them with your
hand through a Canvas strainer, then put in a little Rose Water, Sugar, and
three whites, and stir them all together, put them in a Skillet, and stir them
apace, else they will burn, let them stand and cool a little while; take them
off, and put them in a glass.

To make a Fool.
Take two quarts of Cream, set it over the fire, and let it boil, then take the
yolks of 12 Eggs, and beat them well with 3 or 4 spoonfuls of cold Cream;
before you put the Eggs into the hot Cream, take 3 or 4 spoonfuls of the Cream
out of the Skillet, and put into the Eggs, and stir it together, and then
strain the Eggs into the Skillet of hot Cream, stirring it all the time to keep
it from burning; then set it on the fire, and let it boil a little while, but
keep it still stirring for fear of burning, then take it off and let it stand
and cool, then take 2 or 3 spoonfuls of Sack, and put it in the dish, and some
4 or 5 sippets, and put them in the dish, set the dish and sippets a drying,
and when they be dry, that they hang to the dish, sweeten the Cream, and pour
it in the dish softly, because the sippets shall not rise up, this will make
three dishes: when it is cold, it is fit to be eaten.

To make Cheese-cakes.
For the crust, take half a pint of flower, and 4 spoonfuls of cold water, and
3 parts of a quarter of a pound of Butter, beat and knead these together, and
put the paste asunder several times, then roll it square, and turn it over,
then take a pint of Cream, and 7 Eggs, and a quarter of a pound of Sugar, and a
quarter of a pound of Currants plumpt before you put them in, and a whole Nutmeg
grated on a knife, and some Pepper beaten, but not too much, it must be gently
boiled and stirred as you do buttered Eggs, the stuff must be cold, and then
put in the Coffin, and so bake it.

To make a Sack-Posset.
Take two quarts of pure good Cream, a quarter of a pound of the best Almonds,
stamp them in the Cream, and boil Amber and Musk therein, then take a pint of
Sack in a Basin, and set it on a Chafing Dish till it be blood-warm, then take
the yolks of 12 Eggs, with 4 whites, and beat them very well together, and so
put the Eggs into the Sack, and make it good and hot, let the Cream cool a
little before you put it into the Sack, then stir all together over the coals,
till it be as thick as you would have it, if you take some Amber and Musk, and
grind it small with Sugar, and strew it on the top of the posset, it will give
it a most delicate and pleasant taste.

To make Leach.
Make your jelly for your Leach with Calves-feet, as you do your ordinary
jelly, but a little stiffer, and when it is cold take off the top and bottom,
and set it over the fire with some Cinnamon and Sugar, then take your Turnsels,
being well steept in Sack, and crush it and so strain it in your Leach, and let
it boil to such a thickness, that when it is cold you may slice it.

To make yellow Leach.
Your yellow Leach is just the same, but instead of Turnsels, you must color
it with Saffron, and when it is boiled enough, then put in your Saffron, and
not before, it must not boil in it.

To make a slipcoat-Cheese.
Take five quarts of new Milk from the Cow, and 1 quart of water and 1 spoonful
of Runnet, and stir it together, and let it stand till it does come, then lay
your Cheese-cloth into the vate, and take up your curd as fast as you can,
without breaking, and put it to your Vate, and let the whey soak out it self,
when you have taken it all up, lay a cloth on the top of it and 1 pound weight
for one hour, then lay 2 pound weight for an hour more, then turn him, when he
has stood 2 hours, lay three pound on him for an hour more, then take him out
of the Vate, and let him lie 2 or 3 hours, and then salt him on both sides,
when he is salt enough, take a clean cloth and wipe him dry, then let him lie a
day or a night then put Nettles under the upon him, and change them once a day,
the Cheese will come to his eating in 8 or 9 days.

To make Cheese-Loaves.
Take the curds of a tender, new-milk Cheese, and let them be well pressed from
the Whey, and then break them as small as you can possible, then take crumbs of
Manchet and yolks of Eggs, with half the whites and some sweet Cream, and a
little fine flower, mingle all these together and make a paste of it, but not
too stiff, then make them into little Loaves, and bake them, when they be
baked, cut off the tops, and butter them, with Sugar, Nutmeg and melted Butter,
and put it in with a spoon, and stir it altogether, then lay on all the tops,
and sear them with scraped Sugar.

How to make a very good Tansie.
Take 15 Eggs, and 6 of the whites, beat them very well; then put in some
Sugar, and a little Sack, beat them again and put about a pint or a little more
of Cream, then beat them again, then put in the juice of Spinach or of
Primrose-leaves to make it green, then put in some more Sugar, if it be not
sweet enough, then beat it again a little, and so let it stand till you fry it,
when the first course is in, then fry it with a little sweet Butter, it must be
stirred and fried very tender, when it is fried enough, then put it in a dish,
and strew some Sugar upon it, and serve it in.

To make black Tart stuff.
To a dozen pound of Prunes take half a dozen of Maligo-Raisins, wash and pick
them clean, and put them into a pot of water, set them over the fire till all
these are like pulp, and stir them often lest they burn to, them take them off,
and let them be rubbed through a hair Sive hard with your hands, by little and
little, till all be through, then season them to your taste with searced Ginger.

To make yellow Tart stuff.
Take 24 Eggs, and beat them with salt together, and put into it a quart of
seething Milk, stirring it until it caudles, then take it off, and put it into
a napkin, hanging it up till all the whey be run through, when it is cold take
it and grind it in a stone-Mortar with Sack and Sugar to your taste, and
otherwise to make it look white, leave the yolks, and instead of Sack put in
Rose Water.

To make a made Dish.
Take a quarter of a pound of Almonds, beat them small, and in the beating of
them put in a little Rose Water to keep them from Oyling, strain them into
Cream, then take Artichoak bottoms, and Marrow, and boil the redness of the
Marrow out, then take a quart of Cream, and boil it with Dates, Rose Water and
Sugar, and when it is boiled to a convenient thickness, take it off, and take
your Artichoaks and pare off the leaves and lay them into a dish, and some
Marrow upon them, then pour some Cream upon them, then set it on coals till you
serve it in.

A Sauce for a Shoulder of Mutton.
Take a few Oysters, and some sweet herbs, and an Onion, and a pint of
White Wind, and a little beaten Nutmeg, a little Salt and a large Mace, a
little Lemon pilled, and a little Sugar, a little leaker posset, if you have no
Oysters take Capers in the room of them, and some gravy of the Mutton.

To fry Apple Pies.
Take Apples and pare them, and chop them very small, beat in a little
Cinnamon, a little Ginger, some Sugar and a little Rose Water, take your paste,
roll it thin, and make them up as big pasties as you please, to hold a spoonful
or a little less of your Apples, and so fry them with butter not too hasty,
lest they be burned.

To make Curd Cakes.
Take a pint of Curd, four Eggs, take out two of the whites, put in some Sugar,
a little Nutmeg, and a little flower, stir them well together, and drop them
in, and fry them with a little butter.

To make Furmenty.
Take a quart of sweet Cream, 2 or 3 sprigs of Mace, and a Nutmeg cut in half,
put it into your Cream, so let it boil, then take your French-Barley or Rice,
being first washed clean in fair water three times and picked clean, then boil
it in sweet Milk till it be tender, then put it into your Cream, and boil it
well, and when it has boiled a good while, take the yolks of 6 or seven Eggs,
beat them very well, to thicken on a soft fire boil it, and stir it, for it
will quickly burn, when you think it is boiled enough sweeten it to your taste,
and so serve it in with Rose Water and Musk-sugar, in the same manner you make
it with Wheat.

To make an Artichoak Pie.
Take the bottom of six Artichoaks, being boiled very tender, put them in a
dish, and put some Vinegar over them, season them with Ginger, and Sugar, and a
little Mace whole, putting them into a Pie, and when you lay them in, lay some
Marrow and Dates sliced in, and a few Raisins of the Sun in the bottom, with
good store o^ Butter, so close the Pie, when it is half baked take a dish of
Sack, being boiled first with Sugar, and a Pill of Orange, put in into your
Pie, and set it in the Oven again till you use it.

To make a Chicken Pie.
Make your paste with good store of Butter and yolks of Eggs and Sugar, then
take six small Chickens, taking out the breast bone, and trussing them round,
take 2 Nutmegs and a good quantity of Cinnamon, and cut it in little pieces,
take 2 yolks of Eggs, and beat them with six spoonfuls of Verjuice, then take
your juice and Verjuice, and a little salt, stir them well together, take a
good deal of Butter, and wet it in the Verjuice, and put it in the bellies of
the Chickens, so lay them in the Pie with Butter under them, then take half a
pound of Currants washed and dried, so lay them on the top of the Chickens, with
a piece of Marrow, Barberries, Grapes, and good store of Butter and Sugar, as
will season it, a little before you draw out your Pie, put in Verjuice and
Sugar, boiled together.

To bake Beef like red Deer.
Take a pound of Beef and slice it thin, and half a pint of good wine Vinegar,
some 3 Cloves, and Mace above an ounce, 3 Nutmegs, pound them all together;
Pepper and Salt, according to your discretion, and a little Sugar, mix these
together, take a pound and a half of Suet, shred and beat it small in a Mortar,
then lay a row of Suet, a row of Beef, strew your spices between every lane,
then your Vinegar, so do till you have laid in all, then make it up, but first
beat it close with a rolling pin, then press it a day before you put it in your
paste.

To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Thyme.
Draw your Shoulder of Mutton, and when it is half roasted save the gravy, and
cut a good deal of the inside of it, and mince it gross, and boil it in a dish
with the gravy, and Thyme, Clarret-wine, and sliced Nutmeg, and when your
shoulder is roasted, lay it in the dish with sliced Lemon, but remember to
scotch your Mutton in roasting, as you do when you boil it.

To roast a Shoulder of Mutton* with Oysters.
When you open the Oysters, save the liquor, then season them with Pepper, and
a little Cloves, and Mace, and herbs finely chopped, and the yolks of 2 or 3
Eggs chopped small and some Currants parboyled a little, then stuff your
Shoulder of Mutton thick with your Oysters, then season it and lay it to the
fire and roast it, then take the rest of your Oysters, and boil them with a
little White Wind, and some Butter, this is sauce for your shoulder of Mutton,
when your Oysters are opened, you may parboyl them in their own liquor, then
take them out and season them.

To make Angellets.
Take a quart of new Milk and a pint of Cream, and put them together with a
little Runnet, when it is come well take it up with a spoon, and put it into
the Vate softly and let it stand 2 days till it is pretty stiff, then slip it
out and salt it a little at both ends, and when you think it is salt enough,
set it a draying, and wipe them, and within a quarter of a year they will be
ready to eat.

To make black Puddings.
Take your blood when it is warm, put in some salt, and when it is thoroughly
cold, put in your groats well picked, and let it stand soaking a night, put in
the herbs which must be Rosemary, large Savory, Pennyroyal, Thyme, and Fennel,
then make it soft with putting of good Cream hot until the blood look pale;
then beat 4 or 5 Eggs, whites and all, and mingle it, then season it with
Cloves, Mace, Pepper, Fennelseeds, then put good store of Beef Suet in your
stuff, and mince your fat not too small.

To make white Puddings.
After the Humbles be very tender boiled, take some of the lights with the
hearts, and all the flesh and fat about them, pricking from them all the sinews
and skin, then chop the meat small as can be, then put to it a little of the
Liver v^ry finely searced, some grated bread searced, four or five yolks of
Eggs, a pint of very good Cream, a spoonful or two of Sack, a little Sugar,
Cinnamon, Cloves and Mace, a little Nutmeg, a few Carraway-seeds, a little
Rose Water mingled with a god deal of swines fat, a little salt, roll it in
rouls two hours before you go about it, let the fat side of the skin be turned
and steeped in Rose Water till you fill them.

To make Almond Puddings.
Take a pound of Almonds blanched, and beat them very small with a little
Rose Water, boil good Milk with a flake of Mace, and a little sliced Nutmeg;
when it is boiled, take it clean from the spice, then take the quantity of a
penny loaf, grate it, and searce it through a Cullender, and then put it into
the Milk, and let it stand till it be pretty cool, then put in the Almonds, and
5 or 6 yolks of Eggs, and a little Salt and Sugar, what you think fit, and good
store of Beef Suet, and marrow very finely shred.

To make a Pudding to bake.
Take a penny loaf, pare it, slice it in a quart of Cream, with a little
Rose Water, and break it very small; take 3 ounces of Jordan Almonds blanched,
and beaten small with a little Sugar, put in some 8 Eggs beaten, a Marrow-bone,
and 2 or 3 Pippins sliced thin, or any way, mingle these together, and put in a
little Ambergreece, if you please.

To make a boiled Pudding.
Take a pint of Cream, or Milk, boil it with a stick of Cinnamon a little
while, and take it off, and let it stand till it be cold, put in 6 Eggs, take
out 3 whites, beat your Eggs a little before you put them into the Milk, then
stir them together, then take a penny Roll, and slice it very thin, and let it
lie and soak, and then bray it very small, then put in some Sugar, and butter
your cloth before you put it in, it will take but a little while seething, and
when you take it up, melt a little fresh Butter, and a little Sack and Sugar,
beat all these together and put it into the dish with your Pudding to be served
in.

To make a Cream Pudding to be boiled.
Take a pint and a half of thick Cream, and boil it with Mace, Ginger, and
Nutmeg quartered, then put to it 8 Eggs, with four whites beaten, and Almonds
blanched a pound, and strained in with the Cream, a little Rose Water, and
sugar, and a spoonful of flower searced very fine, then take a thick napkin,
wet it, and rub it with flower, and tie the pudding up in it, boil it where
Mutton is boiled, or in the Beef-pot; remember to take out the whole spice out
of the Cream when it is boiled; the sauce for this Pudding is a little Sack,
Sugar, and a pretty piece of butter; you must blanch some Almonds, when they
are blanched, cut every Almond in 3 or 4 pieces the long way, and stick them up
an end upon the Pudding very thick.

To make a White-pot.
Take a pint and a half of Cream, a quarter of a pound of Sugar, a little
Rose Water, a few Dates sliced, a few Raisins of the Sun, six or 7 Eggs, and a
little large Mace, a sliced Pippin, or Lemon, cut sippet fashion for your
dishes you bake in, and dip them in Sack, or Rose Water.

To make a forced dish of any cold Meat.
Take any cold meat and shred it small a little Cloves and Mace, and Nutmeg,
and 2 yolks of Eggs, a spoonful or two of Rose Water, a little grated bread, a
little Beef Suet shred small, make it up in Balls, or any fashion yo^ please,
and boil them in tried suet between two earthen Dishes, your suet must boil
before you put in your meat, for sauce a little Butter, Verjuice, and Sugar.

To make a forced dish of a Leg of Mutton or Lamb.
Take a Leg of Mutton or Lamb cut out the flesh, and take heed you break not
the skin of it, then parboyl it, and mince it with a little Beef Suet, put into
it a little sweet Herbs shred, 3 or 4 Dates sliced, a little beaten Nutmeg,
Cloves, and Mace, a few Currants, a little Sugar, a little Verjuice, 3 or 4
Eggs, mix them together, and put them in the skin, and set it in a dish and
bake it.

To boil a Calves-Head with Oysters.
Take the head, and boil it with water and salt, a little White Wind, or
Verjuice, and when it is almost enough, then cut some Oysters, and mingle them
together, and a blade or two of Mace, a little Pepper, and Salt, and a little
liquor of the Oysters, then put it together, and put it to the Calves-head, and
the largest Oysters upon it, and a slit Lemon, and Barberries, so serve it in.

To fry a Coast of Lamb.
Take a Coast of Lamb, and parboyl it, take out all the bones as near as you
can, and take 4 or 5 yolks of Eggs beaten, a little Thyme and sweet Marjoram,
and Parsley minced very small, and beat it with the Eggs, and cut your Lamb into
square pieces, and dip them into the Eggs and Herbs, and fry them with butter,
then take a little butter, White Wind and Sugar for sauce.

To stew Sausages.
Boil them in fair Water and Salt a little, for sauce boil some Currants alone,
when they be almost tender, then pour out the water, and put in a little
White Wind, Butter and Sugar.

To boil Ducks.
When they be half boiled, take a quart of the liquor and strain it, and put a
quart of White Wind, and some whole Mace, Cloves, and Nutmegs sliced, and
Cinnamon, and a few Onions shred, a bundle of sweet Herbs, a few Capers, and a
little Camphire, when it is boiled, put some Sugar to season it withal.

To make White-broth with a Capon.
Truss your Capons, and boil them in fair water, and when they are half boiled,
take out 3 pints of the liquor, and put it into a quart of Sack, and as much
White Wind, and slice 2 ounces of Dates, half or quarterwise, as you please, a
little whole Mace, Cloves and Cinnamon, a Nutmeg sliced, of each a little
quantity, boil the broth in a Pipkin by it self, until the Dates begin to be
tender, then put in the Marrow of two bones, and let it boil a little, not too
much, then when your Capons be near ready, break twenty Eggs, save the yolks
from the whites, and beat the yolks until you may take up a spoonful, and it
will not run beside the spoon, then you must put a little cold broth to him,
and so strain them through a cloth, then take up some of the hot broth to beat
your Eggs, because else it will turn, let it have a walm or 2 after the Eggs be
in, but not sees too much for fear it turns, then dish your Capons, and pour
your broth on them, and garnish your dish as your please.

To make stewed Broth.
Take a neck of Mutton, or a rump of Beef, let it boil, and scum your pot
clean, thicken your pot with grated bread, and put in some beaten spice, as
Mace, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, and a little Pepper, put in a pound of Currants, a
pound and a half of Raisins of the Sun, 2 pound of Prunes last of all, then
when it is stewed, so season it with a quart of Claret and a pint of Sack, and
some Sanders to color it, and a pound of Sugar to sweeten it, or more if need
be, you must sees some whole spice to garnish your dish withal, and a few
whole Prunes out of your pot.

To make Gallendine sauce for a Turkey.
T^ke some Claret Wine, and some grated bread and a sprig of Rosemary, a little
beaten Cloves, a little beaten Cinnamon, and some Sugar.

An exceeding good way to stew* Chickens.
Take Chickens, fley them, and cut them in pieces corss-way, then put them in a
Pipkin or Skillet, and cover them almost with Pepper, and Mace, and water, so
let them stew softly with a whole Onion in it, till part of the liquor be
consumed, then put in as much White Wind as will cover them again, take
Parsley, sweet Marjoram, Winter-savory with a little Thyme, and shred them very
small, and put them in, and let them boil till they are almost enough, then put
in a good piece of Butter.

To boil a Leg of Mutton.
Take a Leg of Mutton, and stuff it, for the stuffing, take a little Beef suet,
and a few sweet herbs, chop them small, and stuff it, then boil it, and put in
a handful of sweet herbs, cut them small, mingle a hard Egg amongst the herbs,
and stew it upon the Mutton, melt a little Butter and Vinegar, and put into a
dish, and send it in.

To keep Quinces all the Year.
First, you must core them, and take out the kernels clean, and keep the cores
and kernels, and set over some water to boil them, then put them in when you
set over the water, then let them boil till they be a little soft, and then
take them up, and set them down till they be cold, then take the kernels and
stamp them, and put them into the same water they were boiled in, and let them
boil till they be thick, see you have as much liquor as will cover the Quinces,
and if you have not enough, take of the smallest Quinces, and stamp them to
make more liquor, and when it is boiled good and thick, you must strain it
through a coarse cloth, and when the Quinces be cold, then put them into a pot,
and the liquor also, and be sure the liquor cover them, you must lay some
weight upon them to keep them under, so cover them close, let them stand 14
days and they will work of their own accord, and they will have a thick rind
upon them, and when they wax hoary or thick, then take it from the liquor, for
it will have a skin on it within a month or six weeks.

To pickle Cucumbers.
Take the Cucumbers, and wash them clean, and dry them clean in a cloth, then
take some water, vinegar, salt, Fennel-tops, and some Dill-tops, and a little
Mace, make it fast enough, and sharp enough to the taste, then boil it a while,
and then take it off, and let it stand and be cold, then put in the Cucumbers,
and lay a board on the top to keep them down, and tie them close, and within a
week they will be fit to eat.

To pickle purslain.
Take the Purslain, and pick it i^ little pieces, and put it into a po^ or
barrel, then take a little water vinegar and salt to your taste, it mu^^ be
pretty strong of the Vinega^ and Salt, and a little Mace, an^ boil all these
together, and po^^ this liquor in seething hot into the Purslain, and when it
is cold, tie it close, but lay a little board on the top to keep it down, and
within a week or 2 it is fit to eat.

To do Clove-Gilliflowers up for Salletting all the year.
Take as many Clove-Gilliflower^ as you please, slip off the leaves, then strew
some Sugar in the bottom of the Gally-pot that you do them in, and then a lane
of Gilliflowers, and then a lane of Sugar, and so do till all the Gilliflowers
be done, then pour some Claretwine into them, as much as will cover them, then
cut a piece of a thin board, and lay it on them to keep them down, then tie
them close and set them in the Sun, and let them stand a month, or thereabouts,
but keep them from any rain or wet.

To pickle Broom-buds.
Take as many Broom-buds as you please, make linnen-bags, and put them in, and
tie them close, then make some brine with water and salt, and boil it a little,
let it be cold, then put some brine in a deep earthen pot, and put the bags in
it, and lay some weight on them, let it lie there till it look black, then
shift it again, so you must do as long as it looks black, you mu^^ boil them in
a little Cladro^^ and put them in Vinegar a wee^ or two, and then they will be
(...) to eat.

To pickle Oysters.
Take your Oysters, and pic^ them out of the shells, and save the liquor that
comes from them then take your Oysters one b^ one, and wash them clean out
^^grist, then strain the liquor, an^ take a quantity of White Wind, (...) a
large Mace or two, and 2 or (...) slices of Nutmeg, and Pepper gros^ beaten,
and salt them, boil it together, then put in your Oysters, an^ boil them, then
take the yolk of a^ Egg, and beat it well with Wine^ vinegar, then take up your
Oyster^ and let them cool, then put in yo^^ Egg, and let it boil, take it off,
le^ it cool, and put it up together.

To make Grout.
Take some Wheat and Bea^ and when you have made it into Malt, then rittle it,
take some water, or some small wort, and heat it scalding hot, and put it into
a Pail, then stir in the Malt, then take a piece of sour leaven, and stir it
about, and cover it, and let it stand till it will cream, then put in some
Orange-pills, then put it over the fire, and boil it, keeping it stirring till
all the white be gone.

To make Jelly of Marmalet.
Take Quinces, and pare them, cut them into water into little pieces, and when
you have done all, then take them out of the water, and weigh them, and to
every pound of Quinces, take five quarters of a pound of Sugar, and half a
quarter, then put it into the Skillet, and put as much water, as will make it
pretty thin, then set it on the fire, and clarify it with the white of an Egg,
and scum it off clear, then put in your Quinces, and let it boil a pretty
space, and cover it close till it is pretty thick, then leave stirring it till
it is thick enough for Marmalet, and take it off, and put it in a glass, and do
it with your knife in little works, when you have done let it stand, your
Posnet must boil all the while, you must put in as much water as will make it
pretty thin, when it is boiled to a pretty good color, then strain it, and
weigh it, then take of loafsugar, as much as it weighs, and boil it all
together to a jelly, then pour it into your Marmalet glass, then put it in a
stove, and put some fi^e in every day.

To make Jelly of Pippins.
Take Pippins, pare, quarter and core them, lay them in water, and when you set
them on the fire, shift them in another water, and put them in a skillet, and
put as much water as will cover them, and a little more, set them over the
fire, and make them boil as fast as you can, when the Apples are soft, and the
liquor tastes strong of the Apples, then take them off and strain them through a
piece of Canvas gently, take to a pound of juice a pound of Sugar, then set it
on the fire, when it is melted, strain it into a Basin, and rince your skillet
again, set it on the fire, and when it is boiled up, then scum it, and make it
boil as fast as you can, and when it is almost boiled, put in the juice of 3
Lemons strained through a cloth, if you will have Orange-pill, pare it thin,
that the white be not seen, and then lay it in the water all night, then boil
them in the water till the pill be soft, then cut them in long pieces, then put
it into the syrrup, and stir it about, and fill your glasses, and let it stand
till it be cold, and then it is ready to eat.

To preserve green Walnuts.
Take Walnuts, and boil them till the water do taste bitter, then take them off
and put them in cold water, and pill off the bark, and weigh as much Sugar as
they weigh, and a little more water than will wet the Sugar, set them on the
fire, and when they boil up take them off and let them stand 2 days and boil
them again once more.

To preserve white Quinces.
Take a pound of Quinces, boil them with the skin on, but core and pare them,
take a quarter of a pound of Sugar, with water no more than will wet the Sugar,
put the Quinces into it presently, boil them as fast as may be, and skin them,
when the Syrrup is thick, take it up.

To make Goosberry Tarts.
Take a pint of Goosberries, and put them into a quarter of a pound of Sugar,
and 2 spponfuls of water, and put them on the fire and stir them as you did the
former.

To preserve Rasberries.
Take as many as you please, a lay of Sugar, and a lay of Rasberries, and so
lay them into the Skillet, and as much water as you think will make Syrrup
enough, and boil them, and put two spoonfuls of water in, bescum it, take it
off, and let it stand.

To preserve Currants.
Part them in the tops, lay a lane of Currants, and a lane of sugar, and so boil
them as fast as you do Rasberries, do not put in the spoon, but scum them, boil
them till the syrrup be pretty thick, then take them off, and let them stand
till they be cold, and put them into a glass.

To preserve Medlars.
Take the just weight of sugar as they weigh, to a pound of sugar put a pint
and half of water, scald them as long as the skin will come off, stone them at
the head, put the water to the sugar, and boil it, and strain it, put in the
Medlars, boil them apace, let them stand till they be thick, then take them off.

To preserve Goosberries.
Take the fairest Goosberries you can get, with the stalks on, prick 3 or 4
holes in every one of them, then take the weight of them in Sugar, lay the best
part of the Sugar in the bottom of a silver or pewter dish, then lay your
Goosberries one by one upon it, strew some of the rest of the sugar upon them,
and put 2 spoonfuls of the water into half a pound, then set the Goosberries on
a Chafing Dish of coals, and let them stand uncovered, scalding upon the fire a
pretty while before they boil, but not too long, for then they will grow red,
and when they be boiling, let them not boil too fast, when they be enough, put
them up, you must put the rest of the sugar on them as they boil, and that will
harden them, and keep them from breaking.

To make Goosberry Cakes.
Pick as many Goosberries as you please, and put them into an earthen pitcher,
and set it in a kettle of water, till they be soft, and then put them into a
sive, and let them stand till all the juice be out, and weigh the juice, and as
much sugar as syrrup, first boil the sugar to a Candy, and take it off, and put
in the juice, and set it on again till it be hot, and take it off, and set them
in press till they be dry, then they are ready.

To do Goosberries like Hops.
Take pricks of black thorn, then take Goosberries, and cut them a little a
cross, take out the stones, put them upon the pricks, weigh as much sugar as
they weigh, and take a quart or a pint of water, and put into the sugar, and
let it boil a while, then put in the Hops, let them stand and scald 2 hours
upon the coals till they be soft; then take out the Hops, and boil the syrrup a
while, then take it off, and put in the Hops.

To preserve Apricocks.
First, stone them and weigh them, and take as much Sugar as Apricocks, put in
a Basin, some in the bottom, and some on the top, let them stand all night, set
them on the fire till they be scalding hot, then heat them twice more.

To make Apricock Cakes.
Take as many Apricocks as you please, and pare them, put as much Sugar as they
weigh, take no more water than will melt the Sugar, then boil the Sugar and it
together, till they be pretty stiff, then take them off, and put them in
Saucers.

To make Mackerooms.
Take half a pound of Almonds, put them in water, stamp them small, put in some
Rose Water, a good spoonful of flower, 4 Eggs, half a pound of Sugar; in the
beating of the Eggs, put in the Almonds; heat the Oven hot enough to bake a
Custard, put them in, when you have taken them out, let them stand till they be
cold, they must be baked in earthen pans round, and buttered very thin.

How to preserve white Damsons Green.
Take white Damsons, scald them in water till they be hard, then take them off,
and pick as many as you please, take as much Sugar as they weigh, strew a
little in the bottom, put 2 or 3 spoonfuls of water, then put in the Damsons
and the Sugar, and boil them, take them off, then let them stand a day or two,
then boil them again, take them off, and let them stand till they be cold.

How to preserve Mulberries.
Take as many Mulberries as you please, and as much Sugar as they weigh; first,
wet the Sugar with some juice of Mulberries, stir your Sugar together, then put
in your Mulberries, then boil them apace till you think they are boiled enough,
then take them off, and boil the syrrup a while, and put in the Mulberries, let
them stand till they be cold.

To preserve Pippins white.
Take some Pippins, and pare them and cut them the cross way, and weigh them,
add to a pound of Sugar a pint of water, then put the Sugar to the water, and
then let it boil a while, and then put in the Pippins, and let them boil till
they be clear at the core, take them off and put them up.

To make white Cheese Cakes.
Scald Quinces, and let them stand till they be cold, but not seethed till they
be tender enough, then take them off, and pare them, then scrape off the
softest, and do it through a sive, and then weigh as much Sugar as it does
weigh, and beat it, and sift it into the Quinces, and stir it all together, and
set it on the coals, and stir it about, but let it not boil at all, but let it
stand and cool till it be pretty thick, then take it off, and put it in glass
saucers.

To preserve Grapes.
Stamp and strain them let it settle a while before you wet a pound of Sugar or
Grapes with the juice, stone the Grapes, save the liquor, in the stoning, take
off the stalks, give them a boiling, take them off, and put them up.

To preserve Damsons.
Take as many as you please, and weigh as much Sugar as they weigh, and strew
some on the bottom, and some on the top, and you may wet the Sugar with some
syrrup of Damsons, and a little water, then set them on the fire, and let them
stand and soak softly about an hour, then take them off, and let them stand a
day or two, then boil them till you think they be enough, take them off, and
put them up.

To make Cakes of Lemons of Violets.
Take of the finest double refined Sugar, beaten very fine, and searced through
fine Tiffany, and to half a silver Porringer of Sugar, put to it two spoonfuls
of water, and boil it till it be almost Sugar again, then grate of the hardest
rinded Lemon, then stir it into your Sugar, put it into your coffins or paper,
and when they be cold, take them off.

How to preserve Quinces red.
Take your Quinces, and weigh them to a pound, put a pound of Sugar, and half a
pint of water, put your water to your Sugar, and let it stand, your Quinces
must be scalded till they be tender, take them off, pare them, and core them,
but not too much, then put them into the Skillet where the Sugar is, then set
them on the fire, and let them boil two hours, if it be not enough, boil it a
little more, pour it to the Quinces, and stop it close.

To make Bisket-Bread.
Take a pound and a half of white loaf Sugar, and so much flower, as much
Annise-seeds, Coriander-seed, and Carraway-seed as you please, and 12 Eggs, 3
whites left out, take the Sugar, and sift it fine, and the flower also, and
beat your Eggs a little, and mingle them well together with four spoonfuls of
Damask-Rose water, beat them well together, and put in two spoonfuls more, and
beat it again about an hour and a half in all, then butter plate-Trenchers, and
fit them with stuff, scrape some Sugar on them, and blow it off again, heat
your Oven hot enough to bake a pie, and let the lid stand up a little while to
draw down the heat from the top, then take the lid down again, and let it stand
till it be cold, that you may suffer your hand in the bottom, then set in the
plates, and set up the lid again until they rise, then take them out, and loose
them from the plates, and scrape the bottoms, and let them stand four hours,
then they be fit to eat.

How to preserve Grapes to look clear and green.
Take a pound of Grapes with no stalks on them, when they do begin to be ripe,
then weigh as much double refined Sugar, beaten small, then take the Grapes
that are weighed, stone them at the place where the stalks are, pull off the
skin, and strew some Sugar in the bottom of the thing you do them in, and so
lay them in the Sugar you did weigh, till you have stoned and pilled them, and
so strew the Sugar upon them, and set them on the fire, and let them boil as
fast as can be, till the syrrup be pretty thick, then take them off, and put
them up until they be cold.

How to candy Apricocks.
Take your Apricocks, the fairest, and scald them, and pill them, between two
cloths crush the water softly out of them, as dry as you can without too much
flatting them, then take of searced Sugar almost as much as they weigh, and
boil it all together to a candy height; then take it off the fire, and lay the
Apricocks in it one by one, with a feather anoint them over, then set them on a
Chafing Dish of coals, and let them be thorough sod, but not boil, then take
them off the fire, and set it on the Stove or Oven blood-warm, and twice a day
set them on the fire, and turn them once at every heating, anoint them with a
feather, and the same syrrup every time you take them off the fire, this do
till you see the syrrup begin to spattle, and be full of eyes, then take them
out of the syrrup, and lay them on glass-plates, and dry them in a Stove or
Oven, turning them a day or two till they be dry: white Pear-plumbs may be done
thus.

How to make Paste of Goosberries, or Barberries, or English Currants.
Take any of these tender fruits, and boil them softly on a Chafingdish of
coals, then strain them with the pap of a roasted Apple, then take as much
Sugar as it weighs, and boil it to a candy height, with as much Rose Water as
will melt the Sugar, then put in the pap of your fruit into the hot Sugar, and
let it boil leisurely, till you see it reasonable stiff, almost as thick as for
Marmalet: then fashion it on a sheet of glass, and so put it into the Oven upon
2 billets, that the glass may not touch the bottom of the Oven, for if it do,
it will make the paste rough, and so let it dry leisurely, and when it is dry
you may box it up, and keep it all the year.

How to make Paste of Oranges and Lemons.
Take your Oranges and Lemons and set on the fire 2 vessels of fair water at
once, boil them, and then shift the water 7 times, that the bitterness may be
taken from them, slit them through the midst, and take out the Kernels, and
wring out all the water from them, then beat them in an Alabaster Mortar, with
the paps of 3 or 4 Pippins, then strain it through a fine strainer, then take
as much Sugar as that pap does weigh, being boiled to a candy height, with as
much Rose Water as will melt the Sugar, then put the pap of your Oranges and
Lemons into the hot Sugar, and so let it boil leisurely with stirring, and when
you see it stiff as for Manchet, the fashion it on a sheet of glass, and so set
it in a Stove or Oven, and when it is thoroughly dry, box it up for all the year.

How to make Paste-Royal in Sauce
Take Sugar, the quantity of four ounces, very finely beaten and scarced, and
put it into an ounce of Cinnamon and Ginger, and a grain of Musk, and so beat
it into paste, with a little Gum-dragon steeped in Rose Water, and when you
have beaten it into paste in a stone Mortar, then roll it thin, and print it
with your moulders, then dry it before the fire, and when it is dry, box it up
and keep it all the year.

How to candy Pears, Plumbs, or Apricocks, that they shall look as clear as
Amber.
Take your Apricocks and Plumbs, and give every one a cut to the stone, in the
notch, and then cast Sugar on them, and bake them in an Oven as hot as for
Manchet, close stopped, bake them in an earthen Platter, let them stand half an
hour, then take them out of the dish, and lay them one by one upon Glass
plates, and so dry them; if you can get Glasses, made like Marmalet boxes to
lay over them, they will be the sooner candied; this is the manner to candy any
such fruit.

How to make Paste-Royal white, that you may make Court Boles, Caps, Gloves,
Shoes, or any pretty thing in moulds.
Take half a pound of double refined Sugar, and beat it well, and searce it
through a fine Lawn, then put it into a fine Alabaster mortar, with a little
Gum-dragon steeped in a little Rose Water, and one grain of Musk, so beat it in
a Mortar till it comes to a pretty paste, then roll it thin with a rouling-pin,
and print it with your Moulders, like Gloves, Shoes, or any thing else, and
some you may roll very thin with a rouling-pin, and let it dry in an ashen
dish, otherwise called a Court Cup, and let it stand in the dish till it be
dry, and it will be like a saucer, you must dry them on a board far from the
fire, but you must not put them in an Oven, they will be dry in two or three
hours, and be as white as snow, then you may gild box and cup.

How to make fine Diet-Bread.
Take a pound of fine Flower twice or thrice dressed, and 1 pound and a quarter
of fine sugar finely beaten, and take 7 new laid Eggs, and put away the yolk of
1 of them and beat them very well, and put 4 or 5 spoonfuls of Rose Water
amongst them, and then put them in an Alabaster or Marble mortar, and then put
in the flower and sugar by degrees, and beat it or pound it for the space of 2
hours until it be perfectly white, and then put in an ounce of Carraway-seed,
then butter your plates and sawcers, and put in of every one, and so put them
into the Oven: If you will have a glass and Ice on the top, you must wash it
with a feather, and then strew sugar very finely beaten on the top before you
put it into the Oven.

How to preserve Apricocks.
Take your Apricocks and put them into a skillet of fair water and put them
over the fire until they be something tender, then take them up out of the
water, and take a bodkin, and thrust out the stones at the top, and then pill
off their skins, and when you have done, put them into a silver dish or basin,
and lay Sugar very finely beaten over and under them, and put a spoonful or 2
of water unto them, and set them over a very soft fire until they be ready,
then take them up, and lay them into another dish a cooling, and if you see
good, boil the syrrup a little more, when they are cold, and the syrrup almost
cold, put them up in a gally-pot or glass together.

How to preserve Damsons.
Take a pound or something more of pure Sugar finely beaten, and then take a
pound of Damsons and cut a scotch in the side of each of them, and put a row of
Sugar o^ a silver dish or basin, and then lay in a row of plumbs, and then
cover it with Sugar, and so lay it in til^ they be all in, and then take two
spoonfuls of clear wheat, and make a hole in the middle of them, and set it
over a soft fire, and look to (...) carefully for fear the Sugar should burn,
and when the Sugar is all dissolved, shake them together, and stir them gently,
and then set the^ down and cover them till they be cold; and when they be cold,
s^^ them upon the coals again, and then let them boil gently till they be
ready; and when they are ready, take them down, and take them every one by its
stem, and cover them with the skin as wel^ as you can, and then put them al^
one by one in a dish, and if the syrrup be not boiled enough, set it over, and
let it boil a little longer, and when the plumbs be cold, put them in a
gally-pot, or glass, and pour the syrrup to them, while it is a little warm,
you must not forget to take away the skin of the plumbs as it rises.

How to make Pap of Barley.
Take Barley, and boil it in fair water softly until it begin to break, then
put that liquor out, then put as much hot liquor to it as you put forth, and so
let it boil till it be very soft, then put it into a Cullender and strain it,
then take a handful of Almonds, and grind them very well with your Barley, and
some of the liquor, so season it with Sugar, and a little Rose Water, a little
whole Mace and Cinnamon, and boil them well together.

How to candy Oranges and Lemons.
Take the peels of your Oranges and Lemons, the white cut away, and lay them in
water 5 or 6 days, shifting them twice every day, then sees them till they be
very tender, then take them out of the water, and let them lie until they be
cold, then cut them in small pieces square, the bigness of a penny or less,
then take to every 3, two ounces of Sugar, put to it a quantity of fair water,
and a less quantity of Rose Water, and make a syrrup thereof, then scum it very
clean, and put in your peels, and let them boil for the space of an hour, or
longer if you find your liquor wanting, you may put in more water at your
pleasure, then boil them a little space after with a little sharp fire,
stirring it always for burning, then take it off the fire 3 or 4 times,
stirring them all the while, and set them off again until they be candied.

How to make Cakes of Almonds.
Take 1 pound and a half of fine flower, of Sugar 12 ounces beaten very fine,
mingle them well together, then take half a pound of Almonds, blanch them, and
grind them fine in a mortar, then strain them with as much Sack as will mingle
the flower, Sugar and Almonds together, make a paste, bake them in an Oven not
too hot.

How to make white Lemon-Cakes.
Take half a dozen of white Lemons, the best you can get, then cut and pare
them, leave none of the yellow behind, then take away the sour meat of it, and
reserve all the white, and lay it in water 2 days, then sees it in fair water
till it be soft, then take it out and set it by till the water be gone from it,
then weigh it, and take twice the weight in Sugar, mince the white stuff very
fine, then take an earthen Pipkin, and put therein some fair water, and some
Rose Water? if you have a pound of Sugar, you must have half a pint of water,
of both sorts alike, let your water and sugar boil together, then scum it, and
put in the stuff, and so let them boil together, always stirring it till it be
thick, it will show very thin, and when it is cold, it will be thick enough.

To make Oil of Violets.
Set the Violets in Sallet-oil, and strain them, then put in other fresh
Violets, and let them lie 20 days, then strain them again and put in other
fresh Violets, and let them stand all the Year.

To preserve Pomecitrons.
Take Pomecitrons and grate off the upper skin, then slightly cut them in
pieces as you think good, lay them in water 24 hours, then set over a posnet
with fair water, and when it boils put them in, and so shift till you find the
water not to be bitter; then take them up, and weigh them, and to every pound
of Pomecitron put a pound and a quarter of Sugar, then take of your last water
a pint and quarter, set your water and sugar over the fire, then take two
whites of Eggs, and beat them with a little fair water, and when your sirrup
begins to boil, cast in the same that rises from the Eggs, and so let it boil,
then let it run through a clean fine cloth, then put in a clean posnet, and
when your sirrup begins to boil put in your Pomecitron and let it boil softly 3
or 4 hours until you find your sirrup thick enough; be sure you keep them
always under sirrup, and never turn them, take them up and put them into your
glass and when they be cold cover them.

To Candy Ringus Roots.
Take your Ringus roots, and boil them reasonable tender, then pill them and
pith them, then lay them together, then take so much sugar as they weigh, and
put it into a posnet with as much Rose Water as will melt it, then put in your
roots, and so let it boil very softly until the Sugar be consumed into the
roots, then take them, and turn them, and shake them till the Sugar be dried
up, and then lay them a drying upon a lattice of wire, until they be cold, in
like sort you may candy any other Roots, what you please.

To candy all kind of Fruitages, as Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Lettice-stocks,
Sugar Candy, such as the Comfit makers do candy the Fruits with.
Take 1 pound of refined sugar and put it into a posnet with as much water as
will wet it, and so boil it till it come to a candy^ height, then take all your
fruit being preserved and dried, then draw them through your hot sugar, and
then lay them on your hurdle, and in 1 quarter of an hour they will be finely
candied.

To candy all kind of Flowers in ways of Spanish Candy.
Take double refined Sugar, put it into a posnet with as much Rose Water as
will melt it, and put into it the pap of half a roasted Apple, and a grain
(...) let it boil till it come to a candy height, then put in your flowers,
being picked, and so let it boil; then cast them on a fine plate, and cut it in
waves with your Knife, then you may spot it with gold, and keep it.

To make Essings.
Take 1 peck of Oatmeal-grout the greatest you can get, and the whitest, pick
it clean from the black, and searce out all the smallest, then take as much
evening-milk as will cover it and something more, boil it and cool it again
till it be blood-warm, then put it to the Oatmeal, and let it soak all night,
the next morning strain it from your Milk as dry as you can through a cloth,
then take three pints of good Cream, boil it with a Mace, and the yolks of 8
Eggs, when it is boiled put it into your stuff, then put in six Eggs more,
whites and yolks; season it with a (...) quantity of Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and
Ginger, and a less quantity, of Cloves, and Mace, put in as much sugar as you
think will sweeten it, have good store of Suet, shred small and forget not
Salt, so boil them.

To make Sugar-Cakes.
Take one pound of fine flower, one pound of sugar finely beaten, and mingle
them well together, then take 7 or 8 yolks of Eggs, and if your flower be good
take one white or two as you shall think good, take 2 Cloves, and a pretty
piece of Cinnamon, and lay it in a spoonful of Rose Water all night, and heat
it almost blood-warm, temper it with the rest of the stuff, when the paste is
made, make it up with as much have as you can, bake them in a soft oven.

To make a Calves-foot Pie.
Take your Calves feet, boll them and blanch them, then boil them again till
they be tender, then take out all the bon^^ (...) with Cloves, Mace, Ginger,
a^^ Cinnamon, as much as you shall think good, then put in a good quantity of
Currants and Butter, bake your Pie in a soft Oven, and when it is baked take
half a pint of White Wind Vinegar, beat 3 yolks of Eggs, and put to the coals,
season it with sugar, and a little Rose Water, always stirring it, then put it
into your Pie, and let it stand half a quarter of an hour.

How to make a very good Pie.
Take the backs of four white Herrings watered, the bones and skin taken away,
then take so much Wardens in quantity pared and cored, half a pound of Raisins
of the Sun stoned, mince all these together, and season it with Cinnamon and
Ginger, and when the Pie is baked, put in a little Rose Water, and scrape sugar
on it, if you put in Butter, then put in a handful of grated bread.

(...) Cimbals.
^ake fine flower dried, and as much sugar as Flower, then take as much whites
of Eggs as will make it paste, and put in a little Rose Water, then put in a
quantity of Coriander-seed, and Annise seed, then mold it up in that fashion
you will bake it in.

How to preserve Angelica Roots.
Take the Roots and wash them, then slice them very thin, and lay them in water
3 or 4 days, change the water every day, then put the roots into a pot of
water, and set them in the embers all night, in the morning put away the water,
then take a pound of roots, 4 pints of water, and two pound of sugar, let it
boil, and scum it clean, then put in the roots, it will be boiled before the
sirrup, then take them up, and boil the sirrup after, they will ask you a whole
days work, for they must boil very softly, at St. Andrew's time it is the best
time to do them in all the Year.

To boil a Capon with Brewis.
Take a Capon, and truss him to boil; then set on the fire a good quantity of
water, scum it very clean before you set on your Capon, put a little water,
Savory and Thyme into the belly of it, and a little salt, and gross pepper,
when you have scummed it clean, cover it close to boil, then take a good
handful of herbs, as Marigolds, Violet-leaves, or any such green herbs as you
shall think fit, wash them and set them on the fire with some of the uppermost
of the broth that boils the Capon, then put into it good store of Mace, and
boil it with the Capon, when the herbs be boiled and the broth very green, and
almost consumed away, take the uppermost of your Capon, and strain it together,
and scald your Brewis, and put it into a dish, and lay the Capon on them.

To make a Spice Cake.
Take one bushel of Flower, six pound of Butter, eight pound of Currants, two
pints of Cream, a pottle of Milk, half a pint of good Sack, 2 pound of Sugar, 2
ounces of Mace, 1 ounce of Nutmegs, 1 ounce of Ginger, twelve yolks, 2 whites,
take the Milk and Cream, and stir it all the time that it boils, put your hot
seething milk to it and melt all the Butter in it, and when it is blood warm,
temper the Cake, put not your Currants in till you have made the paste, you must
have some Aleyeast, and forget not salt.

To make Broth of a Neats-tongue.
Take Claret Wine, grated bread, Currants, sweet Butter, Sugar, Cinnamon,
Ginger, boil them altogether, then take the Neats-tongue and slice it, and lay
it on a dish upon sippets, and so serve it.

To souce a Carp or Gurnet.
Take fair Water and Vinegar, so that it may be sharp, then take Parsley, Time,
Fennel, and boil them in the broth a good while, then put in a good quantity of
Salt, and then put in your Fish, and when it is well boiled, put the broth into
a vessel and let it stand.

To make a fine Pudding.
Take Crumbs of white bread, and so much fine flower, then take the yolks of
four Eggs, and one white, a good quantity of Sugar, take so much good Cream as
will temper it as thick as you would make pancake-batter, then butter your pan,
and bake it, so serve it casting some Sugar upon it; you must shred suet very
small and put it into it.

To make a broth to drink.
Take a Chicken and a little of the neck of Mutton, and set them on, and scum
it well, then put in a large mace, and so let it boil while the Chicken be
tender, then take the Chicken out, and beat it all to pieces in a stone Mortar,
and put it in again, and so let it boil from four pints to a little more than
half a pint, then cast it through a strainer, and season it.

To boil a Chicken, or Partridge.
Take your Chicken, and set it a boiling with a little of the neck of Mutton,
and scum it well, then put in a Mace, and so let it boil down, and when it is
almost boiled, have some few herbs parboiled, as Lettice, Endive, Spinach,
Marigold-leaves, for note, these herbs are usually used to be boiled, which by
course will hold their color in boiling, and put some of these aforesaid herbs
to the Chicken and Mutton, if you think your broth strong enough, take out your
Mutton, then you may put a little piece of sweet butter, and a little Verjuice,
and a very little Sugar, and Salt, so serve it in with sippets.

A Broth to drink.
Take a Chicken, and set it on, and when it boils, scum it, then put in a Mace,
and a very little Oatmeal, and such herbs as the party requires, and boil it
well down, and bruise the Chicken, and put it in again, and it is a pretty
Broth; and to alter it, you may put in half a dozen Prunes, and leave out the
herbs, or put them in, so when it is well boiled, strain it, and season it.

A Broth to eat on Fasting-days.
Take fair water, and set it a boiling, and when it is boiled, put to it so
much strained Oatmeal as you think will thicken it, and a large Mace, a handful
of Raisins of the Sun, as many Prunes, and as many Currants, if your quantity
require so boil it, and when it is boiled, season it with salt and sugar, and a
piece of sweet butter if the time will allow it; and for an alteration, when
this broth is boiled, put in a quantity of Cream, and it will do well.

To make a Ponado.
The quantity you will make set on in a posnet of fair water, when it boils,
put a mace in, and a little piece of Cinnamon, and a handful of Currants, and so
much bread as you think meet, so boil it, and season it with Salt, Sugar, and
Rose Water, and so serve it.

To make a Caudle.
Take Ale the quantity that you mean to make, and set it on the fire, and when
it is ready to boil, scum it very well, then cast in a large mace, and take the
yolks of 2 Eggs, for 1 Mess, or one draught, and beat them well, and take away
the skin of the yolks, and then put them into the Ale, when it seetheth, be
sure to stir them well till it sees again for a young-ling, then let it boil a
while and put in your Sugar, and if it be to eat, cut three or four toasts of
bread thin, and toast them dry, but not brown, and put them to the caudle, if
to drink put none.

To make Almond Butter.
Blanch your Almonds, and beat them as fine as you can with fair water 2 or 3
hours, then strain them through a linen cloth, boil them with Rose Water,
whole mace and Annise-seeds, till the substance be thick, spread it upon a fair
cloth, draining the whey from it, after let it hang in the same cloth some few
hours, then strain it and season it with Rose Water and Sugar.

To stew Beef.
Take a good Rump of Beef, cut from the bones, shred Turnips and Carrots small,
and Spinach, and Lettice, put all in a pan, and let it stew 4 hours with so
much water, and a quart of White Wind as will cover it, when it is stewed
enough, then put in a Wine-glass full of Elder Vinegar, and serve it in with
sippets.

To souce a young Pig.
Take a young Pig being scalded, boil it in fair water, and White Wind, put
thereto Bay Leaves, whole Ginger, and Nutmeg quartered, a few whole Cloves,
boil it thoroughly, and leave it in the same broth in an earthen pot.

To boil Flownders or Pickerels after the French fashion.
Take a pint of White Wind, the tops of young Time and Rosemary, a little whole
mace, a little whole Pepper, seasoned with Verjuice, salt, and a piece of sweet
Butter, and so serve it, this broth will serve to boil fish twice or thrice in,
or four times.

To make flesh of Apricocks.
Take Apricocks when they are green, and pare them, slice them, and take half
their weight in sugar, put it to them, so put them in a Skillet, and as much
water as you think will melt the sugar, so let them boil, and keep them
stirring till they be tender, and so take them off, and scum them very clean,
so put them forth of the skillet and let them stand, take as much sugar as you
had before, and boil them into a candy height, and then put in your Apricocks
and set them over a soft fire but let them not boil, so keep them with often
stirring, till the syrrup begin to jelly, then put them in glasses, and keep
them for your use.

To make flesh of Quinces.
Take Quinces, pare them, and core them, and cut them in halfs, boil them in a
thin syrrup till they be tender, then take them off, and let them lie in
syrrup; then take Quinces, pare and quarter them, take out the cores, put as
much water to them as will cover them, then boil them till they be very tender,
and then strain out the liquor clean from them, and take unto a pint of that
liquor a pound of sugar, put as much water to the sugar as will melt it, then
boil it, to a candy height; then stir the Quinces that are in the syrrup as
thin as you can, when your sugar is at a full candy height, put in a pint of
the liquor, then set it over a soft fire, stirring it leisurely till the sugar
be dissolved, then put in half a pound of your slices, keeping it still
stirring, but not to boil, you must take the jelly of Quinces kernels that have
lain in water 2 or 3 hours, take 2 good spoonfuls of it, and put it to the
flesh, so keep it stirring leisurely till it begin to jelly upon the spoon,
then put it into thin glasses, and keep it in a stove.

To preserve Oranges.
Take a pound of Oranges, and a pound of sugar, pill the outward rind, and
inward white skin off, take juice of oranges, put them into the juice, boil
them half an hour, and take them off.

To dry Cherries.
Take the fairest Cherries, stone them, take to six pound of Cherries, a pound
of sugar, put them into a Skillet, straining the sugar among them, as you put
them in, then put as much water to them as will boil them, then set them upon a
quick fire, let them boil up, then take them off, and strain them very clean,
put them into an earthen pan or pot, let them stand in the liquor 4 days, then
take them up and lay them severally one by one upon silver or earthen dishes,
set them in an Oven after the bread is taken out, and so shift them every day
upon dry dishes, and so till they be dry.

To dry Peaches.
Take Peaches and coddle them, take off the skins, stone them, take to four
pound of Peaches, a pound of sugar, then take a gally pot and lay a lane of
Peaches, and a lane of sugar, till all be laid out, then put in half a pint of
water, so cover them close, and set them in embers to keep warm, so let them
stand a night and a day, put them in a skillet, and set them on the fire to be
scalding hot, then put them into your pot again, and let them stand 24 hours,
then scald them again, then take them out of your syrrup, and lay them on
silver dishes to dry, you may dry them in an Oven when the bread is taken out,
but to dry them in the Sun is better, you must turn them every day into clear
dishes.

To boil Veal.
Take Veal and cut it in thin slices, and put it into a pipkin with as much
water as will cover it, then wash a handful of Currants, and as much Prunes,
then take a Courtroul, and cut it in long slices like a Butchers skiver, then
put in a little Mace, Pepper and Salt, a piece of Butter, and a little Vinegar
some crumbs of bread, and when it has stewed 2 hours take it up and serve it.

To boil a Capon in white broth.
Truss a Capon to boil, and put it into a pipkin of water, and let it boil 2
hours, and when it is boiled take up a little of the broth, then take the yolks
of Eggs, and beat them very fair with your broth that you take up, then set it
by the fire to keep warm, season it with grated Nutmeg, Sugar, and Salt, then
take up your Capon, and pour this broth on with a little sack, if you have it,
garnish it with sippets, and serve it, remember to boil whole Mace with your
Capon, and Marrow if you have it.

To boil a Capon or Chicken in white broth with Almonds.
Boil your Capon as in the other, then take Almonds, and blanch them, and beat
them very small, putting in sometimes some of your broth to keep them from
boiling: when they are beaten small enough, put as much of the uppermost broth
to them, as will serve to cover the Capon, then strain it, and wring out the
substance clear, then season it as before, and serve it with marrow on it.

How to boil Brawn.
Water your Brawn 24 hours, wash and scrape it 4 or 5 times, then take it out
of the water, and lay it on a fair Table, then throw a handful of salt on every
collar, then bind them up as fast as you can, with Hemp, Bass or Incle, then
put them into your Kettle, when the water boileth, and when it boileth scum it
clean, let it boil until it be so tender that you may thrust a straw through
it, then let it cool until the next morning. By the souced meats you may know
how to souce it.

How to boil a Gammon of Bacon.
Water your Gammon of Bacon 24 hours, then put it into a deep kettle, with some
sweet Hay, let it boil softly 6 or 7 hours, then take it up with a scummer and
a plate, and take off the skin whole, then stick your Gammon full of Cloves,
strew on some gross pepper, and cut your skin like sippets, then garnish your
Gammon, and when you serve it, stick it with bays.

How to boil a Rabbet.
Fley and wash the Rabbet, and slit the hinder leg on both sides of the
backbone, from the forward, and truss them to the body, set the head right up
with a skuer, right down in the neck, then put it to boiling, with as much
water as will cover it; when it boils, scum it, season it with Mace, Ginger,
Salt and Butter, then take a handful of Parsley, and a little Time, boil it by
it self, then take it up* beat it with the back of a knife, then take up your
Rabbet, and put it in a dish, then put your herbs to your broth, and scrape in
a Carret-root, let your broth boil a little while, put in Salt, pour it on your
Rabbet, and serve it in.

How to boil a Mallard with a Cabbage.
Half roast your Fowl, then take it off, and cast it down, then put it into a
Pipkin with the gravy, then pick and wash some Cabbage, and put to your
Mallard, with as much fair water as will cover it, then put in a good piece of
butter, and let it boil an hour, season it with pepper and salt, and serve it
upon sops.

How to boil a Duck with Turnips.
Half roast her, then cover her with liquor, boil your Turnips by themselves,
half an hour, then cut them in cakes, and put them to your Duck with Butter and
Parsley chopped small, when it has boiled half an hour, season it with Pepper
and Salt, and serve it upon sops.

How to boil Chickens, and Sorrel-sops.
Truss your Chickens, and boil them in water and salt very tender, then take a
good handful of Sorrel, beat it stalks and all, then strain it, and take a
Manchet, and cut it in sippets, and dry them before the fire, then put your
green broth upon the coals, season it with Sugar, and grated Nutmeg, and let it
stand until it be hot, then put your sippets into a dish, put your Chickens
upon them, and pour sauce upon it, and serve it.

How to boil a Pike in white Broth.
Cut your Pike in 3 pieces, and boil it with water and salt, and sweet herbs,
let it boil until it strain, then take the yolks of half a dozen Eggs, and beat
them with a little Sack, Sugar, melted butter, and some of the Pikes broth,
then put it on the fire to keep it warm but stir it often lest it curdle, then
take up your Pike, and put the head and tail together, then cleave the other
pieces in two, take out the backbone, and put one piece on the one side, and
the other piece on the other side, but blanch all, then pour on your white
broth, garnish your dish with sippets and boiled parsley, and strew on powder
of Ginger, and wipe the edge of the dish round, and serve it.

How to boil diverse kinds of Fish.
Bat, Conger, Thornback, Plaice, Salmon, Trout or Mullet, boil any of these
with water, salt, and sweet herbs, when they boil, scum it very clean, then put
in vinegar, and let it boil till you think it is enough, your liquor must be
very hot of the salt, then take it off, you may let it stand 5 or 6 days in the
liquor, then if you would keep it longer, pour that liquor away, and put water
and salt to it, or soucing drink, you must remember to let your Mullets boil
softly, and your Thornback and other fish very fast, you must blanch your
Thornback while it is warm, and when you serve any of those fishes, strew on
some green herbs.

How to make a Sallet of all manner of Herbs.
Take your Herbs, and pick them clean, and the flowers, wash them clean, and
swing them in a strainer, then put them into a dish, and mingle them with
Cucumbers and Lemons sliced very thin, then scrape on sugar and put in vinegar
and oil, then spread the flowers on the top, garnish your dish with hard Eggs,
and all sorts of your flowers, scrape on sugar, and serve it in.

How to stew Steaks between two Dishes.
You must put Parsley, Currants, Butter, Verjuice, and 2 or 3 yolks of Eggs,
Pepper, Cloves and Mace, and so let them boil together, and serve them upon
sops, likewise you may do steaks of Mutton or Beef.

How to stew Calves feet.
Boil them, and blanch them, cut them in two, and put them into a Pipkin with
strong broth, then put in a little powder of Saffron, and sweet Butter, Pepper,
Sugar, and some sweet herbs finely minced, let them stew an hour, put in salt
and save them.

How to stew a Mallard.
Roast your Mallard half enough, then take it up, and cut it in little pieces,
then put it into a dish with the gravy, and a piece of fresh Butter, and a
handful of Parsley chopped small with two or three Onions, and a Cabbage-lettice,
let them stew one hour, then season it with pepper, and salt, and a little
Verjuice, then serve it.

How to stew Trouts.
Draw your Trouts, and wash them, and then put them into a dish with
White Wind, and water, and a piece of fresh Butter, then take a handful of
Parsley, a little Thyme, and a little Savory; mince these small, and put to
your Trouts with a little sugar, let them stew half an hour, then mingle the
yolks of 2 or 3 hard Eggs, and strew them on your Trouts with Pepper and salt,
then let them stew a quarter of an hour and serve them.

How to stew Smelts or Flounders.
Put your Smelts or Flounders into a deep dish with White Wind and water, a
little Rosemary and Thyme a piece of fresh Butter, and some large Mace, and
salt, let them stew half an hour, then take a handful of Parsley and boil it,
then beat it with the back of a knife, then take the yolks of 3 or 4 Eggs, and
beat them stiff some of your fish broth, then dish up your fish upon sippets,
pour on your sauce, scrape on sugar, and serve it.

How to stew Rabbets.
Half roast it, then take it off the Spit, and cut it in little pieces, and put
it into a dish with the gravy, and as much liquor as will cover it, then put in
a piece of fresh butter, and some powder of Ginger, some Pepper and Salt, 2 or
3 Pippins minced small, let these stew an hour, then dish them upon sippets.

How to stew a Pullet or Capon.
Half roast it, then cut it in pieces, put it into a dish with the gravy, and
put in a little Cloves and Mace with a few Barberries or Grapes, put these to
your Pullet with a pint of Claret, and a piece of Butter, let these stew an
hour, dish them upon sippets and serve it.

How to stew cold Chickens.
Cut them in pieces, put them into a pipkin of strong broth, and a piece of
Butter, then grate some bread and a Nutmeg, thicken your broth with it, season
your meat with gross Pepper, and Salt, dish it upon sippets, and serve it.

How to make Paste for a Pasty of Venison.
Take almost a peck of Flower, wet it with two pound of Butter, and as much
suet, then wet your Paste, put in the yolks of 8 or 10 Eggs, make reasonable
light paste, then roll it and lay it on suet, first lay a paper under your
paste, then lay on your Venison, close it, pink it, baste it with butter, and
bake it, when you draw it out, baste it with butter again.

How to make paste for a Pie to keep long.
Your flower must be of Rye, and your liquor nothing but boiling water, make
your paste as stiff as you can, raise your coffin very high, let your bottom
and sides be very thick and your lid also.

How to make past for a Custard.
Your liquor must be boiling water, make your paste very stiff, then roll out
your paste, and if you would make a great Tart, then raise it, and when you
have done cut the bottom a little from the side, then roll out a thin sheet of
paste, lay paper under it, strew flower that it may not stick to it; then put
your coffin on it, of what fashion you will, then dry it, and fill it, and bake
it.

How to make Paste for buttered Loaves.
Take a pottle of flower, put thereto Ginger, and Nutmeg, then wet it with
milk, yolks of Eggs, Yest, and Salt, then make it up into little loaves, then
butter a paper, and put the loaves on it, then bake them, and when they are
baked, draw them forth, and cut them in Cakes, butter them, then set them as
they were, scrape on sugar, and serve them.

How to make Paste for Dumplins.
Season your flower with Pepper, Salt, and Yest, let your water be more than
warm, then make them up like Manchet, but let them be somewhat little, then put
them into your water when it boileth, and let them boil an hour, then butter
them.

To make Puff Paste.
Take a quart of flower and a pound and half of Butter, and work the half pound
of Butter dry into the flower, then put in 3 or 4 Eggs to it, and as much cold
water as will make it a little paste, then work it in a piece of a foot long,
then strain a little flower on the table, and take it by the end, beat it while
it stretch long, then put the 2 ends together, and beat it again, and so do 5
or 6 times, then work it up round, and roll it out broad, then beat your pound
of butter with a rouling pin that it may be light, then take little bits of
your butter, and stick it all over the paste, then fold up your paste close,
and coast it down with your rouling-pin, and roll it out again, and so do five
or six times, then use it as you will.

To bake a Gammon of Bacon.
You must first boil it two hours before you stuff it, stuff it with sweet
herbs, and hard Eggs chopped together with Parsley.

To bake Fillets of Beef, or clods, instead of Red dear.
First, take your Beef, and lard it very thick, then season it with Pepper,
Salt, Ginger, Cloves and Mace good store, and a great deal more Pepper and Salt
than you would do to a piece of Venison, then close it, and when it is baked,
put in some Vinegar, Sugar, Cinnamon, and Ginger, and shake it well, then stop
the vent-hole, and let it stand three weeks before you spend it.

How to bake Calves feet.
Season them with Pepper, Salt and Currants, when they be baked, take the yolks
of 3 or 4 Eggs, and beat them with Verjuice, or Vinegar, Sugar, and grated
Nutmeg, put it into your Pie, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

How to bake a Turkey.
Take out his Bones and Guts, then wash him, then prick his back together
again, then parboil him, season him with Pepper and Salt, stick some Cloves in
the breast of him, then lard him, and put him into your Coffin with butter, in
this sort you may bake a Goose, Pheasant or Capon.

To bake a Hare.
Take out his bones, and beat the flesh in a mortar with the Liver, then season
it with all sorts of spices, then work it up with 3 or 4 yolks of Eggs, then
lay some of it all over the bottom of the Pie then lay on some lard, and so do
until you have laid on all, then bake it well with good store of sweet butter.

To bake Quinces or Wardens, so as the fruit look red, and the crust white.
Your Wardens must be stewed in a pipkin with Claret Wine, Sugar, Cinnamon, and
Cloves, then cover your pipkin with a sheet of paste, and let it stand in the
Oven five or six hours, then raise a Coffin of short paste put in your Wardens
with Sugar, and put it into the Oven, when it has stood an hour, take it out
and wash it with Rose Water and butter, then scrape on Sugar and put it in a
quarter of an hour more, and it will be red upon the top, then scrape on sugar
and serve it.

To bake Chucks of Veal.
Parboil 2 pound of the lean flesh of a Leg of Veal, mince it as small as
grated bread, with 4 pound of Beef Suet, then season it with Biskay, Dates and
Carraways, and some Rose Water, Sugar, Raisins of the Sun, and Currants, Cloves,
Mace, Nutmeg, and Cinnamon, then mingle them all together, fill your pies and
beat them.

To bake a Chicken Pie.
Season your Chickens with nutmeg, salt, pepper, and sugar, then put them into
your coffin, then take some marrow and season with the same spice, then roll it
in yoks of Eggs, and lay it on your Chicken, with minced Dates, and good store
of butter, then bake it, and put in a little sack, or Muscadine, or White Wind
and sugar, then shake it, scrape on sugar and serve it.

How to bake a Steak Pie.
Cut a Neck of Mutton in steaks, beat them with a Cleaver, season them with
Pepper, and Salt, and Nutmeg, then lay them on your Coffin with Butter and
large Mace, then bake it, then take a good quantity of Parsley, and boil it,
beat it as soft as the pap of an Apple, put in a quarter of a pint of Vinegar,
and as much White Wind, with a little sugar, warm it well, and put it over your
steaks, then shake it, that the gravy and the liquor may mingle together,
scrape on sugar, and serve it.

To make an Italian Pudding.
Take Manchet, and cut it in square pieces like a Die, then put it to half a
pound of Beef Suet minced small, Raisins of the Sun the stones picked out,
Cloves, Mace, minced Dates, Sugar, Marrow, Rose Water, Eggs and Cream, mingle
all these together, and put it into a dish fit for your stuff, in less than an
hour it will be baked, then scrape on sugar, and serve it in.

How to make a Florentine.
Take the Kidney of a Loin of Veal, or the wing of a Capon, or the leg of a
Rabbet, mince any of these small, with the Kidney of a Loin of Mutton; if it be
not fat enough, then season it with Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs and Sugar, Cream,
Currants, Eggs and Rose Water, mingle these four together and put them into a
dish between two sheets of paste, then close it, and cut the paste round by the
brim of the dish, then cut it round about like Virginal Keys, then turn up one,
and let the other lie, then pink it, cake it, scrape on sugar, and serve it.

To Roast a Breast of Veal.
Take parsley and Thyme, wash them, and chop them small, then take the yolks of
five or six Eggs, grated bread and Cream, mingle them together with Cloves,
Mace, Nutmeg, Currants and Sugar, then raise up the skin of the breast of Veal,
and put it in your stuff, prick it up close with a Skuer, then roast it, and
bast it with butter, when it is roasted, wring on the juice of a Lemon, and
serve it.

To roast a Hare.
Case your Hare, but cut not off her ears nor legs, then wash her, and dry her
with a cloth, then make a pudding, and put into her belly, then sow it up
close, then truss her as if she were running, then spit her, then take some
Claret Wine, and grated bread, Sugar, and Ginger, Barberries, and butter, boil
these together for your sauce.

To roast a Shoulder of Mutton.
Roast it with a quick fire, that the fat may drop away, and when you think it
is half roasted, set a dish under it, and flesh it with a knife across as you
do Pork, but you must cut it down to the bone on both the sides, till the gravy
run into the dish, baste it no more after you have cut it, put unto the gravy
half a pint of White Wind Vinegar, a handful of Capers and Olives, five or six
blades of Mace, a handful of Sugar, and stew all these together, and pour it on
your meat.

To roast a Neats-tongue.
Boil him and blanch him, cut out the meat at the butt-end, and mingle it with
Beef-suit as much as an Egg, then season it with Nutmeg, and Sugar, Dates,
Currants, and yolks of raw Eggs, then put your meat to the Tongue, and bind it
with a Cawl of Veal or Mutton, then roast it, baste it with butter, save the
gravy, and put thereto a little Sack or Muscadine, let it stew a little while,
then pour it in to your Tongues, and serve it.

How to roast a Pig with a Pudding in his belly.
Fley a fat Pig, truss his head looking over his back, then temper as much
stuff as you think will fill his belly, then put it into your Pig, and prick it
up close, when it is almost roasted, wring on the juice of a Lemon, when you
are ready to take it up, take four or five yolks of Eggs, and wash your Pig all
over, mingle your bread with a little Nutmeg, and Ginger, then dry it, and take
it up as fast as you can, let your sauce be Vinegar, Butter, and Sugar, the
yolk of a hard Egg minced, and serve it hot.

How to roast a Leg of Mutton.
Cut holes in a Leg of Mutton, with a knife, then thrust in slices of Kidney
suet, and stick it with Cloves, roast it with a quick fire, when it is half
roasted, cut off a piece underneath, and cut it into thin slices, then take a
pint of great Oysters with the liquor, 3 or 4 blades of Mace, a little Vinegar
and Sugar, stew these till the liquor be half consumed, then dish up your
Mutton, pour on the sauce, and serve it.

How to roast a Neck of Mutton.
Cut away the swag, and roast it with a quick fire, but scorch it not, baste it
with butter a quarter of an hour, after wring on the juice of half a Lemon,
save the gravy, then baste it with butter again, wring on the other half of the
Lemon, when it is roasted, dry it with Manchet, and grated Nutmeg, then dish
it, and pour on your sauce.

To roast a Shoulder or Haunch of Venison, or Chine of Mutton.
Take any of the meats, and lard them, prick them with Rosemary, baste them
with butter, then take half a pint of Claret Wine, Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar,
grated bread, Rosemary and Butter, let all these boil together, until it be as
thick as water gruel, then put in a little Rose Water and Musk, it will make
your Gallentine taste very pleasantly, put it on a fitting dish, draw off your
meat, lay it into that dish, strew it with salt.

To roast a Shoulder or Fillet of Veal.
Take Parsley, Winter-savory, and Thyme, mince these small with hard Eggs,
season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, Currants, work these together with raw yolks of
Eggs, then stuff your meat with this, roast it with a quick fire, baste it with
Butter, when it is roasted, take the gravy and put thereto Vinegar, Sugar and
Butter, let it boil, when your meat is roasted, pour this sauce on it, and
serve it.

To roast a Gigget of Mutton.
Take your Gigget with Cloves, and Rosemary, and lard it, roast it, baste it
with butter, and save the gravy, put thereto some Claret wine, with a handful
of Capers, season it with Ginger and Sugar, when it is boiled well, dish up
your Gigget, and pour on your sauce.

To Fry a Chicken.
Boil your Chicken in water and Salt, then quarter them into a pan with sweet
butter, and let them fry leisurely, then put thereto a little Verjuice, and
Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Ginger, the yolks of two or three raw Eggs, stir these
well together, and dish up your Chickens, pour the sauce upon them.

How to fry Calves feet.
Boil them, and blanch them, then cut them in two, then take good store of
Parsley, put thereto some yolks of Eggs, season it with Nutmeg, Sugar, Pepper,
and Salt, then roll your Calves-feet in them, and fry them with sweet butter,
then boil some Parsley, and beat it very tender, put to it Vinegar, Butter and
Sugar, heat it hot, then dish up your feet upon sippets, pour on your sauce,
scrape on some Sugar, and serve it hot.

How to fry Tongues.
Boil them, and blanch them, cut them in thin slices, season them with Nutmeg,
Sugar, Cinnamon, and Salt, then put thereto the yolks of raw Eggs, the core of
a Lemon cut in square pieces ^ike a Die, then fry them in spoonfuls with sweet
Butter, let your sauce be White Wind, Sugar and Butter, heat it hot, and pour
it (...) your Tongues, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

How to make Fritters.
Make your Batter with Ale, Eggs and Yest, season it with Milk, Cloves, Mace,
Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Salt, cut your Apples like Beans, then put your Apples
and Batter together, fry them in boiling Lard, strew on sugar, and serve them.

To souce Brawn.
Take up your Brawn while i^ is hot out of your boiler, then cover it with
Salt, when it has stood an hour, turn the end that was under upward, then
strew, (...) salt upon that, then boil you^ soucing-drink, and put thereto
(...) good deal of salt, when it is cold (...) put in your Bra^^^ with the Sa^
that is about it, and let it stan^ ten days, then change your so^^cing drink,
and as you change (...) put in salt, when you spend it, (...) it be too salt,
change it with fre^ drink.

To souce a Pig.
Cut off the head, and cut you^ Pig into two sleaks, and take o^ the bones,
then take a handful (...) sweet Herbs, and mince them small, then season your
Pig and Herbs with Nutmeg, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, and Salt, then strew your
Herbs on the inside of your Pig, then roll them up like two Collars of Brawn,
then bind them in a cloth fast, then put them a boiling in the boiling-pot, put
in some Vinegar and Salt, when they are boiled very tender, take them off, let
them stand in the same liquor 2 or 3 days, then put them into soucing-drink,
and serve it with Mustard and Sugar.

How ^^^ouce Eels.
Take 2 salt^ ^els, and fley them, cut them down the back, and take out the
bones, and take good store of Parsley, Thyme, and sweet Marjoram, mince them
small, season them with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper and Salt, strew your herbs in
the inside of your Eels, then roll them up like a Collar of Brawn, put them
into a cloth, and boil them tender with salt and Vinegar, when they are boiled,
then take them up, let it be in the pickle two or three days, and then spend
them.

How to souce a Breast of Veal.
Take out the bones of a Breast of Veal, and lap it in water 10 or 12 hours,
then take all manner of sweet herbs, and mince them small, then take a Lemon
and cut it in thin slices, then lay it with your herbs in the inside of your
breast of Veal, then roll it up like a Collar, and bind it in a cloth, and boil
it very tender, then put it into soucing-drink, and spend it.

To souce a Tench or Barbel.
First cut them down the back, then wash them, and put them a boiling in no
more water than will cover them, when they boil, put in some Salt and Vinegar,
scum it very clean, when it is boiled enough, take it up, and put it into a
dish fit for the Fish, then take out the bones, pour on as much liquor as will
cover it, with grated Nutmeg, and powder of Cinnamon, when it is cold serve it.

To souce a Fillet of Veal.
Take a fair Fillet of Veal, and lard it very thick, but take out the bones,
season it with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper, and Salt, then roll it up hard, let your
liquor be the one half White Wind, the other half water; when your liquor
boileth put in your meat, with Salt and Vinegar, and the peel of a Lemon, then
scum it very clean, let it boil until it be tender, then take it not up until
it be cold, and souce it in the same liquor.

To marble Beef, Mutton, or Venison.
Stick any of these with Rosemary and Cloves, then roast it, being first joined
very well, then baste it often with water and salt, and when it is thoroughly
roasted take it up, and let it cool, then take Claret Wine and Vinegar, and as
much water, boil it with Rosemary, Bays, good store of Pepper, Cloves, Salt;
when it has boiled an hour, take it off, and let it cool, then put your meat
into a Vessel, and cover it with this liquor and Herbs, then stop it up close,
the closer you stop it, the longer it will keep.

To marble Fish.
Take Flounders, Trouts, Smelts or Salmons, Mullets, Mackrels or any kind of
shellfish, wash them and dry them with a cloth, then fry them with
Sallade-Oyl, or clarified Butter, fry them very crispe, then make your pickle
with Claret Wine and fair water, some Rosemary and Thyme, with Nutmegs cut in
slices, and Pepper and Salt, when it has boiled half an hour, take it off, and
let it cool, then put your fish into a Vessel, cover it with liquor and spice,
and stop it close.

How to make a Tart of Wardens.
You must first bake your Wardens in a pot, then cut them in quarters, and core
them, then put them into your Tart, with sugar, Cinnamon, and Ginger, then
close up your Tart, and when it is almost baked, do it as your Wardenpie,
scrape on sugar and serve it.

To make a Tart of green Pease.
Take green Pease, and sees them tender, then pour them out into a Cullender,
season them with Saffron, salt, and sweet butter, and sugar, then close it,
then bake it almost an hour; then draw it forth, and ice it, put in a little
Verjuice, and shake it well, then scrape on sugar and serve it.

How to make a Tart of Rice.
Boil your Rice, and pour it into a Cullender, then season it with Cinnamon,
Nutmeg, Ginger, and Pepper and Sugar, the yolks of 3 or 4 Eggs, then put it
into your Tart, with the juice of an Orange, then close it, bake it, and ice
it, scrape on sugar and serve it.

How to make a Tart of Medlars.
Take Medlars that are rotten, then scrape them, then set them upon a
chafing dish of coals, season them with the yolks of Eggs, Sugar, Cinnamon, and
Ginger, let it boil well, and lay it on paste, scrape on Sugar and serve it.

How to make a Tart of Cherries.
Take out the stones, and lay the Cherries into your Tart, with Sugar, Ginger,
and Cinnamon; then close your Tart, bake it and ice it, then make a sirrup of
Muskadine, and Damask-water, and pour this into your Tart, scrape on sugar and
serve it.

How to make a Tart of Strawberries.
Wash your Strawberries, and put them into your Tart, season them with Sugar,
Cinnamon, Ginger, and a little Red-wine, then close it, and bake it half an
hour, ice it, scrape on sugar and serve it.

To make a Tart of Hips.
Take Hips and cut them, and take out the seeds very clean, then wash them,
season them with sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger, then close your Tart, bake it, ice
it, scrape on sugar, serve it.

How to make a Pippin Tart.
Take fair Pippins and pare them, then cut them in quarters and core them, then
stew them with Claret Wine, Cinnamon and Ginger, let them stew half an hour
then pour them out into a Cullender, but break them not, when they are cold,
lay them one by one into the Tart, then lay on Sugar, bake it, ice it, scrape
on sugar, and serve it.

How to scald Milk after the Western fashion.
When you bring your Milk from the Cow, strain it into an earthen pan, and let
it stand two hours, then set it over the fire till it begin to heave in the
middle, then take it off, but jog it as little as you can, then put it into a
room where it may cool, and no dust fall into it, this Milk or Cream you may
keep two or three days.

To make a Junket.
Take Ewes or Goats milk, if you have neither of these, then take Cows-milk,
and put it over the fire to warm, then put in a little Runnet to it, then pour
it out into a dish, and let it cool, then strew on Cinnamon and sugar, then
take some of your aforesaid Cream and lay on it, scrape on sugar and serve it.

To make Cream Clutter.
Take milk, and put it into an earthen pot, and put thereto Runnet, let it
stand two days, it will be all in a curd, then season it with some sugar,
Cinnamon, and cream, then serve it, this is best in the hottest of the summer.

To make a White-pot.
Take a quart of Cream, and put it over the fire to boil, season it with sugar,
Nutmeg, and Cinnamon, Sack and Rose Water, the yolks of seven or eight Eggs,
beat your Eggs with Sack and Rose Water, then put it into your cream, stir it
that it curdle not, then pare two or three pippins, core and quarter them, and
boil them with a handful of Raisins of the Sun, boil them, tender, and pour
them into a cullender, then cut some sippets very thin, and lay some of them in
the bottom of the dish, and lay on half your Apples, and curians, then pour in
half your Milk, then lay on more sippets, and the rest of your Apples and
Raisins, then pour on the rest of your Milk bake it, scrape on sugar, and serve
it.

How to make a Pudding in have.
Take a pint of Milk, and put thereto a handful of Raisins of the Sun, and as
many currants, and a piece of Butter, then grate Manchet, and Nutmeg also, and
put thereto a little flower; when your Milk boileth, put in your bread, let it
boil a quarter of an hour, and put in a piece of butter in the boiling of it,
and stir it always, then dish it up, pour on butter and serve it.

To make a Pudding in a dish.
Take a quart of Cream, put thereto a pound of Beef Suet minced small, put it
to your Milk, season it with Nutmeg, Sugar, Rose Water and Cinnamon, then take
some seven or eight Eggs, and beat them very well, then take a cast of
Manchets, and grate them, and put unto it, then mingle those together well,
then put it into a dish, and bake it, when it is baked, scrape on sugar, and
serve it.

To boil Cream.
Take a quart of Cream, and set it a boiling with Mace, whilst your cream is
boiling cut some thin sippets, then take seven or eight yolks of Eggs, put them
with Rose Water and sugar, and a little of your cream, when your cream boileth
take it off the fire, and put in your Eggs, and stir it very fast that it
curdle not, then put your sippets into the dish, pour in your cream, and let it
cool, when it is cold, scrape on sugar and serve it.

To draw Butter.
Take your Butter, and cut it into thin slices, put it into a dish then put it
upon the coals where it may melt leisurely, stir it osten, and when it is
melted, put in two or three spoonfuls, of water, or Vinegar, which you will,
stir them and beat it until it be thick.

Lady of Arundels Manchet.
Take a bushel of fine Wheat Flour, twenty Eggs, three pound of fresh butter,
then take as much salt and barm as to the ordinary manchet, temper it together
with new Milk pretty hot, then let it lie the space of half an hour to rise so
you may work it up into bread, and bake it, let not your Oven be too hot.

To boil Pigeons.
Boil them in water and salt, take a handful of Parsley, as much Time stripped,
two spoonfuls of Capers minced all together, and boil it in a pint of the said
liquor a quarter of an hour, then put in two or three spoonfuls of Verjuice,
two Eggs beaten, let it boil a little, and put to a little Butter, when you
have taken it off the fire, stir this all together, and pour it upon the
Pigeons, with sippets round the dish.

A Florentine of sweetbread or Kidneys.
Parboil three or four Kidneys, and mince them small, season them with Nutmeg,
one stick of Cinnamon, beat as much Sugar as will sweeten it, and a penny loaf
grated, and the marrow of three bones in good pieces, and a quarter of a pound
of Almond paste, a glass of Maligo-sack, two spoonfuls of Rose Water, a grain
of Musk, and one grain of Ambergreece, and a quarter of a pint of cream, three
or four Eggs, and mix all together, and make it up in puff paste, and bake it
three quarters of an hour.

A Pork-pie.
Boil your leg of Pork, season it with Nutmeg and Pepper, and salt, bake it
five hours in a round pie.

A Chicken-Pie.
Scald and season your Chickens with Nutmegs, as much sugar as cinnamon,
pepper, and salt, then put them in your Pie, then put three quarters of
quartered Lettice, and six Dates quartered and a handful of Goosberries, and
half a sliced Lemon, and 3 or four branches of Barberries, and a little butter,
you may use to four Chickens 3 marrow-bones rould in yolks of Eggs, and
Ringo-roots, and some preserved Lettuce, make a caudle, and put in when the pie
comes out of the Oven, an hour and a half is enough to stand in the Oven.

A Lamb Pie.
Take the same ingredients you did for the Chicken-pie, only leave out the
marrow, the Ringo-roots, and the preserved Lettuce, make your caudle of
White Wind, Verjuice and Butter, put it in when the pie comes out of the Oven.

Sauce for a Shoulder of Mutton.
Take a spoonful of Herbs, and as many Capers, half a pint of White Wind, half
a Nutmeg, and two Eggs; when it is boiled put a piece of butter to the gravy,
when is is boiled, take it off, and put the butter in.

A Lumber-Pie.
Take three or four sweet-breads of Veal, parboil and mince them very small,
then take the Curd of a quart of Milk, turned with three Eggs, half a pound of
Almond-past, and a penny loaf grated, mingle these together, then take a
spoonful of sweet herbs minced very small, also six ounces of Oringado, and
mince it, then season all this with a quarter of Sugar, and three Nutmegs, then
take five Dates, and a quarter of a pint of cream, four yolks of Eggs, three
spoonfuls of Rosewater, three or four Marrow-bones, mingle all these together,
except the Marrow, then make it up in long Boles, about the bigness of an Egg,
and in every bole put a good piece of Marrow, put these into the Pie; then put
a quarter of a pound of butter, and half a sliced Lemon, then make a caudle of
White Wind, sugar and Verjuice, put it in when you take your Pie out of the
Oven, you may use a grain of Musk and Ambergreece.

An Oyster Pie.
Season your Oysters with Nutmegs, Pepper, and Salt, and sweet herbs, your
Oysters being first thrown into scalding water, and parboiled, season them, and
put them into the Pie; put 2 or three blades of Mace, and half a sliced Lemon,
and the Marrow of two bones rouled in the yolks of Eggs, and some butter, then
let your Pie stand almost an hour in the Oven, then make a caudle of Verjuice,
Butter and Sugar, put it into your Pie; when you take it out of the Oven, you
may use two Nutmegs to one quart of Oysters and as much pepper as the quantity
of 3 Nutmegs, but less Salt, and one spoonful of sweet herbs.

An Artichoak-Pie.
Take the bottoms of boiled Artichoaks, and quarter them, and take the meat
from the leaves, season it with half an ounce of cinnamon, and half an ounce of
beaten Nutmeg, and two ounces of sugar, and put them into your Pie, and boiled
marrow rouled in yolks of Eggs, and six blades of large Mace, Lemon sliced, six
quartered Dates, and a quarter of a pound of Ringo-roots, half a pound of fresh
butter, then let it stand in the Oven one hour, and when you take it out, put a
caudle into your Pie made of White Wind, sugar and Verjuice.

A Calves-foot Pie.
Mince your Calves-feet very small, then season them with two Nutmegs, and
three quarters of an ounce of cinnamon, 1 quarter of a pound of sugar, half a
pound of currants, two Lemon peels minced, ten Dates minced, 3 spponfuls of
Rose Water, and half a pound of fresh butter, bake it an hour, and put a caudle
into it, made of White Wind, sugar, and Verjuice.

A Skirret Pie.
Take a quarter of a peck of Skirrets blanched, and sliced, season them with
three Nutmegs, and an ounce of Cinnamon, and three ounces of sugar, and ten
quartered Dates, and the Marrow of three bones rouled in yolks of Eggs, and one
quarter of a pound of Ringo-roots, and preserved Lettice, sliced Lemon, four
blades of mace, three or four branches of preserved Barberries, and half a
pound of Butter, then let it stand one hour in the Oven, then put a caudle made
of White-wind, Verjuice, butter and sugar, put in into the Pie when it comes
out of the Oven.

A Calves-head Pie for Supper.
Boil your Calves-head almost enough, cut it in thin slices all from the bone,
season it with 3 beaten Nutmegs, a quarter of an ounce of Pepper, and as much
salt as there is seasoning, then take a spoonful of sweet herbs minced small,
and two spoonfuls of sugar, and two or three Artichoak bottoms boiled, and cut
them in thin slices, and the Marrow of two bones rouled in yolks of Eggs, a
quarter of a pound of Ringo-roots, and quarter of a pound of Currants, then put
it into your Pie, and put a quarter of a pound of butter, and a sliced Lemon,
three or four blades of mace, three or four quartered Dates, let it stand an
hour and more in the oven, then when you take it out, put into it a caudle made
of sugar, White Wind, Verjuice and Butter.

A Lark Pie.
Take three dozen of Larks, season them with Nutmegs, and half an ounce of
Pepper, a quarter of an ounce of mace beaten, then take the Lumber pye-meat,
and fill their bellies, if you will; if not, take half a pound of suet, and one
pound of Mutton minced, half a pound of Raisins of the Sun, and six Apples
minced all together very small, then season it with a Nutmeg, pepper and salt,
and one spoonful of sweet Herbs, and a Lemon peel minced, one penny loaf
grated, a quarter of a pint of Cream, two or three spoonfuls of Rose Water,
three spoonfuls of Sugar, one or two spoonfuls of Verjuice; then make this in
boles, and put it in three bellies, and put your Larks in your Pie, then put
your marrow rouled in yolks of Eggs upon the Larks, and large mace, and sliced
Lemon, and fresh butter, let it stand in the Oven an hour, when you take it
out, make your caudle of Butter, Sugar, and White Wind Vinegar, put it into the
Pie.

A hot Neats-Tongue for Supper.
Boil your Tongue till it be tender; blanch it, and cut it in thin pieces,
season it with Nutmeg, and a quarter of an ounce of pepper, and as much salt as
seasoning, then take six ounces of Currants, season it all together, and put it
into the Pie, then put a Lemon sliced, and Dates and Butter, then bake it, and
let it stand an hour and half, then make a caudle of White Wind and Verjuice,
Sugar and Eggs, and put it in when you take it out of the Oven.

A cold Neats-Tongue Pie.
Your Tongue being boiled, blanched and larded with Pork and Bacon, season it
with the same ingredients the Deer has; that is, three Nutmegs, three races of
Ginger, half an ounce of Cloves and Mace together, and half an ounce of Pepper,
beat your spice all together, more salt than seasoning, and likewise lay in the
liquor, bake it two hours, but put one pound of butter in your Pie before you
lid it.

A Potato Pie for Supper.
Take three pound of boiled and blanched Potatoes, and three Nutmegs, and half
an ounce of Cinnamon beaten together, and three ounces of Sugar, season your
Potatoes, and put them in your Pie, then take the marrow of three bones rouled
in yolks of Eggs, and sliced Lemon, and large mace, and half a pound of butter,
six Dates quartered, put this into your Pie, and let it stand an hour in the
Oven, then make a sharp caudle of Butter, Sugar, Verjuice and White Wind, put
it in when you take your Pie out of the Oven.

A Pigeon or Rabbet Pie.
Take one ounce of Pepper (...) more salt, than season your Pigeons or Rabbet,
and take two Nutmegs, grated with your seasoning, then lay your Rabbet in the
Pie, and one pound of Butter; if you heat the Pie hot: then put in two or three
slices of Lemon, and 2 or 3 blades of Mace, and as many branches of Barberries,
and a good piece of fresh butter melted, then take it and let it stand an hour
and half, but put not in the fresh butter till it comes out of the Oven.

To make Puff-Paste.
Break 2 Eggs in three pints of flower, make it with cold water, then roll it
out pretty thick and square, then take so much butter as past, and lay it in a
rank, and divide your butter in five pieces, that you may lay it on at 5
several times, roll your paste very broad, then rake one part of the same
butter in little pieces all over your paste, then throw a ^^^^dful of flower
slightly on, ^^en fold up your paste, and beat ^t with a rouling-pin, so roll
it out again; thus do five times, and make it up.

A Pudding.
Take a quart of Cream, and two Eggs, beat them, and strain them into the
Cream, and grate in a Nutmeg and half, take 6 spoonfuls of flower, beat half a
pound of Almonds with some Cream, and put it into the cream, and mix this
together, boil your Pudding an hour and no more, first flower the Bag you put
it in, then melt fresh butter, and take sugar and Rose Water, beat it thick,
and pour it on the pudding, you may put to it a little Milk, and stick blanched
Almonds and Wafers in it, add to the same pudding, if you will, a penny-loaf
grated, a quartern of Sugar, 2 Marrow-bones, 1 Glass of Maligo-sack, six Dates
minced, a grain of Ambergreece, a grain of Musk, 2 or 3 spoonfuls of
Rose Water, bake the Pudding in little wood-dishes, but first butter them, your
Marrow must be stuck to and again; then bake it half an hour, five or seven at
a time, and so set them in order in the dish, and garnish them with a sprig in
the middle, and wafers about it, strew Sugar about the branch, and sliced
Lemon, set four round, and one in the top.

Frigasie of Veal.
Cut your meat in thin slices, beat it well with a rouling-pin, season it with
Nutmeg, Lemon, and Time, fry it slightly in a pan, beat 2 Eggs, and 1 spoonful
of Verjuice and put it into the pan, and stir it together, and dish it

Frigasie of Lamb.
Cut your Lamb in thin slices, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, mince
some Thyme, and Lemon, and throw it upon your meat, then fry it slightly in a
pan, then throw in 2 Eggs beaten in Verjuice and sugar into the pan, also a
han^ful of Goosberries, shake it together and dish it.

Frigasie of Chickens.
Kill your Chickens, pull skin and feathers off together, cut them in thin
slices, season them with Thyme and Lemons minced, Nutmeg, and Salt, a handful
of Sorrel minced, then fry it well with six spoonfuls of Verjuice, one spoonful
of Sugar, beat it together, so dish it with sippets about.

Another Frigasie of Chickens.
Take the former ingredients, and add to it boiled Artichoak bottoms with the
meat of the leaves, and a handful of scalded Goosberries, and boiled Skirrets
and Lettice tossed in butter and when they are boiled, and 2 spoonfuls of
Sugar, 2 Eggs and Verjuice beaten together, and lay your Lettice upon your
Chickens as before, and sliced Lemon upon it, and sippets upon the Dish.

A Frigasie of Rabbets.
Cut your Rabbets in small pieces, and mince a handful of Thyme, and Parsley
together, and a Nutmeg, pepper and salt, season your Rabbets, then take two
Eggs, and Verjuice beaten together, and throw it in the pan, stick it, and dish
it up in sippets.

To hash a Shoulder of Mutton.
Half roast your Mutton at a quick fire, cut it in thin slices, stew it with
gravy, sweet Marjoram and Capers, and Onions, 3 Anchovies, Oysters, half a
Nutmeg, half a sliced Lemon; stir this altogether with the Meat, let it stew
till it be tender in a dish, then break 3 or four yolks of Eggs and throw it in
the dish with some butter, toste it well together, and dish it with sippets.

To make a Cake.
Take half a peck of flower, two pound and a half of Currants, 3 or 4 Nutmegs,
one pound of Almond paste, 2 pound of Butter, and one pint of Cream, three
spoonfuls of Rose Water, 3 quarters of a pound of Sugar, half a pint of Sack, a
quarter of a pint of Yest, and six Eggs, so make it, and bake it.

To make a Leg of Mutton three or four Dishes.
Take a Leg of Mutton, cut out the flesh and the bone, but save the skin whole,
divide the meat in three pieces, and take the tenderest, and cut in thin
slices, and beat it with a rouling-pin, season it with Nutmeg, pepper and salt,
and mince Thyme and Lemon Peel, fry it till it be tender, then beat 2 Eggs,
with a spoonful of Verjuice, throw 2 Anchovies into the pan, shake it all
together, and put it into the dish with sippets round the Dish, being dressed
with Barberries scalded, parsley and hard Eggs minced.

Another part of the same meat stew in a dish, with a little White Wind, a
little butter, and sliced Lemon, one Anchovy, two Oysters, two baldes of Mace,
a little Thyme on a branch, and one whole Onion; take out the Thyme and the
Onion when it is stewed; do it all together on a Chafing Dish of coals till it
be tender, then dish it, garnish your dish with hard Eggs, and Barberries, and
sliced Lemons, and sippets round the dish.

Take another part of the same meat, mince it small with Beef suet, and a
handful of Sage, to 3 quarters of a pound of suet add one pound of meat, you
may use a spoonful of peper and salt, mix this all together, and stuff the skin
of the leg of Mutton hard, skuer it close, and spit it at a quick fire, and
well roast it in an hour.

Take another part of the same meat, then put in the pepper and salt with a
grated Nutmeg, some sweet Herbs, and a Lemon Peel minced, a penny-loaf grated,
one spoonful of Sugar, a quarter of a pound of Raifins, and a quarter of
Currants, minced all together with the meat and the suet, and the rest of the
ingredients, put to 2 spoonfuls of Rose Water, and as much salt as spice; then
make it up in little long boles or roules, and butter your dish, and lay them
in with a round hole in the middle, set them in an Oven half an hour, then pour
the liquor which will be in the dish, and melt a little butter, Verjuice and
Sugar, and pour upon it, garnish your dish, stick in every long roll, a flower
of paste, and a branch in the middle.

To souce an Eel.
Souce your Eel with a handful of salt, split it down the back, take out the
Chine-bone, season the Eel with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, and sweet herbs
minced, then lay a pack-thread at each end, and the middle roll up like a
Collar of Brawn, then boil it in water and salt, and vinegar, and a blade or
two of Mace, and half a sliced Lemon, boil it half an hour, keep it in the same
liquor two or three days, then cut it out in round pieces, and lay six or seven
in a dish, with parsley, and Barberries, and serve it with Vinegar in saucers.

To souce a Calves-Head.
Boil your Calves-Head in water and salt, so much as will cover it, then put in
half a pint of Vinegar, a branch of sweet herbs, a sliced Lemon, and half a
pint of White Wind, two or three blades of Mace, and one ounce or two of Ginger
sliced; boil it all together till it be tender, keep it in the liquor 2 or 3
days, serve it, the dish upright, and stick a branch in the mouth, and in both
eyes, garnish the dish with jelly of pickled cucumbers, and saucers of Vinegar
and jelly, and Lemon minced.

A stewed Rabbet.
Cut your Rabbet in pieces, and season it with Pepper and Salt, Thyme, Parsley,
Winter-savoury, and sweet-Marjoram, three Apples, and 3 Onions minced all
together, stew it till it be tender with Vinegar and water, put a good piece of
butter in, stir it all together in your dish, put sippets in the bottom, then
serve it up with the head in the middle of the dish with sippets in the mouth.

Lay your Pig in the same ingredients as you did for your Calves-head, use the
same for a Capon, and the same for a Leg of Mutton.

To boil Chickens.
Boil your Chickens in water and salt, and Wine-Vinegar, a blade of Mace, a
good handful of Endive, and as much Succory, two handfuls of Skirrets boiled,
and blanched, when the Chickens and these things are stewed, take a pint of
liquor up, and put to it a quart of White Wind, and one ounce and a half of
Sugar, and three Eggs to thicken it, a piece of butter, and lay them in the
dish, and pour it on.

To boil a Rabbet.
Boil it in water and Salt, mince Thyme and Parsley together, a handful of
each, boil it in some of the same liquor, then take three or four spoonfuls of
Verjuice, a piece of Irish Butter two or three Eggs, stir the Eggs together in
the liquor, set it upon the fire till it be thick, then pour it upon the
Rabbet, so serve it in.

To boil a Duck.
Half roast your Duck with a quick fire, take as much Wine and water as will
cover her, take some Thyme and Parsley, and one handful of sweet marjoram, two
blades of mace, half a Lemon sliced, stew these together half an hour without
Onions, take some of your liquor, and thicken it with 3 or 4 Eggs, two or 3
spoonfuls of Verjuice, a piece of Butter, and as much sugar as will lie upon
it, dish your Duck, and boil three or four slices of Lemon by it self, and hard
Eggs minced, put this upon your Duck, then pour your liquor upon it with
Barberries, so you may boil Pigeons with the same ingredients, Plover or Teal.

A roasted Shoulder of Mutton.
When it is roasted, slash it, and carbonado it, take two spponfuls of Capers,
and a little Thyme, and Lemon minced, half a Nutmeg, two Anchovies, a quarter
of a peck of Oysters, mix all together, boil them one hour in strong broth and
White Wind, then pour it upon the meat, with hard Eggs minced, and sippets
round the dish, throw first salt on the meat, then the hard Eggs and sliced
Lemon and Barberries.

FINIS.

