Advertisement.
THere is lately printed a Book, entitled, A Companion for the Persecuted; or,
an Office for Those who suffer for Righteousness. Containing particular Prayers
and Devotions for particular Graces; and for their Private or Public Wants and
Occasions. By John Kettlewell, a Presbyter of the Church of England. Price
bound 1 s. 6 d.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Kettlewell, and Benj. Bragg, at the White-Hart,
over against Water-Lane, in Fleet Street, 1694.

A COMPANION FOR THE Penitent: And for Persons Troubled in MIND. CONSISTING OF
An Office for the Penitent, to carry on their Reconciliation with God. And a
Trial or Judgment of the Soul, for discovering the safety of their Spiritual
Estate. And an Office for Persons troubled in Mind, to settle them in Peace and
Comfort.

By JOHN KETTLEWELL, a Presbyter of the Church of England.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Kettlewell, and Sold by Benj. Bragg, at the
White-Hart, over against Water-Lane, in Fleet street, 1694.

Imprimatur,

Ra. Barker.
February 15. 1693/4.
To the Inhabitants and Parishioners, of the Town and Parish of Coles-hill, in
Warwickshire.
My beloved Friends and Brethren,
THough by God's Providence, which most wisely Orders all Things, I now live at
a great distance from you; yet I still retain a Pastoral Affection for you, and
ordinarily remember you in my Prayers, and have an Heart that is truly desirous
to serve you in the great Work of your Souls, and is glad when any pains of
mine can prove serviceable to you therein.

I remember the Labors which I have spent among you, with a very sincere and
good Will, though alas! with much weakness, in my great Lord and Masters
Service; and I hope also that you will not forget them. And if by tract of
time, many things which I have taught you have sl^pt out of your Memories, (as
I cannot expect but they have;) yet much of that, which I prepared and preached
to do you good, I printed, whilst I was among you, for the Benefit of others,
and the Books are in many of your Hands, and may be in more, wherewith you may
refresh your Memories when you please.

In those labors of my Ministry, which I took among you for a course of
several years, I thank God I endeavored to lay before you his whole Counsel,
according to the best my Skill. And suited my Discourses, to the needs of the
place, and to Times and Seasons, to possess you with such Thoughts and Tempers,
as I judged needful to support your Spirits, and to direct your Practice under
them. And I was not silent, but warned you, yea, sometimes till I even wearied
some of you with warnings, against your Spiritual Dangers, when I thought any
great Danger to your Souls drew near. For you your selves know, Brethren, that
I have not kept back the Truths of God from you, nor suppressed them at the
times when you had most need to be put in mind thereof; though I found some were
like to be displeased therewith, and as St. Paul says, to count me Gal. 4. 1^.
their Enemy for telling them these Truths.

Now there must be a strict Account given one day, both how I have discharged
my part in that Station, and how you have discharged yours. And my Hearts
desire, and earnest Prayer for you all is, that you may, both bear in Mind all
the faithful Warnings and Instructions, which according to the best of my
understanding, I was continually pressing upon you, and left with you; and may
likewise willingly, and carefully follow them. That so, when both you and I are
brought before our ever Blesled and Great Master, (as most certainly we shall
be,) we may both rejoice together; I for having been your affectionate and
Faithful Monitor, and you for having afforded a willing, a mindful, and an
obedient Ear.

And now, since I am out of the may of serving you otherwise, I have sent this
Companion among you, to minister to your most Serious and Holy Thoughts, and to
direct and go before you, both in your Prayers, and in your Practice. And I
desire, that by your frequent and considerate use thereof, you wouldturn the
Hymns and Prayers contained therein, to become the familiar and genuine Sense
and Language of your Hearts. Learn habtually to breathe these Thoughts, and
daily to live by them. And by this means you may both perfect the work of your
Repentance, and preserve the Peace of your Consciences, which are the greatest
and most concerning things you have to mind, and the chief things, which I
earnestly pray you that you would, and hope that you will mind, all the days of
your Lives. And this I shall look on, as the best, and the most obliging
Return, that you can make to me for this Labor of Love; which I desire you to
receive, not only as a Token of my Respect and Kindness to you, but also as a
proper means, which, by God's Blessing, may do you good, if you please.

I humbly commend it to the Acceptance and Blessing of the Almighty, without
which it will be of no force, either among you, or among any others. And I
heartily commend you all, to the Protection of his Good Providence, and
especially to the Guidance of his Grace, that he would deliver you from all
dangerous Errors and Wickedness, and both make you perfect in the doing of his
Will, and give you Comfort in the same. I remain, my Beloved Friends and
Brethren,

Your truly Affectionate Friend, and Faithful Monitor, in the Work and Service
of the Lord Jesus, John Kettlewell.
From my House in London, Jan. 23. 1693.
THE Introduction.
DIrections and Helps for Repentance, can never come out of Season. For
Repentance is Luke 10. 42.
the one thing necessary, and the chief Business of all Men in this World, and
will be so whilst they live in it. The best do daily need it, to make up their
daily Failures, their Defects and Forgetfulness. And the bad, have no time to
delay it for one Moment, having deferred a great deal too long already, to
shake off their sinful Habits, and to set themselves with all their might to
please God, and to secure their Everlasting Peace.

Especially this time of Lent, is a Season, wherein great numbers profess to
make this their Business. For from the early usage and practice of the Church,
this has still been made a solemn time for Sinners to call their Sins to
Remembrance, and to seek Gods Mercy and Forgiveness of the same, by earnest
Prayers, and amendment of Life, and by afflicting of themselves, and bringing
forth Fruits worthy of Repentance.

And to help them in so necessary and beneficial a Work, I have composed and
published the following Offices, hoping that they may prove acceptable to my
Heavenly Master, and serviceable to direct and complete the Repentance, and to
settle the Comfort and Peace of some of his beloved Servants, into whose Hands
his Providence shall bring them.

In the Office for the Penitent, I have endeavored to mark out distinctly the
several Steps, and full compass of a Sinners Restoration, or Reconciliation
with God. Wherein I have all along interwoven instructions with their
Devotions, and set their Work before them, that they may see what they have to
amend, and what they are to do to work out their Pardon, as well as how they
are to petition for it.

I have sought to make the Soul acquainted with its Disease, without which it
would neither know what it has for God to forgive, or for his Grace and its own
Care to Remedy. And I have been very particular in some Forms of Confession, to
affect it with a more distinct and effectual Sense of the several maladys which
it lies sick of, and which, as it must beg Mercy for, so in the Course of its
Daily Care, it must both diligently and designedly set its self by God's help
to Cure.

Where Sin is the Disease, the great Gospel way of Cure, is true Repentance.
And this I endeavor to set out, in all the necessary parts, and great and
worthy Fruits thereof. I lead the Penitent to express the same in such Acts, as
through the Merits of Christ, are the truest atonement for Sins, and have the
most express promises of Mercy and Forgiveness made to them. And then I
instruct him to comfort up himself, with an humble claim and application of
those Expressions of the Divine Mercy and Condescension, which are given to us
for our Confidence and Consolation in performance of those Acts, And if he
takes care to say all that I have here put into his Mouth, with Sincerity, and
is really affected as these forms express, he is a true Penitent, and may be a
comfortable one; he has thereby secured his Everlasting Peace, and may quiet
and revive his Spirit, with the joyful Sense thereof.

In the Trial or Judgment of the Soul, for discovering the safety of their
Spiritual Estate, I have given them as clear, and full, and withal as brief a
view as I can, of the final account which will be exacted of them. I have run
through the several Heads of Trial and Examination, and raised such questions
upon them, as I take to be most pertinent and decisive of their future
Condition, and fittest to settle their present Peace and then give them the
Benefit thereof, by setting their Answers and God's Promises together, and
applying all to themselves. My Desire is, so far as my Skill would reach, to
omit no question which is necessary to their Safety: and my care has been, as I
am able, so to word all, as that they may serve to clear their doubts and
uncertainties, upon the several parts of their account, but beget none in them.

And this part will be of chief account and use, to both the other Offices. For
it is the truest Trial of Penitents, and the truest Direction for them in
carrying on and completing their Repentance. And it is the surest Ground of
Peace of Conscience. For, containing the full Draught of settling our Peace
with God, it must give the best Light and Direction for Peace in our Selves,
which lies in seeing that God is at peace with us.

Though the business of these Papers is not to prove and argue, but briefly to
Direct; yet to the several Heads, which I have made the Articles of the
Penitents Trial, I have prefixed Texts of Scripture, to show that God has made
them the Terms of his Mercy. But it is not unlikely, that some who will not be
persuaded to be so good as they should, will think that I am stricter about
this account than I need. And if they do, I cannot help it, but they may. My
Part is to deal faithfully, both by my Blessed Lord, and by them; and to
represent things to them, as he has left them, and as in the end they will find
them. So that if my Discourse has more strictness, than they could wish to hear
from it, it is because I look not how to suit their carnal wishes, but how to
serve their Everlasting happiness. And because I would rather have them
offended with me for telling them unpleasing Truths, whilst they may serve
themselves by them; than flatter them with pleasing Errors, till it is too late
for them to rectify the same, and prevent their own everlasting Ruin and
Destruction thereby.

In the Office for Persons troubled in Mind, I am careful to have them fully
sensible of that Holy Obedience, which is needful to keep them safe; as well
as to free them from those unnecessary mistrusts and Fears, which render them
uneasy. I seek to give them a just sense of the Things which trouble them, and
to keep them from over-valuing them. And to make them acquainted with the true
allowances of Favor, which God is ready to make to their Infirmityes, and with
the several Grounds which they have to hope and look for them; and lead them on
in their Devotions, both humbly to plead with God, and to comfort up their own
Hearts with the same.

To the Offices, I have prefixed Collections of Pertinent and proper
Scriptures. And these will serve the devout Minds, to express their Devotion
in, or to support their Spirits withal; yea, and to guide and direct their
Practice too. For they mark out their Duty upon the several Points which they
refer to, and teach them, not only how they may address to God, but how they
ought to employ themselves, and what the Work and Business is, which Gods
Favor and their own Eternal welfare, or which his Peace and their own require
at their Hands.

AN OFFICE FOR THE PENITENT.
SCRIPTURES.
Psalm. 32. Psalm. 38. Ezekiel. 18. Psalm. 51. Luke 15.
1. For Godly Sorrow for Sins
TO him will I look, that is poor, and of a cont^^te Spirit, and trembles at
my word. Isa. 66. 2.

The Sacrifices of God, are a broken Spirit: a broken and a contrite Heart, O!
God, thou will not despise. Psalm. 51. 17.

Turn ye therefore to me, with all your Heart, and with fasting, and with
weeping, and with Mourning.

And rent your Hearts, and not your Garments, and turn unto the Lord your God.
Joel, 2. 12, 13.

Remember your ways, and all your Doings, wherein ye have been defiled, and ye
shall loath your selves in your own sight, for all your Evils that ye have
committed. Ezekiel. 20. 43.

Lord! Mine Iniquities are gone over mine Head, as an heavy Burden, they are
too heavy for me.

I am ready to halt, and my Sorrow is continually before me.

I will declare mine Iniquity; I will be sorry for my Sin. Psalm. 38. 4, 17, 18.

2. For Penitential Confession of the same.
IF our Heart condemn us, God is greater than our Heart, and knows all
things, 1 Jo. 3. 20.

Our Iniquities are all before him, yea, our secret Sins are set in the Light
of his Countenance, Psa. 90. 8.

And therefore, He that covers his Sins, shall not prosper; but whosoever
confesses, and forsakes them, shall have Mercy, Prove. 28. 13.

If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to
cleanse us from all Unrighteousness, 1 Jo. 1. 19.

I will arise therefore, and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father I
have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called
thy Son, Luke 15. 18, 19.

Behold! I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me, Psalm.
51. 5.

And since I was born, I have gone astray like a lost Sheep, Ps. 119. 176.

Mine Iniquities are increased over my Head, and my Trespasses are grown unto
the Heavens, Ezr. 9. 6.

But, Lord, I acknowledge my Sins unto thee, and mine Iniquities have I not
hid, Psalm. 32. 5.

I acknowledge my Transgressions, and my Sins are ever before me.

Against thee have I sinned, and done these Evils in thy Sight; that thou
migbtest be Justified when thou speak, and clear when thou judge, Psalm.
51. 3, 4.

God be merciful to me, a Sinner, Luke 18. 3.

To me, the chief among Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

To me, that have been at agreement with Hell, and made a Covenant with Death,
Isa. 28. 15.

And whose Destruction is of my self, Hos. 13. 9.

3. For Resolution of Amendment.
I.
IF I regard Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66. 18.

Go therefore, and sin no more, Jo. 8. 11.

Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee, Jo. 5. 14.

And Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works,
or else I will come unto thee quickly, Rev. 2. 5.

Repent, and turn your selves from all your Transgressions, so Iniquity shall
not be your Ruin.

Cast away from you all your Transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, Is.
55. 7.
and make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit; for why will ye dye, O! House of
Israel? Ezekiel. 18. 30 31.

Wash you, make you clean, put away the Evil of your Doings from before mine
Eyes, cease to do Evil, learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed,
judge the Fatherless, and plead for the Widow.

Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your Sins be as
Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they
shall be as Wool, Isa. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18.

II.
CReate in me a new Heart, O! God, and renew a right Spirit within me, Psalm.
51. 10.

I thought on my ways, and turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies.

I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments, Psalm. 1 19. 59, 60.

Lord, Incline not my Heart to any evil thing, Psalm. 141. 4.

Turn away mine Eyes, from behold Vanity, Psalm. 119. 37.

I have made a Covenant with mine Eyes, Job 31. 1.

Set a Watch before my Mouth, and keep the Door of my Lips, Psalm. 141. 3.

Remove my Foot from Evil, Prove. 4. 27.

Hedge up my way with Thorns, and make a Wall, that I may not find my former
Paths to Evil, Hos. 2. 6.

Keep back thy Servant from Presumptuous Sins; let them not have Dominion over
me: then shall I be upright, and innocent from the great Transgression.

Let the words of my Mouth, and the Meditation of my Heart, be acceptable in
thy Sight, O! Lord, my Strength, and my Redeemer, Ps. 19. 13, 14.

4. For Fruits worthy of Repentance
BRing forth Fruits meet for Repentance, Mat. 3. 8.

This self same thing, that ye sorrowed after a Godly sort: Behold! what
carefulness it wrought in you; yea, what clearing of your selves; yea, what
Indignation; yea, what Fear; yea, what Vehement Desire; yea, what Zeal; yea,
what Revenge, or punishing of your selves, 2 Cor. 7. 11,

If the Wicked restore the Pledge, give again that he has Robbed, and Lev. 6.
2, 3, 4, 5.
walk in the Statutes of Life without Committing Iniquity; none of his Sins
shall be mentioned to him, he shall surely Live, he shall not Dye, Ezekiel. 33.
15, 16.

If thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother
has ought against thee.

Leave there thy Gift before the Altar, and go thy way; f^ st be reconciled to
thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift, Mat. 5. 23, 24:

Forgive, and you shall be forgiven, Luke 6. 37.

If ye forgive Men their Trospasses your Heavenly Father will also forgive you.

But if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
your Trespasses, Mat. 6. 14, 15.

Break off thy Sins by Righteousness, and thine Iniquities by showing Mercy to
the Poor, Dan. 4. 27.

Thine Alms are come up, for a Memorial before God, Acts 10. 4.

They lay up in Store for us a good Foundation against the time to come that we
may lay hold on Eternal Life 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19.

Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy, Mat. 5. 7.

He shall have Judgment without Mercy, who has showed no Mercy; but Mercy
rejoices against Judgment James 2. 13.

5. For Pardon of Sins, and Ground for the Hopes thereof.
ENter not into Judgment with the Servant, for in thy sight shall n^^ Man
living be Justified, Psalm. 143. ^

If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquities; O! Lord, who shall stand?

But there is Forgiveness with thus that thou may be feared,

With the Lord is Mercy, and plentious Redemption. Ps. 130. 3, 4, 7.

He knows our frame, he remembers that we are but Dust, and pitieth those
that fear him, as a Father pitieth his own Children, Ps. 103. 13, 14.

Likewise, the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all Sins, 1
John. 1. 7.

The Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and through his stripes we are
healed, Isa. 5. 3, 5.

And if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our Sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2.

For him has God exalted, to give Repentance, and forgiveness of Sins, Acts 5.
31.

And that Repentance, and Remission of Sins, should be preached in his Name
among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24. 47.

This is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the World to save Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

He came not to call the Righteous, but Si^ners to Repentance, Mat. 9. 13.

And there is Joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repents, more than over
Ninety and nine just Persons, which need no Repentance, Luke 15. 7.

Create in me a clean Heart therefore, O! God, and renew a right Spirit with ^n
me.

And hide thy Face from my Sins, and blot out all mine Iniquities, Ps. 51. 9, 10

6. For Comfort in the same.
PUrge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than
Snow.

Make me to hear of Joy and Gladness, that the Bones which thou has broken may
rejoice.

Restore unto me the Joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy fre^ Spirit.

Then will I teach Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be converte^ unto
thee, Ps. 51. 7, 8, 12, 13.

Blessed are they that Mourn, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5. 4.

He will speak Peace to his People and to his Saints, but let them not turn
again to folly, Ps. 85. 8.

I said I will confess my Transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest the
^iquity of my Sin.

For this shall every one that is Godly pray unto thee in a time when thou
may be found, Ps. 32. 5, 6. Psalm. 102, 17, 18.


Depart from me all ye workers of I^quity, for the Lord has heared the ^oice
of my weeping.

The Lord has heard my Supplicati^n, the Lord will receive my Prayer. ^alm 6.
8 9.

PRAYERS.
1. Prayers upon the Several Parts of Repentance, in particular and distinct
Forms.
1. A Confession of Sins.
I.
O! Almighty and most Gracious Lord, look in Mercy upon me the meanest of thy
Servants, Who am less than the least of all thy Mercys, and have deserved the
heaviest of thy Judgments, and am not worthy to lift up mine Eyes to the place
where thine Honor Dwells.

I am a Sinner, O! Lord, yea a Sinner altogether, [and one of the chief among
Sinners.] I was born in Sin and ever since have lead a Life suitable to that
beginning. For to the shame of my Face, and to the praise of thy long
Suffering, O! Almighty God, I do here with a truly humble and contrite Heart,
confess to thee, that I have shamefully neglected and let alone those good
things, which I ought to have done, and have done those Evil things, which I
ought to have forborne. Of both these I am heinously guilty, both in Thought,
Word and Deed. And have wickedly incurred the same, against the innumerable
Endearments of thy Mercys, and Terrors of thy Judgments; against all the good
Motions of thy Grace, and against the many seasonable admonitions which I have
had from Spiritual Advisers, and against the voice and struglings of my own
Conscience. I have done these things, O! Lord, and have continued to do them,
repeating the same many times, yea, alas! too many of them in ordinary course;
yea, and that after my own manifold, and solemn Promises and Engagements, that
I would offend therein no more.

Lord be merciful to me, a miserable Sinner.

II.
ANd in all these Transgressions, O! Righteous Father, I have acted, as a most
impudent Sinner, flying in the Face of an infinite Majesty; and passing all
these heinous Affronts, where I owe the utmost Love and Reverence. And as a
most presumptuously venturous and daring Sinner, provoking that Power, which
can Torment, and utterly destroy me at its Pleasure.

Lord be merciful unto me, a bold and presumptuous Sinner.

III.
I Have therein dealt most disingenuously and ungratefully, O! Merciful Lord,
rising up against thee the Author of all my Blessings: and flying in the face
of that Mercy, which fosters and sustains me, even whilst I am thus basely
aff^onting and despising it, and which is heaping new Obligations upon me every
Moment. Under all these grievous Offenses, I have first begged thy Patience,
and then fallen to abuse it. I have first prayed to be spared, and then turned
basely to provoke thee after thou have spared me, and have abused all thy
Mercys, to an opportunity of committing more Offenses, and of rereturning
hatred where I have received the greatest, and most endearing Love.

Lord be merciful unto me, a base and ungrateful Sinner.

IV.
YEA, O! Holy Father, I have therein dealt falsely and deceitfully with thee,
promising Obedience, whilst I am in need of thy Mercies, but practicing none
after once I have received them. In the midst of all my pretenses, to Honor
and Honesty, and regard to my word amongst Men: I have been wretchedly
careless, of dealing Honorably or Justly with thy Divine Majesty, and of
keeping my word with thee, though thou art always faithful, and can not fail in
the least tittle of thy word with me.

Lord be merciful to me, a false and faithfless Sinner.

V.
ANd in all this, O! My Dear God, I have done most foolishly, all this while
madly hindering and resisting my own everlasting Mercies, Peace, and Safety.
And instead thereof, making a Covenant with Hell, and securing and hasting on
mine own Eternal Misery, and heaping up sorrows, which never can be born, and
which admit of no Remedy.

Lord be merciful unto me, a blind and desperately foolish Sinner.

VI.
SO that in my self, O! Most Righteous Lord, I am nothing but Sin and Misery.
My past Life, can show nothing, for which thou should accept me. Nor can I
reasonably expect, that thou should give heed to my word, or trust me when I
promise to do better, having so frequently, and shamefully broke my word with
thee already.

But, O! Almighty and most Gracious Father, thou have Mercy enough, to pardon
all my Wickedness; and Grace enough to establish all my Promises, and to keep
me true to them: and to thee alone, do I fly for both. I do not justify, nor
excuse my Wickedness, but utterly condemn it, and condemn my Self for the same.
It Is Forgiveness, O! Father, that I seek, and it is merely from thine abundant
Mercys, and for my dear Savior's infinite Merits, that I hope for it. Oh! Thou
who forgivest Sinners, forgive me a great Sinner. [The greatest of Sinners.]
Oh! thou great Physician of Souls, who curest Sinners, cure me who seek to thee
alone for Remedy against all my Sins. Rescue me from the Power and Bondage of
my own corrupt Lusts, by the greater power of thy Grace; and deliver me, good
Lord, from doing ill, and from all tormenting Fears of suffering thine Eternal
Wrath and Vengeance for the same, through the Merits and Mediation of thine
only Son, and my only Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ. Amen.

Other Forms of Confession, are added afterward; whereof the Penitent may
serve himself, and wherewith he may suit his Spirit, as he sees Cause.

2. A Profession of Godly sorrow for Sins, and of Resolutions of new Obedience.
I.
I Ezekiel 20. 43.
call my ways to remembrance, O! Lord, wherein I have defiled my Self, and
remember them with a troubled Heart. Psalm. 51. 3.
My evil doings are daily before mine Eyes, and have made me vile, and
loathsome in my own sight, as they have done in thine. They are a burden upon
my Spirit, a Psalm. 38. 4.
sore burden, and too heavy for me to bear.

But now, O! My God, with a penitent Heart I turn from them, and resolve by thy
Grace to cast away all my Transgressions, which are are most highly
displeasing, both to thee, and to my self. From this Day forward, I am fully
purposed to forsake them. O! then Ezekiel 18. 13.
let them not be my ruin.

God be merciful to me, a returning Sinner.

II.
ANd from them, O! Holy Father, which are the shame, and sorrow of my Life; I
turn to thee, who art the Glory and Comfort, and shall ever be the Guide and
Governor thereof. I turn to thee, with a Psalm. 51. 17.
broken and contrite Heart; O! Receive, and Comfort it, and despise it not. I
return too thee, with my whole Heart, and make no reserves, nor will retain any
allowance of any of my former Sins, no not of those, which seemed most
delightful or serviceable unto me, and are hardest to part with.

I Revel. 2. 5.
remember, O! Lord, from whence I am fallen, and resolve by thy help, to do my
vows. I will Psalm. 119. 60.
make bast to do (...), and not delay to keep thy Com^^dments. I beg no greater
Mercy, than to be found steadfast in thy ways, nor shall account any things to
be so great favors to me, as those which serve to keep me in the same. I will
most heartily thank thee, O! Thou Faithful Guide and Keeper of returning Souls,
if thou will be pleased to Hosea 2. 6
hedge up my way with Thorns, or with any worldly Difficulties, that may keep
me from finding my way to my former Vanities. For it is the unfeigned Desire of
my Heart, and shall be the great Endeavor of my Life, above all things to keep
true to thee; and my chiefest prayer to thee is, to keep me from falling any
more from the way of thy Fear, or from forfeiting thy Mercy.

God be merciful to me, a Returning Sinner.

III.
ANd having ^^w by thy Grace, these hol^ ^houghts and Purposes in my He^^^; I
earnestly beg of thee, O! Blessed Author and finisher of all Grace, that I may
never loose them. I give my Heart to thee, and humbly pray, that it may always
be in thy hands, since it is so unconstant in what is good, and prone to turn
aside to what is evil, when it is in mine own keeping. O! Father, keep it
steadfast, and unalterable in thy ways. Psalm. 41. 4.
Let it not be inclined to any Evil thing, nor lean toward any of my former
Vanitys. Keep mine Eyes, from beholding wickedness; Psalm. 119. 37.
and mine Ears from listening thereto. Let not Ps. 141. 3.
my Lips utter any thing that is Ill, nor my Prove. 4. 27.
feet move a step in any of the Paths of Death. But hold my whole Spirit, Soul,
and Body, in ways of thy Fear; and continue me under the Comfortable hopes of
thy favor, through Jesus Christ my Blessed Lord and only Savior,

Amen.
3. A Profession of the Fruits of Repentance, and the Conditions of Forgiveness.
I.
I Have sinned grievously, O! Lord, but I am angry at my self for my Sins, and
desire to prevent thy Justice, and to take Revenge upon my own Head for my
Transgressions.

And however disposed, and easy I was, to be drawn aside before; yet now thou
have filled my Heart with such 2 Cor. 7. 11.
a Godly Sorrow, and Compunction for my Sins, as begets in me a Vehement
Desire, and Godly Care, to sin no more.

By the help of thy Grace, O! Merciful God, I am ready now Ezekiel. 33. 15.
to walk in those Statutes, which I have formerly transgressed; and to give
again, whatsoever I have at any time unjustly taken away; and to make full
amends to the uttermost of my Power, for all the Wrong and Damage which I have
ever done to any. particularly, etc. here name particulars
And where, either by my Example, or by my Counsel and Persuasion; or by my
Importunities, I have tempted others, and drawn them into Sin; It shall be the
Study and Care of my Life, to make them sensible of the Heinousness, and
extreme Danger thereof, as, through the Blessing of thy Grace I am, to recover
them out of the same. Here name Particulars. Particularly, etc.


God be merciful to me a Returning Sinner.

II.
I Am contented, O! Holy Father, to submit my self to those, who have just
cause to be offended with me, and to use all fair ways of Reconciling my self
to them; before I hope for Reconciliation and Peace with thee. Particularly,
etc.
I freely forgive all those, that have Trespassed against me, and with good
Will offer them my Pardon, as I most heartily desire thine. Particularly, etc.
And my Hearty Desire and Purpose is, to study doing Good to my Brethren in
their Needs, that I may not be held unworthy to receive it from thee in mine
own; and to show Mercy unto others that I may not be ashamed to ask it for my
self, and that the Rigorousness and Unrelenting hardness of my own Dealings
toward them, may not deprive me of the favorable Indulgence, and Mercifulness
of thy Dealings toward me.

God be merciful to me, and forgive me, a Merciful and Forgiving Sinner.

III.
I Have no Hope in my self, O! Gracious Lord, but only in thy Mercy. Nor any
expectation of the same, through my Deservings, but merely thro` thy Blessed
Son's Infinite Merits. Nor rest my Soul upon Acts 4. 12.
any other Name given among Men, whereby thy Justice may be satisfied, and my
Sins expiated, but on his alone.

God be merciful to me a Great, but an Humble and Believing Sinner.

IV.
I Am heartily sorry for all the Sins which I can call to Mind, and do yet know
my self to have been guilty of, and am fully purposed by thy Grace, as far as I
can, to amend them. And I am truly desirous to discover all the rest, which are
yet hid from me, that I may be as particularly sorry for the same, and amend
them too. And I humbly and earnestly pray thee, O! Father of Mercies, that for
Jesus Christ's sake, thou would be pleased to accept this my Repentance.
Receive it, O! Lord, according to the Riches of thy Mercies, and supply
whatsoever is wanting therein by the Power of thy Grace. And place me among the
number of those, who are truly contrite for all their evil ways, and whose
Repentance has prepared them for the free and full Remission of all their
Offenses, through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
4. A Prayer for Pardon of Sins.
O! Holy and most merciful Father, spare me thy poor Sinful, but Repenting
Creature. Spare me, good Lord, spare me, and let me not perish in my Sins, now
I am heartily troubled and sorry for them, but through thine infinite Mercies,
find pardon of the same.

I am a Sinful Person, O! Lord But thou, Blessed Jesus, art 1 Timothy 1. 15.
the Savior of Sinners. And thy coming into the World, was Mat. 9. 13.
to call Sinners to Repentance. Lord, I come, and Repent at thy Call; cast not
me and my Repentance away from thy Presence.

I have gone astray, and am very defective in my return home, through the frailty
of my Flesh. But thou, Gracious Lord, considerest our frailties. Thou Psalm.
103. 13.
know our frame, and considerest whereof we are made. Oh! be not Psalm. 130.
3.
extreme to mark mine Offenses, nor to exact Rigors in my Repentance of the
same; but for Christ's sake, make me all needful, and favorable Allowances.

Now I have found the way to thy Fear, let me find the Comforts of thy Mercy. I
have a truly Psalm. 51. 17.
Contrite Heart, O! Lord, despise it not. My Spirit Is. 66. 2. etc. 57. 15.
is broken, and trembles at thy word; O! Lord, revive it. It is Matt. 11. 28.
heavy laden, and wearied with my Sins; O! my God, give it ease from the same.
Psalm. 103. 14.
Pity me, O! Father, as a Father pitieth his own Children. Receive me, as the
offended Father Luke 15
did the returning Prodigal. Though I ver. 32.
was lost, yet now, by the Blessing of thy Grace, I am found again. Oh! welcome
thy lost v. 4, 5, 6.
Sheep when it returns home; and let v. 7, 10.
there he joy in Heaven on the Repentance of me a lost Sinner.

Oh! 1 Jo. 1. 17.
let the Blood of Jesus cleanse me from all my Sins. Let his Intercession for
me in thy Presence, make my Peace, and appease thy Wrath. Shut not thine Ears,
against the Voice of his Blood, nor be deaf to his Meditation, but hear him my
Advocate for my Pardon. And let me find the Forgiveness of all my Sins, that
thy troubled and trembling Servant may have Peace, and that thou may be
sought unto, and feared and served by Sinners, who will return unto thee in
hopes of thy Grace and pardoning Mercy, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and only
Savior,

Amen.
Two Collects in the Office of Commination.
I.
O! Lord, we beseech thee, mercifully hear our Prayers, and spare all those who
confess their Sins unto thee that they whose Consciences by Sin an accused, by
thy merciful Pardon, may be absolved, through Christ our Lord,

Amen
II.
O! Most mighty God, and Merciful Father, who have Compassion upon all Men, and
hate nothing that thou have made, who would not the Death of a Sinner, but
that he should rather turn from his Sin, and be saved; mercifully forgive me my
Trespasses; receive and comfort me, who am grieved and wearied, with the
Burden of my Sins. Thy property is always to have Mercy; to thee only it
appertains to forgive Sins. Spare me therefore, good Lord, spare me whom thou
have redeemed; enter not into Jugdment with thy Servant, who am vile Earth, and
a miserable Sinner; but so turn thine Anger from me, who meekly acknowledge my
Vileness, and truly repent me of my faults, and so make haste to help me in
this World, that I may ever live with thee in the World to come, through Jesus
Christ my Lord,

Amen.
5. A Prayer for Peace of Mind, and Comfort upon the same.
LET me have thy Peace, O! Gracious Father, and comfort my trembling and broken
Heart with the Hopes thereof. Cause me Psalm. 51. 8.
to hear the Voice of Joy and Gladness, and revive me with the Assurance of thy
Love. O! that I may be able from my own Experience, to speak great things of
thy readiness, to receive and comfort returning Sinners; and thereby draw back
others to thy Service, who are still running astray from the same. O! that by
seeing thy Goodness upon me, Psalm. 32. 6.
every one that is Godly may seek to thee in their Distress, and find Mercy, as
I have done.

But Lord, having found thy Mercy to poor Sinners, let me not abuse it, or
presume upon it. Let me not take Heart to repeat my Sins, because thou art
ready and glad to grant Forgiveness. When thou have spoke comfortably to me
make me careful Jo. 5. 14.
to sin no more lest a worse thing come upon me; but to keep on in all holy and
thankful Obedience unto thee, and never Psalm. 85. 8.
more to return to folly. Let the Sense of thy Mercies, O! My God, serve no
other use in me, but to encourage my Repentance, and to support me in thy Fear,
till I come at length to enjoy thy Eternal Favor, through Jesus Christ my
Lord, Amen.

For Peace of Mind, and favorable Allowances, and hopes of Mercy, the Penitent
may have more particular Provisions, if he is desirous thereof, in the Office
for one troubled in Mind.

2. Prayers for Confession Sin, and Repentance of the same, in one continued
Form.
1. A Form and Confession of Sins, and of Repentance for the same.
I.
O! Almighty, and most Righteous Lord, I do here with grief of Heart, and with
shame and deep Humility confess unto thy dreadful Majesty, that my Sins are
exceeding many and great, and have been frequently Repeated.

I have oft-times transgressed out of Ignorance: O! that I could not say
careless Ignorance, under Opportunities of Knowledge; yea, or affected
Ignorance, espoused for Earthly ends against Light and clear Evidence, which
was enough to shame and silence me, though not to gain and convince me. But I
have transgressed oftener out of Negligence. Worldly Fear, or Desire; yea,
alas! too often, out of presumptuous Wilfulness, condemning the Evil, while I
was a doing it, and offending wi^tingly, and with Checks and Convictions to the
contrary Especially, etc. here mention Particulars.
.

And these Sins I have been draw to, against all the Endearments of the
Mercies, and all the Alarms and louder Warnings of thy Punishments against all
the Rebukes and Strivings of thy Grace, and of my own Conscience, and of other
faithful and seasonable Admonishers. And against all mine own Purposes and
Engagements, Deliberately made and solemnly professed, and frequently Repeated,
that I would offend therein no more.

Lord be merciful to me, a Great and Wretched Sinner.

II.
BUT thou, O! Blessed Jesus, by making thy self a Sin-Offering for us, art come
to take away the Sins of all, who truly Repent thereof. And, O! merciful Lord,
tho^ my Sins are many and grievous, yet (...) desire to overlook them, but
would gladly see and discover them ^l, that I may penitently bewail and forsake
them. And Oh! That so corrupt Passions, nor love of Worldly or Carnal
Interests, may ^ver bias me, or blind my Eyes from seeing of the same, whilst
^here is space left me to repent of them. And as for those Sins, which do know
my self to be guilty of, I do not cover, but with shame coness them. I do not
justify nor excuse, but condemn my self for the same.

I stand thereby Guilty, O! Lord, of highest Disobedience, against the
strictest Obligations; of wretched Disingenuity and unthankfulness, against the
most endearing Mercys; and of most stupid Folly, against my own clearest,
highest, and most lasting Interests, throwing away thy favor and future Joys,
for empty shows and shadows, and a blessed Eternity for moments of Vanity.

I reflect on all this, O! Merciful God, with bitterness, and with a Spirit
wearied with mine own ways. I see and lament my o^folly, and abhor mine own
vilent on account thereof. I wish wi^^ all my Soul, that those Sins had never
been done, and would take an^ way to undo them, and most ea^nestly desire, and
fully propose b^ thy Grace, that I may do so n^ more.

God be merciful to me, a self condemning and repenting Sinner.

III.
LOrd, I am burdened and heavy laden with my Sins, Oh! D^ thou, who Matthew. 11.
23.
call out to the heavy laden, to seek refeshment at thin^ Hands, give me
ease. I confess them, and desire above all things else, that I may utterly
forsake them Let me according to my Promise Prove. 28. 13.
find Mercy. From mine Heart ^ forgive all Persons who have offended me, even
my bitterest Enemies, and most earnestly entreat thee that thou would't forgive
them: Oh! Do thou, who Matthew. 6. 14, 15.
offerest forgiveness to those who are ready to grant it, for Jesus Christ's
sake forgive me. I repent unfeignedly of all my Sins, and am ready to make all
just amends, at least as far as I am able, to any whom I have ever ^njured,
whether they be of low or ^f high Degree, or even the highest of all. O! God of
all Grace, perfect my Repentance and accept it, and blot out all my misdeeds,
as thou Acts 3. 19.
engagest to do unto all those, who sincerely repent of the same.

I know, O! Blessed Jesus, that Acts 4. 12.
there is no name but thine, whereby I can obtain Pardon. And I trust only to
the fullness of thy Merits, and to the faithfulness of thy gracious Promises,
and to the abundance of my Heavenly Fathers Mercy and loving Kindness, to me a
great and miserable, but an Humble, Contrite, Penitent Sinner. Forgive them
all, O! Blessed Father, Remembering not my Deservings, but the pytyableness of
my Weakness, and thy Dear Sons infinite Merits, and thine own boundless Mercyes
and most precious Promises. Let me here have thy Peace, and be admitted
hereafter to stand for ever in thy Presence, for our Lord Jesus Christ Sake,

Amen.
2. A shorter form of Confession, and Repentance of the same.
O! Almighty and ever living God, I thy sinful wretched Creature, do here with
shame and grief of Heart, bewail and confess my manifold Sins, which either
this day, or at any times heretofore, I have been guilty of against thy Divine
Majesty, either in Thought, Word, or Deed; by omitting what I ought to have
done, or by committing what I ought not to have done; against thee, my
Neighbor, or my Self. Sinning in all these kinds, against thy Mercies, and thy
Judgments; thy Spirit, and thy awakening Providence; against my own Vows and
Resolutions, yea, and often times against the checks and calls of my own
Conscience; often times without any pretense to palliate them to my self, and
always without any to excuse and justify me at thy righteous Bar. And by these
ways, O! Great and Dreadful God, am I, who at best am nothing, become far worse
than nothing, an object of thy most deserved Wrath, and Eternal Damnation.

But thou, O! Merciful Father, have sent thine'own only Son into the World,
Luke 19. 10.
to seek and save that which was lost, and when once he returns back, thou art
ready, not only to receive the Prodigal Son, but to Luke 15. 20. etc.
run out and meet him, and Rejoice over him.

Lord, I repent of all my Sins from my very Heart, and am ashamed of my self,
and grieved that ever I committed them. I earnestly desire to do better for the
time to come, and firmly purpose by thy help to labor in the same. And I most
humbly and heartily implore thy Grace, to keep me always in this Mind, and
never to suffer me wilfully to relapse into the ways of wickedness again. I am
heartily offended with my Self, be thou no longer offended with me. Cleanse
away the Guilt of all my Sins, O! Gracious God, by thy dear Son's most precious
Blood, and slay the power and Dominion of them by his Spirit, that Jo. 5. 14.
being made whole I may sin no more, nor return after I am washed, as 2 Pet. 2.
22.
the Dog to his Vomit, or the Sow to her wallowing in the Mire. Grant this, O!
Merciful Father, for thy dear Son, and my only Savior, Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
3. A particular Enumeration of Sins in a large Form of Confession and
Repentance of the same.
I.
O Lord! Most Holy and Terrible, who art most pure in all thy ways, and a
consuming fire ^o all unrelenting Sinners, my manifold and great
Transgressions, make me both ashamed, and afraid to appear before so holy and
just a Majesty.

Lord! How unlike am I to that Image of thine, wherein at first thou made
Man, and how far have all the powers of my Soul fallen from what they should be?
My Mind is overspread with Blindness and Ignorance, Folly and false Reasonings,
and spends it self upon vanity and unprofitable Thoughts. It is loath to fix
upon good things, and very apt to forget them, and to loose that tenderness and
quick sense of Duty, which should make thy Laws to reign in me. My Heart is so
averse to what is good, and so stubborn and refractory; that it is hardly
brought to resolve upon those ways, which my Conscience tells me are my Duty:
and so wavering and inconstant withal, that when it does resolve well, it does
not stick to it with any certainty. My Affections are forward, and violent in
pursuit of earthly things; but very slow to be engaged in thy Service, and when
once engaged therein, soon weary of the same.

Lord be mercyful to me, a miserably corrupt, and depraved Creature.

II.
AND besides this proneness of my Nature, O! Righteous God, to what is bad; to
make me still more lowly in my own Sight, I have little Strength of Holy
Inclination, or obedient Dispositions, which should restrain me from following,
and giving way to the same.

Oh! how little is there in my Heart, of that Holy Fear, which should withhold
me from giving thee any offense; of that Love, which should make me imitate thy
Glorious Excellencies; of that Thankfulness, which should make me return
answerably for all thy Mercies; or of that Joy in God, which should turn
Religion into a Delight, and make me take all Opportunities of conversing in
that place whilst I live, where I desire to be when I come to die:

I am not duly provident to prevent Temptations; nay, alas! I am too often
delighted in them, and pleased to dwell with them, and love the near approaches
of Sin, and to be put into Opportunities, yea, and sometimes almost the
necessity of evil doing. And when at any time thou have thought fi^ to cast me
upon Trials, I have not been sufficiently watchful, active, and unwearied, in
withstanding them. I am easier, O! most Righteous Lord, in harkening to my own
wicked Lusts, than to the good motions of thy holy Spirit, and to the Dictates
of a pious Conscience; and hereby have omitted many Duties, and have been led
into many sinful Thoughts, and evil or indecent Speeches, and unrighteous
Actions, which now I do with grief lament, and am utterly ashamed of.

Lord be merciful to me, a frail, naked, sinful Creature.

III.
HOW seldom have I been, O! Holy Father, in devout Reflections? How Irreverent,
Insincere, and liveless in my Prayers? How careless in observing thy manifold,
and great Mercies? How hard sometimes to be reconciled to thy Will, and to own
the Wisdom and Goodness of thy Orderings? How faint and languid, in believing,
and relying on thy Promises, when I have stood most in need thereof, and Danger
has threatened any Duties? How fearful to exposemy self, in owning of thy
Injured Name or cause, and in showing a concern and Zeal for thy Service? Nay,
how faithless to my own Vows, when I have promised to make up defects, and to
show greater care and watchfulness, in amending these, or any other Offenses.

Lord be merciful unto me, an unbelieving, indevout, and ungodly Creature.

IV.
AND besides all these Offenses against thee, my God, how many ways have I
trespassed against my Brethren also?

In bargaining and Acts of Justice, how apt am I to lean to my own profit, and
to press upon my Neighbors?

In opportunities of Charity and good Offices, how is my affection in doing
good straightened, by too quick an Eye to mine own ease and interest?

In Conversation, how prone am I to take opportunities of instilling my own
Praise, and of detracting from the praise of others?

How liable is my Heart, to give way to Discontents. To harbor uncharitable
surmises, yea, sometimes of those who are the proper Objects of Charity, and
stand in need of my Relief or Assistance. To grow impatient, and angry upon any
^^ovocation, and in such Anger, to ut^^^ some indecent, bitter, or reproach^^^
words, especially to my inferiors, and to retain such resentment of their
Offenses, as renders me, either prone ^o return ill Offices, or at least
backward to show kindness to them, on any fit occasion afterward.

I am still offending, O! Almighty Lord, either by uncharitable Provocations,
or sinful Complyances, or by Negligence and Remissness, in governing my Self,
or my Dependants, or by Irreverence, and undutifulness to my Superiors, or by
want of Affection, Fidelity, or due regard to my Relations; or by proud
Thoughts, or vain glorious Speeches, or harsh Censures; or by Lust, Anger,
Envy, Peevishness, sinful Fear, mistrustful Care, covetous Desire, or some
other inordinate or unlawful Passions; or by being guilty of some Thoughts,
Words, or Actions, which are contrary to thy Laws, and to that excellent
pattern of all Virtue, which my dearest Lord has set me to walk by.

Lord be merciful to me, an unrighteous Selfish, proud, and impatient Creature.

V.
THese, O! Most great and jus^ God, and many others, which I am not able to
recount, are mine Offenses. Which I have committed, several of them ordinarily,
others frequently, and all of them, even those which most seldom, yet alas,
too often; either by the frailty and violence of my Passions, or by my
Ignorance, Negligence, or Wilfulness; against all the endearments of thy
Mercys, and the Terror of thy Judgments, and all the warnings of thy
Providence, and the Suggestions of thy Spirit, and the Bonds of my own most
solemn Vows and Promises; and against all other Methods, of thy preventing,
assisting, and recovering Grace, which should have kept me from them. All these
my Transgressions testify against me, and my own Conscience accuses me, and
thou, Holy Lord, art an upright judge, who wilt do Justice, and not justify a
Sinner in any Wickedness; and whither then shall my guilty and fearful Soul
fly?

But thine own Dearly Beloved on! O Gracious God, has paid his Life a Ransom
for my Sins, and through the Merits of his Blood, thou art most ready to
embrace a Returning Penitent, and to make thy Mercy glory over Judgment. O!
Lord, I repent of all these my Sins, from my very Heart, and freely forgive all
who have trespassed against me, as I now desire that thou would freely
forgive me. O! suffer me not to be swallowed up, either in Death or Despair;
but in the multitude of thy Mercys do away all mine Offenses, and give me
comfort and peace of Conscience, that being cleansed from all my Sins, I may
serve thee with a quiet mind.

Consider my Weakness, O! Father of Mercies, and how frail my Nature is. And
that frail and sinful as I am, I am still the work of thine own Hands, and am
called upon by thy Name. And how I am heartily ashamed, and sorry for what I
have done, and for Jesus Christ's sake, the Son of thy Love, do earnestly
Implore thy Pardon. And how the Savior of the World dyed to save Sinners, and
how thou an^ my Father, and I thy Son, in Christ Jesus. Accept me therefore,
good Lord, in thy beloved. Forgive me freely all that is past, and keep up in
me by thySpirit, such vigor of holy Resolution, and such watchfulness and
circumspection for the time to come, that I may never return to them again.

I know! O Gracious Father, the falseness of my own Heart, and the instability
of my Spirit. But it is not in my self, but in thee, that I trust. My Faith is
in thine Almighty Aid, which thou have bountifully promised, and which thy Son
has dearly purchased for us with his most precious Blood. Oh! Let that always
be my Guard, and then my Sins shall no more prevail over me, but I shall finish
my days in thy Righteousness, and rest at last in thine Everlasting Peace,
through Jesus Christ my only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
4. Another particular Enumeration of Sins, and Repentance of the same, in a
short Form.
I.
O! Almighty Lord, I thy poor Creature, who am a vile and miserable Sinner, do
here in great Humility lament before thee, and am most heartily ashamed and
troubled, for my having lived so long in the World, as through thy Mercy I have
done, and yet having done so little good in it, and being still so unfit to
leave it, and so little qualified for a better.

I am grieved, O! Blessed God, for having lived so long a stranger to thee, and
for my loving and obeying thee no better, and having no greater Zeal for thee,
since by thy Grace, I have been brought to know and fear thee.

For all my neglects of thy Service, and for my insincerity, and unaffectedness
in performing it. For all the Lightness and evil wanderings of my Thoughts in my
Prayers, and my great and daily unthankfulness forthy great and innumerable
Mercys, for my solicitude about wordly things, and mydistrust of thy Paternal
Care and sure Promises.

For all my negligence, yea, and averseness in studying and learning thy Holy
Will, and all my remissness and forgetfulness in doing it, and for all the
defects and difficulties which I have ever found in suffering and submitting to
the same.

For all my corrupt averesness [and shameful refusal] to take up thy Cross, and
preferring World Ease and Interest before a good Conscience, and for having
chosen at any time, rather to part with the way of thy Truth and Righteousness,
than to follow thee, O! Holy Jesu, in patient and faithful Suffering for the
same.

For all my prophanations of thy Sacred Name, by irreverent use thereof; This
to be used or omitted, as the Penitents need requires.
(especially by careless and common swearing; but most of all by the horrible
wickedness, of false or faithless Oaths.)

For all which, and all other my offenses of this kind, which either I can
remember, or have forgotten, Lord be merciful to me a contrite Sinner.

II.
I Am troubled, O! Lord, for all the discontentedness, which I have ever shown
with my own Condition; and for all the Envy and Evil Eye, which I have cast
upon the happier Lot of other Men. For all the pride of my Heart, and all the
sinful lightness of my Spirit, and for all my immoderate Love of this World.
For all my unclean Thoughts and unchaste Carriage, and for all the
Unthankfulness, or Uncharitableness, or Intemperance, which I have ever shown
in my use of outward enjoyments.

For all which, and all my other like offenses, which either I can remember, or
have forgotten, Lord be merciful to me a Contrite Sinner.

III.
I Am heartily sorry, O! Holy Father, for all my deceitful and insincere
Expressions, and feigned or faithless promises; for my having at any time
divulged secrets which I ought to have concealed, or dissembled things which I
ought openly to have professed; for all my unjust and hard censures, and for
all my detracting Speeches against any of my Brethren.

For all the Advantage, which I have ever taken of the Ignorance; and and for
all the sport and pastime, which I have ever made with the folly and weakness
of my Neighbors. For all my covetous desires, and all my wrongful Gripings, or
hard dealings toward any, whom I have at any time been concerned withal. For
all the over reaching which I may have been guilty of [in gaming or other ways]
and for all the excesses and offenses of my Recreations.

I lament, O! Lord, for all the countenance which I have given to other Men's
Sins, or compliance with them, or neglect to reprove the same, when I had an
obliging call so to do. For all the Provocation which I have ever given others;
and for all the sinful Passion which I have ever shown, and opprobrious
Speeches which I have ever used, and ill will which I have ever retained
toward them, when at any time they have provoked me. For all the ungrounded
Jealousies, and evil and uncandid surmises, and for all the Back-bitings and
Evil-speakings, which I stand guilty of toward any. For all my Deafness to the
cries, or narrowness of Heart in Relieving the wants, of the poor and needy.

For all which, and all my other offenses of the like sort, which either I can
remember, or have forgotten, Lord! be merciful to me a contrite Sinner.

IV.
I Humble my Self before thee, O! Almighty God, for all my irreverence,
Disloyalty, or Breach of Faith and due Obedience, whereby I have trespassed
against those, who have had the Right to reign over me. For having ever offered
a deaf or disobedient Ear, to my Ghostly Rulers; for all my undutyfulness to my
Parents, or unkindness to my Wife, [or Husband,] or remissness in governing my
Dependants, and training up all that serve, or are any way subject unto me, to
fear and serve thee. For all the Evil thoughts of my Heart, and sinful words of
my Mouth, and unrighteous Actions of my Life, wherein I have grievously
offended thee either this Day, or at any other times.

For all these, and all other Sins, O! Almighty and most Righteous Lord, which
either mine own Heart, or thou, who know better than my Heart, see me to
be guilty of, I am sorry at my very Soul, and here humbly confess them before
thee with shame and a broken Spirit, and with steadfast Resolution by thy Grace,
to watch and strive against them for the time to come. Where I have wickedly
broken thy Statutes, my Study shall be religiously to keep them. And where I
have done wrong to any Person, I am ready and willing, according to the utmost
of my Power, to repair the same.

Lord! I Repent, increase my Repentance. And for Jesus Christ's Sake, pardon me
a poor repenting Sinner. Oh! Let his Blood wash me from all my Sins, and let
his peace rid me of all my Fears, and let his Spirit preserve me from all
Relapses. Oh! That having utterly abandoned all my former evil ways, I may
eve^hence forward be fixed in thy Fear, and be duly disposed for thine Eternal
Mercy and favor, though the Merits of my only Savior and Redeemer, Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Short Prapers and Ejaculations for the Penitent, to use at any time as he sees
cause.
EJACULATIONS.
I Am a Sinful Man, O! Lord, Luke 5. 8. And mine Iniquities are gone over my
Head, as an heavy Burden, they are too heavy for me. Psalm. 38. 4. Lord, carest
thou not that I perish? Mar. 4. 38. Jesus Master, have Mercy upon me. Luke 17.
13. Thou that came into the World to save Sinners. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Be merciful
to me a Sinner. Luke 18. 13. Thou that take away the Sins of the World. Jo.
1. 29. And have abolished and overcome Death. 2 Timothy 1. 10. 1 Cor. 15. 54, 57.
And destroyed him that had the Power of it. Heb. 2. 14. Deliver me from the
Body of Sin and Death. To. 7. 24.
Short Prayers.
I.
LOrd, I am not worthy to lift up my polluted Eyes unto thee. But whither
should a Wretch Guilt and Misery look, but unto the Fountain of Mercy? Whither,
^^ to a God, whose Mercy is greater than our Wickedness? To a God whose
property it is, to be kind ^^ his Enemies; and whose patience ^^ bear our Sins,
is as great as his power to punish them; and who has much rather be reconciled
to us than take Vengeance on us. Whither, indeed, but to thee, O! God of all
Grace and Comfort, who show mercy on the unworthy and who art most
Graciously pleased to fit and qualify them for thy Mercy, that so thou may
bountifully confer it on them, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
II.
LOrd, under my heavy load o^ Guilt and Misery, I address my Self unto thee.
But I make no Plea, but for thy Mercy. Nor have any pretense to claim it, O!
Father of Mercies, but only because I infinitely need it, and because thou
love to show it, and art more ready to look at our needs which move thy Pity
and Tenderness, than at our Deserts which cry aloud to thee for Wrath and
Vengeance upon our Heads. And because unworthy, as I am, yet, through thine
inexpressible Love and his, I have a most mercyful Savior, who has born all
the punishment of my Sins, to purchase Mercy for me a Sinner, and who now
powerfully intercedes with thee for Mercy for me, if, being weary of my Sins, I
turn to seek and serve thee, through Jesus Christ my Lord.

Amen.
III.
AND my Soul, O! Gracious God, is wearied out, and filed with the bitterness of
mine own ways. I accuse my Self, and need ^o Witnesses. I condemn my Self, and
need no other Judge to pro^ounce me Guilty. I punish and af^ict my Self for all
my Sins, that I ^ay prevent thy Justice for the same. And by thy Grace I am
resolved to ^rn from them all, that they may ^o longer provoke thee: and, as
far as I am able, to repair the harm which my Brethren have sustained thereby,
that they may no longer damnifie, or disturb them.

Father, forgive me, for I am heartily sorry for all the Evils which I have
done. Forgive all my Sins, for I am fully resolved by thy Grace, to forsake
them. Forgive me, O! Dear God, for I forgive others, yea, I forgive all. Do not
go to exact punishment of me for my Sins; but extend thy Mercy and Pardon to my
true Repentance, for my dearest Lord and only Savior Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
IV.
AND having thus utterly renounced my Sins, O! Holy Father, I desire above all
things to partake of thy Righteousness. Having utterly defaced and corrupted my
self, I would gladly be new made by thee. Having hitherto miscarryed, whilst I
would be in mine own Hands, I desire now to be altogether in thine. I loath my
self, O! My dear God, whilst I am without thee: and whatever else I loose, my
earnest Prayer is, that I may recover thy likeness, through Jesus Christ my
Lord.

Amen.
V.
I Know, O! Gracious Lord, that I cannot receive this, but from thy Self. Oh!
therefore be thou both the Blessed giver, and the Gift. I know also, alas!
that I am utterly unworthy, to have thy Divine Image stamped upon my Soul. But
I extremely need it, and I extremely value it; and such thou art pleased to
account worthy of it. And I dearly love thee, O! God, or else I should not be
thus desirous to be like thee. And thou love to communicate thy Goodness; and
whom should thou imprint and display it upon, but on those who love thee, and
are earnestly desirous of the same?

Hear me therefore, O! My God, and breath i^to mine Heart that Spirit, which
Ephesians. 4. 24.
renews us after thine own Image, in Righteousness and true Holiness. Oh! thou
who seek out Sinners to make them Good, do not reject me now when I seek
thee out to make me better. I am poor and naked; Oh! fill me with thy
Righteousness. My Good Thoughts are unconstant and Changeable; O! fix them by
thy Grace. Set up thy Kingdom, O! Jesu, in my Heart, for to become thy Faithful
Servant, is more to me, then to have the Empire of this World. Keep me
steadfast, O! Lord, in serving thee, till thou take me finally to enjoy thee,
through Jesus Christ my Blessed Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
VI.
LOrd, grant that at all times, I may account my Sins, yea all my Sins, to be
my shame; and make thy Laws, yea all thy Laws, to be my Rule; and thy Blessed
Will, to be in every thing, my choice and satisfaction. And let ^^ Promises be
my Hope, thy Providence my Guard, thy Grace my Strength, and thy blessed Self
my Portion, both now and in the end, through Jesus Christ my Savior and
Redeemer.

Amen.
THE TRIAL AND JUDGMENT OF THE SOUL. OR, Certain Questions or Articles of
Examination, whereby the Penitent himself may try and discover the Safety of
his own Spiritual State. On which the Guide of Souls may make Use of, as he
sees cause, in visiting the Sick, and in giving Absolution to them.
WHEN the Person whose Spiritual Estate is to be inquired into, is sick, some
Questions may be premised, touching his due Reception of his Sickness. And
these the Minister (when he is the Examiner) may begin after the Exhortation to
the Sick, in the Office of Visitation.

Questions touching the Sick Persons due Reception of their Sickness.
1. Are you persuaded, that your present Or, when other Calamity or Affliction
name it.
Sickness is sent unto you by Almighty God?

2. Do you believe and acknowledge, not only his Justice, but also his Kindness
therein, as in a Father's Visitation?

And that all which you now suffer, is far less than you have deserved to
suffer?

And that it is all sent for your Good?

3. Do you therefore submit to it quietly, and without murmuring, because he
sent it?

4. And do you look up to him for Assistance and Deliverance, and depend upon
him to take it off again?

5. And are you willing that he should do this when he pleases, and contented
to wait his time for it?

6. And do you freely resign your self up to his disposal, either to continue
under your illness, or to recover out of the same, to live or die as he sees
fittest for you?

7. Do you study to be as easy as you can, to those who attend or minister
about you; and to receive their well-meant Care and Services, kindly, and
thankfully?

8. Do you now plainly see the Vanity of this World, and of all the
Possessions, Pleasures, Pomp, and Splendour thereof, which seemed the most
tempting and desirable to you, in the time of your Health?

And are you fully sensible and convinced now, how little there is in them, and
how soon you may be, or are like to be taken from them?

9. Do you desire therefore, to keep your Heart loose and taken off from the
same?

And to fix your Hopes and Desires upon God and Heavenly things, which you will
always find an Help at hand, and a solid comfort in your Need?

10. Will you endeavor by God's Grace, to hold on in this Mind, and still to
show forth the same; if, having by God's Blessing recovered your former Health,
you should come to converse again among these worldly Satisfactions, and be
enabled to relish and enjoy them?

If that is not done already, I must remind you, as your case requires I
should, and as I am directed and ordered to do by the In the Rubricks before
the Absolution, in the Office of Visitation of the Sick.
Church, to set your Worldly Affairs in order, and to take care of a just
Payment of all you owe, and declare what is owing unto you, and to make such
clear Disposal of the Worldly Goods you have to leave, as may both discharge
your own Conscience, and prevent Disputes, and preserve Peace among your
Friends, who shall survive you.

I must also remind you, according to your Ability; to be liberal to the Poor,
remembering, that what is disposed of this way, is laid out upon your own Soul;
and that this giving to them, is laying up Treasures for your self in Heaven.

And after these, the Guide of Souls (or the Penitent himself if the Sick Man
is his own Examiner) may proceed to other Questions for the Trya^ of his
Estate, in manner following.

Questions for the Penitent, whereby to try and discover the Safety of their
Spiritual State.
When you are passed from Death unto Judgment, and stand at the great Day, to
be tried before the dreadful Tribunal of Jesus Christ, you will be called to
answer to the Searcher of Hearts, and to give an Account of such Points as
these.

I.
1. OF your Faith, whether you have the Belief or Faith of a Christian.
Whosoever believes on him, shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life.

He that believes on him, is not condemned: but he that Believes not, is
condemned already, John 3. 15, 18.

The Articles or Points of this Belief, or Christian Faith, are these:

I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary; suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified,
Dead, and Buried, he Descended into Hell; the third Day he rose again from the
Dead, he Ascended into Heaven; and sits on the Right Hand of God, the Father
Almighty, from thence he shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead.

I Believe in the Holy Ghost; the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints; the Forgiveness of Sins; the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life
Everlasting,

Amen.
Questions about the Belief of them.
1. DO you unfeignedly, and from your Heart, believe the Truth of those things,
which are p^ofessed in this Creed?

2. Have you any Scruples about any Points thereof, or about any other great
Matters of Religion, wherein you are desi^ous to have Satisfaction?

3. Do you thank God from your very Soul, that you were born, and bred up in
this Belief, and do you desire to die in it?

4. Has it been your Sincere Case and Study in the Course of your Life, to
order your Actions so, and to be so affected with things, as might show you
were real in this Belief, and were Ruled and Acted by a firm persuasion of the
aforesaid Points?

II.
2. Of your Holy Obedience, whether you have led the Life, or paid the Duty and
new Obedience of a Christian. If thou will enter into Life, keep the
Commandments. Math. 19. 17.

To them who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for Glory, Eternal
Life.

But to them who obey not the Truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and
wrath, upon every Soul that does Evil. Romans 2. 7, 8, 9.

A Brief Recital of the Holy Laws and Duties, which we are to obey.

1. Duties toward God.
THis holy Obedience you are to pay, in a due and devout Attendance, on
Prayers, (both Public and Private) and on Sacraments.

In thankfully owning Gods free Bounty, and praising his Goodness for all the
good things, which you receive by any ways.

In submitting patiently to his Holy Will under any Afflictions, and not
grudging at them.

Non growing impatient for ease before his Time, because they are of his
ordering.

In trusting to him and to his Providence, for supplying you in all your Wants.

And for preserving you from any Dangers, or for delivering you ou^ of them.

And so trusting to him for them, as never to make use of any Sin for
compassing the same; nor to betaken your self to any wickedness, be it what it
will, when you have a^tempting opportunity thereby to supply or deliver your
self.

In reverencing his Holy Name, not using it, but with Honor and Respect, not
as a light byword.

Nor ever in common Oaths.

And least of all in false, or faithless Oaths.

In reverencing also, his word, and his Worship, and any things or Persons
devoted to him, or Commissioned by him.

2. Duties toward our Selves.
YOU are to pay it moreover, in Humility, or by preserving a just sense of your
own Faults, Defects, and weaknesses.

And not priding your self on account of any outward things.

Nor being pussed up by any undue conceits of your self, or with contempt of
others.

In chastity, both of the Heart, not suffering the Fancy to fix upon forden
objects; or to please it self in being desirous of, or in contriving for any
unlawful Delights.

And also of the Hand, and Tongue, and Ear, and Eye, and of all the outward
Actions, which are all to be kept clean of all forbidden and impure Enjoyments.

In Temperance about Meats and Drinks.

In Self-Denial and Mortification to this World, and in a read^ness to part
with any of the ease, the Interests, or Conveniences thereof, rather than with
the ways of Truth and Righteousness.

3. Duties toward our Neighbors.
YOU are to pay it likewise, in being just in all your Dealings.

In being content with what is your own, and not coveting, or taking away your
Neighbors Right from him, either by Force or Fraud.

Nor by detaining it when it is unjustly taken, or hindering him of the same.

And by this Neighbor, you: are to understand every Man, whether Countryman
or Foreigner, of high or low condition.

In being Faithful to all your Promises.

In being true in all your Speeches, deceiving none with false Expressions.

And slandering none with false Aspersions.

Nor detracting from any Persons real Virtues, and good Actions.

In all the ways of Charity toward others, especially the Necessitous, giving
Alms as you are able, or other Charitable Assistance for their Relief.

In candor, or fair Interpretation of other Men's Words or Actions.

In not delighting unnecessarily to publish other Persons Faults, by evil
speaking; but seeking rather to cover, or excuse them, as we desire may be done
by our own.

In Meekness and Patience under Injuries, not bursting out into Passion, and
Opprobrious words upon them.

In forgiveness of the same, and ing Good for Ill.

In living peaceably your self.

And in studying to preserve Peace among others; not begetting, or cherishing
any mis-understandings between Neighbors, and endeavoring to remove them when
you find them.

In Love, and Reverence, and Duty to your Parents.

And, if Need be, in succouring and maintaining them.

In constant Loyalty and Obedience to your Rightful Princes be they good or
bad, be they o^ true or false Religions, and be they Protectors of God's true
Worship, or Persecutors thereof.

And in not casting off your Allegiance to them, or levying Wa^ against them,
on any Pretenses o^ Provocations.

In reverent Submission, and adherence to Rightful and Faithful Bishops and
Pastors of Christ's Church.

In keeping the Bond of Peace, by adhereing to their Communion, and flying
Schism.

And in keeping to them, at the Head of God's necessary Truths, and in the
Ministration of a pure and holy Worship, against others who fall to minister by
polluted and corrupt Offices, or set up for Heretical Depravers of the Truth.

And in a faithful discharge of your Duties in any other Relations, ^s of
Husband and Wife, Master or Servant, or the like, wherein by the providence of
God, you stand placed with others, and mutually undebted.

Questions concerning our Obedience of these Laws.
1. HAS it been the Study and endeavor of your Life, by God's help, to perform
these forcited, and such like Duties, though with the infirmities of a
forgetful and frail Nature?

2. Have you bethought your self, according as your Time and Memory will serve
you, and called to mind your manifold Transgressions and Breaches of any of
them?

3. After all the Discoveries which you have made thereof, no doubt but many of
your Breaches of the same, are still secret; for Psalm. 15. 12.
who can tell how of t'he has offended? And are you truly sorry in the
General, for all the rest of those Breaches, which by your Recollection you
cannot recover, or call to mind in particular?

4. Where you find, that in any of these, or the like Duties, you have hearkened
more to wicked and worldly Lusts, than to a good Conscience, and have yielded
to Transgress; are you now ashamed of your Self for having done the same?

Especially for having done so, against both the Majesty and the Mercy of the
ever Blessed God, the made you; and of an ever Blesses Savior, who redeemed
you from everlasting Death with his own Blood, and has prepared Joys both
endless and unspeakable for you i^ another World; and of the Holy Spirit of
God, who is Ephesians. 4. 30.
grieved therewith, and whose infinite Love had instilled better things into
you, would you have hearkened to his good Motions?

And against the Senfe and Convictions of your own Mind, which knows you ought
not to have done so?

And against your own many, ^ost solemn, and repeated Promies to the contrary?

5. Are you now offended with ^our Self, and sorrowful from the ^ottom of your
Heart, that ever ^ou yielded to commit them? And ^o you wish with all your
Soul, that ^hey never had been done?

6. Do you earnestly desire, that ^ou may never yield to commit them any more,
nor consent hereafter to repeat the same?

7. Are you resolved by the Grace of God, to endeavor so to do for the time to
come, [ This Clause when the Person is Sick.
if it please ^im to try you still longer, and to ^aise you up again.]

8. Do you believe those precious promises, which God has made us in his Holy
Gospel, to assist and help ^n such obedient endeavors with his Almighty Spirit
and Grace?

And are you fully purposed to ^ut forth these obedient endeavors, ^n hopes
thereof?

9. Are you heartily sorry, that those endeavors have not been more ^erfect in
you hitherto?

And do you truly desire, that they may still grow more and more?

10. Will you be careful to remember these Holy purposes, ^^ you shall need the
same (if by God's Blessing you shall recover from this Sickness?

And will you take it kindly, and be heartily thankful to any who shall put you
in Mind thereof

11. Is there any particular Sin amongst all these, which lies heavy above the
Rest upon your Conscience, and for which you yet need, and desire, more
particular Direction, Comfort, and Absolution?

12. Besides this Repentance, for all your willful or allowed Breaches, of any
of these Commandments; are you likewise humbled, and heartily troubled, for any
Breaches thereof by surprise?

Or for any hasty, and unconsidered stirrings, and first Motions of sinful
Lusts?

Or for rash Words or Censures or Wanderings in Prayer, and the like.

Though you did not indulge, or antecedently give way to these Breaches, yet
are you humbled, and heartily troubled for the same, after once you observe
your self ^o have fallen into them?

Do you earnestly beg God's pardon thereof?

And are you purposed by his Grace, to watch still against them the best you
can, for the time to come?

III.
3. YOU will be called to give an Account of your Charity and Forgiveness of
others. If you forgive Men their Trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also
forgive you.

But if you forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
you your Trespasses, Matthew. 6. 14, 15.

Questions about this Forgiveness.
1. DO you from your Heart forgive those, who have injured or offended you, as
you expect Forgiveness of your Offenses at God's Hands?

2. Do you lay aside all ill Will, and all Desires, and Purposes of Revenge
toward them?

And are you ready and resolved by God Grace, not to show the same, when it
shall lie in your way, either to profit or hurt them?

3. Do you heartily pray, that God would forgive them?

And would you be glad to see them made sensible of their Offenses, and taking
the right way to have God's Pardon of them, rather than to see them suffering
for the same?

4. Do you remember any Person in particular, to whom you would have so much
told, or signified in your Name?

If so, do you intend by God's leave to have the same signified to them?

Or who shall do it? And when?

IV.
4. Of your Reconciliation to your Brethren, and making Restitution after any
wrongs which you have done to them.

If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother
has ^ought against thee;

Leave there thy Gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to
thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift.

Agree with thine Adversary quickly whilst thou art in the way with him, ^est
he deliver thee to the Judge, and ^he Judge to the Executioner, and thou ^e
cast into Prison.

Verily thou shall by no means come ^ut thence, till thou have paid the utter
most Farthing. Mat. 5. 23, 24, 25, 26.

If the wicked restore the Pledge, and give again what he has Robbed, none of
his Sins shall be mentioned to him, ^e shall surely live and not dye. Exek. 33.
^5, 16.

Questions about this Reconciliation, and Restitution, or making just Amends,
after injuries.
1. DO you desire, that all persons, whom you have any ways offended, would
forgive you?

2. If you know of any who have had just cause, either in the way of
Conversation, or of Business, to be offended with you, and take thinks ill of
you, are you ready, where that is wanting, to appease or remove their uneasy
remembrance of the same, by having a signification of your love carried to
them, and of your desire of their Pardon?

3. Do you call to mind any by name, to whom this should have been done, but
hitherto has not been done. ^^ to whom you would have i^ done?

If so, who shall do it? and when

4. Do you Remember any Reparation, or Restitution which you need to make to
any persons, for any wrong which you have ever done to then or theirs, either
in their Lives their Beds, their Goods, or their Good-name; or by tempting them
to sin? and if so, are you prepared, if that has not been done already, to make
them all just and reasonable amends?

Or would you have any thing more done, than has been done in any of these
cases, where it may be done with more convenience; and may tend to your further
comfort and peace?

5. If you have injured any, by tempting and drawing them into Sin, or
dangerous Errors, do you truly desire, if that is still needful to be done,
that they may be made sensible of their sins, or errors, as you are, and so put
into the way of pardon thereof?

6. Or, if as brethren in Iniquity, and companions in Sin, you have hardened one
another by sitting at it together, do you desire the same for them? and where
you have not done it before, will you endeavor to make them sensible thereof,
and seek their Recovery the best you can?

7. Would you have any thing sent to them in your Name, to make them sensible
thereof? And if so, when, and by whom?

8 Are you ready to show mercy, as you have the extremest need to ask it, that
Mercy may rejoice in your behalf against Judgment.

9. And will you Dan. 4. 27.
break off your Sins by Alms-Deeds, according as God has enabled you, and your
iniquities, by giveing to the Poor?

If you have been more wanting in it in time past, will you be more careful
and Liberal therein, for the time to come?

And will you still Remember, that you are but Gods Steward of all your worldly
Estate, and must give an account what you have done out of it for him, as well
as what you have done for your self? And will you prepare to give a good
account thereof?.

Questions upon the whole.
1. DO you believe, that Almighty God is ready Graciously to Pardon all such
Believers of the foresaid Articles of the Christian Faith, as truly repent them
in this manner of all their Sins, and forgive others, and are ready to seek
Reconciliation and satisfy for all injuries which they have done, and to show
mercy, and are in Peace and Charity with all their Neighbors?

2. Do you believe, that he is ready to do this, only for the sake of our
Blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ, and in regard to the Merits of his
Death, who, by his dying on the Cross for our Sins, purchased all this Mercy
for all truly Penitent Believers?

3. Are you truly sensible of his Exceeding Great Love therein, and from the
Bottom of your Heart, are you Thankful to him for the same?

After which questions, the Guide of Souls, if he is the asker of them, in
visiting the Sick, and Dispensing Absolution, [or the Penitent himself, when he
is his own Examiner,] may go on to this effect.

Now know therefore, O! my Soul, that although thou art, etc. When it is only the
Penitent trying himself.
Brother [or Sister] that although you are a Sinner, yet 1 Timothy 1. 15.
Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners. Although you have been a lost
sinner, yet he is Mat. 18. 11.
come to save, and seek after that which was lost.

Although you have sind yet you do not cover your Sins, or Justify them; but with
grief of Heart confess them, and condemn your self for the same. And 1 Jo. 1. 9.
if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins.

You confess them to him with a resolved aversion, and turn away from the same,
having by the help of his Grace already forsaken some, and studying and being
resolved in Heart to forsake all: And Prove. 28 13.
who so Confesses and forsakes his Sins, shall find mercy.

If you have sinned against your Brethren, you are ready to submit your self,
and seek to reconcile your self to them, and to the utmost of your Power to
make them any reasonable satisfaction. And if a Man has Mat. 5 24.
first reconciled himself to his Brother, he may come to God with a good heart,
and offer his gift. Ezekiel. 33 15. 10.
If he has Repented and given again what he has Robbed, his Sin shall not be
mentioned.

Whilst with an Humble, a Contrite, and a returning Heart, you are thus seeking
to the Father of mercys to forgive you your trespasses, you do from your heart
forgive all other persons, who have sinned against you, their Trespasses. And
if we forgive men their trespasses, our Mat. 6. 14.
Heavenly Father will also forgive us.

As you earnestly seek mercy, ^ou are ready to show it, and according to your
ability to give Alms to the needy. And Mat. 5. 7.
blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Jam. 2. 13.
and mercy rejoices against judgment.

This, when the Guide of Souls is the Examiner. But when the Penitent is his
own examiner, he may go on from hence, if he pleases, to comfort up his Spirit,
and further express his Devotion to Almighty God, by Prayer, the 3d. page 29.
Entitled a Profession of the Fruits of Repentance, and the conditions of
Forgiveness. And by Prayer the 4th p. 33. Entitled A Prayer for Pardon of
Sins. Or, if he is desirous to shorten the Office, he may omit them, and pass
on to the Confession of sins, taken out of the Office for the Communion, and
the other Prayers and Sentences, which are here set down.
Upon such Faith, and Repentance and Satisfaction for Injuries, and showing
Mercy and forgiveness of others, when they are sincere and right, our most
merciful God and Savior will most graciously forgive us, at the great Day of
Judgment. And he 2 Cor. 5. 18.
he has committed the Ministry of reconciliation to his Ministers, that, upon
appearance of the same, they may declare and deal it out, for for the Comfort
of such truly faithful, and Penitent Persons here in this world.

And, now upon this profession, which you have here made, of this Christian
Faith, and Repentance, and reparation of injuries, and of forgiveness of
others, and having charity toward all persons, and of showing mercy to the
miserable, all which you declare is unfeigned, and from the Bottom of your
Heart, do you desire from the mouth of Christ's Minister to receive the benefit
of Absolution?

Then may the Minister proceed, as he sees fit, to lead the Penitent on in this
form of Confession taken out of the Office for the Communion.

ALLmighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, maker of of all things, Judge
of all Men Or. I acknowledge and bewail, when the Penitent is his own examiner.
we humbly acknowledge and bewail, and especially this humble Penitent does
hereby acknowledge and bewail, Or her
his manifold sins and wickedness, which Or She
he from time to time most grieviously has committed, by thought, word, and
deed, against thy Divine Majesty. Provoking most justly thy wrath and
indignation against Or Her.
him. Or She according as the person is.
He does earnestly repent, and is heartily sorry for these his misdoings. The
remembrance of them is grievious unto him; The burden of them is intolerable.
Have mercy upon him, have mercy upon him most merciful Father. For thy Son,
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgive him all that is past, and grant that he may
ever hereafter serve and please thee in newness of life, to honor and glory of
thy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
And then Pronounce the Absolution following.
ALmighty God our heavenly Father, When the Penitent examins himself, he may
repeat this on his knees, and say me, and my, for
who of his great mercy, has promised forgiveness of sins, to all them, that
with hearty Repentance, and true Faith turn unto him; have mercy upon you,
Pardon and deliver you from all your sins, confirm and strengthen you in all
Goodness, and bring you to everlasting Life, through Jefus Christ our Lord Amen.

Or, instead of this Form of Absolution, if he think that fitter, he may use
the form in the Visitation of the Sick.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his Church to Absolve all
Sinners, who truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive thee
thine Offenses: And by his Authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all
thy sins, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

After which, Or the Person himself, when he is his own examiner, making such
changes in this, and the following Prayers, of me for him, mine for his, etc.
as are requisite when one speaks not of another, but of himself.
the Minister may go on with the Collect, that follows the Absolution in the
Office of the Visitation of the Sick.

O! most Mercyful God, who according to the multitude of thy mercies do so
put away the sins of those who truly repent, that thou rememberest them no
more; open thine Eye of Mercy upon this thy Servant, who most earnestly
desires Pardon and Forgiveness. Renew in him, most loving Father, whatsoever
has been decayed by the fraud and malice of the Devil, or by his own carnal
will and frailness: Preseve and continue this [ The Sick, as likewise the
following words within the Hooks [ ] must be omitted when this Office is used
in time of Health.
Sick] member, in the Unity of the Church; consider his Contrition, accept his
Tears, [asswage his Pain, as shall seem to thee most expedient for him.] And
for as much as he puts his full trust in thy mercy, impute not unto him his
former sins; but strengthen him with thy Blessed Spirit, and when thou art
pleased to take him hence, take him unto thy Favor, through the merits of thy
most Dearly Beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

And if the Penitent is visited as a sick Person, he may then use the Psalm
after it.

In thee, O! Lord have I put my trust, let me never be put to Confusion: but
rid me, etc.

But else, instead thereof, he may use these Sentences and Prayers.

Sentences after the Absolution, in the Communion Service.

Or, hear, O! my Soul, when the Penitent examines himself.
Hear what comfortable words our Savior Christ says, unto all that truly turn
unto him.

Come unto me, all that travel and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
Mat. 11. 28.

So God loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that
all that believe on him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Jo. 3. 16.

Hear also what St. Paul says.

This a true saying, and worthy of all men to be received, that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners. 1 Timothy 1. 15.

Hear also what St. John says.

If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the Propi^iation for our sins. 1 Jo. 2. 1.

In the Visitation of the Sick.
O! Savior of the World, who by thy Cross and precious Blood have redeemed us,
save this thy Servant, and help him, we humbly entreat thee, O! Lord.

Amen.
In the Communion.
SPare him, O! Lord, who has confessed his sins unto thee, that he, whose
Conscience by sin was accused, by thy merciful Pardon may be absolved, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
The Collect for the 21 Sunday after Trinity.
GRant we beseech thee, merciful Lord, to this thy Servant, and to all thy
faithful People Pardon and Peace, that they may be cleansed from all their
sins, and serve thee with a quiet mind, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
In the Visitation of the Sick.
THe Almighty Lord, who is a most strong Tower to all them that put their trust
in him, to whom all things in Heaven, and Earth, and under the Earth, do bow
and obey; be now and evermore thy defense, and make thee know and feel, that
there is none other Name under Heaven given to man, in whom, and through whom,
thou may receive Health and Salvation, but only the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Amen.
Unto Gods gracious Mercy and Protection we commit thee. The Lord bless thee
and keep thee. The Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee. The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee Peace, both now
and ever-more. Amen.

And the Peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your heart and
mind in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
and the Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be
with you, and remain in you always. Amen.

After all this is done, I would put the Penitent in mind of one thing, viz.
That the Holy Communion is still a further and Principal means, to settle and
secure, both the Pardon and the Peace of his Soul. The receiving it from the
hand of God's authorized Minister, acting therein by God's appointment, and in
God's name, is the most effectual Absolution, and one of the best Assurances
and Seals of Pardon. The Cup, which he gives the Penitent to Drink from God, is
Mat. 26. 28.
Christ's Blood for the remission of sins, or the remission of sins which he
purchased by the shedding of his Blood. And the method of the Church in the
restoration of Penitents, was to finish and consummate their Reconciliation,
by giving them the Holy Communion. For It a quetiescunque ^e^cata donantur,
corporis ejus sacramentum sumimus, ut per Sanguinem ejus fiat pecca^orum
remissio. Ambros. de Poenit. l. 2. c. 3.
as often as sins are remitted or absolved in the Church, they receive Christ's
Body, that the remission of sins which is granted may be conveyed by his Blood,
says St. Ambrose.

And therefore the sick Penitent, when he has received the foregoing
Absolution, would provide well for the Peace and Comfort of his Soul, if, after
some respite to recover his strength, or at some convenient time soon after,
when he sees most fit, he would Consumate his Absolution by receiving the
Blessed Sacrament.

And other Penitents, after the use of this Office, would do well and wisely to
do the same, as soon after as conveniently they can.

AN OFFICE FOR One troubled in Mind.
SCRIPTURES.
Psalm 103. v. 8 to 19, Ezekiel. 18. v. 21. to the end Luke 15. Psalm. 130. Ezekiel.
33. v. 11. to v. 20.
1. For Profession of Trouble.
I Am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me. Psalm. 119. 22.

Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up:
they are more than the hairs of my head, therefore my heart fails me. Psalm,
40. 12.

Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities
of my youth. Job. 13. 26.

Lord, why castest thou off my Soul? why hidest thou thy face from me?

The Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my
spirit: The terrors of God do set themselves in array against me. Job, 6. 4.

Thy fierce wrath goes over me, thy terrors have cut me off.

While I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. Psalm. 88. 14, 15, 16.

2. Grounds of Comfort.
1. From the Mercifulness of God.
WILL thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and will thou pursue the dry
stubble? Job 13. 25.

Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more?

Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore?

Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender Mercies?

And I said, this is my infirmity: but I will remember the years of the right
hand of the most High.

I will remember the works of the Lord, surely I will remember thy wonders of
old. Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Thou have always been a God forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. Ex.
34. 6, 7.

The Lord is merciful and gracious, he will not always chide, neither will he
keep his anger for ever. Psalm. 103. 8. 9.

Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity? He retains not his
anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. Mat. 7. 18.

2. From Promises to the Penitent.
WHen the wicked Man turns away from his Wickedness, that he has Committed,
and does that which is Lawful and Right, he shall save his Soul alive.

Because he considers, and turns away from his Transgressions that he has
Committed, he shall surely live, he shall not Dye.

Repent therefore, and turn your selves from all your Transgressions, so
Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. Ezekiel. 18. 27, 28, 30.

As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the Death of the Wicked,
but that the wicked turn from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways, for why will you Dye? Ezekiel. 33. 11.

Go, and sin no more, then will not I condemn thee. Jo. 8. 11.

Come unto me all ye that Labor, and are heavy Laden, and I will give you
Rest. Mat. 11. 28.

This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ
came into the World to save Sinners, of whom I am Chief. 1 Timothy 1. 15.

If any Man Sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our Sins. 1 Jo. 2. 1, 2.

The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all Sin. 1 Jo. 1. 7.

There is therefore now no Condemnation, to them which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. Romans 8. 1.

3. From the Compassionateness of our High Priest.
THe Lord Pityeth those that fear him, like as a Father Pityeth his own
Children.

For be knows our Infirmityes, he remembers that we are Dust. Psalm. 103, 13,
14.

We have not an High Priest; which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without Sin.
Heb. 4. 15.

He was made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a Merciful and Faithful
High Priest.

For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them
that are Tempted. Heb. 2. 17, 18.

He can have compassion on (or reasonably bear as in the Margin, with) the
Ignorant and those that are out of the way. Heb. 5. 2.

He will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the Smoking Flax. Isa. 42. 3.

3. The acceptableness of an Humble Spirit.
THe humble Publican stood afar off, would not so much as lift up his Eyes to
Heaven, but smote upon his Breast, saying, God be mercyful to me a Sinner.

I tell you this Man went down to his House justified; rather than the other:
for every one that Exalts himself shall be abased, and he that Humbles
himself, shall be Exalted. Luke. 18. 13, 14.

To this Man will I look, even to him that is Poor, and of a Contrite Spirit,
and Trembles at my word Isa. 66. 2.

I dwell with him, that is of a Con^rite and humble Spirit, to revive the
Spirit of the humble, and to revive the Heart of the Contri^e ones. Isa. 57. 15.

He heals the Broken in Heart, and binds up their Wounds. Psalm. 147. 3.

4. Of Peace, and Hope, and Joy in God.
PEace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you. John. 14. 27.

These things have I spoken unto you, that in me you might have Peace. John.
^6. 33.

Herein is our Love made Perfect, that we may have boldness in the Day of
Judgment.

Perfect Love casts out fear, because ^ear has Torment. 1 Jo. 4. 17, 18.

Let all those that seek thce, rejoice and be glad in thee. Psalm. 40. 16.

The fruit of the Spirit, is Joy, Peace, Gal. 5. 22.

The Kingdom of God is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
Romans 14. 17.

Finally, my Brethren, rejoice in the Lord. Phil. 3. 1.

Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say Rejoice.

In every thing, by Prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your
request be made known unto God.

And the Peace of God, which Passes all understanding, shall keep your Hearts
and Minds through Christ Jesus Phil. 4. 6. 7.

Now the God of hope, fill you with all Joy, and Peace in Believing, that ye
may abound in Hope, through the Power of the Holy Ghost. Romans 15. 13.

Show the same Diligence every one of you, to the full Assurance of Hope unto
the end.

Which Hope, have as an Anchor of the Soul, both sure and Steadfast. Heb. 6. 11.
19.

Rejoice in Hope. Romans 12. 12.

Be sober, and Hope to the End. 1 Pet. 1. 13.

Love his appearing. 2 Timothy 4. 8.

Looking for, and hastening unto the comeing of the Day of God. 2. Pet. 3. 12.

Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Rev. 22. 20.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

As it was in the Beginning, etc.

5. An Hymn of Thanksgiving, after one is Delivered from Trouble of Mind.
The bruised Reed, O! Lord, thou haste not broke, nor quenched the smoking
Flax, Mat. 12. 20.

Thou have restored unto me the Joy of of thy Salvation, and upheld me with thy
free Spirit.

Thou have made me to hear of Joy and Gladness, that the Bones which thou had
broken Rejoice. Psalm. 51. 8. 12.

I said I will confess my Transgresions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
Iniquity of my Sin.

For this shall every one that is Godly, pray unto thee in a Time when thou
may be found. Psalm. 32. 5. 6.

Depart from me all ye Workers of Iniquity; for the Lord has heard the Voice
of my weeping.

The Lord has heard my supplication, the Lord will recieve my Prayer. Psalm. 6.
8. 9.

He will regard the Prayer of the destitute, and not despise their Prayer.

And this shall be written from the Generation to come; and the People which
shall be created shall Praise the Lord. Psalm. 102. 17, 18.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without end

Amen.
PRAYERS.
1. A general Prayer for one troubled in mind.
O! Righteous Lord, thy Justice has brought me to reap the bitter fruits of my
own evil ways, and Job. 13. 26.
to possess mine iniquities. My sins at length have taken hold upon me, and
thou writest bitter things against me, and thy Psalm. 88. 15. 16.
fierce wrath goes over me. Thy Terrors do even distract my thoughts, my
Spirit is quite broken within me by reason thereof, Psalm. 40. 12.
and my Heart fails me.

But, O! Gracious God, tho I be troubled and cast down, let me not fall, I
humbly entreat thee, into utter despair. Whilst I live, let me not forgo the
hopes of thy Mercy, nor the care of my own Return to my Duty. When I groan
under my Burdens, make me to flee unto thee for ease. When I am terrified with
my former Sins, let me make haste to forsake the same, and labor diligently to
set my Soul safe by new Obedience. When I am struck with the sting of my own
Guilts, enable, me O! Jesu, to look up to thy Cross, and to the merits thereof,
and to rest my Heart upon the same by true Repentance. When I am most
mistrustful of my self, let me not mistrust thee, nor call in Question any
Comfortable Promises of thy free Grace and Mercy.

O! Father, let thy smiteing reclaim and amend me, and then let thy comforts
revive me. Let thy Dear Sons most Precious Blood Expiate all my Sins, and let
his Grace cure them. And instead of these most just and deserved Terrors,
wherewith thou now take Vengeance for the same; Lord, let me have thy Mercy
to forgive my Sins, and cause me to hear the Voice of Peace, to quiet and
Comfort my amazed Conscience, for my only Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ's
sake, Amen.

A Prayer for the same, out of the Office of the Visitation of the Sick.
O! Blessed Lord, the Father of Mercys, and the God of all Comforts, I beseech
thee look down in pity, and compassion upon me thy afflicted Servant. Thou
writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess my former in
iquities thy wrath lies hard upon me, and my Soul is full of Trouble. But O!
merciful God, who have written thy Holy word for our Learning that we through
Patience and Comfort of thy Holy Scriptures might have hope; give me a right
understanding of my Self, and of thy Threats and Promises, that I may neither
cast away my Confidence in thee, nor place it any where but in thee. Give me
Strength against all my Temptations, and Heal all my Distempers. Break not the
bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax. Shut not up thy tender Mercys in
Displeasure; but make me to hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou
have broken may rejoice. Deliver me from fear of the Enemy, and lift up the
light of thy Countenance upon me, and give me Peace through the merits and
mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Collect for 21. Sunday after Trinity.
GRant, I beseech thee, Merciful Lord, to me and all thy faithful People,
Pardon and Peace, that we may be cleansed from all our Sins, and serve thee
with a quiet mind, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Prayers for Particular Graces.
1. Prayers for a sense of Sins, without Despair of Mercy to Pardon them, or of
Grace to cure them.
I.
O! Almighty Lord, make me truly, and deeply humble for my sins, and fully
sensible of my own Vileness. Never suffer me so far to loose my fears, as to
grow conceited of my self, or Careless of my Duty; nor so far to presume upon
thy Mercy and Pardon, when I truly repent of the same, as to cast off a true
Dread and Terror of thy Justice, if I should revolt and return to them again.

But deliver me, O! my God, from all such abjectness, as, instead of setting me
further off from my Sins, is fit only to keep me a surer Prisoner under them.
And whilst I retain so much fear and lowlyness, as will keep up holy care and
watchfulness; grant that I may retain so much hope too, as will encourage and
strengthen Holy Endeavors, and afford Peace.

And therefore, O! my Dear Lord, when I think the worst of my self, let me not
proceed to a Belief, that I am past all bounds, of being pardoned by thy Mercy,
or of being made better by thy Grace. Let me not once imagine when I am fallen,
either that it is in vain for me to endeavor to rise again; or, if by thy help
I should rise, that there is no hope of my being forgiven.

But when I am most jealous of my self, let me be confident of thee. And
together with an humble sense and fear of my Sins, enable me to keep up a sure
hope of thy Promises, and a strict care of my own Repentance, and a Comfortable
Persuasion of thy Gracious acceptance thereof, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake
Amen.

II.
KEEP me always sensible, O! God, that as thou art most justly angered at my
Sins; so thou art most easy to be appeased, and reconciled by my true
Repentance. And that thou art not more offended with me, whilst I lie down in
my folly; than thou will be delighted with me, when with the Penitent Prodigal,
I shall have come to my self, and returned to my Duty. Let me never forget,
that Luke 15. 7.
there is joy in Heaven over every Sinner that Repents; and that whenever a
Sinner turns away from his iniquity, he shall be sure to find mercy with
thee, through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
2. A Prayer for Hopes of Mercy, and of Grace, to encourage Repentance.
MY Heart, O! almighty Lord, is full of trouble, and ought to be so whilst it
is fond of sin. But let not my sorrow settle into a neglect of cure, nor my
fear grow up into Despair. When I think ill of my self, let me not fall, O!
most Gracious Father, to think ill of thee: and after I have grievously
affronted thy. Majesty, as I have alas! through all the course of my life, let me
not come now at last to affront and exclude thy Mercy.

My Sins, O! Lord, are many, and great. But my sweet Saviors Merits, and thy
Mercys, are infinitely greater. And the Guilt thereof is not too great for thy
Mercy to Pardon; nor my proneness to repeat the same, too great for thy Grace
to overcome. And therefore, O! Dear God, tho by my former evil life, I have
thrown off my Innocence; give me not up therewith, to throw away the thoughts
of my own Repentance, nor the hopes of thy Gracious acceptance. Let me not shut
that Gate of Mercy upon my self by Despair, which thou have set open for every
truly contrite Sinner; nor neglect by true Repentance to enter in at the same.

Psalm. 130 4.
There is mercy with thee, O God! that thou may be appeased: And therefore
there shall be Repentance with me, and in hopes of thy mercy thou shall be
feared. Tho I have falen, yet, by thy Grace I will not rest under my fall; nor
despair of thy Mercy when I am risen; nor of strength by thy Grace, to rise up
again. But setting my heart to fear thee, I desire to rest my Soul on the sure
hopes of thy Spirit, to perfect my sincere Endeavors, and on the sure Hopes of
thy Mercy to Pardon mine Offenses, for the merits of thy dear Son, and my only
Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ, Amen.

3 A Prayer setting forth the Grounds of Hope thereof.
O! Father of Mercys, be thou my support and stay under all this heavyness and
Dejection of my Spirit. And let not thy Mercy, or my Faith fail me, when all
things else do.

Tho at present thou art angry with me: yet, O Lord! Mic. 7. 18.
thou retainest not anger for ever, because thou delightest in Mercy. Oh!
res^ine thy beloved property toward me, and laying aside thy fierce wrath,
show Pity on me.

Tho I am a wicked, and a wretched Creature, yet, thou art a Mercyful God. Ex.
34. 6. 7.
Thou art a God forgiving Iniquity, forgive that which lies so heavy upon me.
Thou art 1 Timothy 1. 15.
the Savior of Sinners, save me who am a most Grievous Sinner, and let me not
Perish in my Sins.

Thy Mercyes, O! Gracious Father, have been wonderful toward the greatest
offenders; such as thy servant David, who was guilty of Adultery and Murder;
and Peter, who forsware himself, and denied his ^ after; and Saul, who
Persecuted and made havoc of the Church; yea, and even those wicked Jews, who
murdered and Crucyfied the Son of God himself: and they were never shut against
any Sinners, who turned to thee with true Repentance. Oh! then let not me
despair of that Pardon, which was never yet denied to any truly contrite heart
in my condition. Let not me imagine, that thou, who art insinite in mercys,
have less mercy in store when I need, than thou had for the needs of others.
Or that thou, who art a tender Father toward all, and 1 (...) ^. ^^.
Judge without respect of persons, wilt deny that mercy to my true
repentance, which, according to thy gracious Promises, thou did extend to
theirs.

I know, O! God, that I have deserved the severest Punishments. But thy mercy
deals not with us according to our Deserts. And as my sins have deserved
Punishment; So thou, O! Blessed Jesus, have deserved my Pardon of the same.

Thou 1 10. 2. 2.
art the Propitiation for our sins: And thy 1 10. 1. 7.
Blood cleanses us from all sin. Oh! let me not mistrust the sufficiency of
thy Sacrifice, to atone for all mine Offenses, which expiates the Sins of the
whole World. 1 10. 2. 1.
If any Man sin, thou art his Advocate with the Father: And let not me imagine
that thou can ever move in vain; or, that whilst thou art ready, yea, sure to
intercede in the cause of every other contrite Sinner, thou will be silent, and
sit still in mine.

Holy Father, have mercy on me. Sweet Jesu, cleanse and save me. Wash away the
stain of my Sins, and speak peace to my affrighted conscience, and revive and
comfort up my broken Heart: that I may live a monument of thy mercy, and a
comfort to poor Penitents and Broken Spirits, who shall hereafter he upheld
thereby, and hope for like mercy in their Dejection, as thou shall have
graciously showed to me in mine, for my Blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesus
Christ's sake,

Amen.
4 Prayers for Mercy and For clearer Information about these Favorable
allowances, the Devout Petitioner may consult the Practical Believer: or the
Articles of the Apostles Creed, drawn cut to form a true Christians Heart and
Practice. Part. 2. Chap. 4. And the Measures of Christian Obedience. Parts the
4th. and 5th.
favorable allowances, in trying our Services.
I.
BE not extreme, O Lord, in marking what I have done amiss, nor deal Strictly
and Rigorously with me; but Judge of all my ways with mercy. Thou Psalm, 103. 140
know our frame, and considerest how weak and frail it is: Oh! make gracious
allowances for all the Pityable frailtyes, and forgetfullness thereof.

In pleading my Cause, O Blessed Jesu, show thy self Heb. 2, 17. and c. 4. 15.
and c. ^. 2,
a merciful High Priest, who can bear in reason with our Ignorance, and
Errors, and can be touched with the secling of our ins^^mitys. Stand not upon
Rigours in discussing my poor Services, nor reject any good beginnings of thy
Grace in my returning Heart. Isa. 42. 3.
Quench not the smoking Flax, but by the gentle breathings of thy Holy Spirit,
quicken it into a pure flame: Nor break the bruised Reed, but in tender care
and pity bind it up.

Examine all my ways, and weaknesses, Oh! my God, with the indulgent and
compassionate abatements of a Father. Judge me, O! Lord, with the mercy and
gentleness of a Savior. Try me with the favor of one that dyed for me, and
seeks at any rate, if it may be done justly and reasonably, to save, not to
condemn me.

Be such a Judge, O! blessed Jesu, as will not strain things to my prejudice,
but that seeks, as far as it may be done with any fairness, to make the best of
my Cause. A Judge, that is ready to make the most of my well meant and sincere
Services, and to supply their wants and imperfections, by a gracious
acceptance. And to make the least of my Errors and Miscarriages, admitting, and
making the uttermost of any thing, which can with truth and reason be offered,
in abatement, or excuse thereof.

Judge me, O! merciful God, with such condescentions of Love and Mercy, and
with such mixtures of favor and equity, as may give poor Sinners, who know
they labor under manifold defects and frailties, cause to hope in thee, and
comfort to appear before thee. With such, as may make them look up to thee with
Peace and Joy, and long 2 Pet. 3. 12. Rev. 22. 20
for thy coming; and support them under all the Trvals and Sorrows of this
troublesome World, with a comfortable confidence of being received at last into
thine everlasting Kingdom, through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ our
Lord,

Amen.
II.
LORD, tho I am still offending thee, yet I dearly love thee. I can never take
pleasure in my self, but when I think I have pleased thee. Nay, I hate my self
for it, as often as I find that I have offended thee. And I bear thee a Child's
obedient Regard and Reverence, tho alas! with too much of the alloy and
mixture of a Child's folly and forgetfullness.

Look upon mine offenses therefore, I humbly entreat thee, O! Father, as the
offenses of one who loves thee above all things. Look upon them as the slips of
one, whose Heart nevertheless is bent upon thy fear, and devoted to thy
Service. But who pays thee this Service under a load of Humane Infirmitys, and
much frailty of the flesh. Who at one time is drowsy, at another unwary; who
is forgetful in many things, and hasty and inconsiderate in more; who naturally
grows weary and remiss, when trials return often, or continue long; and whose
unconstant Temper is too often dull and listless, when it needs to be most
active and vigorous; and supine and inadvertent, when it should be most
circumspect, and stand most strictly upon its Guard.

But through all this Cloud of mine infirmities, be thou pleased, O! Gracious
Lord, to look to my Love and Devotedness to thy Laws: and mercifully accept my
Love, and pity my weaknesses. Oh! thou who made me; Consider, and Pity my
frailty, Oh! thou who Heb. 4. 15.
have bore our infirmities, tho without sin, in thy self, have compassion on
them in me. Bear with them, O! Lord, as with the failures and forgetfulnesses
of a sincerely affectionate and devoted, tho of a very frail and heedless
Servant. Bear with them, O! Father, as with the Errors and Oversights, of a
loving and dutiful, tho of a very weak, and frail, and simple Child. And let me
have thy Grace to help and guard me against them, as well as thy mercy to pity
and pardon them, for my dearest Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake,

Amen.
5. A Prayer for a Clear and settled Judgment of our Selves, and of what may
establish us in Peace.
O! God, the giver of all wise thoughts, and the light of those that sit in
darkness, send forth the light of thy Spirit into my Heart, and scatter those
Clouds of Fears and Ignorance, which have been gathering, and settling
themselves upon it. Rid me of all confusedness of thoughts; and clear up my
mind with just and due apprehensions, both of thee, and of my self. And fix and
stablish me, O! Lord, in right Judgments, that when by thy Grace, I am once
well resolved in things belonging to my peace, I may not be soon shaken in
mind, or easily removed from the same, by any returns of ill grounded and
distempered fears, and melancholy suggestions.

Remove from me, if it may please thee, O! Merciful Father, any disorders of a
distempered Body, that make me unstable in those just persuasions of thy Grace
and Mercy, which should do me good; or that do any otherways cast a Mist before
my troubled Spirit. Suffer not my fears for my sins, to increase so far, as
instead of being a help to carry me out of them, to prove a snare to detain me
in them, and to hinder me from putting forth my self to do my duty, by holding
me under an unprofitable sorrow, and tempting me to despair of mercy.

Lord, fill me plenteously with all those Graces of thy holy Spirit, which must
recommend my Soul to thee: and with such comforts of the same, as may sweeten
Religion to me, and carry me, instead of spending my self in fruitless
complaints, to put forth real endeavors of doing thee Honor and Service, and
to lay out my self in ways of thy Glory and of mine own everlasting peace,
through Jesus Christ my Lord,

Amen.
6. A Prayer for Recommendation of our Humble fears, to Gods merciful
acceptance.
BUT Psalm. 50. 3.
tho I am afraid, yet, O! my God, I trust in thee. My fears and mistrusts are
only of my self, and of the worthlessness and unacceptableness of mine own
Services, or of the insufficiency, or insincerity of my own Repentance; but are
not at all a mistrust of thy Promises, or of the certainty of thy mercy toward
all true Penitent Sinners.

And let not this lowliness in mine own Eyes, O! Merciful Lord, hinder me from
being acceptable in thine. Look graciously upon me, as thou did upon the poor
Publican, tho Luke 18. 13. 14.
I stand afar off, and dare only call for mercy at a distance, and not lift up
so much as my Eyes to Heaven. Isa. 66. 2. etc. 57. 15.
Look upon me, who have a contrite Heart, and despise it not; who am Poor and
Tremble at thy word, and according to thy Promise, dwel^ with me, and receive
my Spirit.

Lord, Jam. 4. 10.
I humble my self before thee, do thou take me up. I humble my self justly, but
do thou take me up in mercy. And all my comforts, will I ever most thankfully
ascribe to the praise of thy free bounty and Grace, through the merits of my
blessed Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ,

Amen.
7. Prayers for Peace, and Hope, and Join in God.
I.
O! Blessed Lord, grant that I may both do thy holy will, and take delight in
doing it; and have the Comfort, as well as the Guidance of thy Grace. Grant me
even now to taste the pleasures, as well as hereafter to reap the Profits of
thy Service, that I may both go on therein more cheerfully my self, and may
also recommend the same unto others, by showing a comfortable and joyful spirit
in Performance thereof.

O! that no hard or unjust thoughts of thee, may embitter Religion to me. O!
that no mistrusts of thy merciful acceptance, may either discourage the course
of my sincere obedience, or deprive me of the comforts of the same. Whilst I am
laboring sincerely to serve thee, give me the comfort of hope, that thou do
accept me, and let me find the ways of Pro. 3. 17. Ps. 119. 156. Ps. 33. 37.
of righteousness to be ways of Peace, both now and in the end, through Jesus
Christ my Lord.

Amen.
II.
Lord, let thy Holy spirit work in me Gal. 5. 22.
Joy and Peace, together with Faith and Righteousness, and other of its blessed
fruits. Set up Romans 14. 17.
thy Kingdom in my heart, as in righteousness, so in Peace and Joy in the Holy
Ghost. Teach me Phil. 3. 1. c. 4. 4. 7.
to joyce in the Lord; Yea, to rejoice in him always. Let perfect love, when it
increases Obedience and cheerful Reverence, Jo. 4. 17.
cast out all tormenting fears: and let the Peace of God, which passes all
understanding, keep my heart and mind, Yea, keep it so sure, that doubtfullness
or despair may never be able to possess themselves thereof any more.

Make my heart to hope in God; yea, Romans 15 13.
to abound in hope through the Rower of the Holy Ghost. To Heb. 6. 11. 19.
give diligence to the full assurance of hope, and that even to the end. O!
that I may have this comfortable hope of thy mercies, as an anchor of the Soul,
both sure and steadfast, and may never be driven from the same, by any Storms,
or troubles of this World.

Yea, grant O! Lord, that I may Romans 12. 12.
rejoice in hope, and Romans 15 13.
be filled with all joy and peace in believing. That I may 2 Timothy 4. 8. 2 Pet.
3. 12
look for thy glorious appearance, and love it, and with desire haste it on.
And that in all my Trials here, I may bear up my self with the comfortable
expectation of the same, till at length thou shall mercifully accomplish my
Hope, and turn it into a blessed and everlasting fruition and enjoyment, for my
dearest Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

The Person in trouble, may likewise use the Prayers in the Office for
Penitents, entitled, A Profession of the fruits of Repentance, and the
conditions of forgiveness, p. 29 for the quieting of his mind. And the two
Prayers following, for Pardon of Sins, and for Peace of mind and comfort upon
the same, as he sees cause.

8. A Prayer against perplexing Doubts and Scruples.
O! Merciful Lord, keep me under such an Holy Fear, as will make me careful not
to trust in false ways, nor to swerve from my Duty when I know it. But remove
from me perplexing doubts, and unresolvedness about the same, which will either
hinder me from doing it at all, or make me do it heavily and with a troubled
mind. Let not me indulge them, as true tenderness of spirit, and fruits of thy
Grace; but labor against them, as my spiritual diseases, or as Satan's
Temptations.

Lord, let not me be still disputing what thy holy will is, when I should be
doing it; or endlesly doubtful and disturbed to find thy ways, when I should be
walking in them; and ever irresolute and still scrupulously deliberating, when
I am called out to action

Let me not want knowledge of my duty, so as to disobey thee blindly and
securely: Nor true tenderness of Conscience, so as to venture on some things
which really offend thee, without remorse, because they seem little to my
carnal and corrupt thoughts, or are little accounted of by others.

But after once I have been duly instructed therein, and am tenderly sensible
of the same, cause me to be fixed and firmly settled in what I know, and to
give up my self afterward cheerfully to perform it; not scrupulously to
debate a new, and endlesly examine on every occasion, whether I may safely and
acceptably do it or no.

O! My God, let faith and knowledge direct my steps, and let Joy and Peace
accompany them. Whatever else thou leavest me ignorant of, let me be clear and
well resolved about thy ways, and careful with all uprightness to walk therein.
Let me not miss here of finding and doing my duty, nor at last of thy eternal
mercy, through Jesus Christ my Lord.

Amen.
9. A Prayer, against Profane mistrust of Divine Truths, and Blasphemous
Thoughts.
O! Most gracious God, who by the Power of thy Spirit, art only able to cure
the sickness, and to overcome the unruliness of mine; Protect me, I humbly and
earnestly entreat thee, against all Profane Doubts and Mistrusts of thy
truths, and against all Blasphemous Thoughts and suggestions about Divine
things, which either mine own melancholy fancy, or the busy and wicked
adversary, are ready to represent and suggest to me.

Never suffer them, O! God, to stagger or weaken my Faith, nor to hinder or
clog my Practice, nor, if thou please, by their wearisom conflicts, to be a
pain and burden to my Life. Preserve me, not only from the sin, but, if it may
seem good to thy Fatherly Wisdom, from the temptation too, and from the trouble
and sorrow of them.

But if it be thy blessed will, to continue these profane and terrifying
thoughts for my Trial and Humiliation; Lord, make me sensible, and comfort my
disturbed Heart with the sense thereof, that it will not be imputed as a sin to
me to be tempted therewith, but to yield to the Temptation. And that in thy
sight, I am not guilty of the same, whilst I neither believe them, nor give
place to them; not altering or abateing, either my Faith, or my Practice
thereupon. And that they are the enemies sin, who, to try and tempt me,
studiously and wickedly suggests them; not mine, who instead of harkening
thereto and complying therewith, immediately resist them as soon as I perceive
them, and cast them out with horror and indignation.

And Oh! that during this trial, I may learn to depend entirely upon thee
without whom I can do nothing. That as often as these profane thoughts are
thrown into my mind, I may find Grace to overcome them, and without the least
allowance or delay, to throw them out again. And that I may learn to bear with
my self, and to show Patience under them, as under every other affliction and
trial of thy ordering. Trusting to thy Grace to assist me, and to thy mercy to
accept me, whilst I am humbly laboring under the same; and to thy goodness to
rid me of them in thy due time, for my Dear Lord and only Savior Jesus
Christ's sake.

Amen.
10. A thanksgiving, for satisfaction and comfort, after one has been troubled
in Mind.
O! Merciful Lord, thou have caused the light to shine out in the midst of
darkness, and given me order and clearness, for my former confusedness of
thoughts, and settled my trembling and troubled spirit in rest and Peace. Thy
Grace has comfortably resolved and enlightened me about thy ways, and set me
free from my entangling scruples, and rid me of my dejecting and disquieting
fears, by comfortable hopes of thy free mercies in Christ Jesus.

Blessed be thy love, O! Gracious Father, for sending me such seasonable helps
and suitable instructors, who by clear representations of things, have happily
removed my fears and ignorance. And blessed be thy Grace, for opening my Heart
and Eyes, and enlightening and quieting my spirit, by their means. But above
all, blessed be thy goodness, for giving us such sweet promises of favor and
mercy in Jesus Christ, as may give poor sinners ease of Heart, and humble
confidence in thee.

And, Oh! Do thou, who have now most graciously spoken peace unto my Soul,
maintain and keep up clear knowledge, and unswerving righteousness in the same,
that it relaps not into guilt and fear, nor be clogged and disquieted by doubts
and scruples any more. Make me satisfied and settled in a right understanding
of all good things, and careful in the observance of them. And let not any
busy workings of the Adversary, or of my own melancholy, make me
unnecessarily mistrustful, or suspicious, or unduely jealous, either of thee,
or of my self. Let me not be fickle and soon alterd, in my Persuasions of thy
Love, or in my purposes of thy Service. But fix my heart in thoughts of
righteousness, and in the blessings and comforts of Joy and Peace, for our Lord
Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Office for the Penitent.
THE Introduction p. 1.

An Office for the Penitent containing

1. Scriptures.
1. FOR Godly sorrow for sins p. 9

2. For a Penitential consession of the same p. 10

3. For resol^tions of Amendment p. 12.

4. For Fruits worthy of Repentance p. 14

5. For pardon of sins, and grounds for the hopes thereof p 16

6. For comfort in the same p. 18

2. Prayers.
1. Prayers upon the several parts of Repentance, in particular and distinct
forms.

1. A Confession of Sins p. 19

2. A profession of Godly sorrow for sins, and of Resolutions of new obedience
p. 26

3. A Profession of the Fruits of Repentance, and the conditions of Forgiveness
p. 29

4. A Prayer for Pardon of sins p. 33

Two Collects out of the Office of Commination p. 36

5. A Prayer for Peace of mind, and Comfort upon the same p. 37

2. Prayers for Confession of sin, and of Repentance of the same, in one
continued Form.

1. A Form of Confession of sins, and of Repentance of the same p. 39

2. A shorter Form of Confession, and Repentance of the same p. 44

3. A particular enumeration of sins, in a large form of Confession, and
^epentance of the same p. 46

4. Another particular enumeration of sins, and Repentance of the same in a
shorter Form p. 55

Sort Prayers and Ejaculations, for the Penitent to use at any time, as he sees
cause p. 61

THE CONTENTS OF THE Trial and Judgment of the Soul, Consisting of Questions.
1. FOR the Sick, touching the sick Persons due reception of their sickness p.
70

2. For the Penitent, whereby to try and discover the safety of their spiritual
estate, viz, of

1. Their Faith p. 73

2. Their holy obedience, where of, the several Duties and Holy Laws, which we
are to obey p. 75. etc.

3. Of their Charity, and Forgiveness of others p. 85

4. Of their Reconciliation to their Brethren, and making restitution after
wrongs p. 87

5. Questions upon the whole p. 90

An exhortation to the examined Penitent p. 91

Prayers before and after his Absolution p. 94. etc.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Office for one troubled in Mind.
SCRIPTURES.
1. FOR Profession of trouble p. 102

2. Grounds of Comfort

1. From the mercifulness of God p. 103

2. From promises to the Penitent p. 104

3. From the Compassionateness of our High Priest p. 105

3. The acceptableness of an humble spirit p. 106

4. Of Peace, and Hope, and Joy in God p. 107

5. An Hymn of thanksgiving, after one is delivered from trouble of mind p. 109

PRAYERS.
1. A General Prayers for one troubled in mind p. 110

Two Collects out of the Liturgy p. 112

2. Prayers for particular Graces

1. Prayers for a sense of Sin, without despair of mercy to pardon them, or of
Grace to Cure them p. 114

2. A Prayer for hopes of mercy, and of Grace, to encourage Repentance p. 116

3. A Prayer setting forth the grounds of hope thereof p. 118

4. Prayers for mercy and favorable Allowances in trying our services p. 121

5. A Prayer for a clear and settled judgment of our selves, and of what may
establish us in peace p. 125

6. A Prayer for recommendation of our humble fears, to Gods merciful
acceptance p. 127

7. Prayers for Peace, and Hope, and joy in God p 128

8. A Prayer against perplexing doubts and scruples p. 131

9. A Prayer against profane mistrust of Divine Truths, and blasphemous
Thoughts p. 133

10. A thanks giving for satisfaction and comfort; after one has been troubled
in mind p. 135

FINIS.
Books Writ by the Reverend Mr. J. Kettlewell.
Quarto.
THE Measures of Christian Obedience: Or, a Discourse, showing what obedience
is indispensably necessary to a Regenerate State, and what defects are
consistent with it, for promotion of Piety, and the Peace of Troubled
Consciences. The Second Edition. Price 8s.

A Discourse explaining the Nature of Edification, both of particular persons
in private Graces, and of the Church in Unity and Peace. And showing that we
must not break unity and public Peace, for supposed means of better edifying
in private Virtues. Price Sticht 6d.

3. The Religious Loyalist: Or, a good Christian taught how to be a faithful
Servant both to God and the King. Price Sticht 6d.

4. A Funeral Sermon for the Right Honorable the Lady Frances Digby, Price 6d.

5. A Sermon, on occasion of the death of the Right Honorable Simon Lord
Digby, Price 6 d.

6. Christanity a Doctrine of the Cross: Or, Passive Obedience, under any
pretended Invasion of Legal Rights and Liberties, Price Sticht 1 s.

Octavo.
7. THE Practical Believer: Or, the Articles of the Apostles Creed, drawn out
to form a true Christians Heart, and Practice. In two Parts, Price Bound 4s.

Twelves.
8. AN help and exortation to Worthy Communicating: Or, a Treatise describing
the meaning, Worthy reception, Duty, and Benefits of the Holy Sacrament. And
answering the doubts of Conscience, and other reasons, which most generally
detain men from it. Together with suitable Devotions added. The Second Edition.
Price Bound 2s.

9 A Companion for the Persecuted: or, an Office for those who suffer for
Righteousness. Containing particular Prayers and Devotions, for particular
Graces, and for their private and public wants and occasions. Price bound 1 s.
6d.

10 A Companion for the Penitent: and for persons troubled in mind. Consisting
of An Office for the Penitent, to carry on their Reconciliation with God.

And a Trial or Judgment of the Soul, for discovering the safety of their
Spiritual Estate. And an Office for Persons troubled in mind, to settle them
in peace and comfort. Price bound 1 s.

All these Printed for R. Kettlewell.

Besides These, Christian Prudence: Or, Religious Wisdom; not degenerateing
into irrelgious Craftiness in Trying Times, in Octavo.

And some others in Quarto.

FINIS.

