A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lady Margaret
Mainard, AT Little EASTON in ESSEX.

On the 30th of June, 1682.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, Thomas, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.

The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom, at the Gun, at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard; and William Clarke Bookseller in Winchester. MDCLXXXVIII.

TO The Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord Mainard, BARON of EASTAINS.
My LORD,

THough I am unwilling to decline any Service which Your Lordship expects from
me, yet when you enjoined me the Printing of this Sermon, I could not obey Your
Command without disputing it. For I considered, that in such an Age as this,
where an Exemplary Holiness is very rare, I shall be thought guilty of most
gross Flattery, in the Character I have given of Your Incomparable Lady, now in
Heaven.

But knowing I have so many unexceptionable Witnesses, to attest every line I
have said, especially Your Self, who best understood her value, and are most
sensible of her loss; and being Conscious to my self, that I have spoken no
other throughout than the words of Truth, I soon broke through all the
discouragements I had, either from the just Censures the World would fix on the
meanness of the Discourse, or from the unjust ones it might pass on my
Insincerity; and resolved, to do all that little Honor I could to her Memory,
and to give God the glory of her Example: And I humbly beseech the Divine
Goodness, that what I now offer to the Public may not be wholly unprofitable
to those who read it; However, I am sure it will not be unacceptable to Your
Lordship, or to those who were so happy to know her, which will be satisfaction
enough, to

My Good LORD,

Your Lordships most Humble and Faithful Servant

Thomas, Bath and Wells.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the Right Honorable The LADY MARGARET
MAINARD,
On Prove. II. XVI. A gracious Woman retains honor.
THE World was never yet so bad, but the good Man, though his life was a
continued Satyr to the Age he lived in, did always either find, or extort, a
Veneration from it. So true is it of both Sexes, which Solomon here affirms of
Woman only, that gracious Persons, they who are in the Grace and Favor of God,
and are strengthened by his gracious assistances, they who by the covenant of
Grace, are enrolled in his service, and in whose hearts, there is a
conspiration, of all the Graces of his Holy Spirit; all which particulars, are
included in the word Grace, and do all concur, to make up a gracious Soul; Such
persons, I say, as these, shall from the generality of Men, gain an inward
esteem, and a great Opinion, and for the most part, an outward, and a suitable
respect, or as the Wise man words it, shall retain honor.

I must confess, that there are many instances, even in our own perverse
generation, wherein Virtue has rather been contemned and ridiculed than
Honored, but I will mention no other than the most signal of all, God
Incarnate, whose example, though it was as perfect, and unblameable, as the
fullness of the Godhead, could render it; yet his most divine Person, was so far
from being honored, by many of the Jews, that he lay under the utmost
imputations of Slander and Blasphemy, which words could express; and as
glorious as all his Miracles were, they were ascribed to no other than
Beelzebub, the Prince of Mat. 12. 24.
the very Devils.

But though it be true, that our blessed Lord, in regard to his state of
Humiliation, seemed to have no form, no comeliness in him; yet all his
Conversation, had so many irradiations of Divinity in it, which did abundantly
evince his heavenly Extraction; Isa. 53. 3.
and it is no wonder he should suffer such contradictions of sinners, it being
usual for an Heroic Virtue, which is singly to encounter whole Legions, to
contend with inveterate Errors, or reigning Vices, to reprove, and reform the
World, as our Savior was, to be loaded with most diabolical reproaches. But
Goodness has an inseparable splendor, which can never suffer a total eclipse,
and when it is most reviled, and persecuted, it then shines brightest out of
Cloud. So that all who are not wilfully blind, who will but make use of their
eyes to see, must acknowledge the force of its Rays.

This did the very Jews themselves, as many as had any relics of common
ingenuity left: The Luke 7. 16, 4, 22.
Multitude owned our Savior for a great Prophet, wondered at his gracious
words, confessed he had done Mark 7. 16.
all things well, insomuch, that they would have exalted him to the throne, and
have made him their John 6. 15, 18, 38.
King; Pilate could find no fault in him at all; and the Centurion, a Heathen,
even when he saw him hanging on the Cross, as a Malefactor, cried out,
Certainly this was a Righteous Man. So that a gracious Luke 23. 47.
Person, under the most extreme degree of Infamy and Slander, shall yet retain
honor, shall from all that are in their right minds, have at least an inward
Veneration.

If this be verified of a public Virtue, there can be less doubt of it in a
private one, which not being on such a stage, as may provoke and affront the
angry World, by openly contradicting, or upbraiding, or chastising it, passes
along with a less assaulted, and less envied reputation, and more undisturb'dly
retains honor than the former.

There is, I know, an honor which is due to all men, as they are God's
workmanship, and have some 1 Pet. 2. 17, 18.
lines of his Image in them, but especially to Kings, and to Magistrates, whom
it is our duty to honor, whether they be gracious Persons or no; this we are
to render to the Froward, and Pagan, as well as to 1 Timothy 6. 2.
gentle and believing Masters; to Princes that are Infidels and Persecutors, as
well as to Christian and nursing Romans 13. 1.
Fathers. But then this honor is not paid them out of respect to any real
Goodness in them, but only to their Authority, as they are God's ordinance, as
we depend on their Protection, and as our Obedience is enforced, by Laws and
Penalties; But the honor we give to a gracious Person, is purely in reference
to his moral excellencies, which are legible in the whole conduct of his life:
The former is merely civil, the latter may in some sort, be styled Religious:
Empire is honored as it resembles God's power, abstracted from his Holiness,
and therefore it is compatible with an ungracious Person, it is confined only
to this World, and reaches no farther: But Graciousness is honored as a
participation of the divine Nature, appropriate 2 Pet. 1. 4.
to no other than Saints, and which has its prospect only on Heaven: The former
is like Thunder and Lightning, and works on our Fear; the latter is like the
appearance of a good Angel, arraid in Beams, awful, but kind, which do not
afflict, but cheer the sight, and raise in us a mixed passion, of Love and
Veneration together; and in this sense it is, that the gracious Person, for the
venerable goodness that is visible in him, shall retain honor.

To attempt any laborious Proof, of so clear a Truth as this, were needless; do
but consult the universal practice of Mankind, and read it there. What Rules do
the Philosophers prescribe to render our lives most satisfactory to our selves,
and most commendable to others? with what Colors do the Orators paint those
persons they intend to Celebrate? what Images do the Poets form when they
design an Hero, are they any other than the Rules, and Colors, and Images of
moral Goodness? Do not Hypocrites, to court the esteem of the Vulgar, personate
the Saint, and Politicians, to make the People honor them, pretend to
Religion? and why do they both put on this disguise, but because they know,
that Wickedness barefaced, is in the eyes of all men most detestable, and that
the names of Saint, and of Religion, are creditable in the World? Show me that
profligate Wretch, who in his cool thoughts, or on his Deathbed, does not
decline all his loose Companions, and seeks out for men truly good, and
conscientious, to whom he may entrust his Estate, his Children, and all that is
dearest to him, even his own Soul too, for which he then begs their ghostly
counsel? What man is there so wicked, who on his deathbed does not wish that
he may die the death of the Righteous, and that his latter end may be like his?
Look into the Histories and customs of Ages past, see how greedily coveted, how
dearly purchased, and how highly valued, the Statues, and all the little remains
of Good Men have been: The Heathens, to express their great esteem of Goodness,
built Temples to Virtue and Honor, and joined these Temples together, and made
the former the only passage into the latter, they thought Praise to Good men as
just a Tribute, as Sacrifice to their Gods; and one of the Wisest of them,
wonderfully pleased himself, in fancying how lovely and venerable, how divine
and transporting an Idea he should see, could he but look into the breast of a
Good Man. We have then the practice and the judgment of the whole World, to
confirm this truth, that Virtue has always had a great and a general esteem,
that the gracious Person retains honor.

On the contrary, is there not a natural shame, a sense of turpitude, or a
confusion of face in vicious and unclean actions? why else are men afraid to
commit them, before the most inconsiderable Spectatour, and choose darkness for
a thick Mantle to cover them? why else do they blush to own them, wish a
thousand times they had never been done, and reflect on them with
dissatisfaction, and horror; why else do their own Consciences, lash and
upbraid them? whereas if we will but take the pains, to make up an Induction of
all Christian graces, we shall easily see, that there is none, whose friendship
is more ambitiously sought, none with whom men would sooner change Persons,
none who are accounted of more substantial worth, or more generally revered, or
more influential to the good of Mankind, or sooner wanted in the World, or who
make a nobler figure in Story, than the Devout, the Humble, the Just, the Meek,
the Temperate, the Charitable; or to express all in one word, the gracious
Person, who therefore shall always retain honor.

I need not reckon up the numerous places of Holy Scripture, where Goodness and
Honor are linked together; how the Wise are said to inherit glory; Prove. 3. 35.
the humble and meek to be exalted; how we are commanded Luke 1. 52.
to keep our Vessels in sanctification and honor, and how God has promised to
honor those who honor 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4.
him: I need not mention the primitive Diptycks, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
or how the Church Catholic, has celebrated the Festivals, and honored the
memories of the Saints, and of the Martyrs; I need not suggest that obvious
Conclusion, That if gracious Persons can draw even wicked Men, to a reverential
love of their Virtue, much more will they engage the friendship of all that are
Holy, and not only of holy Men, but of holy Angels too, who being all
ministering Spirits, deputed by God to attend them, the more heavenly Heb. 1. 14.
they see any committed to their charge does grow, the more respectful
attendance, in all probability, they give him.

And there is the highest reason in the World, why there should be so
honorable a loveliness, in a gracious Person, if we consider, the likeness he
bears to that great God whom we Adore. For as there are on all men, innate
impressions of God's Existence, so there are also of his Attributes, and none
ever yet in earnest, believed there was a God, but he also believed that God
was a Being, Infinite in all Perfections, in Wisdom and Power, Justice and
Mercy, Purity and Holiness, Veracity and Beneficence, and as these excite our
Love, and our Adoration to God, so where ever we see any, though but imperfect
resemblances, of his imitable perfections, in the Saints here on earth, where
ever we see men in any measure Holy and Pure, Just and Merciful, Faithful and
Beneficent, we there see the image of God himself, and cannot but pay them a
suitable honor: Thus as Goodness and Adorableness are coeternal in God, so
are Sanctity and Venerableness co-eval in gracious Persons.

Nor are we only by Grace made like to God, but he is also pleased actually to
dwell in us, and to consecrate our Souls to be his Temples; and as God
commanded the Jews to reverence his Sanctuary, 1 Cor. 3. 16.
the place of his residence among them, where he sat Lev. 19. 30.
between the Cherubims, and a glorious Light that shined on the Propitiatory,
was the Symbol of his Presence: So when in gracious Souls, we discover all the
fruits of the Spirit, a kind of glory brightning Gal. 5. 22.
their Conversation, and a sacred Amiableness breathed on them from Heaven, we
are sure that God inhabits there, and cannot but reverence his Temples.

Such Honor have all Gods Saints from even wicked men, from all holy persons,
and from the good Angels, and infinitely above all these, from God himself, who
honors them with his Image, after which they are renewed, and with his
Presence, of which they are possessed; Such Honor, I say, have all his Saints
even in this life, which if we did but seriously Contemplate, would stir us up
to a generous emulation, would encourage us to implore the Divine Grace, that
we may bewail all our past sins, cleanse our selves from all filthiness, both
of Flesh, and of Spirit, which produce nothing in the end, but Shame and
Horror, and daily grow more conformable to his Likeness, which is the only way
to assert the dignity of our Nature, and to retain honor.

But when once our Souls shall be divorced from our bodies, when the name of
the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10. 7.
and stink, sooner than his Carcass, leaving no memorial behind, unless it be
of his Sin, his Infamy, his Madness, or his Folly; Precious then in the sight
of the Lord, shall be the death of his Saints, blessed Psalm. 116. 15.
shall be their memories, They shall be had in everlasting Psalm. 112. 6.
remembrance, and their good Names, being Registered in the book of Life, shall
flourish to Immortality.

All this while, I have not done Justice to my Subject, by affirming only in
general, that Goodness is honorable, I must therefore be more particular, and
enquire, why Solomon does here instance, in the Woman, rather than in the Man,
A gracious Woman retains honor.

And the reason seems to me, to be either this, that as Vice is more odious,
and more detested, so on the other hand, Virtue is more attractive, and looks
more lovely, in Women, than it usually does in Men, insomuch that the gracious
Woman, shall be sure to purchase, and to retain honor.

Or it is, because Men have more advantages, of aspiring to honor, in all
public stations, of the Church, the Court, the Camp, the Bar, and the City,
than Women have, and the only way for a Woman to gain honor, is an exemplary
Holiness; Prove. 31. 28, 31.
This makes her Children, rise up and call her blessed, her Husband and her own
works, to praise her in the gate, the sole glory then of that Sex, is to be
good, for it is a gracious Woman only, who retains honor.

Or it is, because Women are made of a temper, more soft and frail, are more
endangered by snares, and temptations, less able to control their passions, and
more inclinable to extremes of good, or bad, than Men, and generally speaking,
Goodness is a tenderer thing, more hazardous, and brittle in the former, than
in the latter, and consequently a firm, and steady Virtue, is more to be valued
in the weaker Sex, than in the stronger; So that a gracious Woman, is most
worthy to recieve, and to retain honor.

Or it is, because Women in all Ages, have given many Heroic examples of
Sanctity, besides those recorded in the Old Testament, many of them are named,
with great honor in the New. For their Assiduity and Zeal, in following our
Savior, and their Charity, in Ministering to him of their substance, Luke 8. 3.
they accompanied him to Mount Calvary, lamented his Sufferings, waited on the
Cross, attended the Sepulcher, prepared Spices, and Ointments; and regardless,
either of the Insolence of the rude Soldiers, Matt. 27. 55. Luke 23. 27.
or of the Malice of the Jews, with a love that cast out all fear, they came on
the first day of the Week, before the morning light, to Embalm him; and God was
pleased to honor these Holy Women accordingly, for they first saw the Angel,
who told them the joyful news that he was risen, and as if an Angel, had not
been a Messenger honorable enough, Matt. 28. 5.
Jesus himself first appeared to the Women, the Women first saw, and adored
him; and it was these very gracious Women, whom our Lord sent to his Disciples,
that Women might be the first Publishers of his Resurrection, as Angels had
been of his Nativity; Our Savior himself, has erected an everlasting Monument
in the Gospel, for the penitent Woman Matt. 26. 13.
that anointed him, and God Incarnate honored the Sex to the highest degree
imaginable, in being born of a Woman, in becoming the Son of a Virgin Mother,
whom all Generations shall call Blessed; and I know not how to call it, but
there is a meltingness of Disposition, and affectionateness of Devotion, an
easy Sensibility, an industrious Alacrity, a languishing Ardour, in Piety,
peculiar to the Sex, which naturally renders them, Subjects more pliable, to
the Divine Grace, than Men commonly are; So that Solomon, had reason to bestow
the Epithete Gracious, particularly on them, and to say, that a gracious Woman
retains honor.

I am well aware, that if we consult the sensual and debaucht rank of men, it is
not the Gracious, or the Chaste Woman they esteem, but only the Fair, or the
Lascivious; Esteem, did I say! Men may court an idle, or a wanton Beauty, for
their Lust, but they can only esteem a Gracious, and a Chaste one, and when all
is done, she only deserves the name of Beautiful: As for the Lascivious and the
Prostitute, against whom Solomon so often, and so pathetically warns the Young
man, She is so utterly impure, that I will not so much as name her, in the same
discourse with a gracious Woman; I will then make the Comparison between mere
Beauty only, and Grace, and you will soon perceive the difference.

For Beauty, if it be Natural, is from a Woman's birth, it is her chance, and not
her merit; if it be Artificial, it makes her no other than a painted Sepulcher,
Gaudy without, and that has nothing but Rottenness and Stanch within: But
Grace, is the free gift of God, and our own free choice, in a happy
conjunction, it is no other than a God-like loveliness, impressed on our Spirit.

Beauty is often incident to stark Fools, and to the Profane and Irreligious;
But Grace is peculiar to holy Persons, who like the Kings-Daughter, are all
glorious within. Psalm. 45. 13.


Beauty is prone to admire its self, and to swell with Pride; Grace instills a
just sense of our own vileness, and teaches Humility: That is apt to invite
Temptation; This is a Preservative against it: The former spends her morning
hours at her glass; The latter at her Prayers: That most delights her self in
new fashions, and fine clothes, in plaiting the hair, 1 Pet. 3. 3.
and wearing of Gold; This puts on the ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit,
which is in the sight of God of great price.

Beauty has been often to the best and wisest of Men, witness Solomon himself,
destructive and fatal, for which reason holy Job made a Covenant with his eyes;
and our Savior commands us, not to look on a Woman Job 31. 1. Matt. 5. 28.
to lust after her, and the fairer she is, the greater is the danger; But Grace
secures our Innocence, awes men into Sobriety, looks them into Chastity, and
the more intense it grows, its influence is the more sovereign and efficacious.

Beauty gratifies only our outward sense, it is a mixture of Color, and Figure,
and Feature, and Parts, all in a due Proportion and Symmetry; or indeed, it is a
well shaped Frame of dust and ashes, beloved by fond men only, who like the
most stupid of Idolaters, worship the bare Statue, without regard to the Deity
there enshrined: But Grace is a confluence of all Attractives, which approves
it self to our own most deliberate judgments, and is beloved by God: Do but
imagine you were in the Spouse's Garden, where, when the South Wind blows, the
several Spices and Gumms, the Spikenard and the Cinnamon, Cant. 4. 16.
the Frankincense and the Myrrh, send forth their various smells, which
meeting together, and mixing in the Air, make a compounded Odor; Such a
composition of all Virtues, such an universal and uniform Agreeableness is
there in a gracious Soul, which in a manner, whether we will or no, engages our
affections.

Beauty is vain, and Favor is deceitful, says the Prove. 31. 30.
Wise man, it soon evaporates, and cheats our expectation, in a little time it
decays, by cares, or Childbearing, or Sickness, or a thousand other accidents:
Men no sooner begin to crop the Flower, but it fades, and sinks, and dies, or
it is often sowr'd, with such inward dispositions which render it afflicting
and insupportable; But Grace creates to our minds an entire satisfaction, has a
goodness intrinsic, and eternal, grows more amiable, the more it is enjoyed,
so that the Woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised, she shall for
ever retain honor.

As a Jewel of Gold in a Swines snout, which is hung Prove. 11. 22.
there on purpose to be defiled, to be rolled in filth and mire, and is one of
the most notorious, and ugly incongruities in the World; Such a kind of
absurdity, if you will believe Solomon, is a fair Woman without discretion; her
Beauty it is true, is a Jewel, but a Jewel extremely ill placed, and serves for
no other purpose but to make her folly the more conspicuous, to expose her the
more to impurity, and to a swinish sensuality; But Grace makes a Woman a Crown
Prove. 12. 4. 1 Cor. 11. 5. Prove. 31. 10.
to her Husband, the glory of the Man, and advances her price above Rubies; So
that a gracious Woman, is a Jewel of a value inestimable, she has worth, and
ornament, and luster, and beauty, and honor, all combined together. Most
deservedly then, did wise Solomon, give the preference to Grace, and did assure
us, that a strong Man is not more powerful to get, and when gotten, to retain
his riches, than a gracious Woman to acquire honor, and to retain it, when
acquired.

It is now time to do all the right I am able, to the noble Lady deceased, who
was a Woman so remarkably Gracious, and retained an Honor, so entire, and
unblemished, that all the measures I have hitherto laid down, either of Grace,
or of Honor, are but a faint Copy, drawn after her, she was all the while
before my thought, her holy example is the original, and though I will not say,
that among the many Daughters, who have done virtuously, she absolutely excells
them all, yet I am sure, she deserves to be Prove. 31. 29.
esteemed one of the highest order.

But alas! we have nothing now left except this poor relick of Clay, which in a
few minutes must be restored to its native earth, and for ever hid from our
eyes, the gracious Soul that informed it, is flown back again to God, from whom
it first streamed, and his most blessed will be done, who is compassionate and
adorable, in all his chastisements; yet as we are flesh and blood, we cannot
but feel the stroke, which even his Fatherly hand has given us. It is the Curse
of the wicked, to dye unlamented, unless it be, that they are sometimes carried
to the Grave, with the Jer. 16. 4.
mercenary tears of those who make mourning a Trade: But the death of the
Righteous being a loss irrecoverable, and a real calamity, to us who survive,
must needs fill us with sad resentments, when we consider of how great a
blessing we are deprived.

Our Savior himself has countenanced a moderate grief for our friends, in
weeping over his own dead friend Lazarus; So that if we shed our tears over the
John 11. 35.
Grave of this gracious and honorable Lady, it is but to be just to her ashes,
to ease our own sorrowful Spirits, and to testify to the World, how dear a
sense we have of her worth. For had she had nothing but her Quality to have
recommended her, we might have performed her Funeral Ceremonies with a bare
outward Solemnity, but without any more concern than a common object of
Mortality gives us; But she was a Woman so truly gracious, that we could not
but most affectionately honor her, and cannot but have a grief that bears some
proportion to our loss.

For it is our loss only we can bewail, we grieve for our selves, not for her;
She has a joyful deliverance from temptation and infirmity, from sin and
misery, and from all the evil to come, she is now past all the storms, and
dangers of this troubled life, and is safely arrived at her everlasting Haven;
she is now fully possessed of all that she desired, which was, to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ, and we cannot lament her being happy. When we weep for
common Christians, we are not to be sorry, as 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
men without hope, but when we have so many, so uninterrupted, and so
undeniable demonstrations, of the sanctity of a Person, as we have of this
gracious Woman, we have no reason at all to grieve on her account, since we
have not only a bare hope, but an assurance rather, that she is now in glory.

But why did I call her death a loss? it is rather our gain, we were all
traveling the same way, as Pilgrims, toward our heavenly Country, she has
only got the start of us, and is gone before, and is happy first; and I am
persuaded that we still enjoy her prayers for us above; However, I am sure,
that we enjoy her good works here below, which now appear more illustrious, and
without that vail, her modesty, and her humility cast over them; we still enjoy
her example, which being now set, in its true light, and at its proper
distance, and delivered from that cloud of flesh, which did obscure and lessen
it, looks the more gracious, and the more honorable; and if we follow the
track, she trod, we shall er'e long, enjoy her society in Heaven.

Let us then alter our Note, and rather honor, than bewail her, she was a
gracious Woman, and honor is her due; Her good Name, like a precious Ointment
poured forth, has persum'd the whole Sphere, in which she moved. To paint her
fully to the life, I dare not undertake, she had a graciousness in all her
Conversation, that cannot be expressed, and should I endeavor to do it, I must
run over, all the whole Catalogue of Evangelical Graces, which do all concenter
in her Character; I must tell you, how enflamed she was with Heavenly love, how
well guided a Zeal, she had for God's glory, how particular a reverence she
paid, to all things, and to all persons, that were dedicated to His Service,
how God was always in her thoughts, how great a tenderness she' had, to offend
her Heavenly Father, how great a delight to please him; But you must be
content, with some rude strokes only, for such particulars would be endless;
All my fear is, that I shall speak too little, but I am sure, I can hardly
speak too much.

Say, All you who have been Eyewitnesses of her Life, did you from her very
Cradle, ever know her any other, than a gracious Woman? As to my self, I have
had the honor to know her, near twenty years; and to be admitted, to her most
intimate thoughts, and I cannot but think, upon the utmost of my observation,
that she always preserved her Baptismal Innocence, that she never committed any
one mortal Sin, which put her out of the state of Grace; Insomuch, that after
all the frequent, and severe examinations, she made of her own Conscience, her
Confessions were made up, of no other than sins of Infirmity, and yet even for
them, she had as deep Humiliation, and as Penitential a Sorrow, as high a sense
of the Divine forgiveness, and loved as much, as if she had had Much to be
forgiven: So that after a life of above Forty Years, Nine of which were spent
in the Court, baiting her involuntary failings, which are unavoidable, and for
which, allowances are made, in the Covenant of Grace, she kept her 1 James 27.
self unspotted from the World, and if it may be affirmed of any, I dare
venture to affirm it of this, gracious Woman, that by the peculiar favor of
Heaven, she past from the Font, unsullied to her Grave.

Her understanding was admirable, and she daily improved it, by reading, in
which she employed most of her time, and the Books she chose were only serious,
or devout, and her memory was faithful, to retain what she read: She took not
up her Religion on an implicit Faith, or from education only, but from a
well-studied choice, directed by God's Holy Spirit, whose guidance she daily
invoked, and when once she had made that choice, she was immovable as a rock,
and so well satisfied in the Catholic Faith professed in the Church of England,
that I make no doubt, but that she always lived, not only with the strictness
of a Primitive Saint, but with the resolution also, of a Martyr: It was strange
to hear, how strongly she would Argue, how clearly she understood, the force of
a Consequence, and how ready at all times she was, to give a reason of the 1
Pet. 3. 15.
hope that was in her, with meekness, and fear; Her Letters which were found in
her Cabinet, not to be delivered till after her death, and very many others, in
the hands of her Relations, sufficiently show, how good, and how great she was:
In them this humble Saint, before she was aware, has her self made an exact
impression, of her own Graciousness; They are penned in so proper and unaffected
a Style, and animated throughout with so Divine a Spirit, with such Ardours of
Devotion, and Charity, as might have become a Proba, a Monica, or the most
eminent of her Sex; Insomuch, that her very absence, was the more supportable
to her friends, in regard she compensated the want of her presence, by Writing,
and sent them a Blessing, by every return.

I cannot tell, what one help she neglected, to secure her perseverance, and to
heighten her graces, that she might shine more and more, to a perfect Prove. 4.
18.
day; Her Oratory was the place, where she principally resided, and where she
was most at home, and her chief employment, was Prayer, and Praise; Out of
several Authors, she for her own use, transcribed many excellent Forms, the
very choice of which does argue, a most experienced Piety, she had Devotions
suited to all the primitive hours of Prayer, which she used, as far as her
bodily Infirmities, and necessary Avocations would permit, and with David,
Praised God seven times a day, or supplied the want of those solemn hours, by a
kind of perpetuity of Ejaculations, which she had ready, to answer all
occasions, and to fill up all vacant intervals, and if she happened to wake in
the Night, of proper Prayers even for midnight, she was never unprovided. Thus
did this gracious Soul, having been enkindled by fire from Heaven, in her
Baptism, live a continual Sacrifice, and kept the fire always burning, always
in afcension, always aspiring toward Heaven from whence it fell. Besides her
own private Prayers, she Morning, and Evening offered up to God the public
Offices, and when she was not able, to go to the House of Prayer, she had it
read to her, in her Chamber.

To Prayers she added Fasting, till her weakness had made it impossible to her
constitution, and yet even then, on days of Abstinence, she made amends for the
Omission, by other supplemental Mortifications. Her Devotions she enlarged, on
the Fasts and Festivals of the Church, but especially on the Lord's days,
dividing the hours between the Church and her Closet.

She never failed, on all opportunities, to approach the Holy Altar, came with
Spiritual hunger, and thirst to that Heavenly Feast, and Communicated with a
lively, with a Crucifying, but yet endearing Remembrance, of her Crucified
Savior.

The Sermons she heard, when she came home she recollected, and wrote down out
of her memory, abstracts of them all, which are in a great number, among her
Papers, that she might be, not only, a hearer of the Word, but a doer also.

The Holy Scripture she attentively read, and on what she read, she did
devoutly meditate, and did by Meditation, appropriate to her self, it was her
Soul's daily Bread, it was her delight, and her Counselor, and, like the most
Blessed Virgin Mother, she kept all things she read, and pondered them in her
heart.

Who is there can say, they ever saw her idle? no, she had always affairs to
transact with Heaven, she was all her life long numbering her days, and applying
her Heart to Wisdom, or, to describe her with her own Pen, she was making it
her business, to fit her self for her change, knowing, the moment of it to be
uncertain, and having no assurance, that her warning would be great; Oh happy
Soul, that was thus wise, in a timely consideration of that, which of all
things in the World, is of greatest importance to us, to be considered, namely
our Latter end!

You may easily conclude, that a Saint, who was always thus conversant with her
Grave, and had Heaven always in her view, must have little or no value for
things below, as indeed she had not, she did not only conquer the World, but
she triumphed over it, had a noble contempt of Secular greatness, lived several
years in the very Court, with the abstraction of a Recluse, and was so far from
being solicitous for Riches, for her self, or her Children, that to use her own
words, she looked on them, as dangerous things, which did only clog, and press
down our Souls to this Earth, and judged a Competency, to be certainly the best.

All the temporal blessings, the divine Goodness was pleased to vouchsafe her,
she received, with an overflowing thankfulness, yet her affections were so
disengaged, her temperance, and moderation so habitual, that she did rather
use, than enjoy them, and was always ready to restore them, to the same
gracious hand that gave them, but no one can express her thoughts, so
pathetically as her own self; O, says that blessed Saint, since God gives us
all, let us not be sorrowful, though we are to part with all, the Kingdom of
Heaven, is a prize, that is worth striving for, though it costs us dear: Alas!
what is there in this World, that links our hearts so close to it! and
elsewhere she affirms, that All blessings are given on this condition, that
either they must be taken from us, or we from them, if then we lose any thing,
which we esteem a blessing, we are to give God the glory, and to resign it
freely.

She was a perfect despiser, of all those vanities, and divertisements, which
most of her sex, do usually admire; her chief, and, in a manner, sole
recreation was to do good, and to oblige; and if we will be advised, by one so
wise to Salvation, We are to seek for comfort, and joy, from God's ordinances,
and the converse of pious Christians, and not to take the usual course of the
World, to drive away Melancholy, by exposing our selves to temptations; and
this was really her practice, insomuch that next to the Service of the Temple,
which she daily frequented, There was no entertainment in the whole World, so
pleasing to her, as the discourse of Heavenly things, and those she spoke of,
with such a Spiritual relish, that at first hearing, you might perceive she was
in earnest, that she really tasted that the Lord was good, and felt all she
spoke.

Amidst all her pains, and her sicknesses, which were sharp, and many, who ever
saw her show any one symptom of Impatience? So far was she from it, that she
laments, when she reflects, how apt we are to abuse prosperity; Demands, where
our conformity is to the great Captain of our Salvation, if we have no
sufferings; Professes, that God by suffering our Conditions to be Uneasy, by
that gentle way, invites us to higher satisfactions, than are to be met with
here, and with a prostrate spirit, acknowledges, that God was most righteous in
all that had befallen her, and that there had been so much mercy mixed with his
chastising, that she had been but too happy. Thus humble, thus content, thus
thankful was this gracious Woman, amidst her very afflictions. Her Soul always
rested on God's Paternal mercy, and on all his exceeding great, and precious
promises, as on a sure and steadfast Anchor, which she knew would secure her, in
the most tempestuous Calamities; To his blessed will, she hourly offered up her
own, and knew it was as much her duty, to suffer his fatherly inflictions, as
to obey his commands. Her Charity, made her sympathize, with all in Misery, and
besides her private Alms, wherein her left hand, was not conscious to her
right, she was a common Patroness to the Poor, and Needy, and a common
Physician to her sick Neighbors, and would often with her own hands, dress
their most loathsome Sores, and sometimes keep them in her Family, and would
give them both Diet and Lodging till they were cured, and then Cloth them, and
send them home, to give God thanks for their recovery; and if they died, her
Charity accompanied them sometimes to the very Grave, and she took care even of
their Burial. She would by no means endure, that by the care of plentifully
providing for her Children, the wants, and necessities of any poor Christian,
should be overlooked, and desired it might be remembered that Alms and the Poors
prayers, will bring a greater blessing, to them, than Thousands a year. Look
abroad now in the World, and see, how rarely you shall meet, with a Charity,
like that of this gracious Woman, who next to her own flesh and Blood, was
tender of the Poor, and thought an Alms as much due to to them, as Portions to
her Children.

To corporal Alms, as often as she saw occasion, she joined spiritual, and she
had a singular talent in dispensing that alms to Souls; she had a masculine
Reason to persuade, a steady Wisdom to advise, a perspicuity both of thought,
and language to instruct, a mildness that endeared a reproof, and could comfort
the afflicted, from her own manifold experience of the Divine Goodness, and
with so condoling a tenderness, that she seemed to translate their anguish on
her self.

And happy was it for others, that her Charity was so comprehensive, for she
often met with objects so deplorable, that were to be relieved in all these
capacities, so that she was fain to become their Benefactress, their Physician,
and their Divine altogether, or if need were, she bid them show themselves to
the Priest, or else took care to send the Priest to them: Thus was it visibly
her constant endeavor, to be in all respects merciful, as her Father in Heaven
is merciful.

She could bear long, and most easily forgive, and no one ever injured her, but
she would heap coals of fire on his head to melt him into a charitable temper,
and would often repay the injury with a kindness so surprising, that if the
injurous person were not wholly obdurate and brutish, must needs affect him.
But if any one did her the least good office, none could be more grateful, she
would if possible, return it a hundredfold, if she could not in kind, she
would at least do it in her prayers to God, that out of his inexhaustible
goodness, he would reward him.

Her Soul seemed to possess a continued serenity, at peace with her self, at
peace with God, and at peace with all the World, her study was to give all
their due, and she was exactly sincere, and faithful to all her obligations,
she kept her heart always with all diligence, was watchful against all
temptations, and naturally considerate in all her actions, her disposition was
peaceful and inoffensive, she looked always pleased rather than cheerful, her
converse was even and serious, but yet easy and affable; her Interpretations
of what others did, or said, were always candid and charitable, you should
never see her indecently angry, or out of humor, never hear her give an ill
character, or pass a hard censure, or speak an idle word, but she opened her
mouth in Wisdom, and in her tongue was the Law of Kindness. Prove. 31. 36.


If you look on her, in her several Relations, in her Childhood, her Father,
the Right Honorable the Earl of Dyzart, being banished for his Loyalty, she
was under the breeding of the Excellent Lady her Mother, to whom she was in all
respects, so dutiful a Child, that she protested, her Daughter had never, in
any one instance, offended her; By that time the Young Lady was about Eleven or
Twelve Years old, God was pleased to take her good Mother to himself, and from
that time to her Marriage, this gracious Woman lived with a discretion so much
above her years, with so conspicuous a Virtue, and so constant a Wariness, that
she always retained honor, such an honor, as never had the least More in it.
And to her honor be it spoken, that in an Age, when the generality of the
Nation, were like Children, tossed to and fro, with every wind of Doctrine, she
still continued steadfast in the Communion of the Church of England, and when
the Priests and Service of God, were driven into Corners, she daily resorted,
though with great difficulty, to the public Prayers, and was remarkably
Charitable to all the suffering Royalists, whom she visited, and relieved, and
sed, clothed, and condold, with a zeal, like that which the Ancient Christians
showed, to the Primitive Martyrs.

The silenced, and plundered, and persecuted Clergy, she thought worthy, of
double honor, and did vow a certain Sum yearly, out of her Income, which she
laid aside, only to succor them. The Congregations, where she then usually
communicated, were those, of the reverend and Pious, Dr. Thruscross, and Dr.
Mossom, both now in Heaven, and that of the then Mr. Gunning, the now most
worthy Bishop of Ely, for whom she ever after had a peculiar Veneration.

But I must by no means pass by, the Right Reverend Father in God, Bishop
Duppa, then of Salisbury, afterward of Winchester, but now with God, who was
then put out of all, and an Exemplary Confessor, for the King, and the Church;
This Holy Man, when she resided in the Country, lived in the Neighborhood,
and she often visited him, and he seemed to be designed on purpose, by God's
most gracious direction, to be her spiritual Guide, to confirm her in all her
holy Resolutions, to satisfy all those Scruples, to becalm all those Fears, and
regulate all those Fervours which are incident to an early, and tender Piety,
and God's goodness rendered him so successful, that she retained the happy
influence of his ghostly Advice to her dying day.

Before the Age of twenty, she was Married, to the Right Honorable, William
Lord Mainard, to whom in her Letters, she often gives, the most affectionate
thanks imaginable, for his unvaluable, and unparalled kindness toward her,
as she her self terms it, and most servently prays, That the Lord Jesus Christ
would be his exceeding great reward, and his portion for ever: But I forbear to
offer violence to the modesty of the Survivor, and will content my self, to say
only in general, that when she was a Wife, she still retained her accustomed
devotion, which she practiced when a Virgin, and her greatest concern, was for
the things of the Lord, how she might please the Lord; how in a Marriage
honorable, and a Bed undefiled, she might be Holy both in Body, 1 Cor. 7. 32.
and in Spirit, and attend upon the Lord, without distraction. And since, as
Solomon affirms, a prudent Prove. 19. 14.
Wife is from the Lord; she was certainly the immediate gift of God, and sent
by propitious Heaven, for a good Angel, as well as for a Wife.

As a Mother she was unspeakably tender, and careful, of the two Children with
which God had blessed her; but her Zeal for their eternal welfare was
predominant, and she made it her dying request, that in their education, their
piety should be principally regarded, or to speak her own words, That the chief
care should be to make them Pious Christians, which would be the best Provision
that could be made for them.

In reference to her Son, it was her express desire, that he should be good,
rather than either rich or great, that he should be bred in the strictest
Principles of Sobriety, Piety and Charity, of Temperance and Innocence of life,
that could be, that he should never be indulged in the least sin, that he
should never be that which these corrupt days call a Wit, or a fine Gentile
man, but an honest, and sincere Christian, she desired he might be.

She professed, there was nothing hard to be parted with but her Lord, and her
dear Children, but though her passion for them was as intense as can well be
imagined, yet for the sake of her God, whom she loved infinitely better, she
was willing to part with them also, had long foreseen the parting, and prepared
for it, and humbly begged of her heavenly Father to take them into his
protection; she took care of their Souls, even after her death, in the Letters
she left behind her, and comforted her self with an entire acquiescence, in the
good pleasure of her beloved, with hopes, that she should still pray for them
in Heaven, and that she should e're long meet them there; and this
consideration of meeting above, put her into a transport, which makes her in
one of her Letters cry out, O how joyful shall we be to meet at Christ 's right
hand, if we may be admitted into that Elect number!

In her Family, she always united Martha and Luke 10. 41, 42.
Mary together, took a due care of all her domestic Affairs, and managed them
with a wise frugality, with a constant deference to Gods merciful Providence,
and without either covetous fears, or a restless anxiety; but withal, she sat
at the feet of Jesus, and heard his word, and of the two, was still most intent
on the better part.

She studiously endeavored, by private, and particular, and warm applications,
to make all that attended her, more Gods Servants than her own; and treated
them with a meekness, and indulgence, and condescension, like one who was
always mindful, that she her self also had a Master in Heaven. Ephesians. 6. 9.


Her near Relations, and all that were blessed with her friendship, had a daily
share in her intercessions, all their concerns, all their afflictions were
really her own; her chief kindness was for their Souls, and she loved them with
a charity, like that which the Blessed show to one another in Heaven, in their
reciprocal complacence at each others happiness, and mutual incitements to
devotion.

In respect of the Public, which she often laid sadly to heart, her eyes ran
down in secret, for all our National Provocations, and she had a particular
Office on fasting Days for that purpose, which shows how importunate she was at
the Throne of Grace, to avert Gods Judgments, and to implore his Blessing on
the Land.

And now, after all these great truths which I have said of this Excellent
Lady, one Grace I must add, greater than all I have hitherto mentioned, and it
is her Humility; she was so little given to talk, and had that art to conceal
her goodness, that it did not appear at first sight, but after some time her
Virtue would break out whether she would or no; she seemed to be wholly
ignorant of her own Graces, and had as mean an opinion of her self as if she
had had no Excellence at all, like Moses, her Face shined, and she did not know
it; others she esteemed so much the Exodus 34. 29.
better, had that abasing sense of her own Infirmities, and that profound awe
of the Divine Majesty, that though she was great in Gods eyes, she was always
little in her own.

After the Whitson-week was over, she removed from White Hall, to Eastonlodge
in Essex, not out of any hopes of recovery, but only that she might have some
little present relief from the Air, or that she might die in a place which she
loved, in which God had made her an instrument of so great good to the Country,
and which was near her Grave; and you may easily imagine, that after a life so
holy, the death of this gracious Woman must needs be signally happy; and so it
was, not but that during her pains, she had often doubts and fears that
afflicted her, with which in her health she was unmolested, and which did
manifestly arise from her Distemper, and did cease as that intermitted; but the
day before she died God was pleased to vouchsafe her some clearer
manifestations of His mercy, which in the tenderness of His compassion he sent
her, as preparatives of her last conflict, and as earnests of Heaven, whither
he intended the day following to translate her.

How she behaved her self in her sickness, I cannot better express than by
saying that she prayed continually; and when the Prayers of the Church were
read by her, or when the hour of her own private Prayer came, though she was
not able to stand, or to help her self, she would yet be placed on her Knees;
and when her Knees were no longer able to support her, she would be put into
the humblest posture she could possibly endure, not being satisfied unless she
gave God his entire Oblation, and glorified him in her body as well as in her
spirit, which were both Gods own by 1 Cor. 6. 20.
purchase here, and were both to be united in bliss hereafter.

On Whit-sunday she received her viaticum, the most holy Body and Blood of her
Savior, and had received it again had not her death surpised us, yet in the
strength of that immortal food, she was enabled to go out her journey, and
seemed to have a new transfusion of Grace from it, insomuch, that though her
Limbs were all convulst, her Pains great, and without intermission, her
strength quite exhausted, and her Head disturbed with a perpetual drousiness,
yet above, and beyond all seeming possibility, she would use force to her self
to keep her self waking, to offer to God her customary Sacrifice to the full,
to recollect her thoughts, and to lodge them in Heaven, where her Heart and her
Treasure was, as if she had already taken possession of her mansion there, or
as if she was teaching her Soul to act independently from the Body, and
practicing beforehand the state of Separation, into which having received
Absolution, she in a short time happily lancht; for all the bands of Union
being untied, her Soul was set at liberty, and on the Wings of Angels, took a
direct and vigorous flight to its Native Country Heaven, Luke 16. 22.
from whence it first flew down.

There then we must leave her, in the Bosom of her heavenly Bridegroom, where,
how radiant her Crown is, how ecstatick her Joy, how high exalted she is in
degrees of Glory is impossible to be described, for neither eye has seen, nor
ear heard, nor has it entered 1 Cor. 2. 9.
into the heart of Man, to be conceived the good things which God has prepared
for those that love him, of all which she is now partaker.

We have nothing then to do but to congratulate this Gracious Woman, her
eternal and unchangeable honor, and as she always, and in all things, gave God
the Glory here, so that his praise was continually in her mouth, for all the
multitude of his Mercies, and of his loving Kindnesses toward her, and is now
praising him in Heaven; Let us also offer up a Sacrifice of Praise for her
great example, her light has long shined before us, and we have seen her good
Works; Let us therefore glorify the Father of Lights, at whose beams her Soul
was first lighted.

Blessed then for ever be the infinite goodness of God, who was so liberal of
his Graces to this humble Saint, who made her so lively a Picture of his own
perfections, so Gracious and so Honorable; blessed be his mercy, for indulging
her to us so long, for taking her in his good time to himself, and for that
happiness she has now in Heaven; to God be the Glory of all that honor, her
Graciousness did here acquire, for to him only it is due; let therefore his
most holy name have all the praise.

To our Thanksgiving let us add our Prayers also, that God would vouchsafe us
all his Holy Spirit, so to assist, and sanctify, and guide us, that every one
of our Souls may be gracious like hers, that our life may be like hers, our
latter end like hers, and our portion in Heaven like hers, which God of his
infinite mercy grant, for the sake of his most beloved Son: To whom with the
Father, and the blessed Spirit, be all honor and glory, adoration and
obedience, now and for ever.

Amen.
THE END.

