Speculum Gratitudinis; OR, David's Thankfulness UNTO GOD FOR All His Benefits.

Expressed in a Sermon on the 29th of May, 1664. being Whitsunday, and the Day
of the happy Birth and Return of our Gracious KING, CHARLES the Second.

By John Kerswel, B. D. and Rector of Goddington in Oxfordshire.

Psalm. 103.1, 2. Praise thou the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me
praise his holy Name.

Praise thou the Lord, O (...) Soul, and forget not all his Benefits.

Seek for an apt and convenient time to be at leisure to thy self, and meditate
often on God's Benefits and Blessings. Tho. a Kempis, of the Imitation of
Christ, l. 1. c. 20. London, Printed for the Author, 1665.

TO THE Noble and Learned Gentleman JAMES HYDE, Doctor in Physic, and
Principal of Magdalen-Hall in OXON.
Honored Sir,
THe learned Stoic wisely perpending the right way of receiving Good-turns,
with the just reddition and return of them in suitable Gratitude, resembles it
to a Game at Tennys; where, though it be a considerable part of the Play to
receive the Ball with agility and skill, nevertheless (says Seneca) N^^
dicitur bonus lusor, De benefic. l. 2. Ep. 32.
nisi qui apt and expedite pilam remiserit quam exceperat; None deserves the
commendation of a good Gamester, unless he send it back again with equal vigor
and dexterity. Whereupon out of an unfeigned sensibleness of your respective
kindness, and ever obliging courtesies, I began to consider, how I might serram
reciprocare, and give some reciprocal testimony of those manifold respects I ow
you; the which in my weak judgment I conceived I could not more seasonably
perform, than in a Subject or Argument of Gratitude, to which I have at present
taken the boldness to give my self the Honor to prefix your Name; which if you
design favorably to accept, I have all I aimed at, and shall ever acknowledge
my self

Your most obliged Friend and Servant J. K.

Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his Benefits toward
me?


CRosses and Losses, Persecutions and Afflictions, as they are, for the most
part, the lot and portion of the Righteous; so are they the lists and theaters
too, wherein to exercise their Graces, to win the greater honor unto
themselves, and a nearer alliance with God. As in our material Building the
Timber and Stones can have no suitable place, until the Skilful Artificer has
thoroughly hewn, cut, and squared them: Even so in that spiritual and heavenly
Building, (not made with hands) we cannot be (...), 1 Pet. 2.5.
quick and Living Stones, unless we be first hewn, cut, and squared (as it
were) with sundry tribulations and afflictions. Again, as in the one, the
greatest and goodliest piece of Timber endures the greatest stress, as being
most entrusted and charged with the weight and burden of the Building: So
likewise in that other, it pleases God oft-times to lay the hardest pressure,
and heaviest weight of affliction and misery, upon his best Saints, and most
dearly beloved Children. But, Why does he so? Why does he most afflict, and lay
his hand heaviest on, those that are nearest and dearest unto him? St. Austin
will resolve this Question; Ideo justi premuntur (says he) ut pressi clament,
clamantes exaudiantur: To no other end and purpose does God suffer his
untainted Joseph's and spotless Daniels to be flung into pits and prisons, dens
and dungeons of deepest calamity, than that they should de profundis clamare,
from those depths call and cry unto him, and in his good time find relief and
enlargement from him.

If we look back, and reflect our thoughts a while on the primitive World, see
we may the hands of a cruel and accursed Cain mercilesly butchering his
innocent Brother Abel:

Fraterno primi maduerunt sanguine muri.

And looking but a little further, we may descry an Esau's feet swiftly posting
on in the revengeful persuit of his Brother Jacob. If there be an Elijah, a
Prophet, and Man of God, there will soon start up a Jezebel, a Daughter of
Belial, fiercely to persecute him: If an Amos, an Amaziah, to proscribe and
banish him the Court; and if a David, a Saul too, to toss him and hunt him to
and fro like a Partridg in the Mountains. But, Non si male nunc and olim, sic
erit semper; The Heavens are not always over-cast with sackcloth and darkness,
'twill doubtless in time clear up again, when the Sun shall recompense his
former absence with a more grateful approach. Heaviness may endure for a night,
but joy comes in the morning: The rod of the ungodly, though it fall, yet
shall it not rest upon the righteous; and albeit many and manifold be their
troubles, yet in time the Lord delivers them out of all, and encompasseth
them about with songs of deliverance, as he did Royal David in this place.

The Psalm is wholly gratulatory, wherein the Prophetical King, and Kingly
Prophet, and sweet Singer of Israel, does solemnly commemorate and chant forth
not only the several Blessings and Benefits which Almighty God had conferred on
him, but those imminent and apparent dangers also, which with a mighty Hand and
outstretched Arm he had secured him from.

The Text consists of three general parts. 1. David's Gratitude or
Thankfulness; What shall I render? 2. The Object thereof, or Person to whom he
is about to address himself, and that is, The Lord. 3. The Motives or
Inducements thereunto, All his Benefits. [What shall I render unto the Lord for
all his Benefits toward me.]


Of these in their order. And first of

David's Gratitude or Thankfulness; Quid retribuam? What shall I render?

God never gives a good Man a single or solitary Blessing, but at the same time
makes him as well thankful as happy: Hence we read of Altars erected and built
by Noah, Abraham, and other Patriarchs and holy Men of Old, as Monuments of
their dutiful Gratitude unto God for Blessings lately received by them. How
cheerfully did Moses and Miriam sing Praises unto God, for their miraculous
Deliverance from Pharaoh, Exodus 14.
and his Host? The like did Barak and Deborah in their triumphant (...), for
saving them out of the hands of Jabin and Sisera: Judge. 5.
yea, thus it is for the most part with the Israel of God, whose safety he
(...) willing to make, in a manner, as evident as his Power, gains the
height of his Praise from the depth of their Misery. Thou have delivered my
Soul from death, mine Eyes from tears, and my Feet from falling, at the 8th
verse of this Psalm, whereupon there follows at the 12th, a Quid retribuam?
What shall I render? God delivers David from death, and other dangers, and
David straightway delivers himself from Ingratitude; for he gives Thanks unto
the Lord: He gives Thanks, (I say) whilst in a serious and solemn Quaery he
prepares them; and whilst he does confess his Debt, he pays it. Which payment
by words is not more easy than true, it being a Gift which both accompanies a
Blessing, and is One. And this society of Blessings our Understanding may
observe, even in those things which are without understanding: The Doves, at
every grain they pick, look upward, as giving Thanks: the Jewel, which is
illustrated by the Sunbeams, colors the beams: and the Earth which
receives moisture from the Sky, repays it back again in vapors and
exhalations; and each good Tree returns Thanks, as it were, for its goodness,
by its fruitfulness: yea, the very Rocks and Stones, which receive a sound from
the Air, (before it be fully given) return it by an Echo. No marvel then, if
holy David show himself so sollicitous and inquisitive about some Boon or Gift
to present his Lord withal. (...), says Saint Basil; He is in a million of
scrupulous Expostulations and Quaeries within himself, about that matter. But
after all search and inquest made, he finds (...), All too little, and below
the worth of such a Benefactor.

Quid retribuam? What shall I render? He says not here, Quid tribuam simply;
What shall I give? But Quid retribuam? What shall I give back? Acknowledging
that all which he possessed he first received from God. Domini est terra, and
plenitudo ejus; The earth is the Lord's, Psalm. 24.
and the fullness thereof; and so are the cattle upon a thousand hills, We are
but Usu-fructuaries, and Tenants at Will; if perhaps for a while we enjoy the
possession of things, howbeit the propriety is none of ours: So that none of us
all can give deproprio; retribuere, render up only, and give back, we may.
Which again Royal David most emphatically and amply acknowledged, in his
Eucharistical Solemnity and Stupendous Preparations for the building of the
Temple, saying; Thine, O Lord, is Greatness, and Power, and Glory, and Victory,
and Praise; for all that is in Heaven and Earth is thine: Thine is the Kingdom,
O Lord, and thou excellest as Head over all. 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12, 13, 14, 16.
Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious Name. But who
am I? and what are my People? that we should be able to offer willingly after
this sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine own hand have we given
thee. O Lord our God, all this abundance that we have prepared to build thee an
House for thine holy Name, is of thine own hand, and all is thine. Where our
Royal Prophet seems almost as much taken up in preparing Materials for the
Temple of the Lord, as in pouring out Blessings, and accumulating Praises, unto
the Lord of the Temple.

I have read that an Echo was held by Pythagoras in such sacred and reverent
Estimation, that he even adored it as some admirable and divine thing;
especially if there were any wind up and stirring at the production thereof. An
Echo now, we know, is but the multiplication or reflection of some sound or
other, occasioned through the Refraction of the Air in some hollow opposite
place (as the Philosopher describes it) or as the Wise man calls it, Wisd.
17.19.
The rebounding Echo of the hollow Mountains. Which Philosophical conceit, (or
rather Poetical Fiction) is by Franciscus Georgius thus drawn into a Moral.
Seeing that (says he) Man was made at the Word of God's command, and proceeded
from him as some sacred Blast or heavenly Breath (for, inspiravit in faciem
ejus, and fecit animam viventem, he breathed on him, and so made him a living
Soul) tunc redit vox flante vento, quando gratia reflectitur in Deum, quantum
potest; then (says he) our Voice, Eccho-like, returns in a gentle Blast and
sweet Rebound, when we sacrifice unto the Lord with the voice of Thanksgiving,
and our tongues resould with his Praises. Ps. 107.
O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men! That (invited and excited by
Royal David's example) they would sacrifice unto him the Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving, and show forth all his Praise! that they would not so far
degenerate, as to suffer themselves to be out-gone in point of Gratitude by the
dumb Creatures! for even the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's
Crib: Esaias 1.3.
and the Storks both feed and carry the old ones that brought them forth. Many
Stories tell us likewise of grateful Lions, kind Eagles, and trusty Dogs, qui
etiam mori pro dominis, that are ready to die for and with their Masters, as
Saint Ambrose has observed.

But come we now to Men, and oh! what Ingratitude and Unkindness we presently
meet with there: Joash remembered not the kindness of Jehoiada: 2 Chronicles. 24.
Genesis 23. Luke 17.15.
The chief Butler quickly forgot Joseph; and of ten Lepers that were cleansed,
there returned but one to offer his Thanks.

Hereupon the Lord was so highly incensed against degenerate and ungrateful
Israel, that he summoned heaven and earth to testify against them. Esaias 1.2.
Hear, O ye Heavens, and hearken, O earth, (says he) I have nourished and
brought up Children, but they have rebelled against me. And again, They forgot
God their Savior which had done so great things for them in Egypt, they
remembered not his hand: Psalm. 78. Hos. 13.6.
for when they were filled, their heart was exalted. As the Mule having sucked
to the full, presently flingeth at the Dam; so Jesurun waxed fat and kicked;
Den. 32.15.
he forsook the Lord that made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his
Salvation. How beit it is otherwise with our Royal Prophet here, who never
baulks the fountain of living Waters for Cisterns, broken Cisterns which hold
no water; rightly making his only Lord and Maker the sole entire Object of his
Obedience and Gratitude, still singing a Quid retribuam Domino? What shall I
render unto the Lord? (my second part now in order to be considered) Quid habes
quod non accepisti? 1 Cor. 4.7.
What have thou which thou have not received? and if thou have received it, Why
boastest thou as if thou had not received it? John 3.27. Jam. 1.17.
No man can receive any thing, except it be given him from above. Every good
and perfect Gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights.
Origo fontium and fluminum omnium Mare; Virtutum, Dominus, says holy Bernard;
As all Waters come from the Sea: So all Graces and Blessings flow from God, and
are derived unto us from that boundless Ocean of all good. Si quis callet
ingenio, si quis nitet eloquio, si quis moribus placet, inde est; says the
same Father: Art thou rarely furnished with the rich treasures of Learning and
Knowledge? or graced with volubility of Speech and Elocution? Art thou powerful
in attracting the Eyes and Affections of Men by thy graceful Deportment and
winning Behavior? It Is all from him. He all-sufficient, and lacking nothing,
powers down on us a rich and plentiful supply of all things. He opens his
hand, and fills every thing living with plenteousness. And therefore, as all
Springs and Fountains of Water have their secret and subterraneous passages,
through which uncessantly they run into the Seas; that thence again they may
return in their perennal offices and courses for our use and commodity; Why
should not the spiritual Rivers too (I mean the Gifts and Graces of the Mind)
be refunded and delivered back again, without stop or intermission, in the full
and faithful currents of Praise and Thanksgiving, unto their proper Head and
Fountain; that thence again they may never surcease to water and make fruitful
the fields of our Souls.

In all things then let us give Thanks, and still return all Blessings and
Benefits unto his Praise and Glory, from whose grace and favor they have been
derived.

In all things (said I) let us give Thanks? All giving of Thanks is not
acceptable before God. Read we not of the Pharisee in the Gospel, and of the
form of his Thanksgiving? how he stood up most pertly, and prayed, and gave God
Thanks, Luke 18.13.
that he was not like other Men, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or like the
Publican that stood afar off; he fasted twice in the Week, and paid Tithes of
all that he possessed? But see the up-shot, and mark the Censure the infallible
Judge passed upon him, I tell you (says Christ) this man (that is, the poor
Publican) went home justified rather than he. His Thanksgiving was so far off
from being accepted with God, that it was utterly rejected as most abominable.
What say thou, proud Pharisee? Art thou not like other Men? Art thou no
Extortioner, in the first place? I say thou art, and in the very denial thereof
thou grantest it; for whereas thou crackest and boastest of thy Purity and
Holiness, and glorifiest thy self so much in thine own Works and Worth, thou
provest thy self an Extortioner, and a notorious one too; for thou wrestest and
extortest the Glory from God, of which he has said, Esaias 48.11.
He will not give it to another.

Nay, read we not of many more beside the Pharisee, who as much mistake the
Fountain and first Original of all the Blessings and Benefits they receive? In
the first of Habakkuk, at the 15 and 16 Verses, we meet with the Nimrods of the
Earth, who when they took up all with the Angle, and catched it in their Net,
and gathered it in their Yarn; they then Sacrificed to their Net, and burnt
Incense to their Yarn, as if by them their Portion became fat, and their Food
plentiful. That is, They flattered themselves, and gloried in their own Wit and
Strength, as if thereby they had gotten all their Victories, with increase of
Wealth, and Honor, and what not? and so they robbed God of his Glory. In
requital of the like Ingratitude, when superstitions People, in the time of
Hosea, ascribed unto their Lovers, (that is, to their Idols) the gift of their
Bread and Wine, Corn and Oil, Wool and Flax, Silver and Gold; then Almighty God
returned in high displeasure, and took away his Corn in the time thereof, and
his Wine in the season thereof, Hos. 2.9.
and recovered his Wool and his Flax, which he had lent them for a time to
cover their nakedness withal. The right Praise and Thanksgiving indeed is
always distinguished from the Pharisaical and false Honor, by the Object: The
one being still fixed and terminated on God, the other on our Selves, or some
secondary Agent. Therefore both devoutly framed, and rightly levelled, was that
Confession of the Church, Esaias 26.12. Omnia opera nostra operatus es tu Domine;
All our works have thou wrought in us, O Lord: and therefore, Non nobis; Not
unto us, O Lord, but unto thy Name, be the Praise. Now the false Honor has
still some subordinate Agent or secondary Means for its Object; thus
Nebuchadonosor vaunts himself in the height and Tropic of his Pride, saying of
Babylon, Is not this great Babylon that I have built, Dan. 4.30.
for the house of the Kingdom, by the Might of my Power, and for the Honor of
my Majesty? Thus Sampson arrogantly usurpeth God's honor, saying, Jud. 15.16.
With the Jaw Bone of an Ass, heaps upon heaps; with the Jaw Bone of an Ass
have I slain a thousand men. What was the Lord's doing alone, and should have
been the more wonderful in his Eyes, he most arrogantly challenges to himself.
Thus, as it is in the 10 of Esaias, verse 15, the Hatchet and the Saw magnify
themselves against the Workman, when secondary Means rob the first Agent of his
Honor. Thus (in a word) every foolish and vainglorious Person exalts
himself, and, like an empty Scale, quickly mounts upwards; whereas the Wise
man, like the fuller and weightier one, still inclines downward in all
Humility, making it the greatest Argument of his sufficiency, to disclaim all
Self-sufficiency, and his highest Perfection, to confess his Imperfections; and
thus, with our Royal Prophet here, he makes God (as in all Right and Reason he
ought) to be the proper Object of his Praise and Thanksgiving.

And so from the Object of David's Thankfulness, I proceed to his Motives or
Inducements thereunto, God's Benefits; All his Benefits toward him. [What
shall I render to the Lord for all his Benefits toward me?]

Chrysostom, in his Comment on Galat. 2. thus magnifieth the boundless Bounty
of Almighty God, (...). He prosecuteth each individual person with no less
measure of Affection than he does the whole Universe. And those Benefits which
I, Thou, He, (in a word) All of us, receive from him, we receive them not
dimidiated, or by halfs, minced or cut into parcels; but so perfect, entire,
and complete, that each one in particular may take and interpret them as
conferred on himself alone: For, Do not all the celestial Orbs and elementary
Bodies? Do not those praedominant and greater Lights, the Sun, and Moon, and
whole Choir of heavenly Tapers, dispense and impart their comfortable Light and
sweet Influences alike to this sublunary and inferior World? There Is no
singular Person, or single Creature, (if capable) but has the same Interest
and Share in them, which all (collectively) participate and enjoy. Now, if the
Proportion of these, all these Benefits be taken with reference to us, who
without him are very Nothing, and Vanity it self; we must confess, with the
forecited Father, Chrisostom.
that there is (...), and that they are far greater than the narrow Scantling
of our hearts can conceive or imagine.

First, He has created us, and into such dead Clods of Clay as we were, has
he inspired the Breath of Life, and fashioned us after his own Image; which
bright and glorious Image of His, we wretched Creatures, with our Works of
Darkness, have most abominably defaced, and cast our selves headlong into the
bottomless-pit of Eternal Destruction. Then when we lay weltring and polluted
in our Blood, Ezekiel. 16.5, 6.
and no Ey pitied or had compassion on us, He passed by, and saw us when we
were in our Blood, and said unto us, Live: yea, when we were in our Blood, He
said unto us, Live. Then when we were not able to come unto him, he came unto
us, and that when we were his greatest Enemies, and through the singular Wisdom
of his Goodness stole into our Affections: For, seeing how that naturally we
were addicted and given to love our selves, and the things which were our own,
he would needs hereupon become our God also, that so we might, in a manner, be
compelled to love him. O the Bowels of Compassion! O Love, never to be
forgotten! O Clemency, Mercy, Goodness, incomprehensible! Wonderful,
wonderful, wonderful must this needs seem: For, whereas Angels, Archangels,
and such an innumerable Multitude of celestial Powers and Spirits love their
God so ardently, do him all Homage so willingly, and execute his Behests so
faithfully; He nevertheless, as less regarding all this, expects to be loved
and enterteined of us Men, of us terrene, abject, and ungrateful Wretches.
Wherefore he bowed the Heavens, and came down, and was incarnate for our Sake,
for our Love. Thus much has a most glorious infinite Majesty done gratis, for
very Nothing: Thus much has a most merciful Father, and Lord of all things,
done for those which were far worse than nothing, when he might, in his
Justice, in the Breath of his Displeasure have blasted us, and resolved us
again into our primordial Elements, and very Nothing it self. If we, for his
sake, resign up our very Being it self, than which naturally nothing is more
near and dear unto us, alas! What do we? We offer him the poorest Offerture,
and nothing but what was his own before, and that by far more and greater Right
than our own. Numisma Caesaris Imago, Homo Dei: The Coin bears the Stamp and
Inscription of Caesar the King; but Man, the Similitude and Impress of God, the
King of Kings. Read ergo, Mat. 22.21.
-- Render therefore unto Caesar the things that belong unto Caesar, and to God
the things that are God's; for both are their Due. Neither has he created us
alone, but all other things for our Use and Commodity. Look but up to Heaven,
and that gives thee Light, by the Ministry of the Sun by Day, of the Moon and
Stars by Night, that thou walk not in Darkness; that sends thee down those
sweet Influences, whereby diverse things spring up and grow, that thou perish or
die not through Famine. The Air, that does accommodate it self for thee to
breath on, that cools thee, tempers that internal Heat of thine, lest it should
consume thee. The Water servs thee with Rain, with soft and seasonable Showrs,
and with her silver Drops, in set and seasonable time, does crown thy Field;
with goodness. The Earth, as our common Mother (methinks) speaks thus to each
one in particular: Behold, I sustein thee; I, like a Mother, bear thee in mine
Arms; all necessaries I provide for thee: I maintein thee with the very fruit
of mine own Bowels: Whether in Life or Death, I never forsake thee; in thy
Lifetime I suffer thee to tread and trample on me with thy Feet; after Death I
afford thee a place of Rest; I intomb thee in mine own Bowels. Neither has his
Love unto us here been terminated and shut up: He has not only made us, and
all other things for our use and service, but he has gone on and continued
still his Mercy toward us, by preserving us too, ever since we were born, nay,
before ever we drew in this common Air: Ps. 139.16.
His Eyes were upon us in our Mother's Womb, when as yet our Substance was
imperfect, and all our Members in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there
was none of them: And he has all this while been content to stay for Thanks,
until by the leisure of Nature our Understandings have been made as capable of
his Blessings as our Bodies were, and yet, all this while, we have paid him
nothing; Nothing (I am sure) as we should; nothing as we ought. His Mercies are
renewed every Morning (says the Prophet) yea, L^m. ^.2^.
every Moment: We move not a Foot which he moves not; we neither open nor shut
an Ey without his especial help. Neither is here yet a Period of his Love unto
us. He has freely given us his holy Word and Sacraments to sanctify, nourish,
and preserve our Souls unto Life everlasting. Ps. 147.20.
He has not dealt so with many other Nations, neither have the Heathen
knowledge of his Laws; yea, as though that were yet too little, he has given us
his only begotten Son, and with him all things; even that Gift of Gifts, his
blessed Spirit of Grace, and holy Unction, on this day of Pentecost.

In our Creation Christ gave us Ourselvs; In our Redemption he gave us Himself,
thereby restoring us to ourselvs: Therefore, thus given at the first, and
restored again when we had lost our selves, we ow our selves for our selves, and
ow our selves twice. But now, What shall we repay unto the Lord for Himself?
Though we could repay Our Selves ten thousand times, What are we in comparison
of Christ the Son of God? So then, though we had as many Lives to spend as
Drops of Blood to shed, we could never recompense his Love.

There is yet behind another Redemption, not to be balk'd or passed over in
silence, and that is from Domestic Usurpation and Tyranny, by the miraculous
Restoration of his Sacred Majesty CHARLES the Second; the best of Kings; the
Father of his Country; the Extinguisher of Tyranny; the Restorer of Liberty;
and the Founder of Tranquillity; at whose joyful and victorious Approach,
Rebellion and Usurpation, with their horrid Attendant Confusion, are chased
away, and Concord and Loyalty recalled in their room.

If the Lord had not been on our side (may England now say) If the Lord himself
had not been on our side (may his late afflicted Church say) and had he not
turned our Captivity as the Rivers in the South, we had till this time gone on
our way weeping and sowing in Tears, despairing ever of a joyful Harvest, and
of bringing our Sheavs with us. But blessed be God, who has not wholly given
us over as a Prey unto our Enemies, but has plucked us, at the last, as a
Firebrand out of the Fire. Blessed be God, who has directed the heart of a
most sagacious and faithful Counselor (much like to another Hushai, or
Nehemiah) to contrive the happy means, and pave the way, for our Deliverance.
Blessed be God, who has stirred up the Spirit of a prudent and magnanimous
Chieftain (like a second Moses or Cyrus) to effect it, and bring it to pass, by
rescuing us out of those miserable Calamities and Distractions which we so long
groaned under, and by restoring us to our ancient Freedom, with all the just
Rights and Immunities thereof.

Tell me, O ye Redeemed of the Lord, ye that yet stand amazed at the
strangeness of your Deliverance; Tell me, Men and Brethren, and all that hear
me this day, How can we sufficiently aestimate, or worthily prise so rich a
Blessing? What Return shall we make unto the Lord for This, and all other his
Mercies, the Number whereof is numberless, and their Measure beyond all
measure? Assuredly, render something we must; for this is the Nature and
Property of Him, who is Optimus Maximus, our best and greatest Benefactor, who
opens his hand, and fills every thing living with his Goodness, and gives
us all things richly to enjoy. 1 Timothy 6.17.
That as in conferring Benefits he is most liberal and free; so is he likewise
a most just and severe Exacter of his ordinary Tribute of Thanks: Not because
he any ways stands in need of any thing from us; (for, if thou be righteous,
Job 35.7.
what give thou Him? or what receives he at thine hand?) but because it is
his most just and lawful Due, he demands it; requiring the Reciprocation and
Return of our Duties for our own Good and Benefit, and not for any Advantage of
his.

Then let our Mouth (as holy David exciteth us) be filled with thy Praise all
the Day long, O Lord. What is that (says devout St. Austin) All the Day long;
but without intermission? In prosperis, quia consolaris; in adversis, quia
corrigis; antequam essemus, quia fecisti; cum essemus, quia salutem dedisti,
etc. In prosperity, because thou comfortest us; in adversity, because thou
chastisest us; before we were, because thou created'st us; when we were,
because thou preserved'st us; when we had sinned, because thou forgavest us;
when we turned unto thee, because thou drawed'st us; and if we persevere,
because thou will crown us.

Thus, even thus, let our Mouth be filled with thy Praise all the Day long, O
Lord, and without intermission; and let us, with our Prophet here, express the
manner of our Thanksgiving: Let us take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the
Name of the Lord: Let us pay our Vows unto the Lord, now, in the presence of
all his People. And because we can render him Nothing, let us render him a
Confession, That we can render him Nothing: For such is the Longanimity and
Forbearance of our heavenly Creditor, that if we do but acknowledge our
Willingness along with our Inability to repay him, He will accept our Will for
the Debt, and our bare Confession for a full Discharge.

Thus then let us do; Let us humble our selves under his mighty Hand, confess
our own Defects and Imperfections, and so give Him alone all Glory.

To the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise God, be all Honor and
Glory, throughout all Ages.

AMEN.

