Imprimatur.

Nov. 2. 1691. Geo. Royse, R. Rmo in Christo Patri,
ac Dno Dno Johanni Archiep. Cantuar. a sacris Domest.

Christ Crucified.

A SERMON PREACHED AT SALISBURY, August 23. 1691.

By JOSEPH KELSEY, B. D. Prebendary of SARUM.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1691.

TO THE Right Honorable THOMAS EARL of PEMBROKE, etc. One of Their Majesty's
Most Honorable Privy Council.
My LORD,
HAD this Sermon been designed to be public, I would have endeavored, that it
should better have answered both the Dignity of the Subject, and the Nobleness
of the Name prefixed to it. But since your Lordship was pleased to encourage
the Printing it, as it was Preached; I esteem that Favor solely to proceed
from your Great Piety to Catholic Verities, (particularly the Honor of our
Savior, at this time so injuriously assaulted) and your Love to the Church of
England, which ever was, and continues to be, the best Defender and Conserver
of them.

That God will confirm to your Lordship these and all other Virtues, which make
true Greatness, and reward them with spiritual and temporal Blessings, is the
Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's in all Duty most obliged, and most humble Servant,
Joseph Kelsey.

Christ Crucified.
1 COR. I. 23, 24. But we preach Christ Crucified, unto the Jews a
stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness. But unto them which are
called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the Wisdom of God.


CHRIST in this Text seems to represent the future fate of his Religion to the
end of all things: that it should be always militant on Earth till triumphant
in Heaven; like an Isthmus, or narrow neck of Land, it is opposed to the fury
of two rageing Enemies, Jew and Gentile, yet stands the Emblem of invincible
Fortitude, an eternal exception to all the powers of fleshly Wisdom; wounds no
less the acuteness of the Grecian Sophister, than the dullness of the illogical
Jew; and puzzles as well the brisker genius of Athens, as the more phlegmatic
Rabbis at Jerusalem. A Problem baited both by ignorance and learning, by
prejudice and ingenuity, by malicious interest, and a better generosity. The
most excellent things still fight with the greatest difficulties; God himself
has the most Enemies; and Virtue is ever placed betwixt opposite Vices. Christ
Crucified sounds a contradiction to the Philosophy of a Greek, implicates in
the very terms; To the Hebrew Superstition it is more terrible and confounding
than the shakings of Mount Sinai. Stupid and heavy Jew! whom nothing less than
Thunder will confute. Captious Greek! who seek Wisdom in Mode and Figure;
rejecting all as folly which has not its appearance in Logical Syllogisms, or
Sophistical Elenchs. Quid quaeris, Judaee? Signa? hic est Dei Virtus. Quid tu,
Graece? Sapientiam? hic est sapientia Aeterni Patris. We preach Christ
Crucified, The power of God, and the Wisdom of God. In which words we will
consider, I. The great subject of Christian Doctrine: We preach Christ
Crucified. II. The Vindication of it from the Oppositions of Jew and Gentile:
The power of God, and the Wisdom of God.


I. We preach Christ Crucified, That is, 1. The Satisfaction which he made. 2.
The Merit of his Death. 3. The unbounded Virtue of it. 4. The effect which so
great an Example of Virtue ought to have upon our selves.


1. We preach the Satisfaction which by his Death he gave to Divine Justice for
the sins of the World: rendering the offended Majesty of his Father, gracious by
the oblation of himself.

They are low and unworthy designs which terminate the Virtue of our Saviors
Death in any thing less than those high and noble effects which Scripture and
the Faith of Gods Church have attributed unto it. That he should die chiefly to
give Testimony to the Doctrine of Remission of sins which he preached, is to
make him a mere Martyr to his own Religion; to put no distinction betwixt the
Death of the Son of God, and of a mortal Man, to allow more real Virtue to the
blood of Bulls and Goats, as to the taking away of sin, than of the immaculate
Lamb of God. The Apostles and all holy Martyrs, who died for the Doctrine which
they preached, might on this account compare with him in the efficacy of their
Deaths, and challenge the incommunicable Title of Saviors and Redeemers of
Mankind. Nay Socrates himself, supposing the Morality of his Philosophy, such
as might make those who should practice it acceptable unto God, would justly be
said by his Death to have purchased remission of sins, and to have been the
Author of Eternal Salvation to his Athenian Proselytes.

The Miracles which our Savior did were more convincing Arguments of the truth
of his Doctrine than was his Death: it being no unheard of thing for Men with
the loss of their Lives to defend the most impious and heretical Opinions. Nor
is that Faith and Hope of Eternal Life, so much magnified, as the great effect
of his Death, with any reason applied unto it; since the cruel torments of a
most innocent Person at first sight appears the most preposterous means to
induce a belief of immortal bliss. And the Scriptures every where lay the
foundation of a firm Faith in our Saviors Resurrection. Moreover had the Death
of Christ been only intended for a Testimony to his Doctrine, it might very
well have been spared, and others, and no less convincing methods used. After
having lead a Life of perfection upon Earth, he might have ascended after the
manner that Enoch and Elias were translated, into Heaven, and from thence have
showed his Majesty to the confusion of his Enemies. He might have taken his
Murderers at their word, have descended from the Cross, and so confuted all
their pretenses. But this Sacrifice was intended for greater ends; To have its
effect not only upon Men, but to move even God himself. And this it did to two
things which seem to make up the Nature of Satisfaction.

1. It moved God to a relaxation of his Law, or a receding from his right. 2.
To a translation of the punishment.
1. Upon the account of Christ's Sufferings, God was moved to a dispensation of
his law. This Law is set down, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest the forbidden
fruit, thou shall surely die; thou shall be punished with eternal death. If
this Law had exactly been executed, none could be saved; but we are taught,
that those who believe in Christ are redeemed from the Curse of the Law, Gal.
3.13. And by the conditional Promises of the Gospel, God does plainly recede
from that right of punishing which that Law gave him. Many are the instances in
Scripture that God has done this, and to dispute that he cannot, is to
transform the God of Christians into a stoical (...), to bind him in Chains of
fatality as invincible as a Heathen Jupiter. Promises do give a right to him to
whom they are made, which will be injury against his consent to take away: but
threatenings are revocable without any injury: because it is supposed the party
threatened will not challenge the performance of the threatening. Nor in this
case is it necessary to dispute the (...), under what notion God is to be
considered; whether this action of relaxing his Law proceeded from him as a
Judge, as the party offended, or as the Governor of the World, since all these
agree in him. It is sufficient that he is God, a Being wise, just, and good,
and was pleased (for satisfacere in the Law is alterius voluntatem implere)
upon the account of Christ's Death to dispense with the execution of that Law
whereby all Sinners, that is, whole Mankind were condemned to Eternal Torments.
Which dispensation, if it had not intervened, two most excellent things had
quite perished out of the World, Religion from Man to God, and Divine goodness
toward Man.

2. The second part of this Satisfaction is the translation of the punishment.
God's accepting the Sufferings of Christ for the punishment due to Sinners.
This is according to another expression of the Civil Law, Satisfactio est pro
solutione. It is not the payment it self, but in lieu of it: the Sufferings of
Christ were not the same which we deserved, yet such as served all the ends of
Justice and Mercy. That he suffered very grievous Tortures, appears from the
History of his Passion: That he suffered for our sins is clear from the ancient
Prophecies, ( Isaiah 53.) God laid on him the iniquities of us all: and from
infinite places in the Epistles. He was made sin for us, a Curse for us; which
places can signify nothing else, but that Christ did undergo those Sufferings
upon the account of our sins, and his Death was accepted instead of ours.

It is objected, That no body can be justly punished for another sin; because
obligation to punishment arises from Merit, but Merit is personal proceeding
from the will, than which nothing is more our own. But.

1. First, It is to be considered, That though all the instances brought to
declare the translation of punishment from the guilty to the innocent, in the
Athenian and Roman Commonwealths, of two Friends ready to die one for the
other, of Zaleucus who redeemed his Sons Eye with the loss of his own, do
suppose a Principle which Christianity will not allow, That every Man is
perfect Master, and has the disposal of his own Life, as appears by that
(...), self-murder, which was not only not esteemed blameable, but gained the
repute of manly and heroic amongst the most refined Heathens; yet it was not so
with Christ, He had both power from his Father, and as himself tells us ( John
10.18.) No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self, I have
power to lay it down. That which made their actions unjust has no place in his
sufferings.

2. Although when God visits the sins of the Fathers upon the Children he may
be said to make use of his Sovereign right in taking away that Life which he
gave, in which there can be no injustice so long as the punishment exceeds not
the benefit of Creation upon which his right is founded. Yet is it clear from
Scripture, That the People of Israel, and the Posterity of Jeroboam (however
they had sins of their own) yet were they innocent as to that for which they
suffered, David's numbering of the People, and Jeroboam's many iniquities.

3. Lastly it is evident, that exquisite sufferings are inflicted by
Providence, where there is no sin to be punished or prevented, but perfect
innocence. For brute Beasts and infant Children (who having no free will cannot
by sin abuse it) do ly under and die by the same tormenting Diseases with
rational sinful men. So that the distinction betwixt punishment and affliction
will not bear that weight, either in the common use of words, or reasoning,
which in this dispute is laid upon it. God will ever be just, what names soever
Men put upon his proceedings. It was not therefore unjust, either according to
Scripture or reason, that our most innocent Savior should be punished for our
offenses, that we by his stripes might be healed, and the wrath of God receive
that satisfaction which his mercy, truth, and justice did require.

2. We preach the Merit of his Death, which is founded in these particulars.

1. In the free and willing obedience of Christ. This the Scriptures take great
notice of. Thus Christ himself bespeaks his Father, Lo, I come to do thy will,
O God. And God at the first appearance in his Office, by a Voice from Heaven,
declared the great complacency he had in the Obedience of his Son. This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. And St. Paul tells us, that as by the
disobedience of one many were made Sinners, so by the obedience of one many
should be made righteous. Amongst the Heathens it was accounted a bad Omen, if
the Beast to be Sacrificed came with any reluctance to the Altar. The prompt
and ready submission of Christ to so great sufferings, on behalf of the World,
was of mighty power to incline his Father to recede from the rigor of his
Justice.

2. The Merit of Christ's Death is founded in the dignity of his Person. We
were not redeemed with corruptible riches, but with the precious blood of the
Son of God. It was the Lord of Life and Glory who was Crucified: God did
purchase to himself a Church by his own blood. Although the Divinity was
impatible, and remained untouched amidst all the fury of its Enemies, yet was
the value of his Sufferings advanced by its union with his Godnead; as it is a
greater aggravation to strike a King than a Slave, though in both, only the
body receive the stroke. The Stoics do but play with words whilst they
maintain an equality of sins, yet grant that the Murderer of his Father
deserves greater punishment, because there is a complication of many sins; he
not only killed a Man, but took life from him who gave him his, who nourished
him, and was the Author of all his contentment.

If the Catholic Fathers, in their disputations with Arius and others, the
Opposers of Christ's Divinity, did not insist much upon the undervaluing the
merit of his Death, nor urged the detriment to his satisfaction, by making him
mere Man, it was rather because his Divinity being secured, his satisfaction
likewise would remain entire; than that they did not see the consequence. He
must have low thoughts of his Sufferings, who believes them only to be the
Sufferings of a Mortal Man; as he who can allow all that to the Sufferings of a
Man, which the Scriptures give to Christ's, will easily be brought to think
there is no need of a Mediator. And therefore Socinus from the denial of
Christ's satisfaction, proceeded to bereave him of his Godhead. A mere Man
destroyed the World, but only God could recover it, by the effusion of such
blood, -- (...). even his own.

3. His Merit is founded in the greatness of his Sufferings, not excluding the
humility and necessities of his Life, the poverty and contempt of his low
estate.

That he indeed suffered the pains of the damned, or that his descent into Hell
imports any such thing is not to be believed by a Christian; both because the
state of desperation there fills up the meafure of their misery, (which would
be impious to think of Christ) as also that satisfaction does not require, that
the pains of his Death should be equal to the Eternal punishment of all Men;
That would have been exact payment of Debt, and God in Justice could not have
punished any Sinner a second time in his own Person. But that his Sufferings
were of another nature, than we are capable to endure, or our Minds to
conceive, seems to follow from the greatness of that Passion, and Symptoms of
exquisite torture more than once observed in him, which the Evangelists express
by (...), forcing him to sweat drops of blood, to pray (though with great
submission) that the Cup might depart from him, and at last to cry out, My God,
why have thou forsaken me? Had there not been some invisible tortures exceeding
those inflicted on his Body, Celsus his Question in Origin would not seem
unreasonable, (...); have we not heard of many Martyrs, and even others who
could receive no Courage from the cause for which they suffered, whose Deaths
were not only free from the least complaint, but accompanied with rejoycings?
We must believe, that the pains of our Savior were more than we can give any
account of, or (which is Blasphemy to affirm) that he had not the fortitude of
a Stoic, or an ordinary Spartan; when even the Thieves themselves, who were
Crucified with him, and died by most of the same external circumstances of
Cruelty, showed not the signs of so severe a Passion.

4. The Innocence of the Person advanced the Merit of his Death. As in nature
that medium which transmits Colors untainted to the Eye, must have no Color
of its own; so Christ, who was the propitiation for our sins, did no sin,
neither was guile found in him. He is called the Lamb without spot. As both the
Jews and Gentiles were ever careful, that the Beast devoted to Sacrifice should
be notorious, both for the clearness of its color, and beauty of it is bodily
shape. My righteous Servant shall justify many.

The rules laid down by the Jews are almost infinite, whereby he who was to be
accounted a fit High Priest, was to be examined. The parts of his Body, and
qualities of his Mind, were exactly surveyed; no deformity in either could be
excused when he made expiation for sin. Such an High Priest became us, who is
Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners; free not only from the
commission but inclinations to Vice, who neither did nor thought harm. The only
Person who led a Life conformable to his Doctrine, and vindicated simple
innocence from the reproach of softness and want of wit. He did perfectly
fulfill that Christian Proverb, (...). A harmless Prudence aderned every action
of his Life, as an unparalleled love was manifest in his Death. He lived to
teach us how we may be happy, and died to expiate not his own but our sins. And
certainly there is not in the World a more moving Spectacle, than to see an
innocent Person sore afflicted: So sad an effect without an immediate cause.
Death and Diseases are the undoubted consequents of sin. But that our Savior,
who with the truest Conscience, and strongest assurance, challenged his
Murderers to accuse him of sin, should with so much Patience and Charity
subject himself to such exquisite torments, this was the accomplishment of his
Merit, and such satisfaction as infinite Justice knew not how to refuse.

3. Thirdly we preach the Universality, the unbounded Virtue of his
Crucifixion. Not as some, who making great pretensions to preach Christ, preach
nothing less, or preach him out of envy to all the World but themselves; making
void his Death, by confining the intent of his Sufferings to the little flock,
upon whom alone, as on Gideon's Fleece, this Heavenly Dew must fall; whilst the
rest of the World remains parched, and dried, prepared matter for everlasting
burnings, raising a Monopoly of that blood intended to enliven whole dead
Mankind. It is a Jewish Principle, and fully as opposite to Christianity as the
rest of their Religion, for any Party or Sect to believe themselves the Elect
of God, and to allow no hopes or possibility of Salvation to the infinity of
Men, only to the Inhabitants of a little piece of ground scarce above two
hundred Miles in length. But God is true. He has told us, That Christ gave
himself a ransom for all; that he tasted death for every man. And in the 1 John
2.2 (to which place no distinction can give a colorable answer) he was the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole
World. So that the death of Christ extends its Virtue, 1. To all persons. Every
Man is bound, under the obligation of eternal Death, to believe, that Christ
died for him in particular; therefore Christ did die for every Man. God
obliges no Man to believe a lie, which according to them who confine Christ's
Death only to the Elect, the far greatest part of Mankind must necessarily do.
What solid ground of comfort can any sincere Christian find in believing, that
almost whole Mankind are excluded from the benefits of his Death! Will it not
breed despair, and make Men cast off all Religion? or if any one be so hardy,
as to believe himself is one of those very few whom Christ so loved as to die
for; it is indeed like the confidence of those who call themselves Saints; But
God has no where made Pride, ill Nature, and high Presumption, to be
qualifications for his Salvation.

2. It extends to all Ages of the World. Hence he is called the Lamb slain from
the foundation of the World, and a ransom testified in due time. That though he
dyed not till the fullness of time, yet whoever were saved before his
appearance, were saved by his Merits, and by the efficacy of that blood which
was figured by all the Sacrifices of the Jews, and also of the Gentiles, who
without question received the rite of Sacrificing by tradition from the first
Fathers of the World. Moses counted the reproach of Christ greater riches than
the treasures of Egypt. Jesus Christ is the same propitiation in all parts of
time, yesterday, to day, and for ever. This is one excellency of the Christian
Sacrifice above the Levitical, that its Virtue diffuses it self throughout all
Ages of the World, and therefore needed but once to be offered, as the Apostle
argues, Hebr. 9. 25. had not the Gentiles the explicit knowledge of our
Savior? neither had the generality of the Jews, only some few excellent
Persons to whom God vouchsafed a clearer Revelation. This is manifest from the
end of all their Sacrifices, That they looked upon God as a Rewarder, merciful
and placable, and that Expiation of sins might be made.

4. We preach Christ Crucified, That is, The effect that so great an Example of
Virtue ought to have upon our selves, by an inward mortification of all those
sins which were the cause of his sufferings. This is that which the Scripture
calls ( Phil. 3.10.) the fellowship of his sufferings, and to be made
conformable to his death; this Saint Paul did glory in, this is that Christ
Crucified, the knowledge whereof he was so ambitious, as without which all the
other excellent ends of his Death would signify nothing but the aggravation of
our sin and misery. But the World called Christian thinks it now the greatest
sign of its being so, that it retains the Death of Christ in History and
Speculation; can make harangues upon his Vurtues, and rhetorically set forth
the Cruelty of his Passion. We have more disputes concerning the spiritual
Cross and virtue of his Death, than Critics have about the fashion of his
material Cross: infinitely more concerning the nature and power of the
Sacraments, than Physicians have about that part whence the Water and Blood did
issue forth. It is an easy way of satisfying punishment by the afflictions of
another, and scarce to have any sense of those stripes whereby we are healed.
As if imagination were as powerful in Religion, as it is in nature, that a
strong belief of Election and imputative righteousness, without performance of
Christian Duties, would avail to our Salvation. Mistake not thy self, fond
Creature! Christ died not to excuse thee from duty, but from punishment, on
condition of that duty. There is a Cross which thou must bear, a Crucifixion
which thou must undergo, a heavy burden of sin which thou must feel, thy heart
also must be pierced before thou receivest any benefit from his Death. His
Blood is no Magical Amulet, no unintelligible Weapon-salve to heal at any
distance, to Cure the wounds of sin without application: its Virtue conveys not
it self through hidden passages of the air, to perfect the Cure without trouble
or observation. Thou must search and examine every Corner of thy Heart, not
spare the most beloved Pleasure, nor the sin that does most easily beset thee.
Can thou think any thing too dear to forsake when it comes in competition
with him who has purchased thy love at so great a rate? or think it reasonable
to take delight in those sins which gave thy beloved Savior so much pain and
torment? (...). Look upon me and be Religious, was written on the Tomb of an
Egyptian King: Let us look a little upon him whom we have pierced. Many and
incomparable are the Virtues which shine forth in his bitter Passion, proposed
to our serious imitation. Consider his Patience and submission to the Divine
appointment. Look unto Jesus, who for the joy set before him endured the Cross,
despising the shame. He was oppressed and afflicted, yet opened he not his
mouth, he was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter. Can we then murmur at the
punishments we have deserved, when we see the purest innocence, the most
consummate goodness (which had better deserved of the World) so injuriously
treated? He understood better than any Man the intrinsic worth of all Worldly
things; yet did he not upon all occasions show the greatest slight and neglect
of them? Behold therefore the Cross of Christ by which the World is Crucified
to thee, and thou to the World. A powerful Meditation to curb the motions of
ambition, and desires of earthly glory. How can we refuse to be reconciled to
any who have offended us, when Christ died for us who were his greater Enemies?
Can we think on his Death as a propitiation to restore us to the favor of God,
and not receive our returning Brother into our favor? This is Christianity
indeed, To imitate thy Savior in so hard a duty. Further, why should thou be
troubled at the ingratitude thou meetest with from the World? Have thou done
good, and endeavored to oblige by services of love? Thou shall have thy reward
in the next Life. This whole World is a reward too little for one truly
virtuous action. What though thy most religious intentions be misrepresented?
Be not discouraged: Let not dis-ingenuity stop the Communications of thy Virtue
and Goodness: which if it had done in God, we had not now been here to
acknowledge our Great Benefactor.

Against this Doctrine of Christ Crucified, which St. Paul (1 Cor. 15.3. the
Epistle for this day) first of all delivered, That Christ died for our sins,
according to the Scriptures, a Doctrine full of Divine Benignity, and infinite
consolation. What is it that Jew or Gentile could object?

1. To the Jews it was a stumbling block chiefly upon these accounts: 1. The
meanness of Christ's appearance. They expecting a triumphant Prince, who should
Conquer the World into their Domination. 2. That the Messiah should die a full
and sufficient Sacrifice, signifying the abolishing the Ceremonies of their
Law. 3. That a great end of his Death was to reconcile Jew and Gentile, and to
unite the whole World in Love and the same Religion; which contradicted that
proud and envious temper; whereby they thought none should have any benefit of
the Messiah his coming, but those who became Proselytes to their Law, which
they believed to be Eternal. All which scandals might easily be removed, both
from Scripture, and their own ancient Traditions.


2. To the Greeks it was foolishness. The high and towering speculations which
filled the pages of their Philosophy, had so puffed up their understandings, that
the simplicity of Gospel Doctrine could not be admitted to any thing but
contempt and scorn. They could dogmatically refine concerning the Divine
Goodness, and its perpetual Emanations; and thence deduce the eternity of
matter, the infinity of Worlds, the generation of Souls, and preexistence,
their exile from primitive Happiness, and lapse into mortal Bodies. They often
asked the Question, (...); what was the Origin of Evil, but could never answer
it; they discoursed much of an (...), a freedom of power to Act, but gave no
account how it is become weak and feeble; of a Deification to be attained, That
their wise Man was the only rich, beautiful person in the World, happier than
the Gods, they being so by Nature, but he by his own acquisitions. They amuzed
their Scholars with the Encomiums of such a Virtue as never was nor can be
found. These and such like were the lofty phancies upon which whilst their
Imagination sat, and looked down upon the plain Truths of the Christian
Doctrine, they must needs seem low and despicable Principles, viz. That God did
not only love the World of Mankind, but sent his only Son to tell them so: who
after he had by his Doctrine taught true Virtue, and by his holy Life shown
that it was practicable, died to satisfy Justice and redeem the World. And that
there is no other way to Salvation, but Faith in Christ Crucified, and the
imitation of his Example. This is the plain sum of Christian Philosophy, which
even Justin Martyr confesses was foolishness to him whilst he was in the
School of Plato. Yet this is

1. The Power of God. I could tell you a large History, from how low
beginnings, by what improbable methods it subdued Kingdoms, conquered the
greatest Conquerours, brought the Empires of the East and West into its
profession; how it stopped the mouths of Apostates and Blasphemers, silenced the
Oracles of the Devil, that he could no longer use either his Poetry, or his
ambiguous Prose to the delusion of the World. That it has sanctified the
Temples of Idols into Churches, turned the Schools of Philosophers into the
Houses of God, thrown down Amphitheaters, levelled Pantheons, ruined the
Kingdom of the Prince of Darkness, and obtained a Dominion larger than the
famed Monarchies of the Earth. This has humbled the most haughty Spirits,
purified the most defiled Minds, and can boast of more Proselytes to Virtue,
and Martyrs in its Cause, than the most applauded Systems of Philosophy.

2. It is the Wisdom of God. I will not determine, as some too rashly have,
That it was impossible for God to have found out any other way for the
redemption of the World, but the Death of his Son. It is folly to pretend to
set bounds to Infinity; this is to suppose that God's Wisdom was exhausted, and
subject it to the comprehension of Man. This we may safely say, That our
understandings will not reach to the conception of any other method, which
would so much advance the admiration of his Wisdom; which in the Government of
the World seems to propound two things chiefly to it self; The encouragement of
Goodness, and Discouragement of Vice. His own Glory, and the Happiness of his
Creatures depending upon each of these; and they are both served incomparably
in Christ Crucified.

1. Here is the discouragement of sin. By Gods transferring the punishment from
us upon Christ, his indignation at sin is manifested. That his beloved Son
should suffer rather than sin go unpunished, and satisfaction not be given to
that Rectitude and Order of things, which is the true Creditor in the case,
requiring punishment to deter Men from sin. Here we may see the grievous nature
and direful effects of sin; with what cruelty and infamy it procured Christ's
Death, much more will it ours. By this we learn, that God will certainly
provide for his Justice, under which it must be our care not to fall. If it
made thy Savior sweat, it will set thee all on fire; if it made him die, what
will be thy portion, when Death, which was his release, shall not be granted?

2. By this method God provided for the increase of Goodness. Had not Christ
come and taught his Heavenly Doctrine, the World had never known what true
Virtue is, nor would it have had sufficient encouragement to attain it; had he
not died, rose again, and given his Holy Spirit to assist and illuminate our
darkened minds, we had yet slept in the faint light of Nature, never found the
way to Happiness. He explained the disputed Precepts of the Ancient Moralists,
declared the future States, the just rewards of sin and goodness. And if such
Motives will not prevail, God is not to be blamed. He grant therefore that
every one may find the power of Christ Crucified in his own Soul: and that All
may earnestly endeavor, That the Wisdom of this design may have its intended
effect, in making whole Mankind good and happy to Eternity.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St Paul's
Churchyard.
TEN Sermons, with two Discourses of Conscience. By the Lord Archbishop of
York. 4to -- 's Sermon before the House of Lords, Nov. 5. 1691. Bishop
Overall's Convocation Book MDCVI. concerning the Government of God's Catholic
Church, and the Kingdoms of the whole World, 4to Animadversions on Mr.
Johnson's Answer to Jovian. In three Letters to a Country Friend, 8vo Turner De
Angelorum and Hominum Lapsu, 4to Mr. Raymond's Pattern of Pure and Undefiled
Religion, 8vo -- 's Exposition on the Church Catechism, 8vo Mr Lamb's Dialogues
between a Minister and his Parishioner, about the Lord's Supper, 8vo -- 's
Sermon before the King at Windsor. -- 's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. -- 's
Liberty of humane Nature, stated, discussed and limited. -- 's Sermon before
the King and Queen, Jan. 19. 1689. -- 's Sermon before the Queen, Jan. 24.
1690. Dr Hickman's Thanksgiving Sermon before the Honorable House of Commons,
Oct. 19. 1690. -- 's Sermon before the Queen at Whitehall, Oct. 26. 1690. Dr
Burnet's Answer to Mr Warren. -- 's Consideration of Mr Warren's Defense.
Bishop of Bath and Wells Reflections on a French Testament, Printed at
Bordeaux. -- s Christian Sufferer supported, 8vo Dr Grove (now Lord Bishop of
Chichester) his Sermon before the King and Queen, June 1. 1690. Dr Hooper's
Sermon before the Queen, Jan. 24. 1690/1. Dr Pelling's Sermon before the King
and Queen, December. 8. 1689. -- 's Vindication of those that have taken the Oath,
4to Dr Worthington of Resignation, 8vo -- 's Christian Love, 8vo Mr Nichols's
Answer to the Naked Gospel, 4to Faith and Practice of a Church of England Man,
12o. The Third Edition. Religion the Perfection of Man. By Mr Jeffery 8vo
Kelsey Concio de Aeterno Christi Sacerdotio.
The End of the Catalogue.

