TRUTHS PLEA FOR INFANTS, OR, INFANTS RIGHT VINDICATED: In a Reply to Jeremiah
Ives, Chees-munger concerning the Baptism of INFANTS.

By ALEXANDER KELLIE.

Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause Divisions and
Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them.
Phil. 4.9. These things which ye have both learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in me, do, and the God of peace shall be with you. Prove. 9.13. The
Light of the Righteous rejoices, but the Candle of the wicked shall be put
out. (...) LONDON, Printed by T. R. and are to be sold by Nath. Brooks at the
Angel in Cornhill, 1656.

To the READER.
THe Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 11.13.14, 15. has set forth to the life, our
Adversaries with whom we have to do, saying, That such are false Apostles,
deceitful Workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; and no
marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light. Therefore it
is no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed, as the Ministers of
Righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works. God has seldom,
or never, had in any Age his Truth pleaded by his servants without the
contradiction of his Adversaries: as 2 ^im. 3.8. Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses, so our Anabaptists resist the Truth, men of corrupt minds, false
accusers, despisers of those that are good, heady, heigh-minded, having a form
of godliness, but denying the power thereof: but we hope their folly shall
shortly be made manifest to all men, that they shall proceed no further: They
are much like the false Prophet Zedekiah, In the first Book of the Kings the
last Chapter, ver. 24. who smote Miicaiah the true Prophet, and said, Which way
went the Spirit of the Lord from me, to speak unto thee: all the dirt of foul
aspertions which mine Adversaries has cast upon the Truth, which I have
delivered, have not so defaced it, but that it can sufficiently plead for it
self without any further reply, and therefore if I should make no more answer
then David did Shimei, or Ezekiah, and the men upon the Walls of Jerusalem to
the railings of Rabshakeh, the Lord quickly would appear and plead his own
Cause with a witness against his enemies: yet nevertheless, lest mine enemies
should be too proud, and brag too much where they have little reason; and
that my friends should not be led away with the errors of the wicked, falling
from their stedfastness, and losing those things which we have already
wrought, wherein there is not one word to my remembrance that ever I spoke
in public several years against the Anabaptists, that ever I mind to recall,
but if need be to confirm to the end. And therefore I have once more
undertaken to contend for the Truth, which I have not only lately made known
here in LONDON, amongst them that heard me, but has also from Abraham's time to
Ours been delivered to the Saints. I would not have my Hearers, like many of
the Anabaptists, to cast away the Helve after the Hatchet, making shipwreck of
faith and a good conscience, some become Quakers, some Ranters, some denying
God, some Christ the Lord, against Family duties morning and evening, before
and after Meat, slighting Word and Sacraments, from such the Lord deliver us.

Finally, Gentle Reader, whereas some sentences in this my Book seem to follow
impertinently to what went before, blame not me, but my Adversary, whom I am to
pursue as a thief, and to ride out of the road way now and then after him
with Hue and Cry, over ditch and hedge; whereas otherwise I might have been
a great deal more clear and full, and methodicall.

From my House in Giles Criplegate, Your Friend in Christ, Alexander Kellie.

An Answer to the Epistle.
YE are not like the men of Berea, but like the Heretics in all ages, that
pretended Scripture for all they said, and there be none more contradictious
then you Anabaptists, both to all the godly learned in the world, and likewise
to one another, some for the Glass-House, some for Paul's, some for Beechlane,
some for Arminians, some against them; and many that frequent one of your
places, think it abomination to go to another of them, and many of you are
turned Ranters and Quakers. Sure therefore ye are not like Solomon's Wise men,
Prove. 14.15. That look well to their goings; and where you cast dirt upon the
Fathers, you do not show us in what places to find their errors, and if it
^^re true you say of them, yet therein you are more like cursed Ham that made
known his fathers nakedness, then like blessed Shem and Japhet, who hid their
faces from it, and covered it. And whereas you look upon us as such who have
only the name of Religion, and of Christians, etc. with us, 1 Cor. 4.3. it is a
very small thing that we should be judged of you, who like proud Pharisees
despise us as sinful Publicans, and yet I hope we shall go away justified
rather then you. You wickedly slander godly learned men, as men minding their
profits and credit more then the Truth, whereas there have been, and are, and
still will be many hundred thousand for Infants Baptism, who never had any
worldly profits by it; and where you speak of credit, you say true, for a man
shall have no credit but shame before God and man to follow you. Next, you
bring in your Excentriks and Epicycles, and Phenomina; sure Sir, by your high
terms you would make some simple Reader believe that you are some great
Professor of the Mathematics, but your Phenomina spoils all, wherein your
ignorance of Orthography appears and shows plainly that you know no more what
an Eccentricke, Epicycle or Phenomenon is, then the heel of an old Cheese, Ne
sut or ultra crepidam.. And thus let the unpartiall Reader Judge justly between
you and me. And so I have done with your Epistle, and I come to your Gospel.

A Reply to JEREMIAH IVES, Cheese-mungers Answer, concerning THE BAPTISM OF
INFANTS.
FIRST, you say, Where our Savior commanded all Nations to be baptized, he
meant, not any Infants for four reasons;

1. Because they are not then capable of teaching. 2. All Nations many times do
not include Children in Scripture. 3. Because Infidels, Turks, and Children of
Unbelievers are a great part of all Nations. 4. Because (...) is referred to
Disciples. To the first I answer three things. 1. It is no absurdity to preach
the Gospel to an Infant, Luke 1.70. and so on. 2. The Apostles were to teach
all that was commanded, and that could not be done in short time, but afterward
by degrees as the party baptized was able to receive. 3. The Apostles teaching
can no more keep back Infants from baptism, then Abraham's teaching, Genesis 18.
v. 19. could keep back the Infants from Circumcision, Genesis 17: v. 12. To the
second I answer, ye cite some Scriptures of all Nations, but therein you are no
Noble Beraean, as you would make men believe in the beginning of your Epistle,
for you give us not one place set down where to find the Scriptures. Secondly,
You bring us Scriptures for what Infants cannot, to prove that they should not
have that which according to Scripture they can have; And whereas you say,
Infants cannot bless, why is it then said in the 8. Psalm, Out of the mouths
of Babes and Sucklings thou will perfect praise, and in the ^48 Ps. Praise him
all people, old men and babes. Thirdly, J will bring you places of Scripture,
where Children are to be reckoned amongst all Nations, which bring them into
Baptism, more then your Scriptures of all Nations can keep them out; As ^en.
12. v. 13. Where the Lord promises to bless all the Families of the Earth,
and their Children are included, and this promise of the blessing brings them
into Baptism, more then your Scriptures can hold them out, and withal, this
place pronounces a curse against you Anabaptists, for they that curse Abraham's
Gospel way, in setting the token of Gods Gospel Covenant of grace upon Infants,
they curse Abraham, and God has threatened to curse such; so ye Anabaptists
are a Generation lying under the wrath, and curse, and vengeance of God.

The other places of Scripture comprehending Infants amongst all men, and
Nations are, Heb. 2. v. 9. Where it is said, Christ tasted death for every one,
and consquently for Infants. and 1 John 2. v. 2. Where Christ is a propitiation
for the whole World, Infants are understood, and Romans 5: 18. Which place you
grant to be meant of Infants, where it is said, That the free gift came upon
all men unto justification of life, and yet ye will not admit Infants into the
Ordinance of their first entry into any grace. Thirdly, Where you say, Turks,
Insidels, and their Children may as well be baptized as Professors Children; it
is false, for the Infants of Believers are the blessed of the Lord, Isa. 65. v.
23. They are Gods Children from the Womb, Ezekiel. 16. v. 20, 21. They are in
Covenant with God, Gen: 17. And to them belongs the Kingdom of Heaven: This is
never said of Turks and Infidels; and the Infants of Gods people were by God
admitted unto the possession of the like Ordinance to Baptism, which God calls
the Token of his Covenant, Genesis 17. Paul calls it the Seal of the
Righteousness of faith, Romans 4. and much profitable every way, Romans 3. and
Infants continued in the possession hereof for many hundred years, and the Lord
never put them aside from this long possession, no more then he did the aged,
and therefore of necessity, when he commands all Nations to be baptized, he
commands Infants to be baptized. Lastly, in Matthew. 28. you say, (...) must be
referred to Disciples: Sometimes you speak of Children eight days old, in the
Cradle; you can no more then one of them find me in the Greek Text a
Substantive of the Maseuline Gender to agree with (...); but what do J talk of
the Greek Text, when you show your ignorance so gross, as if you had never
learned your Accidents, putting a Nominative Casein the Singular Number, for
the Accusative in the Plural, (...) for (...), and a Noune of your own
devising that was never heard of for a Verb, as many times sequitor for
sequitur, and sometimes a Verb for a Noun, as Baptizo for baptasmus, or a Noun
again for a Verb, as Aspersia for aspergo.

Secondly, J proved Infants were Disciples, from Isa. 54. v. 13. Where the Lord
promises that Infants shall be taught of God, you answer, that they are not
Disciples, who do not learn if they were taught: Herein you and Mr. Tombs, and
the rest are ^earfully out, for John 6. v 60.66. it i^ said, many Disciples
said of Christ's Doctrine, This is a hard saying, who can hear it? And they
went away from him and would walk no more with him: Here then be Disciples, and
yet they did not learn; you would fain make simple people believe that the Moon
is made of green Cheese, but the Cheese munger has never a Taster to make us
find it so. Then you bring in Jerem. 32 v. 33. Where it is said, ^od taught
^he^, but they refused to receive instruction: But had not both they and their
Infants the Token of Gods Covenant? And did ever any of the Prophets speak
against it as a sin? And is there not most gracious promises made to the same
people in the same Chapter? As that he would never depart from them to do them
good, and that he would put his fear in their hearts that they should never
depart from him, and that he would plant them assuredly with his whole heart,
and with his whole Soul, and yet them you bring in as no Disciples.

In your sixth page you say, Infan^^ in the Cradle are not taught of men,
therefore not of God; As if Gods power sailed in inward teaching, when man's
fail in outward.

Secondly, You say, if they were all taught of God, then they should be all
saved.

Answ. So you confess with me, that they are saved if they dye in their
Infancy, but if after their Infancy they should live and prove bad, yet in the
time of their Infancy we are to judge charitably, and so you are fain to do
with them whom ye dip, who afterward prove stark naught. Therefore where the
Lord promises that all shall be taught, Infants must be understood, otherwise
ye shall leave out a great many of all the Children, for many dye in their
Infancy, and are never afterward taught; therefore their teaching must be in
their Infancy, or else never, and if so, how shall the promise be true, All
shall be taught: But say you in the seventh Page, Why do you teach them to be
converted when they come to age. We answer, The work of Conversion is the work
of a man's whole life. After Peter had been converted, Christ said to him, When
thou art hereafter converted, strengthen thy Brethren Turn your selves and
live, is a Text that may be preached to the best Convert so long as he lives;
but then if men become naught (say you) After they have been taught of God.
There will be a falling a way from Grace. We answer, When we say, Infants are
taught of God, we mean the elect Infants, who are all taught of God sooner or
latter; but because we cannot search into God secrets absolutely to determine
who are elect, and who not, we are charitably to judge the best of all the
Infants of Gods people, and if any afterward prove bad, it is but a mistake in
our Judgment, and no change in Gods Election, and yet according to that outward
judgment we are to proceed; for when in John 15. v. 2. our Savior says, Every
branch in him that brings not forth good fruit is out down and cast in the
sire: He speaks of Branches that appear so to the judgment of men, and yet he
calls them Branches in him, so we may call Infants Disciples taught of God,
though we have no certainty of every ones particular Election, but a general
ground from the promise for our charitable judgment of all.

In the eighth page you say, J speak indiffinitely leaving out the word All, J
thought you had known that Indisinitum aequipelet Universally.

2. You say, Deuteronomy. 11. v. 1.2. The Lord spoke not outwardly to the Children of
Israel; What then, cannot he therefore teach Infants inwardly, inspiring them
with the seeds of spiritual saving truth and life? how came the Baptisi to leap
for joy in his Mothers Womb at the salutation of Mary: And though the Lord
spoke not to the Children, yet the Infants had a right to the token of the
Covenant that then was: And

3. Ye confess that Infants are made righteous by Jesus Christ, and yet
formerly you said that in the Command Baptize all Nati^ns, such Infants that
are made righteous by Jesus Christ, are no more comprehended then Turks or
infidels. You are a sweet youth. In the ninth page, that which you call a
fiction of my brain without one word in all the Bible; to wit, that Infants are
inwardly and effectually taught or else there is no hope of their Salvation.
You confessed in the seventh page, that to be inwardly and effectually taught,
was to be really and truly regenerated Then I prove what you say cannot be
found in the Bible: Except an Infant be born again he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, John 3. v. 5. But except an Infant be taught effectually of
God he cannot be born again, for you confessed the new birth to be all one with
this teaching, page seventh: Therefore except an Infant be effectually taught he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, neither of Grace nor Glory, for we
must judge him so if he be in the outward Kingdom of Grace, and he must be
truly so a Child of God, taught of God, if he be either truly in grace here, or
glory hereafter. If Christ blessed the Infants, prayed for them, and laid his
hands on them, then were they in some measure capable of his blessing and
prayer, and the benefit of the laying on of his hands, which could no wise be
without regeneration and being taught of God, for without it no entry into
Heaven, neither of grace nor glory to any purpose.

Secondly, I will show it by a Golden Scripture Chain. There is no Salvation
but by Christ, Act. 4. v. 12. but there is no coming to Christ but by the
Fathers drawing, John 6 v. 44. But there is no drawing of the Father without
this teaching, verse 45. Therefore without this teaching to Infants no
Salvation, Virtue is said to be copulative; so is Grace, so is this, having one
Link of the Chain you bring all to you.

Again in the ninth page, you acknowledge from Matthew. 19. v. 14. That they were
Infants of whom Christ said, the Kingdom of Heaven was. This is more then ever
I knew an. Anabaptist confess, yet the more base you to say, that such have no
more right to the command of Baptism then Turks: Where in the tenth page, you
say there is eternal life for Infants, without the knowledge of God in Christ,
it is as much as if you said, Infants have eternal life without eternal life,
for Christ says, This knowledge is eternal life. Secondly, you say there,
that Infants that know not the right hand from the left cannot know Christ.
Call. Instit. l. 4.16. sect. 19. ^^r non Deus insantibus in presens exigua
scintilla ^^gaitionis (...)? A^^b. says o^ the Baptist, Habuit intelligendi
s^nsum qui exult^n (...) habuit affectum.
J answer, We are to believe the promises of God though we do not apprehend
them by sense, as you seemost of the Articles of our faith; We believe them all
by faith, though they be far above our sense. The blind man that knew not white
from black, yet knew Christ to be the Messeas, the Son of David, willing to
have mercy on him, and able miraculously to cure him: The young Prophets that
knew not poison from Pot-hearbs, when they put a Goord in the Pot, yet they
knew much of the Mysteries of Heaven, and they knew the very day when Elias
should he taken from Earth to Heaven.

In the eleventh page you say, they that know God will trust in him, and indeed
this saying is convertible, for they that trust in God do know him, but Infants
trust in him therefore know him, Psalm. ^2. And whereas you say, there appears as
much knowledge of God in a Turks Child as in a Christians, it is false, for
they have not both the like promise; and the profession of the Parents is a
sufficient distinguishing note, and especially the Text we are handling
manifests more in our Children then in Turks.

That which you speak of Armenianisme, I have answered already in answering to
your seventh page. Next you bring in Heb. 11. where it is said, Without says
it is impossible to please God, here I make an argument against your self. All
they that please God have says, but Infants please God therefore, etc.

In the twelfth page you bring in James 2. v. 17. where he says, Faith without
works is dead, that place is meant of them that are of age, in whom faith
should appear not only in the budd and flowers of Profession, but in the Fruit
of good works; yet this makes nothing against Children, in whom faith may be in
the seed and root. If a Tree have neither leaves, nor blossoms, nor fruit in
Spring, Summer, nor Harvest, then it is dead, and yet it may be a good Tree
though nothing appear in the first of January. The rest that you have in the
twelfth page, is nothing upon the matter but what you said, and J have answered
before.

In the thirteenth page you cry out of my miserable blindness, and that J
miserably abuse the Scriptures, Isa. 65.20. J am sure you are a miserable bold
fellow, and they are miserable blind that follow you for their Guide: If you
say, that Infants should live a hundred years before they dye a natural death,
you make the Scripture false, for Infants do not live so long, if you mean
their Estate in glory, that is likewise false, for there they do not dye,
therefore my sense of the place is better agreeable both to Truth and Text,
which speaks both of death and life, and in that sense many such Infants I
baptize: But for you Anabaptists, you live so long old Disciples many of you,
till ye become more fit for the water to be drowned then to be dipped. Ye
come in impertinently with the Midwives sprinkling on the face. Amphora caepit
institui currente rota cur Vrseus exit.

In the fourteenth page my Master Ives brings in his Non sequitor, and in that
page you say, Acts 8.37. God has prescribed believing there to be the time of
baptizing, it is false: And they that gladly received the word, Act. 2.41. they
did not thrust out Infants that should be saved, verse. 47. from being added to
the Church by Baptism, wherein God has not prescribed any day as in
Circumcision, to the which Moses and the Israelites were then tied, though the
Infants had a right to the token from their birth, by virtue of the Covenant,
and if there had been no command at all, yet the Covenant brought Infants to
Circumcision, Genesis 17. and still gives them a right to Baptism: And though
Females were not circumcised, yet I can give you many Scriptures where Women
are reckoned amongst the Circumcised. The word Circumcision includes all the
people of Gods Children, and Women, as Romans 3.30. Rom: 4.8, 9.12. Romans 15.8.
Gal. 3.8.9.12. Ephesians. 2.11. Tit. 1.10. And in Samaria both men and women were
baptized Hitherto then it appears that I have not built neither Hay and
Stubble, but Truth as Gold, and Pearls upon, Isa. 54.. Now you say you will
prove my Arguments to be Clouds without water, and yet the first is such, that
all the Anabaptists in England cannot answer, and so are the rest that follow,
let us then try an issue.

God says, Great shall the Childrens Peace be whom he teaches. You say page
sixteen, like a base fellow, that God makes but a bare promise, but is not so
good as his word; and where the Text speaks of conferring of peace, you speak
of preaching of peace to Infants, the rest that follows in that page you have
it answered in the answer to the seventh page. Whereas you say, the Children of
the flesh are not the Children of God: Where the Apostle seems to speak so, he
means the flesh only; But in your sense it is false, for many Saints, and holy
Kings and Prophets came of Abraham, his Children of the flesh, and yet they
were also the precious Children, and we are to look upon all the Children of
Gods people as such in their Infancy.

In the seventeenth page, J perceive the Knavery of Hetiticks, they will seem
to slight that most which does indeed pinch them hard, so he calls my reason
lighter then If God do not promise effectual teaching to Children, then the
promise Isa. 54. is much one with the threatening, Isa. 6. which of all the
judgments of the world, is one of the saddest. Though teaching be a mercy as it
is tendered to a people, yet it proves a judgment as it is abused.

In the eighteenth page, my place from John 6. v. 44, 45. is so strong for me
against you, and your answer so short, weak, and unworthy, that it does not
deserve a reply.

In the nineteenth place, the Prophet Jeremias SHALL, has reference to our
Gospel represent, wherein that times now which before was to come, you are an
unworthy man therefore to pronounce a curse, for that against me. You fall foul
upon my teaching at Giles Cripple gate, and charge them all with folly that pay
me a farthing for preaching. J have many loving friends here, and Sir if you
had no more for your Cheese, then J have of the Parish for preaching, you would
make but a poor Trade of it: You indeed would have all the Ministers of England
to beg or starve at your doors, The mercies of the wicked are cruel; yet the
Apostle has ordained that they that preach the Gospel should live by it; our
Savior says, The labourer is worthy of his wages, and they that labor in the
word and doctrine, are worthy of double honor. Whereas you speak of going to
America, better men have gone and do go thither, and are like to do God more
service there among the Savages then you in London amongst the Anabaptists. But
how comes this railing against my preaching in London, because Heb. 8. v. 11.
it is said, They shall not teach every man his Neighbor, therefore J should not
teach; nay, rather you should not teach who have no Gospel ordination, but like
Thieves and Robbers, ye come not in at the door but as it were through Walls,
and over Hedges. The Negative is not absolute but Comparative, for it is men
shall not be so much taught of men as of God, and so it is unpertinently
brought in against me, you could hit better upon this distinction of Negatives
in my house, though you came untowardly to it; for when our neighbor Heath
told you that Paul was not sent to Baptize but to Preach, you Answered, he was
not so much sent to to Baptize; but before that, you said a man should not
Preach except he be sent, but he may Baptize, said you, without Commission, why
then do you require a commission for Baptizing of Infants, and why do you
Preach and are not sent? Let me ask you, how can such as you go to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, since the Lord has forbid such to come to the
Passover, Exodus 12. v. 48. Where if he that circumcised not his child might not
eat of the Passover, then he that does not Baptize his child must not eat of
the Lords Supper. And if Abraham must not suffer them to live with him that did
not Circumcise their Infants, Genesis 17. v, 13. Then Christians if they have a
lawful power in their hands, should not suffer Anabaptists to live with them
because they refuse to Baptize their Infants. And if the soul was cut off that
was not Circumcised, Genesis 17. v. 14. And God sought to kill Moses for the
neglect of Circumcision., Exodus 4. v. 24. how much more then damnably dangerous
is the wilful neglect of Baptism.

In the twentieth page I Said, Psalm. 22. v. 9. that children trust in God. Ye
Answer hereto the words (when I was) are unnecssarily put in, yet otherwise ye
cannot make sense of it. And ye say David in his infancy, and so consequently
Christ whom the Psalm. chiefly concerns, did not more hope in God from the
mothers breast then unbelievers children; and you say the whole Creation is
subjected in hope then by you, the hope of Christ, of David, and the children
of Gods people is all one with the hope of a Snake or a Toad, O base blalphemy.
Lastly, Tremelius that knows the Original better then you Translates the
Hebrew word Confidere, which is to trust, and more then the ordinary hope of
the creature.

And to the one and twentieth page, I Answer, the humility of children is Gods
inspired Grace which goes with his inward and effectual teaching, which is
more then the innocence of Doves, or wisdom of Serpents, for Matthew. 18. v. 4.
they that are so humble are said to be the greatest in the Kingdom of heaven,
but it is not so with the Doves innocence, or Serpents wisdom; a man may have
the Doves innocence, to do no man wrong, yet go to hell because he does no man
good, Matt. 25. and a man may have the Serpents wisdom and be damned, and want
that wisdom as children do and be saved; but this humility is such, Matthew. 18.
v 3 that there is no heaven without it, and the greatest happiness of heaven
comes by it, v. 4.

In the two and twentieth page, I Answer, confer Esaias 54. v. 13. with 1 These.
4. v. 9, 10. In the first you find Gods teachings of all his peoples children,
in the latter, that this teaching is effectual, therefore it will follow, that
childrens teaching being the teaching of God is effectual.

To the three and twentieth page I Answer, though some be not called till the
last hour, yet we must judge the best of them, according to their outward
Church privileges and faederall rights.

To the four and twentieth page I answer, Profession was as much required of
Abraham and the Israelites, and yet that did not debar Infants from
Circumcision, nor can it now from Baptism.

2. You come with a fallicie in the word (name) for in the Kings name, may be
in the Kings Authority, and to show favor in God or Christ's Name, is for God
or Christ's sake, but any man sees that to give to a Prophet, in the name of a
Prophet, and to a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, and to a child
in the name of a Disciple, is to give to them as to Prophets and righteous men
as to Disciples.

To the five and twenty page I answer I do keep me to Infants of Professors,
and such were they, Matthew. 4.10. for Christ was not sent but to the lost sheep
of Israel, who professed themselves the people of God, and whose children had
received the token of the Covenant of God.

To the twenty sixth page I Answer, the unprofitable servant was able to work
and would not, but the children cannot, yet God calls them his servants.

2. If unprofitable servants be not servants, why are they called servants? and
if not servants, then none of Christ's Disciples are servants, for when we have
done all we can, we are unprofitable servants, the best of us ye have up with
your non sequitor, sequetor again.

Again, you cite the Text which I bring (you say) falsely, to wit, Levit. 21.
for 25. v. 41, 42. where any man of the world may see that Infants are
understood, whatever you say, for they were not to be left behind as
bondslaves, you are fearfully out in saying that such were never at such age
servants as appears by Eccles. 2.7. where Solomon had them that were born
servants in his house, if born servants then so in the cradle. Now I come to
the 15. of the Acts, where Peter calls Infants Disciples, v. 10. where you say,
the yoke upon the neck of the Disciples is as a tax upon the Clergy, as it
will not follow (say you) all the Clergy are taxed, therefore all that are
taxed are Clergy men, so then your Disciples that can answer for themselves are
your Clergy men, for whom only the Apostle pleads, say you; then if believers
Infants be they that have this tax upon them, which is the yoke of
Circumcision, and if the Apostle speak nothing for them as being none of your
Clergy Disciples, then it will follow that believers Infants must still be
Circumcised, why then do not you circumcise your children for they are none of
the Clergy Disciples, for whose freedom only you would have the Apostle
plead. Then ye give a touch to the Doctrine that was taught the Brethren, as
if that had been the only yoke which is apparently false, for it is clear
when the Apostles opposed Circumcision, they opposed not only the false
Doctrine of it, but also the continuance of the practice of Circumcision it
self: And you say you can read, Read then the first verse of the Chapter,
where you find Circumcision after the manner of Moses, and all know that was
the Circumcision of Infants; this the Apostle calls a yoke upon the neck of the
Disciples. Therefore Infants are disciples; or thus, they for whose freedom
Peter pleads, ver. 10. are disciples; But Peter pleads for Infants therefore
they are disciples; I prove Peter pleads for them, because he pleads for the
same for whom Paul pleads; but Paul pleads for the children, Acts 21. v. 21.
therefore Peter also here pleads for them

In the twenty eight page, What I speak of Infants ignorance, I speak
concessione fiduciaria, (...), you know my meaning, for you Sir are no
praevaricaor, but a Clergyy Disciple, and may commence Doctor when ye will.

2. I say the command of Infants Circumcsion includes them in the command of
Baptism, for if by Gods Covenant and command they were in the long possession
of an Ordinance aequivolent to Baptism, and never afterward put from Baptism,
they must needs be included in the Command, and so the question is not begged,
he that beggs at your door shall find poor relief. Again, the faith of
Parents professing suffices to bring in the children.

In the twenty ninth page, I say that Babes sprinkled feel the water as truly
as Peter felt the washing, and when Christ washed, Christ said, Peter, knew
not what he did, yea, he knew no more the end and use of it at that time then
an Infant; yea, he opposed it more then an Infant could have done, for at the
first he would not suffer Christ to do it, yet then said Christ it must be
done; and it was sufficient that Peter might know it thereafter, and so it is
with Infants Baptism: and whereas you say, that Peter was ignorant but of a
circumstance, ye are far out, for Christ said that he was ignorant of the
work: which Christ wrought, and you say he was ignorant of the end and use of
it, and is the work, the end, and the use nothing but a circumstance; and why
do you deny children being ignorant of such a circumstance.

In the thirtieth page, you come impertinently in with baptizing of Bells and
going a Pilgrimage, and Circumcising the sixth or fourth day, and giving the
Sacrament of Bread and Wine to Infants, saying that such things are not
forbidden: For I Answer, though such things were never forbidden in Scripture,
yet the like was never commanded but for children as Baptism is not forbidden
them, so the like Ordinance was commanded them.

In the one and thirtieth page, You say the Eunuch believed, therefore Infants
should not be Baptized, what poor stuff here is? I shall Answer the 16. of
Mark hereafter. Again, I say the excluding of not understanding disciples
puts not children more aside from Baptism then 2 These. 3. v. 10. The excluding
of them that do not work puts children aside from the Breast: And then in the
two and thirtieth page you say, If children will not work they must not eat.
I wonder what great will any Infant has to work and yet if need be ought to
be relieved of the Churches charity, and there lies as great a charge upon
Parents to Baptize their children as to feed them.

In the thirtieth third page, Ye say, when all Nations shall be separated good
from bad, you say Infants are not understood there, because it cannot be said
to them, When I was hungry ye feed me, etc. then by your Opinion they are not
to be separated from the Goats, but must go to hell with them, and yet you
said before they were all saved. That which you talk of knowing right hand and
left is answered already, ye make a woeful Text of that 25. of Matthew. against
Infants, as ye begin to apply it, for they neither feed, nor visit, nor cloth
more then the Goats; but the truth of the Text is, the Infants are reckoned
with the Parents, what the Parants do, it is as if the Infants had done it.
When the wicked world was drowned, the Parent and the Infants were drowned, so
when Sodom was burnt, and so when Pharaoh and his host were drowned; and when
Israel was saved, they and their little ones were saved.

I come to the thirty fourth page, where ye deny my whole argument, And I say,
that he who denies what that Argument contains, be he who he will, had never
the fear of God in his heart, for he that fears God dare not deny Infants
Baptism, knowing that God had given them a right to a privilege of an
Ordinance aequivalent, and though he take away the Ordinance, yet he never took
away the privileges, whereof this is one, that they should have some token of
his Covenant and we know none now for first admission but Baptism.

2. They that had a right to Circumcision have a right to Baptism, that
follows it, for the people of God are not put aside from keeping our Sunday for
the Saboath day, because the Saturday which they were to keep before is taken
away; and the Apostle says, Ephess. 6. v. 2, 3. the fifth Command is a command
with Promise of a blessing in the Land where ever obedient children lives,
though now the Land of Canaan which in the Command was promised be in the Turks
Possession, even so the taking away of Circumcision puts children rather in the
possession of Baptism then takes it from them; what ye write of Duke,
Hamilton, and the like shows your vanity, whereas you speak of umbelieving
Jews they are not to be compared to believing Christians, for in the Romans
God has cut them and their children off from being his branches in the Olive.

I am now come to your absurdities in the thirty sixth p. in one place you speak
of a descent from Abraham, where any one but a Blockhead may know that the word
comes from d^scendo, and not from discendo; Circumcision was a yoke in the
cutting off the flesh, and tying people to a keeping of the whole Law, but the
advantage of it, for Infants is still continued in Baptism, though the
Printiship of Circumcision be gone, yet the advantage remains. Ye give a stout
hallenge to me and to all the world to show one Text, threatening Parents for
not Baptizing their Infants. I have showed you that the Lord met Moses to kill
him for not Circumcising his Infant, Exo. 4. v. 24. And Genesis 17. the Lord
commands to cut off the uncircumcised Infants, And our Savior says, Ioh. 3.
v. 5. Except we be borne again of water, we cannot enter into heaven; and Heb.
2. v. 23. The Apostle says, That we cannot escape if we neglect so great
salvation, and Heb. 10. v. 28, 29. He that despised Moses Law died without
mercy, of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy who has trodden
under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith
he is sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace,
as now Anabaptists do, in neglicting, slighting, mocking and opposing Infants
Baptism; and Paul says, 2 These. 16. v. 8. That Christ shall appear in
flaming fire, taking vengeance of such as you that do not obey the Gospel of
our Lord, And our Savior was much displeased for keeping Infants from him.

In the thirty seven page, I say, whereas our Savior says, That the Pharisees
were of their Father the Devil, and they that offered up their children to the
devil, Psalm. 106. v. 37. were no better; and they in Ezekiel. 16. v. 20. were
such, yet God call their children his, and they had his token which Romans 3. v.
3. advantaged much every way, and now ye will have children have no token
advantageous any way, therefore ye make them worse now then the children of
the devils servants were then.

In the thirty eight page, Jer. 30. v. 20. Prophesies, that children in Gospel
times shall have all Gospel Privilledges, whereof the token of his Covenant is
one as much as ever before, though the legality of Circumcision be taken away.
And Mich. 7. last, and Luk 1.71, 72. The truth which God swear to Abraham and
the Fathers, and which Christ came to fulfill, belonged to the Parents and
their Infants, and was sealed to both of them by Circumcision, and to us and
ours by Baptism.

To the thirty ninth page, God commands our Infants to be Baptized, when he
says, Baptize all Nations, Matthew. 28. And when Peter, says, Be Baptized
every one, for the Promise is made to your children, and Genesis 17. When God
says, My token shall be upon your children.

To the forty page, I say, the children of the Jews and Pagans were not all
one; we desire but the favor the Heathen had, who when they confessed their
Lord to be their God had Gods Seal upon their Infants. I have answered already
all in the one and forty page, only where ye say, that Baptism is not a Seal,
therein ye make it worse then Circumcision, which the Apostle calls, Romans 4.
the Seal of Righteousness.

To the forty third page, you said Baptism was the Ordinance profitable every
way; and Paul says that Circumcision is such therefore upon the matter you
made Baptism and Circumcision all one, and yet ye contradicted your self in
saying afterward they were no wise parallel; Sir, there were no gentlemen in my
house that favor your Error for all your Logic, except the Anabaptists whom
ye brought along with you.

To the forty four page, I say God himself makes it an Argument from his
Covenant, Genesis 17. to the token upon the children, as it appers by the word
therefore, in the 9. v. God gives us not such an Argument for Will Worship. Ye
say, if I look Deuteronomy. I. v. 39. where I looked I found no Covenant at all. The
place is Deuteronomy. 29. v. 1. And the Covenant the Lord made when they came out of
Egypt is the same with this in Deuteronomy. when they were to enter into the Land of
Canaan, it was the same in substance, but differing in circumstances. In Deuteronomy.
it was made to the children when they were to enter in to the Land of Canaan,
In Exodus it was made with the Parents forty years before when they came out of
Egypt, the Covenant then was the same in the matter of it, but it differed in
the time place, and persons with whom it was made.

2. Ye say, that the Covenant in Deuteronomy. is another, besides that when they came
out of Egypt, when the Lord gave them the Law, in the ten Commandments. There
can be but two Covenants, viz: of Works, or of Grace. But what ever you may
think that they were two Covenants differing essentially, yet in truth they
were both of Grace, for when the people came out of Egypt, the Lord was a
Husband to them in that Covenant, therefore it was a Covenant of Grace, Jer.
31. v. 32: And the Covenant in Deuteronomy. The Apostle calls it the righteousness of
Faith, therefore the Covenant of Grace also.

Craftily ye bid compare the 10 and 12. Verses of the 29. Chapter of
Deuteronomy leaving out the 11. between them, because it is full against you
and the Covenant of Grace is one and the same though it be many times renewed.

Next we come to the forty fifth page, In handling the Covenant you show your
self grossly ignorant, and know not what ye say, yet ye would have m^ believe
whatever ye say, but when your Nose is Cheese the Cats shall eat it. In these
times and places wherein we live, God has done vvonderfull things, yet we
have been so unthankful and unfruitful, that we have not yet had hearts to
perceive, nor eyes to see to this day, and yet we are not Infidells, so it was
with the Israelites in such a case, they still believed the Lord to be their
God. Paul in Romans 11. v. 8. does not allude to Deuteronomy. 29. v. 4. but to Esa. 29.
v. 10. that sin was growing upon the people in Moses and Isaiahs time, but it
came not to a full ripeness till the Apostles time, for before they were looked
upon as branches in the Olive, but then cut off. The vvorst Parents whose
children I Baptize are sounder in the faith then the best Anabaptiste with
you, so you are rotten Heriticks. The very same men whom you call unbelievers,
Deuteronomy. 29. v. 4. Moses, Deuteronomy. 30. v. 14. says, The word was very nigh unto them
in their mouth, and in their heart that they might do it.

2. This word being in the heart of the Parents to believe it, and in their
mouth to confess it entered the little ones into Covenant with God, Deuteronomy. 29.
v. 11, 12. This way the Apostle calls the righteousness of faith, Romans 10. v.
6. and this he Preached v. 8. Therefore the Fathers faith and Confession must
still enter the children in Covenant with God, which cannot now be without
Baptism, which is the initiating token of the Covenant. Sir, It is one thing
to be in Covenant, which I proved first, and another thing yet consequently
following to have the token of the Covenant which the femalls were not capable
of in Circumcision, as now in Baptism, as Acts 8. v. 12. And Gods Argument is
sufficient for Infants right to the token from the Covenant, and though then he
prefixed a certain time, yet it was still in their infancy, and so still now
in Infancy where we have no prefixed time.

Thus to your forty seven page; but before I come to the forty eight, I must
remember some good stuff in the forty sixth, where you say you are relieved
from desparing of me by a Latin Sentence, which is Opere in longo, etc. and it
speaks of sleep, and you of despare: O brave Clarke, you understand your
Latin well, and apply it better, but do not sleep yet, up run Robbin the Ram
is in the Rye: the Prophecy in Ezekiel. 37.25. is to children, and to childrens
children, and that for ever; and the Lord says, He will set his tabernacle
amongst them, which must be his out ward Ordinance, now children can have no
outward Ordinance if Baptism be denied. Where you bring in Noah, it is to no
purpose. Where ye say I may as well say a child is Christ as Baptize it; if
you mean Christ personally ye speak blasphemy, if ye mean Christ collectively
with his members, Christ then is so taken in Scripture as I Cor. 12.12. Gal.
3.16.

Ye have abundance of Non sense in the forty nine page, to which I Answer,
Baptism was never ordained for Angels as for Infants, and the Apostles being
once received to the Church needed not to be twice Baptized, and so be
Anabaptists.

In the fifty page, Ye say no man denies that they were Infants whom Christ
blessed when he took them in his Arms. I never knew an Anabaptist confess it
before, and these Infants had that from Christ which was better then all you
can make of your dipping, and yet they believed and understood and confessed as
little, being, as you say, Infants, as they do now at Baptism; and here we find
that Christ laid his hands upon them, but no where they received the Supper:
and what ye speak of teaching, I have Answered already, and if you were
ingenuous, where one Reason does not seem to give you satisfaction, take in my
other reasons with it, and then a threefold cord is not easily broken, Nam quae
quod non prosunt singula multa juvent, where you say, Jesus Baptized none, John
4. v. 1. it appeared he did Baptize. Christ is said to do what the Apostles did
by his Command, as Peter may be said to have Baptized Corneliousses house,
though the Text only says, Acts 10. v. 48. that he commanded them to Baptized.
Infants have a right to all the privileges of the Church, and to the Kingdom
of heaven, but that right is as by reversion, but they have a right to Baptism
in their Infant enjoyment.

To the fifty second p. As the Jews were cut off, the Gentles were ingrafted,
but the Jews when they stood, or were cut off, or shall be restored, both
they and their children were so, and so it is with the Gentiles.

To the fifty third page, I say all that are of the flesh, are not truly
begotten of God, and yet many after the flesh were after the Spirit also,
nevertheless all of them in out ward Church privileges, and though a great
many of them be cast into out ward darknese, yet are to be looked upon as the
children of the Kingdom, Mat. 8. v. 12. All that had the token of Gods
Covenant were reckoned as Abraham's seed in Covenant, but such were not only the
children of the flesh in outward privileges, but the Infants also of the
Proselites after the flesh, and consequently our Infants being Gods people by
Nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, Gal. 2. v. 15. but Gal. 3. v. 16. the
Apostle calls this seed Christ, therefore members of Christ, therefore ver. 27.
fit to have Christ put on them by Baptism.

To the fifty fourth page, The wives sanctification, and the holiness of the
child differ; the child is holy faederally by the Covenant with the believing
Parent, but the unbelieving wife is set apart for the sanctified cohabitation
of the believing husband with her. Unbelievers being married, their marriage is
lawful but not sanctified, Tit. 1. 15. but if the one be a believer, though
the other be not, yet the marriage is sanctified to the believer, and lawful
to both, so she is but sanctified, as the Apostle speaks 1 Timothy 4. v. 4, 5. As
for Gal. 2.15. I do not so much mistake the place, as I perceive ye donot
understand it. Antiochus Epiphanes did according to Dan. 8.24. destroy the
Infants which were a part of the holy people, ye reason wildly when you say
they could not be destroyed with the holy people, because they could not be
said to have power with them, vid. 1. Mac. 6. v. 1.

To the fifty five page, Repent is a command of the future Tence, which they
that were Baptized then, were to perform afterward, as John Baptized to
Repentance.

2. The children are brought in in the Promise besides them that were charged
to repent. And why not the Infants of the cradle under Christ's vvings? ye
believe your Infants are not under Gods protection. What a mad Argument had
this been of the Apostle, to say ye have good reason to be Baptized, for now it
is a great deal worse with your children then it was before, for before the
Lord was their God, wherein all the precious Promises that may be are
contained, but now they have none, before they had a token but none now,
therefore you have good hearting to be Baptized; here had been fearful mad
motives to encourage them. The Jews said, Christ's blood be upon us and ours;
this blood Peter so applied it, that it melted the hearts of his Hearers; now
to comfort them again, he says, The Promis is made to you and your children.
This had been but cold comfort to say you prayed that Christ's blood might be
on your Infants, and now I tell you the Promise does not belong to them. By
children, Acts 2. Infants are understood first, because the word is (...),
which most usually signifies Infants: Secondly, the children are set down
besides them that understood what he spoke, and besides them that were called,
or to be called a far of, and and if Infants be not in the Promise, what
becomes of them when they die, or what are they better then than Infidells
children? And the Apostle speaks indefinitly of all, leaving out no Infants.

To the fifty sixth page, The Fathers were Baptized, not in Moses name but in
Gods name, yet to Moses as their guide before them, and as the water in Jordan
was Sacramental water only to them that were Baptized by John and his
Disciples in it, but not to the Cattle that went through it; so the Baptism in
the red Sea was Baptism to the Fathers, and not to the beasts, though you make
it alike to both.

To the fifty seven page, Your contumelious reproaches against me, are more fit
for such a fellow as you to utter then me to answer. I take a Prevaricator to
be he that handles a good cause badly, and then though I handle it badly, yet
ye are base to oppose a good cause; and what you mocked, I say it again and
again. That what was commanded by Christ was taught and practiced by the
Apostles: it was practiced, for they were not like the Pharisees that taught
one thing and did another. And what was commanded was taught by them, Matthew.
28. else they should prove worse then the Centurions servants who obeyed their
Master. Now Christ commanded that they should suffer little ones to come to him
that they might fully every way have as much done to them as Baptism comes to;
therefore the Apostles in their practice could never scruple Infants Baptism;
ye talk like an Ass in bringing in the instance of an Ass. It was necessary
that that of the Ass should be once done to fulfill the Prophecy, Zach. 9.
ver. 9. but this of Infants has a reason of perpetual standing for the
continuance of it, which is because to such belongs the kingdom of heaven.

To the fifty eight page, Some receiving of the Word, does not exclude Infants
from Baptism, for by men and women, males, and females are understood taking
in Infants in the number, so our Savior calls a new born child a man, Ioh. 16.
v. 21. Cornelius and Lydia were such as seared the true God, and though
Gentiles borne, yet when their houses were Baptized the privileges of a
Proselite belonged to them and their Infants, to be in Covenant with God, and
to have the token upon both, and therefore whether there were Infants in their
houses or not, it matters not, but upon that account if there had been a
thousand, they had all been Baptized.

In the fifty ninth page, It is a foolish reason for you to say Infants in
Stephans house could not administer to the Saints, therefore they should not be
Baptized, Acts 16. 33. Luke speaks of the Jaylors house, according to their
capacity: when he speaks of all hearing and believing the Word, he means
such as were able, and when he speaks of Baptism, he means likewise such as
are able to receive it, which Infants are; Lydia might have children for ought
as you know, and might have a husband then also, for all you can bring to the
contrary.

In the sixty first page, I do instance women at the Lords Supper, intending to
deny no thing I have said, but it is argumentum ad hominem, (...) and quisque
may be where there is no woman, therefore they do not prove women at the Lords
Supper from 1 Cor. 11.28.

In the fixty second page, The Apostle, Col. 2.11, 12. to stop the mouths of
false Apostles that were for Circumcision, says, We are Circumcised in
Baptism, now if Baptism did not reach Infants as well as Circumcision did,
then the loss in regard of Infants is more by the want of Circumcision then our
gain is by having of Baptism, and so the false Apostles might have said our
losses are not fully made up by Baptism, and so Baptism cannot give us
satisfaction for our loss. And where you say Infants Circumcision did not
signify the hearts Circumcision; it is false, for it was a token that the Lord
was the Infants God, which contains all Gods Promises, whereof this is one,
Deuteronomy. 29. I will Circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy children.

In the sixty third page, You complain that my Arguments have not water enough
to sprinkle a child: it is no matter if they be weighty, though they be not
watery. I grant yours are watery enough to plunge over head and ears, and you
and all your Arguments like Ruben light as water, as water put it in a round
glass it is round, put it in a square glass it is square, put it in a green,
blew, or yellow glass, its like the glass, so you conform to the times, some
times Quaquers, or Seekers, Antinomians, Arminians, Socinians, Anabaptists, or
what ye will.

These men whom I name, page fifty three, could do little good upon the
obstinacy that were in the Times and Places where they lived Therefore I have
little hopes to do good upon you. The Authors I name are for the Word, and you
like an erroneous fellow are against it.

In the sixty four page, you come to your proof of believers Baptism; but who
denies it, you should have proved that they that were Baptized in their infancy
must be Baptized again, when they can make you a consession with
understanding, and you have no show for that, but Acts 19. where the Disciples
were not Baptized again of Paul, but only Paul tells how they had been
Baptized of John.

In the sixty fifth page, You bring in Mark 16.16. which place is no rule to
us for Baptism, for it speaks of saving faith, and such as was accompanied
with miracles, but such faith we cannot now find out in any; the Text only
shows who then were in the way of salvation. John preached Baptism unto
Repentance, Matthew. 3.11. which after ward was to follow and so suits Infants.
The Word We does include and not exclude Infants, Romans 6.4. neither does the
confession of aged, Mat. 3.6. hinder the Baptism of Infants.

In the sixty sixth page, You come to prove Dipping, the word (...), which I
sind sorty times in the four Gospels, and twenty times in the Acts, and above
half a score of times in Paul's Epistles, besides (...) and (...), which I find
twenty six times in the New Testament, yet in all these places the word cannot
appear once to signify Dipping over Head and Ears. But I confess I know not
where Baptizo signifies Aspersio, for the one is a Verb, and the other is a
Noune, but my man knows not a Verb from a Noune, yet I can show where (...),
are put for aspersiones, as Heb 9.10. compared with these same Verses in the
same Chapter, to wit, 13, 19, 21. And all Grace is signified by sprinkling, as
Ezekiel. 36.25. etc where sprinkling with clean water signifies cleansing from
all filthiness, and a new heart, and a new spirit, and a putting of Gods Spirit
in that new heart and spirit, causing it to walk in, and to keep and do all
Gods Commandments, and to save it from all future uncleaness; what can the
heart of man desire more then is here signified by the sprinkling of water, and
in Heb. 10.22. by sprinkling is meant the hearts through cleansing; So Heb.
12.24. Christ's blood is called the blood of sprinkling, which is no less then 1
Ioh. 1.7. then a cleansing from all sin. You cite for Christ's Baptism over
head and ears, Matthew. 16 3. where we have nothing but a foul weather morning,
as your Pamphlet is full of dirt and mire and blustering weather; the place is
Matthew. 3.16. where the word is (...) from the water, nor (...) out of the
water, then Mark 1.5. (...) is put for (...), or (...) that is in, is put for
with or by, Mat. 6.29.11.21. Chap. 16.27. Chap. 25.31. Ioh 1. v. 4.2 Cor. 13.4.
Ephe. 3.13.2 Tim. 1.13. and so makes nothing to your purpose. Next you say John
was Baptized in Aenon; it is more then ever I read or heard any man of the
world say before you that will say any thing, yet ye cite for it, Ioh. 2.23.
where there is never a word of John's Baptism, nor of no bodies else; the place
you mean is 3.23. where it is to be observed that Aenon is a Brook that you
may step over with your foot, therefore though it had much water for
sprinkling, it had not enough for dipping; and when Philip and the Eunuch went
down from the Chariot and upper ground to the water below them, it is not said
they went over head and ears, without which they might come both from and out
of the water.

In the old Testament the Hebrew for Dipping it (...) which sometime signifies
dying with colors, as Ezekiel. 23.15. and sometimes drowning, as Exodus 15.4. This
the Anabaptists will not like, though it sets forth an outward conformity to
the death and burial of Christ more then dipping, and yet they urge a
necessity of dipping rather then sprinkling, because of this outward
conformity; and sometimes I confess the Hebrew word does signify Dipping, but
not a whole Plunging of the thing dipped, as Levit. 14.6. where the living Bird,
the Ceder Wood, and the Scarlot, were all of them dipped in the blood of one
little Bird, which could not be by plunging all in so little a quantity of
blood; and in the 15. and 16. verses of the same Chapter. the Priest was
commanded to dip his right singer in the Oil that was powered in the palm of
his left hand, which could be no more then the top of his finger; and Josh.
3.13. it is said only the soles of the Priests feet were in the water when
they dipped in Jordan, v. 15. and Ruth is said to dip her Bread in the Vinegar,
Ruth 2.14. though she put but a little in it; and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14 is said
to dip his Rod, when he put forth only the end of it into the Honey Comb.
Therefore I conclude, that neither the Hebrew word for dipping in the Old, nor
the Greek in the New will signify a plunging of the whole necessarily.

Now let unbiassed men judge how little all this makes for dipping. Next ye
bring in Socrates Historicus, whom you call Scholasticus relating the Baptism
of Constantine the great. I Answer, it is a Question whether ever Constantine,
was Baptized at all. As for most of your Church History Writers, it is well
known to the Learned how false and fabulous they are. Carolus Sigonius lib. 5.
de Occidentis Imperio ad An. 350 says, Co^stantinus and Constants utrumne
sacro font abluti vita excesserint parum compertum. Your Catechumenists were
either such as were Gentiles children, who were to be taught before Baptism,
as we are to teach Blackemores before Baptism, yet this makes nothing against
our Infants Baptism; or else your Catechumenists were of such as were
grosely tainted with the error of the Novatians, mistaking the sense of the
Scripture, Heb. 6.4. etc. And that the Ancients did sprinkle in Baptism, it is
evident to me by their clinici, which were they that were Baptized in their
Beds near the time of their death, which could not be by dipping, but
sprinkling. Now that there were such clinici, Cyprian shows in his 76.
Epistle written ad Magnum; this may be seen likewise in other ancient Fathers,
as Epiphanius and Basilius, besides the Councels, all cited by Vossius in his
fifth Thesis of the twelfth Disputation of Baptism. That Constantine and
Theodosius, and Nectarius, and Gregory Nazianzen, and Chrysostom, and the like
deferred their Baptism, it was not because they were Anabaptists denying
Infants Baptism, but because they were rather Novatians, conceiting that if
they sinned after Baptism, they could not be saved, and therefore delayed
Baptism as long as they could, which sin of delaying Baptism Tertullian li.
de peniten. c. 6: says is delinquendi commeatum faceri; and Nazianzen Orat.
40. page 643. Edit. Morell. says, (...) As for Grotius though he was learneder
then you, yet he was erroneous as you, more fit to live amongst the
Transylvanians, who deny the Trinity, the Diety of Christ and Infants Baptism,
then to be amongst Orthodox Divines. Grotius is well known to incline too much
to Socinians, Arminians, Anabaptists, and any thing that is naught.

Lastly, Where you say, there is no antiquity in the first three hundred years
after Christ for Infants Baptism; let us try it out a little: but first, where
some said that Pigius was against Infants Baptism. Pelagius denies it, and was
ashamed of it, though you be not; as in his Epistle ad Innocentium, and
Augustinus in that clears him, Cap. 17. de peccat. originis. But now we shall
show Infants Baptism before Pelagius his time I pass by Dionisius Areopagita,
supposed he, Act. 17. last, in his last Chapter Hierarchiae Ecclesiasticae,
because I suspect him spurious. Hyginus lived in Polycarps time, who was the
Apostle John's disciple, and was for the Baptism of Infants, who is said to be
the first that appointed for Infants in Baptism Patrimos, and Patrimas.
Lactantius who is said to live about two hundred years of Christ, he is for
us, Instit. l. 4. c. 4. and Cyprian who lived within two hundred years of
Christ is for us, for he heard Tertullian (says Helvicus) being Bishop of
Carthage. Anno 247. He in his Epist. 59. ad Fidum, together with a whole
Council in his time, is for Infants Baptism: the Council consisted of sixty
six Bishops, where the Question was, Whether Infants might be Baptized before
they were eight days old; Cyprian, and the Council held that Infants might be
Baptized before they were eight days old; their Adversaries held that they
might not till the eight days were expired. The place in Cyprian is cited to
be in his Epistle, ad Fidum, 3. li. 8. Epist. Irenaeus also is cited for
Infants, li. 2. c. 39. and he lived in Polycarpus time. Likewise Origin, who
lived within two hundred and thirty years of Christ, in the 5. l. c. 6. Tom. 2.
page 543. edit. Basil. says, Ecclesia traditionem ab Apostolis suscepit, etiam
parvulis dare Baptismum etc. which is, the Church has reccived it from the
Apostles, even to give Baptism to Infants. The like he has in the eight Book,
and eight Hom. upon Levit. And Ambrose, who lived not much above three hundred
years after Christ. l. 2. c. 11. De Abraham Patriarcha, says, Nec senex
proselytus, nec infans vernaculus excipitur, quia omnis aetas peccato obnoxia,
and ideo omnis aetas Sacramento idonea; and a little after, Nullum excipit, non
infantem; of the same mind is Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus Catech. Mystag. 1. and
Basilius exhortat. ad Bapt. And Chrysostom Hom. ad Neophytos.

The Christians who were converted by Thomas the Apostle in Crangonore in the
East Indies, they have to this day continued the Baptising of Infants, witness
Osorius, 3. l. de rebus gestis Emanuelis, though for the most part they delay
it till the children be forty days old. Tertullian (says Helvicus) wrote his
Book of Prescriptions, about the year 195. some ninty seven years after the
Apostle John's death, at which time he was at least between thirty and forty
years old, and so borne some sixty years after the Apostles death, he ( lib. de
Baptis. c. 18.) though he gives some frivolous reasons why Infants should not
be Baptized, yet therein he clearly shows that the people did Baptize their
Infants. Moreover Tertullian was for the necessity of Baptism to salvation, and
for the salvation of Infants, and therefore could not be altogether against
Infants Baptism: but within four or five hundred years of Christ, for Infants
we find Jerome Epist. ad Laetam, and toward the end of his third Book against
the Pelagians, where he brings in the Authority of Cyprian and his Colleagues.
We find also Innocentius, Epist. 26. to the Milevitan Council. And
Augustinus, Epist. 28 and de peccat. orig. cap. 40. and 2. li. de nuptiis and
concup. cap. 20. and lib. 3. de peccat. mer. and remissi. cap. 9. and 2. lib.
contra Jul. and 4. li. de Bapt. contra Donatist. cap. 24.

And we find Paulinus for Infants in vita Ambrosii; and Theodoret Epitome
divinorum dogmat. cap. de Baptismo; and Leo Magnus, Epist. 84. aliis 86 ad
Episc. Aquileiens. And the Writer de vocat. gentium lib. 2. cap. 8. And
Gennadius de Eccl. Dogm. cap. 31. All these for Infants Baptism lived within
the first five hundred years after Christ; yea whole Councels besides, that in
Cyprians time were for them, as the Council of Carthage called the Milevitan
held Anno 418. in the 2. Canon thus, Quicunque parvulos recentes ab uteris
matrum Baptizandos negat, aut dicit in remissionem quidem peccatorum cos
Baptizari, sed nihil ex Adam trahere originalis peccati quod regenerationis
lavacro expietur, Anathema sit: And the Council at Gerund held Anno 517. in
the fifth Canon is to the same purpose, and likewise the second Council at
Bracara in the seventh Canon; lastly, the Council at Vienna.

I will here close with some places of Augustine. And first, De Genesi ad liter
am l. 10. cap. 23: Consuetudo (inquit) matris Ecclesiae in Baptizandis parvulis
nequaquam spernenda est, neque ullo modo superflua deputanda, nec omnino
tradenda nisi Apostolicae esset traditio, where he means traditionem (...), not
(...), as appears lib. 4. de Baptis. cap. 24. where he proves it by Scripture
against the Donatifis: his words likewise li. 1. de peccat mer. and remissi.
cap. 26. are; parvulos Baptizandos esse Pelagiani concedunt, qui contra
authoritatem universae Ecclesiae proculdubio per Dominum and Apostolos traditam
venire non: possunt and Ser. 10. de verbis Apostoli. Ne, mo inquit, vohis
susurret doctrinas alienas: hoc Ecclesia semper habuit, semper tenuit, hoc a
majorum fide accepit, hoc usque in finem perseveranter custodit. Idem lib. 2.
contra Caelest. and Pelag. says, that Caelestin. himself in a Book set forth
at Rome, confessed Infants Baptizari in remissionem peccatorum secundum regulam
Vniversae Ecclesiae and secundum Evang lu sertentiam. To this same purpose,
Aug. de peccat. Orig ca. 17. And de Baptis. contra Donatist. l. 4. c. 23. If
any man ask Divine Authority on this matter, although we most rightly believe,
says he, that what the Universal Church holds, and was not instituted by
Counsels, but has been ever held, was not delivered but by Apostolical
Authority, yet may we truly conjecture what the Sacrament of Baptism
performs to Infants by Circumcision, which the former people did receive; and
de pec. Merit. and remis. lib. 2. cap. 5. All Antiquity has firmly held, that
believers Infants do receive remission of original sin by Baptism. Origin.
Hom. 8. in Levit. quid causae est cum Baptismus Ecclesiae in remissionem
peccatorum detur, secundum Ecclesiae observantiam etiam parvulis Baptismus
detur? Ita Hom. 14. in Luc. and lib. 5. in cap. 6. ad Romans

Justine Martyr lived in the Apostle John's time, and says, women ought to
look* to their children, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; And Gregory
Nazianzen Orat. 40. page 658. which was concerning holy Baptism, (...).

Finally, Where you close with your service, I know no service of yours, except
it be wherein you are more fit to serve then I to suffer; nevertheless to pray
for your conversion, and to do you good I am yours,

Alexander Kellie.

Postscript.
THe Anabaptists think and say, that there is no command for Infants Baptism,
being such as do not understand, nor make confession of faith or sins, and yet
we give them Scripture commands, many and full, though nothing will satisfy
them, no not when they have good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and
running over; as Genesis 17. there is not only a command for Infants that cannot
confess, but a reason that still holds, to wit, that the Lord is their God, and
God threatens the disobedient, and this command in the substantials was never
abrogated. Therefore here is the first Command, with a full perpetual reason,
and with a threatening, and a command of a continual standing, and is the very
same with Baptism in the essentialls

2. When Christ commands Infants to be brought to him, to bless them, to pray
for them, to lay his hands on them, therein he commands as much and more then
Baptism comes to: So here is a second command, running over with the wrath of
Christ to them that oppose it.

3. Matthew. 28. Baptize all Nations, is a command likewise of a full measure
running over, for it does not only reach Infants, but all Nations.

4. Acts 2. Peter commands every one to be Baptized, with a reason reaching
Infants, for theirs is the Promise, and here again you have both Precept, and
Promise: and yet the Anabaptist says, there is no command. What is it to set
the Word of God at naught, and to cast his Commandments behind our back, if
this be none? Let such therefore take heed lest the Lord come and tear them in
pieces, while there shall be none to deliver. Remember John Leydan and such
fellows.

Infants have all the graces set forth and sealed in Baptism, therefore are to
be Baptized, they are justified sanctified, regenerated, clothed with Christ,
planted with him, added to the Church, incorporate in his body, entitled in the
Covenant to have the Lord for their God, dead, buried, and risen again with
him, and had by Gods command for many hundredth years a right to an Ordinance
equivalent to Baptism, being then profitable every way, and the seal of the
righteousness of Faith, and were never since put aside from Baptism, but by
that woeful generation of Anabaptists here of late since the beginning of
Luthers opposing the Pope; since which time the Lord has fearfully blasted
that wicked sort of people in many Nations. And therefore I conclude, that
children in their Infancy have an undoubted, full and clear right from
Scripture for their Baptism still to this day, and shall have till the last
day, when the Anabaptists shall be judged and convinced to purpose of all the
ungodly deeds and speeches which they have done and spoken against Christ's
Truth. And as for the particular graces that I have named, as Justification of
Infants, sanctification, etc. I shall, God willing, if I be put unto it, easily
prove all these graces to belong to Infants in our dutiful and charitable
judgment against any Anabaptist in England whosoever he be.

I could wish with all my heart that the Anabaptists would weigh well and
consider what I write without prejudice, remembering that it is no shame for
them to forsake their error, but rather their honor and happiness to turn to
the Truth, and stand for it, and it is both their shame and sin to be hardened
in their hearts against it. Better then they have forsaken this error and
closed with us, Zuinglius who far excelled all the Anabaptists in the world
both for grace and learning; Mr. Baxter, who may be a pattern for holiness and
reading to most of his time, he has not only forsaken the Anabaptists, but
opposed them, that they are not all able to answer him. There be many English
Books of learned men aganst the Anabaptists, as namely Doctor Featly, Mr.
Marshall, Mr. Gerce, Mr. Church, Mr. Cobbet, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Cook, Mr: Blake,
Mr. Fuller. Mr. Sidenham; besides many other excellent men, who have written in
Latin, as Vossius, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, and all our best Lights in the
Christian world, both Ancient and Modern.

These five sheets do not, and cannot contain the hundredth part of what I have
delivered to my Hearers, for the space almost of three years, for Infants, and
against Anabaptists, and much more may be said.

FINIS

