(...); OR A DISCOURSE, Touching the EXCELLENCY and VSEFVLNESS OF THE CHRISTIAN
RELIGION, Both in its PRINCIPLES and PRACTICES.

Chiefly designed by the AVTHOR, for the Benefit of his PARISHIONERS.

By STEPHEN KAYE, M. A. and Rector of Manton in Lincolnshire.

John. 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son: that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life. YORK,
Printed by Jo. White, for Robert Clarke at the Angel and Bible in low
Owse-gate. M.DC.LXXXVI.

Imprimatur.

To. Altham, Rmo. P. Dmo. Johan. Archiep. Ebor. a sacris Domesticis.

To the Right Worshipful Sir JOHN KAYE, Of Woodsome Baronet, one of His
Majesty's Deputy Lieutenants for the West Riding of the County of York.
Honored SIR,
It Is not the apprehension of any Worth or Excellency in this Discourse,
(except what its Subject Matter imports) that could tempt me to the Publication
of it: Nor am I so vain as to think, that any thing of mine should find such
Acceptance in a learned and critical Age, but that the Dread of its severe
Censures would rather deter me from appearing in public, then the Opinion of my
own Performances could encourage me thereunto; save, that I hope by committing
my well intended, though slender Labors to Your worthy Patronage, I shall be
secured at least (however otherwise treated) from open Reprehension or Calumny,
by sheltring my self under the tutelar Vmbrage of Your great Name. A Name
indeed deservedly great; if Your exemplary Piety and Virtue; Your Loyalty to
our Gracious Sovereign, and Integrity to the present Government; if Your strict
and impartial Administration of Justice; Your charitable Temper in composing
Differences, to the singular Benefit and Satisfaction of the neighboring
Country; if Your excellent Pattern of Household Government in all the Relations
and Circumstances of it; and Your particular Respect and Deference to all the
truly loyal and Orthodox Sons of the Church of England, but the Clergy
especially: If all these I say, and Your other innumerable Acts of Charity and
Beneficence may add any thing to Your Character; no Person of Your Rank has
more improved the Patrimony of Honor, (derived from Your truly Religious and
Loyal Ancestors) nor advanced a Family to an higher Pitch in the general Esteem
of All. But I would not offend Your Modesty with more particucular Enumerations
and Eulogies of Your Merits: And indeed, the Transactions of Your whole Life
are so obvious to a considerable Part of the Nation, that 'twould be very
incongruous to enlarge this Dedication with needless Panegyricks. To whom then
could I dedicate this Discourse with that equal Respect of Choice and Duty, as
to Your Self; who, (besides Your Integrity and Success in those public
Administrations) have not only been a Friend and Patron, but even a Parent to
the Author; Beneficioorum memoria senescere non debet Sen. Lib. de Beneficiis.
both whilst Your domestic Chaplain, and always since: So that the sincerest
Gratitude and Service in my private Devotions are too small a Tribute, for
those many and undeserved Favors Your Bounty has bestowed on me and mine. And
therefore, as my Book in Duty desires Your Patronage; so, for many considerable
Reasons I have ventured it abroad in the World under Your Protection. But it is
not expedient, nor do You expect that I should acquaint the World with the
Particulars that I owe You: Besides, those verbal Acknowledgements (as they are
often censured; so they) are but unsuitable Returns for real and great Favors.
It Is Love and Duty that is payable from Your Votary; and I have no other Way at
present to discharge my Obligations, Primitias Cordis and Oris.
than by a humble Dedication of my Labors to the Memory of Your Name and
Family, which I desire to do with all possible Respect and Observance: And may
it prove (as it is sincerely designed) a lasting Monument to Posterity of Your
courteous Beneficence, and my real Gratitude.

I hope, (Sir) You Will find in the candid Perusal, Quod scriptum habetur sempet
vacat ad legendum, cum vacat legenti. Ne onerosum sit praesens, quod com voles
sumitur, cum voles ponitur, Aug. Ep. 1.
that this Discourse does carry in it the Stamp and Impress of Truth and
Holiness: And as I could not have chosen a Subject more Excellent and
Beneficial in it self, so neither, (I am well assured) more acceptable to You;
which will minister the hope at least, that the Dignity and Usefulness thereof,
may atone for the want of Elegancy in the Composure.

Such as it is (good Sir) be pleased to accept it, as the humble Messenger of
my Duty and Respect; that by the Favor of Your Patronage, my Endeavors herein
may be more kindly interpreted: Nor need I fear a Reprimand for the Boldness of
this Attempt; since Your Goodness will pardon, and your Candor bear with more
Indiscretions, than I would willingly be guilty of.

God Almighty bless You in Your ready and loyal Intentions to serve Your King
and Country, in the faithful Management of that honorable Trust reposed in You
by both: and may You persevere in your pious and zealous Resolutions to serve
the King of Kings sincerely and affectionately, in the Communion of this best
of Churches. And that You may be every way happy in Your incomparably prudent
and pious Lady, those hopeful Cions Your Children and Grandchildren, and all
Your Worthy Relations; (whereby You and They may prove Ornaments to Your
Country, Instruments of God's Glory here, and Possessors of it hereafter) shall
be the daily Prayer of,

Worthy SIR, Your most humble, most obliged, and most faithful Servant, S. K.

To my worthy Friend, Mr. GEORGE JOLLAND Of Glamford-Briggs in the County of
Lincoln; and to all and every of 'em, who are or have been my PARISHIONERS.
SIR,
THere are many cogent Reasons which induce me to prefix your Name to this
Epistle: For, besides those personal Obligations which I am not able to
recount, and the Relation you bear to the Parish wherein I was several Years
Incumbent; (and wherein your good Example and Authority have had no small
Influence, for the Advancement of the Interest of the established Religion and
Government,) I say, besides all these, I could instance in many Particulars of
your singular respect Kindness to all honest orthodox Clergymen, your Charity
to the Poor, but especially poor Scholars, and your Hospitality to all; not to
mention your pious Beneficence in repairing and beautifying God's House at so
great a Charge: But, I would neither offend you nor my Reader, with that
unpleasing and fantastical Method of Flattery and Ostentation.

Yet (Sir) I shall never be awanting in my Wishes, and hearty Prayers for you;
that you may persevere in your Endeavors to preserve and propagate that Order
and Uniformity in God's Worship, which you have hitherto prosecuted with so
much Zeal, Success, and Integrity. So, that by your Proficiency in Grace and
Virtue, you may not only erect a Monument to your self, but transmit a Blessing
(with a plentiful Estate) to your hopeful Posterity.

AND now my most kind and respective Parishioners, (for whom this small
practical Discourse is chiefly intended) you are not insensible of the Occasion
of my Removal from you, and the Inconveniences which I then suffered by it,
which I am now unwilling to repeat, save that I do unfeignedly pardon the
unhappy Instrument of it. And though, I hope my Pastoral Care and Affection for
you (in my Absence) did not fall much short of my Obligations; yet, because I
could not personally discharge my Duty, I then resolved to compose this
Treatise chiefly for your Use, and do now present it to your candid Acceptance.
Wherein I Have endeavored to remind you of those Truths which I have formerly
taught, and wherein (I hope) you are now established. Whereunto I have added
some Forms of Prayer, for the Benefit of private Persons and Families; which I
heartily beg (not only for my Satisfaction, but your own) that you would
sincerely, fervently, and constantly make use of, Morning and Evening, both
with your Families, and in your Closets. Yet so, that (when Opportunitie's
present) you do not neglect the more solemn and public Service of the Church,
for the wilful Omission of this important and necessary Duty of Religion, as
it is highly dishonorable to God, a Scandal to our holy Profession, and of very
dangerous and damnable Consequence to all, but to Masters of Families
especially, who have the chief and immediate Charge of, and Inspection over the
rest; so, if it be sincerely and devoutly performed, this will entitle you to,
and qualify you not only for the Comforts and Blessings of this, but a future
and better Life: Nor have I the least cause to doubt, but that my well meant
Endeavors herein, will meet with a ready and kind Acceptance, from you
especially. And may your hearty Compliance with the Truth and Duties herein
recommended, bring you by degrees, to the perfect Knowledge and Practice of
true Wisdom and Holiness; and make you abound still more and more in all the
Virtues and Graces of the inner-man, to the Praise and Glory of our infinite
Creator and Redeemer.

This Discourse (I hope) will prove so agreeable to the primitive Institution
of the Christian Religion, that the Excellency and Usefulness thereof, (as the
Title imports) are in a great Measure represented, both in its Principles and
Practices. A Religion, which shows the Dignity of Christ's Person, the
Sufficiency of his Merits, and the faithful Administration of his Offices; by
virtue whereof, he is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption. A Religion, which above all things teaches us to be godly and
honest, pure and peaceable, and to abound in all the Fruits of Piety, Justice,
Charity, Sobriety, Loyalty, etc. and in all and every one of these without
partiality, without hypocrisy.

And herein I have endeavored to be serious and practical, rather then make
use of any vain glorious Digressions of Wit and Eloquence; and have not failed
to beg the Assistances of God's Grace and holy Spirit to direct me in the
Composure. Besides, the private Satisfaction I have experienced already, and
the Benefit which (I hope) you will reap by it, will not only compensate all the
hard Measures I can meet with; but sufficiently countervail all my Pains and
Fatigues herein. Nor am I concerned for any more in this World, then to
discharge the Duties of my Calling with a good Conscience, and leave behind me
a good Example. I have not much troubled my Reader, with the Quotation of those
Authors I have made use of. And the Faults which have escaped the Press are
neither very many nor material; yet there are some, which I desire he will
either heartily censure, or correct.

And now, let us all endeavor (as we are obliged by the many powerful Motives
of Duty and Interest) to adorn this most excellent Religion of the holy and
eternal Jesus, by our unshaken Faith in its Principles, and hearty Compliance
with all its just and reasonable Commands and Constitutions whatsoever. So that
we may reap in this World Satisfaction and Peace of Mind, and in the World to
come Life everlasting. And if this Discourse, (now that it is made public,) may
any way conduce to the magnifying of God's Glory, and the Interest of his
Church; (which is the Argument of it) I shall return him most hearty and
unfeigned Thanks for the Success, and my Friends for the Encouragement in the
Publication. Now, to God's merciful Guidance, Protection, and Blessing I commit
you: And as the Assistance of your Prayers, to enable me the better to
discharge my Duty in the Ministerial Office, is not the least Part of my
Happiness; (for the Duties of Minister and People are reciprocal,) so I doubt
not, but 'twill be Comfort and Satisfaction to you, to have this Assurance from
me, that I am in all Sincerity,

Your truly affectionate Pastor, and faithful Servant in Christ, S. K.
York, January 23. 1685/6.
THE EXCELLENCY, and USEFULNESS Of the Christian Religion, etc.
The INTRODVCTION.
THe Knowledge of the Christian Religion is justly preferred to the knowledge of
any other Religion or Institution in the World: Not only in respect of the
external Evidence, which we have of the Truth of it, and the Divine Authority
of its Doctrine; but likewise as to those internal Excellencies, which no other
Religion can pretend to. For all the Principles, and Precepts, and Duties of
the Gospel, are not only most excellent and ravishing in themselves; but highly
advantageous and beneficial to us: And so calculated to our Nature on Purpose,
as to make us wiser, and better, holy and virtuous here, and Eternally Glorious
hereafter.

It Is too obvious, That the whole Race of Mankind by the Fall and defection of
our first Parents, (in violating the first Covenant) have not only obscured the
Light of Reason, and Divine Knowledge, whereby they might perfectly have
understood their Duties both to God and Man; but have so depraved their Wills,
and impaired their strength, that such an impotency has seized our Faculties,
both as to the Knowledge of God's Will, and the Power of performing it; That
we have now the greatest want imaginable, as of a clearer Light to discover our
Duties to us with greater certainty, whereby we might know what is the good and
acceptable will of God; So of more powerful Encouragements and Assistances,
that by the gracious Influences of God's holy Spirit, we might be enabled to
conduct our Lives, in a sincere and steadfast Conformity to the Divine Will and
Wisdom.

And to this End, God Almighty was pleased to institute the Law of Moses, as a
more perfect Rule and Transcript of our Obedience, than that of Nature (as now
depraved,) and writ it himself in Tables of Stone that it might last the
longer. Yet this Law in process of Time was so falsified and corrupted, by the
erroneous and incongruous Interpretations, and false Glosses of the Jewish
Doctors, that thereby it became so impracticable and obscure, that 'twas
neither obeyed nor understood.

But because Mankind should not be left for ever destitute of a suitable and
sufficient Remedy, to repair those miserable Defects, which we had contracted
by our Sin and Disobedience; nor of reasonable Assistances to buoy us up, and
support us under the Temptations, and Pressures of a calamitous World; and at
last by the saving Methods of his Grace, to bring us to the Enjoyment of his
Kingdom and Glory: God was pleased (for several Reasons best known to himself)
in this last Period of the World, when all other Means and Methods proved
ineffectual, to extol and magnify his Mercy in sending his own Son; and by a
clearer and more perfect Revelation of his Will to mankind, 2 Timothy 1.10.
(which he determined from all Eternity) has now brought Life and Immortality
to light, through the Gospel.

Which (...), or the Gospel, is a Term appropriated to signify the glad
Tidings of our Salvation, purchased by the Blood of Christ. This was the
Subject of the Angels Song to the Shepherds; Luke 2.10
the Desire and Happiness of all Nations, God manifested in the Flesh, to
concilate the difference and make up the Breach between offending Man, and an
offended God; to rescue us from the Power of our sins by his Grace; and from
the punishment of 'em by his blood; and that by the Belief and Practice of this
most excellent, holy, and innocent Religion all his sincere Proselites might
become holy here, and happy eternally.

And this is that Religion, which by God's assistance I design to make the
Subject of my ensuing Discourse. But that we may proceed with some competent
Assurance in a Business of so great importance; I shall premise something (by
way of Introduction) concerning the Truth and Excellency of the Christian
Religion: The Truth and Excellency of the Christian Religion fully represented.
And though 'twould be needless to multiply Arguments for the Confirmation of a
Truth which has been so generally owned, yet these following Topics may prove
of considerable Advantage to illustrate, and recommend this admirable Doctrine
to the serious and impartial Considerer. And

(1) God the Father has testified the truth of it from Heaven by an audible
Voice, By Gods own Testimony. Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved s^n in whom I am well pleased. And has confirmed it by the
miraculous and Visible descent of the Holy Ghost; a double sensible Evidence
three times repeated; which were the strongest and most convictive
Demonstration our humane Nature is capable of.

(2) All the Prophesies of the old Testament concerning Christ the Savior of
the World, By fulfilling of all the Prophesies concerning him.
as to all the Punctualities of his Life, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension,
and every Circumstance of Time, and Place, when, where, and how he should be
manifested, had their completion in him. So, that there was not the least Title
or Iota failed concerning him, from the first instant of his Conception, to the
last period of his Glorification.

(3) The Truth of this excellent Doctrine which he delivered, By Miracles.
was confirmed by real and inexceptionable Miracles; such as neither the Devil,
nor any of his Agents, either Sorcerer or Magician were able to counterfeit.
And this evidence by Miracles was necessary for the conviction of the Jews, who
had received their Law by Signs and wonders from Heaven: Nor could it be
imagined they would lay aside their own, or admit of any other Institution,
(how specious and excellent soever) unless it were confirmed, and recommended
by as powerful Arguments and Demonstrations as the former. Now the Miracles
which were done by our blessed Savior, and his Apostles could be no less than
the Product of an omnipotent Arm, either as to the things themselves, or the
manner of producing 'em; being such as were never done by any finite Creature
either before or since. To instance in some Particulars; As in raising the dead
Body of Lazarus, John 11.
the restoring him to life and to the exercise of all his Faculties, after he
had laid four days in the Grave. The curing the blind, the lame, and the sick,
and diseased, not only without, and above, but even contrary to means. The
feeding of so many thousands of men and Women, Matt. 14.19, 21.
with a few Loaves, and some small Fishes, (even to satiety) besides the
Surplusage of several Baskets full. John 2.
The turning of Water into Wine, and that far more excellent than could be
produced by the most generous Grape. Acts 5.
The sudden Death of Ananias and Saphira, at the Apostle's Word, for lying to
the Spirit of God. Acts 9.
The miraculous Conversion of St. Paul, who in a few days (far beyond any
Metamorphosis we read of in the Poets) was changed from a malicious, virulent,
and fierce Persecutor of Christians and Christianity, to be a zealous Professor
of this excellent Religion; and at last testified the Truth of it (after he had
suffered many years persecution for it) by dying it is Martyr. And all these and
many other Miracles, which would be endless to repeat, (for the whole Lives of
our Savior and his Apostles, were a continual Series of Miraculous
Achievements) were not done clancularly in a blind corner of the World; but
openly and visibly, every where about Judaea, in the Temple, Synagogues, and
all public Places: Insomuch that his professed Enemies were convinced of the
Truth and Reality of it, though Prejudice and Passion had prevailed so with them,
that they were unwilling to comply with it. Besides, there was something of
Piety, and and Charity in all the Miracles which our Savior and his Apostles
did; For they were of special Use and Advantage, either for the curing of Men's
Bodies, and the Conversion of their Souls; or the promoting of God's Glory in
the Establishment of the Christian Religion. All which Omnipotent Productions
are not only a most certain and undeniable Evidence of the Truth of our
Savior's Doctrine; (For the Divine Providence would not suffer so many
Miracles for the confirmation of a Superstitious and erroneous Opinion) but of
the Power of his Divinity; and that he is the true Messiah, the Son of God, and
Savior of the World, which was promised by God; predicted by the Prophets; and
is already come to accomplish the great Work and Business of our Redemption.

(4) There was never any Religion but this, neither Mahometism, Paganism, etc.
By the Means and manner of its establishment in the world.
that could ever be propagated by any other Means, than either force or
Violence; or by indulging its Votaries, in a sensual and brutish Liberty, which
might influence their Appetites, and Affections into a sinful and slavish
compliance with it. But our Heavenly Lawgiver has recommended the Christian
Religion to our Belief, and Practice, by other Motives and Credentials; and has
settled it in most of the known Parts of the World, by other Means and Methods:
For a few days before his Ascension into Heaven, he gave Commissions to, Matt.
28.19, 20.
and invested his Apostles, and Disciples with Power, and inspired them with
Abilities to Preach this Doctrine of Salvation to, and propagate it in the
World. And this was not the least Miracle in it; that a few Persons of the
lowest Extract, slender Education, and armed with no external Power, (the most
of 'em being poor Mechanics, as Tent-makers, Carpenters, Fishermen, and such
like) should be able to withstand all the Authority, Wit, Learning, Policy, and
Eloquence of the greatest Monarchs, Politicians, and Philosophers on Earth, and
all the Devils and damned Spirits in Hell, which were combined against them;
and in despite of Malice it self, to establish a Religion which did so much
check and control the Ambitions, Interests, Pleasures and Appetites of the
greatest Princes, and their Adherents; and was so directly Opposite to the then
Temper and Inclinations of Mankind; that they must offer Violence to their
dearest Lusts, and deny themselves the sensual Enjoyment of their most
ravishing and transporting Pleasures, ere they could become Proselites to it.

And yet notwithstanding all these Obstacles, the Apostles and Disciples of our
Lord had wonderful Success in Establishing the Gospel; triumphing over and
trampling upon the greatest Oppositions; and did defend it, and its Excellent
Author, with the highest Manifestations of Zeal, and Integrity; though continual
Reproaches, and Contumelies, Racks and Prisons, Flames and Martyrdoms, did
await 'em in every place where they came: For we have a certain account from
Ecclesiastical History, that eleven of the twelve Apostles, and many Thousands
of the Primitive Christians suffered violent Deaths, by the hands of those who
persecuted them, merely for their Religion.

And what rational Motive could carry 'em through such an hazardous Employment;
that Christians alone should seem so fond of sufferings, that they forgot
Humanity it self, endured Torments, and abode the Flames not only with
Patience, and Magnanimity, but with joy? For though this Christian Courage was
looked on by the most, to be either the folly or Frenzy of a distempered
Brain; yet doubtless it could be no less than the absolute conviction of their
Minds and Consciences of the Truth and certainty of the Doctrine which they
delivered; with a comfortable Prospect of those inconceivable Rewards which
should await 'em in another World.

Thus, Christianity has been always hitherto, and shall be ever propagated by
Arguments rather than Arms; by submission and sufferings, rather than force and
Violence: And has (far beyond all humane conceit) been attended with such
wonderful Succcess and Prevalency, without any kind of Power or Earthly
Authority to back it, and not so much as one Sword (except that of St. Peter,
Matthew. 27.52, 53.
for which our blessed Savior severely reproved him) has been drawn in the
defense of it: Insomuch that 'twas impossible that any thing but Truth it self,
which has an Omnipotent and overruling force in it, could (by such weak and
improbable Means and Methods) have so soon subdued mankind to the Faith, and
obtained a Victory over the hearts of Men in so great a part of the World.

And thanks be to God our Religion has not only captivated a few of the Meaner
sort; but the greatest of all Ranks and degrees, even Kings and Emperors have
submitted to Christ's Scepter, and many of 'em have become nursing Fathers of
his Church. The greatest Philosophers, Orators, Rhetoricians, etc. (such were
Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Tertullian, Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus, and many
others) who neither wanted Wit, Learning, Eloquence, nor Authority, to defend
and maintain their Heathenish Principles and Opinions, yet became Proselites to
the Christian Faith, and zealous Preachers and Defenders of it, with their very
Lives, and Fortunes. And to our great comfort and satisfaction, our Religion
rides on prosperously still to conquer Nations far remote; and there have been
few Ages since our Saviors Exhibition in the Flesh, wherein the Boundaries of
his Church have not been enlarged with new Productions.

(5) The Truth, and Excellency of the Christian Religion is evicted and
confirmed, By the Miraculous Effusions of God's holy Spirit upon the Apostles
etc.
by the Miraculous Effusions and gracious Influences of God's Holy and Blessed
Spirit: (according to Christ's promise concerning it) Not only on the Day of
Pentecost, but in many thousand instances besides, to the wonder and
astonishment of all Beholders. And though the most of the Apostles and Disciples
of our Lord, were men of very obscure Fortunes, mean Capacities, (as I hinted
before) and altogether unskil'd in humane Learning; yet they were furnished in
a moment with such an extraordinary measure of inspired Wisdom and Knowledge,
Acts 2.2. etc. Acts 10.44.
that the greatest Doctors among the the Jews, and Philosophers among the
Gentiles stood in a Maze at them; were baffled and overcome by the Dint of
their Arguments; and afterward became zealous Champions for the Defense, and
active Instruments in the Propagation of the Gospel. All which Gifts were
bestowed by the Spirit of God, for their perfect Guidance and Instruction; for
their Support and Comfort, in the great Temptations, and Pressures which they
underwent; and to enable 'em to convince the obstinate and unbelieving Jews,
and Gentiles, of their Legal, and Heathenish Superstitions; and to convert them
from their Sins and Errors, to the Belief and Practice of this Excellent
Religigion of the holy and Eternal Jesus.

(6) Upon the first publishing and promulgation of the Gospel, By silencing the
Heathen Oracles, at our Saviors coming into the World.
all the Heathen Oracles were silenced. cleombrotus, Demetrius, etc. (as
Plutarch relates) though they had been formerly very zealous Champions for them,
yet at Christ's coming in the Flesh, they neither could, nor durst speak one
Word in the defense of them.

Ablata est Pythii Vox haud revocabilis ulli
Temporibus longis: Eternim jam cessit Apollo:
Clavibus occlusus silet: ergo rite peractis
Discedens Patriae, redeas ad lumina sacris.
Porphyr. Vt citatur Lib. 5. Cap. 8. Eus. de Preparat. Evangelica. Vltima
Cumaei venit jam Carminis aetas,
Magnus ab integro seclorum nascitur Ordo
(Virg. Eccl. Sybils Oracles then drew their last breath, and in them all
others. On which the same Poet sweetly,

Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia Regna;
Jam nova Progenies Coelo demittitur alto.
And the Devil himself, who was the Father and Founder of all those illusive
Dreams and false Prophesies, received a deadly Blow: so that not only Christ
himself has obtained an absolute Victory over him; But all sincere Christians
(of which more fully afterward) through the assistance of his Grace, are more
then Conquerors over him, and all his Agents.

(7) The Christian Religion in the New, Omnia quae Scriptae sunt ad unum
Christum referuntur, nec saepit vet^^ scripturae nisi Christus in ea
intelligatur. Aug. in Ps. 51. Id. in Joan. Tract. ^.
is the same for substance with that of the Ancient Jews under the Old
Dispensation. The Patriarchs, and Prophets had the same Faith, Religion, and
Worship common with us Christians; Nor did they expect then, or do they inherit
eternal Happiness now upon any other Terms, then by a sincere and steadfast
Belief of the purchased Redemption by their promised Messiah.

(8) And lastly; By many other Arguments summed up in this Paragraph.
To these Topics many others might be added, (if it were necessary) to testify
the Divinity, and Excellency of our Saviors Doctrine: As the Purity of his
Life; the Sublimity of his Religion; the Perfection of its Laws; the Force of
its Arguments; the Testimony of his holy Spirit in Men's Consciences; the
Operation of his Grace; the Fruits and Comforts of the Christian Devotion, etc.
And in a word, the whole Contexture and Design of it can be no other, then to
glorify God; and to make us Holy and Virtuous here, that we may be eternally
Glorious hereafter.

Seeing then, we have the most convincing Attestations that can be given, to
confirm us in the Belief of the Christian Religion in General; and since
there is nothing in the whole Constitution, (as will more fully appear in the
Sequel of this Discourse) but what is most worthy of God, and consentaneous to
the rectified Reason, and Interest of Mankind; We must hence necessarily infer,
that it derives it is Original from Heaven, and can be no less than the
Contrivance and Product of an infinite and eternal Wisdom, and Goodness. Thus
much concerning the Truth and Excellency of the Christian Religion in General.

PAss we on now to Particulars; Wherein I shall endeavor to give you the
clearest Account I can of God's infinite and Inconceivable Love to Mankind; and
what admirable Means and Methods the Divine Wisdom, Col. 1.20.
and Goodness was pleased to make use of to reconcile the World unto himself.
And in treating of this great Mystery of Man's Redemption; We shall consider

1st. The Partition of the Boo^^.
The several Names and Appellations which are promiscuously ascribed to our
blessed Savior in Holy Scripture, the explication whereof will give great
Light to, and make the Doctrine of the Gospel much more intelligible.

2dly. We shall Discourse distinctly of his Divine, and Humane Natures, and
their Hypostatical Union in the Person of Christ. And proceed to assign some
special Reasons, why the Mediator of the New Covenant must be God; Why he must
be Man; and why God and Man in the same Person, to constitute him a fit
Mediator between both.

3dly. We shall enquire Particularly into the Nature of Christ's Offices, and
the Manner of their Administration: All which will clearly illustrate the great
End and Design of our Blessed Savior's Incarnation; and what great things he
has done, and suffered for us, that we should live comfortably here, and be
happy for ever. To Treat of all which, we now proceed distinctly, and in Order.

CHAP. I. Of the Names and Titles ascribed to our Blessed Savior in Holy
Scripture.
OF those sundry Names and Appellations ascribed to the Eternal Son of God and
Savior of the World in Holy Scripture; some have respect to his Person, others
to his Offices: And are variously distinguished into Proper, and Figurative
Denominations agreeable thereto.

As to his Divine Nature, (in the greatest propriety of Speech) He is called
God, ^^iles relating to Christ's Godhead.
Isa. 9.6. The true God, 1 John 5.20. The great God, Micah. 5.4, 5. The Son of
God, Mark 15.39. and Luke 8.28. And the only begotten Son of God. John 3.16.
And in the same respect he is said to be (though Figuratively) the Word of God,
John 1.1, 2, 3. (...), the Image of the invisible God, Col. 1.15. or the
Character of his Person.

As to his Humane Nature, To his Manhood.
he is properly termed the Son of Man, Luke 9.56. A Man of Sorrows, Isa. 53.3.
The Son of Abraham, the Son of David, etc. Luke 3.23, 24, etc. And upon the
some account (though Figuratively) he is said to be the Seed of the Woman, Acts
13.23. The Seed of Abraham, the seed of Isaac, the Seed of Jacob, etc. Genesis
17.19. Mat. 1. the righteous Branch, and he shall be called the Lord our
Righteousness, Jer. 25.5, 6.

As to his two Natures Hypostatically united in the same Person of the Son of
God, And to both as united in the same Person of Christ.
he is called Emmanuel, Mat. 1.23. The Lord of all things, Col. 1.16, 17, 18,
19. The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.16.

Again, in Relation to his Offices in general, Titles relating to his Offices
in general.
he is called Jesus, Mat 1.21. which is an Hebrew word (and always written in
the Syriack, Translation of the New Testament) signifying to Save, and
therefore's a Name most agreeable to his Mediatorship. He is also called
Christ. John 6.69. Which is a Greek word signifying to Anoint: From which two
Names it may be reasonably conjectured, that he is the anointed Savior of the
whole Race of Mankind; of the Hebrews, and Greeks, both of the Jew, and
Gentile. To which may be added the Titles of the Messiah, the Savior, Acts
5.31. Salvation it self in the Abstract, Luke 1.69. and Luke 19.9. The Mediator
of the New Covenant, Heb. 12.24. The Redeemer of the World, Tit. 2.14. The hope
and expectation of the Gentiles, Mat. 12.21. The Desire, and Delight of all
Nations, Isa. 2.2. And properly speaking he is all and every one of these. And
in the same respect (tho in a Figurative Sense) He Is entitled the Bridegroom,
Mat. 9.15. The Head over all things to his Church, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. The
Foundation of a Building, 1 Cor. 10.4. A Lion, Rev. 5.5. Bread from Heaven,
John 6.48.50. The Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. Light it self, Joh. 1.4, 8,
9. The Morning Star, Number. 24.17. A Vine, John 15.1. The Tree of Life, Rev. 22.2.

But more Particularly, And to his several Offices in particular.
and with special reference to his Offices. As

1st. To his Priestly Office.
To his Priestly Office; He is called our High Priest, Heb. 3.1. The Priest,
Heb. 7.3, 11. Oblation, or Sacrifice, Heb. 9.26, The Lamb of God, Job. 1.29,
36. The Paschal Lamb, Exodus 13.13. Comp. Rev. 13.8. The Passover it self, 1
Cor. 5.7.

2dly. As to his Prophetical Office, To his Prophetical Offices.
he is said to be our Pastor, and great Shepherd, John 10.14, 16. Rabbi,
M^ster, Mark. 10.17. John 1.28. Apostle, Heb. 3.1. Min^ster of the
Circumcision, Romans 15.8. etc.

3dly. As to his Kingly Office, To his Kingly Office.
he bears the Titles of King, Luke 23.2, 3. Prince, Acts 5.31. King of Peace,
Heb. 7.2. Captain of our Salvation, Heb. 2.10. The Ruler of all things, Micah.
5, 2. Phil. 2.10, 11. and Judge of all men, Acts 10.42. Titles derived from his
Types.
And sometimes his Titles are derived from the Types, as the Second and Last
Adam, from the First, 1 Cor. 15.22, 45.

Lastly, That General Name of Christians, His Name Christ, whence we are called
Christians, comprehends all his other Titles.
(by which we are distinguished from all other Religions in the World) is derived
from his Name Christ: In which all the Names and Appellations attributed to him
in holy Scripture, are eminently comprehended.

CHAP. II. Of our Savior's Godhead.
HAving treated thus distinctly of the Quid Nominis, Of Christ's Divine Nature.
of the Names and Titles of Christ, for the prevention of all future Mistakes
which might occur concerning 'em. We shall proceed to discourse in the next
Place of our Savior's Divine Nature; which (being an Article of our Christian
Faith) is most demonstratively evinced from Scripture; the Truth whereof will
evidently appear in these following Particulars. As

1st. Arguments for it.
He is dignified with the same Titles, and Appellations equal with God the
Father, (which I Have hinted before) and is often styled in Scripture, The great
God, The true God, The Lord Jehovah, The Son of God, and the only begotten Son
of God. From whence we must necessarily infer; That our Lord Jesus Christ is
the true God as the Father is, and has the same Nature, Essence, Will, and
Power with him.

2dly. The same Attributes, and Properties of God are frequently ascribed to
him: For he is the (...), Luke 6.8.
and does clearly discern all the Thoughts and Imaginations of Men. Heb. 13.8.
He was from Eternity without beginning, and shall continue to Eternity without
end. Mat. 28.20.
By the Immensity of his Power, and Presence, He is Omnipotent, and
Omnipresent. Joh. 1.3. Col. 1.16. Mat. 8.25. Joh. 0.19.
All the Works of the Deity; as the Works of Creation, Providence,
Sanctification, Illumination, Justification, and the Remission of Sins are
attributed to Him. All the Creatures, even the most boisterous and unruly, the
most malignant and Rebellious, contrary to their Natures, and against their
Wills did obey his Commands. All the Miracles done by Him, were real
Demonstrations of his Divinity, and to them he appeals to evict the reality of
His Godhead. Ioh. 14.11.
Believe me (says he) that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, or else
believe me for the very Works sake. And in his Answer to John the Baptist's
Disciples. Mat. 11.3, 4, 5, 6.
Go (says he) and show John again those things which ye do hear, and see; the
blind receive their sight, and the Lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed, and the
Deaf hear, the Dead are raised up, etc. The only Argument which he made use of
at that Time to convince 'em, That he was the true Messiah and Savior of the
World.

3dly. Divine Worship and Honor are every where given unto him: Ioh. 3.16.
Acts 7.55, 59. Matthew. 28.18. Phil. 2.9.10.
For in him we Believe; to him we Pray; in his Name we are Baptized; and God
has given him a Name above every Name; that at the Name of fesus every knee
should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the
Earth.

4thly. We have the undeniable Testimony of God himself, and the concurrent
Suffrage both of Good and Bad Angels to confirm us in the belief of this
important and saving Truth. Matthew. 3.17, and 1.27. Mark 5.7. (...) Oecumen. ad
Locum.
In him (says the Apostle) dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily; that
is, really and substantially. See to this Purpose. Col. 2.9. 1 Timothy 3.1^. Heb.
1.3, 8. 1 John 5.20. Hence it is fully Evident from the undoubted Testimony of
holy Scripture, that Christ is God truly and properly so called; even one and
the same God, co-essential, coequal, and coeternal with the Father.

Thus the Doctrine of our Savior's Divinity, Equality, and Consubstantiality
with the Father being sufficiently evicted, and consirm'd: We shall now
seriously apply this Point, by considering what Influence this saving Doctrine
should have upon the Lives and Practices of Men. And

1st. We may learn from the Consideration of our Savior's Godhead, and the
Excellency of his Divine Nature, What Influence this Doctrine should have upon
Practice.
what Honor, Respect and Reverence is due to him. Even the same Homage is to
be given, and the same Adoration to be paid jointly and equally to the Father,
and the Son: For all men should honor the Son, Ioh. 5.23. 1 Ioh. 2.23.
even as they honor the Father: And whosoever denies the Son, the same has
not the Father. Again, the eternal Son of God is not only preser'd in
Scripture, to Abraham, Moses, David, etc. but to the holy Angels themselves,
being much better, Heb. 1.4, 5, 6.
and having a more excellent Name then they; and therefore he says, let all
the Angels of God worship him. These Considerations lay a sure Foundation for
our Duty; do justify our Practice in worshipping our Lord; and may exceedingly
animate and encourage us to be faithful, and zealous, devour, and constant, in
all the Instances of Pretty and Religion: For we have full Assurance from the
Premises, that our blessed Redeemer knows all our Necessities; and he
neither wants Will, nor Power, to save, supply, and bless us to the uttermost,
if we Believe in, Worship and Obey him.

2dly. Hence we may be encouraged to have Recourse unto Christ, and be
comforted in all the Straits and Difficulties of this Life; and hereon we may
ground our steadfast Hope, that God for his sake will supply all our Wants, with
the Abundance of his Grace and Favor: Ioh. 3.16. Romans 8.32.
For he that gave us his only begotten Son, will not be unwilling to bestow
whatever to his Wisdom shall appear needful, and convenient for us. Seeing then
we have a great High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of
God, Heb. 4.14, 16.
let us hold fast our Profession, and come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that
we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need.

3dly. Let us always bear in Mind those important Obligations the great Majesty
of Heaven and Earth has laid upon us, in sending his own Son into the World to
mediate a Peace for us, that we who were Enemies by wicked works should be
reconciled unto Him. Col. 1.21.
How should this consideration affect our hearts with a passionate Sense of his
Goodness? How should we Love him who has been so exceeding gracious and
meeciful to us? What thankful Acknowledgements with our Mouths; and what a
dutiful Observance in all our Actions do such wonderful Expressions of Majesty,
and Mercy deserye and require from us? And lastly, Let our Faith, and Hope,
etc. in the eternal Son of God, be sounded in Humility, (of all which more
fully in the following Chapters) with a Suitable Behavior, and awful sense of
Mind most becoming his gracious, yet dreadful Presence. And therefore

4thly. We should be extremely careful above all things, lest we wilfully
despise or dishonor that high, and holy Name whereby we are called. God's
Honor in Christ our anointed Savior, is a Prerogative He Is exceeding jealous
of; and therefore whosoever shall arrogate that Glory to themselves, or
substract that Obedience which is due to the Eternal Son of God, shall
certainly feel the Power of his Godhead. We Have a great many sad Instances upon
Record of God's Justice and Vengeance, on purpose to deter us from the like
Offenses. How conspicuous are the tragical Memoirs of the fallen Angels; of
Herod, Pontius Pilate, Judas, and many others; who would have set themselves in
God's stead? What shall I tell you of the whole Jewish Nation, that derided,
betrayed, condemned, and Crucified the Lord of Life. Not one of all these could
fly from Justice; but suffered the severest Punishments (in proportion to
their Crimes) for their wretched Profaneness, Cruelty, and Irreligion. What
might I add of the later Heretics, as Arrius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Servetus,
etc. whose Lives, and Deaths are, and shall be for ever infamous to all
Posterity.

Seeing therefore that God will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; and that
he will by no means endure that his Glory should be given to another: And seeing
we have such a Cloud of Witnesses before us, who have suffered by the Contempt,
and Neglect of his Worship; it stands us in hand to be very prudent and
circumspect in our Demeanor and Deportment toward him; lest we wilfully
blaspheme his Name; derogate from his Glory; abuse and trample upon his Word,
and Sacraments; despise his Servants; neglect our Duties; transgress his just
and reasonable Commands; or continue in any one unlawful Act of Sin or
Disobedience unrepented of, unreform'd. It Is our Savior's own Rule, and
confirmed by every day's Experience, Ioh. 2. Ep. ^.
He that loves God will keep his Commandments: And what heinous Ingratitude
(as well as Disobedience) must we Christians be guilty of, if we make not our
Lives the Transcript of his Divine and Excellent Doctrine; and with the highest
Expressions of Love, Joy, and Thankfulness recognize his inconceivable Goodness
and Mercy to the Children of Men. But if on the contrary, we should render him
evil for good, and hatred for good will; this Abuse and Contempt of his Grace
and Clemency, shall not be able to escape the just Resentments of his Wrath and
Vengeance. And judge what a miserable Condition those poor Wretches will be in,
who not only trample under foot the Son of God; but have so disregarded the
Sanctions of his Laws, and the Charitable Tenders of his Grace and Goodness,
that Salvation it self cannot save them.

Thus much concerning our Savior's Godhead. I have been the longer about it,
because the Devil has been more sedulous in his Endeavors to corrupt and
undermine this, than any other Article of our Christian Faith; Which every Man
will readily grant, that has the least Acquaintance with Ecclesiastical
History, and Decrees of Councils. Wherefore no Person of any Candor, or
Christianity, can think my Time, or Pains mis-imploy'd, and misspent; in
explaining, and confirming this Article of our Faith; wherein the Excellency
and Dignity of the Person of the Son of God, and our own present, and eternal
Welfares, are so Emimently concerned.

CHAP. III. Of our Savior's Manhood.
THis is another Fundamental Article of our holy and excellent Religion. The
Humane Nature of Christ constder'd.
that the Eternal Son of God became true and real Man for our sakes. That he
assumed the Humane Nature into the reality of his Person, though in a manner most
incomprehensible: And yet he was fully invested with it, (and precisely at the
time appointed of the Father, and predicted by the Prophets) was really
conceived in the Womb, and born of the Virgin Mary. He was made, that he might
be a perfect Man, (not begotten) of the Seed and Substance of the Woman, as all
other Men are; differing from Us only in the Miraculous Conception by the Power
of the Holy Ghost: And 'twas necessary that it should be so, that he might be
free from all sin Himself, especially since He came to suffer for Ours. For
indeed all other Men being conceived by natural Generation, must needs be
tainted with the Guilt, and Stain, of Adam's first Sin; which has been thus
transmitted to, and propagated by his miserable Posterity.

But though Christ the Eternal Son of God was conceived by the Holy Ghost, yet he
was made of the Flesh of the Virgin; Genesis 3.15. Genesis 22.18. Mat. 1.1.
otherwise he could not have been (what he really was) The seed of the Woman,
the seed of Abraham, the seed of David. Besides, this was absolutely necessary,
to qualify him for, nor could he've been otherwise capable of that
Mediatorship, whereby he was to procure, and establish a Peace between God and
Man. Thus he took our Nature, and therefore no Starry Substance, as the
Marcionites, cerdonians, and Manichaean Heretics vainly dreamed; nor yet a
Spiritual, or Elementary Body, as Valentinus, and others conjectured. And though
those several Heresies were censured, and exploded by the Decrees of Councils
in the four first Centuries; yet there is still a Spawn of those Errors amongst
us: And therefore for the Conviction of those that have espoused them; and to
confirm others in the steadfast Belief of this important and saving Truth; I
shall make it fully evident; That our Lord Jesus Christ did not only assume our
Flesh, but our whole Nature. That is

1st. Arguments for it.
A true Humane Body, and a rational Humane Soul.

2dly. He suscepted in that real Body, and reasonable Soul, all the Properties,
and Infirmities of both.

First he took our whole Nature, Christ assumed a real humane body.
viz. (I) A real Humane body, figured, and circumscribed as ours; which had all
the Parts, and Members of a true Body; compounded of Flesh and Blood; was
visible, and tangible; did eat, drink, sleep, increase in strength, and
stature; sensible of pain, and want; and was at last subject to a conspicuous
Death for the conviction of the obstinate and unbelieving World. The Holy
Scripture has confirmed, and fortified this Truth with variety of Arguments;
for Christ is said to be of the Seed of Abraham, the Seed of Isaac, Romans 1.3.
Romans 9.5.
the Seed of Jacob, and particularly of the Seed of David; For Christ (says
the Apostle expressly) descended from David, and the Fathers according to the
Flesh. And again, when the sulness of time was come, Gal. 4.4.
God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, etc. and in the likeness of sinful
flesh, Romans 8.3. Ephesians 4.16.
that he might condemn Sin in the flesh; by which means he became the Head of
his Body the Church. For as much then as we are partakers of Flesh and Blood, He
also likewise himself took part of the same, Heb. 2.9.
that he might taste Death (which he could not otherwise have done) for every
Man; and therefore he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the seed of
Abraham. Heb. 2.16 17.
Thus it behooved him to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a
merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, that he might
make Reconciliation for the Sins of the People. And upon St. Thomas the
Apostle's Doubting of the reality of his Humane Nature, our blessed Savior to
convince him of his Error; and to confirm the rest of the Apostles, and (in
them) all succeeding Christians in the belief of this necessary Point of Faith;
Luke 24.39.
He said unto them, handle me, and see, for a Spirit has not Flesh, and Bones,
as ye see me have. Now what can be more evident (since the Scripture is every
where full to this purpose) then this, that the Son of God assumed the true
Nature of Man, and the very substance of his Mother, and that he was not only
made in her, but born of her. To which the Testimony of all Antiquity might be
added, to confirm us in the Belief of it. But Theodoret, and Gelasins present
us with a Collection of excellent. Arguments (out of the Councils and Fathers)
to this purpose, whither I refer the judicious Reader, if he require further
satisfaction in this Point.

Secondly, The Humane and real Body of Christ was informed, And a rational
Humane Soul.
actuated, and enlivened, with a perfect, rational, and immortal Soul. And as
He had all the Members, Organs, Dimensions, and Properties of the one; So He
assumed all the Powers, Faculties, and Functions of the other; as
Understanding, Will, Memory, Affections, Passions, etc. Which I could easily
make out, Heb. 1.17.
(if it were necessary) by an Induction of Particulars. For he was made like us
in all things, Sin only excepted; and therefore could not be deficient in the
most minute, and much less in the primary and most constituent Part of his
Manhood; and besides he that was to be Mediator between God and us, must needs
be a perfect Man: Of which hereafter. Again, Mat. 26.38.
He complained a little before his Passion, saying, My soul is very sorrowful
and heavy even unto Death. And in his last Agony he said, Father into thy hands
I commend my Spirit. This Truth is every where so evident in the History of our
Savior's Incarnation, that I need not multiply Instances to prove it. But yet
for all this, tho Christ was really invested with all the Members, and
Faculties, and all the Essentials of the Soul, and Body of a Perfect Man. Yet

2dly. In this true and real Body, in this reasonable and immortal Soul, he
assumed took upon him all the Properties, and Infirmities of both, Sin only
excepted. He assumed all the sinless insirmities of both.
His Birth, manner of Life, Death, Burial, Resurrection, and Ascension are full
and perfect Demonstrations of the reality of his Manhood. But with reference to
our Infirmities, he was subject to Cold and Heat; Hunger and Thirst; Sweating
and Bleeding; Weariness and Weakness; Pain and Sorrow; Heaviness and Fear;
Passion and sinless Anger; yea Torment and Death it self. All which Arguments
are so cogent and convictive, that neither the Heretics of Old, nor the
Socinians and Libertines of our Age, ever were, nor ever shall be able to elnde
the Power and Energy of them. Let us now endeavor to make some practical
Improvement of the Point under Consideration. And

(1) In the Incarnation of our Lord, Application of this Point; by considering
its Influence on Practice.
we have an admirable Instance of God's tenderest Love and Compassion to poor
sinful Man: For what kindness could parallel this, that the Father should send,
and the Son condescend to come from his Bosom and Bliss, upon that great
Ambassie of making our Peace, even then, when by our sin and Disobedience we
had violated his just Laws; broken the Covenant between God and us, and put our
selves into a state of Hostility and Rebellion against him? But besides all
this, it is an evident matter of Fact, (as will fully appear afterward) that
Christ the Son of God, and Heir of eternal Majesty, did not only descend from
those Regions of Bliss, and assumed our whole Nature with all its Properties
and Infirmities: But he also underwent the Burden and Smart of all our sins,
and sorrows; and having finished his innocent Life, he submitted to all the
Tortures, and Indignities of a painful and ignominious Death for our sakes. And
these were all such Tokens and Evidences of Love and Bounty, as both the
Hierarchy of Angels, and the whole Race of Mankind stood amazed at: And that
the Son of God should lay down his dearest Life for his most daring and bitter
Enemies, (even for the Salvation of those who were the immediate Instruments in
his Condemnation, and Crucifixion) is such a Mystery as no Humane Reason is
able to comprehend. O the ineffable and infinite Love and Mercy of God in
Christ! How should this consideration affect our Souls with Love, Joy, and
Wonder! Has he given us his Son whilst we were Enemies unto him; Romans 5.10.
How much more will he bless us with the Abundance of Grace and Glory, (if we
live as the redeemed of the Lord) being thus reconciled? Indeed this Love was
beyond all possibility of Parallel; and if we seriously consider our Interests
and Obligations, we can do no less than devote our Souls and Bodies entirely to
his Service through the whole course of our Lives. We should hate all things in
respect of him; that is, Matthew. 10.37.
so far as they stand in Opposition to him, or pretend an equal share of
Affection with him. Let us then follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; in doing
and suffering for him, and his: And if any that bears the Name of Christian
should be so ungrateful as not to love the Lord Jesus Christ with the greatest
intenseness of Gratitude and Affection, 1 Cor. 16.22.
Let him be Anathema, Maranatha.

(2) We can no less admire, and should be as careful to imitate his singular
and unparalled Humility; who came down from the highest Pinnacle of heavenly
Grandeur, and vertical point of Sovereignty, to become incarnate in the obscure
Womb of a poor Virgin. And therefore well might the Evangelist prefix an Ecce
to the Mystery, behold a Virgin shall conceive: This was a Miracle indeed;
Faith must assist Reason in it. (...), 1 Timothy 1.15.
It Is a faithful Saying, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners.
Quanto pro me vilior tanto mihi Charior. Bern. Ser. 1. de Epioh.
Now that the Ancient of Days should abase himself to become a little Child;
and the Word and Wisdom of the Father not be able to utter a word, was such a
wonderful Instance of Humility as can never be sufficiently admired. How then
should we Christians study and endeavor to be like Him: As in all other
Instances of Piety and Virtue, so particularly in this; and I Am sure there can
be no Inducement either Internal, or External, to persuade us to be, or do
otherwise. And indeed it is the greatest Honor we can do him, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7,
8, 9.
to endeavor to have the same mind in us which was in Christ Jesus, and by all
means possible to transcribe his Pattern, who was the great Exemplar of
Meekness and lowliness of heart.

Thus, if we walk (as we are obliged) in his Steps; 1 Pet. 2.21
and patiently bear (as he did) with Meekness and Humility, those Injuries and
Affronts, which are usually the Portion and Pattimony of the best Christians in
this School of Affliction: If we account and esteem Honors, Riches, Pleasures,
Wit, Beauty, Strength, and all the other enticing Allurements of this World (as
they are indeed in themselves) Loss, and Dung, Phil. ^.8.
Emptiness and Vanity compared with the Exellencies of Christ Jesus our Lord
(...) and do humbly acknowledge that God i^ Christ is the Proprietor, and
Dispenser (...) 'em: If we be careful to manage the^ Subsidia prudently and
discreetly, to God Glory, and the mutual Comfort and Benefit of our selves and
others; if we cheerfully submit to God's unerring Will and Wisdom, in disposing
of us and our Concernments; and patiently bear every cross Accident which may
happen to us, and Ours; upon these Conditions (I say) we shall in some
proportion resemble our blessed Savior's innocent Life, in Grace and Goodness
here, a temper of mind and Spiritmost acceptable to him; and we need not doubt,
but upon these hearty Compliances he will accept of us and reward us, when he
comes again in his glorious Majesty hereafter.

(3) We must yield our unfeigned Assent to, and sted factly Believe this great
Mystery of our Savior's Manhood; that he was conceived without Sin in the
Womb, and born of a pure and immaculate Virgin by the Operation and Influence
of the Holy Spirit; that he voluntarily assumed our Nature, and has (by the
Merits of his Active, and Passive Obedience) fully satisfied God's Infinite
Justice for all our sins; which (as I hinted before) could not be atoned for by
any other Means, then by Suffering the severest Resentments of God's just Wrath
and Vengeance in that Nature which had sinned against him. But because the
Guilt, and Punishment of our Sins were a Burden too insupportable for Flesh and
Blood; therefore we must also believe, that our frail Humanity was supported by
his Omnipotent Divinity; of which more fully in the next Chapter.

Let us therefore seriously apply this Point, by the exercise of a true and
lively. Faith: That as Christ was conceived by the Operation of the Holy Spirit
in the Womb of a Virgin, and became Man for Us; So we may conceive him
Spiritually by a true and saving Faith; and bring forth the Fruits of
Evangelical Obedience, in a holy, virtuous, and innocent Conversation.

4. We should be always mindful to offer up upon the Altars of our Souls, that
reasonable Sacrifice and Service of Praise and Thanksgiving for the Incarnation
of our Lord. Could ever Tidings be more welcome, or any Report so grateful to
mortal Ears as this was? All the Inhabitants of Heaven were ravished with joy,
breaking forth into Hymns of Praise and Congratulation for the Redemption of
Mankind; and how should we Christians most especially (who inherit all the
blessed Privileges of the Gospel) bear a part in that Heavenly Chorus?
praising the Lord incessantly for his Goodness, and declaring the Wonders which
he has done for the Children of Men. Psalm 107.8, 15, etc.


To shut up this Point. I Have been the more express in the handling of it, not
only because it is the great Foundation on which our Christian Religion is
built; but because our restless Adversary the Devil, and his wicked Agents and
Emissaries have (in all Ages) used their utmost endeavors to corrupt and
undermine it. And though this Doctrine be an impregnable Fortress and Bulwark;
(under which we may securely defend our selves, and against which all the
Powers of Hell shall never be able to prevail) yet we are not ignorant of
Satan's devices, nor of his malicious Stratagems and mischievous Designs
against us, and our Religion. And how active, and successful he has been
hitherto in his Temptations and Allurements is most notoriously evident. For
this great and implacable Adversary has endeavored (by all means possible) to
extinguish the Knowledge of Christ the Messiah of the World, both before, and
since his coming in the Flesh. And

(1) Before his coming into the World, How restless the Devil has been
hitherto, in his Endeavors to undermine and destroy this Doctrine.
he used all imaginable Means to extirpate the whole Jewish Nation, whence
'twas prophesied the Messiah should descend. He studied to ridicule, and
enervate all the Prophesies, and Promises of Holy Scripture concerning him. He
made it his business to possess the World with gross Conceits and Apprehensions
of Christ's Kingdom at his Coming, And his Suggestions were so prevasent and
successful; that 'twas generally expected that the Messiah should appear in
great State and Grandeur; that he would bestow Crowns and Scepters; and the
greatest Immunities and Privileges upon his Subjects: Which conceit doubtless,
(our Savior appearing in so mean and despicable a Condition) was not the least
cause of the Jewish Infidelity, and did in a great measure obstruct their
embracing of the Gospel. It seems the very Apostles of Christ were tainted with
this Prejudice, by their being so inquisitive about the Restitution of the
Kingdom again to Israel. They expected (doubtless) to be Grandees in it, as may
be gathered from that request of the Mother of the two Sons of Zeledee, for
whom she was so importunate with our Savior, Marth. 20.21.
that one of them might sit on his right hand, and the other on his left in his
temporal Kingdom, for so the Words must be understood. Thus far had Satan's
Stratagems prevailed to prejudice Mankind against the Messiah of the World,
Before his coming.

(2) When he was come, from the Cradle to the Cross, his whole Life was an
entire Series of Sorrows and Persecutions. How did the Devil inflame the
Scribes and Pharisees with a fiery and impetuous zeal and eagerness, not only
to defend and maintain all the Laws and Constitutions, Rites and Ceremonies
which they received from Moses, with their own erroneous Comments and heterodox
Opinions concerning 'em: But to oppose and stifle (with all imaginable Vigor,
and Policy) our excellent Religion, (as it were in the very Embryo) ere it had
got any considerable footing in the World. And though this was beyond the reach
of their Power and Malice (God having decreed to establish it by his own
Omnipotent Arm;) yet he persecuted its excellent and innocent Author to Death,
by the severest Methods of Cruelty and Injustice. And though the Devil received
then a deadly blow, yet he has not been wanting (to his power) ever since to
persecute and ensnare his Members; and he is restless still in his endeavors
to prevail with them, to make Shipwreck of Faith, and a good Conscience; and
makes use of all his Stratagems to make 'em turn Heretics, if not Apostates.
And that his Projects have been too successful, will evidently appear if we
consider the many Heresies which have been broacht in the Church, concerning
the Natures, Person, and Offices, of our blessed Savior. Which I should be
sorry to conjure up, and therefore I hope my Reader will excuse me, if I rather
desire to have 'em buried in the darkest Shades of Oblivion.

CHAP. IV. Of the Union of the Divine, and Humane Natures in the Person of
Christ.
WE shall not be too curious in inquiring into the Manner of this Hypostatical
Union: Of the union of the two Natures.
For my design is rather to edify the sober and conscientious, then humor the
captious, or Skeptical Reader. The perfect Knowledge of this Mystery is a
Sacred Reserve for the contemplation of the holy Angels and Saints glorified;
and it would cease to be admirable if we could comprehend or express it. But we
Christians may conceive (though not by the energy of Reason, yet) by the eye of
Faith, that the Messiah of the World is (...), the Manhood is taken into the
Godhead, and by the singular virtue and operation of the Holy Ghost, (without
the intervention of an Earthly Father) the blessed Virgin became impregnated
and did conceive. And this was the most suitable way of accomplishing that so
necessary Conjunction of the Divine, and Humane Natures: That he might be
perfectly Sanctified as Man; and that the Nature which he assumed might be free
from all stain and pollution. Thus God and Man make one Person.

Yet So, that the two Natures are preserved (...) entire without Confusion, as
the Councils, and Fathers defined against Eutyches. And the Person of Christ
(...), Si quis non confitetur carni secundum Subsistentiam unitum Dei Patris
Verbum Anathemisit. Cyril. in Ep. Alex. Council. Anath.
without Division against Nestorius. But they were united (...) truly and
perfectly, without Confusion of Persons, without Commixture of Natures; and yet
they were united (...) by a Personal and real Union. Thus the eternal Son of
God took our Nature upon Him, which being united to his Divine Nature, has now
the same Subsistence which he has: so that the (...), the word assuming, and
the Nature assumed make but one Person; God and Man one Christ. I would not
confound my Reader with Metaphysical and School. Notions concerning the
Hypostatical Union; it is like God himself better understood by its Properties,
and Effects, than in its own Nature. It Is sufficient that all our Creeds, and
all Antiquity do confess it and unanimously concur in this great Article of our
Faith: Namely, that although Christ has two Natures, the Word, and the Flesh; yet
do these two make but one Person; one Son of God, one Savior of Men. We pass
from the Manner of this Union, to consider in the next Place.

(1) The Necessity of it. (2) The Benefits which we Christians do receive by
it. And (3) We shall make some Practical Improvement of the Point in hand, by
way of Application. And

1st. It Is by virtue of the Union of these two Natures, that our Lord Jesus
Christ has reconciled us to God and works all things for us in the great
Business of our Redemption. We have considered already what a deplorable Estate
and Condition mankind was in, by the Disobedience and Fall of our first
Parents; And no expedient could've been more suitable to unite those two distant
(and otherwise irreconcilable) Extremes, an offended God, to offending Man;
than the Interposition of a Person consisting of both Natures, which were so
much at variance. For

(1) By virtue of that Agreement between the Father and the Son, The Necessity
of this Union.
it is impli'd that the Savior of the World should be God: since no other
expedient could mediate a Peace, nor make a plenary satisfaction to God's
Justice for us. Besides our Transgressions being committed against an infinite
God, and attended with the most heinous aggravations of wickedness and villainy;
the (...) or price paid for our Atonement must be sutably great, otherwise
God's Justice would be still unsatisfied. But the Blood of the whole Creation
could not redeem one Soul from Death. Wherefore he must be God, that should
undergo this Wrath; and God that he might overcome and not sink under the
Punishment.

More particularly; if we consider the Price which was to be paid for the
Purchase of our Redemption; the many and great Obstacles which were to be
removed; the potent and numberless Enemies which were to be conquered and
subdued, as Satan, Death, Hell, etc. the Justice of God (as before) which must
be fully satisfied for Man's Delinquency and Disobedience; the intolerable
Burden of our Sins; and the shattered Condition of our Nature, which was to be
rectified and restored to its primitive Innocence and Integrity; If (I say) we
consider all these Particulars impartially: We must necessarily infer, that
'twas not mere Man that could atchieve our Reconciliation; but it is the immense
Merit of the eternal Son of God, that must conciliate the difference and
reconcile sinful Man to an offended Justice.

Secondly, Why Christ must be Man.
The Savior of the World must be Man also, to constitute him a Redeemer of
Men. And this was absoutely necessary upon several Accounts.

(1) Because he must be subject to the Law, and perform all the Conditions
which the Law required at our Hands; in making up all our Defects by his
Active, and satisfying for all our Obliquities by his Passive, and unsinning
Obedience: That as Man had deeply offended, so he should highly please God and
procure his Grace and Favor.

The Apostle is very express to this purpose. As by the Disobedience (says he)
of one Man, Romans 5.19.
many were made Sinners: So by the Obedience of one many shall be made
Righteous; that is, they shall be absolved from Guilt; rescued from Punishment;
and be restored (by degrees) to the full enjoyment of their lost Innocence and
happiness. But the Deity being impassible, and Christ our Surety having
Covenanted to do this sor us; 'twas necessary therefore that he should assume
Our Nature; Heb. 2.9, 10.
that he might be made perfect through sufferings, and taste Death for every Man.

(2) 'Twas requisite that the same Nature should conquer the Devil, that was
overcome by him; and propitiate for our Pardon, which had caused the Enmity
between God and us: Otherwise the Promise That the seed of the Woman should
bruise the Serpent's head had been covenanted to no purpose. Genesis 3.15.
It was the Nature of Man in the first Adam that made the Breach; and it is the
same Nature in the second Adam that must satisfy God's Justice and make our
Atonement. This was the Nature, which was tempted by Satan; and this is the
same Nature which shall for ever triumph over him.

(3) This New Covenant of Peace and Reconciliation by Christ, must be sealed in
Blood: Heb. 9.22.
For without shedding of Blood there is no Remission to be expected. Now it is
not the Blood of Bulls, Heb. 10.4.
nor of Goats that could atone for our Sins, and the Deity being impassible,
(as before) therefore Christ by his own Blood entered once into the Holy Place,
Heb. 9.12.
having by his Obedience and Sufferings (if we faithfully apply 'em) purchased
our Peace, and ratified and Sealed our Pardon.

(4) He must be Man also; that being touched with our Infirmities, He might be
sensible of our Wants; tender of our Welfare; merciful and compassionate in
bearing with our Weaknesses; solicitous for the Pardon of our Sins; and the
comforts of God's Grace to support us under the burdensome Asslictions which
spring and flow from 'em; and finally that he might bear with all the
Imperfections of our Nature, and repair the Breaches of our declining Faith.
For as he must be unskilful in instructing others to bear Afflictions
patiently, who has not been passive himself; So it is as difficult for any to
apply seasonable and successful Remedies to the Afflicted, who is a stranger to
their Sufferings. Wherefore, (says the Apostle) That the High Priest of our
Profession might be more apprehensive and sensible of our Infirmities, he
became like unto his Brethren in all things, that he might be a merciful High
Priest in things pertaining to God, Heb. 2.17.18.
and intercede effectually, and make Atonement for the sins of the People: For
in that he suffered being tempted, he knows how, and is willing to succor
those that are tempted. Having then such a compassionate Advocate and
Intercessor with the Father, we may be encouraged to come with bolduess to the
Throne of Grace; where we shall meet with a comfortable return to our Prayers,
and the favorable Acceptance of our Persons in time of need. Thus we have seen
that the Savior of the World must be God, and that he must be Man, to
constitute him a Redeemer of Men; But neither of these two Natures distinct
from the other were proper Instruments to make up the Breach: Therefore

Thirdly, Why Christ must be God and man in the same Person.
There must be a Conjunction of the Godhead and Manhood, by an Hypostatical
and real Union in the Person of Christ. To evince and illustrate this Point.

6. If God in his Justice had rooted out Mankind from the Earth, his Mercy
could not have been manifested in pardoning Trespasses and Offenses. If he had
created a new Generation pure and spotless without sin, which by Sufferings
were to satisfy for the Offenses of the former; it would 've been severity in
God to have punished the Innocent for the wicked. If God had appointed an Angel
to have taken upon him the Nature of sinful Man, the Justice of God could by no
means have been satisfied with the finite Obedience of a Creature. If God had
pardoned Man's Apostasy without satisfaction, Justice had still been violated,
and the Decree broken which was issued out against him, Genesis 2.17.
In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.

Almighty God therefore out of his inconceivable Love to Mankind, whom he had
so wonderfully created; and withal so jealous of his own Honor, that he would
neither violate the great Attribute of his Justice, nor yet obscure the Glory
of his Mercy; was pleased to appoint his only begotten Son, the express Image
and Character of his Father's Person, to take our Nature upon him, Gal. 4.4, 5.
and be made of a Woman under the Law to redeem us from the curse of it, and
that we might receive the Adoption of Sons.

Thus Christ the Savior of the World is God and Man in the same Person; and
this Union was necessary, that he might be a fit Mediator between both; to
compose the difference and solicit a Peace between God and our Souls; and by
the merit of his obedience and sufferings make our Access to the Throne of
God's Heavenly Grace more tolerable and easy. Christ is God to speak to the
Father for us; and he became Man that he might declare God's Will to us, in a
more familiar, less amazing, and more obliging Way then otherwise it could have
been: Hereby showing us an Example (by his own wonderful condescension) how we
should submit to the meanest condition, and entertain the worst Events with a
Patience and Courage suitable to the submissive, yet Magnanimous Spirit of
Christianity. Thus much of the Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in the
Person of Christ: Which the Heavens do admire, all the Inhabitants of the Earth
may be astonished at; and the Devils in Hell are afraid to think of. We pass
forward

2dly. To discourse of those admirable Benefits and Privileges, which result
from this blessed Union of the Divine, and Humane Natures in the Person of
Christ, to the unspeakable Comfort and Happiness of all true Believers. And

(1) Our Nature is wonderfully Enobl'd and exalted since it became a Temple for
the Divinity of Christ to dwell in. No Creature but Man, did ever arrive at
that pitch of Honor to be personally united to, and be adorned with the
Godhead. And that our Nature is thus dignified, I have clearly evicted from
the Premises. To which may be added ex abundanti, these two remarkable
Passages from Antiquity: The one is of Saint Austin in these Words, Whosoever
(says he) shall despise, Aug. de Verb. Dom 2 Joan. Sermon. 38. Luke 1.71.72.
Neque tamea creaturam adoramus absit, sed Dominum rerum Creatam incarnatum
verbum Deum adoramus. Athan. Or, 5. contra Arianos.
or refuse to worship Christ with Divine Worship, shall undoubtedly suffer the
Pains of Eternal Death. The other is of St. Athanasius, who writing against the
Arrians, vindicated the orthodox Christians from the imputation of Idolatry,
(which these Heretics endeavored to brand 'em with) God forbid (says he)
that we should worship the Creature; but we do worship the Lord of all the
Creatures, God the Word Incarnate, etc. But concerning the Communication of
Properties, and whereas God is said to 've purchased our Redemption; that he
redeemed the Church with his own Blood; and that the blessed Virgin is termed
(...) the Mother of God, etc. These are all inconceivable Mysteries; yet do
fully import the Exaltation of our Humane Nature: But though we should not too
curiously pry into them; yet are obliged hereby to admire and adore God's
infinite Goodness and Mercy, who has thus advanced our Nature from the very
dregs of Corruption, to a State of absolute Perfection and eternal Bliss.

(2) And as our humane Nature is thus wonderfully dignified by its Union to the
Godhead; Gal. 3.22. Luke 4.18.
So we who were Enemies to God by wicked Works, are again restored (by the
Power and Efficacy of Christ's Mediatorship) to God's Grace and Favor. He has
broken the Shackles of Universal Guilt; subdues and destroys all his and our
Enemies; rescues us from the slavery and dominion of Sin and Satan; has taken
away the Sting of Death; and does effectually revoke that fatal Curse, by which
we were exiled from Paradise, and bound over to everlasting Punishment. And
having (by the immense Sactifice of his precious Blood) paid so dear a Price
for our Redemption; all our Debts are now fully discharged; God's Anger
appeased; his Justice satisfied; an eternal Peace between Heaven and Earth
fully ratified; and all true Believers in Christ are reinstated in a Condition
of Hope, and an undoubted capacity of being for ever happy.

(3) The Sun of Righteousness (thanks be to our gracious God) is risen upon our
Horizon, Luke 1.78, 79. Isai. 60.1.
diffusing his pleasant Light and saving Influences over the whole Body of the
Creation; dispelling by his radiant Beams, the Nignt and dark Clouds of
Ignorance and Error, which (before his coming) had overspread the face of the
whole Earth. Christ is the Way, John 14.16.
the Truth, and the Life; He keeps his Residence in, and exerts his Power in
the defense and protection of all pious Souls; he enriches his Members with
that pure and perfect Wisdom which is from above, and kindles Charity, Joy, and
Comfort in their Hearts, by the powerful Influence and Operation of his Grace
and Spirit; he raises their Affections above transitory Things, and does
inspire and qualify 'em with such holy and heavenly Dispositions, as will
sweeten and sanctify all the Cross Providence which are incident to them in
this Life; and will finally advance them to, and put 'em in Possession of a
State of ravishing, and uncompounded Pleasures at God's right hand for evermore.

(4) Christ Jesus the righteous governs his Church with perfect Love and
Clemency, preserves his Servants in Peace and safety; and it is impossible
(says Irenaeus) to recount the number of those great things which are done
through the World by the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of Christ; for the Succor
of the Nations, and the Salvation of Mankind: For as he lived, so he died, and
rose again for us to cure all our Maladies; and to restore us to a more happy
condition than we lost by the Fall and defection of the first Adam. And now (to
our unspeakable comfort) he is sitting in Majesty and triumph at the right hand
of God, of which more fully afterward) pleading his infinite Merits, and
interceding power fully with the Father for us: That all these Blessings and
Privileges, and many more than we can either conceive or think of, may be
seasonably applied for the comfort and Benefit of all true Believers. Hence we
proceed

3dly. The Application of this Point; importing its influence upon Practice.
To the Application of this Point, and shall consider what Influence this
important and saving Doctrine should have upon the Lives and Practices of Men.
And

(1) This is a Subject which may ravish our Souls with Joy, and Wonder: A
Mirror which the holy Angels delight in and desire to contemplate. God and Man
in the Person of Christ, was the hope and expectation of the Fathers; whom the
Patriarchs foresaw, and rejoiced at, and whom the Prophets in such magnificent
streins did predict and presignifie, whose presence makes glad the City of our
God. But the perfect understanding of this Mystery transcends all Humane
Knowledge, and in this Valley of Ignorance we can but attain to a small measure
of it. His Name is Wonderful, and who can understand it? Councellor, and who
can find it? The mighty God, and who can comprehend it? How he being God,
should be begotten of God, and yet but one God still? Or how he could be born
of a Woman without a Man, and she continue still a Virgin?

That Almighty God out of the Virgin Earth created man, and breathed into his
Nostrils the Breath of Life, was indeed a great Miracle: But that a Virgin
should conceive and bear a Son that was both God and Man was far greater. That
God without a Woman should form Eve out of Man was a strange Wonder; but 'twas
much more prodigious that a Woman without a Man should bring forth a Son that
was both God and Man.

For Iron to swim above the Water; a Fountain to flow out of a dry Jaw Bone; an
Ass to speak; an old Woman to Conceive; Manna to be rained down from Heaven; a
withered Rod to yield both Blossoms and Fruit; Rivers to flow from a flinty
Rock; Waters to be turned into Blood; Ravens to feed a Prophet; Jordan to turn
his stream backward; the Red Sea to be divided; etc. These are Miracles to be
extremely admired: But in the Incarnation of our blessed Redcemer we have a
greater Miracle than all these; for a Maid is made the Mother of God; a great
Sphere is drawn into the Center; the great God of Heaven and Earth was
conceived in the narrow Womb of a Virgin. This is indeed a Miracle which humane
Reason's not able to comprehend: Miraoulum Mirabiliter Miraculosum. 1 Timothy 1.15.
And therefore (says the Apostle) it is a faithful saying, That Jesus Christ
came into the World to save sinners; We may as well doubt of the reality of our
Being and Existence, as suspect the Truth of it. This is the Lord's doing, and
it is mavelous in our Eyes.

Man is naturally inquisitive after Curiosities, and very desirous to know
strange Accidents. Now here is a Subject for the most contemplative Curiosity to
be exercised about. A Mystery indeed, and the more we pry into it, the more
miraculous we find it. The more we know of it, the more we shall be inflamed
with the desire of comprehending it; and shall be still more and more happy in
the improvement of this excellent Knowledge. Si Christum discis, nihil est si
cae^era nescis. Si Christum, etc
All other Wisdom without the Knowledge of God in Christ, is as bad, if not
worse than Ignorance it self: For though (with the wisest Solomon) we could
understand all the secrets of Nature; the several Motions and Influences of the
Stars; all the Intrigues and Policies of State; all the Mysteries of Traffic,
Arts and Sciences; and whatever can be imagined to be within the reach of
humane Understanding: Yet without the saving Knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, all our Wisdom is but Foolishness, and to no purpose.

Let the Son of God therefore, made Man for our sakes, become the Subject of
our devoutest Meditations. 1 Cor. 2.2.
The Holy Apostle determined to know nothing else, and I am sure it is both our
Interest and Duty to concur with him in this Opinion. We read in the Gospels,
that Christ was sometimes in the Cratch, sometimes in the Garden, sometimes in
the Synagogue, sometimes in Egypt, sometimes at Jerusalem, sometimes at a
Marriage, sometimes amongst Publicans, conversant with both Sexes, and among
all sorts of Persons, high and low, rich and poor, noble and ignoble, and at
last died between two Thieves. There can be no Place then, no Person, no
Estate, no Condition of Life, which does not continually present us with one
Object or other to renew and resume our Meditations; and may minister some
Occasion or other to think on Christ. And this would prove the most absolute
Catholicon to support us under, and to encourage us to conflict with the
Sorrows and Miseries of a troublesome World. Let us therefore at all Times, in
all Places, amongst all Persons, and in every condition of Life, lift up our
Eyes unto Christ. Let the strong defend him in the Weak, and the Weak honor
him in the strong; let the Rich give him Alms in the Poor, and the Poor love
and admire him in the Rich; let all Persons of all Ranks and Conditions so love
and honor him, that when the Vail of our Mortality is taken away, we may not
only know him and see him as he is; but be known of him, received by him, and
eternally enjoy him.

(2) The Consideration of this no less gracious than wonderful Union of the
Godhead, and Manhood in the Person of Christ our Redeemer, should raise our
Minds to a true sense of the Dignity of our Nature; That the Disposition of our
Hearts, the Frame and Temper of our Spirits, may rise in some considerable
Proportion to that State and Condition which he has been pleased to enoble us
with. We are now of the Blood Royal of Heaven; Psalm. 8.5. Heb. 2.7, 8. and 1 5
and 2.16.
and he has made little lower than the Angels, to Crown us with Glory and
Honor: Our Minds and Affections then should be sutably great and noble, and
chiefly conversant about those excellent things, which are the Joy, Delight,
and Wonder of the Holy Angels, and Saints glorified. It would be strangely
incongruous, and infinitely below the Dignity of our Heaven-born Souls, to be
employed and busied about the base Cares, unmanly Desires, and ignoble Designs
of this vain and transitory World. Luke 6.35 Heb. 2.11 Romans 8.17.
We are now the Children of God, and Brethren of Christ; Heirs and coheirs
with him of the same eternal Inheritance; To be brutish and sensual then,
would not only be a great Indignity and Afront to our Illustrious and
Omnipotent Relations, and a Disparagement to our selves; but it would be a
cutting off the Entail, and an absolute Forfeiture of our Title to all the
Blessings and Privileges of the Gospel. Besides, As the Profane and
Dissolute, the Unbelieving and Disobedient Christians, would be incapable of
relishing or delighting in the Joys of Heaven; So they may assure themselves
that if they live and die in those Sins unrepented of, Gal. 5.21.
they shall never enter into that Kingdom.

(3) The spiritual and pious Reflections of sincere Believers on this gracious
Union of our Nature to the Godhead, may sill their Hearts with heavenly Joy
and Comfort, and their Mouths with Praise and Thanksgiving. And doubtless there
could never be greater Cause of rejoicing to Mankind; nor should any Tidings be
more grateful to Mortal Ears then this Evangelium; that the eternal Son of God
for us Men, and for our Salvation came down from Heaven. Were the glorious
Angels in Heaven transported with such an Exstacy of Joy as caused them to
break forth into triumphant Halelujahs? And did they warble forth Hymns of
Praise and Congratulation when they beheld that wonderful Spectacle of Majesty,
Luke 2.13 14.
Mercy and Humility in the Incarnation of our Lord? What reason then have we
Christians to exult and leap for Joy, and bear a part in that heavenly Chorus,
since we (above all the Creatures) are so signally happy, as to reap the
Benefits and Privileges of that unparalled and boundless Charity? Let us
therefore never cease to chant forth his Praises, in the Words of the holy and
devout Virgin in her Magnificat saying, Luke 1.46, 47, etc.
My soul shall magnify the Lord, etc.

(4) The Consideration of the Union of these two Natures in the Person of
Christ, should not only beget in us a correspondent esteem of him; oblige us to
be faithful and obedient to Him. Has he done and suffered so many things for
us, that we should live comfortably here, (in the participation of those
excellent Privileges which I Have mentioned) die happily, and reign with him
eternally? Phil. 2.9, 10.
And is it not then most fit and reasonable, that he should rule and govern us,
and exact the highest Veneration and Reverence from us? Now, the only Evidence
and Testimony which can be given of the Truth and Sincerity of our Obedience to
Christ, is the keeping his Commandments. Joh. 14.15.
And to enforce this Obligation, it will be necessary to consider; Heb. 1.14.
That the Good Angels in Heaven are his ministering Spirits to do him Service,
and cheerfully obey him; Mark. 5.10. Luke 8.28
and the Devils in Hell are subject to his Authority. All the sensitive and
inanimate Creatures (which are guided by no other Genius than that of mere
natural Instinct) do submit to the Laws of his Providence, and are not backward
in paying that just Tribute of Fear and Obedience to the eternal Son of God
made man for our sakes: How much more should we, who are not only Men but
Christians, and actuated by an higher Intelligence than that of Nature, be
conformable in all things to the Wisdom and Will of God in Christ? Has the
Eternal Son of God divested himself of that infinite Honor, Wealth, Joy and
Happiness, which he might have triumphed in for ever at the right hand of God?
Did he willingly submit to an ignoble and inglorious Obscurity under the Vail
of our flesh merely for our sakes? And shall we be unwilling to do or suffer
any thing for him? That would be such an Instance of Injustice and
Disingenuity, as well as Disobedience, as might deservedly render us obnoxious
to the severest Resentments of his Divine Wrath and Vengeance. Mat. 25.30.
He will cause such unprofitable Servants to be bound hand and foot, and give
'em their just Portion in the Horrors and Sorrows of a sad and miserable
Eternity.

(5) The Personal Union of these two Natures in Christ, may encourage us to
have a steadfast Confidence in, and a cheerful Dependence upon him, Quia quod ex
me mihi deest, usurpo ex visceribus Domini.
for the supply of all our Temporal and Spiritual Wants, and for Support and
Comfort in all our Straits and Difficulties whatsoever: For we have all things
in Christ, and Christ's all things in us. If we be sick with Sin, Christ is our
Physician to save us; if we be Hungry or thirsty, he is the Bread of Life, Joh.
6.35 Joh. 7.38.
and the Fountain of ever-living Waters; and whosoever eats him (that is
Spiritually by faith) shall never hunger, and whosoever drinks of him shall
never thirst; if we be naked, he will cloth us with the Robes of his Virtue,
and the Garments of his Righteousness, Psalm. 45.8. Gen 27.27.
which smell of Myrh, Alloes, and Cassia, and are like the smell of a pleasant
Field which the Lord has blessed; if we be simple or ignorant, he is our Wisdom
to instruct us; if we be sinful, he is our Righteousness to save us; if we
desire to be holy, he is our Sanctification to bless us, Acts 3.26.
in turning us away from our Iniquities, Tit. 2.14.
and purifying to himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works; if the Devil
tempt and allure us to sin, he is the Captain of our Salvation, who has not
only (in a great measure) countermanded Satan's Commission but dissolved his
Authority. 1 John 3.8.
Now as all sincere Believers are thus abundantly supplied with all things
needful and convenient, an hundred fold in this Life, and in the World to come
Life everlasting. Luke 18.3^


So on the Contrary, All the pompous Delights of this visible World, (though they
be seemingly never so specious or profitable) unless they be sanctified to us
by the Grace of Christ's holy Spirit, instead of being a Comfort and Blessing,
they will become our Plague and Punishment. In like manner all our Wisdom,
Righteousness, Learning, etc. which are not derived from this Fountain, and
purified by the Blood of Christ, are but as a menstruous Cloth, or filthy Rags;
and neither pleasing to God, nor beneficial to our Selves, as might be
instanced (if 'twere needful) in many Particulars. Those outward
Accomplishments may indeed make us appear Great; but can never make us Good:
They may puff us up with Pride and Selfconceit; but they seldom or never make
men more holy and virtuous. John 15.5.
Without Christ we can do nothing; but by the Assistance of his Grace and
Spirit we are enabled to do all things. 2 Cor. 9.8.
Our Sufficiency is of him, and we must ascribe all our holy Performances (not
to any Endeavors of our own, but) to the Riches of God's Grace in Christ. And
whatever we do that is Holy or Virtuous, it is no more We, but Christ, who by
the Power and Presence of his Holy Spirit dwells and works in Us.

In a Word, We hold all that we have in Capite from him, and it is the best
Tenure too. We are his by Purchase, he has paid a dear Price for us, and
therefore how dear and precious should he be to us? We are Obliged to forsake
all and follow him: Matthew. 19.27. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
This is the most effectual Plea against Satan's Stratagems, that we are not
our own, for we are bought with a Price; and therefore entirely at his, not our
own Disposal. This is that seasonable Expedient which will vanquish this, and
all other Enemies, even our Faith in Jesus Christ, God and Man in the same
Person.

(6) And Lastly; This Point of Doctrine duly considered, will remind us of the
State and Condition of other Men as well as our Selves. Has God set such an
inestimable Value upon Men's Souls as to purchase 'em at so dear a Price? Could
nothing less then the Blood of the eternal Son of God pay a sufficient Ransom
for the Redemption of them? How should we then, respect honor and indulge
Christ's Humane Nature in the poorest and meanest of his Servants? And since
Good has been pleased to think us worthy of so much Care and Indulgence, we have
Reason to use all possible Endeavors, to keep these precious Jewels pure and
unspotted, both in our selves and others. Have we contracted such an honorable
Alliance with, and do we stand so nearly related to the holy Trinity, and our
fellow Christians by the Union of our Nature to the Person of Christ? How then
should our Thoughts, Desires, Dispositions, Words and Actions be conformable to
the Nature, Laws, and Dignity of such Relations? How should we be afraid to
submit to any thing that is base or ignoble, lest we reflect Dishonor upon God,
and that Nature of ours, which he has so much dignified by his Incarnation?

Let us therefore endeavor (as we are obliged both in Duty and Interest) in
every Iustance, and Circumstance of our Lives to be, and to do good; to avoid
all things evil in themselves, and of evil Report; That we may thereby glorify
God in our Bodies and in our Spirits which are his. This would prove the most
certain Expedient to bring this excellent Religion of the Holy and Eternal
Jesus into Repute and Credit, with those that differ from us; and (by our
hearty Compliances with all its reasonable Constitutions) we cannot fail both
of the present, and future Rewards which spring and flow from it.

Thus I have treated distinctly on the first Branch of this great Mystery of
Man's Redemption; and herein Particularly of the Names, and Natures of Christ,
and that wonderful Union of 'em both in the same Person. I have alleged several
important Reasons why the Savior of the World should be God; why he should be
Man; and why God and Man in the same Person of Christ. I have considered those
special Advantages and Privileges resulting from this heavenly Doctrine, with
the peculiar Influences which it should have upon the Lives and Practices of
all Christians. God Almighty give us all Grace so to believe these Truths
faithfully, and practice them conscientiously, That the whole frame and
contexture of our Lives may be truly conformable to the Kingdom and Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

CHAP. IV. Of the Offices of Christ in general.
BY discoursing of the Offices of Christ, and the Manner of their
Administration, we may understand (more particularly) the great End and Design
of our Savior's coming into the World: And the many great things which he has
done and suffered for the Redemption and Happiness of lost Mankind.

The Name of Christ (as we noted before) is a Title which imports Office and
Dignity. The Name Christ imports his Offices.
It Is a Greek word in the Original, and answers to the Hebrew Messiah; both
which signify our Anointed Savior. Historians tell us, that 'twas an ancient
Custom in the Easten part of the World to Anoint their Public Officers (Kings
and Prophets especially) with material Oil; denoting and symbolizing thereby,
the liberal and plentiful Effusion of extraordinary Endowments, such as might
qualify them for, and presignifie the hopeful and happy success of their
Administrations.

But our Christ the eternal Son of God (coming into the World to manage that
great and important Office of Mediator between God and Man;) must be
sanctified, Christ's unction differed from all others.
and set a part in a more peculiar manner than any of the Ancients were: For
they were only anointed with material Oil, but he was Sanctified and filled
with the Holy Ghost; they were set apart by Men, but he was confirmed by the
Father in this Office; they were invested with Authority and Ability to save
for a Time; he for Ever.

Therefore, A Concurrence of all the three Offices in Christ.
that he might be every way sutably qualified for the Charge and Burden which
he underwent, he became Prophet, Priest, and King; all which Offices were never
conferred on any but on Christ: For it is observed, that Melchisedec was King and
Priest, but no Prophet; David was King and Prophet, but no Priest; Samuel was
Priest and Prophet, but no King: But there is a Concurrence of all these three
Offices in Christ, and he was furnished from Heaven with a sufficiency of Power,
Holiness, Wisdom and Goodness to dispense them for the Comfort and Benefit of
all that believe in, and obey Him. And to this End 'twas necessary

(1) That he should be a Prophet, The absolute Necessity of Christ's being a
Prophet.
to cure that gross Ignorance which we derived from the Loins of the first
Adam; to reveal and expound God's Mind and Will to us; to teach us how to apply
his Merits by the exercise of a true and lively Faith; and to direct us how to
walk more conformably to God's Will in doing our Duties and avoiding Sin for
the future; that so the Devil and our Lusts should not have the Rule and
Dominion over us.

(2) It was necessary that he should be our Anointed Priest, And Priest
Altar, and Sacrifice; that he might propitiate and make Atonement for all our
Offenses; free us from the Guilt and Punishment of them; reconcile us to God's
Grace and Favor; and translate us from a state of Sin and Death, to a State of
Righteousness and eternal Life.

(3) But since this Peace and Happiness could not be obtained for us, And Xing.
not applied to us, but by an absolute and irresistible Power, (considering the
many Enemies and Impediments we have to conflict with in our Christian Course;)
therefore 'twas necessary that he should be a King: That having sufficiency of
Power and Authority, he might enable us to resist and overcome all those
Difficulties and Oppositions which might hinder our Return, from the Chaos of
corrupt Nature, to a state of Grace and Glory. And to this End, God has been
pleased to raise him far above all Principalities and Powers; that he might
effectually apply the satisfaction which he made, and the Ransom which he paid
for the Salvation of Mankind.

Thus much of Christ's anointing in General (by God's holy Spirit) to those
three great Offices, which he received as the Head, and conveyeth to his
Members the Church: By instructing us as a Prophet; satisfying for us as a
Priest; and protecting and governing us as a King. We pass on to Particulars.

CHAP. V. Of his Prophetical Office.
THere are several other Titles synonimous to his being a Prophet, which are
ascribed to our blessed Savior in holy Scripture. He is called the Pastor, the
Apostle of our Profession, Rabbi, Master, a Teacher from God, a Lawgiver, the
Author and Finisher of our Faith, a Minister of the Circumcision, a Teacher of
the Gentiles; that he might be a Light to them, as well as the Glory of his
People Israel. All which several Titles and Appellations do import, that he was
a Prophet sent from God to instruct his People and to guide them in the Way of
Salvation.

And without all controversy, Christ the Prophet
this is he whom God the Father promised to send into the World; whom the
Prophet Isaiah tells us should be anointed to Preach the Gospel: And being
com'd into these lower Regions, was confirmed in this Office by an audible
Voice from Heaven, three times repeated, (as before) with this peremptory
Command annexed to his Commission, Hear ye him. His Mission was also confirmed
by many notable Signs and Wonders; by the Testimony of his Harbinger John the
Baptist; and many other infallible Proofs which would be needless to mention
here. But besides, the Disposition and Temper of his Mind was every way suitable
to his Office and Authority: For, his Wisdom and Discretion, Purity and
Holiness, His Particular Qualifications
Courage and Constancy, Meekness and Patience, Sweetness and Goodness, Power
and Majesty (conspicuous in all his Discourses and Demeanor) are so many
unanswerable Topics to prove, that our Lord Jesus Christ was anointed with the
holy Spirit, and with Power; that he might be every way qualified for the due
Administration of this high and extraordinary Office of a Prophet.

Which Office (in the most strict sense) denotes, that the Person invested with
it should be inspired with extraordinary Abilities to Prophecy of and foretell
things to come. And though our Anointed Savior, could not be deficient in this;
(since his Wisdom and Knowledge are infinite) yet his Prophetical Office is to
be understood in a larger Acceptance; and does import a Person endu'd with the
extraordinary Gifts of Divine Wisdom and Authority; to interpret God's Mind and
Meaning, and to reveal his whole Will to the Sons of Men, so far as it may
concern his own Glory, and their present and eternal Welfare.

Thus we have seen, how Christ our great Prophet is every way sutably disposed
and qualified for the Management of this weighty Office. We shall enquire in
the next Place into the manner of its Administration: The Admistration of this
Office.
And for the better understanding of this Point, We shall consider

1. What it is that God has been pleased to make known and communicate to us by
the Spirit of his Son. 2. What Returns of Duty and Obedience he expects from
us. For the
1st. What God has been pleased to reveal to us, by the Spirit of his Son.
Christ our great Prophet has (by his Grace and Spirit) revealed God's will to
Mankind; hereby declaring what he will have us believe and do, that we may be
happy here, and for ever. And to this end he has been graciously pleased to
take away the Veil, and has fully explained those Laws of Nature and Morality
which were never understood before; Mat. chapters 5.6, 7.
he has also corrected the Mistakes, and supplied the Defects of all former
Dispensations; Concerning the Law which he was rectified and improved.
and added some excellent Principles and Precepts, most conducing to the
Interest and Satisfaction of Mankind; which do far transcend all former Laws
and Institutions whatsoever. For in the Doctrine of the Gospel, we have anexact
Specimen of all those Truths which concern the Salvation of Christians; wherein
the Terms of our Reconciliation are fully and clearly expressed; all the
Doctrines, Commands, Counsels, Conditions, Covenants, Threatenings and Promises;
(which respect the present, and future Happiness and Misery of our Souls and
Bodies) are so thoroughly stated, that he who runs may read. And the excellent
Design of this great Ambassie; the Privileges and Immunities of this Gospel
Covenant, are not limited to some few Kingdoms and Countries; but extended to
all Persons in all Ages, through the most remote and distant Parts of the World.
The sound thereof is gone into all the Earth; discovering such Truths, and
instituting such Laws and Precepts as were never known before. For

(1) Christ our Prophet has presented us (in the Doctrine of the Gospel) with a
clearer and more distinct Notion and Character of God himself, The Nature
Attributes, etc. of God, more clearly revealed
then ever was known before;) as to his Nature, Persons, Unity, Attributes,
Properties, etc. and also concerning all his Works of Creation, Providence,
Redemption, Sanctification, etc. All which (seriously considered) describe him
to be a God of infinite and immense Power, Wisdom, Truth, Justice, Mercy,
Goodness, etc. (of which more fully hereafter) and in a Word, a Being which
consists of all possible Holiness and Perfection.

(2) He has made a full discovery of those fundamental Truths which concern his
Divine, The fundamental Truths of the Gospel fully discovered.
and Humane Natures, as united in the Person of our blessed Redeemer:
Intimating hereby, what he has done and suffered for us; and the consequent
Benefits which result from his meritorious Death and Intercession, to all such
as apply 'em; as the Sanctification of their Persons, the Pardon of their Sins,
and the hopeful Assurance of a blessed Resurrection to eternal Life for
Christ's sake.

(3) Christ (as Prophet) has enacted such Laws for the Government of the
Actions, Rules for the religious conduct of our Lives adapted to our Capacities.
Words, Thoughts, Affections, Inclinations, Appetites, and Passions, both of
the outward and inward Man, as are highly rational and ingenuous, plain and
easy to be understood and practiced; and so universally Good and Beneficial in
all Respects, that (as the like was never known before; so) it is beyond the
Capacity of Men and Angels to conceive any thing better, or so perfective of
the Nature, Reason, and Interest of Mankind: For it is plain in in all the
Particulars, that our blessed Lord has prescribed no other Conditions for the
Attainment of eternal Happiness, then what are most consentaneous both to our
Rational Nature, and present Interest in this World: And would certainly have
been best for us to 've done if they had not been commanded: whereby He has
evidently declared, that he is so far pleased with our Services and Duties to
him, as they are advantageous and beneficial to our selves; that we may take
one Blessing in the Way to another; Grace, Peace, and Contentment here, in the
Way to Glory hereafter.

(4) All the Duties of Christianity are of the same Stamp and Character with
its Principles and Precepts, The Duties tafie to be performed.
and every way so correspondent to the Rules of universal Rectitude; that
there is no Person that is truly regenerate, can assign any Difficulty in Praying
unto God, or in Praising of him, in Hearing, Reading, and Meditating on his
Word, in receiving the holy Sacraments, in holy Conferences, pious
Ejaculations, etc. Yea even those more austere Duties of Religion; as
Repentance, Mortification, Self-denial, Self-resignation, taking up the Cross,
Patience in Afflictions, etc. which (though they be most afflictive to Flesh and
Blood, yet) are so far from being troublesome and uneasy to the rational Powers
of the Soul; that (doubtless) if there be any Elixir or substantial Pleasure in
this World, it must result and flow from a serious, devout, and conscientious
Performance of the Duties of Religion: And therefore the Church of England
(upon well grounded Experience) declares, That the Service of God is the most
absolute and perfect Freedom. And this will more evidently appear, if We
consider

(5) Those Motives and Arguments which the Christian Religion propounds, And
enforced by powerful Motives and Encouragements.
to encourage us in the doing of our Duties: Which are neither few nor
inconsiderable. For if we be faithful herein, we have an Assurance of the
Pardon of all our sins past; the Promise of the most plentiful Supplies of
God's preventing, restraining, exciting, assisting, and sanctifying Grace; to
enable us to avoid all Sin, resist all Temptations, and to inspire us with such
a holy Frame and Temper of Mind and Spirit, as may dispose us to serve God
sincerely and affectionately (in all the Instances of Duty,) through the whole
Course of our Lives. To which considerable Advantages and Privileges, he has
added ex abundanti, the Promises of the Blessings of this Life; Mat. 6.33.
as Health, Wealth, a good Reputation, Peace, Prosperity, etc.

But lest all these should not prove Motive sufficient to enforce the Practice
of those most pleasant and profitable Duties of our Religion; he has further
assured us that (upon the faithful discharge of those necessary and important
Duties) we shall liv^ for ever with him; in whose Presence is fullness of joy,
Psalm. 16.11.
and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore. Now, if all these powerful
Incentives to Duty do not charm and allure us to be holy and virtuous, devout
and serious in our Religious Addresses; it will be requisite to consider on the
other hand, Romans 1.18
that the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against all Ungodliness, etc.
And as the impious and profane, who contemn, or neglect the Service of God and
the Duties of Religion, seldom escape punishment, even in this Life; so there is
a dismal. Time approaching, Psalm. 9.17.
when the Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the People shall forget
God. If then such Arguments as these do not persuade us to be holy and
religious, I know not what will! If these Menaces do not force us to fly from
the Wrath to come, and sue for our Reconciliation, I know not what can! And
it is most just and reasonable, that those who despise or neglect the Riches of
God's Grace and Mercy propounded and promised in the One; should feel eternally
the Tragical Effects of his Justice and Vengeance denounced and threatened in
the Other.

Thus, the whole Tenor of that Religion which Christ our great Prophet has so
clearly revealed to us, and propagated in so considerable a part of the World,
is a lively Transcript and Pattern of God's eternal Wisdom and Goodness.
Wherein the Divine Pleasure (in what concerns our happiress and dependence upon
him, in this and a future State) is so plain and obvious to be known, possible
and easy to be performed, and recommended to us by such powerful Motives and
Encouragements; that if we be not wanting to our selves in the faithful
Performance of those incomparably pleasant Duties which the Gospel prescribes,
it is impossible we should fail of the Blessings and Rewards of it.

And to convince us that neither the Terms of our Reconciliation are difficult,
The Duties of Religion are inforet and recommended.
nor the Duties of our Religion impossible to be performed. Our blessed Savior
(this great Prophet) has left us his own, and we have the Examples of many
thousands of his Saints and Servants on Record as Patterns to walk by, who have
confirmed the Truth of this Excellent Doctrine and sealed it with their Blood:
So that we have no cause to be discouraged in the stictest Compliance with all
the Conditions and Duties of the Gospel, because they have been done
effectually by Others: Nor can we doubt of the success Recompense herein;
because the Saints in Heaven (who were formerly in the same Circumstances with
us) do now, and shall eternally inherit the comfortable and saving fruits of
them. And

1st. Christ our great Prophet was strictly conformable to his own Laws and
Constitutions, By his own Example.
in all the Instances both of his Active and Passive Obedience; having imposed
nothing upon his Proselites and Followers, but what he first practiced himself
in our own Nature; leaving us hereby an Example, that we should follow his
steps. 1 Pet. 2.21.
And indeed it is plain and obvious, that the Gospel is rather a Narrative of
his holy and exemplary Life, than a Systeme of his Precepts: For the Doctrine
of the One is mostly comprehended in the Graces and and Virtues of the Other:
For

(1) Christ was a Partern to us in all the Instances of an Active Obedience;
And by his Active Obedience.
as will fully appear in these following Particulars. And

First, To the Ceremonial Law. Luke 2.21. Mat. 3.15.
he was most exact and uniform in his Obedience to the Ceremonial Law: For he
was Circumcised the eighth day; and submitted to Baptism (a Rite substituted in
its stead) that he might be a Pattern to others (for he had otherwise no
occasion to be Baptized) to the end of the World. He kept the Jewish Passover,
and all their other solemn Feasts, and Sabbaths; he frequented their Temple,
and Synagogues, at the Hours of Prayer, and taught publicly in both; he was
subject to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's sake; and became in all
things conformable to the lawful Customs of his Country, and the regular
Constitutions of that Church, under whose Polity he was born and educated.

Secondly, The Moral Law. Math. 5.17
He was uniform in his Obedience to all the Precepts of the Moral Law, in the
strictest sense and meaning of it. And although there be some Actions of our
blessed Savior's Li^e upon Record, (particularly those Maracles which he
wrought, wherein he asserted and vindicated his Divine Power and Authority)
which were never designed for our Imitation; yet in all such Instances (as it is
well observed by most modern Divines) wherein the Evangelical Doctrine is to be
our Map and Rule, his holy Practice and Obedience are to be our Guide and
President to walk by.

Thirdly, In all the Duties of Piety to God.
His Piety toward God (inconformity to his own Doctrine) was even and
constant, not affected with high Transports and Raptures in Devotion, but such
as was meet and easy for Mortals to imitate: For all his Addresses to God were
secret and serious; free from all appearances of Hypocrisy and Ostentation;
most calm and candid in themselves; and always conducted with Reason and
Sobriety: He forsook his earthly Parents, lest they should be Hindrances unto
him in doing the Will and the Work of his heavenly Father.

Fourthly, And in his whole Conversation toward Men.
His whole Conversation amongst Men was innocent and candid, free and
ingenuous; he resisted not Evil with Evil, but treated his most fierce and
implacable Enemies with Courtesy and Kindness. He paid Tribute where it could
not be exacted, to testify his Loyalty and Subjection to earthly Powers. He
was just and charitable to all Men without partiality; nor was there any Guile
found in him. Joh. 8.46.
All the Sermons which he preached, and the many Miracles which he wrought, were
so many melting and compassionate Expressions of his immense Goodness and Mercy
to the Souls and Bodies of Men: For whose sake he was most active and
industrious in all the Instances of Charity and Beneficence, and made it his
whole Business to do good. Act. 10.38. His whole life is an Example of Virtue
and Goodness.


Fifthly and Lastly, What a divine Light and Luster did his admirable Virtues
send abroad into the World! Even those which were more peculiar and private to
himself, became eminent and conspicuous to others. How many Instances of his
Humility, Meekness, Patience, Candor, Constancy, and Perseverance in welldoing
are yet upon Record for our Example and Imitation? And in a Word, there was not
one Passage in the whole Course of his Life, but Odours of Grace and Virtue did
thereby break forth from him, to the wonder and astonishment of Jew and Gentile.

But God having appointed the Gospel Dispensation to be a State of Sufferings,
and Sorrows and Afflictions to be the Portion and Patrimony of Believers; so
that we cannot expect (ordinarily) to be happy hereafter unless we be afflicted
here: Therefore our blessed Savior to encourage us in our Warfare, was made
perfect through Sufferings. (...) 10.
And as he because a Pattern for us to exemplify (as before) in all those
Instances of an Active, He became also a Pattern to us in his Passive
Obedience. Mar. 4.1^
so likewise

2dly. of a Passive Obedience: To instance in some Particulars. And

(1) Though our potent and politic Adversary the Devil did frequently assault him
with various Temptations, and so attemper'd and gilded his Baits that no less
than an untainted Innocence, and invicible Power could have been able to resist
them: Yet our blessed Lord did effectually countermine and defeat all his
Projects by Grace and Virtue; by Prayers and Tears rather than force and
Violence.

(2) How many thousands of the Jews were every where in Combination against him
to take away his Life? Yet with what Patience, Meekness, and Humility did he
submit to all those Indignities and Affronts, which those his restless and
malicious Adversaries put upon him? For tho he was Scourged and Buffered, Spit
upon and Reviled, Arraigned, Condemned, and Crucified; and that in a most
infamous manner too, between Thieves: (of which more fully hereafter) yet for
all that he went as a Lamb to the slaughter, Isai. 53.7.
and as a Sheep before the Shearers is Dumb, so he opened not his mouth, unless
it was to pity and pray for his Persecutors.

(3) That he might be sensible of, and more deeply affected with our
Infirmities and Afflictions, he did not only voluntarily submit himself to all
the lawful Appetites, Affections, Passions, Desires, Necessities, and natural
Inclinations of the Flesh; but he most cheerfully underwent all other acute and
perplexing Agonies of Mind and Body, with a patient and entire Submission of
himself to his Father's Will; designing hereby to teach us Patience, Meekness,
and Condescension by those things which he suffered.

Hence therefore we may learn, (for the prevention of all Discouragements and
Despondency) that though the way to Heaven be difficult and troublesome, We are
taught that the way to heaven is passible.
yet it is passable; and we 've no cause to murmur against God, nor be dejected,
though we meet with cross Accidents, and perplexing Impediments in our way
thither: For the Captain of our Salvation was not advanced to the Crown of
Glory at his Father's right hand, By the example of himself.
till he had completed all his Agonies, and received his Consummatum est upon
the Cross. By which Means he has made our Ingress into that state of eternal
Happiness more feasiable, and certain. Wherefore, it should be matter of the
greatest Joy to us when we bear his Cross, and suffer Persecution for
Righteousness sake; especially if we consider, that this light Affliction,
which is but for a Moment, Cor. 4.17
shall work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; and this
wet Seed-time of Sorrow shall be recompensed with a Harvest of Joy: If we now
go on our Way weeping (and bear it patiently) we shall return with Joy, Psalm.
126.5.6.
and bring our Sheaves with us.

Besides, if our innocent Redeemer endured so many Troubles and Tortures, not
for himself but us; how should we willingly and cheerfully submit to the Wisdom
of divine Providence, when we suffer most justly for our manifold
Transgressions? Was he Meek and Patient under those many Injuries and Affronts,
which he every where met with in his Life, and at his Death? 'Twas doubtless
for this very end and purpose that we should be so (...) Did the intolerable
Burden of the Cross ^^^ce him to Sweat both Water and Blood? Joh. 19.34
He has taught us hereby to take up ours, (which are less burdensome and
afflictive) and follow him, that by Suffering with him we may be also glorified
together. Romans 8.17, 18.


But to convince us thoroughly of the Practicableness of this Doctrine; And the
Example of his Followers.
and to encourage us to be earnest and affectionate, zealous and uniform in our
active and passive Conformity to the Laws and Example of Christ: We have a
Cloud of Witnesses; as Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and holy Men in
all Ages of the Gospel, who by their virruous Lives, and innocent and patient
Sufferings have tract the Way before us. Romans 2.7.
Who are now all entered into Bliss, and shall eternally inherit the comfortable
and saving Fruits of their Christian Patience, and Perseverance in Well-doing.
All which divine and excellent Examples may influence our Spirits, with the
most powerful Encouragments and Incentives to Goodness: For we are most certain
that we may be eternally happy upon the same Terms that they are; if we Fight
this good Fight, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
finish our Course, and keep the Faith, henceforth (without all peradventure)
is laid up for us a Crown of Righteousness, We may be certainly happy upon the
same Terms.
etc. Let us ride on prosperously then, because of this Word of Truth and
Righteousness: For there is nothing in our Religion but what is possible to be
performed; and the greatest Difficulties which attend it, may be conquered and
overcome by Diligence and Endeavor.

Now it would be of singular Use and Advantage, to have the heroic Virtues, and
pious Examples of those holy Men often in our Thoughts, which are gone to
Heaven before us. For these have commonly a greater, and more lasting Influence
than their Precepts and Counsels; we are not so easily convinced by Men's Words
and Reasonings, as their Lives and Actions: But when their Conversations are
answerable to their Callings, it is beyond dispute they are earnest; and the
most conclusive Argument to persuade others, that their Doctrine is true.

To conclude this Point; Christ has taught us all things which are necessary to
be known and practiced. 2 Cor. 4.3.
There Is nothing can be more evident then this, That Christ our great Prophet
has taught us all the Truths which are necessary to be known and practiced,
with that undeniable Evidence and Satisfaction; that if this Doctrine be hid,
it is hid to those that are lost. Again he has enforced the Belief and Practice
of this excellent Religion (so clearly revealed to the Sons of Men) by his own
Example and Authority, in all the Instances of his active and passive
Obedience, and in compliance with all the Laws and Constitutions of the Gospel.
Whereunto might be added the Experiences and Success of all his faithful
Servants in all Ages: By all which, (without any further Enlargement) we may in
a great measure understand what it is that God has been pleased to reveal to us
by the Spirit of his Son; that we may live comfortably, die happily, and reign
with him eternally. Which brings me to the

2d. Branch of our Savior's Prophetical Office; Which imports the reciprocal
Returns of Love and Duty which he Expects and requires from Us:

Our blessed Savior (herein complying with the Frailties of our Nature) has
reduced all the Fundamental Principles, The Returns of Duty which Christ
expects and requires from us.
and Duties of Christianity to these two Common Heads of Repentance, and Faith.
Both which, are not only the necessary Conditions of our present and future
happiness; but do eminently comprehend all those Gospel-Graces and Virtues
which must qualify and dispose us for the regular discharge of all the Duties
of our Religion, in the Rewards consequent to 'em. And for the prevention of
future Mistakes, these may be considered either generally, or particularly. And

1st. In general. As Repentance.
By Repentance in general, we must understand the Conversion of the whole Man
from Darkness unto Light, Acts 26.18.
and from the Power of Satan unto God: Or it is a passing from Death unto Life,
and 11.18. Rev. 20.6.
that we may have part in the first Resurrection, over whom the second Death
shall have no power.

But more particularly, This Duty of Repentance consists in the Conversion of a
Sinner unto God. That is, when the Penitent is truly humbled by a hearty sense
of, and a well grounded sorrow for all his Sins, he applies himself wholly to
the Mercies of God, and the Merits of Christ, by the exercise of a true and
lively Faith for their Pardon and Forgiveness: And hereupon he resolves (by the
assistance of God's Grace) to use his utmost Endeavors against all Sin and
Temptation for the future; and to obey all the Commandments of God in every
Action and Circumstance of his Life. This Duty of Repentance must be often
repeated, This Duty must be often repeated.
not only before, but after our Conversion; and it is a necessary Principle and
Ingredient in the whole Series of a Christian Conversation; since there is
something of Obliquity and Defect in every Work and Duty which we do.

2dly. Faith, which comprehends all other Duties.
The other Head of Evangelical Doctrine is Faith, a most comprehensive Term,
and often used in Scripture for the whole of Christianity. But the holy Apostle
describes it to be a vital and active Principle of Grace, which works by
love: Gal. 5.6.
And in this sense all the Duties of Christianity (are by our blessed Savior)
reduced to this Head: Thou shall love the Lord thy God (says he) with all thy
Heart, Matthew. 22 37, 38, 39.
with all thy Mind, with all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength; and thy
Neighbor as thy Self. Hereby implying, that we should make that Return of Duty
unto God, as to Love and Honor, Worship and Obey him with all the Powers and
Faculties of our Souls, and Members of our Bodies: That we should so love our
Neighbors, ( viz. the whole Race of Mankind,) as to be just and charitable to
'em, in our whole Intercourse and Dealings with them: That we should have that
tender Regard to our own present and eternal Welfare, 1 Cor. 6.20. Jam. 1.17.
as to glorify God both in our Souls and Bodies, and to keep our Selves
unspotted in this world.

These are the indispensible Duties of Religion which God expects and requires
from us; and the certain Conditions of our Happiness, which (being faithfully
and conscientiously performed) will dispose and qualify us for all the
Blessings and Privileges of the Gospel. I shall therefore treat of these
Duties severally and distinctly; by which I hope to acquit and discharge my
self of that Task I Have undertaken. And we begin

1st. More particularly. Of true saving Faith.
With our Duty to God. And hereby we are obliged to Believe and Confess That
there is but one God, and that there is no other besides Him; That he is an
infinite and immortal Spirit, without Beginning and without End; That by his
infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, he has made all things, visible and
invisible, the Heavens, the Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is. We must
believe also, that he that made 'em does preserve them in this excellent Beauty
and Order wherein they do now consist; that they might all minister to his
Glory, and the mutual Benefit of one another. We must believe, That he knows
all Things; and is intimately present in all Places; and that he is the
Fountain and Original of all Happiness and Perfection, of Grace and Glory; That
he is a God of infinite Power, Justice, Mercy, Truth, Goodness, etc. and
therefore abundantly able, and freely willing to protect our Persons, and
reward all our Endeavors with Temporal, Spiritual, and eternal Blessings.

But we are obliged (more particularly) to believe and confess, That God has
made us Men by Creation; Christians by Redemption; and Candidates of Grace and
Glory by Sanctification; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three distinct Persons in
the Unity of the Divine essence, after a secret and inconceivable Manner, which
we must believe, but cannot understand. Again we must believe and confess, That
all things contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments are
the Word and Will of God, revealed to the Sons of Men by his holy Spirit; That
all the Affirmations thereof are true, both as to the Doctrinal and Historical
parts of them; and we must acknowledge 'em to be so though they be above our
Reason, and beyond the reach of our humane Capacities; that all God's
Commandments are holy, just, and reasonable, and necessary to be observed and
obeyed, though they may seem opposite to our natural Tempers, and visible
Interests in this World; That all the Promises and Threatenings in Scripture,
which concern the present and future Welfare and Misery of Mankind, (upon the
performance or neglect of the Duties and Conditions on which they are grounded)
shall most certainly and inevitably come to pass: For our God is of infinite
Veracity, faithful and just in his Dealings with us; Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, Mat. 5.18.
but not one Iota of his Word shall fail, till all these things be fulfilled.

But herein we must be cautious, that we do not mistake a naked Assent to the
Truth of these Mysteries, for a Principle of saving Faith: Jam. 2.19.
For the Devils do believe all these things to be true, and tremble to think of
it. But that Faith by which we Christians (through the infinite Mercies of God,
and the alone Merits of Christ) do expect Salvation, The Properties of a saving
Faith.
must appear in the powerful Effects, and excellent Fruits of it; it is a lively
active Faith (if it be sincere) most ready to comply with, and willing to obey
the whole Will of God. And the effects of it will appear.
And this is the first Instance of Duty which we owe unto God: Namely to
believe in him.

2dly. (As a necessary and natural Result of a justifying and saving Faith) We
are obliged to Love him above all things, 1. By our love to God.
This is another Branch of Christian Piety, and an indispensible Condition of
our supreme Happiness: For if we do not love God sincerely and devoutly with
our whole Hearts, Wills, and Affections in this Life, it is morally impossible
that we should enjoy him in the other. Now the Motives by which we are induced
to love the things of this World, with any competent Delight and Satisfaction;
are either the excellent Qualities of the Things themselves, or it is for the
sake of the Benefits and Advantages which we receive from them, and by them:
But we are most especially obliged to love God in both Respects. Whom we must
love. For the sake of his own Exlencies.
And

(1) Because he is most amiable and lovely in himself: For all the scattered
Excellencies which we are apt to love and admire in the Creatures, are but
Emanations from, and imperfect Adumbrations of that infinite Perfection, which
the boly Angels and Saints glorified do contemplate in God; a Happiness which
above all things we should aspire to, and desire to enjoy: How should our Souls
be charmed and delighted with the incomparable Excellencies of the Divine
Nature! how should we be ravished and transported with Exstasies of Joy and
Wonder, since we may (upon certain easy Conditions) more fully comprehend, and
perfectly enjoy all those wonderful Endearments of Love and Beauty hereafter,
which (even now) shine so conspicuously in all God's glorious Attributes and
Actions?

(2) God is not only infinitely lovely in himself; And for the Benefits bestowed
which should oblige us to love and admire him (even for the sake of his own
Excellencies) above all the transitory Delights, Riches, and Honors of this
World: But we must love him above all things because he is most beneficial and
bountiful to us, Psalm. 100.3.
in bestowing his innumerable Blessings and Benefits upon us. To instance in a
few amongst many Particulars. And

First, On our Bodies.
Man is the Epitome of the whole Creation, a Compound of Heaven and Earth;
Psalm. 139.14.
little lower than the Angels; and yet far transcending all the rest of the
Creatures: Psalm. 8.5, 6.
He is fearfully and wonderfully made, as to the curious and admirable
Structure of his Body, for which the divine Providence has made a liberal
Provision for its support and comfort; not only for its Being, but also for its
Well-being. And we of this Nation especially, have been most signally happy in
the enjoyment of public Peace and Plenty for several years: Our Lot is cast in
a good ground: We have the Advantages of a fruitful and generous Soil, which
affords all things necessary and convenient for Food and Raiment, for Physic
and Delight. We are blessed with a temperate Air; fruitful Seasons; Conveniences
for Traffic, yet secure and free from Invasion; a well constituted Government;
a wise and merciful Prince, whom God long preserve; good Laws, and duly
administered, for the Peace and Benefit of the Subject. But then

Secondly, And our Souls.
We are far more transcendently happy in our precious and immortal Souls, if we
consider those admirable Facuities of Understanding, Will, Memory, Affections,
etc. and all their excellent Tempers and Dispositions which God Almighty has
stamped with the Signature and Impressions of his own Divinity; the love of
Goodness, and the knowledge of the Truth. And though our Faculties were extremely
obscured and depraved by our miserable Fall in Adam; yet God has been
wonderfully gracious to us, in sending his dearly beloved Son into the World;
(as we have seen at large before) thereby repairing all our Defects, and making
up the Breach between God and us, upon the gentle and easy Conditions of Faith
and Repentance. And to enforce all the saving Methods of Grace and Mercy, he is
pleased to vouchsafe unto us the bountiful Assistance of his holy Spirit, by
whose Operation and Influence we are preserved (in a great Measure) from Sin
and Temptation; and enabled to perform all our Duties to God's Glory, and for
the mutual Comfort and Benefit of our selves and others. We have all the
blessed Advantages of his holy Word and Sacraments; and he has instituted and
appointed an Order of Men to minister in Christ's stead, and to be Ambassadors
to solicit our Peace, and reconcile us unto his Grace and Favor. And besides
all this, we are certain (if we be good Christians) that we shall not only live
comfortably here; but our Souls th^ll be kept in safe Custody after Dea^^^ that
our Bodies united to our Souls; and that God will bestow on us that glorious
Kingdom which he has prepared and purchased for us; where we shall perfectly
enjoy all those never failing Pleasures (without the least Allay or
Discomposure) which our Hearts can desire or hope for.

Thus, the Divine Providence has made a wonderful Provision for our Souls and
Bodies; that we may live comfortably here, and (if we be not wanting to our
selves) be happy for ever: And what could our gracious God have done more for
his Vineyard then he has done for us? Isai. 1.4.
Can any heart then be so callous and impenetrable, as not to be influenced and
affected with such admirable Endearments and Charms of Beauty, Love, and Mercy
as these are? How should we study therefore and endeavor (as we are most
strictly obliged in Duty and (...)) to please him in all things, and conform
the whole Man to his gracious and reasonable Commands? How should we love him
with the greatest fervency of Affection, so as to desire (above all things) to
enjoy him in all the Dispensations of his Grace and Glory? Especially if we
consider, that there can be no Duty, nor Virtue, nor Grace acceptable to God,
unless it be founded in, and flow from a Principle of Love.

Since then, The sincerity of this Duty examined
our Love to God is a Duty of so great Importance; let us a little examine the
Sincerity of it, which may be understood by such Properties as these: For if
our Love be sincere, we shall hate every thing that he hates; and make it our
chief Business and Delight to have a holy Intercourse with him, in all the
Duties and Offices of Religion; and we shall study to avoid all those Sins and
Temprations (as the very Plague and Firebrands of Hell,) which shall at any
time interrupt or hinder us in our Duty: We shall be more zealous for God's
Glory, then our own Interest; and be careful in all our Ways to do the Will and
the Work of our Heavenly Father: We shall be ready and disposed to forsake all
things that are most dear to us in this World for his sake, and the whole Bent
and Tendency of our Lives will be a full Demonstration of the sincerity of our
Affection to him.

A Mistake herein would prove of infinite Consequence to us, (which has caused
me to be more express in the handling of this Point) so that we are highly
concerned to be very inquilitive about the Nature and (...) of our Love to God
in Christ. which to the natural and necessary Effect or a (...) Faith, and the
very Source and Foundation of all Religion: For if we have these worthy
thoughts in our Minds concerning the Essence and Artributes of God. and his
Benefits to us, which become the Perfection of the Divine Nature, his
Sovereignty over us, and our Dependence upon him; if we love him as the Author
of all that Happiness which we enjoy and hope for, then

(3) We shall esteem and Honor him, 2. By the (...) we (...) to him.
for his Majesty and Mercy, his Power and Goodness, etc. not only inwardly in
our Hearts, by conceiving always worthy Troughts of him in our Minds, (where
all true Love is grounded) (...) also outwardly in our Demeanor and Carriage
towords him, in all our Words and Actionse viz. By acknowledging our whole
Dependence upon him, and Praying unto him for the supply of all our Temooral
and Spiritual Wants; by paying him the just Fribure of Thankfulness for his
manifold (...) and blessings bellowed upon our Souis and Bodies; in Hearing,
Reading, and Meditating on his Word, with a serious (...) of Mind, and fervency
of Affection, in receiving the holy Sacraments with a Disposition of Soul, and
a Posture of Body correspondent to those stupendous Mysteries; in Sanctifying
his Sabbaths, and keeping with due Observance the Festivals of the Church; in
allowing a competent Maintenance, and a dutiful Respect and Obedience to all
his Ministers and Viregerents; in promoting holy Conferences with his Children
and Servants, for the mutual Edification and Comfort of one another. And in a
Word, by being zealous in the whole Course of our Lives for the Enlargement of
the Boundaries of his Kingdom of Grace and Righteousness, as it becomes his
dutiful and Obedient Children.

(4) This Temper of Mind will oblige us to depend upon him, 3. By our Trust in,
and Dependence upon him.
and to repose our whole Trust and Confidence in his All Sufficiency in
general; and in his Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Mercy in particular. Always
praying unto him earnestly and devoutly for the supply of all our Wants, (as
before) and depending entirely on him, for protection in, and deliverance from
all Temptations, Sin, and Danger; and humbly submitting our selves to the
determination of his Wisdom and Providence, for the disposing of us and our
Concernments to his own Glory, and our Good. In which holy Confidence we shall
rest secure and safe, and nothing shall be able to disturb or interrupt our
Quiet: And whatever our Condition be in this Life, we shall enjoy a Heaven upon
Earth in the Peace of a good Conscience, which to an upright man) is more
precious than Rubies, and much more valuable than all the Treasures of the East.

(5) Our pious Reflections upon those infinite Expressions of Gods Love and
Bounty, 4. By our filial Fear of offending him.
etc. should possess us with all awsul Regard to, and Fear of offending Him.
And we have many powerful Inforcements to persuade us to a strict Performance
of this Duty: For the infinitely wise God observes all our Actions, Psalm. 139.1
to 12.
hears and considers all our Words, and sees our very Thoughts and
Inclinations; they are all registered in his Book, and will infallibly be
brought to Account, either to our Consolation, or Condemnation at the day of
Judgment.

But, where the Fear of God is truly fixed, it is the Spring of all other Duties;
the Watch-port and Sentinel of the Soul to keep out Temptations; and in
Scripture Language comprehends the whole Duty of Man. Ecc. 12.13
This Duty is of that absolute Importance, that the Christian who truly Fears
God, has no cause to be afraid of any thing besides: For God can restrain the
Power and Malice of Devils and wicked Men, when and how he pleases; and make
our greatest Enemies to be at Peace with us. Prove. 16, 7
Those temporal Afflictions which the righteous suffer, are but fatherly
Chastisements; for the trial and improvement of their Graces, or the Punishment
of their Sins for a time, that they may not perish for ever. Hence it is, that
our blessed Savior exhorts us not to Fear those that can kill the Body only,
(for that is the worst they can do, since our Souls are out of their reach,)
Mar. 10.28.
But rather fear him that can kill both Soul and Body in Hell

It Is no matter then, whether the World smile or frown on us: For if we fear
God as Sons, out of a true Principle of Love and Obedience, Romans 8.1 Psalm,
25.23.
it will exempt us from all other Fears; our Souls shall dwell at ease, and if
God be with us, who can be against us.

From all which it may be reasonably inferred, Heb. 10.31.
(on the contrary) That it is a dread full thing to fall into the hands of the
living God: For who shall stand before the Lord when he is angry, Psalm, 76. 7^
or be able to conflict with everlasting burnings? What cause then have the
Atheists, and all impenitent Persons to be afraid? especially if they consider
that Vengeance does every where await them, nor can they be secure one Moment
from Destruction. Those that will not repent of their Sins, and reverence their
heavenly Father as Sons; shall be cast out of his Presence as Slaves, and have
their eternal Portion assigned 'em with the Devil and his Angels. Matthew. 25.41.


Wherefore let the best of Men tremble at God's Judgments, and fly from all
Occasions and Temptations of Sinning: For since to live and die in the least
Sin unrepented of is damnable, and if the righteous Man depart from his
Righteousness, Ezekiel. 3.20.
all his former Piety and Virtue shall stand him in no stead; but the heavy
Wrath of God must fall on him for his wilful Apostasy and Disobedience: What
cause have we then to be watchful over our selves, and serve the Lord with fear
all the days of our Life, that we may not be afraid of his Judgments at the
hour of Death, or in the great day of Account?

(6) And Lastly, 8. By our sted fast Hope in him
If God's Spirit witness with our Spirits that we have thus Repented of our
former Sins, and do sincerely resolve to abandon 'em for the future; if we
steadfastly believe all those necessary and saving Truths, which God has been
pleased to reveal to us by the Spirit of his Son, and testify the sincerity of
our Faith by the genuine Fruits and Effects of it; if our Love toward God be
attended with those necessary and excellent Properties which I have mentioned;
if we Pray devoutly and humbly, and patiently submit to God's wise and gracious
Disposals; if we be afraid to offend him, and be willing to quit all our
Interests in this World, and die a thousand Deaths rather than wilfully
transgress the least of his Commands; we may undoubtedly (upon these
Conditions) cheerfully and comfortably expect and hope for the happy
Accomplishment of all the Promises of the Gospel, to our endless Joy and
unspeakable Felicity. Yet here I must note to you, that we must by no means
depend upon the Efficacy of the Duties themselves; (though they should never be
neglected) but on the infinite Mercy of God in Christ, for the comfortable
success of all our pious Endeavors. These are the Principal Duties of Piety we
owe unto God, which he indispensibly requires of all Christians, and must be
carefully and conscientiously performed by all those, who expect and hope for
the admirable Blessings and Privileges of the Gospel. And as these excellent
Duties must by no Means be neglected. So

On the contrary, The Opposite Sins most dangerous and damnable.
we are obliged under the severst Penalties of Hell and Damnation, to avoid and
abandon the Sins of Atheism, Polytheism, Blasphemy, Idolatry, profane
Swearing, Lying, Sacrilege, Covetousness, the neglect or contempt of God's
Worship: Word, Sacraments, Services, Days, groundless Presumption, Distrust,
Despair, etc. All which searlet Sins are highly dishonorable to God; reflect a
Scandal upon our excellent Religion; will deprive those Miscreants of all the
rational Pleasures of the Soul; and without a sincere Repentance and
Reformation of Life, they will forfeit their Tittle to eternal Happiness: And
those Penalties (which I mentioned before) shall be their just Portion and
Punishment in another World. We pass forward to the

2d. The Dities relating to our Selves.
Duty, which our blessed Savior has enjoined and recommended for the
Attainment of his Grace and Glory: Namely, that which has a peculiar reference
to our Selves: Which Duty consists in the prudent and virtuous Conduct of our
Lives; especially in the Affairs and Business of Religion: And since this must
needs highly concern us, 'twill admit of a serious and impartial Consideration.

Now Christian Prudence (of which I shall give you an account in the first
Place) will be of necessary use and advantage to direct and further us in this
Duty. Prudence of general and necessary use for the Government of the whole Man.
This Virrue will teach us to govern our selves according to God's Word, and
the Dictates of sober Reason; and prevail with us by degrees to conform all the
Actions, and Affections both of the outward, and inward man to the Pattern of
Christ, that we may not only be morally virtuous, John 1.16.
but receive of his abundant fullness grace for grace. He that is truly prudent
in the government of himself, will use his utmost endeavor to abstain from all
Sins, of all sorts; and study (in every undertaking) to make choice of the best
Ends and most effectual Way and Means of obtaining them: He will be careful not
only to improve every Opportunity for the bettering of himself; but studiously
avoid every Occasion and Temptation of sinning which may interrupt his Progress
and Proficiency in Grace and Virtue. Now by this discreet Procedure in the
prudent Conduct of our Selves, we shall in some degree resemble the infinitely
wise God, who acts and contrives all things according to the Dictates of Wisdom
and Prudence; and are hereby distinguished from all sublunary Beings, who have
no other Light nor Laws to direct 'em but those of natural Instinct.

Thus in general as Creatures endued with Religion and Reason, we are obliged
(that we may proceed to the Acquest of Virtue, and perform all the Duties of
Christianity cheerfully and vigorously, without any considerable Let or
Distraction) to subject all the Appetites, Affections, Passions, and
Inclinations both of the Soul and Body to the Empire of Reason; and by the
prudent, deliberate, and conscientious guidance thereof, we shall be able to
correct and subdue the Extravagancies of corrupt Nature, and grow more manly in
the Government of our Selves, as sober Judgment, and God's infallible Word
shall direct us.

Thus, when we have reduced the superior Faculties of the Soul to this Order
and Harmony; so, that our Understandings dictate aright, and our Wills are
conformable to those Laws and Rules which are prescribed by an unbiased and
unprejudiced Understanding; when our Affections and Appetites are subject to
our Reason, and have a direct Tendency to these Objects, in the Enjoyment
whereof true, real and substantial Satisfaction can only be expected; then it
is that we govern our selves prudently, and all is calm and quiet within us:
Then we act regularly, as it becomes Men and Christians who are in the pursuit
of generous Ends by rational Means and Methods, and make it their chief
Business and Delight to live holily and vermously here, that they may be
glorious and happy for ever. And thus much of Christian Prudence, which is of
general and necessary use for the government of the whole Man in the Ways of
Religion. We descend to the particular Virtues which spring and flow from it.

The Souls and Bodies of Men are the constituent Parts of themselves; which by
the Laws of Nature and Christianity, we are most especially obliged to love and
take care for. And this must be done, (1) by repelling all Injuries and
Inconveniences which may tend to the Ruin or Prejudice of either: And this
imports an Abstinence from, and a hearty Abhorrence of all Sin. (2) By
consulting and enforcing all the prudent and rational Means and Methods which
may conduce to our comfortable subsistence in this World, and will dispose and
qualify us for the Employment and Happiness of that State which we hope for in
a better.

Now, these virtuous and vicious Dispositions, are either such as respect the
Happiness and Misery of the whole Man; as Sobriety and Moderation: Or they have
a more peculiar respect; some to the Souls, others to the Bodies of Men
distinctly. We shall treat of all these severally, and in Order. And we begin

First, The Virtue of Sobriety of necessary Us, for the Government both of coul
and Body.
With Sobriety or Moderation. These twin-Virtues (which we shall handle
together) are of special use and importance for the Government of all the
Faculties, Affections, Desires, and Appetites of the whole Man; that we may be
able to confine them to those due Bounds and Measures, which Christian Prudence
has assigned them.

And if we be truly sober and moderate, we shall not be studious to indulge and
please those Appetites and Passions, which are always ready to comply with
every Sin and Temptation, to the great disquiet and prejudice of our rational
Powers: For if we study to please and gratify our Palates with delicate Meats
and Drinks; the Touch with Softness and Effeminacy; the Eye with fair and gaudy
Shows; the Ear with harmonious and pleasant Sounds; the Smell with fragrant and
costly Perfumes: etc. Such Allurements as these do so influence and bewitch the
sensual Appetites and Passions, that the Reason and Judgment will be forced
not only to quit their Dominion and Authority; but they become subservient to
all the base Ends and Designs, which these imperious and domineering Usurpers
shall desire 'em to comply with. And what can be expected in this Discomposure,
but a fruitless variety of Expectations and Disappointments? If then we set a
greater value on these Things then they are capable of, it is impossible that we
should be satisfied with 'em whenever we enjoy them: For it is most notoriously
evident, That no man has that gust and pleasure in the Acquest of worldly
Delights, which he propounded to himself and so eagerly expected whilst he was
in pursuit after them. Besides it is considerable, that all the things of this
World are flitting and transitory; and in a few Years (perhaps in a few
Minutes) we shall be stripped naked of every thing we possess, except the good or
bad Qualities and Dispositions of our Souls: Now if it should happen when we
come to die, that our Souls should be hankering after the Pleasures of Sense,
we should carry our Affections into another World, and leave their Objects
behind us. And judge ye, in what a miserable state and Condition those poor
Creatures will be in, who depart this Life with such Appetites and Affections
as these.

Therefore, (upon these Considerations) how should we proportion our Desires
and Inclinations to the value of those things are delighted and pleased with.
And the Enjoyments of this World should only affect us so far, as they become
subservient to the things of God, and the rational and intellectual Pleasures
of the Soul; and till our Affections be thus cultivated by Grace and Virtue, we
can have no true Relish of Spiritual and Heavenly Delights: For if we devote
our selves to the Pleasures of Sense, they cannot satisfy the Desires of the
Soul, but do only comply with and indulge the boundless and extravagant
Appetites of the Body.

Hence then it must needs follow by the Rule of Contraries; that the state and
condition of wicked and intemperate Men in this World (who being enslaved by
their Lusts and Appetites) are like a Vessel in the midst of a rugged and
tempestuous Sea, which is in danger to be shipwrackt by every Wind and Wave, by
every Lust and Temptation: A thousand cross Accidents (both within and without)
do continually perplex and torment 'em, which Flesh and Blood are not able to
encounter nor endure; and to add to their Misery they are always attended with
a succession of new and unexpected Mischiefs. This is the worst part of Hell,
and far more perplexing than whole Legions of infernal Fiends without them:
Since then, these brutish Passions have such a mischievous Influence, to turn
Angels into Devils; how can any Man hope to be happy, so long as he suffers
such Furies to rule and reign over him? There Is no way therefore to be at Peace
with God, and Man, and our own Consciences; but by subduing our sensual
Appetites and Passions; and reducing 'em by Sobriety and Moderation under the
Empire and Sovereignty of rectified Reason and Religion: Otherwise, if 'twere
possible that we should be in Heaven with such uneasy and troublesome
Companions, we should find nothing there to please us; but be rather desirous
to return into the lower World, to react these sensual Pleasures which are most
correspondant to our brutish Tempers and Inclinations.

Thus, Sobriety and Moderation are the Harbingers, which (by the Assistance of
God's Grace) do dispose and qualify a Christian for all other Virtues; and
there must be a concurrence of 'em all to make as truly wise and truly good. We
shall now descend to Particulars: Partieular Virtues relating more peculiarly
to the Soul. As
And treat distinctly, (1) Of the Virtues which do more immediately respect the
Soul. And (2) Of those which are most peculiar to the Body. Those of the former
Rank are

1st. 1 Heavenly-mindedness.
Heavenly-mindedness. The Soul of Man has a direct and natural Tendency to the
Place from whence it derives its Original: And though our Bodies be polluted with
sin, and the Faculties of our Souls chained and fettered by the sensual
Appetites and Passions here below; yet they will (now and then) endeavor to
disintangle themselves from those Confinements, especially when prompted
thereunto by the Motions of God's holy Spirit and the Assistances of Religion.

Our own Experience will inform us, That the Things of this World (which are
usually esteemed and valued by worldly minded men) are not easily got,
difficult to keep, and do often procure so much Malice, Envy, and Danger to
those that possess them, that the Worldling's life can be no other than a
continued Series of Trouble and Discomposure: But those who have no other Aims
than the necessary Supplies of Nature, and are not affected with the fruitless
Vanity of being rich or honorable in this World; but place their whole Desires
and Delights in the exercise of Piety and Virtue, and in Contemplation of the
Riches of Gods Grace in Christ, and that suture Happiness which we aspire to:
Those heavenly minded Christians (I say) who have arrived at this divine Frame
and Temper of Mind, do trample upon all the little Projects and Fooleries of
this World; enjoy a Heaven upon Earth; and live little less than the Life of
glorified Angels and Saints, whilst by a Mind content with little, they imitate
their want of nothing.

Now, this Heavenly Disposition is most suitable and correspondent to the Genius
and Spirit of Christianity, and the Doctrine and Example of our blessed
Savior: Who commands us to pray, not for Delicacies and Superfluities to
pamper and please our wanton Curiosity; (and if they are not to be prayed for,
they are not worth the having) but for daily Bread, and such Accomodations of
Life, as may keep our Bodies in Health, that they may be fit for Action, and
more serviceable to the Soul. When we have raised our Faculties to this Pitch of
Purity and Holiness, 'twill be no difficult Task to part with our Fathers,
Mothers, Wives, Children, the dearest Friends and Relatives, Houses, Lands, and
whatever else may be esteemed valuable in this World, if they should come in
Competition with Christ, and the interest of our precious and immortal Souls.
In a word, this heavenly Frame and Temper of mind and Spirit, will teach us to
bear with Aequanimity all the cross Accidents which may happen to our Persons
and Possessions: For there is nothing can fall amiss to that Person that is
divinely disposed. And if it should so happen that our Enemies break open the
Cages of our Bodies, (which is the worst they can do) they will make the more
safe and expedite Passage for our Souls, into those peaceable Regions of Bliss
and Immortality. Thus as the Soul is in, but not of the Body; so Heavenly
minded Men may be in, but not of the World: But with passionate Groans and
Cries, (yet always submitting to the Will and Wisdom of God) they desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
which is far better.

2dly. Humility.
The next Virtue which is of necessary use for the conduct of our Souls in the
ways of Religion, is Humility. I have touched that Branch of it already which
relates immediately to God: I shall consider it here, as it has more peculiar
reference to our Selves. Now this Virtue consists in having a lowly and modest
Opinion of our Persons, Acquisitions, Merits, and Endowments both of Body and
Mind, and being content that all others should have so to; resolving all, what
we are, and what we have, into the Grace and Mercy of God in Christ. This
Humility will teach us to dwell at home, and converse more familiarly with our
Selves: And indeed if we seriously reflect upon, and consider all the
Deficiencies, Follies and Indiscretions in our best Performances; the Ignorance
and Errors of our Judgments; the Perverseness of our Wills; the Defects of our
Manners; the Ommissions of our Duties both to God and Man, which we are
incessantly guilty of; we shall have sufficient Grounds to correct and subdue
the proud and insolent Conceits our haughty and ambitious Spirits, and submit
to the meanest Offices and Employments, Romans 12.10.
in Honor preferring one another.

To enforce the Practice of this excellent Virtue: We have the concurrent
Examples of our blessed Savior and his Apostles; which are written every where
in the New Testament in such lively and legible Characters, that I need not
instance in Particulars: We have the holy Angels also for our Patterns; who
(tho they be advanced to the highest Pinnacle of Honor and Happiness, Heb. 1.14.
yet) are ministering Spirits to the Sons of Men, for their Weal and
Preservation. To which may be added the admirable Examples of the Church of
Christ in all Ages; and what her Members have done and suffered for God's Glory
in the Defense of, and for the Establishment of the Christian Religion. Now, if
we apply these things seriously to our Selves; we shall appear like so many
Lamps in the Sight of the Sun; and those little remains of Wisdom, and the fond
Conceits which we are so apt to admire in our selves, and undervalue in others,
would expire and vanish: A modest Humility and Self denial would take
Possession of our Minds and Spirits, and the Effects of it would appear in our
whole Intercourse with, and deportment toward one another.

Again it is reasonable to consider; that whatever we are, and whatever we have,
(our Beings and Well-beings) are the immediate Product and Pensions of God's
Bounty; who can in a moment dispossess us of our dearest and most pleasant
Enjoyments: He is the Proprietor, we are but his Usu-fructuaries: And for this
Time of our mortal Life; and all these Talents which he has entrusted us with,
we must be strictly accountable at the Day of Judgment. How then should the
sense of our real Wants, Infirmities, and whole Dependence upon God, (with
those great Examples of Humility which I have mentioned) cast us down like
Balls upon the Earth, that with a comfortable and happy Rebound we may mount
the higher in Glory: Man. 23.12.
For he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

But on the contrary the Sin of Pride is destructive of all other Virtues; it
makes Men overvalue those little Pittances of Grace and Virtue in Themselves,
and undervalue the far more worthy Gifts and Endowments of other Men: And
whilst they are under the Transports of these towering Fancies and Conceits, the
utmost Honor attainable in this Life, falls many Degrees short of their
imaginary Deserts and Expectations. This Pride was the Sin of the fallen Angels,
Ep. Jude 6
for which they lost their first Estate; and for this Cause our first Parents
were cast out of Paradise. Genesis 3.23, 23, 24.
And it is certain, that whilst Men live under the Prevalence of amb^ious and
self-conceits, they can have no Title to the Happiness either of this, or a
better Life.

Let the Reader therefore seriously consider the Arguments propounded already
against this capital Sin. To which may be added, the serious Thoughts of our
approaching Mortality, which (if seasonably made use of) would prove a notable
Expedient to level and subdue our proud and aspiring Humors: For what has vain
man to boast of? And shall not these stately Fabrics of our Bodies within a
few years be crumbled into Dust? Where are the Coesars, Plato, Aristotle, and
all those mighty Princes and Philosophers we read of? Job 34.15. Genesis 3.19.
That inevitable Sentence, Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shall return, has
levelled all their Wit, Power, Learning, Policy, and Grandeur; and the Bowels of
the Earth (that common Urn and dark Region of Oblivion) does, and shall
comprehend them and us, till the Judgment of the great Day. Go into a Charnel
House, and there you will see the Mysteries of Humane Nature unveiled in the
liveless Skeletons of your once famous Ancestors: where also you may read a
Lecture of Mortality to your Selves. Why then should vain Man so proudly boast
of, and delight himself in those Dreams and Shaddows which last but for a
Moment? Besides, a proud and self-conceited man, as he has so far a near
resemblance to the Devil; So whilst he continues under the Power and Dominion
of this Sin, he renders himself odious and abominable both to God and Man. We
proceed

3dly. Watchfulness.
To the Virtue of Watchfulness, which (considering the State and Conditition we
are placed in, during our Warfare in this World) must be of great and necessary
Use and Importance to us. Now this Virtue or Duty does consist in a prudent
Circumspection over our Souls and Bodies, and all the necessary Concernments of
both: But it is more particularly conversant in the cautious and discreet
Management of our Thoughts, Words, and Actions. And

1st. Watchfulness over our Thoughts
We are highly obliged to be Watchful over our Thoughts: For they are as it
were the Key which unlocks and opens the Soul; and are always evil when we
desire any thing that is sinful; but worse, when we comply with, connive at, or
consent to it. And though we should not proceed to speak or act what we think
amiss, yet these very Thoughts do tincture and pollute the Soul; and are very
prompt and forward to interrupt us in every good and virtuous Action or Duty
which we do.

Now for the prevention of those Mischiefs, To prevent and cure ill thoughts
which are the natural and necessary Result and Consequence of evil Thoughts;
It Is advisable to consider, that God sees them afar off, will bring them to
Account; and unless they be repented of and reformed, they shall be all laid
open to the view of Men and Angels at the day of Judgment. Again, it is beyond
dispute, that evil thoughts are Indications of a corrupt and unregenerate
Heart; they are often suggested by the Devil; and always the Springs of
Confusion and Disorder. But for the Cure of this dangerous and destructive
Malady of the Soul, it is incumbent upon us to be watchful over our Thoughts:
Obsta Principiis should be our constant Motto: For that Christian that dares
not conceive nor foster an ill Thought, will be afraid to speak or act any
thing contrary to his Reason and Conscience. Have the Quatuor No vissima,
Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell Often in your Thoughts; meditate seriously
thereon; and this will bring them under a due Restraint, and confine them
within the proper Boundaries of rectified Reason and Religion. Let us be truly
sorry for the vain and sinful Excogitations of our Lives past; be diligently
watchful over our Thoughts for the future; and this will prove the most certain
Expedient to keep 'em within their due Limits, and become most conducive to the
Peace and Happiness both of the outward and inward Man.

2dly. Watchfulness over our Words.
This Duty of Watchfulness consists in seeing to our Words: For though Men's
Pretensions to Religion be never so smooth and specious, Jam. 1.26.
yet if they bridle not their Tongues, their Religion is vain. All profane,
uncharitable, and filthy Speeches; as Blasphemy, idle and vain Swearing,
profane Ribaldry, Lying, Backbiting, Slandering, Detraction, and all sorts of
filthy, frothy, and impertinent Communication, are highly offensive to God; a
Scandal to Religion; a Snare to the weak Christian; and most dangerous Symptoms
of an impious and unsanctified Heart: From whence proceed all that hellish
brood of Murders, Adulteries, etc. (which our blessed Savior speaks of; and)
for which the wicked and unrepenting Sinner must be severely accountable at the
Day of Judgment. Matthew. 12.36.


But to prevent the mischievous Effects which issue from that unruly Member the
Tongue; we are obliged to set a Watch always before the Doors of our Lips; Psa.
34.13. Psalm. 39.1. Epn. 4.29.
and enter into a Covenant with our Selves, that no corrupt Communication
proceed out of our Mouths: Let yea, yea; and nay, nay; Matthew. 5.37.
Truth and Integrity be the Rule and Standard of all our Discourse and Dealings
with one another: And to this End, we should pray unto God devoutly and
incessantly, that he would be pleased so to sanctify our Speech, that it may
minister to his Glory, and the mutual Comfort and Benefit of our Selves and
Others.

3dly. Watchfulness over all our Actions.
We are obliged to be truly circumspect in, and Watchful over all our Actions.
Herein always proposing God's Glory, the Happiness of our Selves and Others as
the End, and his holy and infallible Word, and the Dictates of sober Reason, as
the Rule and Standard to stear and manage our Affairs by: For without this our
best Endeavous, (even our religious Performances) will prove either sinful or
unprofitable. There is always indeed some Tincture of Obliquity or Defect in
every thing we do; but if our Intentions be sincere in the Main, God is pleased
to pardon our Infirmities and Indiscretions; and will interpret our Endeavors
(though imperfect) according to the general Frame and Tendency of our Lives: Yet
nevertheless, we are obliged by the Laws of our holy Profession to set our
selves against all sin in general, and every one in particular; especially
against those to which our Tempers are the most prone and incident, and which
we take the greatest Pleasure and Delight in: These darling Lusts are the right
Eyes which must be plucked out, Matt. 5.29, 30. Heb. 12.1
and the right Hands which must he cut off, These are the Sins which hang so
fast on, and cling about us; and require the greatest Diligence and
Watchfulness to overcome and subdue them.

But then we are not only obliged to be watchful over our most open and
beloved, but even over our most secret and private sins. Job 24.15.
Do not think when you commit them, that no eye sees you: For David's Sins were
committed with all possible Privacy, (and there are many thousand such like
Instances besides) yet did they not escape the strict scrutiny of the divine
Omniscience. Prove. 15.3.
The Eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good; nor
can the most minute Sin which we commit in our most private Retirements,
(unless repented of) fly from Justice. Therefore, it is dangerous to indulge
any one Lust, or continue in the least Sin with delight and approbation: Ne
Consideres igitur quod parva sune peecata, sed quod magnus est Deus, etc. Aug.
de Paenit. vera and falsae Cap. 8.
For though they may appear inconsiderable in themselves, yet it is advisable to
consider, that he is an infinite God against whom they are committed. Besides,
Sins of the smallest size are always Incentives and Decoys to greater: For
profane, uncharitable, and unclean Thoughts (if indulged in our Bosoms)
proceed to Words, Words to Deeds; and in this Progress of Wickedness, Men are
trained on by degrees from Sin to Sin, and from one degree of sin to another;
till they be plunged at last, into the bottomless Inundation or Abyss of
Eternal Misery and Torment. That we may be wise then as Serpents, and innocent
as Doves, Mat. 16.
(in the true sense and meaning of the Gospel) we must be strictly watchful
over our selves: Studying always to avoid the tempting and cursed Society of
Drunkards, profane Swearers, unchaste Men and Women, etc. Fly all Occasions of
Sinning, and reject every Temptation with Indignation, and Scorn, which may
prove an Enemy to Virtue, or a Friend to Vice: Resist 'em in the very first
Assault, and the Conquest will be easy and certain. Consider your past
Fa^lings; implore the Assistances of God's Grace and Spirit to enable you (in
some measure) to repair the former Defects of your Lives, by a more steady
watchfulness over your Selves and Ways for the Future. The best and most
certain Means to avoid greater Sins, is to make Conscience of the less: Christ
died for our very Slips, (as the Original imports) and therefore those sins
cannot be accounted little or cheap, for which the eternal Son of God paid so
dear a Price as his own Blood. When the Work of Regeneration is wrought in you,
beware of relapsing; consider the dangerous and mischievous Consequences of
Apostasy; keep close to your Duty; Mark. 13.37.
and what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch.

4thly. Patience and Meekness.
And lastly, There are two other Virtues yet behind, namely Patience and
Meekness: Which conduce much to the Peace and Happiness of our Souls, and are
of special Use and Advantage in the whole Course of our Christian Conversation.
But since these two Sister Graces do always go hand in hand: Therefore (for
brevity's sake) I shall treat of them under this same Head of Discourse. Now
these Virtues do peculiarly consist in bearing, and suffering meekly, and
patiently, all the cross Accidents which may befall us in this Life; not only
without fainting and fretting, but with such an evenness and composedness of
Mind and Spirit, as is most consonant to the mild and gentle, yet gracious and
magnanimous Temper and Spirit of Christianity. Besides Meekness and Patience
are perfective of, Jam. 1.4.
and the Complement of all the other Virtues of God's holy and blessed Spirit.
For if all be well within, we are safe from all Troubles whatsoever: By this
Means we secure to our selves the comfortable Enjoyment of what we have; and if
we bear and suffer Injuries meekly and patiently, God will give us more
strength, and contrive a speedy and happy issue out of all our Troubles.

Therefore, why should any Affliction in this World dissuade us from our Duty,
or abate our Zeal and Courage in the doing of it: For the Instruments of our
Torture (says Tertullian) are the Ensigns of our Honor and Happiness; Tert.
Apol. Cap. 5. p. 39.
the Habit of our Victory; and the embroidered Garments wherein we must ride to
Heaven. A state of Sufferings on a good Account is the most lively Transcript
of his Doctrine and Example, Matthew. 11.29.
who commands us to learn of him, not because he is wise, rich, or honorable,
but he inforces the Obligation from the Pattern of his own Meekness and
Humility. To suffer Persecution for Righteousness sake (in some degree) has
been always the Portion and Patrimony of Believers under the Economy of the
Gospel. And we Christians know no other than this strait and narrow Way, which
must through much Tribulation lead us into the Kingdom of God. Acts. 14.22.


But then to balance our present Miseries and Sufferings (which are perfective
of the Virtues under Consideration) with our future Hopes and Expectations: The
Troubles which we suffer in this World are light and inconsiderable, compared
with the Torments of Hell; and if we bear them patiently they will dispose us for
a brighter Crown, when these Clouds and Storms are blown over. Let us but hold
out a little longer, till we come within the Fortifications of the new
Jerusalem, and there we shall have a total Exemption both from sinning and
suffering. Besides, if we be considerable Proficients in these Virtues, They Will
make our present Sufferings less burdensome and afflictive: For we shall
neither be timorous in Danger, envious in Want, impatient under Troubles, angry
and restless at Reproaches and Contempt; nor malicious and revengeful under
Injuries and Persecutions; the truth whereof is as clear as the Sun Beams, from
the Experience of all sound Christians. But to be angry and impatient at our
Sufferings, will but fret and torment us; and make the Burden of them far more
grievous and insupportable: Whereas, by a patient Submission to the Will and
Wisdom of God under the manifold Pressures of this Life, they will become far
more tolerable and easy to be endured. Especially to those who have a well
grounded Assurance, that their Sufferings in this World shall be infinitely
rewarded with the Favor and Plenty of a heavenly Country.

Thus, if we bear with Patience, and Meekness, those sundry Pressures (and
almost infinite Sufferings) of this Life, we shall not only reap the Comfort
and Benefit our Selves, both in this, and a future State; but by this Means
Christianity would be restored to its ancient Purity and Splendor; we should
bring out excellent Religion into Repute and Credit (as the first Christians
did;) and persuade others to embrace it, though to the utmost hazard of their
Lives and Fortunes. Hitherto of those excellent and admirable Virtues, which
are most peculiar to the Souls of Men, with their Opposites. We pass on

2dly. Virtues relating to the Body.
To the other Branch of Duty, which concerns our Bodies. Now we are obliged by
the Laws of Nature, and Christianity, to make use of all suitable and convenient
Means, to preserve our Bodies (as well as our Souls) in a state of health and
safety, till Providence be pleased to dismiss them into the other World. And
the best Expedient which God's holy and infallible Spirit directs us to for
this End, is the comprehensive Virtue and Duty of Sobriety: Sobriety as it
relates to the Body. The Species of i^ are Temperance.
Which, (in a more limited sense) as it relates to the Body, does consist in
the moderate use of Meats, Drink, Sleep, Apparel, and Recreations; both as to
the Quantity and Quality of them; and this is Temperance: Or in the Moderation
of the Lusts and Desires of the Flesh; which is Chastity: Chastity.
Or in the sober and moderate use of Riches and Honors; and that is
Contentedness. Contentedness.
In practicing all these Virtues, and avoiding the contrary Vices, we act like
men endued with Reason and Religion; and are hereby distinguished from bruit
Beasts, who know no other Measures than their sensual Appetites. Of all these
(as they are of special and necessary use to conduct the Body in the ways of
Religion, that it may be a fit Mansion for the Soul) distinctly and in Order.
And I begin

1st. Temperance
With Temperance in the moderate use of the Creatures, in Eating, Drinking,
etc. And we are obliged to be temperate

(1) In Eating. In Eating.
It Is beyond Dispute that our gracious God does allow us the moderate Use of
the Creature; and we are confined to no other Measures, either as to the
Quantity or Quality of Meats, than what may consist with the Health and
Preservation of our Bodies. But though we have no positive Law to restrain our
Appetites to a certain Rule; nor is it possible that it should be so, because
Men's Appetites are of different Proportions, some require more, and some are
satisfied with less: Yet our blessed Savior has expressly forbidden all manner
of Excess in Eating, in these words, Luk, 21.3^.
Take heed that your Hearts be not overcharged with surfeiting. And he
insinuates the Danger in that Instance of the rich Glutton; Luke 16.
so that every Man has sufficient cause to make Laws to himself, to restrain
and put Bounds to his Appetite. Besides, it is highly observable, that
intemperate Eating and Sin were coetaneous and had the same Original: And in
the very infancy of the World, Esau would quit the Interest of his Birthright,
and make Shipwreck of his Honor too, rather than offer Violence to his greedy
Desire of Eating. And the Sins which brought sudden Destruction upon the once
flourishng Cities of Sodom and Gomorah, were Idleness, and fullness of Bread.
Intemperate Lust is always the miserable Companion of intemperate Eating; and
other Sins are indulged and thrive by this kind of Excess.

It Is the Duty and Interest then of all Mankind, to use moderate and wholesome
Diet; to live always temperately, and soberly according to the Rules of sound
Reason and Religion: For they that do so, sleep sweetly and quietly, and are
seldom troubled (as the intemperate are) with ill Humors, or deprived of the
Comforts and Benefits of Health by violent and raging Distempers. Their
Understandings are clear; their Constitutions firm and unshaken; their Bodies
are active and fit for Business; and this is the most certain Expedient
(through God's blessing) to preserve Mentem sanam in Corpore sano, a vivacious
and brisk Soul in a sound Body. Now if the great Advantages of this Branch of
Temperance on the one hand, and the infinite Mischiefs of the opposite Vice on
the other, were seriously weighed and considered; they would not fail in
persuading Men to be more sober and moderate in their Diet; and avoid that
excessive Gluttony, and the Vanity of pampering their Appetites, which is every
where too obvious in the World.

2dly. In Drinking.
We should use the like Measures of Temperance and Moderation in Drinking; for
the Health and Preservation, for the Sustenance and Refection of our Souls and
Bodies, both as to the Quantity and Quality of Liquors. The very Heathens who
had no other Light nor Laws to direct 'em then those of Nature, were highly
strict in the Practice of this Virtue of Temperance in Drinking, and avoiding
the Sin of Drunkenness. Even the Cretians (who were much addicted to Gluttony,)
made a Law against Drunkenness and enforced it by inflicting the severest
Penalties upon Offenders. Tit. 1.12. Plato de Leg. Lib. 7. Sen Ep. 84.
Senecae was of an Opinion, that Intemperance in Drinking is a voluntary
Madness; and he that does accustom himself to guzle from day to day, till he be
drunk, is possessed with an absolute Frenzy. Fabricus, and many of the most
moderate Heathens were great Proficients in this Virtue; and declaimed against
those (who know no other Measure to bound their Excess by than their Appetites)
as Beasts and Monsters, rather then Men endued with Reason and Judgment.

What a shame then must it be to Christians, and a Scandal to our excellent
Religion, that any Man amongst us should drink more than he is able to bear;
But it is the highest Aggravation of Wickedness and Villainy to become the Devils
Factors for Damnation, (as too many do) in striving not only to debauch
themselves, but to overcome others. We that are of the Day, and directed by the
Light of Evangelical Grace and Truth, 1 These. 4.8. 1 Cor. 9.25. Romans 13.12, 13.
are more especially obliged to be sober and temperate in all Things; to walk
honestly as in the Day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, etc. The Creatures are
only to be used as necessary Supplies, and convenient Accessions to our present
abode: for we should neither make Food our Business, nor pleasures our Aim; but
rather study and endeavor to wean our Appetites and Affections from all
Excess; that we may have the stronger Gust and Relish of that Spiritual Food,
on which we should desire to live for ever. And thus the Primitive Christians
denied themselves the Delicacies of this World, that their Souls being weaned
from them, they might be taught beforehand to live on the Delights of beatified
Spirits; and never desire to return again to their Bodies, till they come to be
glorified together in the happy Resurrection to the Life Eternal.

And here 'twill be necessary to consider on the contrary, The Mischiefs of
this Sin.
that all manner of Excess in Drinking is extremely pernicious to, and
destructive of the Weal and Happiness of the Body, both in this, and a future
Life: For intemperate Drinking is the Fuel of all sensual and filthy Lusts; it
makes Men's Bodies sottish and unweildy, and disposes them rather to Sleep and
Idleness, than a prudent Watchfulness and a religious Care over themselves. In
these extravagant Fits, Jerem. 5.8. Romans 13.13.
it is no wonder to see Men like sed Horses neigh after their Neighbors Wives:
For St. Paul adds Chambering and Wantonness, as the necessary Consequence and
Effect of Rioting and Drunkenness. And it is notoriously evident, that the most
Drunkards Blaspheme, Swear, Lie, Rail against and Back-bite their innocent
Neighbors; engage many times in irreconcilable Quarrels and do often kill one
another: so that in this Carrier of Drunkenness Men (I should rather say
Beasts) seldom stop at any Sin which falls in their Way. This is the most
compendious Method for spending their Estates; and ruining their Reputations;
and hereby they seldom fail of contracting an ill habit of Body, and laying a
sure Foundation for all lingering and mortal Diseases.

But that which is yet more fatal and mischievous, an habitual Drunkenness does
so dull the Edge, impair the strength, and cloud the discerning Faculty of
their Reafon and Judgment; that it is impossible for the customary Drunkard to
practice any Virtue or Duty aright, or resist the power and prevalence of any
evil Appetite or Temptation. Besides, this sort of Extravagance is wholly
inconsistent with the Gifts and Graces of God's holy and blessed Spirit; and
it is utterly impossible (says St. Hierom) that a Man should be filled with
strong Drink, and God's sanctifying spirit at the same time. The Holy Ghost has
always put them as Opposites in Scripture; be not Drunk with Wine (says the
Apostle) wherein is excess, Ephesians. 5.18.
but be filled with the Spirit: And how is it possible that any Man should
serve these two arbitrary Masters, whose Commands are so contradictory to each
other. To all which we might add, the Consideration of those future and eternal
Torments, which must certainly be the Portion of intemperate and debaucht
Persons in another World. See, and consider those apposite Texts of Scripture
Luke 21.34. Gal. 5.21. etc.

Since then Temperance and Moderation in Eating and Drinking is a great Step to
all other Virtues; and seeing the Consequences and Effects of this kind of
Excess are so pernicious and destructive to the Souls and Bodies of Men, both
in this and another Life: How are we obliged to keep our Appetites within the
due bounds of Sobriety, that we may enjoy the Benefits of the one, and be
exempted from the Inconveniences and Mischiefs of the other?

And to this End, I would advise my Reader to consider that short Rule of
Pythagoras. Above all things (says he) be sure that you make your selves
Masters of your Bellies: And that you may do it to the purpose, cut off all the
unnecessary Supplies of Meats and Drinks, and the Siege cannot last long. Avoid
and abandon the Conversation of debaucht and intemperate Persons: Let neither
their smooth Language, nor their Scoffings and Railings against you, allure or
persuade you to a compliance with their inhumane and beastly Immoralities, lest
they persuade you to run with them to the same Excess of Riot: 1 Pet. 4.4.
These are the Devils Engines which he frequently sets on Work, to precipitate
inconsiderate Men from the Throne of Grace and Virtue. And alas! how many
thousands have complained in their last Agonies, that these Enchantments have
decoyed them into those Sins, which they must eternally smart for?

Again, it will be of great Use to consider, how acute those Twinges of
Conscience are, which will rack and torment the Drunkard, (that has any
Conscience at all of the Sin) if he should outlive the extravagant Fit. How
must he who is so grievously perplexed (as the most Drunkards are) with a
yesternights Debauch, be rackt and tormented, (if ever in a sober Mind) with
the dreadful apprehensions of those future and approaching Judgments? How
shall those brutish Sensualists who have wallow'd in a Sea of delicate
Liquors, brook the peremptory refusal of a Cup of cold Water to cool their
Tongues? Luke 16.24
Consider impartially those Woes denounced against this Sin by the Prophet:
Isa. 5.11, 12.
And if neither the fear of God; nor the Pleasures, nor Advantages of this
Virtue of Temperance can influence you into a compliance with it, and persuade
you to the practice of it; yet let the consideration of those present and
future Mischiefs oblige you to fly from the Wrath to come: Matthew. 3.7
and if all these Arguments will not awake you from your senseless Stupidity,
you must perish in your Sins; and the Blood be upon your own Heads.

3dly. The next Branch of Sobriety which concerns our Selves, is the temperate
and moderate Use of Apparel; which is indispensably required in both Sexes. In
the moderate Use of Apparel.
And if we consider the Ends for which Cloths are ordained; I see no reason why
Men and Women should be so curious, and make use of so many strange Artifices
to deck and beautify their Bodies. For (1) the Original Institution of Apparel
after the Fall of Man was to cover their Nakedness, and preserve them from the
Violence and Extremity of Wind and Weather. Which Consideration should rather
humble us, than by decking our Bodies imprudently and sinfully, Act. 25.23.
to glory in those things which are the Ensigns of our Shame and Sorrow. (2) In
the use of Apparel, there must be a Distinction (according to the Law of
Nature, and the Custom of all Nations) between Men and Women: That there be no
design of Levity, nor incentive to Lust in our Habiliments, when we meet
together. (3) That both Men and Women should keep within their Faculties and
Callings: And though there be some difference allowed between Persons of a
higher, and lower Rank; yet there should be that Sobriety in the Habits of
both, that there be nothing of Novelty, or Vanity, or Superfluity, which may
tempt themselves, or others to Lust, or Pride, or vain Glory.

Hence we may remarque; that it is most unbecoming Christians (especially) to
use those disingenuous, and unlawful Arts of Patching, Painting, and Perfuming
their Bodies; a vanity too much practiced by those of the weaker Sex, to the
great scandal of our Religion and Government. These Arts of Leger-demain are
expressly forbidden in Scripture; and are particularly censured in Iezebel as a
Badge of her Whorish Impudence. 2 King. 9.30.
The Idolater is compared by the Prophet to an Adultereres who Paints her face,
to tempt and ensnare her Lovers. See the Prophet Isaiah more fully to this
purpose, chap. 3. from the 16, to the end. The ancient Fathers declaim
passionately against it, as most offensive and dishonorable to God; and a
scandal to the Modesty of Christians. Tertullian boldly affirms, Tertul. de
cultu Mulich.
That Women by their artificial Dressings, as Painting, Patching, Persuming,
etc. do allure and invite Men to Lust, and open a Door to those Temptations
which should rather be shut out: And since (says he) God did not create them
in those Forms which they so unwarrantably assume, it would be inquired whether
they be willing to appear in this Disguise (that God should not know them for
his) at the day of Judgment. Again, this is not only a defileing of God's
Temples, and a correcting of his handiwork, for which he has threatened to
destroy them; In Ep. ad Furcam de vid. Servand. In Epist. ad Possid.
but the forementioned Arts (says St. Hierom) are certain Signs of an unchaste
mind, and incentives to Lust. St. Aug. is yet more express upon the point;
where he tells us, That the wearing of Gold and precious Stones, or the putting
on of Costly Apparel, are not forbidden to Persons of the best Rank and Quality
of the female Sex: But for Women to paint, and patch, to color or discolor
their Faces, or to make 'em either more or less white or red, then the God of
Nature has formed them, is a fallacious kind of Adultery; from which it may be
reasonably inferred, that they will not be backward (when a fit Opportunity
presents) to make Shipwreck of their Virginity, or betray their own Husbands.

To avoid the Scandal then, and dangerous Consequences of those Sins which are
inseparable from pompous and immodest Apparel; look back to the forecited
Passage of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 3.16, 17, 18, etc.
and there you will see God's dreadful Resentment of it in plain and legible
Characters: Besides, what Reason has any Man or Woman to be proud of or glory
in that, which is the Badge and Cognizance of their Sin and Slavery? But on the
Contrary, how should we rather study to beautify our Souls, with the precious
and lovely Ornaments of Grace and Virtue; which can only stand us in stead,
when all the pompous and fantastical Gaieties of this World do expire and
vanish. These are the rich Wedding Garments which (through the imputative
Righteousness of Christ) will render our Persons and Performances acceptable to
God; Romans 13.14. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5.
and so become the chifest Ornaments to us, and our Religion. We proceed

4thly. To those Virtues of Moderation required in our Sleep, and Recreations:
And because the Excess in both is expensive of that precious Talent of Time,
which should: be dearer to us than all things in the World besides; therefore
we shall treat of them under the same Head of Discourse.

Now, there is no Man who subscribes to the Truth of the Christian Religion, but
he will readily acknowledge, The Prudent Management of our Time. 1 Timothy 6.19.
that the great Business we have to do in this World, is to lay up for our
selves a good Foundation against the Time to come, that both our Souls and
Bodies may be happy for ever. This is the great Task which lies upon our Hands;
and if it be not diligently and discreetly managed, we are eternally undone.
But alas! we have but a short Time for the accomplishment of this great Work;
our hands are very slow in the doing of it; and the infinite Justice of God
will take a strict and severe account of our Administrations: Therefore, it
must highly import us to be industrious and vigilant in the conscientious
Management of all the Duties of our Christian Calling, that we may be able to
appear before his just and impartial Tribunal, with Joy and not with Grief.

But the Time of our present Life is so uncertain, that there is no one part of
it that we can call our own but the present, which is yet scarce in our power
to dispose of: For the Time past cannot be recal'd; and how God will be pleased
to shorten the remaining part of our Days, we are not able to prognosticate:
Princes, and Monarchies have their Periods and Revolutions, as well as private
Persons and Families. What Is become of the Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, and
Roman Monarchies? Where are those famous Conquerors, Cyrus, Alexander the
great, etc. and where are their triumphant Wreaths, and their other Enfigns of
Honor? devouring Time has swallowed 'em all up: And our Being here is so
transient and uncertain, that (for any thing we know) the next Morning may waft
us hence and determine our final Doom; and that Eternity which we have now in our
hands, may slip through our Fingers before to morrow morning. Who then dares be
so bold and imprudent, as to adventure his eternal Salvation on such a
fortuitous Contingency? And why should any man neglect that Work one Minute,
which all will acknowledge is necessary to be done? But besides, it is highly
considerable, that we are now contesting with our potent, subtle, and mortal
Enemies of all sorts; and we are fighting for an immarcessible Crown of Glory,
which cannot be obtained without great Diligence, Prudence, and Watchfulness,
as well as Courage: It behooves us therefore, if we desire and hope for the
comfortable Success of our Endeavors in this pious Adventure, to be temperate
in all things; 1 Cor. 9.25.
and to spend as little of our precious Time as possible, either in immoderate
Sleep, or unnecessary Recreations. And

1st. We are under many pressing Obligations to be very moderate in our Sleep;
Temperance in Sleep.
nor should we desire any more than may fit us for our civil Callings, and
dispose us for the Business of Religion. We must not comply with our Appetites
and Passions, but consult our Reason and Conscience as to the Measures of our
Repose. And though some Tempers may require more Sleep than others; yet in
passing our Judgments we must always have an eye to the great Concernments of
Eternity. This will be the best Expedient to keep both our Souls and Bodies
awake; and whilst careless and inconsiderate Men are lulled fast asleep upon
the Bed of carnal Security, those that are truly watchful (having their Lamps
burning and Lights shining) will be in a fit Posture to meet the Bridegroom
with joy at his coming; Matthew. 25.1, 2, etc.
either by his private Messenger Death, or in a general Judgment. And as we
are thus obliged to be moderate in our Sleep: So

2dly. And in our Recreations.
In our Recreations. There Is no question but seasonable Refreshments are
allowed us, for the Diversion and Reparation of our weary Thoughts; as well as
the Support and Comfort of our Bodies. Religion is no Enemy to moderate
Pleasures; nor does it infringe the Privileges of humane Nature, in the Use of
innocent Divertisementt. But then we are obliged to observe such Measures in
our Recreations, as not to make our Sports our Business: We should use them as
we do Sawces to our Meat, to set an edge upon our Faculties, and revive our
Spirits, that we may be the more vigorous and active in all the Works and
Duties, both of our Callings, and Religion.

Again, Covetousness should be no Ingredient in our Pastimes. And we must also
see to 'em that they be not evil in themselves; or if lawful, that they become
not otherwise by the undue Circumstances of Time and Place; as on the Lord's
Day, on Days of Humiliation, etc. All Violence, Passion, Anger, Fury,
Quarreling, Cursing and Swearing, must be utterly abandoned in all our Sports
and Divertisements; For these Irregularities instead of refreshing, will
discompose us, and become vexatious both to our selves and others. Lastly our
Recreations should be short, so that they encroach not on our necessary
Business, or Religion in a fruitless Expense of that Time which might be
employed to better Purposes: For indeed no prudent Man has so much Time lying
upon his hands, but he knows better how to employ it, then to spend it vainly
about Trifles. Thus, all our Merriments should be bounded with the necessary
Rules of Reason and Sobriety; and if we keep our selves within these Bounds;
Religion does not only connive at our Mirth, but commends and approves of it.

2dly. Chastity, or Abstinence from bodily Pleasut cs^
This Virtue of Sobriety (as it relates to the Body) consists in the Moderation
of the Lusts and Appetites of the Flesh; which (properly speaking) is Chastity
or Abstinence from bodily Pleasures. The Laws of Nature and Christianity do
expressly forbid all sorts of Uncleanness, as Adultery, Fornication,
Self-pollution, and all the other kinds and degrees of Effeminacy; and do put
an absolute Restraint upon all the concurrent Motions, Affections, Desires, and
lustful Appetites, both of the Soul and Body: For, if any of these be indulged
and complied with, they will set on fire the whole Course of Nature, and sud
dainly plunge the whole Man into unavoidable and irreparable Mischiefs. We
should therefore rather fly from this Sin, then dispute against it: And to
this End 'twill be necessary to consider

(1) That all sorts of Venery and Vnclenness, The Dangers attending this Sin.
Hos. 4.11.
do not only suppress and stifle all the divine and spiritual Operations of the
Soul, but do effectually draw them away from God and his Worship. This was
notoriously remarkable in the Case of Solomon, 1 Kings 11, 12.
who (though otherwise a Prince of unparalled Wisdom and Prudence, yet he)
tells us from his own miserable Experience, that when inconsiderate Men have
plunged themselves into the Pit of Filthiness, it is very difficult for them to
retreat: For they are led (says he) by the contrivances of their wanton
Prostitutes, as an Ox to the slaughter, Prove. 7.22, 23.
or as a Thief to the Correction of the Stocks, 'till a Dart strike through
their Livers; or as a Bird hastes to the Snare, and knows not that it is for
his Life. Pro. 23.27.
And, a Whore is a deep Ditch, and a strange Woman is a narrow Pit: All which
imply the unavoidable dangers and Mischiefs which lustful Persons run upon, who
give way to, and indulge their sensual and brutish Appetites and Passions.

(2) The Sins of Uncleanness are usually attended with Poverty and an infirm
Constitution. Prove. 6.6.
This has been too remarkable in the decayed Bodies, and shattered Estates of
too many sad and miserable Instances, especially of late years in this sinful
Nation; to the great scandal of our pure and undefiled Religion, and has been
no small Disparagement to the excellent Constitutions of our Government, both
in Church and State: But, though perhaps a vicious Libertine may (which is very
rare) escape these temporal Punishments; yet the just Vengeance of God will
certainly overtake him in another World: For it is express from Scripture, that
God will judge Whoremongers and Adulterers; and whosoever shall live, and die
under the Power and Prevalence of these sins unrepented of unsubdued, shall
never enter into the Kingdom of God.

(3) These Deeds of darkness cannot be hid from God's all-seeing Eye: For
whither can we go from his Spirit, or whither shall we fly from his Presence?
Psa. 139.7.
He beheld David's Adultery (as before) though committed with the greatest
Secrecy; 1 Samuel 12.12.
and our blessed Savior knew the practice of the adulterous Woman of Samaria;
Joh. 4.18
It must needs then be a great Falacy and Cheat which Whoremongers and
Adulterers put upon themselves, whilst they endeavor to conceal those Works of
Darkness from the Eye of the World. For the infinitely wise God registers all
these Offenses in the black Book of his eternal Memoirs; and will bring them
all to a sad Account at the Day of Judgment, (unless they be sincerely
repented of) to the unspeakable Shame and Horror of those that commit them.

Give no way then to your Lusts, and hold no Parley with your sensual
Appetites; for if you do, you are in great danger of being overcome. Solomon,
though the wisest of Men, did prostitute his Wit, Learning, Honor, Experience,
and all, to gratify a lustful and wanton Appetite. It stands us in hand
therefore to be always upon our Guard, and the best way to be so is, to be
watchful over our Thoughts; to make a Covenant with our Eyes; and to keep our
Hearts with all diligence, Matthew. 23.26. Prove. 14.23.
from whence all these Abominations flow and derive their Original: For if we
keep the Fountain incorrupt, the Streams will be so too; and if the Fear of
God, and the serious Apprehension of Death and Judgment dwell in our Hearts,
like a strong Porter they will keep the Door against, and dislodge all vain and
sensual Desires. This was Joseph's Security against all the lustful Dalliances
of his wanton and importunate Mistress. And this will effectually guard all the
Ports and Avenues of the Soul, against the incursion of carnal Temptations; so,
that if they should creep in by surprise or unawares; such Apprehensions as
these, will not suffer 'em to fix there, but either cast them out, or kill 'em.

Again, set a strict watch over all your Senses, lest they be charmed and
allured by the delicate and soft Embraces of forbidden Objects: Have no
Communieation with lustful Persons of either Sex. Alexander the great would not
see the Wife of Darius, lest by the Charms of her admirable Beauty he might be
tempted and overcome. And certainly, he that dares not look on a beautiful
Woman to please his eye, cannot come within the danger of Wantonness and Folly.
And it is better for a man (says Solomon) to be Master of his own Passions,
than to conquer an Army.

Temperance in Eating and Drinking, with Fasting and Labor, are powerful
Expedients to subjugate the Flesh, and bring under the Body. St. Paul made use
of 'em to subdue his own Appetite, and recommends the same Duties to us, as the
best instruments to further us in the great Work of Mortification and
Self-denial. To which we should not fail to join our earnest Prayers to God for
the Assistance of his Grace and Spirit, that we may obtain this comfortable
Victory and Conquest over our Selves: For our blessed Savior (who best
understood our Frailties) recommends this Duty to us, as the most successful
Expedient; and without which all our other natural and moral Endeavors, will
prove ineffectual and to no purpose.

Now, if all these Means will not secure our Chastity, but that our Appetites
are still headstrong and unruly; then 'twill be necessary to make use of lawful
Marriage, which God has been pleased to institute and allow, to pare off the
Excrescencies of corrupt Nature, and to secure us from the Guilt and Punishment
of our fleshly Lusts: Yet herein we must consider, that there is a Temperance
and Moderation to be used even in the Pleasures of lawful Wedlock; and as all
Embraces and Contact are simply forbidden with others, so we must not abuse our
own Allowances; but preserve our Vessels in Sanctification and Honor, 1 These.
4.4.
and keep our selves within the due Bounds of Justice and Modesty. By these
Hints we may understand, how much this Virtue of Chastity will conduce to the
Interest and Satisfaction not only of the outward, but the inward Man; (for no
man shall ever repent that he has lived chastely and virtuously) as the
Contraries are most pernicious to, and destructive of both. My designed brevity
will not suffer me to enlarge further on these Heads: And therefore I must
leave it to your Prudence, and Conscience to collect the rest.

3dly. The last Virtue which concerns the Body, is the sober and moderate use
of those Riches and Estates, which the divine Providence has been pleased to
allow us, for our Support and Accommodation in this Life, which is known by the
name of Contentedness.

Which Virtue consists, in the inward, voluntary, and universal Submission of
our Wills and Desires, to God's gracious and wise Disposal of us, in every
Estate and Condition of Life: For if our Condition be prosperous, this true
Christian Contentment will oblige us to rest satisfied with what we have;
without the trouble of an anxious Care, and carking Desire of getting more: If
we be poor, this will teach us to be satisfied with that little Portion which
God has given us; without coveting of, or murmuring and repining at the
flourishing Estate and Condition of other Men. But, this peaceable and innocent
Composure of Mind and Spirit, is only peculiar to the sound Christian: For though
the Heathens did pretend to it, yet they were not Masters of it. They could
indeed comport with the want of Riches, and were sometimes affected with a
simple Poverty: But if they happened to fall into Disgrace or Contempt, then
they esteemed it an heroical act to kill themselves; (which in such Cases they
usually did) and a Demonstration of a magnanimous Spirit. Lib. de Civit. Dei
Cap. 10.
But St. Aug. (in the Case of Cato Vticensis and Lucretia) detects the folly
and madness of this Conceit; and fully shows, that this Fool-hardiness does
rather proceed from an impotent and cowardly Spirit. And doubtless it is the
greatest Fortitude to be Masters of our selves; to conquer our own Passions;
and to entertain all Events with a submissive Patience, Contentedness, and
Aequanimity, Especially if we consider, that God Almighty has been pleased to
appoint a state of sufferings, to be the more suitable Dispensation for the
promoting of his own Glory, and our Good.

Therefore it must hence follow, that the chief and adequate Object of our
Christian Contentment (in which the Mind of Man can only be satisfied, and
without which all the Enjoyments of this World will prove empty and evan^^d) is
the alone infinite and immutable God, and the full enjoyment of him by Faith
and Love in Christ our Mediator: John 17.3
For, that pious and gracious Soul that makes God his only Substance and
Portion, rusts fully satisfied in his Mercy and Goodness, though the things of
this World should fall cross, and run counter to his natural Desires and
Expectations. The Truth whereof will more evidently appear, if we consider
these few Things. And

(1) Nothing ^ess than this infinite and Universal Good (which fills all the
Faculties) can terminate the Desires and Aspirations of the Soul, after an
endless and blissful Immortality. Pleasant sounds may delight the Ear, but not
the Eye; beautiful Colors may please the Eye, but not the Ear: But that divine
and excellent Spirit which injoys the Favor of God in Christ, has an Universal
Satisfaction, and shall abound with the perfection of Parts in this Life, and
Degrees in the future to his unspeakable and endless Comfort. 1 Pet. 1.8.
Whom having not seen they love, etc.

(2) This Universal Good must be powerfully impressed upon, and have its
residence in the Cabinet of the Heart, which is the Fountain and Principle of
all rational, and religious Thoughts and Actions. Now, all the Pleasures,
Riches, and Honors of this vain and transitory World do only rove and
fluctuate in the Fancy, and have no Communication nor Intercourse with the
Soul; for they are like the Armor of Saul to David, too wide and unfit for it:
But the true sense of God's Love in Christ does replenish every Corner of the
Heart with Grace and Truth, and gives that substantial Pleasure and
Contentment; that there is no Joy on Earth, like that of resting satisfied with
the Enjoyment of God the Supreme Good.

(3) This only, is the Complement and Perfection of all other Virtues, but
especially of this Christian Contentment. Nothing less then the Supreme Good
can replenish the Soul; and in the midst of all temporal Enjoyments, there is
still a plus ultra, something to be desired and pursued, which is yet superior
and far more excellent. Moses could not be satisfied 'till he came to the Top
of Pisgah, that he might see the beauty and fruitfulness of the promised Land:
But a Believer's Rest and Contentment is only in Heaven, and without a certain
Prospect of, and Title to those future Rewards, all the puny Delights on Earth
will prove nauseous and unsavory to him.

(4) It Is the Property of this supreme Good (which can only afford the rational
Powers of the Soul plenary Contentment) to be permanent and of everlasting
continuance. For though we should enjoy all things, even to our wishes, yet the
very apprehension of a future change (as we see in the more favorable
Intervals of chronical Distempers) would stifle or diminish our present Ease
and Contentment. All the Delights of this World are as the Summers Rain, or
Morning Dew, which are presently dried up: But the Favor and Mercy of God in
Christ, are as the Sun Beams, which shine out more and more to the perfect day,
to which there succeeds no Darkness. Though our Accommodations be mean and course
in these Tents of Kedar; yet, the enjoyment of the Favor and Mercy of God,
(that infinite and Supreme Good) will supply all these Defects; when we come to
be satisfied with the fullness of his house, Psa. 16.11
and drink abundantly of the riches of his pleasures.

Since then our infinitely wise and gracious God has assigned us our Portion in
this Life, it is but just and reasonable we should be content with it. And though
it be the bitter Cup of Affliction which he has put into our hands, yet in
Conformity to Christ and his followers we must cheerfully drink of it: Which if
we do, 'twill turn to good Account at the last. If we moderate our Desires, and
be content with such things as we have, our Souls will not only live at ease,
and be free from all distracting Cares and Despondency; but God will bestow a
greater Measure of his Blessings upon us, if he see it convenient: And if it
should fall out otherwise, we have still cause to submit to his wise and
gracious Determinations. Abraham being content with, and desirous that Ishmael
(only the Son of his Concubine) should live, and God blessed him with an Isaac,
who was many Degrees better and more worthy. Solomon desired Wisdom only, and
being satisfied with it, God was pleased to add Riches and Honors as the
farther reward his Contentment and Moderation. Having therefore Food and
Raiment let us be therewith content. 1 Timothy 6.8.
Many thousands better than we are forced to truckle under a narrow Fortune.
The Heir of eternal Majesty and Lord of all things, was content with barley
Bread, and a few small Fishes; nor had he a Bed of his own whereon he could lay
his head: Showing us hereby, that Nature is satisfied with a little; 2 Cor. 8.9.
and therefore he became Poor for our sakes, that we through his Poverty might
be made Rich; whose Grace and Mercy are a full Compensation for all our other
wants. We have no cause therefore to distract our Thoughts with an anxious Care
and Despondency, but should rather be content with that Dividend which God's
Providence has assigned us: For he that spared not his own Son, Romans 8.32.
but delivered him up for us all: how should he not with him also freely give
us all things?

Hitherto of those divine and admirable Duties of Piety toward God: and of
those of Christian Morality, which do most immediately concern our selves, and
have the greatest Influence on Men's Practices in the great Business of
Religion. We proceed now

3dly. and Lastly, to treat of those several Duties which concern our Dealings
and Intercourse with other Men. And these must be considered, either (1) in
general, as they belong to the whole Community of Christians. Or (2) and more
particularly, as they relate to our Persons, and Offices, in all the Civil, and
Religious Transactions of Humane Life. And

1st. Those which concern all the Members of the Christian Brotherhood in
general are universal Love and Benificence to all and every one of them;
(without respect of Persons) of what Country, Calling, Sect or Party soever
they be. And herein we should endeavor to imitate the divine Benignity who
causes the Sun to shine, and the Rain to descend, Mat. 5.54.
upon the Persons, and Possessions, both of the just and unjust. And this is
most consonant to the admirable Doctrine and Example of our blessed Savior,
who made it a necessary Duty and Principle of Life, for Christians to Love one
another. Joh. 15.1^. 1 Cor. 14.1 Col. 3.14.
To be earnest in the pursuit of Charity; and above all things to put on
Charity which is the Bond of perfectness; which Duty is recommended to us by
this noble Enforcement: For he that dwells in Love dwells in God, 1 John
3.16
and God in him. This is the new Commandment and that Universal Law, Joh. 13.34
which all believing Christians are willing to be governed by; even that which
our Savior has ratified and confirmed by the admirable Sanction of his own
Authority and Example. So that there can be no dispute now (under the Gospel
Economy) concerning the just Bounds and Measures of our Love and Charity to
others: For the whole Tenor of the Christian Law does oblige us to love as
Brethren, 1 Pet. 4.8.
to have fervent Charity among our Selves, and to be kindly affection'd one
toward another: Romans 12.10.
And our eternal Lawgiver has made this one Duty, the Criterion and Cognizance
of the Sincerity of our Faith and Obedience; for by this (says he) shall all
men know that ye are my Disciples, Joh. 15.35.
if ye have love one to another.

But to illustrate this Point more fully: wherever the Christian Religion is
sincerely believed and complied with, it begets in its Proselytes such a
gracious Temper of Mind and Spirit, as will make its Votaries humble,
courteous, affable, candid, ingenuous, tender and compassionate; and as
sensible of, and zealous for other Men's Good as their own. This will dispose
them for all Offices of Humanity and good Neighborhood; and so cultivate and
sweeten their Tempers, that they will find themselves hereby obliged to perform
all the mutual Offices of Charity and Duty to others which their present State
and Condition of Life require and call for.

Again, the Gospel Dispensation obliges us to be obedient and submissive to
our Superiors; courteous and civil to our Equals; and to treat our Inferiors
and all we converse with, with a pleasant Look, civil Language, and an obliging
Deportment. We are obliged also to be kind and grateful to our Benefactors, to
pity and pray for our Persecutors; and though we should suffer as Christians, yet
even herein we must exercise Forbearance and long suffering Patience,
abstracting from all Malice and Revenge; being most kind and gentle and easy
to be entreated, forgiving Injuries, enduring Affronts, and being forward and
easy to be reconciled. And we should be so charitable in all doubtful Cases,
as to take hold on the right Handle; interpreting all the Words and Actions,
even of our most inveterate and malicious Enemies, favorably and heartily;
rather excusing, or extenuating, than proclaiming their Errors and
Miscarriages; unless it be in some important Cases, wherein the Interest of
Religion, or the Reputation of our selves, or others may be eminently
concerned. This is that heaping of Coals upon their heads, Romans 12.2^
(which the Apostle speaks of) and if this sovereign Medicine will not melt
their rugged Tempers and Dispositions, into a friendly and amicable Compliance
with us; they have just cause to be afraid, that God's infinite Justice
reserves 'em to be Fuel for those inextinguishable Flames, which are prepared
for the Devil, and his Angels. This charitable Frame and Temper which I Have thus
recommended, will dispose and qualify us for Heaven; wherein we shall enjoy
the freest Intercourse with the holy Angels, and the Souls of just men made
perfect: And upon these Terms, we need not doubt to be received into their holy
and innocent Communion, where we shall be inconceivably happy and rejoice with
'em for ever.

But, as this Universal Love and Benificence will be every way so comfortable
and advantageous, both to our selves and others: So on the contrary, a froward,
rugged, and uncharitable Disposition, and those base Effects which spring and
flow from it, (as Hatred and Revenge, Pride and Insolence, Injustice and
Oppression, Whispering and Backbiting, Railing and Slandering, Faction and
Rebellion, with all their other cursed Accomplices) are not only inconsistent
with that pacific and charitable Temper of Christianity; but they are the very
Bane of, and Scandal to all civil and sacred Societies, as well as a continual
Disturbance to those that commit them. And whosoever shall leave this world,
whilst he is under the power and prevalence of these insolent, mischievous, and
domineering Passions, is fitted only for the Society of Devils and damned
Spirits; who having sinned with 'em by Compliance, must expect to be punished
for ever by Sympathy. And thus much of that Universal Love and Benificence,
which all Christians are obliged to practice one toward another. We pass on

2dly. To the Particular Duties incumbent upon us, in all our Intercourse and
Dealings with other Men. And they are such as concern, either (1) the Persons,
or (2) the Possessions, or (3) the Private, and Public Peace and Happiness of
all Christians. And I begin

1st. With that Love, Mercy, and Charity which respects the Persons of our
Christian Brotherhood: Which for Method's sake must be considered under a
double Reference. And (1) with respect to their Souls: And (2) to their Bodies.
But

(1) Men's Souls being of infinitely more value than their Bodies, become the
primary objects of our Care; and it is certainly the highest Instance of
Christian Charity, to rescue a Soul from Death, and from the Peril and
Punishment of Hell Torments. Levit. 19.17.
Therefore, to this End we are obliged to discountenance Sin in all Persons we
converse with; (since that is the Cause of all the Maladies we suffer) and we
should use our steadfast Endeavor to reclaim and reform the Sinner, by mild and
serious Entreaties; and if these will not do, by severe (yet seasonable)
Reproofs; always aiming at the Conviction and Conversion, not the Disgrace of
the Offender. And herein we exert our Zeal for God's Glory; our just hatred
against Sin; and our hearty Concernment for the Salvation of our fellow
Christians. Indeed, all our Discourses should be seasoned with something of
Religion; that they may minister Grace unto the Hearers. St. Bernard complained
in his Time, (and I am afraid it is too applicable to ours:) Nihil de
Scripturis, Bern.
nihil de salute Animarum agitur, sed Nugae, and Risus, and verba proferuntur
in ventum. Christians now a days (the more's the pity) discourse little or
nothing of Religion, that they may edify one another: But of Toys and Trifles;
and so their Communication becomes either sinful, or frothy and impertment;
whereas holy Conferences (well timed) would conduce much to the Credit and
Interest of Religion. And doubtless it would be of singular Advantage, to
communicate our Experiences to one another, concerning the Power, Mercies and
Goodness of God to us, in all the Straits and Exigencies which we have met with
in this Life; prescribing also such Rules and Methods herein for their Support
and Comfort, as we have found most useful and beneficial to our Selves. 1 Pet.
4.10
As every Man has received the Gift, so let him minister to another, as it
becomes a Steward of the manifold Grace of God.

Again, that we may be happy Instruments in the promoting of God's Glory and
our own Good, by the practice of fervent Charity to the Souls of others; Ur
malus sermo inducit Peccarum, sic malum silentium reli^quit in Peccato, Aug.
we must be careful to instruct the ignorant, satisfy the doubtful, strengthen
the weak, encourage and confirm the strong, persuade sinners to Repentance,
comfort the comfortless, and reprove the scandalous Offender: Studying hereby
to make all men as happy as our selves; by convincing them of the necessity of
making their Peace with God through Christ; and assuring them, that there is no
Repentance to be expected beyond the Grave; (for the Concernments of the other
World are fixed and immovable, as the Tree falls so it lies, and as Death
leaves us so will Judgment find us) that without a true Faith in God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, with a sincere Endeavor to be and to do good, and
a hearty Repentance for all our sins past, there can be no certain Hope of the
comfortable Presence of God's Grace here; nor any well grounded Expectancy of
his Glory hereafter; Heb. 10.^7.
but a fearful looking for of Judgment, and endless Perdition.

Now, if we desire to enforce these Methods, and render 'em successful to
others; our Selves must be uniform (so far as it may consist with the
infirmities and indiscretions of humane Nature) in the devout and serious
practice of all the Duties of Religion: We should study and strive to be pure
and innocent in our whole Conversations, and be extremely careful that we
partake not of other men's sins; either by conniving at, consenting to,
complying with, or vindicating of them in their vicious and ungodly Courses:
For unless we practice those Things our selves, which we press on others; ^ox
and praeterea ^ihil.
our most witty sayings, closest Reasonings, and all other Means which we can
possibly use for the Conversion and Salvation of their Souls, will have little
or no Influence upon, nor Authority to prevail with them.

And when we have thus conscientiously discharged our Duty, and yet our most
pious and charitable Endeavors prove insuccessful; then we should mourn for
their sins in secret; pray earnestly and importunately for their Conversion;
and (by a just complaint to their lawful Superiors) we should see to the
execution of Justice, that they may suffer due and deserved Punishment for
their Offenses in this Life; that their Souls and Bodies may be saved in the
day of our Lord Jesus.

Since then the faithful Discharge of this Duty is a Business of such
Advantage, Necessity, and Importance both to our own, and the Souls of other
Men; and since the Glory of God, and the Interest of Religion, are so highly
concerned in it: Then, what account shall wicked Men be able to give for the
total Neglect, if not absolute contempt of this Duty? And what extreme
Punishments shall those ungodly Miscreants endure, who by their vile and
abominable Examples, are so far from saving a Soul from Death, that they lead
them headlong to Hell; and become the Devil's Factors to plunge 'em into
temporal Misery and eternal Condemnation. These are certainly of the number of
those unprofitable Servants who shall be bound hand and foot, and suffer the
ignominy and torture of those Pains, which are easeless endless and remediless.
But as we are obliged to be extremely solicitous for the welfare of Men's Souls.
So

(2) Their Bodies are as suitable Objects of our Charity and tenderest
Compassions: And to their Bodies.
And we are obliged by the Laws of our holy Profession, to minister all things
needful for the relief of their Wants, who are not able to provide for
Themselves. For the Poor are the Treasuries and Ornaments of the Church, and by
being charitable to 'em, they become as it were Bills of Exchange, by which we
make a wise and frugal Purchase in Heaven, and transmit our Estates into the
other World. And it can be no matter of scruple to us, whether we give Money,
or Money worth to those that want; since all Christians are left to their own
Prudence and Discretion, to dispense their Charity and Beneficence, as may seem
to 'em most meet and convenient.

Now, the particular Instances, wherein we must express our Charity to the
Bodies of our fellow Christians, are such as these. Namely, the poor Widows,
and Orphans, the Blind, Lame, Aged, Impotent, Sick and Diseased should never go
from our Doors empty, if we have wherewith to supply their Wants: We must give
them something for Food, and something for Raiment; and protect and defend (if
we be able) their Persons and Possessions, from the Oppression and Injury of
Merciless and unrighteous Men. More particularly yet, our Religion obliges us
to recruite the Spoiled, to redeem Captives and those that are in Bonds; to
entertain Strangers, relieve the Sick, and those that are in Prison; and to be
careful to bury the dead Bodies of our Brethren in honor and safety. And thus
we are bound (in all those Instances which I have mentioned) to be charitable
to all Persons; but especially to those who are unblameable in their Lives, and
(according to their Abilities) painful in their Callings, modest in their
Behavior, and to such (most particularly) who being really indigent, are yet
ashamed to beg.

To enforce this Duty: God has placed the Safeguard of our Lives in the mutual
Assistances of one another: And then we rejoice most sutably for God's Mercies
received, when by our bounty others have cause to rejoice with us. If we be not
able to give much yet we must give what we can, and where there is a willing
Mind and Disposition to do Good, God has promised to accept it and reward the
Widows Mite, Si nihil babes da Lachry mulam magnum enim est solatium afflicto
Misericordia. Naz. Or. 16
and a Cup of cold Water with the Comforts and Blessings, both of this and a
future life. And though we cannot relieve the Distresses of our poor brethren by
our Purses, yet we may assist them with our Persons and in our Prayers, which
(in many Instances) may be comfortable and advantageous to them. And to
encourage us further herein,

Our Charity to Men is always rewarded with Mercy from God. And this will be a
certain Expedient (if it be seasonably made use of) to secure both our Persons,
and Possessions from injury and violence. (1) Our Persons will be safe under
the conduct of a wise and gracious Providence: The wicked indeed may rage
against, and persecute the charitable and merciful Man, but God will hold him
in the hollow of his hand; preserve him from violence under the shadow of his
Wings, and he shall be safe under his feathers in the time of trouble. Psa.
51.1. Acts 10.4.
God will hear his Prayers and grant his Desires; and either give what he asks,
or something equivalent if not more advantageous. Deal thy Bread then to the
hungry, Isa. 58.7, 8, 9. etc.
and bring the Poor that are cast out to thy House: when thou see the naked
cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own Flesh; then shall thy light
break forth as the Morning, (thy Soul shall be enriched with all spiritual and
heavenly blessings) and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy
righteousness shall go before thee, the Glory of the Lord shall be thy
Re-reward. And as our Benevolence and Beneficence to others, is a certain
Expedient to preserve our Persons in peace and safety. So

(2) It Is of great use and importance (1) to improve, and (2) to secure our
Estates and Possessions, to us and ours. For the

First, The liberal Soul shall be made fat, Pro. 11.24.
and he that waters shall be watered himself. For he that has pity on the
Poor, Pro. 19.17.
lends to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 15.10. Mat. 7.2.
and that which he has given will he pay him again, and bless him in all that
he puts his hand unto. The same Measure that we mete to others, shall be
measured to us again: To the merciful, Ps. 18.25.
God will show himself merciful, Psa. 112.9.
and the righteous (that is the charitable Man) shall be had in everlasting
Remembrance. Eccl. 11.1
Thus if we cast our Bread upon the Water, (without hopes of Retribution from
those whom we relieve) we shall find it after many days: Luke 12.33
This is to make to our selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, and to
provide Bags which wax not old; a treasure in heaven that sadeth not, where no
Thief approaches, neither Moth corrupts. Habet sem^ per unde dat qui habet
pectus plenum Charitatis.
And doubtless the more we communicate to others (out of a true Principle of
Charity) the more will God communicate to us: For in St. Austin's opinion) they
shall never want Abilities, nor Opportunities to give, who are thus piously and
charitably disposed. And as our Charity and Bounty to the Poor, is of singular
Use and Advantage for the Improvement of our Estates and Possessions, (as has
been noted from the experience of many charitable Persons, even in our
Memories) So,

Secondly, This will prove the best Expedient to increase and improve what we
have got, and to preserve them too: (1) For the benefit of our Selves, and (2)
of our Posterity.

(1) Our diffusive Charity will be of great Use and Expediency to preserve and
improve our Possessions for the Benefit and Comfort of our Selves. No
Extortioner, no Tyrant, no Oppressor shall be able to seize them out of our
Hands. The strongest Locks and Bolts, Banks and Exchequers, and the surest
Mortgage in Lands may fail; (for Riches do often take to themselves wings and
fly away) but that Money, Prove. 23.5.
and those Goods which we give to the Poor, are transmitted to, and laid up in
those Heavenly Treasuries, Mat. 6.20
where neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves shall not break
through and steal 'em; God having promised that they shall be kept in safe
Custody for us 'till the great day of Account, Mat. 25.34, 35, 36, 40.
When the King shall say to them on his right hand, come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World:
(And he assigns these Acts of Charity as the Motives and Reasons inducing him,
to advance 'em to this Honor and Happiness) For I was an hungered, and ye gave
me Meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me Drink, I was a Stranger and ye took me
in, naked and ye clothed me, I was sick and ye visited me, I was in Prison and
ye came unto me: For verily I say unto you, forasmuch as ye have done it to one
of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. He interprets all
those Acts of Bounty and Charity bestowed on his poor members as done to
himself.

(2) By Acts of Mercy and Charity we entail our Estates with a blessing upon
our Posterity; whereof they shall enjoy the Comfort and Benefit when we are
dead. The Widows Child was blessed with the Fruits of his Mother's Charity to the
Prophet. 1 Kings 1^ 22. 2 Samuel 9.3, etc.
The Son of Jonathan was plentifully rewarded for his Father's Beneficence to
David. And 'twas the Observation of that Kingly Prophet (from a well grounded
experience) that he never saw the righteous (that is the charitable Man)
forsaken, Ps. 37.25.
nor his Seed begging their Bread. All which might be further confirmed (if
'twere necessary) by innumerable Instances, both ancient and modern. And if
Parents would be careful to put something into God's hands for their Children,
which they might do by relieving the Poor and Indigent; (for God acknowledges
it as a Debt due from himself, which he will certainly pay and with advantage)
whatever becomes of the rest of their Estates that part will be safe.

Thus by being merciful to others, we shall obtain God's blessing for our
Selves and our Children, both in this and a future Life. Therefore, for the
sake of our indigent Brethren, for God's sake, for Christ's sake, (and if not
for theirs, yet) for our own, and the Happiness of Ours, let us be tender and
affectionate, charitable and compassionate to all Men, of every Nation and
Country, Sect or Party whatsoever, (for the Command is indefinite) if they be
in Misery and Distress. And all our Aims and Intentions of doing good to others
should be sincere, without any mixture of Pride, Passion, Interest, Hypocrisy,
Ostentation or Vainglory. What we give to the Poor, must be without grudging,
murmuring, or repining: And Deeds of this nature must be done cheerfully,
freely and bountifully, from the Conscience of our Duty to God, and with a
charitable Intention to do Good.

Since then this Duty of Charity and Mercy to the Poor is every way so
beneficial to us, and ours; and can by no means be omitted without manifest
Prejudice, both to our present and future Concernments, in this and another
World: And seeing we neither want Objects to relieve, nor Opportunities of
doing good; (for the Poor shall be always with us) let us therefore endeavor
to make unto our selves Friends (whilst we may) of this Mammon of
Unrighteousness; that when we are stripped naked of all these temporal
Enjoyments, our merciful and gracious God may receive us into his everlasting
Habitations.

Now, if the Case stands thus with the Charitable and Merciful Christian,
(which indeed it does) as it is fully and clearly represented, (for God is
pleased with Mercy, but inexorable to those that shut up the Bowels of
Compassion against the Poor:) Then what shall become of those merciless, cruel,
and uncharitable Men, who have most wickedly spent their Estates in superfluous
and intemperate Eating, Drinking, Gaming, sumptuous Buildings, costly Furniture
of Houses, gorgeous Apparel, troublesome and vexatious Suits in Law, Horses,
Dogs, numerous Attendants, and in many other Instances of Luxury, and
Debauchery; which are every where obvious, and God knows too common in this
sinful Nation? By which irreligious and wicked Extravagancies, Charity to the
Poor (as well as Hospitality) are dwindled into nothing; and if the importunate
Beggar does now and then squieze a Penny out of their Pockets; (to be freed
from his Clamours) yet they seldom give without some smart, or scurrulous
Reflections upon his Person and Condition; whilst they can spend whole
Lordships on their Luxury. We have alas! (which is very sad) too many
deplorable Instances of Men of uncharitable Minds and unmerciful Dispositions;
that have ruined their Estates, Honors, Reputations, Bodies, Souls, and all by
intemperate Living; who by a frugal and careful Management might have made
themselves and there Families (whom they have utterly undone) both happy here,
and for ever.

But there are another sort of griping Mammonists, (in the other extreme) who
have raised their own Fortunes by Fraud and Oppression, upon the Ruins of
other Men's. But these Cormorants have little or no Enjoyment of what they have
thus basely got; and therefore it cannot be expected that they should be
charitable to others. Here and there one perhaps, will dedicate some part of
his ill begotten Estate to pious and charitable Uses, to atone for those
crimson and crying Sins, which they have so wickedly and wilfully committed:
But, as these specious Pretenses to Piety and Virtue, are no other then gross
Hypocrisy, Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum Aug.
and abominable in the sight of God; so they will find that (without Repentance
and Restitution) all these Projects will prove fruitless and stand 'em in no
stead at the great Audit.

To conclude this Point. Let all unmerciful Men consider, that if they continue
so, their Doom is already determined; for they shall all go away into
everlasting Torments: Matthew. 25.41. Jam. 2.
And there is nothing but Judgment without Mercy to be expected by those that
will show no Mercy. All their Prayers, and Tears, etc. without Charity are to
no purpose: Pro. 21.13
For whosoever stops his Ear to the cry of the Poor, he shall also cry himself
and shall not be heard. Thus much of that Instance of Duty which respects the
Persons of our fellow Christians. We proceed

2dly. To that other Branch of it, which concerns their Possessions, which is
Justice and Honesty. Now, Justice is a comprehensive Term, and in its full
latitude implies the Conformity of the whole Man to the whole Will of God: Or,
it is more Particular, and restrained to the Persons; (of which already) or the
Possessions of our Neighbors. And those are either their Wives, Children, and
Servants; (as before) or their Gold, Silver, Houses, Lands, and that which may
be as dear to 'em, as all the rest, viz. their Credit and Reputations. But I
shall treat of this Virtue or Duty, now under Consideration, with respect (1)
to the Estates, and (2) the Reputations of our Christian Brotherhood. And for
the better understanding of this Point,

1st. Justice respecting the Estates of Others, is either
That Justice which has a peculiar Reference to the Estates of other men, is
either (1) Commutative, or (2) Distributive Justice. Both which do necessarily
imply a constant Will, Desire, and Endeavor to give to every One, Superiors,
Equals, Inferiors, what by a just Right and Title becomes their due; whether
they be Friends or Enemies, virtuous or vicious; all Persons whatsoever are
comprehended in it, and have a right to it. We begin

(1) With Commutative Justice; 1. Commutative.
which is wholly conversant in the ordinary Transaction of Business between Man
and Man. This obliges all Men mutually to consult their own, and Neighbors
Advantage in their Commerce and Conversation with them. That fundamental Law of
Nature, which our blessed Lord has adapted into the Christian Religion of
dealing with others bona fide, as we desire to be dealt with our selves, must
be kept inviolable in our whole Intercourse with one another. Every Man's
Conscience should be a private Chancery and Court of Equity in his own Bosom.
And unless we make this Golden Rule the Standard to regulate our Affairs by,
all other acts of Piety, etc. are no better than painted Hypocrisy, Mic. 6.11.
and most abominable in the sight of God and all good Men.

Those Gentlemen have been no great Friends to the Christian Religion, who so
eagerly dispute against Morality, (as they pretend) for the advancement of free
Grace. As if both sides of this Contradiction could be true, that a Man might
be godly and dishonest at the same time; and be a pure Disciple of the first,
whilst he is an open Enemy to, and transgressor of the Commandments of the
second Table; so that no man (in their sense) can be Evangelically righteous,
unless he be Morally unrighteous. But if they would examine the whole Christian
Doctrine impartially, they may be satisfied (if they please,) that an honest
upright Carriage, speaking Truth to our Neighbor, the keeping of a Man's Word;
performing Oaths and Promises; the acting sincerely and conscientiously in all
our Dealings with other Men, is a considerable part of that Religion, which our
blessed Savior came to preach and propagate in the World.

But I would studiously avoid all Controversy, and shall only desire them, and
all Christians to consider; that this excellent Religion which we profess does
oblige us to be candid and ingenuous, to measure all our Words by our Meaning,
so, that we neither pretend what is false, nor conceal what is true; but make
Truth and Equity, Justice and Honesty the Common Basis and Standard of all
humane Transactions: For to lie, and swear, and dissemble, for the promoting of
Men's Interests in this World, are Stratagems which the Devil has always made
use of, to allure and entrap all inconsiderate and worldly-minded Men. And
indeed, it is highly incongruous, and most inconsistent with the Genius and
Spirit of Christianity, to dissemble and deny the Truth; and every sincere
Christian will abhor and abandon those Methods, of maintaining his secular
Interests by Lies and Falsehood.

Again, this Justice does oblige us to perform all our Promises and Contracts,
(which are neither unlawful, nor impossible to be kept) though to our greatest
prejudice; and unless these be faithfully observed, as the Government we live
under may be endangered: So no Man can be safe, either in his Person, or
Possessions. Nor should we wilfully transgress any of those Laws of Justice and
Sincerity; nor make use of any Man's Necessity, Ignorance Passion, etc. to
enrich our Selves, or advance our Estates in this World. Thus I have given you
a short Specimen of this positive part of Commutative Justice; wherein we
should be as tender of other Men's Interests, as our own.

But our Obligations herein will more evidently appear, if we consider the
Negative part of this Duty; which forbids all Entrenchment on other men's
Rights, in taking away their Cattle, Money, Houses, Lands, etc. either by
Fraud, or Violence. And this Injustice is either (1) of the Heart, which is
extended to all those several Objects mentioned before, which we should not
Covet nor desire; and a Sin expressly contradictory to, and forbidden in the
tenth Commandment. (2) There Is the Injustice of the Mouth: As in using
deceitful Words and false Pretenses to cheat and overreach one another in
buying and selling, or in persuading an Heir by false and flattering Speeches
to quit his Interest in all, or any part of his Estate; or when a Widow is
wrought on by Fraud or Force, to transfer the Title of that Inheritance, which
of right belonged to the Children of the first, to those of her second Husband.
Or lastly, when Schismatical and Seditious Persons, by their smooth and
deceitful Language, do not only allure and persuade others to substract their
Obedience from their lawful Superiors; but do decoy them by degrees to join
with 'em, in all their vile and unwarrantable Practices of Faction and
Rebellion. (3) There Is the Injustice of the Hand, which consists in taking away
the Estates of other Men, (or any part of them) by Fraud or Injustice; or in
detaining the just Wages of Laborers or Servants; or in not restoring the
Pledge upon the payment of the Money for which that was the Lender's Security;
or in defrauding the Prince of his Honor and Tribute; or in corrupting the
Justice of the Nation for Bribes; or lastly, when a man appropriates those
things to himself, which have been dedicated (by his pious Ancestors) to the
service of God, and the maintenance of his Ministers: As in the detention of
Tyths, and Offerings; or in the selling of Ecclesiastical Livings, etc.

All which several kinds of Injustice are expressly contradictory to, and
forbidden by the Law of Nature, the Law of Nations, and the positive Laws of
God, both in the Old and New Testaments. And whosoever offends in all, or any
of these Instances, without Repentance, and Restitution (in most Cases,) and a
through Reformation of Life, seldom escape Punishment even in this World; De
male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius hares.
and do with their ill gotten Estates entail a Curse on their miserable
Posterity, (of which we have seen many lamentable Instances in our Days:) But
if they should hold whilst they live, what they have basely got by their Deceit
and Rapine; God's Justice and Vengeance will certainly meet with them in the
other World. Know ye not (says the Apostle) that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? 1 Cor. 6.9.
Be not deceived; neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, (who violate the
Chastity of their Neighbors Wives and Daughters, the greatest injustice that
can be committed,) nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Extortioners, shall inherit
the Kingdom of Heaven: For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
unrighteousness of men: Romans 1.18.
Thus all those several kinds of Injustice (which I have given you an account
of) are censured and condemned by the just Laws of God, and the infallible
Decree of Heaven, from whence there can be no appeal. We pass on from this Head
of Commutative.

(2) To Distributive Justice. This is peculiar to the Supreme and Subordinate
Magistrates in every Nation; who are God's Vicegerents and Representatives on
Earth, and invested with Power and Authority from above to protect and reward
the Innocent; and to inflict Punishments on Offenders, in proportion to the
Crimes committed against the Laws of God, and the King. But though the great
Majesty of Heaven and Earth, has devolved his Authority upon them, yet they are
to exempted from Rule; being obliged by the Laws of God, and their Country, (in
their respective Capacities) to be impartial in the Administration of Justice:
Therefore, they should be always ready to hear the Complaints of those that are
oppressed and injured; and be severe and terrible in inflicting due and deserved
Punishments upon all wilful and open Transgressors. And it is required of 'em
that they be impartial and unbiast, in their Determinations of Matters of Law,
or Fact, which may concern either the Poor or Rich. Justice knows no Friends,
no Relatives, no Bribes; and is equally at Leisure to hear the Complaints of
all Persons, of all Ranks and Qualities whatsoever.

It must needs then be heinous Impiety in any man, who is entrusted with the
Managemenr of the Affairs of Government, either in Church or State, to take
Bribes; or out of any by-ends or private respect, to wrest and corrupt the
public Justice of the Nation; or to proceed in Judgment contrary to the Merits
of the Cause: For though ill Magistrates may, and (many times) do escape
Punishment in this World; yet there is a God above who is higher and greater
than they (and with whom there is no respect of Persons) that will take a strict
and severe account of their Administrations; 1 Pet. 1.17
and reward, or punish 'em accordingly. Romans 2.6.
This exact and impartial Administration of Justice, would be a great means to
reduce Christianity to its ancient Dignity and Perfection: and doubtless those
should be most careful and conscientious in doing Justice themselves, who are
entrusted with Commissions from God and the King, to distribute it to others.
But it is not my Province to prescribe Rules to my Superiors. I have done with
that Branch of Justice which concerns the Possessions of our fellow Christians.
My Method leads me

2dly. Justice respecting the Credit and Reputation of others.
To consider that which relates to their Credit and Reputation. And it is
unquestionable, that all Men have a natutural Right and Title to a good
Reputation in this World, unless they shall forfeit it by some gross
Miscarriages: Whosoever therefore shall go about to attaint an innocent Man's
Credit by false Witness, public Slanders, private Whisperings, or any other
clandestine and disingenuous Means and Methods; is not only guilty of the Sin,
but shall incur the Penalties of downright Knavery and Injustice.

Therefore, in common Charity and Justice we are obliged to be as tender of
every Man's Reputation as our own. And doubtless upon this Account, our blessed
Savior has forbidden all sorts of Lying, Backbiting, Slandering, Railing,
Detraction, Censoriousness, virulent and uncharitable Invectives, and all other
false and politic Devices; whereby the Repute and Credit of our Neighbor may
be impaired and injured. Besides, these uncharitable Practices, are the spawn
and issue of the Devil, who is the Father of them; and therefore, whosoever
does maliciously lie and dissemble for his own Advantage, or to the prejudice
of others, he is of the Devil his Father, Joh. 8.44.
whom God has threatened to destory.

Again, these Methods of evil Speaking have a double Tendency to do Mischief:
Either public, as Slander; or private, as Detraction. Pievish and passionate
Men do make use of the open way to hurt; but those who are more politic and
reserved, (and yet envious) are more close and subtle in managing their
Designs of Mischief and Wickedness; an though the Credit and Reputation of good
Men be usually wounded both ways; yet private Whisperers are the most dangerous
Enemies; because the injured Person does seldom or never meet with an
Opportunity to vindicate himself.

Now, for the Prevention, and Cure of this uncharitable and unchristian Humor,
(which God knows is every where too common, especially amongst those of the
precise Party who esteem themselves considerable Proficients in Christianity)
give me leave to make these few Remarques. And

(1) The holy Scripture has denounced a severe Woe against the Haters and
Revilers of their Brethren; 1 Cor. 6.10 1 John 2.9.
esteeming 'em no better than Children of Wrath, Prove. 6.16, 18, 19. Ps. 101.5.
and Vessels fitted for Destruction. In which they nearly resemble our great
Adversary the Devil, who is a cruel Enemy to, and merciless Accuser of God's
dearest Saints and Servants.

(2) Uncharitable Invectives are certain Evidences and Indications of a corrupt
and unsanctified Heart: and are said by the Ancients to be caninos dentes
Diaboli, the devouring Teeth of the old Serpent. Upon which Saint Bernard
expressly, Detrahere aut detrahentem audire, Bern. Lib. 2. de Con^ide, ad Eugen.
utrum horum damnabilius fit, non facile dixerim, so vile and mischievous are
these uncharitable Practices; that those who can hear their Neighbors
reproacht with pleasure and satisfaction, are as much to blame, and must expect
to share with the Detractors themselves in their due and deserved Punishments.

(3) The Slanderer and Detractor add sin to sin, and iniquity to iniquity; For
he always despises and hates those whom he so unwarrantably rails against. We
shall conclude this Point with that remarkable Distich of St. Aug. which he
writ over his Table; and I wish it were written in legible Characters in the
Practices of all Christians:

Quisquis amat dictis absentem rodere Famam, Hanc Mensam vetitam noverit esse
sibi. For, it is very unmanly and disingenuous as well as unchristian, in any
one to abuse his Neighbor, especially in his Absence. And I am confident it
would conduce much to the Interest of Religion, and the Peace of our Civil
Government, if such Canibals were interdicted all humane Society: and indeed,
they are more fit to be herded up with Beasts, then have the Privilege to
converse with Men. Thus much of those Duties which relate to the Persons and
Possessions of our Christian Neighborhood. We pass forward

3dly. Concerning the practice of Peace and Unity amongst Christians.
To the last Branch of our Duty to Others, which imports the public Peace and
Quiet of the whole Community of Christians. It Is most observable, that before,
and at our blessed Savior's coming into the World, the Jews and Gentiles were
so much at odds, that they denied the common Offices of Civility to one
another; they would have no Intercourse nor Dealings together; but did
prosecute each other by such barbarous Methods of Cruelty and Injustice, that
their Inhumanities were scarce ever equaled, but could not be outdone by the
most savage Heathens. But when our everlasting Prince of Peace came into these
lower Regions to make up the Breach between God and Man; he brake down the
Partition Wall; proclaimed an universal Peace by his Doctrine, and confirmed it
by the Example of his own Life, and the peaceable and quiet Deportment and
Demeanor of his Followers. Hereby fulfilling that Prophecy, of breaking
Swords into Plough-shares, etc. And the whole Contexture and Design of our
Christian Religion (as is most evident from all the Particulars of it) can be
no other then to reconcile God and Man, Jew and Gentile, and to reduce the
whole World into one Community.

Now to enforce the Practice of these Duties not only of public but private
Peace; 'twill be of singular use and importance, to consider the Force and
Energy of these following Arguments. For (1) We are Members of that mystical
Body, whereof Christ Jesus is the Head: Ephesians. 3.15. Heb. 12.14 1 These. 5.13.
Ephesians. 4.3.
Who commands us to be at peace with all men; to practice Peace among our
selves; and to use out utmost endeavors to preserve the Unity of the Spirit in
the Bond of Peace; which if we be careful to do, 2 Cor. 13.11.
the God of Love and Peace will be with us.

(2) We are all Descendents from the same common Parents, Adam and Eve ^ and
therefore it would be most unnatural to hate, Ephesians. 4.6.
rail against, and quarrel iwth our own Flesh. We have all the same God to our
Father; and since we are Brethren, how should we love, and be at Peace one with
another. Especially, since nothing can be more pleasant in this World, Ps.
133.1.
then for Brethren to live together in Unity.

(3) We have all one blessed Lord our Redeemer, who purchased us all at one and
the same Price; that we might be at Peace with God, and amongst our Selves. He
has given us all one Gospel, and one Faith, which is perfected in us by one and
the same Spirit: Since then we are united in our Minds in believing the same
Doctrine, it would be highly incongruous to be divided in our Affections; this
would be to pull down with one hand, what we are endeavoring to set up with
the other.

(4) We are all Temples of the same holy Spirit the Sanctifier; by whose
powerful Operation and Influence (if we stifle not his Gifts and Graces by our
Sins) he will unite us to Christ our Head, and in the mutual Bonds of Love,
Peace, and Unity to one another.

(5) We have all one Calling to Piety and Holiness of Life; and we have the
same Hope of our Calling in Christ Jesus: we all aspire to, and hope for the
same Happiness, and upon the same Conditions; why should we therefore differ on
Earth, since we do all expect to be united in the same Society in Heaven? where
there shall be an absolute End of all Feuds and Contentions.

(6) We are all of us united in one Body by Baptism, and herein admitted to all
the Privileges thereof, as Members of the same Christian Brotherhood: If we
separate therefore from the Body, we unchurch our selves; make void the Terms,
and cancel the Bonds of our Peace and Reconciliation.

(7) and Lastly, we do all partake of the same Elements in the Sacrament of
Christ's Holy Supper: We mystically eat the same Body, and drink the same Blood
of Christ: And certainly this Pledge and Assurance of his eternal Love to us,
should be the most powerful Motive to persuade us to love one another.

By these and many other Arguments, Examples, Precepts, and Counsels, we are
not only obliged to preserve and maintain Peace in our Christian Community; but
to avoid (as we would do the most Pestilential Disease) all Factious,
Schismatical, and turbulent Behavior in all Societies both Sacred and Civil,
whereof we are Members. The Mischiefs of Factions and Seditions are
innumerable; nor can we preserve Peace and Unity, but by mutual Forbearance,
and Condescension; and indeed, it is impossible that there should be any such
thing as Unanimity, amongst fiery, fierce, and contentious Spirits.

Now, for the better Establishment of this Peace, which I Have recommended to you
by such cogent and convincing Arguments; which our greatest Adversaries by all
their Malice, and Sophistry shall never be able to elude. It concerns all
Persons, in every Capacity, both public and private, to use their utmost
endeavors to promote and maintain it. And therefore

(1) Those that move in the highest Sphere of Government, Superiors.
have cause to consider how much they are obliged to study the Peace and Quiet
of the whole Community. And this cannot be accomplished by any other Means, then
by the Punishment of those Offenses which are inconsistent with the public Weal
and Tranquillity of the Government; and by the Encouragement of those Persons,
who are tractable and submissive. That both Superiors and Inferiors may lead
peaceable Lives, 1 Timothy 2.2
in all Godliness and Honesty.

(2) Those that move in a lower Orb, Inferiors.
and live (as we of this Nation do) under the happy Influences of a peaceable
Government, both in Church and State, should use their utmost Endeavors to
propagate, and preserve it. And to this End, all the Subjects of this Kingdom
are obliged to behave themselves toward their lawful Governors, with all
Modesty and Respect, Deference and Submission, both to their Persons and
Offices; paying them that Tribute which is due to them; and submitting their
Persons and Fortunes to be disposed of by their just and reasonable Commands.
The Contraries to these are usually attended either with Confusion or Tyranny;
and which of them soever prevails, the Consequences must be mischievous.

Thus, The whole Community of Christ's, a^s are concerned in it.
all Persons of all Ranks and Conditions (who are Christians indeed) will study
to be unanimous and compliant one with another, for Peace and Righteousness
sake; they will be careful to do their own Business, study the mutual Satisfaction
and Delight of all they converse with; and endeavor to practice all those
Virtues which are most conducive to the Peace and Interest of Mankind: for, we
must acknowledge, that we are all concerned in the Blessings and Comforts of
public Peace, and in the Miseries of War and Discord: And therefore if we
crumble and divide our selves into Sects and Parties, we shall be less able to
repel the force of our Adversaries, defend our own Interests, or assist one
another: Nor can it be expected, (if our Humors, and Interests clash) that we
should enjoy Peace, and the comfortable Fruits of it under the same Government.

But then, since we must of Necessity converse with, and live amongst those
that are Enemies unto Peace: our blessed Savior exhorts us to endeavor to
quel and overcome the unruly spirits of Men; by bearing Reproaches, suffering
Injuries, practicing Meekness, Patience and Condescension, curbing and
restraining our extravagant and unruly Passions, which (being indulged) will
undoubtedly prove the Springs and Incentives of Confusion and Disorder. And
indeed, if Christians did but really believe what they outwardly profess, they
would not incur the Hazard of Hell fire (which they certainly do) to gratify a
domineering Passion, or please a petulent Humor for a few Moments; but would
rather practice those things which make for Peace, (tho contrary to the Bent
and Tendency of corrupt Nature) that they might inherit the Comforts and
Rewards of it. And as we lie under these pressing Obligations to promote and
maintain Peace, in all those Instances I Have mentioned. So

On the Contrary, The opposite Vices forbidden.
Our eternal Lawgiver does every where in Scripture expressy forbid all manner
of Discord, Unpeaceableness, Emulation, Provoking of one another,
Pragmaticalness, meddling in other men's Matters, Tale-bearing, Censoriousness,
Backbiting, Revenge, Bitterness, Wrath, Anger, Clamor, Detraction, Suits in
Law for Trifles; etc. and he brands these and all the spurious Brood of them,
as the Bane and Plague of all Humane Societies; and he commands us further to
hate and avoid all those turbulent and uncharitable Practices, as being most
agreeable to the Tempers and Dispositions of those factious Fiends, who were
excluded Heaven for their Mutinies and Disorders, and shall live eternally in
Broyls and Variance with one another.

Let all Christians then, of all Ranks and Conditions, study and endeavor to
promote and propagate public and private Peace in Church and State, in their
Neighborhood, in their Families, and in their whole Intercourse and
Conversation with one another. By which Means, they shall not only please God
and Man, and discharge a good Conscience by endeavoring (what in them lies) to
preserve Peace and Unity with both; but this divine and excellent Frame of
Spirit, will dispose and qualify 'em for the Society of the holy Angels and
Saints glorified; who do all unanimously concur in the same common Interests
and Affections, of praising and adoring the God of Purity and Peace, in a
perfect and harmonious Uniformity; and are as sincerely one, as if they were
animated with the same Soul and Spirit.

Thus it will evidently appear from the Premises; that Christ our great
Prophet has not only rectified the Mistakes, and repaired the Defects of all
former Dispensations; but has (in great mercy to our Souls) made a perfect
Discovery of the eternal Will of God, in what concerns his own Glory, and our
Good. He has told us plainly what he has done already, what he will do for us,
and what returns of Gratitude he expects from us in this Life, that we may be
for ever happy in a better. And to enforce these saving Methods of Grace and
Mercy, he vouchsafes unto us the Assistances of his holy Spirit, to restrain us
from Sin; to encourage us in, and enable us to perform the Duties of Religion.
He has been pleased likewise to institute an Order of Men, and invested them
with Power and Authority to minister in holy Things, and to be Ambassadors in
his stead; and has furnished them with Abilities to instruct and govern his
People, and to guide them in the Ways of Salvation. And to obtain an honorable
Respect and Deference to their Persons and Offices: (that they might discharge
their Duties, and manage the Business of their Callings with Comfort to
themselves, and Success to others) He tells the World; that he will interpret
the Respect given 'em, and the Injuries done to them as if they were done to
himself, and to encourage them in the pious Administration of the Offices of
their holy Function; he has promised to assist 'em with his Grace and Spirit
here, and to recompense their holy Performances with a Crown of eternal Glory
hereafter.

Hence we may understand by the Premises, what a Miserable Estate and
Condition we were in, and should have continued so had he not appointed this
new and living Way for our escape and rescue. Therefore, we are indispensibly
obliged (not only in Duty but Interest,) to believe and practice that Heavenly
Doctrine, which has so many admirable Sanctions, and powerful Motives to
recommend and enforce it. And indeed, unless our Lives be the real Transcript
of Christ's holy Example and Institutions, and sincerely correspondent to what
we profess, the Title of Christianity will prove an empty sound: nor can we
expect to be dignified by that, whilst we dishonor him that gives it.

Let every Man therefore, 2 Timothy 2.19.
that names the Name of Christ, and expects Salvation by his Merits, depart
from Iniquity; otherwise he undermines what he should endeavor to propagate
and uphold: And it would be a difficult Task to persuade others to believe that
Doctrine, which our own Lives and Practices are a flat Contradiction to: For
our Religion does not consist in the specious Pretenses, or the formal
Appearances of being holy and devout; Matthew 7.2^
it is not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into God's Kingdom; but
he that does the Will of our Father which is in Heaven. The most profound
Knowledge of all the Principles and Duties of Christianity, abstracted from the
real Belief and Practice of 'em, will prove a Scourge to, and highly aggravate
the Condemnation of the dissolute Christian: Luke 12.47.
For he that knows his Master's Will, and does it not, shall be beaten with
many Stripes. Our whole Lives then, should be a Constellation of all those
Gospel Graces, which are recommended under this Head of Discourse. And though
there may be some mixture of Weakness, and Imperfection, and perhaps of Sin, in
all the Actions and Duties which we do; yet if they be not impenitently lived
and died in, and if we use our utmost Endeavors to overcome and subdue 'em;
the imputative Righteousness of Christ our High Priest will effectually
interpose, and accomplish our Peace and Pardon for all our Sins, if we
faithfully apply it.

CHAP. VII. Of Christ's Priestly Office.
THat Christ Jesus the righteous might be sutably qualified for the great Work
and Business of our Redemption, 'twas absolutely necessary (as we have seen) that
he should be a Prophet; to dispense and accomplish that Part of his
Mediatourship. We shall proceed now (according to our propounded Method) to
give you an account of the Importance of his Priestly Office: Which does
eminently consist, in the offering up himself a real and perfect Sacrifice, for
the sins of the whole World; and in his meritorious Intercession at God's right
hand: that the infinite Merits of that Sacrifice may be accepted and applied,
for the Comfort and Benefit of all sincere Christians that believe in, and obey
him.

Now, by the Merits of this great Propitiation, he has fully satisfied God's
infinite Justice for Man's Delinquency and Disobedience; obtained our Pardon and
Peace with God, delivered us from the Guilt, Pollution, and Punishment of all
our sins; and we are certain (that upon some tolerable and easy Conditions) he
will vouchsafe unto us the powerful Assistances of his Grace and Spirit, and
enable us to comply with 'em, to our comfort here, and Salvation hereafter. I
shall endeavor to be very express in the handling of this Point, that I may
inform and affect my Reader with the saving Truths, and important Duties
contained in it. In order whereunto, I shall observe this Method. And

1st. Titles Synonimous to his Priestly Office. Heb. 5.10. Heb. 2.17. Heb.
9.11. 1 John. 2.2. 1 Timothy 2.6. Rev. 13.8. 1 Cor. 5.7. Romans 3.29 Ephesians.2.14.
We shall consider the several Titles ascribd to our blessed Savior in holy
Scripture, which are synonimous and correspondent to his Priesthood: wherein
he is said to be the great High Priest, the merciful and faithful High Priest,
the High Priest of good things to come, the High Priest over the House of God,
our Advocate with the Father, the Price of our Redemption, the Lamb slain from
the beginning of the World, Christ our Passover, and the Propitiation for our
Sins. All which Passages and Compellations do necessarily imply, that Christ
our High Priest assumed our Nature, that he might perform absolute unsinning
Obedience to the whole Will of God; and thereby fulfill the Conditions of the
first Covenant which we had wilfully violated in Adam: and yet being faultless,
to undergo (and that voluntarily) a shameful and painful Death for us upon the
Cross, to make our Atonement. Who (having sealed this new Covenant of our
Redemption in his Blood) is now ascended into the Heavens, where he sits at the
right hand of God, Heb. 7.25.
(as we noted before) pleading his own Merits, and Interceding powerfully for
our Reconciliation. We pass on

2dly From his Titles, to his Office. And this great Mystery of our Savior's
Priesthood will (I hope,) be fully stated and considered, by treating plainly
and distinctly of these two Particulars. (1) Of the Satisfaction which he made
for us on Earth (2) Of his powerful Intercession for us in Heaven. The former
of these is purcha^^ by his Merits: the latter is applied by his Mediation. He
satisfied for our Sins upon the Altar of the Cross; and so became a Priest and
Sacrifice for us according to the Order of Aaron: he applies that Satisfaction,
and intercedes for us at the right hand of God; where he becomes a Priest for
ever, (by the Laws of an unchangeable Priesthood) according to the Order of
Melchisedec. Heb. ^.6.
Both these do plainly refer to, and directly point at our blessed Jesus, the
true Priest of the New Covenant; Heb. 7.3. (...) 10.1.
tho the Order of Melchisedec is far more excellent and honorable than that of
Aaron, both in respect of the Person, and Office. But to return. I begin

First, With the Satisfaction which he made for us on Earth. Of Christ's
Satisfaction on Earth.
In the handling whereof, and for the better understanding of this necessary
Point of Faith, we shall do these two Things. (1) We shall prove that God's
Justice is fully Satisfied for Man's Sin and Disobedience; and we thereby
restored to God's Grace and Favor. (2) We shall consider by what Methods this
great Business was brought to pass. For the

(1) Christ breathed forth his Soul, God's Justice fully satisfied.
and offered up his dearest Life in Satisfaction to God's Justice, for the Sins
and Transgressions of lost Mankind. For all the Projects and Contrivances of
Men and Angels were insufficient for this Purpose; and all those imaginary
Sacrifices of Bulls and Goats, etc. under the Law, (tho of God's immediate
Institution and Appointment) were of little Significancy: Heb. 10.
For (being only Types and Adumbrations of that real Sacrifice of Christ) they
could not purge the Conscience from Sin; much less were they able to satisfy
God's Justicie, or make our Atonement: But the Merits of Christ's Death were
every way commensurate to those Ends, as will most evidently appear, if we
consider

1. The Dignity of the Person by whom the Atonement was wrought; being no other
then God's most dearly beloved Son: Who (as we have fully proved) is God,
co-essential, coequal, and coeternal with the Father.

2. This Truth will be fully made out, from the Consideration of those grievous
Punishments and Indignities which he suffered for us from his Cradle to his
Cross: his whole Life being an entire Series of Miseries and Persecutions. Of
which more particularly hereafter.

3. That God's Justice is fully satisfied by the Propitiation of Christ's
Merits, is most obvious from his own Acknowledgement and Approbation of 'em:
who has declared himself well pleased, both with the Excellency of his Person,
and the Sufficiency of his Obedience and Sufferings. Consult at your leisure
these several Scripture Arguments, which are very apposite to our Purpose. Viz.
Romans 6.9. Heb. 9.12, 25. Heb. 10.10, 14. 1 Pet. 3.10. And to enforce the Belief
of this necessary Point of Faith. See John 1.29. Isa. cap. 53. 1 Cor. 15.22. 1 Timothy 2.6. and 1 Timothy 4.10. 1 John 1.7. and 1 John 2.22. To which may be added
the Energy of the Union of his Active and Passive Obedience. All which being
put together, are a clear Demonstration of that full and undeniable
Satisfaction, which Jesus Christ the righteous has made to God's Justice for
the Pardon of our Sins, and for the Purchase of our Peace and Reconciliation.

This important Truth (being so firmly grounded) must obtain and challenge our
Belief and practical Assent to it; notwithstanding the Cavils of some, and the
unreasonable Objections of others which have been framed against it: for if
Christ has not made a plenary Satisfaction for the sins of all Mankind, then
'twould follow, that the Privileges of the Gospel are not extensive to all:
and if this Hypothesis should be granted; then the Guilt of Adam's Sin is of a
larger Extent then Christ's Merits; which is such a blasphemous Conceit as can
never enter into the Thoughts of a sober Christian. Again, it would be
Injustice to damn the Wicked for their Unbelief, if Christ have done and
suffered nothing for them: which would also be dangerous to affirm. But to put
the matter out of Dispute; it is evident from holy Scripture, that Christ died
even for those that perish. Romans 14.^^ Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. 2 Pet^ 2.^^
And St. Peter complains that there were Heretics in his time, who denied the
Lord that bought them. Therefore, whosoever shall appropriate these Texts of
Scripture to believing Christians only, must be guilty of great Mistakes, in
perverting the genuine Sense and Meaning of em, for the defense and mentainance
of their own erroneous and heterodox Opinions. Thus much may suffice for the
Confirmation of this Point; namely, that our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ has fully satisfied God's Justice, for the Sins of all Men indefinitely
without exception; and has put all Mankind in an undoubted Capacity of being
saved.

(2) We shall enquire by what Methods and after what Manner this Atonement and
Propitiation was wrought; By what Means this great Propitiation is wrought.
that we may the more seasonably apply it, for the Comfort and Benefit of our
Souls. And this could not be accomplished (as we have hinted before) by any
other Means whatsoever, then the Merits of Christ's Death: By which it is fully
made out, that God's Justice is wholly satisfied, and our Offenses punished in
the Humane Nature of Christ: Which is the Point now under Consideration.

If we make a particular Enquiry into our blessed Savior's Sufferings and
Sorrows, in his Life, and at his Death, we shall be more fully satisfied
touching the reality of his Merits; and of the Certainty as well as the Manner
of our Atonement, by that dear and unvaluable Price which he paid for it. For,
he endured all the imaginable Tortures which humane Nature could be subject to;
not for his own Sins, (for there was no guile sound in him) but ours; and did
bear in his own Person the Iniquities of us all. He was smitten for our
Offenses, and wounded for our Transgressions, the Chastisement of our Peace was
upon him, Isa. 53.
and by his Stripes we are healed: For having assumed the same Nature that had
sinned, he must suffer for the Guilt which we had contracted, and bear the
heavy Wrath of God which pursued our Sins, after the same manner that our
selves should have done. Nor can we be ignorant of that which he endured for
us, by the Twinges and Agonies we sometimes feel in our own Consciences, when
God is pleased to awake 'em. But to come nearer the Point:

Our Savior's whole Life was a black Scene of Sorrows; and Miseries, and
Persecutions did await him in every Place where he came. The Nature of my
Subject does oblige me here, A Narrative of our Savior's Sufferings; in his
Life, and at his Death.
to present my Reader with a particular Narrative of the pungent Miseries which
our compassionate High Priest underwent for our sakes in his Life, and at his
Death: Insomuch, that it is a received Maxim, that Christ and his Cross were
never parted. For

His first Entertainment in the World was in a Stable amongst the Cattle, and
on a Cratch; which were very mean and slender Accommodations for the Son of God
and Savior of the World. On the eighth day after his Birth, he endured the
Pain and Peril of Circumcision; and immediately after, his Parents were forced
to take a long and tedious Journey in the midst of Winter, to preserve their
Son's Life from the Assassinations of a cruel and butcherly Herod. After his
return from Egypt to Galilee, he lived in a mean Obscurity, to secure himself
from the Rage of Archelaus Herod's Son, and an inheritor of his Father's Pride
and Passions, as well as Patrimony. But, at his appearing more publicly in the
World, the Devil his inveterate Enemy carried him into the Wilderness, where he
endured a forty Days Fast, Mat. ^.
(doubtless a most severe Penance) and was tempted all the Time to blaspheme
God and become Satan's Proselite. He had no sooner achieved a Victory over
this infernal Fiend; but he set his Agents, the Scribes and Pharisees on work
to blast his Reputation; and if that Project failed, to take away his Life. In
a Word, Distress and Poverty, Hunger and Thirst, Weakness and Weariness,
Reproache and Slanders, Miseries and Persecutions did await him in every Place
where he came.

But more particularly, Judas one of his own Disciples and Family betrayed him,
and delivered him into the hands of those wicked Conspirators; who (as if he
had been some notorious Malefactor) bound him, and carried him away. Ps. 38.11.
Then were these Prophesies fulfilled concerning him; I will smite the
Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered abroad: Zech 13.7.
for at that dismal and dreadful Sight, his very Disciples (notwithstanding
their manifold Obligations to the contrary) were so amazed, that they forsook
him and fled from him; and in that juncture too, when he had most Occasion to
make use of them. But alas! these were but the Beginnings of Sorrows.

For, being thus apprehended, bound, and forsaken, his Enemies delivered him up
to Caiaphas the Ecclesiastical Judge; before, and by whom he was strictly
examined concerning his Doctrine and Disciples; and tho he answered discreetly
and modestly; yet the High-priest's Servant (with Disdain and Insolence) struck
him violently on the Cheek; nor did he return the least Reproof to that hard
Usage and Incivility. By this Time his Enemies were assembled, and make up a
full Court; and the suborned and perjured Witnesses were ready to act their
Parts on this bloody Theater. Die he must, that was resolved on ere he came to
his Trial. the Depositions being taken, the High Priest charged him with
Blasphemy, and told the Court that the Matter of Fact was so evidently proved
against him, that they needed no more Witnesses; for by the Law he deserved
Death: the whole Assembly (nemine contradicente) concurring with this merciless
and unjust Judge, did pronounce him guilty of the Crimes laid to his Charge.

Whereupon, they committed him to the Sergeants and base Soldiers, there to be
kept (in arcta custodia) as a condemned Malefactor. These Villains (to pass
away the Night) did contemptuously and inhumanely spit in his Face, ridiculed
and mocked him; and said scornfully, and (as themselves thought) in Disgrace to
him, Prophecy who it is that smote thee. Then they struck him with the Palms
of their Hands, buffetted and bruised his Face; which was so besmeared with
Blood and Spittle, Isai. 53.
that there was neither Form, nor Beauty, nor Comeliness in him. But all these
harsh Words and harder Blows, came far short of those Tortures which are yet
behind.

For the Jews having no Power to condemn and execute him judicially, (the Roman
Governor alone, being at that time invested with the Power of Life and Death)
when they had troubled and tortured him as long as they pleased, then they sent
him bound to Pontius Pilate the Roman Deputy, and Governor of Judea; before
whom he was indicted upon new Articles: Wherein they charged him

(1) With Impiety; as teaching false Doctrine against the Law, Traditions, and
Liberties of the Jewish Nation; and that he was a Prophaner of the Sabbath:
Which being all notorious Untruths, and such Allegations too as were not under
his Cognizance; therefore Pilate took little Notice of them. But to enforce
their Malice, and exasperate the Judge against this innocent Person,

(2) They charged him with Treason against Cesar's Person, and Sedition against
the civil Government: Because said they, he refused to pay Tribute, and
declared himself to be the King of the Jews. This indeed Pilate was very much
startled at, being tender of the Honor and Interest of Caesar; and chiefly
because 'twas the Stay and Security of his own: But to incense and inrage him
still more against the Prisoner, they further complained, that this Sedition
was begun in Galilee, a Place most notoriously infamous for Faction and
Rebellion; where Judas Galilaeus, Theudas, and several others had frequently
disturbed the Peace of the civil Government. Upon which Suggestion, Pilate
(being conscious of our Savior's Innocence, and unwilling to have any hand in
his Blood) sent him to Herod, who was then Tetrarch of Galilee, another
Province in Judea. This was very acceptable to the Jews; for Herod being a
fierce and bloody Man, they supposed, that Innocence it self would be as little
Security to him, as 'twas to his Harbinger John the Baptist. Being convened
before Herod, (who had desired of a long Time to see him) he was questioned
about many things, and answered all their Interrogatories (for he expected no
Justice there) with a profound Silence. Then Herod and the Soldiers set him at
naught; clad him in a gorgeous Coat; and when they had exposed him to all the
Obloquy and Contempt they could invent, he was remanded to Pilate.

This egregious Politician is now put to all his Shifts: for he was fully
convinced in his Conscience of our Savior's Innocence, and the Injustice of
their Proceedings against him. He was afraid of the Jews Displeasure, and yet
desires to save the Life of the Prisoner: and therefore he must endeavor to
find out an Expedient (if possible) to satisfy their Importunities, and
indemnifie himself from the Guilt of innocent Blood. Now, having fully
considered these things, and to extricate himself out of this Mass of
Contradictions; he makes use of this politic, though severe Project: For he
commanded him first to be stripped naked, Hierom.
and then to be whipped (says my Author) by six merciless and cruel Ruffians,
who beat him with at least three hundred Stripes, till there was scarce any
Skin left on his Body; and having thus inhumanely scourged him, they platted a
fantastical Crown of Thorns, and put it on his Head; 'twas a Crown to deride
him, and made of Thorns, on purpose to torment him: For the Blood gusht out
where the Pricks went in, and now streamed as fast down his Face in the Palace,
as it did down his back and shoulders at the Pillar.

But yet for all this, neither the piteous Sight of this miserably distressed
Object, nor Pilat's Shifts, nor Arguments, nor Importunities could prevail with
these desperately wicked and malicious Sons of Belial; still die he must, nor
could any Engines of Cruelty satisfy their Revenge, till they saw him breath
out his last. They would by no means remit the Punishment, nor commute for his
Life. Crucify him, crucify him, was their constant Cry: He is guilty of
Blasphemy against God, and Sedition against the King; and therefore he that
goes about to save his Life is no Friend to Caesar. And to enforce their Plea
beyond all Contradiction, they would take the Guilt on themselves if the
Sentence were unjust; and they, and their Posterity would answer it at the
Peril of the Prisoner's Vengeance, if he should really prove what he pretended
to be; and his Blood be upon them and their Children. Pilate was no longer able
to resist the Dint of their Arguments; and hereupon resolved that he would
rather crucify a thousand Christ's, than disoblige one Caesar.

Now we come to the Catastrophe of his dismal and Bloody Crucifixion. The
eternal Son of God and Savior of the World, O horrendum nefas! was (for our
sakes) sentenced to die an accursed, shameful, and painful Death upon the
Cross. And that cruel inhumane Method, which these vile Wretches proceeded in
against that meek and innocent Person was this, viz. In his way to Calvary they
took off his purple Garment, (put on him in Scorn before) and clothed him with
his own. Then they loaded him with a heavy Tree, and forced him to undergo the
Burden till he could bear it no longer: and when they perceived that he was
ready to faint, and fall under it, they commanded one Simon a Cyrenian (a
Gentile) to assist him in the bearing of it, till he came to Golgotha, the
Place appointed for his Execution: Which must needs be a stinking and dreadful
Place; where the Skuls of dead Men, and the putrified and rotten Limbs of
Malefactors were dismal to the Eye, and nauseous to the Smell. Here it was that
the Cross (being a tranverse Piece of Wood) was erected, and the Son of God,
the saddest Spectacle that ever mortal Eye beheld, nailed unto it.

Thus I have given my Reader a Specimen of the Manner (though we cannot
comprehend the Measure) of our Savior's Sufferings in his Life, and at his
Death: All which he patiently underwent for our sakes, by a submissive
Condescension to his Father's Will, and the satisfying of his Justice for our
manifold Transgressions: and therefore, as those Pains and Pressures must needs
be terrible and afflictive to him; so they should be a Monument of the greatest
Sorrow and Compunction to us. Especially in these two Respects.

1st. Because (for our sakes) he underwent a shameful and accursed Death; Gal.
3.13.
which was ordained for Slaves and Malefactors only, and unworthy of any free
Man, tho the greatest Criminal. And now, the People who before were the
greatest Admiters of his Person, Doctrine, Example, and Miracles, were
scandalized at his infamous Death; so that though the most of them could not look
on him but with Pity, yet also with Scorn and Contempt. This Shame then, and
Scandal of the Cross must needs add to the Bitterness of the Cup, and the
Loathsomness of the Affliction. And yet for all this, he (considering the Glory
of God, the happiness of all Mankind, which was so eminently concerned in his
Death, and that future Crown of rejoicing which he should shortly enter upon,)
He (I say,) upon all these Considerations, patiently submitted to the Torment,
and cheerfully underwent the Ignominy of that accursed Death for us; that we
might recover that Life, Liberty, Honor, and Happiness which we had forfeited
and lost, by our enormous Sins and Transgressions. But

2dly. As he suffered a most cursed and shameful, so a most bitter and painful
Death: For his Limbs being stretched out like Cloth upon the Tenters, and his
Hands and Feet (the very Centers where all the Sinews met) being pierced
through with massy Nails, must needs make the Tortures more exquisite and
cruel. Besides, he did hang there three long Hours; and because he could not
die of Hunger in that time, the Blood must distill Drop by Drop, 'till it was
all drained out of his Body. And to render his Death still more bitter and
painful; he not only suffered by all these Engines of Cruelty in his Body, but
by a worse and more afflictive Agony in his Soul: For, as those sensible
Tortures which he felt in his Body were most pungent to him; because 'twas of
all other Bodies the most tender, being formed only out of the Substance of his
Mother, without any commixture of the Male Nature: So his Soul being
proportionably delicate, and his Spirit more apprehensive; the Impressions of
Pain and Sorrow must be so much the more severe and intolerable. Again, he was
to grapple with, and undergo the Fierceness of God's Wrath, Psa. 76.7. and
18.7, 15.
and the heavy Burden of our Sins; which must needs press him down with almost
insupportable Anguish. No wonder then, that he swear great Lumps of Blood; Luke
22.44
and well might he cry out in the great Bitterness of his Soul, (God having
also withdrawn the Beams of his gracious Presence for a time) Eli, Eli, etc.
Upon which Jeremiah prophetically complained, that there was never any Sorrow
(either of Men, or Martyrs) like unto his Sorrow. But because it is impossible
to recount the Number, and express the Quality of those Torments which he
suffered, both in Body and Soul: We will conclude this Point with that
rapturous Petition inserted into the Litany of the Greek Church. (...).
By thine unknown Sorrows and Tortures felt by thee, but imperceptible to us;
have mercy upon us, and save us O Lord our God.

Hitherto of the real Sacrifice which our faithful and most merciful
High Priest offered up for our Sins; and of the Means and Methods which he
used, (both by his active and passive Obedience) to perfect the great Work and
Business of our Redemption: We shall consider in the next Place, the Benefits
resulting from this great Propitiation; and then deduce some Inferences from it
by way of Application. And

(1) Christ our High Priest, Benefits of this Propitiation.
by the infinite Merits of his Obedience and sufferings, has purchased the
Remission of our Sins, the Sanctification of our Nature, the Justification of
our Persons, and (upon the tolerable and easy Conditions of Faith and
Repentance) we shall be restored to that Holiness and Freedom, which we lost by
the Fall and Defection of our first Parents. But then, we must be careful to
perform the Conditions on our Part, ere we can expect the Benefits of Christ's
Mediatorship. And if we seriously consider the sad Effects, and mischievous
Consequences of our original Apostasy, we shall be more truly apprehensive of
the Benefit and Necessity of a Redeemer; and use all possible Endeavors to be
Sharers in that Pardon and Peace, which he has purchased for us (as we have seen)
at so dear a Price.

(2) By the infinite Merits of his Obedience and Sufferings, he has razed out
the Handwriting, and delivered us from the Curse and Condemnation of the Law.
We cannot be insensible of our manifold Transgressions both original and
actual; and that we have been guilty of the Breach of God's holy, just, and
reasonable Commands in many thousand Instances, both by Thought, Word, and
Deed: For all which, it is impossible that we should make our Atonement, either
by satisfying of Gods Justice for the Offenses of our Lives past; or by our
perfect and unsinning Obedience to his Laws for the future. And therefore,
'twould be but just with God to inflict the severest Punishments upon us, and
judge us according to those Laws which we have so wickedly and wilfully
violated.

But, our gracious God was pleased in great Mercy and Compassion to undone
Sinners, to send his own Son (as we have seen) in the fullness of time, Gal. 4.^.
to satisfy the Law for us, and has thereby purchased Indemnity and Impunity
for the Transgressors of it. And we are hereby delivered, not only from the
burdensome Yoke of all the Mosaic Performances, by nailing 'em to his Cross;
but he has so mitigated the Penalties, and limited the Obligations of the moral
Law; that though we fail in our Duties and Obedience to it, yet if we do not
wilfully continue in a State of Impenitency; but be truly sensible of, and
heartily sorrowful for the Offenses of our Lives past; if we exercise a true
Faith in Christ our Redeemer; and be watchful over our selves in the more pious
and prudent Conduct of our Lives for the future: Then (I say, upon our sincere
Endeavors, and hearty Compliance with these Conditions) he will make up all
our Defects, and by his imputative Righteousness satisfy the Law for us: For
there is now no Condemnation to those which are in Christ Jesus; Romans 8.1.
who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

(3) By the efficacious Merits of Christ's Obedience and Sufferings, we are
delivered from the Sting and Terrors of Death. Now Death is the Stipend and
Wages of Sin, which is due to every Man since the Fall of the first Adam; and
he that labors the whole day diligently and painfully in his Calling, has not
a more just Title to his Wages, then the wilful and impenitent Sinner has to
temporal and eternal Death: But the second Adam has conquered the Grave, pulled
out the Sting of Death, and given us a certain Title to a blissful Immortality:
So that though the Dissolution of our Bodies, may be above all terrible Things
most dreadful to Flesh and Blood; yet through the Merits of Christ's Death 'twill
be sanctified and made easy to us: And the worst Office that Death can do to a
sincere Believer, is only to send his Body to the Grave, a Place of Ease and
Silence; and his Soul to eternal Bliss. Besides, all its Harbingers and
Concomitants, as Afflictions, Infirmities, Diseases, etc. will not only prove
tolerable and easy for a good man to bear, but will turn to Advantage, and
become Matter of our greatest Triumph and Exaltation.

(4) Christ our High Priest has conquered the Devil and all his infernal
Powers, by the wonderful Efficacy of his Obedience and Sufferings. This
politic, potent, and malicious Enemy was such, from the beginning, and all the
Sons and Daughters of Adam must expect the same Measures from him, to the end
of the World. He knows that Christ (the Seed of the Woman) shall pronounce and
execute that dreadful Sentence against him; and therefore, so many of his
Friends and Relatives as come within his Clutches shall smart for it.

But, the Son of God and High Priest of our Profession, though he has not
absolutely destroyed, yet very much limited his Power and Authority. Those
idolatrous Religions which he so much gloried in heretofore, are since his
Coming, crept into some private Corners of the World. His Oracles are silenc't,
and he seldom possesses the Bodies of Men, or appears in their Shapes as
formerly. But seeing he is not yet bound up in those Chains of Darkness which
shall eternally confine him; he will lose no Opportunity in setting all his
Engines and Instruments on Work, to entrap and ensnare poor Sinners, that he may
make us (if possible) as unhappy and miserable as himself.

But this is our Comfort and Happiness, that though the Devil may now and then
tempt us to Sin; yet our blessed Lord's so exceeding tender of our Welfare,
that he will cither countermine his Stratagems, (if we be good Christians) or
furnish us with a Sufficiency of Grace and Power to resist and repel them. We
have indeed some Instances in Sacred History of those who have been yielded a
Prey to him for a time; yet for that very End and Purpose, that their Victories
over him might become more illustrious: And their Examples are left us on
Record, (as in the Case of holy Job, etc.) that they might be lasting Monuments
of God's Grace and Power, and of their Patience and Magnanimity to all
succeeding Generations.

Let no sincere Christian then be discouraged, tho he be now and then obnoxious
to Satan's Temptations: For if he hold out vigorously, the Power and Malice of
the Devil shall not only be much abated by the Opposition of good Angels, (who
are much more able and active to preserve and protect us, then Devils and
wicked Men can be to mischieve and hurt us:) But the Spirit of God is also
greater in us, 1 John 4.4.
then he that is in the World; and he who is God over all, has prescribed such
Bounds to our Enemies of all sorts; that they are now confined like those
turbulent (and otherwise uncontrolable) Waves of the Sea, Job. 1.1^.
that they can only move so far, and no further then he pleases. But this is to
be understood of Believers only: For the sinful and disobedient, Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
the unbelieving and impenient are led captive by him; become his absolute
Slaves and Vassals, and are forward to commit all those Villainies which he does
persuade and tempt 'em to, tho never so dishonorable to God, or mischievous to
themselves, and others.

But here I must note to you; Absolute Conquest over Sin not att^^able in this
Life.
that we cannot expect an absolute Conquest over Sin and Satan in this Life, by
the Sacrifice of Christ's Death: And therefore we had need to stand continually
upon our Guard; and pray incessantly for the Assistances of God's Grace and
Spirit, to help our Infirmities, and enable us to resist them; yet this we are
certain of, (which may encourage us in the Conflict) that when we come within
the Fortifications of the new Jerusalem, we shall reap the blessed Fruits of
this great Expiation; and have a total Exemption from all Temptation, Sin, and
Suffering whatsoever.

Then shall our Bodies shine as the Brightness of the Sun Beams, and as the
Stars for ever and ever; and our Souls shall be clothed with an immaculate and
spotless Dei-formity. Then shall all those Laws which are now so difficult to
be performed, be either cancelled and repealed, or our merciful High Priest
will furnish us with a Sufficiency of Will and Power to obey them. Then will
all our Desires, Inclinations, and Affections cheerfully concur (without any
by-respects to our private Interests or Passions) in the promoting of God's
Glory, and the mutual Joy and Happiness of the whole Community of holy and
beatified Spirits. Then shall all Labor and Travel, Sorrow and Sickness be at
an end; and Death it self which is now so terrible to Flesh and Blood, shall be
swallowed up in absolute and perfect Victory. Then shall the Devil our most
malicious and inveterate Enemy, and all his Agents be cast into the Lake of
Fire and Brimstone; and shall be confined eternally to those Flames and
Tortures, which are prepared for him and his Angels.

There are several other Benefits resulting from this great Propitiation; More
particular Benefits
(which I have touched already) and therefore shall only name them here: as, the
Conquest which Christ has obtained over the World, with all its vain Pomps, 1 John 5.^
Honors, Beauties, Pleasures, etc. which the Apostle did so much glory in, and
rejoice at. Ephesians. 2.15, 16.
He has put away the Enmity between God and Man; between one Man and another;
and between every good man and his own Conscience: He has ratified and
confirmed the new Covenant between God and us, Heb. 10.29.
in his own Blood; repaired God's Honor which had been so much obscured and
violated by our Disobedience and Rebellion against him; and has restored us to
all those just Rights and Privileges, which we thereby forfeited and lost. He
has raised and advanced us to the Honor and Happiness of God's own Sons; thus
mystically uniting us to himself, and elevating us above the World. In a Word,
he has fully satisfied God's Justice, which had been so often affronted by our
Iniquities; and perfectly made up the Breach between God and Man, (as we have
proved before) to the advancement of his own Glory, and the unspeakable Comfort
and Happiness of all true Believers.

Thus, our most faithful and compassionate High Priest has made our perfect and
plenary Atonement with God, by that infinite Sacrifice, and unsinning Obedience
which he performed in his Life, and has perfected at his Death. Which
Propitiation of his is fully correspondent to God's determinate Counsel, and
all the Prophesies and Types in holy Scripture concerning him. We have seen
likewise what a happy State and Condition Mankind is in, by his Assumption of
our Nature; and what Blessings and Privileges he has purchased for us, and
will certainly bestow on us, if we endeavor to make our Lives the Transcript
of his Doctrine, and Example. We shall Apply this Point, by considering what
practical Inferences may be drawn from it. And

(1) The serious and impartial Consideration of this great Mystery, The
Influence which this Doctrine should have upon Practice.
should affect our Souls with the highest Transports, and oblige us to make the
most affectionate Returns of Love and Duty toward him. No Imagination could
devise any thing beyond this! That the Lord of eternal Life should stoop from
the Top of Heaven, and under the Vail of our Flesh, endure the Pain and Infamy
of an accursed Cross; not only to rescue his Enemies from Death, but to exalt
them to eternal Life. What infinite Obligations are these? and how unworthy
should we be of those Favors, if the effects in our Hearts and Lives do not
bear some considerable Proportion to those wonderful Emanations of his Love and
Bounty? And how should we Love him above all things, who has thus loved us?

(2) This is a most solid Foundation for our Faith, Romans 8.32
our Hope, and Confidence to rest upon, amongst all the distracting Cares and
Sorrows of a miserable World. That we live under the Providence and Protection
of an all-powerful and merciful God; and have the Plea of Christ's infinite
Merits to secure and confirm to us, our present and eternal Peace, upon such
reasonable and easy Conditions as are propounded in the Gospel. If these
things were duly weighed and considered, they would prove the best and most
absolute Catholicon, to cure all the melancholy Suggestions of Distrust, and
Infidelity.

(3) Our serious Reflections upon that black and tragical Scene of Christ's
Sorrows and Sufferings for our Sins, may give us a true Representation of the
damnable Nature, heinous Aggravations, and dreadful Consequences of 'em; and
inspire us with the greatest Dread against, and Detestation of those Enemies,
which are so dishonorable to God, and mischievous to our selves: For our Sins
alas! have been the Betrayers and Slanderers of the most innocent Son of God
(our best Friend and most compassionate Redeemer) and the immediate Authors
too, of that painful and infamous Death, and all the precedent Cruelties which
he suffered for us. How should these Considerations, then affect our Souls with
a deep Compunction, and a hearty Contrition for our bypast Offenses? And how
should we hate and aband on even the very Appearances of all Sin and Wickedness
for the future? More especially if we consider, that

If God did so signalize the severe Rensentments of his Wrath, in the
Punishment of his own most dearly beloved Son; what then shall be the Doom of
the impenitent and contumacious Offender? What dreadful Impressions should this
great Exemplar of God's Justice and Vengeance make upon our Lives? How should
we study and endeavor to mortify our Flesh, ^ Pet. 4.1, 2.
and crucify our Lusts, which have been the immediate Causes of all those
barbarous Cruelties and merciless Persecutions which he suffered? How should we
renounce all the superficial and extravagant Fooleries of this World, according
to the Example of Christ and his Followers? Col. 3.3, 5. Romans 6.5, 6.
And indeed, unless we thus crucify the old Man, and become conformable to
Christ in trampling upon all the sinful Delights of this vain and transitory
Life, we have no real Title to the Blessings and Privileges of this great
Propitiation: For, if we Sin wilfully under the Gospel, we crucify the Son of
God afresh, Heb. 6.6.
and react that dreadful Tragedy which we lately heard of. This would be to
despise and reject all his charitable and merciful Endeavors for our Peace and
Welfare; and if we continue in any one wilful Act of Sin and Disobedience
unrepented of, 'twill render all his bitter Sufferings for our sakes, not only
vain and fruitless, but destructive and pernicious. Let us therefore fly from
all Sin, as the most deadly Contagion; and when by a through Mortification of our
Lusts and Appetites, we have made our Peace with God; we should dread the
Danger, Shame, and Scandal, of returning with the Dog to the Vomit, or with the
Sow that is washed, 2 Pet. 2.22
to her wallowing in the Mire.

(4) We are strictly obliged by the Laws of Gratitude, Interest, and Duty, to
conform our Lives (so far as we are able) to the Doctrine and Pattern of
Christ: And our Respect and Reverence to the eternal Son of God our faithful
High Priest, should be attested with a sincere Obedience to all his holy
Institutions. He submitted to his Fathers Will, in bearing the heavy Yoke,
Phil. 2.8.
and drinking the bitter Cup for our Sakes: How should we then study to imitate
his holy and innocent Life; always looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher
of our Faith, etc. Heb. 12.2.
For our pious Conformity hereto, will not only recommend us to the Regard and
Admiration of future Ages, but will effectually dispose and qualify us, for
all the blessed Privileges and Advantages of his Grace and Glory. In a word,
the Life and Death of Christ are an Inforcement and Recommendation of Patience,
Mat. 11. Math. 5.10.
and Perseverance in well doing and suffering for his sake, to the Glory of
God, and the Interest of Religion: We should devote our selves therefore
entirely to his Service, and become most active Instruments in the promoting of
his Glory; and then 'twill be impossible that we should fail of the Comfort and
Benefit of our holy and virtuous Endeavors.

(5) And lastly, Christ's infinite Love to us (in all those Instances which I
have mentioned) should be a powerful Motive and Argument to persuade us to be
kind and charitable to Others. 1 John 4.11.
Did the eternal Son of God set such an infinite value on our Souls, as to lay
down his Life for them? How then should we love those lively Images of his, for
whom he has paid so dear a Ransom; and do always bear the Signature, and
visible Characters of his Grace and Favor? Has he done and suffered so many
things for us? and cannot we prevail with our selves, Romans 15.1 Ephesians. 5.2. 1 John 3.16
to dispense with a petty Neglect, bear some small Injuries from, and
Infirmities in our Brethren for his sake; who has pardoned us a Debt of more
than ten thousand Talents? Let all these things be duly considered and
applied, that we may behold our Lord (by the Eye of Faith) standing upon the
Cross; not only as a resolute Sufferer, but a glorious Conqueror, to the
infinite and unspeakable Joy and Comfort of our Souls in this, and their
infinite and eternal Happiness in another World. I have done with the first
Part of our Savior's Priestly Office, namely, the Satisfaction which he made,
and the Ransom which he has paid for the Purchase of our Redemption here on
Earth, which brings me to the

2d. Branch of it, viz. his meritorious Intercession for us in Heaven. Christ
our High Priest intercedes for us in Heaven.
Jesus Christ our most merciful Lord and Savior is now entered into the
Heavens, where he is executing and administering his Melchisedekian Office, for
the Interest and Benefit of his Church and People here on Earth; most
especially in these two remarkable Instances. (1) By interceding for us. (2) In
Blessing of us. And

1st. Christ our faithful High Priest, For the supply of all our Wants.
Intercedes powerfully with the Father, for the supply of all our temporal and
spiritual Wants; that we may live comfortaby here, and be glorified with him
eternally hereafter. And to this End, he is now presenting the Merits of his
Blood, and Obedience to his Father's Acceptance; representing all the Wounds
and Marks of his Sufferings; and pleading 'em in full Satisfaction, For the
pardon of our Sins. Heb. 12.24 1 Pet. 1.2
for all the Sins and Offenses which his Votaries have committed. The Blood of
Christ supplicates in Heaven for Mercy and Compassion for us: And the
sprinkling of it now, is as necessary for the Sanctification of Believers, as
the shedding it upon the Cross was for the Salvation of them: For although one
Drop of it might be sufficient to save ten thousand Worlds, yet it becomes
efficacious only to those on whom it is sprinkled. This is that precious Blood
which speaks better things to us, then that of Abel; and it has such a rinsing
and cleansing Property in it, For sanctisying Grace
as to purify the Souls and Bodies of those who truly believe and apply it,
from all the Contagion and Filthiness both of the Flesh, and of the Spirit.
This only can render our Persons and Performances, Sacrifices and Services
acceptable to God: So that when he beholds the Wounds and Sufferings of Christ,
he will think nothing too dear for us.

More particularly: That our Hearts may be truly affected with a real Sense of
the Comforts and Benefits of his meritorious and powerful Intercession, 'twill
be of necessary and important Use, to consider these following Instances of it.
For

(1) He offers up his own Prayers to God the Father for us; He offers up his
own Prayers to the Father for us.
and stands like Aaron, (being truly sensible of our Wants, heartily zealous
for, and extremely tender of our Welfare) with the Censer of his own Merits in
his Hand to stop the Plague; and apply sovereign and saving Remedies to our
wounded and languishing Spirits. He prays most affectionatly, and incessantly
for the Pardon of our Sins, for the pity and care of our Infirmities, Romans 8.33
34. 1 John 2.1. Heb. 4.14, 15, 16.
for the relief of all our Necessities, for the defense of our Persons, for
victory over Temptations, for the Sanctification of our whole Nature, for our
nearer Union with him and the Father, Joh. 14.16. Joh. 17.1, 2, 9, 15, 17, 20,
24.
even in this World, and for our future Glorification with him in Heaven, and
that eternally. And this is our great Comfort and Happiness, that (if we be
good Christians) his Prayers will be successful for us; and he will be no less
concerned for his Votaries now, then formerly, for the Shepherd of Israel does
neither slumber nor sleep; Ps. 121.4.
but is the same merciful Intercessor for his Servants, yesterday, this day,
and for ever. And as he prays effectually for us; So

(2) He is graciously pleased to offer up all our Prayers and holy Performances
to God the Father for us; And presents our Prayers to him. Tota congregatio
Societasque sanctorum offertur Deo, per sacerdotem magnum. Aug. de Civit. Dei
Lib. 10.
and Intercedes powerfully for their Reward, and Acceptance. All our spiritual
Sacrifices; as Confessions, Petitions, Thanksgivings, Intercessions, voluntary
Restraints, Self-resignations; all our seasonable Words and Actions, our pious
Thoughts and Inclinations, our virtuous and gracious Dispositions, our Passions
and Sufferings, are continually offered up, with all Earnestness and
Importunity for their Acceptance, (by our compassionate and faithful
High Priest) at the Throne of God's heavenly Grace. And to encourage us herein
though we sometimes fail in our Duties to God, or Man, and are drawn into Sin
unawares, by Infirmity or Surprise, yet he pities and prays for our Pardon; 1 John 2.1, 2.
and (if we be humble and penitent) his redundant Merits will atone for the
Pardon of our manifold Defects. And indeed, if we consider the many Slips and
Infirmities we are daily guilty of, and the great Neglects even in our best
Performances; we have need of such a High Priest, to intercede continually to the
Father for us.

But here we must remarque, That Christ prays not for the World; not for
those who are wilfully disobedient and impenitent, Joh. 17.9. Rev. 6.10 1 Ioh.
5.6
or who live in an habitual Course of Sin and Wickedness: But does rather
deprecate the Father against those wretched Enemies of his Church, and
Religion. And as this may be a Terror to the wicked and dissolute, so it may
be the greatest Encouragement imaginable, to the conscientious and upright
Christian. It must therefore nearly concern us, to be very prudent and
circumspect in all our Duties both to God and Man; lest (by our Disobedience
and Unbelief) we lose our Propriety and Interest in those merciful
Intercessions and omnipotent Prayers, whereby (if we be faithful and obedient)
it is impossible we should miscarry.

(3) By his meritorious Intercession (if we comply with the recited Conditions)
he procures us a free Access by the Spirit unto the Father, that we may present
our Petitions our Selves, for all things we stand in need of, if we ask them in
his Name: For it is by Christ only, Ioh. 16.2^, 24, 26, 26 Rev. 8.3.
that we come with Boldness to the Throne of Grace, and have Admission into the
holiest of all. And if our devout and earnest Prayers be sprinkled with his
Blood, and perfumed by the Grace of his Merits and Intercession; we need not
doubt of their Reward and Acceptance with the Father, for the sake of his dear
Son. Wherefore, all our Prayers, Thanksgivings, etc. must be concluded
(according to the Church's Prescription, which is grounded upon Apostolical
Practice) in his Name. To whom be ascribed all Honor and Glory, now and for
ever.

Now, as Christ our most merciful Highpriest, does powerfully and effectually
intercede for us; for the Acceptance of our Services; and disposes us by his
Grace, to pray successfully for our Selves: So

2dly. He blesses us. Ps. 84.11.
He does sanctify and Bless us both in our Souls and Bodies, with the
Abundance of his Grace and Glory: For, he blesses us in our many temporal, and
spiritual Deliverances, from the Temptations and Tyranny of Devils and wicked
Men. He blesses us in turning away every one of us from our Iniquities; Acts
3.26
in sanctifying our whole Nature, by the lively Influence and Operation of his
holy Spirit, and by the wonderful Effusions of his exciting, preventing, and
restraining Grace; whereby he keeps us back from Sin, and makes us holy here,
(as before) that we may be happy for ever. It Is very observable since our
blessed Savior's Exaltation, that his true and faithful Converts are far more
expert in the Knowledge of Divine Mysteries, more religious and circumspect in
their Words and Actions, more seraphic and affectionate in their Devotions: And
those very Slips and Indiscretions they are guilty of, do seldom escape without
some Regret and Reluctance; and are therefore (doubtless) consistent with the
Sincerity of their regenerate State. And that he will bless us immeasurably
after this Life, is most certain and evident from holy Scripture: But we cannot
yet comprehend the Degrees of that Blessedness; and therefore it is rather our
Duty to Hope and wait for it with Patience, then by a wanton Curiosity, to pry
too eagerly into that boundless and inconceivable Mystery. 1 John 3.2 1 Cor.
2.9.


Hitherto of the Intercessory Part of our Savior's Melchisedekian Office,
which he is now transacting in Heaven for us. Let us now apply this Point in
two or three Instances. And

(1) We have not an absolute Title to the Privileges of our Savior's Mediation
in Heaven for us; The Application of this Point.
for all the Promises of the Gospel (as we have noted at large in this Treatise)
are Conditional: If we believe, we shall be saved; if we die with him, we shall
also live with him; 2 Timothy 2.11, 12, 13.
if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him, etc. And (so on the
contrary) if we deny him, he will also deny us, etc. Therefore, we are obliged
by the Laws of that New Covenant which Christ's now mediating in Heaven for us;
to believe, repent, pray, read, and meditate on the holy Scriptures; hear God's
Word, receive the holy Sacraments, and endeavor to be sincere in all Duties
both to God and Man: And that general Term of Godliness whereby we are rendered
capable of the Blessings of this, and a future Life, does eminently comprehend
all these; nor have we any real Title to the Benefits of Christ's Mediatorship
in Heaven, but by our sincere Endeavor to observe and comply with these
tolerable and easy Conditions. Besides there can be no Justification without
Sanctification: For he gave himself for us, Tit. 2.14.
not only to redeem us from all Iniquity; but to purify unto himself a
peculiar People zealous of Good-works. Heb. 14.14 16.
Seeing then we have a great High Priest that is passed into the Heavens for
us, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast and adorn our Profession, by our
strictest compliances with the Conditions; and our uniform Obedience to all the
reasonable Commands and Constitutions of the Gospel. And therefore

(2) We have sufficient Motives and Encouragements to persuade us to be
vigorous and active in the prudent Conduct of our Lives in the ways of
Religion, if we look back to the Premises: But besides, to enforce those
Obligations, we have a Friend and Favorite in Heaven; who (being sensible of
our Infirmities) is able and willing to present and recommend, Mat. 21.2, Mat.
7.72 8.
and (if they be seasonably offered) he will prevail for the comfortable
Success of all our pious Endeavors. And what can be more argumentative, to
persuade us to be faithful and diligent, in our most devout Attendance on all
the Duties of Religion; then such a well grounded Assurance of the Success of
our Performances, and the Acceptance of our Persons before God?

(3) what returns of Love and Gratitude, do such wonderful Instances of Mercy
and Bounty require from us? These are the last Overtures and Tenders of Grace
and Mercy, which shall ever be made to the Sons of Men; and therefore to be
embraced with the highest Regard, and most endeared Expressions of Love, Joy,
and Thankfulness: But if we reject and trample upon, Heb. 1.2. and 2.1, 2, 3,
4. Heb. 10.26 27.
or neglect and undervalue these glad Tidings of our Peace; our other Sins will
receive a mighty Aggravation, and our Guilt will be hugely increased: Insomuch,
that it had been comparatively well for us, if we had been born in India
amongst Pagans, who never heard of Christ nor his Religion; rather than in
England, where the Gospel has been publicly and purely preached for many years:
And it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah at the Day of Judgment,
Mat. 10.15
then for the dissolute and debaucht Christian.

Thus we have seen at large, that when the whole World was involved in the sad
Catastrophe of Adam's Sin and Guilt; and laid under the dreadful Decree and
Condemnation to eternal Misery and Death: And when all the legal Sacrifices
could not satisfy for the least Offense, nor procure a Minute's Reprieve from
God's justly incensed Wrath and Vengeance: 'Twas in this great Strait that
mercy interposed; and God was pleased to provide a Sacrifice worthy of his own
Acceptance. A Sacrifice so pure and excellent in its own Nature, and so
precious in its Value; as becomes every way satisfactory to God's Justice, and
a sufficient Ransom for the Sins of the whole World. We Have seen likewise the
highest Proposals of Grace and Mercy, which could be offered to the Sons of
Men; in that the eternal Son of God is pleased to intercede so effectually for
our Pardon and Peace; and has put us into such a feasible Way of obtaining
them; that nothing but our wilful Stubbornness can make us miserable. What
remains now, but that we proceed by the Assistance of God's Grace, to the last
Branch of Christ's Mediatorship: In which we have the assured Confidence, that
he will preserve us in the Enjoyment of Peace; protect us from all the Enemies
of our Welfare; and establish and confirm us in the Enjoyment of those temporal
and spiritual Blessings, which he has purchased and prepared for us.

CHAP. VIII. Of Christ's Kingly Office.
THat Christ Jesus the righteous is invested with an absolute and irresistible
Power, to govern the whole World in General, and his Church and People in
Particular, was the last thing I propounded to be discourst of in this
Treatise. Now, that I may the better inform the Judgments, and affect the
Hearts of my Reader with the saving Knowledge of this necessary Point of
Doctrine: I shall (for Methods sake) offer these four things to your serious
and impartial Consideration.

1st. We shall present you with some unquestionable Evidences of Christ's
Kingly Power and Authority, which has been fully manifested to the World; and
herein we shall consider, from whence this Right of Government is derived.

2dly. We shall treat distinctly of the Administration of this Government; and
enquire particularly how, over whom, and in what Instances he exercises his
Dominion and Authority.

3dly. We shall give you a Specimen of the several Benefits resulting from his
supreme Power and Jurisdiction; which he does thus impartially administer for
the Comfort and Happiness of his Subjects.

4thly. We shall consider what Influence this excellent Doctrine should have
upon the Lives and Practices of all Christians. Of all these severally, and in
Order. And the

1st. Imports, that Christ is an absolute King, and the supreme Monarch of all
the Kingdoms of the World. Testimonies of Christ's Kingly Power. Ps. 2.6, 8.
Which may be fully evidenc't. (1) From Scripture Testimony. The Psalmist is
very express to this purpose. I will set my King (says he) upon my holy Hill
of Sion; and I will give him the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the utmost
parts of the Earth for his Possession. Consonant to which, is that of the
Evangelical Prophet Isaiah. Isai. 9.6, 7.
Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given; the Government shall be upon
his shoulder, and his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty
God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace: of the increase of his
Government and Peace there shall be no end; to sit upon the Throne of David,
and upon his Kingdom to order it, and to establish it with with Judgment and
Righteousness, from henceforth, even for ever and ever. Ps. 45.7, 6.
Thy Throne O God (says the Kingly Prophet) is for ever and ever, the Scepter
of thy Kingdom is a Right Scepter; thou have loved Righteousness, and hated
Iniquity, therefore God even thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of
gladness above thy Fellows. And so he goes on through the whole Psalm, to exalt
and magnify the Grace and Majesty of Christ's Kingdom. And that all the
Prophesies concerning his Kingdom, are to be thus interpreted, is evident from
the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. Zech. 9.9. comp. Mat. 2.45.
Tell the Daughter of Zion, behold thy King comes unto the meek, etc. which is
the complement of that of the Prophet Zechariah, with many other parallel
Passages to the same purpose, which would be needless to repeat. But besides,
all the Works of Creation and Providence are ascribed to him, (as before;) and
God the Father has given him all Rule and Authority: Mat. 28.18 Phil. 2.8. 1
Pet. 3.22.
For which end he raised him from the Dead, and set him at his own right hand;
far above all Principalities and Powers, Heb. 2.9. Ephesians. 1 20, 21.
and every Name that is named, both in this World, and also in that which is to
come: And has put all things under his Feet, and gave him to be the Head over
all Things to the Church. This is he of whom St. John makes mention, that he
was clothed in a Garment dipped in Blood, Rev. 19.13 16. com. Isa. 63.2, 3.
(the Ensign of his Victory and Triumph over all his and the Church's Enemies)
and his Name was called the Word of God; and he has on his Vesture, and on his
Thigh, a Name written, KING OF KINGS and LORD OF LORDS. Many other Arguments
and Authorities, might be added from Scripture, (if 'twere necessary) to
confirm and illustrate this Point: Ioh. 1^.37
But Pilate though a Heathen believed it upon his own single Testimony, (and may
serve instead of many others) as appears by the Inscription set over him on
the Cross; Ioh. 19.19
with the Sanction added, what I have written I have written.

2dly. His Kingly Authority is asserted and confirmed, by the many strange and
wonderful Miracles which he wrought: For he manifested his Power on Earth, in
curing the Blind and the Lame, and all manner of Diseases; and in raising the
dead Bodies of Lazarus, and many others at his Resurrection. He exerted it in
the Sea, when he assuaged its Storms and Tempests, and walked on the Water
without a Ship. He gave a Testimony of it in the Air, when he led Captivity
captive; drew Principalities after him, and trampled upon them. And lastly, he
exercised his Kingly Power in Hell, in his Conquest over the Devil, and all the
infernal Furies: Who, in despite of all their Policy, Power, and Malice, were
forced to confess that he was omnipotent; Act. 19.15
and therefore they must submit to his Jurisdiction.

(3) We have the unanimous Consent of all pious and prudent Christians in all
Ages, who have cheerfully submitted themselves to the Scepter of his Kingdom:
For they had their whole Dependence on his Power for their Safety; on his
Wisdom for their Guidance and Direction; and on his infinite Merits and Mercy
for their comfortable Living here, and eternal Salvation hereafter.

But, as Christ our King is invested with an absolute and unlimited Power and
Authority; so he has an unquestionable Right and Title to govern the whole
World, and all the Creatures in it. And he holds this absolute Tenor of Empire
and Sovereignty.

(1) By Inheritance. Christ has an undoubted Right to this Office. Mat. 2.2. 1.
By Inheritance.
This is clear from the Concessions of the Eastern Sages, who came so far to
see him and do him Homage. And besides his Hereditary Power as the eternal Son
of God, he was of the Royal Race, as Man. St. Matthew derives his Pedigree from
fourteen Kings successively; and therefore his hereditary Title (as Man) to the
Kingdom of Israel must needs be indisputable.

(2) He has an absolute and unquestionable Right to his Kingdom, by Donation;
2. By donation. Mat. 28.18 Psalm. 8.7. Matthew. 9.6. Ioh. 5.22. Ioh. 5.27. Mat.
16.27
and hence he derives his Power and Authority to rule and govern all things, to
forgive us all our Sins, and to indemnifie us from the Punishment of them; to
pass Judgment upon Angels and Men, not only in what concerns his Kingdom of
Grace here, but in determining their final Doom and Condition hereafter; and in
the Distribution of Rewards and Punishments to the faithful, and disobedient.

(3) He has obtained an absolute Right to govern all the Creatures, by
Conquest: For he has spoiled all Principalities and Powers; 3. By Conquest.
taken the Prey out of their Teeth; and in despite of the Power and Policy of
Devils and wicked Men, the greatest Part of the known World have been reduced
from their Heathenish and Idolatrous Superstitions in worshipping false Gods;
and have cheerfully and voluntarily submitted themselves to be governed by the
just Laws and Constitutions of his Kingdom.

(4) He has a just claim to his Kingly Government by Purchase: 4. By Purchase.
Romans 2.23 etc.
For when by our Sin and Rebellion against God, we had justly forfeited our
Lives, lost our Freedom, contracted an universal Guilt and Stain; and had not
only deprived our selves of all the Hope and Possibility of any future Comfort
and Happiness, but were sentenced to Death; and as condemned Slaves and
Villains bound over to everlasting Torments: When (I say) we were by our Sins
plunged into this desperate and damnable Condition, 1 Timothy 2.6 Act. 20.28. 2
Pet. 1.18
without the least prospect of Reprieve or Rescue: Then it was, that the
eternal Son of God, (and our blessed Savior) purchased our Peace and Pardon,
by the Sacrifice of his dearest Life; and has hereby restored all his faithful
Votaries to the comfortable Enjoyment of God's Grace and Favor.

Hence it is evident, in all these several Respects; that our Lord Jesus Christ
is the most absolute King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: A King, at whose feet
all Prices and Emperors must cast down their Crowns; and a Lord, whose
Authority supersedes the Power and Jurisdiction of all Earthly Princes and
Monarchs. They must all stoop to him, all Nations shall do him service. And
thus much of the Original and Extent of our Savior's Kingly Office. We pass
forward,

2dly. The Administration of Christ's Kingly Government.
To the Administration of his Government. But for the better understanding of
this Point, we must consider the Government of Christ's Kingdom under a double
Acceptance. And it is

(1) Universal over all the Creatures; which the Schoolmen call the Kingdom of
his Power: Whereby he orders and disposes all things; and rules all the
Creatures, visible, and invisible within this vast frame of the Universe: For
he governs the highest Heavens, and appoints the holy Angels his ministering
Spirits, their several Offices and Employments. He rules the lower Orbs,
causing Day and Night, Heat and Cold, Summer and Winter. He governs the Air,
the Winds and Seas, Storms and Tempests, raising and calming them again, how,
and when, and where he pleases. He rules the Earth and all the Inhabitants
thereof; so, that those things which seem casual and contingent to us, are
ordered and brought to pass by his determinate Council and Providence. He
exercises his Power and Authority in Hell, overruling those unruly Powers of
Darkness; keeping that disorderly Rout under a certain kind of Government, well
known to himself, but inconceivable to us, or to them who are ruled by it. So,
that from the glorious Angels, to the crawling Worms; from the highest Heavens,
to the lowest Hell, all the Creatures are within the Sphere and Compass of his
absolute, and indeed unlimited Jurisdiction. But

(2) And more Particularly, He exercises his Dominion over the Church his
Body, and every particular Member thereof. His Kingdom is founded in the Souls
and Consciences of all true Believers; where he reigns by his Word and Spirit;
directing them in the Ways of Godliness by his Grace, that he may dispose and
qualify 'em for his Kingdom of glory. Which Government over his Church, is yet
more particularly displayed and manifested, in these two remarkable Instances.
(1) In the Guidance and Preservation of his, and the Church's Friends. (2) In
the Confusion and Destruction of his, and her Enemies. And

First, He exercises his Power in, and over his Church, 1. In the Guidance and
Protection of his Church. Romans 2.16 1 Cor. 4 5
in the Guidance and Protection of his loyal and obedient Subjects. And tho he
sits at the right Hand of his Father in Heaven, yet he forgets not the Poor
afflicted Members of his Church here on Earth. He rules Men's Hearts, and sets
up his Empire there; exciting 'em by his holy Spirit to be, and to do good; to
avoid all things evil in themselves and of evil Report; whereby they may escape
all the Mischiefs both of Sin and Punishment. He exercises his Power and
Authority in making and repealing Laws; and passes Judgment upon what is
expedient and lawful, or unnecessary and unlawful, as seems best to his
uncontrollable, yet unerring Wisdom. Acts 17.31
He remits and retains Sins, and has an absolute Power to execute Judgment
upon all Creatures; before whose impartial Tribunal we must all shortly appear
to receive our final Doom, when neither the Secrets of Men, nor the Counsel of
the Heart shall escape his Scrutiny. 1 Cor. 3.13, 15.
He rules his people by his holy and just Laws; and enables them by his Grace
and Spirit, to comply with, and obey them. He protects his Votaries from the
Tyranny of their domineering Lusts and Passions; and preserves 'em from the
conquering Power and Prevalence of all Temptations. He supports them under, and
comforts 'em in all the Pressures and Afflictions of this Life; and at the
last, crowns them with an absolute Conquest over all his and their Enemies.

Yet here we must note, That his Church and People have their tristia, as well
as lucida Intervalla: For by his Counsel and Providence, the Tyrants of this
World, (as the proud Assyrian, etc.) become Ministers of his Justice; Rods and
Scourges to chastise his People, and reduce 'em to Obedience. And this is most
signally remarkable from the Annals of the Church: For there was never any
Religion in the World so severely persecuted as the Christian; nor did the
Devil and wicked Men ever confederate so strongly against any Sect of religious
Professors, as they have done against those who professed the Doctrine of
Christ: And if all the Engines and Methods of Cruelty (as Fire, Faggot, the
Teeth of wild Beasts, Racks, Wheels, Gibbets, Grid-irons, etc.) could have
destroyed all the Primitive Christians) our Religion had long ere this been
banished out of the World.

But Christ has always hitherto, and ever will interpose his Power and
Goodness, in the Rescue, and Defense of his Church and People. Psa. 2.4.
He that sits in Heaven will laugh his Enemies to scorn, and protect his
obedient Subjects; so, Mat. 16.18
that neither the Gates of Hell nor all the Atheists, Apostates, and Heretics
on Earth shall be able to prevail against 'em: For, he will ever bless the
righteous, and with his loving kindness will he compass them, as with a Shield.
And whom Christ is thus pleased to rule and protect, on them he bestows
infinite Rewards: For the Lord gives Grace and Glory; and no good thing will
he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Psalm. 84.11


Thus Christ our King governs us here by the wisest and best Laws; and protects
and defends us from all our Enemies of all sorts: And he will in his own good
Time, raise us from a mortal to an immortal State, full of Glory and
Blessedness. But as he manifests and administers his Kingly Power in the safe
Conduct and sure Defense of his loyal and loving Subjects. So

Secondly, 2. In the Confusion and Destruction of his and her Enemies.
He administreth and dispenses it to the Confusion and Destruction of his and
his Church's Enemies. This is a most evident matter of Fact; and we may be
confirmed in the Belief of it, if we consider the Plagues of Egypt, the
Destruction of Pharaoh and Amalek, the Subversion of the five Kings who were
slain with Hailstones, the blindness and Destruction of the Sodomites, and the
total Subversion of the Jews, (tho formerly so dear to him) when they turned
Rebels against him. Besides, we have an account of the most infamous Deaths of
Herod, Alexander, Judas, Simon Magus, Julian the Apostate, and many other
notorious Idolaters and Heretics; who being professed Enemies to his Religion and
Government were most miserably destroyed. And though the Kings and Tyrants of the
Earth be never so high and mighty, yet Christ our King is greater, and more
powerful then they; and his Dominion superior to all the Princes of the World.
Rev. 1.5. and 17.14
For as he has hitherto, and ever will infatuate the Counsels, and baffle all
the Plots and Hostilities of all his, and our temporal Enemies: so he will
countermine and defeat all the Projects, Stratagems, and Conspiracies of the
Devil, Sin, and Death, our Spiritual Adversaries: For he will reign till he
has put all the Enemies of his Kingdom under his Feet. 1 Cor. 15.25.


Yet here it must be considered; The Enemies of Christ's Kingdom destroyed by
Degrees.
that the Temporal and Spiritual Enemies of Christ's Kingdom must not be
destroyed all at once; but successively and by Degrees. The Church of God is
but now in her Progress to the highest State of Perfection; and Christianity is
yet in her Travel toward our heavenly Canaan; in expectation only, and not
fully entered into its eternal Rest. We read and do believe, that many wonderful
Works and Miracles were done by our blessed Savior whilst he sojourned on
Earth; but he has accomplished far greater since his Departure: For, he is
daily bringing more Sheep into his Fold, and sending out more Laborers into
his Vineyard; to make the Harvest of the Gospel still more and more plenteous:
Our Religion (ever since its first Plantation) has been in its Pilgrimage,
traveling from one Country to another; from Asia to Africa, from Africa to
Europe, from Europe to America: And he still leads Captivity captive, and
sooner or later, he will conquer the whole World with the invisible Power of
his Word and Spirit; and all the Nations of the Earth shall submit (by degrees)
to the Scepter and Authority of his Kingdom. Psalm. 2.8.
In a Word, he will, and does defend and protect us from the Power of Satan,
and Prevalence of our own Lusts; unless we desire to become their voluntary
Slaves and Vassals. They may indeed now and then tempt us to Sin, for the
Probation and Improvement of our Graces; but we are all free Agents, and Christ
has put us into a capacity (if we please) not only to resist, but to conquer
and subdue them: And therefore if Sin, and the Devil get the upper hand and
lead us Captives to Condemnation; it is not imputable to any impotency in the
Administration of Christ's Government, but to our own Obstinacy and Cowardice:
We are not, because we will not be happy. We proceed.

3dly. The Benefits resulting from Christ's Kingly Government.
To the Benefits which flow from the Powerful Administration of Christ's Kingly
Office: Of which take this following Account. Now it must be extremely happy
for us Christians, that we have such a King, and live under the gracious
Influences of that excellent Government, which I have described to you in
several Particulars. As

(1) In respect of his Abilities: For it is said prophetically of our King, I
have laid help on one that is mighty, Ps. 89.18.
and I will make him my first born, higher then the Kings of the Earth. Some
indeed have a fit Capacity to dispose, but want Power and Ability to put their
just Laws in Execution, for the Peace and Benefit of their Subjects. Others
have Power more then enough, but want Wisdom and Discretion to contrive and
manage the Affairs of Government: But it is said of our King, Colos. ^.19
that it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell; Fullness, (in
the abstract) both of Wisdom and Power, that he might dispose and order the
Concernments of his Government, for the Peace and Benefit of his People.
Earthly Princes may make their Subjects great, but they cannot make 'em good:
But such is the Power of our absolute and supreme Monarch, that he makes his
Dependents first good, and then great; he makes them gracious here, and
eternally glorious hereafter. For, when he ascended on high, he led Captivity
captive, Ephesians. 4.8.
and gave Gifts unto men; and the Doors of those heavenly Treasuries are still
open to his Votaries and Servants. He distributes Grace in proportion to their
modest Desires and Necessities; his holy Spirit leads them into all Truth;
inspiring them with Love, Peace, Patience, Perseverance, Joy in the Holy Ghost,
and all other needful Graces which may qualify 'em for Heaven, and make them
glorious and happy for ever.

(2) The Government of Christ's Kingdom is Monarchical, the very best of all
Constitutions; in which, there is an absolute Concurrence of all Power, Wisdom,
and Righteousness, without any Corruption or Diminution: For, as Christ is the
Power of God, Psa. 45.6.7
and the Wisdom of God, so the Scepter of his Kingdom is a right Scepter; a
Scepter of Equity, and a Rod of Direction, say some Translations. And as he
lays his Commands on his Subjects, so (which is peculiar to the Subjects of his
Kingdom only) he gives them Directions, and furnishes them with Abilities to
comply with, and obey all his Commands and Institutions. Besides, this
Monarchical Government of Christ has these special Privileges to distinguish
it from all others. (1) It Is Universal: For he is the Head of the whole Body;
he rules the Church Militant, and the Church Triumphant; us, who are here, and
those who are gone to Heaven before us. (2) It Is Spiritual, he sets up his
Throne in the Souls and Consciences of Believers and does there effectually
conquer and subdue all his and their Enemies. (3) It Is Perpetual; which is the
greatest Privilege, and best Property, that a well constituted Government can
be capable of: For he rules by his Power for ever. All earthly Governments
have been, and are subject to many Alterations, and Revolutions: Not only from
one Person to another, but from one kind of Government to another; and it is
very uncertain how long we may continue, either under this Person or Form of
Government under which we live. But the Polity of Christ's Kingdom, as well as
his Person are unchangable: For it is constituted and established by such an
unerring Wisdom, that a better cannot be devised nor desired; and it is
supported by such an invincible Power, that all the Grandees on Earth, and in
Hell shall never be able to destroy nor dissolve it: Luke 1.32.
Upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom shall he sit for ever, to order
and establish it with Judgment and Justice, even for ever and ever.

(3) Christ our King has made an eminent Provision for the Weal and Safety of
his Subjects: For he gives them the Assistances of the holy Angels in Heaven,
and of his Ministers and Pastors on Earth: By whose Ministeries, and the
concurrences of his Grace, we are supplied with a sufficiency of Wisdom to make
us Wise; of Holiness to make us Good; and Righteousness to make us Just: He
affords us a sure Protection, liberal Maintenance, and unspeakable Rewards, for
those little Tributes and Fealties of Service which we pay him. In a word, his
loyal Subjects can want nothing which may be requisite for their Support and
Convenience in this Life: But if they should be at any time straightened, by the
want of these, he will enrich them more abundantly with spiritual and eternal
Blessings. Let them but hold out a while with Patience and Perseverance in well
doing; and they shall have Kingdoms and Sceptres put into their Hands, and
Crowns set upon their Heads, as Ensigns of their everlasting Triumph.

(5) and Lastly, It may be added as a considerable Benefit and Privilege of
Christ's Kingdom; that Satan's Power (as before) is dashed in pieces, and we are
safe under the defense and Protection of this mighty Monarch. The other Enemies
who oppose his Authority, and do disease and trouble us, are Atheists and
Infidels without, and Heretics and Apostates within the Church; and all these
Adversaries have no small Advantage against us, from that innate Corruption and
Concupiscence in our own Bowels: but all the hurt that Christ our King will
suffer them to do us, is only by some faint Encounters (now and then) to try
and advance our Graces, and prove our Integrity. And though that last Enemy Death
may be a present torture; yet cannot deprive us of that Bliss, which shall
certainly be the Reward of all his Subjects in another World: For these
Oppositions will rather further than hinder us in our Journey, and bring us
perhaps sooner however with greater safety) to the Haven and Happiness where we
would be. We go on to the

4th. The Application of this Point.
and Last Particular. Which is to make some practical Improvement of this
Point, by way of Application. And

(1) Seeing that Christ our King is advanced to this high and honorable
Office: We are obliged (both in Duty and Interest) to pay that just tribute of
Fear and Homage, of Love and Obedience, which is most deservedly due to so
great, and so good a Monarch. And we are under the greatest Obligations to be
most exact and uniform in our Services to him, since the very Angels in Heaven,
and all other Creatures do not only acknowledge his Sovereignty over 'em, but
do (in their several Capacities) send up Acclamations of Blessing and Praise
unto him. Therefore, since we live under the happy Aspect, and most benign
Influences of Christ's most admirable Government, let us renounce all other
Powers and Interests whatsoever, if they come in Competition with him; and
account of them as the most mischievous Enemies of our Peace and Safety: for
Christ will admit of no Rivals; we cannot serve him and Belial, Mat. 6.24.
God and Mammon. When we obey others, it must be in Obedience and Subserviency
to him. When he commands all other Obligations are superseded, which are either
opposite to, or interfere with the Laws of his Government. Luke 14.3^
He is absolute Lord and King over all, and therefore must be obeyed and
reverenc't by all. Let us therefore cheerfully submit to the safe Conduct of
his Heavenly Government; and be sincerely obedient to all his admirable Laws
and Constitutions whatsoever: That his Majesty, Power, and Wisdom may be for
us, and not against us; rather for our Support and Comfort, than our Confusion
and Destruction. Psalm. 2.11, 12.
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence; kiss the Son,
etc.

(2) Our Obedience and Subjection to the Laws and Constitutions of Christ's
Kingdom, may be further enforced, by considering the extreme Danger and Hazard
those Rebels run upon, who hold out any disloyal Fort; or encourage their Lusts
and Appetites to war against him: For, who can conceal his Sins from Christ's
all-seeing Eye; or withstand the irresistible Power of his Justice and
Vengeance, when he is angry? Besides, how inconsistent would it be for any
Christian to dishonor him in his Practice, whom he has so often acknowledged
to be his Lord? And how shall he be able to answer it to God and his own
Conscience, if he should deny him, to whose Person and Government with repeated
Vows in both Sacraments, he has so often and solemnly promised Fealty and
Subjection? What a terrible sight then must it needs be to the Wicked to behold
him (whom they have so often pierced and crucified afresh by their almost
infinite Transgressions) sitting upon the Throne of eternal Majesty, 1 Cor. 5.10
and to have their most irreconcilable Enemy their Judge? But what infinite
Terror and Astonishment shall seize their desperate and distracted Spirits,
when that Judge (who came into the World, and was so extremely desirous to save
'em, but they would not) shall pronounce the dreadful Sentence, Depart ye
cursed, etc. And these mine Enemies that would not that I should reign over
them, Luke 19.27
take them bring them hither, and slay them before me. But on the other hand

(3) The Consideration of Christ's Power and Sovereignty over us, will conduce
much to the Interest and Satisfaction of all his obedient and loyal Subjects:
For we are so happy under the gracious Administration of this Government, that
all things are lawful to be done by us, which are not mischievous and
unprofitable to us. All his Commands Counsels, Administrations, Chastisements,
etc. are in some Respects beneficial to us; either in the Life which now is, 1 Timothy 4.8
or will be so in that which is to come.

And indeed, the dutiful Subjects of Christ's Kingdom are the only free Men in
the World: Iam. 1.2^
Because they are the Masters of those turbulent and unruly Passions, which
confine the Wicked to a worse slavery than that of Egypt. Besides, it is very
considerable, that the King whom we serve is no respecter of Persons; Luke
1.48. Job. 24.19.
but has an equal Regard to, and Kindness for the meanest, (if they be holy and
virtuous) as the greatest of his Subjects. We are all not only his Workmanship
by Creation, but the Purchase of his dearest Blood by Redemption: and therefore
without any Note of Distinction, he gives all true Believers indefenitely, the
Title and Character of Friends and Brethren. 1 Ioh. 3.1.
Why then should poor Men be dejected at the narrowness of their Fortune, and
the meanness of their Condition? If they will but endeavor to be good
Christians, they are the Friends and Brethren of Christ, which is the greatest
Preferment and Dignity in the World: All Crowns, Sceptres, Kingdoms, Honors,
Estates, costly Apparel, numerous Attendants, and the like, are but trivial and
sordid things, compared with the Dignity and Immunities of this Relation: for
the Apostles did glory in this, more then in all things besides: Were willing
to endure the greatest Fatigues, and undergo the most painful Drudgeries, that
they might gain Christ. And therefore, whosoever is not prepared in his mind,
to quit all his Interest in this World, rather then disobey or deny him, shall
be rejected, as a Traitor and Rebel to his Kingly Office and Government. But

(4) If we do but cheerfully and obediently submit to his Authority, and the
gracious Conduct of his admirable Government, we need not fear the want of any
Good, or the trouble of any Evil: For he has not only a sufficiency of Power
and Authority, and therefore able: 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. Rev. 3.21.
but of Mercy and Goodness, and therefore willing to protect us, and provide
for us. Nor have we cause to be afraid of any thing but God; and what can there
be in the World to disease and disturb us? Christ (as we have seen) has
obtained an absolute Conquest over Devils and wicked Men; and though they should
be too hard for us, yet he is too strong for them; and we shall be more then
Conquerers too, if we believe in and obey him. Act. 7.55, 56.
This was St. Stephen's Asylum in a Shower of Stones, nor could any thing
discourage him in the Conflict; because he saw Christ standing at the right
hand of God, ready to deliver him out of his Enemies hands, and receive him
into Glory.

Are we afraid of Sufferings? Here is a certain Remedy at hand; believe in
Christ, and he will not only become our King to protect us, but our Advocate to
save and exalt us in due time. Are we under a suspicion of Want? Our King's the
Proprietor of the whole Universe, and the Dispenser of all good Things, which
pertain to Life and Godliness. Are we afraid of any future Events? All the
Concernments of this World are disposed of, and managed by his gracious and
wise Providence; and in his Book are all our Members written. Let our Condition
then be what it will, if we be sincerely religious, (as all the Subjects of
Christ's Kingdom are) our Hopes may be buoyed up with this assured Confidence,
Romans 8.2^
that all things shall cooperate for our good: And if Christ be for us we are
safe, though the whole Fraternity of Devils and wicked Men should conspire
against us.

The Close.
We Have seen what excellent things the Son of God has done for us already; and
(if we be not awanting to our selves) we cannot fail of being eternally happy,
under the gracious Influences and Conduct of his admirable Government. We lie
under most pressing and infinite Obligations then, to submit our selves
entirely to the Guidance and Protection of so great a Lord; who bears to us the
Bowels of a Man, and the tenderest Compassions of a Brother. We Have enforced all
these Obligations to Holiness of Life, and newness of Obedience, by our Vows
and Covenant in Baptism; we repeat them frequently in the Lord's Supper; and do
oblige our selves still more and more by our renewed Choices and Promises, in
every Duty of Religion: And we have in all these, and many other Instances,
devoted our Selves, our Souls and Bodies entirely to his Service. How should we
then, (in Conformity with the Design of this Treatise) make it the Scope and
Aim of all our Desires and Endeavors, to be where Christ our great Prophet,
Priest, and King is. And since he is gone to Heaven, to prepare a Place for us;
Ioh. 14.3^
let us make it the Endeavor and Business of our whole Lives, Phil. 3.2^
(according to the Rules laid down in this Book) to dispose and qualify our
selves for that Place. By which means we may not only live comfortably here,
and solace our selves with the Peace of a good Conscience, in doing the Duties
of our Christian Calling; But after this painful Life ended, we shall have the
most perfect Consummation of Grace, in the possession of the Rewards of eternal
Glory and Bliss. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant unto us, for our blessed
Savior's sake. To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed by us,
and all the World, Blessing, and Glory, and Honor, and Power, and
Thanksgiving, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Morning Prayer for Families.
O Most Glorious and Eternal Lord God, the Father of Mercies, and the God of
all Consolations! thou art greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints,
and to be had in reverence of all that draw nigh unto thee. We thy unworthy
Servants desire with all Humility to acknowledge our immediate Dependence upon
thee: for by thy Power we were made, by thy Wisdom we are governed, by thy
Goodness we are provided for, under thy Dominion we live, and we owe unto thee
all that we have in this World, or hope for in the next.

And yet alas! we have made very unsuitable returns unto thy Bounty: For we have
violated all thy just and reasonable Commands, not only by our mistakes and
indiscretions, by our sudden, secret, and unobserved Sins; but we have set at
naught and trampled upon thy sovereign Power and Authority, by our open,
voluntary, deliberate, and actual Transgressions; to the dishonor of thy
glorious Name, the scandal of our holy Profession, and the great increase of
our shame and sorrow. Besides, such is the ignorance of our Minds, the
stubborness of our Wills, and the unruliness of our Affections, that we have
been either wholly negligent about, or careless and trifling in the performance
of those incomparably pleasant Duties of our holy and excellent Religion:
Whereby, much of our precious Time has been wickedly misspent, either in
sinful Recreations, or Idleness and Vanity. And to increase and aggravate our
Guilt and Punishment, we have sinned against many Judgments and Mercies, Vows
and Resolutions, the Light of thy holy Spirit, and the many checks and
convictions of our own Consciences: by all which, we have made and judged our
selves unworthy of eternal Life.

Wherefore holy Father, we might justly expect the severest Resentments of thy
Wrath and Vengeance, in the most due and deserved Punishment of all our Sins:
But thou art a God of Mercy, and with thee is plenteous Redemption; thy
Promises are full in Christ Jesus to truly humble and penitent Sinners: We come
with boldness therefore to the Throne of thy heavenly Grace, most humbly
begging the Aids of thy holy Spirit; that with a deep Sorrow and hearty
Contrition, we may steadfastly bewail all the Sins and Offenses of our
past-lives. Increase our sorrow, and detestation of 'em still more and more:
Remove far from us all Security and Presumption, Impenitence and unbelief, and
all the sad Remains of Apostasy and Disobedience; and if it be thy gracious
Pleasure deliver us from temporal Punishments, however from eternal Death.

But since there is no hope of Mercy and Forgiveness, whilst we continue in the
Ways of Sin and Irreligion which lead to Hell and Damnation; let the sense of
our Vileness prevail with us to forsake and abandon all our Sins; so that we
may never return to them again with any consent, delight, or approbation.
Forgive we pray thee whatever we have done, spoke, or thought amiss; bury all
our Iniquities in the bottomless Ocean of thy own Mercy and Forgetfulness, and
our Savior's Blood; and for the sake of his infinite Merits, deliver us from
the Guilt and Pollution, the Dominion and Punishment of all our Offenses.

Lift up our Hearts we pray thee, above all the little and empty (yet alluring)
Trifles of this vain and transitory World: Affect our Souls with a true and
lively sense of our Duty and Dependence upon thee. Restore and renew in us that
Health and Comfort, Joy and Peace, Freedom and Strength, Knowledge and
Integrity, by the Righteousness of the second Adam, which we forfeited and lost
by the Fall and Disobedience of our first Parents. Improve and cherish still
more and more, those holy Resolutions of Growth and Perseverance in all Wisdom
and Goodness; that neither Life nor Death, good Report nor bad Report, may
obstruct our Obedience, nor separate us from thy Love. Conduct us safely through
all the Changes and Varieties of this troublesome Life in Peace and safety; and
dispose and qualify us with such a holy and innocent Frame and Temper of Mind
and Spirit, that we may live with, and enjoy thee for ever.

Send forth thy Light and thy Truth, and enlighten we beseech thee, all the
dark Corners of the Earth, with the bright Beams of thy glorious Gospel. Bless
more especially all Estates and Conditions of Men, in the Communion of thy holy
Catholic Church: But we entreat thee more particularly for the increase of true
Wisdom and Godliness in the Churches of these Kingdoms: We confess O Lord thou
might justly remove thy Candlestick from us, and give it to a People more
deserving than we; but as thou have been pleased to magnify thy Mercy hitherto
in the wonderful Defense of our Persons, Religion and Government,
notwithstanding the malicious Designs and wicked Contrivances of those fierce,
fiery, and politic Spirits, who have ill will at our Sion: So, continue we
beseech thee, the present Establishment in Church and State, with a Blessing
upon both, to us and our Posterity for ever. Remember not against us our
manifold Provocations, neither suffer the Plagues of Atheism and Apostasy,
Heresy and Schism, Sedition and Rebellion to shake the Foundation, or
interrupt the Public Peace and Tranquillity of this excellent Government: But
unite us all to thy Self in the Bonds of true Faith and Hope, and in brotherly
Love and Charity one to another.

To this End, we entreat thee for the Health and Preservation of the King's
most excellent Majesty, James the Second, etc. and all the Royal Family; bless
the whole Clergy, but him especially whom thou have appointed to watch over us
in this Parish; together with all the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of this
Realm; that they may all become active Instruments for the Advancement of thy
Glory, the Safety and Preservation of the King's Person, Honor, and Interest;
and for the Comfort and Benefit of all his truly loyal, peaceable and obedient
Subjects.

Visit we pray thee with thy Grace and Blessing, all our Relations, Friends,
and Benefactors; forgive the Injuries committed against thee and us, by all our
Enemies: Comfort and Support all distressed Persons, with the steadfast Belief
of, sure Confidence in, and a patient Submission to thy divine Will and Wisdom
in all Straits and Sufferings whatsoever.

And now O Lord, we return thee most humble and hearty Thanks for all those
temporal and spiritual Blessings, which make the time of our short abode in
this Life more easy and comfortable to us: But let our Souls for ever love and
adore, admire and praise thee, for thine infinite Goodness and Bounty in
sending thine own Son from the highest Region of Bliss, to take our Nature upon
him: Who (submitting to all the Indignities of a sorrowful Life, and the
Injuries and Tortures of a painful and accursed Death) has not only delivered
us from the dreadful and damning Effects of our Sin and Disobedience; but puts
us thereby into an undoubted Capacity of being said; appointing the Use of
such Means, and affording us those most powerful Assistances, whereby we may
live comfortably here, and be happy for ever.

We praise thee more particularly, for the Safety and Refreshment of the Night
past; and since thy Providence has blessed us with the Light of another Day,
keep our Souls and Bodies we beseech thee pure and undefiled; and enable us to
employ it, and the whole residue of our Lives to thy Glory, and the real and
mutual Benefit of of our selves and others: So that after the few Days and
Nights we have to pass in this World, we may be happily translated from the
short and troublesome Enjoyments thereof, to the ravishing and immutable
Pleasures of a future and better Life. Grant these our most humble
Suplications, and what thou see further needful and convenient for us we
sincerely beg at thy hands, for the Merits of Jesus Christ the righteous; in
whose holy Name and Words we pray unto thee,

Our Father, etc. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
An Evening Prayer for Families.
O Lord, the Almighty Creator of the World, and the merciful Redeemer of
Mankind, who see our down lyings and uprisings, and to whom the Darkness and
Light are both alike. Thou art a God of Infinite Purity and Holiness, nor can
any thing be added to thy admirable Perfections and essential Glory, by us or
any of thy Creatures: for thou reprovest thy Angels of Folly, and the Heavens
are impure before thee; much more might the sense of our wretched Estate and
Condition make us justly ashamed and afraid to offer unto thee any Sacrifice;
yet in great Mercy to our Souls thou hear Prayer, and thy Power and Goodness
are every where manifest in the visible Administrations of thy Providence. We
beseech thee therefore to accept of this Evening Oblation of our Souls and
Bodies, which we desire with all Humility to present a holy, living, and
acceptable Sacrifice unto thee, through Jesus Christ.

We do confess O Lord, and in great bitterness of Spirit lament and bewail our
detestable Impiety, Unworthiness, and hardness of Heart; in that we have
wilfully trampled upon thy Sovereign Power and Authority; by violating and
transgressing thy just and reasonable Commands, rejecting all the bountiful
Tenders of thy Grace and Mercy, and obstinately despising the Riches of thy
Forbearance and long suffering Patience which should lead us to Repentance. But
thou have graciously spared us hitherto when we deserved Punishment, and in the
midst of Judgment think upon Mercy. Wherefore O Lord, thy Mercy is our
Sanctuary, and unto thee do we fly for Succor. Let the sense of our Vileness
possess us with an holy Indignation against our Selves; and give us Grace to
look back upon the Offenses of our former Lives with that horror and regret,
hatred and detestation, that neither our vile Lusts, the illusions of Satan,
nor the alluring Enticements of this vain and transitory World may prevail with
us to neglect the great Concernments of Eternity.

And for the perfecting of our present and future Happiness, we beseech thee O
heavenly Father to be gracious and merciful unto us in the forgivenness of all
our Sins. Pardon the vanity and impurity of our Thoughts; the sinfulness of our
profane, idle, and impertinent Words; and the Impurity, injustice, and Impiety
of all our Actions. Purge our whole Nature from the Stain and Pollution of the
Old Man; not only from grosser presumptuous Sins, but even from our private
Slips, and more secret Corruptions. Sanctify us thoroughly by thy holy Spirit
and we shall be clean, wash us in thy Sons Blood and we shall be whiter than
Snow: Bless all our Endeavors of Reformation; and let the redundant
Satisfaction of our meritorious Advocate and Intercessor prevail for our
Release and Rescue, for thy Grace and Acceptance.

Fix our thoughts, our hopes, and desires on Heaven and heavenly Things. Make
us watchful over our Ways, and enrich our Understandings and our Wills with the
love of Goodness and Knowledge of thy Truth. Mortify and subdue all our
lustful Appetites and Passions by the Operation and Prevalence of thy Grace;
that we may submit our Selves entirely to the gracious and safe Conduct of
rectified Reason and Religion. And to this end, we beseech thee strengthen our
Faith, confirm our Hope, and give us a daily increase of Charity; that we may
serve thee sincerely, fervently, and constantly, in Righteousness and true
Holiness all the days of our Life. Enable us to increase still more and more
and persevere in all the Instances of Piety and Virtue; that by adding Strength
to Strength, and one degree of Grace unto another, we may have acomfortable
Well-being in this Life, and in the World to come Life everlasting.

We implore thy Mercies also for the Peace and Happiness of all Mankind. Bless
thy Church universal, but more especially that part of it to which we stand so
nearly related in these divided Kingdoms of great Britain, and Ireland.
Remember not O Lord, our crying Sins, nor the Iniquities of our Forefathers,
whereby these Nations have been involved in Blood and Ruin, and do still cry
aloud against us for Vengeance: But out of the Bowels of thy tenderest Mercy,
and for the sake of our Compassionate Redeemer, let thy heavy Wrath and
Judgments be turned away from us.

Bless our gracious Sovereign, and all the Royal Family; endue him with the
Spirit of Wisdom and sound Judgment in thy Fear, and make him successful in
all his Undertakings, for the Advancement of the true Honor and Interest of
the established Religion, his Subjects Peace, and his own Safety; Give a
plentiful Portion of thy Grace and Spirit to all the several Stewards and
Dispensers of thy holy Mysteries; whether they be Archbishops, Bishops, or
other subordinate Priests and Deacons: but more particularly to him, whom thou
have entrusted with the more immediate Care and Inspection over our Souls in
this Parish: Enable them to feed their Flocks with true Wisdom and Knowledge;
that after a plentiful Conversion of Sinners from the Error of their Way, they
may shine like so many Stars in thy Kingdom and Glory for ever and ever. And
let the same holy Spirit we most humbly beseech thee, sanctify and direct all
the King's Counselors, Judges, Magistrates, and Ministers whatsoever; that
they may be all faithful and zealous in their several Stations and Callings,
for the Maintenance of thy true Religion, the Encouragement and increase of
Piety and Justice, and brotherly Love and Unity amonst us.

And now O Lord, as we have prayed unto thee for the supply of all temporal and
spiritual Wants; so we beseech thee to accept of the hearty Return of our most
affectionate Praise and Thanksgiving, for the abundance of thy Grace and Mercy
vouchsafed to our Souls and Bodies. We bless thee for our Creation,
Preservation, and manifold Deliverances from Temptation, Sin and Danger; for
all the comfortable Motions of thy holy Spirit, and the blessed effects thereof
in our Lives and Actions; for our Health and Liberty, Peace and Prosperity: But
above all, let Heaven and Earth praise thee, for thine infinite Love and
Compassion to our miserable Nature, in the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and herein we praise thee more particularly for his Merits and
Intercession, his Doctrine and Example, the benefit of Repentance and promise
of Pardon; for thine unwearied Patience, and passionate Entreaties to save us
from Sin and Ruin: for all the blessed Opportunities of Grace and Mercy in this
Life, and the assured hope of a blessed Immortality in that which is to come.

Finally we beg the Assistance of thy good Providence, which has watched over
us, and preserved us this Day, to defend us this Night also. Refresh our
wearied Bodies with comfortable Rest and Sleep, and keep our Souls and Bodies
from the Violence and Malice of the Spirits of Darkness, from all evil
Accidents and illusive and filthy Dreams: So, that if thy good Providence bring
us to the Enjoyment of another Day, we may serve thee fathfully and sincerely;
both in the business of our Callings and Religion. Take us not out of this
World we pray thee, till thou have disposed and qualified us for the happy and
eternal Enjoyment of a better; and let thy merciful Kindness be our Support and
Comfort in the whole remaining part of our Lives. In confidence whereof we
recommend our Selves and Ours to thy gracious disposal in Christ Jesus; in
whose most holy Name, and prevailing Words we beseech thee to hear us,

Our Father, etc.
A Morning Prayer for a Private Person.
O Most merciful and gracious God, the Fountain of all goodness and blessing,
of life and peace, of plenty and pardon; thou art greatly to be feared and had
in reverence of all that draw unto thee: Wherefore I humbly beg the assistance
of thy Grace at this time, to sanctify and enliven my Devotions; that I may
pray with the Spirit, and pray with the Understanding also.

For I must confess O Lord, to my great shame and sorrow, that I am a most vile
and sinful Creature, less then the least of all thy Mercies, and liable to the
severest of thy Judgments: All the Powers and Faculties of my Soul, and
Members of my Body are polluted with the contagion and filthiness of Original
Sin; I am clothed with Iniquity as with a Garment, and my Transgressions are
gone over my head like a sore burden too heavy for me to bear. I have sinned in
every Circumstance, in every Condition and Employment of my whole Life; not
only in my youth and days of ignorance, but in my more discerning and riper
years: Insomuch, that there are few sins which I have not either actually
committed, or at least been inclined to, to the great increase of my present
Misery, and future Condemnation. Here mention your partitular sins, as
Besides, vile Creature that I am, I have been so miserably entangled in the
snares of Sin and Wickedness, as to be hurried on, either to the wilful neglect
of the Duties of Religion, Here confess your particular Omissions of, and
Failings in Duty.
or those I perform, are done with so much indifference and formality,
hypocrisy and distraction, coldness and indevotion, that even my Prayers and
other religious Performances are not seldom turned into sin: And to render all
my Transgressions out of measure sinful, the guilt of 'em has been hugely
aggravated and encreast, Here consider the circumstantial Aggravations, as
when: how often, where, etc.
by the Commission of 'em from time to time, against the clearest Convictions
of thy Word and Spirit, and the Testimony and many checks of my own Conscience;
notwithstanding my many solemn Vows, and Resolutions to the contrary.

Wherefore holy Father, thou might justly enter into Judgment with me, and
if thou should be extreme to mark what I Have done amiss, I should not only be
of all Men, but of all Creatures the most miserable: But with thee is mercy and
forgivenness, and because thy fatherly Compassions fail not, therefore I am not
consumed; thou passest by the Transgressions of thy Servant, and retainest not
thine Anger for ever.

Let the abundant Merits of thy Son and my most merciful Redeemer, make a full
and satisfactory Atonement for the Sins and Offenses of my whole Life; and for
his Righteousness sake, deliver me I beseech thee from the Guilt and Stain, and
from the Power and Punishment of all my reigning Lusts, which I have hitherto
indulged, and cling about me. Here mention the Sins to which you are most
inclined, and pray earnestly against them.
Enable me to subdue and overcome all those Follies and Indiscretions, the
unreasonable Cares and unrelenting Affections, that remisness and indisposednes
in Duty, Here mention and pray against your several indispositions to Duty.
whereby I Have been so miserably led captive hitherto, to the great dishonor of
my holy Profession, the Scandal of others, and the extreme trouble and disquiet
of my own sorrowful and afflicted Conscience. Rescue me from those many
alluring Temptations, which are daily perplexing me in every Condition of life,
Here mention the Temptations which do oftnest a^^ault you.
or give me a Sufficiency of spiritual Strength, when they assault me to
overcome them; lest my Enemies prevail against me, and lead me unawares into
the Pit of Destruction and endless Perdition.

For this end, I humbly beg the Aids of thy holy Spirit, to purify my whole
Nature, and dispose me for the moderate use of all thy Creatures: Inform my
Judgment with the useful Knowledge of those Truths which are necessary to be
believed and practiced, rectify my Will, and sanctify my Affections, that I
may so love and fear, trust and hope, desire and delight in thee above all
Things; that all my Thoughts, Words, and Works may show forth thy praise, who
have called me from the dark Regions of Sin and Ignorance to the mavelous
Light of thy pure and undefiled Religion. Give me Grace to improve every
Opportunity and Blessing thy good Providence has entrusted me with; that when
thy Messengers, Death or Judgment shall put an end to all the tedious Cares
and troublesome Concernments of this mortal Life, I may be clothed upon with a
glorious and blissful Immortality.

Bless thy holy Catholic Church, but more especially the Churches of these
Kingdoms: Bless the King's Majesty, the Royal Family, the Clergy, Nobility,
Gentry, and Commonalty of this Realm. Let all my Friends, Relations, and
Benefactors, particularly As Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Children, etc.
the Family wherein I live, etc. receive the Benefit of my Prayers. Bless them
in their Bodies with the Comforts of Health and Peace, Liberty and Safety; and
in their Souls with sound Judgments, holy Affections, and heavenly
Dispositions, that their Lives and Practices may be unblameable before thee,
and in the sight of all men.

And now O Lord, I beseech thee accept of the Tender of my most humble and
hearty Thanks, for those innumerable Blessings by which I live, and am provided
for: Thou have given me Food and Raiment, Liberty and Friends, Here mention the
temporal Blessings God's Bounty has bestowed on thee and thine.
etc. and by thy merciful Providence have wonderfully preserved me yet alive
amidst the innumerable Assaults of my bitter and malicious Enemies. But chiefly
O Lord, I praise and magnify thy holy Name with all my Soul and all my
Strength, for the miraculous Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, for the
Revelation of thy Will, the Satisfaction which he made, and the Ransom which he
paid not only for mine, but the Sins of the whole World; for the sanctification
of my Nature by the Grace of his holy Spirit, the admirable Comforts and
Refreshments of his Body and Blood, the conquest over all his and mine Enemies;
for his powerful Intercession, and the gracious acceptance of my Prayers and
Person before God, etc. Spiritual Mercies.
For which and all other temporal and spiritual Mercies my Soul shall magnify
the Lord, and with the best Faculties I have, I will bless and praise him for
ever.

Finally, O Lord I beseech thee, preserve me in a perpetual Remembrance of
those manifold and undeserved Favors thy Bounty has bestowed upon me and mine:
And as thou have wonderfully preserved me hitherto, and particularly from the
dangers of the Night past: so keep me this Day, and for ever from all Sin and
Mischief. Let the Love of Christ be always in my heart, and in my thoughts, and
as he is my hope, so let him be for ever my rule and pattern to walk by: That
by by a sincere and faithful Discharge of the several Duties of my Calling and
Religion both to God and Man; I may enjoy a comfortable and prosperous
well-Being in this Life, and in the World to come Life everlasting. To which
the Lord of his infinite Mercies bring me and all his People, through the Merits
of Jesus Christ. In whose Name and Words I continue to pray unto thee,

Our Father, etc.
An Evening Prayer for a private Person.
OH eternal God! the Father of Men and Angels, whose Glory is far above the
Heavens, and by whom the lower World is established in a Wonderful Order, making
the Day and Night to succeed each other: Thou excellest the praises of all thy
Creatures, and have no need of our Services, neither can any thing be added to
thy infinite Perfection; yet in great Mercy thou hear Prayer, and thy Power
and Goodness are abundantly manifested to the meanest of thy Servants, who call
upon thee in Faith and Sincerity. In confidence whereof I most humbly implore
the gracious Assistance of thy holy Spirit, and be pleased to accept of such
Prayer and Service as thy Bounty shall enable me to perform.

But the sense of my sinful Estate and Condition might justly make me afraid to
speak of thy holy name; since I have so wilfully and wickedly abused thy
Goodness, affronted thy Clemency, resisted thy Power, undervalued thy Wisdom,
trespassed upon thy Patience, and stopped mine Ears against all the charitable
tenders of Mercy and Salvation. In so much, that through this senseless Stupidity
and unreasonable Folly, my heart is become proud and unmortified, pievish and
disobedient, lustful and intemperate; and so wholly entangled in the snares of
Sin and Wickedness that I am utterly unable to resist or fly from 'em: For I
am daily prevailed with, by my buitish Appetites and Passions to commit those
Sins which thou have forbidden, Here confess thy particular Sins committed.
as etc. and to ommit those Duties which thou have commanded; And the Duties
omitted.
even contrary to the most convincing Attestations of rectified Reason and
Religion: For which beinous and innumerable Offenses, thou might justly long
ere this, have given me my portion in the horrors and sorrows of a sad and
miserable Eternity.

But thou delightest in Mercy, and thy loving kindness has been abundantly
manifested hitherto, in sending thy Son and Spirit, not to call the Righteous
but Sinners to Repentance. Come Lord Jesus, and say unto my Soul I am thy
Salvation, and my Leprosy shall be healed. Think upon thy Mercies holy Father,
consider thy Son's Blood and Obedience, and accept of my sincere Contrition and
unfeigned Repentance for his Names sake. Touch my frozen heart with the Finger
of thy Omniporence, dissolve it into those Tears which may so wash my pol^ited
Conscience, that thy love may refresh me, that thy presence may revive me, and
the Garments of heaviness will be turned into the white Robes of Praise and
Exaltation. Oh let me hear the joyful News of a merciful Pardon from thy
gracious Lips, that the Bones which thou have broken may rejoice. Stretch forth
thy hand O Lord, to save a poor miserable and sinful Creature from the power of
Sin and Satan, and the pain and peril of hell torments: Keep me unspotted from
the World: that my Thoughts and Affections may not be drawn away from thee by
the deceitful Pleasures, unmanly Desires, and unworthy Designs of this vain and
transitory Life. Support me under the many Temptations and Pressures, which thy
good Providence may order and appoint, for the trial and improvement of my
Graces, or the punishment of my Sins. Teach and enable me to be truly watchful
in all my Ways, and so keep the door of my lips, that I may not offend in
Thought, Word, or Deed, either against the Laws of Piety, Temperance, or
Charity.

Supply my outward wants with health, safety, and success, in my honest Calling
and lawful undertakings; give me true Friends, and other temporal Blessings, so
far as thou see them needful and convenient for my Support and Comfort. Guide
me with thy Wisdom in the Way wherein I am to walk, cloth me with thy Sons
Righteousness, and seal me with thy holy Spirit, unto the Day of Redemption;
that I may not be cast out of thy gracious presence with Hypocrites and
Unbelievers: And since thou have been pleased to enrich my Soul with divine and
excellent Faculties, so enable me to employ 'em entirely to thy Service, that
neither Death nor Judgment may overtake me unawares.

And seeing thy Mercy O Lord is over all thy Works, I beseech thee to be
gracious to all Mankind. Bless the universal Church, especially the Churches of
these Kingdoms: And herein I entreat thee for all temporal and spiritual
Mercies, for the guidance and safety of the King's most excellent Majesty, the
royal Family, and the whole Clergy of this Realm; but particularly for the
Guide and Pastor of our Souls in this Parish. Bless all the Nobility, Gentry,
and Commonality, in their several Capacities and Callings. Be favorable and
gracious to all my Relations, Friends and Benefactors; and extend thy Mercy and
Goodness to all (even my most inveterate and malicious) Enemies. Be propitious
to those who want the blessings and comforts which I enjoy: strengthen the
weak, confirm the strong, instruct the ignorant, deliver the oppressed, relieve
the needy, pity and support the Fatherless and Widow, and bring us all by the
Waters of Comfort, and in the Ways of Religion to thy Kingdom of rest and Glory.

The holy Angels and Saints in heaven praise thee O Lord, extol thy Power,
bless thy Goodness, and are astonished at thy Wisdom; the whole Earth is full
of the Riches of thy Grace and Mercy. But thou have blessed and obliged me more
especially, by all the endeared Expressions of love and bounty in my Creation,
Preservation, and all the Mercies and Comforts of this Life; but above all by
the infinite Riches of thy Grace and Goodness, in fending thy Son to purchase
my Peace and Pardon at so dear a price as the expense of his own blood: And
herein I thank thee with all my Soul, for his miraculous Birth, his most holy
and innocent Life, for his bitter Agony and Passion, his Glorious Resurrection
and Ascension, and his sovereign Power and Authority over all the Creatures;
for the sprinkling of his Blood, and his Intercession with the Father for us,
and for the coming of the holy Ghost; for all the blessed Opportunities of
Grace and Salvation here, and assured hope of eternal Glory hereafter. And to
all thy other Mercies and Blessings thou have graciously added the Protection
of me and mine in our Persons and Possessions this Day; from all Casualties and
ill Accidents, from the power and prevalence of our Enemies, and from thine
infinite Wrath and Vengeance which might have deservedly fallen upon us. In like
manner I beseech thee preserve my Soul and Body from all the Malice and
Violence of the Spirits of Darkness, and suffer not any vain Thoughts or Dreams
to disturb or ensnare me. Bless and sanctify my Sleep that it may be
temperate, holy, and safe, and that I and all thine may be refreshed from time
to time with wholesome and moderate Rest; that both our Souls and Bodies may
not only serve thee with a never failing Duty, but that whether we wake or
sleep, live or die, we may be thine in Christ Jesus.

Our Father, etc.
FINIS.

