

THE LIVES AND CHARACTERS Of the Ancient Grecian Poets. Dedicated to His
HIGHNESS THE DUKE of GLOUCESTER,

By BASIL KENNET, M.A. of C.C.C. Oxon.

At simul Heroum lauds, and facta Parentum
Jam legere, and quae sit poteris cognoscere virtus:
Alter erit tum Tiphys, and altera quae vehat Argo
Delectos heroas: erunt etiam altera bella,
Atque iterum ad Trojam magnus mittetur Achilles.
Virgil. Eclog. 4. LONDON: Printed for ABEL SWALL, at the Unicorn at the
West End of St. Paul's-Church-Yard. 1697.

QUAE MOX IMITERE LEGAS.

J. Savage scul.

To His Highness the Duke of GLOUCESTER.
SIR,
YOur HIGHNESS can never rule so equally in the Empire of Learning, but that
the Poets will pretend to a particular Interest in Your Protection, as well as
in Your Fame: And the Grecian Masters, who are the first of the Tribe, will
reckon themselves injured, unless they have the Honor of paying their Duties
before the rest.

In the Late Degeneracy of Ancient Valor, they have had the Hard Fortune to
pass for mere Romancers; because their Worthies and their Adventures appear
beyond our present Notions of Human Conduct and Force: But from Your
HIGHNESSE's Actions, they expect a full recovery of Faith and of Esteem: They
are impatient for the Time, when they may renew their old Title to Prophecy;
and when the Fame of Your HIGHNESSE's Achievements shall justify the Miracles
of their Verse. For Princes SIR, have this Advantage above us the Vulgar Herd
of Scholars; that we read the Story of Heroic Exploits, barely to understand
and to admire them; THEY to imitate, and to exceed them.

And whilst thus, with a hasty kind of Loyalty, the Good Old Songsters are
coming to wait on Your HIGHNESS, it is no wonder if they make use of any poor
Guide to Conduct them: never fearing that with Your HIGHNESS's Justice, the
Worth of the Addressers can suffer by the meanness of the Introducer;

SIR, Your HIGHNESS's Most Humble and most Obedient Servant, BASIL KENNET.

THE PREFACE.
THE Pleasures and the Distasts which we receive from former Years and Men, are
chiefly owing to our selves: Their favors affect us not, unless we apply them;
and their Injuries have no force; but what they borrow from our Folly. The Good
People of Antiquity never benefit us, 'till we work our selves with pains into
their Acquaintance: and the Bad never corrupt us, but when we court their
Company. It Is on this account that, while we neglect the Old Examples of
Ignorance or Vice, the Patterns of Wit and Virtue engage our Curiosity as well
as our Esteem. And among these, we entertain a particular Affection for the
celebrated AVTHORS of Ancient Times: We are desirous of understanding their
Actions and Fortunes as well as their Writings, and are the more eager to
enquire into Their private Story, the more agreeably they divert us with the
Adventures of other Men.

Yet Envy and Ingratitude have done their best to deprive us of this
Satisfaction. Many of the Great Masters survive only in the Front of their
Labors; and we read their whole History in a Line of the Title Page. Fame,
with the ordinary Spirit of Informers, discovers Ill Nature in her very Praise;
and under the pretense of giving a Loud Sound to their Memory, excuses Herself
from giving a Distinct one. Now the POETS have a deeper share in this
Misfortune than the Professors of other Arts and Studies. Philosophers commonly
leave numerous Sects behind them, which endeavor to enlarge their own Credit
by swelling the Legends of their Founders. Orators, being allowed a Hand in the
Business of State, pass down in the Current of Common History: And the
Historians themselves, while they Illustrate the Times they live in, entwist
their private Affairs with the Memorials of Public Actions: and, borrowing the
Vanity of an Art to which they lend Materials, never fail to draw their own
Picture in their Noblest Work. But the Poet by the Rules of his Order,
forswears Business as heartily as Riches: He is to cover himself from the World
with Shades and Privacy; and even the noise of his own Praises must not be so
great as to break the Cloud which inveils his Person. If he chance to Address
his Verses to the Honor of the present Age, then perhaps Posterity may know
the City, and the Times he lived in: But his chief Affairs lie amongst the the
Old Race of Mortals; He is to revive Heroes that have died in their very Brass:
And though he may possibly rescue Them from the Gulf of Time, he is Himself
commonly swallowed in the Attempt.

If the MUSES have been civilly treated in any Chronicle, it must be in that of
the Grecian Affairs. As they are reported to have been born in that Country,
so they may with more justice be said to have given Birth to it. The Language,
the Arts, the Civility, the Laws, the Religion, and the very Triumphs of
Greece, all sprung from their Fountain, and were all nourished by their
Streams. Nor indeed was their Service ill repaid, while the good Effects of it
continued. In the flourishing height of Wisdom and of Empire, the Poets were
ranked amongst the Guardians of the State; and a Victory at one of their
Contentions in the Theater obtained as fair a place in the Public Registers,
as the Actions of a successful General. But when by a muiual failure, Greatness
began to languish for want of the incitement of Wit, and Wit to sink because
unsupported by Greatness: the Poetic Tribe, like a decayed Family, not only
suffered in their own Credits, but were unable to secure the Honors and the
Atchievments of their Predecessors. The Old Heroes in the Art of Verse had
their Trophies scattered about in the wide Field of History; but their weak
Posterity could not gather them into a Pile, and so they have rolled down in
the same Confusion to our Times.

To pick up some parts of these divided Honors, and to lay the Sacred
Fragments together, is the Design of this small Attempt. The Cementing, the
Polishing, the giving the nice touches of Symmetry and Life, should be the Care
of Noble Artists.

It was thought convenient, not to stop at those admired Masters whose Labors
survive as well as their Memory; but to take in the most celebrated of the
other Train, who live on the Stock of their Ancient Glory; and have made That
their passport through so many Ages, since their truest Credentials have been
lost upon the Way.

Some Endeavors after their proper Characters have been added in both
Divisions: Because their Wit makes the best part of their Story; and because to
give the Life of an Author without speaking of his Works, is no wiser Conduct,
than to write the Memoires of a Prince or Hero, and to omit the Relation of his
Exploits.

A TABLE of the POETS in the First Part.
HOMER. Page 1 HESIOD. 44 ANACREON. 59 PINDAR. 65 AESCHYLVS. 87 SOPHOCLES. 97
EVRIPIDES. 106 ARISTOPHANES. 124 THEOCRITVS. 142 LYCOPHRON. 152 CALLIMACHVS.
156 APOLLONIVS. 165 ARATVS. 169 NICANDER. 175 DIONYSIVS. 177 OPPIAN. 182
A TABLE of the POETS in the Second Part.
LINVS. Page 1 ORPHEUS. 4 MVSAEVS. 9 TYRTAEVS. 11 ARCHILOCHVS. 14 STESICHORVS.
Page 18 MIMNERMVS. 25 SAPPHO. 28 ALCAEVS. 35 EPIMENIDES. Page 39 SIMONIDES. 43
THEOGNIS and PHOCYLIDES. 49 EMPEDOCLES. 51 EPICHARMVS. 56 CHOERILVS. 58
CRATINVS and EVPOLIS. 62 ANTIMACHVS. 65 MENANDER. 68 PHILEMON. 74 BION and
MOSCHVS. 77
ERRATA. Part I.
PAge I. Line 3. for a Comma put a Colon: p. 12. l. 6 for (...). p. 43. l. 24.
for Skin r. Phiz. p. 56. l. 15. for Collas. r. Colles. p. 81. l. 26. for prise
r. Prize. p. 90. l. 26. for (...) r. (...). p. 132. l. 20. for First r. Fifth.
p. 147. l. 23. for by r. of. p. 152. l. 12. for Stories r. Stores. p. 174. l.
5. for Situation r. Citation. p. 187. l. 28. for yields r. breeds. Part II.
Page 25. l. 2. for Smurna r. Smyrna. p. 48. l. 9. for Pluto r. Plato. p. 67. l.
5. for Meleagres r. Meliagri. p. 80. l. 9. for the r. to.

Many lesser Faults (particularly in the Greek) have been occasioned by the
Author's Absence.

OF THE Lives and Characters Of the Ancient GRECIAN POETS.
PART I.
The Life of HOMER.
THE Age and Country of Homer have exercised the Critics, more than all his
Works, Historians are so much in the dark about these Points; that, if they
were to be determined by a Majority, 'twould be hard to find two on the same
side. In the mean time the Men of his own Profession have made their Advantage
of the uncertain Dispute; have been willing their Great Master should be
acknowledged of Divine Original, as well as their Art: And advised the
contending Cities to resign the Prize to Heaven. Without doubt the Honor of
Poesy is much advanced by the Noble Controversy about its Author. And while we
own Homer to be Him, -- Cujus de gurgite sacro
Combibit arcanos vatum omnu turba furores.
From whose Immortal Stream the Tuneful Train
Derive their Transports and their Secret Vein:
We have the greater Veneration for him, the less we are acquainted with his
Source. As when Old Nilus, who with bounteous Flows,
Waters an hundred Nations as He goes;
Scattering Rich Harvests: keep's his Sacred Head
Among the Clouds still undiscovered Dr. Bathurst on Mr. Seldom.



If we take the pains to examine all the Ancient and Modern Calculations, and
compare them with one another: we find the greater part of the Votes declaring
Smyrna the place of his Birth; and fixing the time of it, between One and Two
hundred Years before the Building of Rome. But then if we enquire farther into
the Particulars; the Prospect grows infinitely Darker: and he has scarce more
Fables in his Poetry, than Authors have confusedly multiplied about his Life.

Indeed Herodotus, who according to his own Account In Euterpe.
lived but Four hundred Years after him, is said to have drawn up the entire
Story of Homer. And we have still among his Works a Piece, which promises us
the same favor by its Title; though Learned Men have not yet agreed to
acknowledge it for Genuine. However, it cannot fail of a civil reception, while
it is not manifestly convicted as a Cheat. And, supposing the worst, why may
not we as well entertain our selves with the feigned History of a Person we
admire, as with the fancied Statue or Picture, when the true are irrecoverably
lost? In those Arts, if one single Mark or Feature be but known, there is
ground enough to proceed on in forming the whole Piece. And here, after all the
strange Reports, we have still Certainty enough for a Foundation. Therefore,
while we stick to the common Notion formed of him by all the World, of a Blind,
Indigent Bard, strowling up and down, and owing all his poor subsistence to his
Muse: should the larger Memorials not appear strictly true; yet they must needs
seem in some measure pleasant and agreeable, when they are built on so good a
Bottom.

If then we may be allowed to tell the Tale after Herodotus; His Mother
Critheis was born and lived at Cuma in Aeolia: where, happening to be with
Child by a stolen Embrace; her Guardian after her Parents Death, to avoid the
Public Scandal, sent her away to a Friend of his at Smyrna; which City had
been lately founded by a Colony from Cuma. Within a little time after her
remove, going with the Procession of Women to a Feast, celebrated near the
River Meles, she was suddenly brought to Bed of HOMER; and gave the Boy the
Name of Melesigenes, from the Place of his Birth.

Upon this Accident, she was obliged to leave the Gentleman, to whose Care she
had been committed by her Guardian; and to set up in Smyrna for herself;
getting her Livelihood by her Work. This thrived so well with her, that she did
not only procure a Competent Maintenance, but could afford to bring up her Son
in the Arts and Improvements proper to his Age. Her Industry and Prudence
gained Her so fair a Character in the City; that in a little time she received
the Addresses of one Phemius, an eminent Teacher of Letters and Music; and
after a long Siege, at last consented to Marry him. The Old Gentleman admired
the extraordinary Parts of his Son in Law; and taking all the Care in the World
of his Education, found him quickly so far beforehand with the rest of the
Scholars, as to be able to cope with his Master in his own Art. And in short,
at his Death, left him all his Effects, and the Command of the School.

Our Poet, falling to his Hereditary Profession, soon advanced it to such a
prodigious degree, as to make himself the common Wonder, not only of his
Countrymen; but of all the Strangers that resorted to Smyrna; on account of the
Great Corn-Trade, for which that City was famous. Among other Foreigners who
applied themselves to him for the Benefit of his Conversation; one Mentes, the
Master of a Vessel, and a Man, as Times went, of tolerable Knowledge and
Learning, was so taken with his Company; that by a great many fair Promises, he
prevailed with him to leave his School, and to go aboard for Leucadia, the
Merchant's own Country. The Main reason of His Compliance seems to have been
the extraordinary desire he had of informing himself in the Manners and Customs
of different People; which he judged would be of great use to the design he had
before formed, of making Poetry the Business of his Life.

He had now furnished himself with abundance of Remarks on the Places occurring
in his Travels. When, by reason of his ordinary Infirmity, a terrible Humor in
his Eyes; not being able to make the whole Voyage, He agreed to be left at
Ithaca: being recommended to the care of one Mentor, an Acquaintance of the
Merchants, and a Man of the greatest Character for Justice and Hospitality, in
that Island. And here it was that he picked up the main part of his Stories
about Ulysses. His Old Friend the Merchant, returning some time after, and
finding his Eyes a little better, took him aboard again: and carrying him about
to many places, at last landed him at Colophon: where his Indisposition
returned so violently as to take away his sight.

He had reason to be tired of rambling now, and accordingly, as well as he
could, repaired home to Smyrna. But it seems he had lost all his Interest
there, by leaving the City after so unaccountable a manner. So that finding
himself in a fair way to be starved, he resolved to take a Journey to Cuma,
where his Ancestors had lived; and to support himself as well as he could upon
the Road, by his Begging and by his Muse. But finding his Poetry take very much
in a little Town on the Way; He settled there for some time, and got his
Victuals by Haranguing the People in Verse. However, supplies did not come in
so fast, but that he quickly grew as Hungry as ever: and so took his leave of
his Patrons, and went in earnest for Cuma. Here, surprising the People with his
Songs and his Art, he was encouraged to address the Council for a maintenance:
engaging upon that Consideration, to make their City the most Famous in the
World.

The greater part of the Magistrates were at first inclined to accept his
Proposal: only one of the Grave Gentlemen declaimed bitterly against admiting
him; and told his Wise Brethren among other things, that if they made a Custom
of taking all the (...), or Blind Strowlers, into their Protection, the Town
would be filled in a little time with a company of useless Creatures, fit for
nothing in the Earth but to breed a Famine.

And to this Accident Homer, owed his Name. After much Debate, this Opinion
carried the Day, and was proclaimed by the Crier; decreeing no support to be
given to the Petitioner. Surpised at the sad disappointment, he left Cuma for
Phocaea: only wishing the Inhabitants at his Departure, that there might never
rise a Poet in their Country, to celebrate so ungrateful a People.

Arriving at Phocaea, He plied his old Trade of Poesy; and made a shift by
reading and showing his Verses, to keep Body and Soul together. There happened
then to live in the City, one Thestorides a Raskally sort of a Pedant, whose
Talent reached no farther, than to teach Children their Letters. However he had
sense enough to admire the Excellency of Homer's Art; and thought he should
make a fair Prize, if he could trick him out of his Wit. With this Design, he
made his Applications after a very civil manner; and promised the Poet to allow
him a convenient subsistence, upon condition he might have the liberty of
transcribing those Pieces, which he had already by him, and whatever he should
compose farther. Homer was glad of any security from Hunger and Cold; and so,
without suspecting any Knavery, agreed to live with the Fellow; and to give him
what liberty he pleased in relation to his Writings. Under the Care of such a
Patron, he is said to have wrote the Lesser Iliad, Aristotle denies Homer to
have been the Author of this Poem, Poet. cap. 24.
which began (...)
(...)
I sing Troy's Plains for Generous Steeds renowned;
Where the Brave Greeks such bloody Labors found.


Thestorides having received this Poem, and a great many other Pieces, that his
Guest put into his Hands, thought it was time for him now to be gone, and to
make the best Market of them he could. Accordingly, stealing away from Phocaea,
he went for Chios; and there opening a School, and publishing Homer's Verses in
his own Name, they thrived so much better with him than they had done with
their Author, that he quickly found himself possessed of a sufficient stock of
Money, and a larger of Reputation. Poor Homer all this while was living hard on
his Wit at Phocaea; and seemed more concerned to provide himself necessary
sustenance, than to venture an uncertain quest after the Thief. But, a little
while after, there happened some Persons of Learning to arrive there from
Chios; who, wondering to hear several pieces of Poetry recited by Homer, that
they had been obliged with from another hand in their own City; took occasion
to give an account of the new Schoolmaster, and what a Trade he drove with his
Verses. Homer, understanding where his Sharper was fixed, resolved to take the
trouble of unkenneling him; and went presently to the Seaside to meet with a
Vessel for his Expedition. As ill luck would have it, there were no Ships
directly bound for Chios: however finding a Fleet ready to Sail to Erythraea
with Wood, he thought it would not be much out of his way, if he embarked with
them for that City. Approaching the Mariners, he said a great many fine things
to them, and easily prevailed to gain admission into one of the Vessels. As
soon as ever he was well seated, he began to show his Gratitude and his Art;
and made his Prayer for their good Voyage in such Strains as these. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Hear me, Great Neptune, whom the Waves obey,
Whose Trident makes the trembling Shores give way;
But rules Fair Helicon with gentler Sway.
Grant these Good Men, that over thy Realm are born,
A Prosperous Gale, and bless their safe Return.
While I securely reach the Sacred Lands
Which Stately Mima's awful height commands.
Direct me to some Host that will be kind;
And aid my search; 'till the Vile Wretch we find;
Who thus with impious Theft repay's my Love,
And breaks the Rites of Hospitable Jove.


Whatever his Prayers might signify, they had a fair Gale to drive them to
Erythaea. But here things did not go altogether so well as Homer could wish.
For getting a Friend to enquire at the Harbor, he heard of no Ships that were
ready to make a Voyage toward Chios. However to try his Fortune, a little
farther, he desired to be led along by the Seaside, something lower, to the
Place, where the Fishermen used to ply with their Boats. Some of these appeared
to be Bound for Chios, but were so Churlish as to deny a poor blind Follow the
small favor of a Passage. Homer netled at their rudeness, broke out into his
ordinary Revenge of Verse. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Hard hearted Villains, whom the milder Sea
Keeps (like its Cormorants) on Wrecks and Prey:
Expect Jove's Vengeance; for his Bolts prepare:
It Is Jove makes Strangers his peculiar Care.
Thus disappointed of his Hopes he sat down very melancholy on the Shore: when
presently after he heard the same Seamen bawling near the Land; they having
been driven back by a Tempest to the Place, where they set out. He did not fail
to make his advantage of this Accident, but told them gravely, that the only
Cause of their Misfortune was their base refusal of his Request; and engaged
they should have a good Voyage, on condition they would be more civil, and honestly
take him in. The Fishermen, upon second thoughts, easily imagined something
more than ordinary in the case; and consented to hoist him into the Boat. But
as soon as they had crossed the Sea, they went about their Affairs, and left
the Poor Passenger on the Beach to shift for himself. It seems he straggled
luckily enough toward Chios; but met with an Adventure in the way, which stopped
his Journey and his Designs. For happening in his Ramble to follow the Cry of a
company of Goats, that were feeding in the Country, he lighted at last on the
Goat-herd himself: who enquiring into his Condition, and receiving a most
lamentable story of Troubles and Afflictions; took pity on the Distressed
Stranger, and led him into his Hut. As soon as they had refreshed themselves
with a little Food, Homer beginning a pleasanter Tune, and a Relation of his
former Travels; worked himself into the entire love and esteem of his honest
Host, and was obliged with a Lodging there for that Night. The next Morning,
the Goat-herd though it his Duty to acquaint his Master with the good Fortune.
Accordingly, leaving Homer in the Cottage, with the promise of a speedy return,
he repaired to Bolissus, (a Town hard by) where his Master lived, and informed
him what a Miracle of a Man he had met with; desiring his Advice in the Point
how he was to be disposed of. The Gentleman had no great inclinations to
countenance a blind Vagabond; however he ordered the Stranger to be brought to
him, to see if he answered his Character. The Goat-herd returning to the Field,
led Homer into Town, and presented him to his Master. And he, after much talk,
receiving full satisfaction of the Wisdom, Ingenuity and Integrity of his
Guest; entreated him to take up his Quarters there in the House, and to engage
in the Institution of his Sons. Homer accepting the Proposal with a thousand
Thanks; immediately fell to his Charge. And here it was that he Composed
abundance of his lighter Pieces, with universal Applause, particularly the
Battle of the Froggs and Mice. The report of his residence in the Neighboring
Parts, soon reached Chios: Upon which Advice, Thestorides thought fit once more
to give him the slip, and was glad to sneak away with the first Fleet, and seek
his Fortune.

Homer, however satisfied with his new Patron's Favors, yet could not entirely
forget the main design of his Expedition. So that after a considerable stay, he
begged leave to carry on his first Pursuit, and to proceed for Chios. Here, though
the Thief was fled who had occasioned his Journey, yet he found his Labor very
well spent, meeting with extraordinary encouragement, and quickly raising
himself a flourishing School; where he instructed the Youth in his own Verses.
And now, being arrived at a Happiness he never before enjoyed, a plentiful
Fortune; he got him a Wife, and resolved to fix in so good Quarters. Under
these easy Circumstances he composed his Nobler Works; taking particular care
to make a grateful mention of those Persons, from whom he had received the
chief Obligations of his Life. Thus he brings in Mentor, who had treated him so
kindly at Ithaca, as one of the Prime Ministers of Ulysses, and him to whom the
Prince when he set forward for the Trojan War, committed the Charge of his
Family, and his Concerns. And what is more Honorable, having occasion to
introduce Pallas in a Mortal shape, he gives her the form of Mentor. His Father
in Law and Master Phemius's Care he has repaid in that grateful Commemoration
of him, in the first of the Odyssey, (...)
(...)
His shining Harp the Herald straight resigned
To Phemius, Prince of all the tuneful Kind.


His Friend Mentes the Merchant stands too upon Record, (...)
(...)
Mentes my Name I boast, Stout Anchial's Son:
And my just sway the Sailing Taphians own.


The Fame of Homer's Poetry was not now confined to Ionia, where he had passed
his Life, but made an equal Noise in Greece. So that among the vast Number of
Strangers that used to visit him for the sake of his Wit, some at last
prevailed with him to take a Voyage into those Parts. He was mightily pleased
with the Invitation: and having in the first place inserted several Honorable
touches on the City Athens in his Poems, he set Sail, and arrived at Samos,
where he took up his Winter Quarters.

During his stay there, his way of maintaining himself, was at the time of
every New Moon, to go about, with a Chorus of Boys that led him, to the Houses
of the Greatest Persons in the City, and to sing this kind of Ballad, or
Wassail at their Doors. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
At our Masters Great House, Merry Tribe, here we stand,
To praise his just Wealth, and applaud his Command.
Let the Bars be knocked off, and unlock the Proud Gate,
While Plenty and Peace make their Entrance in State.
May Joys here, like Rivals, contend which shall Reign;
And Ceres with Bachus the Combat maintain.
May the Nymph, whose sweet Charms our Young Patron have won,
Drawn by Prancing high Mules, ride in Triumph to Town.
And when the Gilt Coach it is fair Load shall resign,
Beneath her gay Feet may the bright Amber shine.
May her Wit to her Needle fresh Labors afford;
And over the rich Loom spread the Fame of her Lord.
Thus our Visits and Vows we repeat through the Year,
And with the new Seasons, like Swallows, appear.
In the Porch we wait Your Boon: say quick, will it come, or no;
We Have a long round to make; when our Song's done We go.


This Begging piece of Cant, was held in great veneration for a long time after
in Samos; and used constantly to be sung by the Boys on the Festival of Apollo.

In the Spring, Homer thinking on nothing but his Journey to Athens, embarked
with some of the People of those Parts, and landed at Ios. Here finding himself
violently ill, and the Town being at a great distance from the Harbor, he laid
down upon the Grass near the Shore. In this Condition the Fishermen met with
him, and encountered him with their Famous Riddle, of (...)
(Leaving what is took, what we took not we bring)
which, they say, he not being able to expound, died with Grief. But the true
account is, that his former Distemper was the cause of his Death; which
happened soon after in Ios. The People of the City, and the Passengers who had
born him company thither, paid their last Respects to him in an Honorable
Burial. His Tomb stood by the Seashore; and had this Epitaph engraved on it in
a later Age; when his Poems had gained the Approbation of all the World, (...)
(...)
In this blessed Earth his Head old Homer shrouds,
The first of Heroes, or the last of Gods.


This is the miserable account we have of Homer: these are the faint shadows
Antiquity reflects at such a distance. But if we recall the Mind from the dark
view of his Story, and six it all at once on the Relics that he has left us;
our Pity is turned into a deeper Wonder: We forget the rude Draught of his
Person and Fortune, to contemplate on the Nobler Image of his Soul. The Blind
Songster immediately vanishes; and in his room we are presented with the Father
and Prince of Verse the Preacher of Wisdom and Virtue, the Founder of Arts and
Sciences, the Great Master of Civil Life, and the Counselor of Kings.

The Ancients have heaped much higher Titles on him than these. But it is easy
to observe, that their Rhapsody of Praises is rather founded on particular
Excellencies, than on the entire Beauty of his Poems, and the justness of the
whole Designs. They admired the vastness of his Thought, the torrent of his
Words, the sweet Charms of his Fictions, and the usefulness of his Precepts and
Counsels: But they had little regard to the Masterpiece of his Divine Art, his
Conduct and Institution. It Is true, Aristotle and Horace have laid down a
number of Rules drawn from Nature and Reason: by applying which, they sometimes
applaud his Contrivance in General; and sometimes insist on the discovery of
peculiar Graces. But then they either commend the whole, without examining the
Parts; or else they illustrate the Parts without intimating their Relation to
the whole. They either show us the fine Machine at one view, without taking it
to pieces: or else they lay those Pieces at too great a distance, and never
give them us all in the same Light. The most Judicious and Ingenious Bossu, who
built his Doctrine of the Epique Poem on the Foundation they had laid, is the
first that has drawn Homer at his full length: Attoning, by this eminent piece
of Service, for the many useless Labors of his Countrymen in the same Field;
by which, in the Judgment of a Great Man, They seem rather to have valued
themselves, than improved any body else.

It Is from Bossu then, that we must thus learn the Design, the Construction and
the Use of the Iliad and the Odyssey.

In all matters which we undertake with deliberation and conduct, the end
proposed is the first thing in our Minds, and that by which we govern the whole
Design, and it is particular parts. Now the End of the Epique Poem being the
Regulation of Manners; it is this the Poet must have first in his View, before
he set's to Work.

But then, there is a great deal of difference between the Philosophical and the
Poetical Doctrine of Manners. The Schools content themselves with the
consideration of Virtues and Vices in general. The Instructions which they give
are calculated for all States, People, and Ages. The Poet now, has a nearer
concern for his own Countrymen, and a particular eye on the present Distresses
and Inconveniences that they labor under. With this design he chooses some
Moral Point, the justest and the most proper that he can imagine: and to urge
the Truth of it, he does not so much employ the force of Reasoning, as the Arts
of Insinuation and Pleasure; accomodating himself to the particular Customs and
Inclinations of those, who are either to be the Subject or the Readers of his
Work. Now let us see how exactly Homer has answered these Rules.

He found the Grecians, for whose Instruction he wrote, divided into as many
independent States and Principalities, as they had Towns of any considerable
Note: notwithstanding which, they lay very often under a necessity of uniting
in one Body against a Common Enemy. Now it being impossible to join these two
different Conditions or Governments in one Maxim of Morality; or a single Poem:
He has built them into two separate Fables. One for Greece in general, as
joined in a Common Body; though composed of parts otherwise not depending on one
another. The other for every particular state, as they may be supposed to have
stood, in time of Peace, when they had no Obligation to such an Union or
Alliance.

As to the first of these; it is a known Remarque that in all Confederacies
composed of independing States, the Good Success is in a great Measure owing to
the fair Understanding maintained by the Chief Commanders. And on the contrary,
that scarce any Miscarriage happens, which was not occasioned by the Heats and
Jealousies, and Ambition of the different Princes; and the uneasiness they
pretend to feel in obeying any single General. So that the most useful Lesson
Homer could give his Countrymen, considered in this Relation; was to set before
their Eyes the sad Calamities which must necessarily fall both on the People
and the Princes, by the unhappy Ambition, Discord and Stubbornness of the
latter. He takes therefore for the Foundation of his Fable this grand Truth,
That the Misunderstanding between Princes in the ruin of their States.

But this Truth, before it can be set in its full Light has need of a second to
sustain it. It Is necessary in such a Design, not only to represent the
Confederate States at first quarreling among themselves, and so, unfortunate:
but to show them afterward reconciled and victorious. Let Us see how he has
joined these matters in one sole universal Action.

Here are several Princes, independent one of another, united against their
Common Enemy. The Person who has been chose Generalissimo, happens to offend
the most Valiant of all the Confederates. The affronted Prince is enraged to
such a degree, as to relinquish the Union, and to enter into an obstinate
resolution of engaging no farther in the Common Cause. This Misunderstanding
affords the Enemy such an advantage, that the Allies are in a fair way to quit
their Enterprise with disgrace. The Prince himself who made the separation, is
not without his share in the Evils which he has brought on his Party. For
having given his dearest Friend leave to Succor them in an extreme necessity:
this Friend of his is killed by the Greneral of the Enemies. So the quarrelling
Chiefs being both grown wise at their own Expense, the matter is taken up; and
they join Forces as before. The happy Consequence of which reconcilement is,
that this Valiant Prince who had withdrawn, not only brings the Victory to his
side; but compleats his private Revenge, by killing with his own hands the
Author of his Friends Death.

See here the first Plan of the Poem, and the Fiction uniting in one important
and universal Action all the particulars on which it is raised.

Now this must be made probable, by the circumstances of Time, Place and
Persons. There must be Men found out of eminent Character and Fame either in
History or otherwise, on whom this Fable may be handsomely fixed. Homer has
chose the Siege of Troy, and supposes the Action to have passed there. To that
Aerie Gentleman of his Brain whom he fancies Valiant and Choleric, he gives the
Name of Achilles; his General of the Confederates he calls Agamemnon; and the
Enemies Chief, Hector; and so of the rest.

He has still another task left; the accommodating himself to the Manners, the
Customs and the Genius of his Auditors, the People of Greece; to engage them to
read his Work, and to gain their Approbation, by the Praises he gives them: So
that they might forgive him those Faults which he must necessarily represent in
some of his chief Personages. He has acquitted himself of these Devoirs to
admiration, by making the Victorious Princes and People, all Grecians, the
Ancestors of those whom he is concerned to flatter.

But not being content to propose only the principal Point of the Moral, which
he designs to teach, so as to fill up the rest of the Fable with vain Garniture
and useless Incidents: He extends his Moral by its necessary Consequences. For,
in the Question before us, it is not enough to know, that a good understanding
should be always maintained among Confederates; but it is a piece of Wisdom of
almost equal importance, if any Division happen, to keep it secret from the
Enemy: that their Ignorance may hinder them from making any use of the
Advantage. And, in the second place, while such a Breach is not really made up,
but only disguised, it is by no means advisable to press on the Enemy very
vigorously; least we discover the weakness which we are obliged to conceal.

Now the Episode of Patroclus conveighs these two Instructions in a most
admirable manner. For when he appeared in the Arms of Achilles, the Trojans,
taking him really for that Prince reconciled and reunited to the Grecians;
presently ran away, and relinquished the Advantages which they before had over
the Confederates. But Patroclus who ought to have been satisfied with this
success, assailing Hector too closely, and forcing him to a single Combat: soon
let him understand, that 'twas not the true Achilles which his Armor covered;
but an Hero of much inferior prowess. In short Hector kills his Antagonist; and
recovers the Advantages his Men had lost on the feigned Reconciliation of
Achilles Du Poem Epique. Live. 1. Chap. 8.
.

The Odyssey was not made, like the Iliad, for the instruction of all the
Grecian States joined in a Confederate Body; but for the use of each State as
it subsisted singly. Now a State being composed of two parts, the Head that
commands, and the Members that obey; both these have need of instruction; the
one to govern, the others to submit to Government.

There are two Virtues necessary for a Governor, Wisdom to order, and Care to
see his Orders put in Execution. The Wisdom of a Politician is not acquired but
by long experience of all sorts of Affairs, and by an exact knowledge of all the
different forms of Regiment in the World. Then again, the Care of
Administration never permits the Supreme Governor to be far from home; but
obliges him to a constant residence: And those Princes who ramble from their
States, are in great danger of losing them; in regard they give occasion to the
highest Disorder and Confusion.

These two Points may easily be united in the same Person. A King leaves his
Subjects to visit many Foreign Courts; where he informs himself of the Manners
and Customs of several Nations. Hence there naturally arrises an infinite
number of Incidents, Dangers, and Adventures very useful for advancing the
Doctrine of Politics. On the other side this absence of the King draws a
thousand disturbances on the Kingdom; which are not concluded till his return,
whose Presence only can re-establish will have the same part, and the same
effects in this Fable, which the Division of the Princes had in the other.

The Subjects have scarce need of any more than one general Maxim, which is, to
suffer themselves to be governed, and to obey faithfully; whatever reasons they
may fancy to themselves against the Orders they receive. It Is easy to join
this Instruction with the other, by furnishing this Wise and Industrious Prince
with Subjects, who in his absence are more inclined to follow their own
Judgments than his Commands: and by showing from the Miseries which their
Disobedience brings upon them, the unhappy Consequences which almost
necessarily attend these Private Counsels when carried on in opposition to the
Supreme Power.

But now, as 'twas necessary that the Princes of the Iliad should be Choleric
and Contentious; so it is as necessary in the Fable of the Odyssey, that the
Chief Person be sage and Prudent. This raises a mighty difficulty in the
Fiction: because this Chief Person ought to be absent, for the two Reasons
already given; which are essential to the Fable, and compose the principal
Spring: and yet he cannot absent himself, without transgressing the other Maxim
of equal importance, that a King ought upon no account to ramble from his
Country.

It Is true indeed, there are many necessary Causes which might be a sufficient
Covert to the Prudence of our Politician in this case: But then, such a
necessity is important enough of itself to furnish matter for a Poem: and this
Multiplication of the Action would be faulty. The Remedy therefore is, in the
first place, to fix this necessity and this departure of the Hero, without the
Bounds of the Poem. And, Secondly, the Hero, having been obliged to absent
himself for some reasons antecedent to the Action, and placed without the
Fable; he ought not embrace this opportunity of instructing himself; and so
wilfully keep from his own Dominions. For, at this rate his Absence would be
plainly voluntary, and they might justly impute to him all the Disorders that
broke out at Home.

So that in the Constitution of the Fable, the Poet ought not to take for his
Action, and for the Foundation of his Work, the departure of a Prince from his
Country; nor his voluntary stay abroad, but his Return; and that too as it is
retarded against his Will. This is the first Idea which our Poet gives us. His
Hero makes his first appearance in a remote Isle, sitting by the Sea shore, and
surveighing the Water with Tears in his Eyes; as the Obstacle which had so long
opposed his return, and kept him from the sight of his dear Country.

Lastly, As this forced delay is something more natural and more likely to
happen in Voyages by Sea; Homer has judiciously pitched on a Prince, who
reigned in an Island.

Let us see then, how he has framed the whole Action; making his Hero a Man of
Years, as necessary for improving himself in Wisdom and Politics.

A Prince being obliged to quit his Country, and to lead an Army of his
Subjects on a Foreign Expedition: having gloriously accomplished this
Adventure, is leading back his Victorious Forces to his own State. But in sight
of all the Arts and Endeavors with which his Impatience can inspire him; the
Tempests keep him on the Way several Years; and cast him on many Countries,
differing in Manners and Government from one another. In the midst of these
Dangers which he encounters, his Companions, refusing to obey his Orders perish
all by their own Fault. Mean while the Great Lords in his Territories, abuse
his absence, with the vilest Insolence, and put all things in Confusion at
home. They lavish his Riches; they endeavor treacherously to murder his Son;
they would constrain his Lady to accept of one of them for a Husband: and carry
on their violent courses with so much the more liberty, in regard they persuade
themselves, that he will never see them again. But, in the End, the Prince
returns; and, only making himself known to his Son, and to some Persons, who
still continued Loyal, and firm to his Interest: He is himself the Witness of
his Enemies Impudence; He gives them their just punishment, and restores to the
Isle that Peace and Tranquillity which had suffered Banishment with him.

Here, as the Truth which serves for the Foundation of this Fiction, and which
with it composes the Fable, is, that the absence of a Person from his Concerns,
and his Negligence in his own Affairs, are the Cause of great Disorders at
home: so the principal and the most essential part of the Action is the Absence
of the Hero. This takes up almost the entire Poem: for not only his real
Absence is of many Years continuance: but even after his Return, he does not
let himself be publicly known: And this prudent disguize, of which he makes so
great an advantage, has the same effects on the Authors of the Troubles, and on
those who know nothing of his coming home; as if he was still abroad. So that
he is absent with relation to them, till such time as he discovers himself in
their Punishment.

The Poet, having thus composed his Fable, and joined the Fiction to the Truth,
has made choice of Ulysses King of the Isle Ithaca to sustain the chief
Character; and has distributed the inferior parts among Penelope, Telemachus,
Antinous, and what other Names he pleases.

We need not here insist on that multitude of excellent Precepts, which are so
many parts and natural Consequences of the Fundamental Truth; and which the
Poet has so artificially disguised in those Fictions, that are the Episodes and
the Members of the Grand Action. Such are these Moral Advices. Not to intrude
into the Mysteries of Government which the Prince would keep secret. This is
represented to us by the Winds sowed up in a Leathern Bag; which the miserable
Companions of Ulysses would needs be prying into; and so lost the use and
benefit of them. Not to be captivated by the Charms of an idle and unactive
Life: such as the Songs of the Sirens invited to. Not to suffer our selves to
be besotted with Pleasures, like those Wretches who were changed into Beasts by
Circe. With an infinite number of other Instructions necessary for all sorts of
Persons.

This Poem is more for the use of the People than the Iliad; where the Subjects
suffer more by the ill Conduct of their Princes, than by their own
Miscarriages. But in the Odyssey the loss of his Subjects can by no means be
charged on the Hero: On the contrary, this Wise Prince leaves no means untried
to make them happy partakers of his Return. Thus the Poet tells us in the
Iliad, that, he Sings the Anger of Achilles the Cause of so many Grecian's
Deaths. In the Odyssey, on the other side, he takes care to let us know, that,
the Subjects perished by their own Default.

It Is nevertheless very true, that these mighty Names of Kings and Heroes; of
Achilles, Agamemnon, and Ulysses represent no loss the meanest Citizens, than
the Caesar's the Pompeys and the Alexander's of the World. Men of ordinary rank
are equally subject to lose their Estates, and to ruin their Families, by
Quarrels and Divisions, or by their negligence in managing their Affairs, as
Persons of the highest Quality. So that they have as much occasion for Homer's
Instructions, as Kings themselves; and are perhaps as capable of profiting by
them Du P. Ep. live. 1. chap. 10.
.

Those that set up for Scepticks in Criticism, may easily say that, all this is
but Scheme and Hypothesis; and that Homer never understood Politics and and
Oeconomics half so well, as since Bossu has been his Tutor. That the sine Train
of Allegory or (as they will rather term it) Mystery, is not owing to the
Poet's Imagination but to our own: while, be-in once grown enamored of his
Muse, we not only see a thousand new Charms about her, to which she is really a
Stranger; but like crazed Lovers, turn her very imperfections into Beauties.

But sure if Theories in Philosophy, are so much in fashion, Theories in Poesy
might hope to be as kindly received. It Is now a days the Character of Fools to
admire what they don't thoroughly know: But the Men who pretend to Thought and
Sense, will never esteem a thing 'till they fancy they understand it. Thus they
are not ravished with the fair variety of Nature, till they have framed some
kind of Clue to the Mazes of her Works; and a reason for every appearance,
every little Feature in her Face. They would not admire the Celestial Motions,
unless they carried their Spheres about with them in their Heads; and could
measure the steps of every rolling Orb. And certainly, they cannot be better
pleased with a Poet, till they form some Notion of his Conduct and Design. They
cannot value his Magic, unless they conceive how it is wrought: nor acknowledge
the Power of any Charms, that pretend to conquer, without being understood.

Thus, were this Doctrine no more than a probable Hypothesis, it would be of
real use to the World; because it would recommend the Poems to Men's esteem; and
by that means, enforce the Lessons they convey. But we may as rationally imagine
that all the Letters which express the Iliad and the Odyssey were jumbled into
their present Order by a chance throw: as that the Poems were composed by the
Author without some General and useful Prospect. And, when we are to judge what
this Prospect was; we must be guided by the Natural drifts and turns of the
main Actions, and by the Manners of the People for whom he wrote. And then, we
shall be carried into the same Plan which Bossu has finished, and of which
Aristotle and Horace drew the first Lines.

It must be acknowledged, that the same Excellent Father, and other late
Masters have raised on this Model, several new structures, which probably never
entered into Homer's Brain. Thus particularly, that the Divinities whom he
employs, are sometimes Virtues and Vices, sometimes Natural Appearances, and
only sometimes the Supreme Powers of Heaven, is a Distinction which if Plato
and Pythagoras had ever heard of, it is not likely that one of them should have
banished the Poet his Commonwealth for speaking injuriously of the Gods; or
the other have made him do Penance in Hell for the same Crime.

They are indeed as much in an extreme, who make Homer infallible, as those who
despise him for a trifling Dotard. He could not paint his Deities without Spots
and Blemishes: And must we allow him a Prerogative which he thought fit to deny
Heaven? Or when all the rest of the World, Immortals and Mortals are fast
asleep, must he only with his Jupiter (...)
(...)
Iliad. 2.
be exeus'd from Nodding? We may take Horace's word for it that he does
sometimes Nod; and my Lord Roscommon's, that he now and then proceeds a little
farther. But then commonly he does it for Company: and because in his Age the
same Fit had taken the greatest part of Mankind. Thus his own OIOI NYN POTOI
EISI, if rightly managed, would confute all the vain Cavils of his Modern
Opposers. Those nice Gentlemen, who, because Wit and Sense are the same in all
Ages, must needs have Manners and Humors and even Languages to be the same
too. For the three main things which offend their curious Palates, are the
Fables which we find in Homer, the odd Manners of his Heroes, and the
Improprieties (as they call them) of his Style. And in all these Charges, they
show themselves so very Modern, as to think the World always was, just as they
found it. Otherwise, is it possible they should be ignorant, that Poetry and
Fables made up the Learning and the very Religion of the Old Heathens: Fables
to conceal the Doctrines, and Poetry to convey the Fables? Could they be
ignorant that the Wisest and most Judicious in all Ages believed those Stories
no more than they themselves; all of them thinking what Strabo has the boldness
to declare, 'That Mankind being naturally desirous of Knowledge, and the
ignorant and undisciplined part of Men no better than Children, 'twas fit they
should be plied with such Notions, as would at the same time satisfy their
Curiosity, and enforce their Obedience.' The same excellent Author will inform
them, 'That it being absurd to hope in those dark times, that Women and the
common Multitude should be drawn to Religion, Holiness, and Fidelity, by the
reasonings of a Philosopher; there was need, besides these, of some
Superstition to constrain them; which Superstition could not be carried on,
without Fables and Prodigies: And that thus the Thunderbolts, and the
Goats-skin Shield of Jupiter, the Trident, the Torches, the Snakes, and the
Ivy-Rods, were all Fables, and so was the whole System of the ancient
Theology.' Strabo Lib. 1.


But if the modish Cavillers should prove so complaisant to Antiquity, (...) be
offended at Fables in general, they will say, they only dislike Homer for the
absurd use of them; that is, for inserting a great Number of such as cannot be
reconciled to any rational Allegory; others that are absolutely impossible; and
some, which instead of instructing and encouraging the People in Virtue, seem
rather to countenance the vilest Disorders.

To the first of these Objections it may be returned, that while the greater
part of the Fictions disclose some glorious and useful Moral, it is
unreasonable to exact the true Allegory of every little Adventure. They may as
well, when they read a Fable in Aesop, as suppose the Dog and the Shadow; not
be satisfied with the general Caution against leaving real Goods for
Appearances: unless they could expound the particular meaning of the River, and
why the Cur should have a piece of Flesh in his Mouth, rather than any other
Food. Thus their Niceness would appear very impertinent, though we should suppose
that a great many of Homer's Stories were designed for no farther use, than to
be the necessary Attendants of those other Fictions which they allow to contain
some plainer Instruction. But what if it should be admitted for a fair
Conjecture, that the Poet did really shadow a perpetual Lesson, in every part
of the piece, but laid a great deal of it so artificially, as to be discovered
only by those Persons whom he should favor with a Clue to the whole Labyrinth?
Why might not Homer have as numerous a Train of Followers, as Orpheus and
Musaeus are said to have gained by the same Arts? And then, why might not he
(like the Masters of other Sects) besides the general Instruction to all the
World, have concealed some deeper Doctrine in his Verses, designed only to be
known by the Tribe of his own Scholars?

If a Man was to read Tasso's (...) of Jerusalem, he would presently apprehend
a great many useful Notices scattered through the Action; such as the necessity
of joining the force of Piety to that of Arms; the weakness of the Powers of
Hell, when engaged against Heaven, and the like. But is it probable he should
see yet farther within a second Curtain, and conceive that Jerusalem there
signifies Civil Happiness; Godfrey, and the other Heroes, each of them some
particular Power of the Soul; and that the Common Soldiers make up between them
Man's Body, unless he had read the Author's Allegory presix'd to the Poem; and
seen the obscure Treasure pointed to by the same Hand that hid it?

To those who charge Homer with the impossibility of some of his Fictions,
Bossu and Dacier will answer, that the want of probability may generally be
excused upon account of some attending Circumstance. And that thus all the
monstrous Relations about Circe, Polypheme, the Sirens, etc. though absolutely
false and extravagant, yet may pass with a good Air enough, if we consider what
sort of People those were whom Ulysses entertains with such Recitals. And they
were the Phaeacians, whom the Poet takes care to describe, as a soft,
effeminate, idle Race of Mortals, living at a great distance from the Civil
World; and desirous of no other Knowledge but that of Tales and prodigious
Occurrences.

This Apology carries a fair Face, and may be sufficient to establish Ulysses
his Credit with his new Enemies, because they are not likely to look so far as
the latter end of the Poem to confute it. But what if they should light by
chance on that place in the Twenty third Book, where the Hero is said to have
obliged his Lady at his return, with an Account of the same mad Adventures, the
same Polypheme, and Scylla, and Circe, which had so charmed his Foreign
Auditors? They will certainly bring this as an invincible Argument, that the
stupidity of the Phaeacians ought not to excuse the extravagant absurdity of
those Stories: unless we suppose the Traveling Prince, after the Sight of so
many Cities and Manners, not to have been able to distinguish between a
virtuous Penelope, and a Debauched Alcinous. Therefore, if we may venture to
wander a little from such great Guides, as Bossu and Dacier; the reason of
Homer's Impossibilities in the Odyssey, is not to be laid on the little spot of
Phaeacia, but upon the whole Heathen World. Did not the Priests continually
amuze the staring Multitude with Relations much more prodigious than any of
Ulysses his Tales? And was not all the Philosophy for many Hundred Years after
Homer, a wilder Romance than any part of his Poesy? Indeed there was plain
necessity for this old Conduct. 'Twould have been as vain an attempt to have
endeavored the keeping simple Creatures in awe by rational means, as to talk
serious sense to little Children. Both were to be charmed into their Duty by
Prodigy and wonder. The Lawgiver applied his Stories like the Nurse: and the
Gorgons were as useful for maintaining the Quiet of Tribes and Societies, as
the Bug-bears for securing the peace of the Cradle.

The last part of the Charge against Homer's Fables is generally owned; where a
great many of them are accused of serving rather to the encouragement of Men in
Vice, than the inclining and inciting them to Goodness. All the brave Advocates
and Champions that his Fame holds in pay, have not been able to guard it from
this Attack. Being forced to acknowledge, that those unworthy representations
of the Celestial Powers which run through every Story, must needs have advanced
the Cause of Impiety in the ignorant World; because the unthinking part of
Mankind were not able to look behind the gross Veil which covered these Sacred
Matters; and so were miserably abused, mistaking the deformed and odious Shadow
for the real Beauty and Substance, and esteeming the most dangerous Fictions,
as solid and necessary Truths. It Is in vain to urge, that these unhappy
Proceedings may be justified by considering the particular Circumstances of
every Business. As, that the rude Scene of Love between Mars and Venus may be
reconciled to a Decorum, if we observe, that it is neither the Poet nor the
Hero, nor so much as an honest Man that gives the Relation; but the dissolute
Phaeacians sing it at a public Festival; as if the Poet designed only to show
us, that the idle Arts of softness and luxury, are the Source of the most
sinful Pleasures; and that the Men who spend their lives in these Disorders,
naturally take a pleasure in hearing such shameful Recitals, and in making the
Gods themselves sharers with them in their Debauches. Bossu du Po. Ep. l. 5.
chapter 2.
For this fine Allegory would not have hindered the ill effects of the Fable,
unless every private Grecian had been blessed with as Nice a Wit as Monsieur
Bossu, to understand it.

The Original of the Heathen Superstition is an enquiry too difficult and too
tedious to be here engaged in. And yet we must have some Notion of it, because
Homer is like to find no shelter, unless he takes Sanctuary behind the Altars
of his Country. If then we consider the greatest part of the first Nations
after the Dispersion, immediately corrupting into the grossest Ignorance, we
may easily imagine the very Principles of true Religion to have been
extinguished among them; except some few Relics of Natural Maxims, which
remaining in wiser Heads, fitted them for Lawgivers and Founders of States.
Now 'twas necessary for these great Designers to let the People have some
Apprehensions of the supreme Powers of Heaven, whose authority was to keep them
in their Duty. But it being impossible that the abstracted Notion of one
Eternal, Infinite, and Almighty Being, should take any firm hold on Minds
guided only by the outward senses; some Corporeal Images were to be introduced,
which might maintain a vigorous Impression on the Fancy, by the resemblance of
some things with which it was better acquainted. This might be offered as a
reason why they clothed the Sovereign Being in a material shape, before they
presented him to the adoration of the vulgar; still leaving him the Power of
Invisibility, and of taking any new Form he pleased. But now when they had
divested the Heavenly Nature of its infinite and uncompounded Essence, they
found themselves obliged, to take away the Unity too, the Multitude would never
have stood in due awe of one only Supreme Ruler in the Skies, whom they
conceived in Form and Limbs not much unlike themselves; nor have allowed his
Power so prodigious an extent beyond his Body. Therefore, besides the chief
Jupiter, every corner in Heaven and Earth too, was filled with Inferior
Deities; who though they were properly no more than Officers to put their Great
Master's Pleasure in Execution, yet had the power of punishing any Crime
committed in their particular Districts. But still, because no Divinity could
have maintained his force upon the People, unless he had his peculiar Name and
Story to run always in their Heads, and to keep their thoughts in play: 'Twas
thought convenient to let them know that these Heavenly Governors were once
Mortal Princes, who for their great Services to Mankind, had merited so exalted
a State. And thus every God came to have his Legend, consisting of the mighty
Adventures he had passed through during his Humane Condition. And because many
of these Worthies lived at the same time, hence came they to be engaged in many
common Intrigues. And from these arose their Loves, their Flights, their Wars,
their Antipathies, and Friendships. Thus the Multitude arrived at the
entertainment of these Adventures; the Civil Power encouraging their Curiosity,
and retaining the Poets to give it Satisfaction.

It Is not unlikely, that the Government might hope for some farther Benefit
from this Indulgence, than is commonly imagined. For 'twas reasonable for them
to suppose, that the People acknowledging the Power of the Gods at the same
time as they related their Failings; would, upon the same Principle, refuse to
take any occasion from the Faults of their Rulers to resist their Authority.
But would conceive Gods and Princes both to act by Prerogative, and to have a
just right of punishing the same Actions in their Inferiors, which their own
high Station, and their exemption from common Duties excused, or justified in
themselves.

Perhaps when Learning and Arts came to be more refined, the wise Masters who
sat at the Helm might find the bad consequence of these Doctrines, and that the
People would never grow heartily averse to sinful Courses, while they had so
great Patrons and Examples, and could make Heaven a partner in their Guilt. And
therefore the State might again call the Poets to its assistance, who by
framing an useful explanation of every old Story, should hinder the more
knowing Persons from taking offense; and at least give an uncertain amusement
to those who could not apprehend the Exposition.

Thus without doubt in many Cases the Fable was not cast on to cover the
Allegorical Truth; but the Allegorical Truth spread under, to disguize the
Fable. For it can never be denied but that there were once really such Men as
the Ancients called Saturn, Jupiter and Bacchus, though we have had so many old,
and so many new Morals to make out the Mystery of their Stories, and of their
Names.

If now it at all appears from these Conjectures, that the original of the
ridiculous Stories about the Gods, was not owing to the extravagant Fancies of
the Poets, but to the necessity of the Times, and to the Rules of State: Can
Homer be justly condemned for carrying on the same Design with a better Grace;
that is, for presenting the old Fictions in a new dress, and so bringing them
nearer to a hidden and Allegorical meaning? But indeed, should he plead Guilty
to the whole Indictment, and through himself on the Mercy of his Judges; 'twould
be very hard if we should require the strictest Piety in the Ancient Poets,
while we are forced to dispense with it in the Modern; if our Zeal should exact
from a Pagan Homer the Purity of a Christian, while our Complaisance can allow
in our Christian Homers the Liberty of Pagans.

But our new Zoiluss, whatever plausible Actions they may have against Homer's
Fables, are shamefully Cast, when they come to accuse him of Indecencies in his
Manners and in his Style. They are exceeding angry, to hear Ulysses boast of
his being the best Cook in the World, and challenge any Man to cut Meat, serve
Wine, or make a ^ire with him. And to see Achilles himself trying his Faculty
at the same Employment. But then they have forgot the Character of the ancient
Simplicity, when among the good Primitive Mortals 'twas reckoned no dishonor,
for the greatest Person to take care of his meanest Family Concerns, and upon
occasion to perform the common Offices in his Kitchen, or in his Stable. Dacier
on Aristot. Poet. cap. 26.


With just as much reason, they complain of Homer's Comparisons and Epithets,
which they imagine to be gross Improprieties. They are affronted to find Ajax
compar^d to an Ass: when all the while, not only the Word is good and lofty
enough in the Greek and Hebrew, as Mr. Boileau observes, Reflections Critiques
fur Longin. page 226.
but the Beast too was in esteem with the Ancients (as it is still in some
Countries) and had the Honor to carry Kings and Princes, as well as Prophets
and Priests.

Ulysses too gives them a great disgust, when being in a violent Fury with the
desire of punishing the lewd Gallants, tossing and tumbling from one side of
the Bed to the other; he is compared to the Belly of a Beast, with the Fat
about it, broiling on the Coals, and being often turned by the Fellow that
takes care of it for his Dinner. Whence the facetious Mr. Perrault tells us,
that Homer compares Ulysses to a Black Pudding on the Gridiron. A Jest that he
borrowed, as Reflections Sur. Longin. p. 211.
Boileau informs us, from an old lamentable Translation of the Odyssey into
French. Now it is likely, that Similitude was taken from the Sacrifices, in
which we know the Fat was especially regarded. Besides, the Bellies of some
Animals were reckoned heretofore most delicious Meat, and much above the
condition of our Modern Tripe.

'Twere tolerable if this scrupulous niceness were only impertinent; but
'twould be no hard matter to prove it impious too. For there are abundance of
Expressions in the Holy Scriptures which agree no butter with the Genins of
Modern Times and Languages. Thus particularly these two Comparisons of Ajax and
Ulysses seem to have something much of the same mode of Speech with them, in
the Bible. Jacob in the 49th of Genesis, at the 14th sa^^ Issachar is an Ass
stooping between two Burdens. And in Ecclesiasticus, the 47th at the 2d, David
is said to have been Separated from the Children of Israel, as the Fat is
separated from the Flesh.

But the most usual Folly, is the sneering at all such Epithets, as would
perhaps look ridiculous in our Modern Phrase. Thus the Grave Malbranche
observes, that the Title of (...), which is fixed on the Hero of the Iliad,
would be a more proper praise for a Fleet-Hound or a Race. Horse. Preface de la
Recherche.
Yet sure the Custom of giving most Princes and Great Commanders some
distinguishing Epithet, is not so very much worn it, but we may find Examples
enough of it, even in the Histories of later Times. Sure, Charles the Simple,
and Lewis the Lazy of France, as well as our Robert Short-hose, and William
Rufus might make us more merciful than to scout poor Achilles, for his old
Surname of Light-foot. But indeed this swiftness of Feet was always esteemed a
Quality worthy of the noblest Captains, among the Ancients. Otherwise David
would not have applied it so in his Divine Poesy. Yet he says of himself, that
God had made his Feet like Hearts Feet. And reckoned it among the Excellencies
of Saul and Jonathan, that they were swifter than Eagles, as well as stronger
than Lions.

Monsieur Perrault, who has been so hardy as to undertake the Cause of the
Moderns against the Wisdom and the Arts of Antiquity, though he has not failed to
make the best of every one of these little Cavils, yet seems to have been
sensible of their weakness. And therefore, for fear the Name and Authority of
Homer should defend Him against such slight attaques, he wisely begins his
Censure with maintaining, that there was never any such Man in the World
Paralelle des Anciens and des Moderns. Tom. 2. p. 23.
That the two Poems, the Iliad and the Odyssey, are nothing but a Collection of
many little pieces by several Hands, joined altogether in a Body. In as much,
as the Siege of Troy being the general Subject of the Poets in the Times when
we pretend he lived; there came out commonly twenty or thirty Poems on that
Action every Year, and the Man that made the best Verses gained the Prize. Till
at last there happened to be some sort of Men in the World, who took a fancy to
join the best of these pieces together; and accordingly putting them into some
Order and Method, they formed the Iliad and the Odyssey. Page 24.


When he is put on the proof of this fine Hypothesis, he owns that he has indeed
no demonstration, but is ready to produce very strong Conjectures. These strong
Conjectures are, first, that Homer's Works are called Rhapsodies; the reason of
which Name could be nothing else, but their consisting of a parcel of Songs
tag'd together; no Person ever after giving his Poems the same Title. Secondly,
that we don't know the Country of Homer; and that therefore it is probable,
every one of those Cities which laid claim to his Birth, had really produced
one of those petit Poets, who composed some part of the Works. Page 25.


Now, as to the first of these Objections, what a surprise Monsieur Perrault
would be in, if he should be told, that the word Rhapsody, is nothing but a
Corruption from Rhapdody, or at least has the same signification; taken from
the Boughs of Laurel which the public Reciters of Homer's Verses used to carry
in their Hands; but indeed that one phrase of Pindar, (...) Nemae. Od. 2. ver.
2.
is enough to confute this Notion. We may venture therefore to grant, that the
word (...) comes from (...) to sew or tag Verses together. But then is it not
very natural, that this Name might first be given to any Poem of considerable
length; and at last applied more properly to Heroic Poems; and by way of
eminence to those of Homer?

It Is certain (...) is used by the Ancients, as well for making Verses, as for
singing them in Public: and (...) signifies as well the Poets themselves, as
the Reciters of their Works. Lucian calls Hesiod (...), and Sophocles gives his
Sphinx the same Title, from her making Verses. And so too, after the
Rhapsodists were established into a Company of Men who sung Verses at Festivals
and on Public Occasions, they were not confined to Homer's Works (as a great
Man Mr. Boileau.
imagines) but rehearsed the Compositions of many other famous Poets See
Athenaeus lib. 13.
Though indeed, his Writings being the most esteemed and admired, they were
beholden to him for the chief part of their Employment; and in gratitude took
the Name of (...), as Athenaeus Lib. 14.
informs us. But there would have been little occasion for this latter Title.
If their first of (...) imported the same thing.

Besides, if Mr. Perrault would deign to look at the beginning of any Book in
the Iliad or the Odyssey, he would find that particular Book distinguished by
the Name of such a Rhapsody; and therefore according to his Explication of the
word, he would have the same reason to say that each Book was patched up of odd
Verses, as each Poem of odd Books.

His second Scruple, about our ignorance of Homer's Country will weigh no more
than the first. For how many other Authors have we, whom we acknowledge and
admire in their Works, though we are net inform^d of the Place of their Birth? At
this rate, because we cannot yet settle the Country of Duns Scotus, (...) must
presently pass for one of his own Logical Chimeras. And we must lose our own
Homer Jeoffrey Chaucer, because he is contended for by several Counties, and
adjudg'd certainly to none.

But Mr. Perrault is so much a Gentleman, as at last to suppose that Homer
might indeed make the Forty eight Books, which we find in the Iliad and the
Odyssey; but then he says it is almost beyond dispute that he never formed those
entire Poems. What in his Judgment puts this matter almost beyond dispute, is a
passage of Aelian's various History; which indeed in Perrault's Words prove;
what he desires; but in Aelian's quite contradicts and spoils the whole
Business. He draws the Argument after this manner;

Aelian, whose Testimony is by no means contemptible, plainly tells us, 'twas
the Judgment of the Ancient Critics, that Homer never composed the Iliad and
the Odyssey any otherwise than in little scraps, without any unity of Design.
And that he gave no other Name to these particular pieces (which he made
without order or method, in the heat of his imagination) but the title of the
Subjects that they treated of: that he called the Song, which afterward made
the first Book of the Iliad, The anger of Achilles; The numbering of the
Vessels, that which was turned into the Second Book. The Combat of Paris and
Menelaus, that which we have for the Third Book, and so of the rest. He adds,
that Lycurgus the Lacedemonian was the first who carried these separate pieces
into Greece; and that 'twas Pisistratus who modeled them, as we are saying,
and who made the Iliad and the Odyssey, in the manner we now see them,
consisting of Four and twenty Books, in Honor of the Four and twenty Letters
of the Alphabet. Thus Mr. Perrault, after his haughty and dogmatical manner,
has made Aelian speak in his Citation; and now it is sit Aelian should speak for
himself. His Words then in his 13th Book, Chap. 14th, as nearly as they can be
rendered, are to this effect. Page 26.


The Ancients used to sing Homer's Verses in separate Pieces. Such as they
named, The Fight near the Ships; the Dolonia; the Valor of Agamemnen; the
Catalogue of the Vessels; the Patroclea; the Redemption of Hector 's Body, the
Sports in Honor of Patroclus, and the Violation of the Oaths. All these in the
Iliad. In the other Poem, The Pylian Expedition, the Visit to Lacedemon; the
D^n of Calypso; the Ship; the Fables of Alcinous; the Cyclops, the Descent into
Hell; the Baths of Circe; the Field-Adventure, and the meeting of Laertes. But
the entire Works of Homer, came late into Greece; being brought by Lycurgus the
Lacaedemonian, when he returned from his Ionian Voyage. Afterward Pisistratus,
putting them all together, first published the Iliad and the Odyssey. Now is
there in all this, one word of Mr. Perrault's Sense, or the least reflection on
Homer's Honor? Does Aelian speak of the Poet's way of composing by scraps; and
not of the Peoples getting his Verses by heart in little parcels, and giving
those parcels, what Names they pleased? But, (what was the boldest stroke of
all) does the Historian say that Pisistratus made the Iliad and the Odyssey?
It Is true indeed we find confecit in the Latin: but besides that we may
construe that rather made up, than made, it is manifestly a false Translation.
For the Greek word is (...); which imports no more than to show or exhibit to
the Public Reflections Sur Longin. p. 179.


This is the Substance of what the most Judicious Boileau has returned to
Perrault's Citation of Aelian. But there is a farther discovery behind, which,
if it takes any thing from Perrault's Impudence, lays a great deal more on his
Ignorance. The truth of the matter then is this. Our terrible Champion did not
venture so far as the Greek or Latin either, for this Specimen of his Learning;
but took the passage just as he found it in Father Rapin's Comparisons: where
the Story is told exactly after the same unfaithful manner, and for the most
part in the very same words La Compar. d Homere and de Virgile. p. 153.


But, because the most delicate of the New Critics, may be willing to stand to
the Judgment of so Gentleman-like a Wit as Horace; (except Perrault who will
say He was prevailed on by the Vulgar Error Paralelle. T. 2. p. 22.
) there cannot be a better conclusion, than his Character of our Great Poet; as
he gives it his Friend, in the easy way of an Epistle. Lib. 1. Epist. 2.
Trojani belli scriptorem, maxim Lolli,
Dum tu declamas Romae, Praeneste relegi:
Qui quid sit pulchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non,
Plentus and melius Chrysippo and Crantore dicit.
Curita crediderim, nisi quid te detinet, audi.
Fabula, qua Paridis propter narratur amorem,
Graecia Barbariae lento collisa duello,
Stultorum regum and populorum continet aestus.
Antenor censet belli praecidere causam.
Quid Paris? ut salvus regnet, vivatque beatus,
Cogi posse negat. Nestor componere lites
Inter Peleiden festinat and inter Atreiden.
Hunc amor: ira quidem communiter urit ut^umque.
Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi;
Seditione, dolis, scelere, atque libidine, and ira,
Iliacos intra muros peccatur and extra.
Rursus quid virtus, and quid sapientia possit,
Utile proposuit nobis exemplar Ulysses.
Qui domitor Trojae, multorum providus urbes,
Et mores bominum inspexit; latumque per aequor,
Dum sibi, dum sociis reditum parat, asperamulta
Pertulit; adversis rerum immersabilis undis.
Sirenum voces, and Circes pocula nosti:
Quae si cum sociis stultus cupidusque bibisset;
Sub domina meretrice fuisset turpis and excors:
Vixisset canis immundus, vel amica luto sus,
(...) numerus sumus, and fruges consumere nati;
(...) Penelop^s, nebulones, Alcinoique
(...) ^anda plus aequo operata inventus.
(...) fuit in medios dormire dies, and
Ad strepitum cuharae cessatum ducere curam.
While Rome, Learned Sir, obeys Your Powerful Tongue,
Our cooler Shades repeat the Trojan Song.
Where the Wise Muse has six'd such lasting Rules,
As baffle all our Sects, and shame the Schools.
Where, Vice and Virtue stand, and Wrong and Right,
All at full Length, all in their truest Light.
Before this bold Assertion raise a doubt,
If not engaged, pray hear my Reasons out.
The Tale, where Paris with his lewd Amor,
On Barbarous Plains consumes the Grecian Power,
Discovers what rash Heat what Danger springs
In senceless Croads, when ruled by senceless Kings.
Antenor to the Trojan Cheifs declares
What only Cure must stop the desperate Wars.
Begs the loose Dame may be with speed restored;
Due to the Vengeance of her injured Lord.
No Hopes, no Threats the stubborn Youth can move,
To save his Crown by parting with his Love.
Mean while Old Nestor calls up all his Charms,
To join the wrangling Princes, and their Arms.
The wrangling Princes wilder Thoughts engage;
One melts with tender Love: both burn with Rage.
Madness is their Prerogative alone;
But on the guiltless Herd the Common Plagues come down.
While Vice and Sin like Fatal Neuters stand;
Reign in the Camp, and in the Town command.
Ulysses will as a fair Pattern show,
What Wisdom's Art, and Virtue's Power can do.
Who, while from Ruming Troy his Troops he led,
Such Change of Manners saw, such different Coasts surveyed.
In Seas unknown so many Labors bore,
To land his Crew upon their Native Shore.
His Breast still firm against the pressing Load
Of Adverse Fate, and still Superior to the Flood.
The Sirens Songs and Circe's Magic Draught;
You cannot but know: which had the Hero sought,
With the same Gust, as his unthinking Train,
He too had felt her Spells, and dragged her Chain;
Losing at once by Lust, his Shape and Wit,
Bark't by her side, or wallow'd at her Feet.
We too are drawn. We are the numerous Fools
That crowd the Ranks and swell the Muster-Rolls.
Rude Ciphers, of Dame Nature's careless blotting;
And only born to keep her Fruits from rotting.
Penelope's Gallants, mere Pimps and Sharks;
Courtiers of soft Alcinous; thoughtless Sparks,
That in base Ease the lazy Hours employed,
To smooth their Skin, and to distend their Hide:
Believed it Heavenly Bliss to sleep till Noon,
And in the Lute's sweet Voice their useless Passions drown.


depiction of Hesiod HESIODVS.
Apud Fuluium Vrsinum in marmore


HESIOD.
THE time of Hesiod is generally computed with relation to that of Homer: and
therefore cannot be expected to stand in a much fairer Light. Some Authors,
chiefly on account of the gravity and simplicity of his Style, make him the
Elder of the two Jul. Scalig. Poet. l. 1. c. 5. Accius in A. Gell. l. 3. c. 11.
Marm. Arund.
some place Him a long time after Cicero. Cat. Maj. Solin. Paterc.
Homer. Many affirm them to have been cotemporaries, and to have contended for
the Prize of Poetry in a Famous trial of Skill Plutarch Sympos. l. 5.
Philostrat. Heroic. in Euphorb.


The Younger Scaliger in his Animadversions on Eusebius Ad Number. M. CCLV.
has observed, that there is one passage in Hesiod's Works, which if some able
Astronomer would be at the trouble of the Experiment, might serve to
demonstrate the Poet's Age within Seventy Years. Because he tells us himself
that, when he lived, the Constellation Arcturus rose Acronycally on the 8th of
March. He alludes, without doubt, to that place in the EPGA, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
But then, when Sixty Winter-days have run
Since Jove turned back the Chariot of the Sun:
The Great Arcturus leaves Old Ocean's Flood,
And, soaring, spreads his Midnight-Orb abroad.


The Danish Astronomer Longomontanus, has taken the pains to solve this
Sphaericorum Lib. 2. cap. 5. p. 83.
Problem: And, upon a long Proof, finds, that Hesiod wrote in the Year of the
World 2918, 140 Years after the Trojan War; and consequently 100 before Homer,
if we fix him in the 240 Year of that Period. But on another necessary
consideration, the Astronomer afterward substracts one half from that
Interval; and so, bringing them nearer together, agrees pretty well with the
Arundelian Marble, which makes them between Thirty and Forty Years distant:
The Numeral Letter which should show the exact Year being worn out.

Hesiod has been more kind than Homer, in regard that he has given us an
account of his Country and Descent; But perhaps it was not so much with design
to oblige the rest of the World as to abuse the Place where he lived by an
unpleasant description; after having received some considerable affront there,
which Lib. 1. cap. 7.
Paterculus thinks was the Imposition of a Fine. Whatever the occasion was, in
his EPGA speaking of Trading by Sea, he addresses his Brother Perses with this
account of their Father's first Seat and his Remove. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
'Twas thus our Father, simple Perses, rowed
Half his poor Life away, to earn his Food.
'Twas he came hither too; over Waves unknown,
In his Black Ship, from Cuma's ancient Town!
No glutting Wealth, no Joys too great to bear,
Forced him for refuge to a Foreign Air:
But Need and Gold, and all the Meagre Train
That Jove sends down to punish sinful Men.
Near Helicon he fixed his last Retreat,
In paltry Ascra's miserable Seat.
With Winter Storms, and Summer Suns oppressed;
And never sit to lodge an Human Guest.


By this we find that his Family (as well as Homer's) was originally of Cuma in
Aeolia, now Faio Nova, about Thirty Six Miles North of Baudrand Geogr. in Cuma.
Smyrna. Whence his Father removed to Ascra, a little pitiful Village of
Baeocia, just by the Mountain Helicon. The Names of his Father and Mother we
must learn from some other Intelligence. And Suidas tells us they were Dius and
Pycimene; and that he went with them very Young in their Voyage to Ascra.

His Father seems to have thrived a little better in Ascra, than he did in his
own Country. Yet poor Hesiod could arrive at no higher employment, than to keep
Sheep on the top of Helicon. In this condition, the Muses met with him, and
took him into their Service: if we will believe his own relation of the Adventure.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
They taught their Hesiod first the Reeds to tune,
Feeding his Flock on Heavenly Helicon.
In words like these the Daughters of High Jove,
Olympu's fairest Guests declared their Love.
'Swains, that all Night can on a Mountain dream,
'And love your Belly, but neglect your Fame.
'We are the Maids that Sacred Truths reveal,
'Or dress sweet Fictions, 'till they ^ass as well.
Thus spoke the Immortal Sisters, and bestowed,
A Scepter on their Slave, a Laurel Rod,
Plucked from their greenest Tree, and in the fairest Bud.
Opening, at one strange Prospect, to my Mind,
What Scenes of Time had pas'd, and what pressed on behind.
Gave me a Voice Divine, and bad me grace
Their Native Heaven; and sing the eternal Race.
But most themselves: adorning with their Name
My earliest Labors, and my latest Theme.


The main part of this Story has been thought an Allegory, designed to
intimate, that Hesiod sleeping one day, as he describes, happened to dream,
that Nine young Maids came and fed him with Laurel Berries. Whence, in that
superstitious Age, it being inferred that he was particularly chosen by Heaven
to be an excellent Poet: He lest his Profession of a Shepherd, and applied
himself wholly to Arts and Learning; in order to the improving of the Divine
Gift, which he had received after so extraordinary a manner Tzetzes Schol. in
Hesiod. p. 2. Ed. Heins.
. But perhaps it might be no more than a piece of Poetical Vanity; under which
notion it is scouted by Lucian in a whole Dialogue page 926. Edit. Bourdelot.
. And Ovid seems to have had much the same opinion of the Business, when in the
entrance on his Art of Love, declaring the truth and sincerity he intended to
use, he says, Non ego, Phaebe, datas a te mihi mentiar arts,
Nec nos aeriae voce monemur avis.
Nec mihi sunt visae Clio, Cliusque sorores,
Servanti pecudes vallibus Ascra tuis.
Phoebus, I boast no Gift by thee conferred,
I hear no Counsels of a Whistling Bird.
I never was courted by the tuneful Maids,
Driving my Sheep to Ascra's Rural Shades.


Ovid indeed might have spared so unkind a reflection, since he himself took
the same course in the exactest of his Works the Fasti: Where sometimes his
Muse, sometimes Old Janus, sometimes Mars himself, are brought in, talking
familiarly with the Poet: And yet this Conduct is generally looked on as a very
great Beauty to the Design.

Virgil was more favorable in his Judgment of a Person to whom he was so much
obliged. And therefore, only turning the Rod of Laurel into a set of Pastoral
Reeds, he takes occasion from this Story to pass the highest Compliment in the
World on Hesiod; at the same time paying his respects to the Name of Old Linus,
and refering the whole Design to the Honor of his Patron Gallus. Ut Linus,
haec illi, divino carmine Pastor,
Floribus, atque apio crines ornatus amaro,
Dixerit: hos tibi dant, calamos, en accipe, Musae,
Ascraeo quos ante seni, quibus ille solebat
Cantando rigidas deducere montibus ornos. Eclog. 6.

How Linus, now deputed by the Throng,
Master Divine of Pipes and Rural Song;
His Hair with Flowers, and parsley Chaplets pressed,
Their Hero's Welcome, and their Vows expressed.
'These Reeds the Muses to Your Lips commend;
'The same they lent their Old Ascraean Friend.
'By whom inspired, Descending Trees they led
'To mix in Chorus with the Flocks he fed.


When the Old Man was dead, Hesiod divided the Stock that was left, with his
Brother Perses. But Perses by corrupting the Judges got half of Hesiod's share.
This injustice was so far from provoking the Poet to any resentment; that
instead of bewailing his own hard Fortune, he only picied those poor mistaken
Mortals, who did not know that the Arts of Moderation and Contentment could
baffle the Philosophers Maxim, and make Half more than the Whole. The Story is
one of his own telling in the beginning of his EPGA addressed to his Brother;
where he advises him to Labor and Industry as much a surer way to increase his
Fortune, than attending on Courts of Law, and engaging in unjust suits. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Lately we met in Court, resolved to share
Our Father's Stock; and prove our Title clear.
When You the Bribe-devouring Judges greased,
And with rude Hands one half my Portion seized,
Unhappy they to whom God ha'nt revealed,
By a strong Light, which must their sense control,
That half a Great Estate's more than the Whole!
Unhappy, from whom still concealed does lie
Of Roots and Herbs the wholesome Luxury! Mr Cowley

This PAEON ISY PANTOS, is that Acute saying couched in the reverend Obscurity
of an Oracle, which Mr. Cowley See his Discourses, page 102.
so much admired.

There are scarce any other Passages of his Life, but what we are Strangers to.
Only, it is generally agreed, he took up with a solitary Retreat in the Country;
professing always an extreme aversion to public business, and desirous of
nothing more than to live peaceably and comfortably, and to enjoy the useful
favors of his Muse. Whence Hist. Lib. 1. cap. 7.
Paterculus calls him Otii quietisque cupidissimus, making Ease and Quietness
his chief Wishes and Designs.

The Story of his Contest with Homer, though Sympos. Lib. 5, Probl. 2.
Plutarch reckons it among the (...) Old obsolete stuff; yet occurs too
frequently to be quite neglected. It happened, they say, at the Public Funeral
of Amphidamus the Chalcidian: when the Glory of the two Renowned Poets striking
the Judges with such a Reverence, as made the Prize very doubtful; at last they
came to proposing odd Questions, and Homer began with (...)
(...) --
Muse tell the Things that never have been before,
Nor shall hereafter be. --
To which Hesiod immediately Answered (...)
(...)
When Jove's Great Tomb the Rival Coursers shook
With Thundering Hoofs; and kindling Axes broke.
This put the Judges into a Fit of Wonder, and made them decree Hesiod the
Tripos, which was the Reward of the Contention.

Thus Periander gives the Relation in Plutarch's Banquet of the Seven Wise Men.
Dion the Orator brings in Philip of Macedon and Alexander discoursing the same
Point. The Young Prince professes himself to be mightily ravished with Homer.
His Father tells him, how finely soever Homer wrote, yet he was conquered in
his Art by honest Hesiod, and asks him if he never heard of those two Verses
which Hesiod inscribed on the Tripos, when he dedicated it to the Muses on
Mount Helicon. (...)
(...)
THIS Hesiod to the Nymphs of Helicon:
In Chalcis, by his Song, from Heavenly Homer won.


Alexander grants the Story, and says, that Hesiod might well get the Victory,
when Kings were not Judges of the Prize, but Plowmen and ignorant Rusticks Dion
Chrysostom. page 20.


From this inscribed Epigram A. Gell. Lib. 3. cap. 11.
Marcus Varro concluded Homer and Hesiod to be Cotemporaries. And Philostratus
In Heroic. in Euphorb.
made the same Inference. Who adds farther, that Panides King of Chalcis was
chief Arbiter of the Trial. Whence we meet with (...) Erasm. Adag. page 429.
among the Old Proverbs, for a foolish Vote, or Decision. From the Tradition of
this Adventure, Lucian, without doubt, took the Hint; when in his True History,
reckoning up the several Contentions in all Arts, at a samous Festival in the
Isle of Heroes, he says pleasantly, (...) Page 399. Edit. Bourdelet.
As for the Poets, to say the Truth, Homer had much the better on it; and yet,
at the same time, Hesiod was the Victor.

He had the same Chance, as Homer, in not being taken into the Favor and
Patronage of any Prince or Great Man Pausanias Attic. p. 3.
: but on a different Account. For Homer's rambling kind of Life, may be
supposed to have deprived Him of that Advantage. Whereas, Hesiod, being wholly
intent on the Pleasures and the Innocence of a Plain Countriman's Condition;
seems not so properly to have missed of those Honors, as to have contemned
them.

In the latter part of his Life, he removed to Locris, a Neighboring Town of
the Phoceans, about the same distance from Mount Parnassus, as his Ascra was
from Helicon.

The Story of his Death, is thus told by Solon in Plutarch's Feast of the Seven
Wise Men.

The Man that Hesiod lived with at Locris, a Miletian born, happened to ravish
a Maid in the same House. Hesiod was entirely ignorant of the matter; yet, upon
some envious Accusation being charged as Privy to the Design, and to the
Concealment of it; the Maid's Brothers barbarously murdered him, together with
a Companion of his, named Troilus; throwing their Bodies into the Sea. The Body
of Troilus stopped within a little time at a Rock, which took the Name of
Troilus from that Accident, and keeps it ever since. But Hesiod's Body, as soon
as ever it lighted on the Water, was received by a Shoal of Dolphins, and
carried, close by the Promontory Rhion, to the City Molicria. The Locrians were
at that time engaged in holding a solemn Feast near Rhion; the same which is
still celebrated with so much Pomp and Splendour. Seeing a floaring Carcass they
ran woadring to the Shore; and perceiving it to be the Body of Hesiod newly
slain, they thought themselve, obliged to find out the Murderers of a Person
whem they so much honored. Their search was very successful; and having laid
hold on the Wretches who had committed the Fa^ they threw them alive into the
Sea, and afterward demolished their Houses. The Remains of Hesiod were
deposited in Nemeion, and his Tomb is unknown to most Strangers: Being
concealed upon account of the Orchomenians, who, upon advice of some Oracle or
other, have always had a Design to steal away the Relics, and to bury them in
their own Country. Pausanias (...) ^otic. p. 5^
tells as, that, when the Orchomenians were thus commanded by the Oracle, to
bring Hesiod's Bones into their Country, as the only means to remove a
Pestilence that raged among them: they did find them, and actually bring them
home.

It Is a common Observation and Complaint of Learned Men that we have no Reiques
of the Genuine Simplicity and Purity, which made the Old Grecians so famous,
except what we meet with in the Works of Homer and Hesiod: And that the
Excellency of the latter Pieces is more owing to the luster of Artificial
Ornaments, than to the Charms of Native Beauty. On this account the admirable
Vida, has fixed the Times of Homer and those immediately following, as the
Golden and the Silver Ages of Poesy in Greece. Felices, quos illa aetas, quos
protulit illi Proxima!
Happy, whom that Auspicious Age inspired!
Happy the next; and to be next admired!
Indeed Homer's Design was not so very capable of this simplicity, except in a
few Places. And therefore he seems to have left that Palm almost untouched, to
Hesiod, whose Subjects as well as his Genius lead him to Plainness and Gravity.

We meet with the Titles of a great Number of Pieces ascribed to Hesiod, up and
down in Pausanias, Eunapius, Lucian, etc. all which are put together in a
Catalogue by Lylius Gyraldus, in his Dialogues about the Poets. What we have at
present, are, the Works and Days, Hercules's Shield, and the Theogony, or
History of the Race and Birth of the Gods. The two last of which Poems, are
hardly admitted for Genuine. Particularly the Theogony is as good as marked for
Spurious by Pausanias himself. Arcadic. p. 483.
Though that Historian, as Heinsius observes, seems in some measure to have
betrayed his Cause, when he blames the Baeotians for making an Image of Hesiod
with a Harp, were as He sung his Verses to a Rod of Laurel Baeotic. p. 589.
; when, all the while, the Story of the Rod of Laurel, is in the present
Theogony: and at the same time Symposiac.
Plutarch assures us that Hesiod's EPTA used to be sung to the Harp.

Manilius in the beginning of his second Book, has bestowed these high Lines on
Hesiod and his Works. -- Sed proximus illi
Hesiodus memorat Divos, divumque parents,
Et Chaos enixum terras, orbemque subillo
Infantem, and primum titubantia sidera Corpus,
Titanasque senes, Jovis and cunabula magni:
Et sub fratre Viri nomen, sine fratre parentis;
Atque iterum patrio nascentem corpore Bacchum;
Omniaque immenso volitantia numina mundo.
Quinetiam ruris cultus, legesque rogavit,
Militiamque soli: quod collas Bacchus amaret,
Quod fecunda Ceres campos; quod Bacchus utrumque
Atque arbusta vagis essent quod adultera pomis:
Silvarumque Deos, sacrataque Numina Nymphas,
Pacis opus, magnos naturae condit in usus.
Next Hesiod sings the Gods Immortal Race,
He sings how Chaos bore the Earthly Mass:
How light from Darkness struck, did Beams display,
And Infant Stars first staggered in their way.
How Name of Brother veiled an Husband's Love,
And Juno bore unaided by her Jove;
How twice-born Bacchus burst the Thunderer's Thigh;
And all the Gods that wander through the Sky.
Hence He to Fields descends, manure's the Soil,
Instructs the Plowman, and rewards his toil:
He sings how Corn in Plains, how Vines in Hills,
Delight; how both with vast Increase the Olive fills:
How Foreign Graffs the Adulterous stock receives,
Bears Stranger Fruit, and wonders at her Leaves.
An useful Work, when Peace and Plenty reign,
And Art joins Nature to improve the Plain Mr. Creech
.


This account, though it seems to include no other Labors but the EPTA and the
THEOGONY, yet agrees with neither of the Pieces which we now have, under those
Names. For those fine things which the Latin Poet recount's about the Birth of
the Gods, and the making of the World, are not so nearly allied to any passages
in the present THEOGONY as to justify the allusion. And therefore 'till the
late most Learned and Ingenious Translator of Manilius shall oblige us with his
corrections of this place in a Latin Edition, it must be concluded; that either
the Astronomer's Fancy has carried him beyond his Aim: or else, that Hesiod
composed some other Poem of the Genealogy of the Gods, which might be extant in
those Times.

And then the other part of the Relation, which is taken up with describing the
Arts of Planting cannot on any account, be referred to the EPTA, where that
part of Husbandry is entirely wanting; or at least but slightly touched; If,
after this we consider that Virgil proposed Hesiod Ascraeumque cano Remana per
oppida carmen.
for his Pattern in the second of his Georgics, which contains the Care of
Trees, we may imagine that Hesiod wrote some other Pieces of Rustical Affairs,
which Virgil might rather imitate; and that the EPTA and HMHPAI are not so
properly a Treatise of Agriculture, as a Body of Oeconomics: a Point, which
Daniel Hensius has written a long Discourse to prove.

These EPTA and HMHPAI being the only unquestioned Work of Hesiod, as has been
observed, must, to us, be the main Foundation of his Character and Esteem. It Is
true indeed, that Quintilian gives him the Palm only in med^o genere dicendi,
in the Middle Style; yet it must be considered that his Subjects obliged him to
rise no higher. And that too gave occasion to the Remark of Cleomenes the
Spartan, that Homer was the Poet of the Lacaedemonians, and Hesiod of the
Ilotes, or the Slaves: because the first taught the Art of War, and the other
the Art of Husbandry. A saying much like that of Alexander the Great, that
Homer was fit for Kings, and Hesiod only for Shepherds, Carpenters and
Ploughmen.

Yet his Reputation need not be built on a better bottom, than the success of
those Pieces: where the sweet and easy plainness of Style; that Air of the
Gravest Virtue; those Fables pleasantly told and usefully applied; together
with that inestimable Treasure of unaffected Moral Precepts, will always
justify and secure that Elogy which Paterculus and Plutarch so long since gave
him, of being the next Poet to Homer, as well in the value of his Works, as in
the Period of his Age.

depiction of Anacreon ANACREON.
Apud Fuluium Vrsinum in nomismate aereo


ANACREON.
ANacreon was born at Teos Strab. Lib. 13. Suid.
in Ionia; which was the reason of his using that Dialect in his Works. He is
commonly placed about the 62d Olympiad, under Polycrates, the Prince or (as
they called it then) the Tyrant of Samos, with whom he is said to have been
highly in favor. We cannot expect many particulars of his Life, because he
seems to have been a professed Despiser of all Business and Concerns of the
World. And since he designed his whole Age merely for one Merry Fit, it were
rather a Piece of Civility than of Injustice in the World, to let it be
entirely forgotten.

Thus far we may be certain, that Wine and Love, had the disposal of all his
Hours. And if to divert himself, he engaged in so delightful a Study as Poetry;
perhaps his intention was, rather to pay his Respects to some other Deities
than to compliment the Muses. Ovid himself, though one of the freest Livers upon
Record, yet could censure Anacreon's Verses, as of a looser humor than his
own. Quid nisi cum multo Venerem confundere vino,
Praecepit Lyrici Teia Musa Senis?
Venus with Bacchus madly to confound
Was all the Wise Advice the Teian Lyre could sound.


His Tippling was as famous in the World as his Poetry: And, when we sind his
Statue in Pausanias Lib. 1.
habited like a Lyric Professor; we hear at the same time, that it was better
distinguished by the postures of a Drunkard.

As to the other part of his Profession Love: He appears to have been equally
enamored of both Sexes; and to have shown as great a Veneration for Cupid, as
he did for Venus. Var. Hist. Lib. 9. cap. 4.
Elian indeed is very angry, if we suspect Anacreon of any dishonesty toward
the Train of fine Boys whom he admired. But the General Cry runs so loud
against the Poet in this Point: that there is no need of his own (...), to prove
that he loved his Minions on no better account than he did his Mistresses.

Hermesianax, as he is cited in Lib. 13. p. 598.
Athenaeus, gives an account of Anacreon's Amors with Sappho. But Athenaeus
himself refutes the Story; by observing that Sappho and Anacreon could not
possibly be Cotemporaries; the Lady living under Alyattes Father to Craesus and
the Gentleman under Cyrus and Polycrates. But it is grown a Common Wish, that
they had flourished in the same Age and Country; and had by some nearer
Relation, improved the happy agreement of their Temper and of their Wit.

Anacreon was famous for one Quality, not very ordinary with Poets, that of
despising Money, when he could get it. For they tell a memorable Story, that
when Polycrates had made him a Present of five Talents, he could not get a
Minutes Sleep in two Nights after; so that, not being willing to lose his Rest
in so bad a Cause, he fairly carried back the Treasure; and told his Patron,
that however Considerable the Sum might be, it was not an equal Price for the
trouble of keeping it.

We don't hear that he was much gi^ (...) ^ambling: Only Plato Hipparch.
informs us that when Hipparchus Son to the Tyrant Pisistratus, invited him to
Athens, and sent a Vessel on purpose to convey him; he accepted the Honor and
made a Voyage to that Court.

The same Philosopher who gives this Relation, in another place Phaedr.
does Anacreon the Honor to Style him (...) The Wise Anacreon. Which is the
Foundation of Monsieur Fontanelle's ingenious Dialogue, where he brings in
Anacreon and Aristotle disputing the Prize of Wisdom; and gives the Advantage
to the Poet.

What became of him after the Athenian Voyage, or where He passed his last
Minutes is not on record. But, as his own Verses confess his Great Age, (though
not the effects of it) so Lucian reckons him among the Long-livers, allowing
him Fourscore and Five Years.

The manner of his Death was very extraordinary. For they tell us, he was
choked with an unlucky Grape-stone, which slipped down, as he was regaling on
some new Wine Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 7. Val, Max. l. 8. c. 13.
. This remarkable End, altogether as odd as his way of Life, has given an
excellent Subject to his Successors in Poetry, Among the rest our Incomparable
Mr. Cowley, who has so happily imitated the Style and Manner of Anacreon, has
farther repaid his Obligations by honoring him with an Elegy in his own
Strain. The Conclusion is very grave and serious, and the most Fortunate in the
World for the occasion, It grieves me, when I see what Fate
Does on the Best of Mankind wait,
Poets ^ Lovers let them be;
'Ti neither Love nor Poesy,
Can a^m against Death's smallest Dart
The Poet's Head or Lover's Heart.
But when their Life in it is Decline
Touches the inevitable Line,
All the World's Mortal to them then,
And Wine is Aconite to Men.
Nay in Death's Hand the Grape-stone proves
As strong as Thunder is in Jove's.


If it be thought an Advantage to Anacreon that he should still enjoy his
beloved Ease in spite of the Historians, who have been able only to transmit
such short Memorials of his Actions; it cannot be esteemed a meaner Happiness
that he has escaped the more dangerous disturbance of the Critics. Indeed both
the Blessings, are in a great measure owing to himself; one to the Condition of
his Life, the other to that of his Writings. For, as the careless and
u^concern'd freedom of his Manners hindered him from being drawn into the
Business of the World, so the beautiful negligence and the sweet Gaeity of his
Odes have kept them from ever forming an ungrateful Field for Learned Quarrels
and Encounters.

The Masters of Controversial Philology are utterly disappointed when Anacreon
falls under their Canvass. He deprives them of all their Common Places of Talk.
They can produce, no tedious Labors, on the Occasions of his Poems; because
they were all perfect Humors. They can neither dispute what Examples he
followed, nor who have followed his Example: because the Natural delicacy of
his Pieces disdains a Copier, as much as it did a Pattern. Would they contend
about his Numbers, or his Style; they are both too equal to found a difference.
Or would they, as their last Refuge oppose one Excellency against another; the
Virtues of his Poesy, are more closely united than those of the Moralists; and
his Graces being all born together, it were unnatural to divide them. The nice
Judges may safely please themselves, with admiring each a particular Beauty.
One may celebrate the happy novelty of his thoughts: Another the agreeable
fineness of his Turns; a third the moving softness of his Expressions; and many
more declare in favor, either of his Sublimity, or of his Justness, or of his
Simplicity, or of his Musical Cadences; or of whatever they think touches them
with most advantage. But were they all obliged to describe the Powers that had
charmed them; they might very probably appear better Friends than they desired.

For a General Character of Anacreon, Cupid who was the chief Hero of his
Verses, has given the best account of their Worth: as Mr. Cowley has taught him
to speak. All thy Verse is softer far,
Than the downy Feathers are
Of my Wings, or of my Arrows,
Of my Mothers Doves, or Sparrows.
Graceful, cleanly, smooth and round:
All with Venus's Girdle bound.


depiction of Pindar PINDARVS
Apud Fuluium Vrsinum in marmore


PINDAR.
WHatever attempts have been made for fixing the exact time of Pindar's Birth,
are all demonstrated to be uncertain by the Great Animadvers. ad Eusebius. Numb.
MDXXXI.
Scaliger: only thus much is clear, that it happened somewhat above Forty Years
before the Expedition of Xerxes against Greece, and somewhat more than Five
Hundred before our Savior.

The place of his Birth, which ought rather to have been forgot, stands firm
enough on Record, and appears to have been Thebes the Capital City of Baeotia.
A Country of so gross and heavy an Air, as to furnish Common talk with a
Proverb for extreme stupidity. We find the Poet confessing this disadvantage of
his Climat, but at the same time resolving to procure himself an exemption from
the General Censure. For in the Sixth Olympique he thus exhorts Aeneas, the
Master of the Chorus that used to Sing his Verses, -- (...)
(...) --
-- (...)
(...) --
-- (...)
(...) --
And You. Aeneas, drive Your ready Choir;
Let their first March be into Juno's Praise.
And show the Wondering World, if er'e my Lays
Betray my Country's weaker Fire:
If not with Justice I decline
The Vulgar rude Reproach, a dull Baeotian Swine.


Many will have him the Son of one Scopelinus a Piper, though the most credible
Authorities name his Father Diaphantus Vid. Suid.
. On the Women's side one Myrtis or Myrto, seems to have born the nearest
relation to him, either as his Mother, or his Tutoress, or, perhaps, as both.
His Nativity fell out just in the Solemnity of the Pythian Games Plutarch
Sympos. Lib. 8. Q. 1.
: an Omen of the Honors they were afterward to receive from his Verses.
Philostratus makes the Nymphs to have danced at his Birth, and Pan himself to
have leaped awkerdly about for Joy: who (if we believe the same Story) when the
Poet was grown up, and set to Writing, left off his Antic Sports, and employed
himself in singing the new Compositions Philostrat. in Icon. p. 798.
.

Julius Firmicus the Astronomer, has taken the pains to erect Pindar's
Horoscope; and demonstrates from the Stars that he was designed by Heaven for a
Divine Master in the Lyric Strain. But because the happy site of his Planets
was not likely to be so well understood; they tell us, he was honored with a
clearer Token of his destined Greatness. For sleeping one day in the Fields,
while a little Boy, the Bees came and fed him with their Honey Pausan. in
Baeotic. p. 575.
: which passes for the occasion of his first applying himself to Poetry.

It seems probable that the Circumstances of his Birth and Fortune, could not
afford him any extraordinary Advantages of Education: And therefore it is his
prodigious Natural Genius which always holds the first place in his Character.
He himself was very sensible of the kindness of Heaven in thus providing for
him, and knew there was as much difference between himself and his drudging
Rivals, as between the easiness of Nature and the Pains of Art. Hence he
bravely compares them to the base Crows, and Himself to the Generous Eagle in
the Second Olympic. -- (...)
-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Art lives on Nature's Alms; is weak and poor:
Nature herself has inexhausted store,
Wallows in Wealth, and runs a turning Maze,
That no Vulgar Eye can trace.
Art, instead of mounting high,
About her Humble Food does hovering fly,
Like the ignoble Crow, rapine and noise does love,
Whilst Nature like the Sacred Bird of Jove,
Now bears loud Thunder, and anon with silent joy
The beauteous Phrygian Boy.
Defeats the strong, o'retakes the flying Prey;
And sometimes bask's in the open Flames of Day,
And sometimes too he shrowds
His soating Wings among the Clouds. Mr. Cowley.



We have little account of his way of Life, only we are informed in general,
that he was highly courted and respected by the greatest part of the Princes
and the States of Greece. One would think they really believed him something
more than a Mortal, when we find them allowing him a share with the Gods in
their Gifts and Offerings. But it is a much nobler Praise, that this was done by
Command of the Oracle itself. For, it seems, the Officiating Prophetess at
Delphi, strictly ordered the People, to give a part of their First Fruits
(which they brought thither,) as a Present to Pindar Pausan. in Baeotic. p. 575.
. He had an Iron Stool set on purpose for him in that Temple, which remained a
long time after; upon which he used to sit, and sing his Verses in honor of
Apollo Pausan. in Phocic. p. 656.
.

His Countrymen the Thebans had an unlucky grudg against him, upon account of
his commending their Mortal Enemies the Men of Athens: which not only rendered
them unequal favorers of his Glory; but provoked them to Fine him, for his
Public Affront to the State. But the Generous Athenians at the same time made
him a Present, double in value to what he had been amerc'd; and honored him
with a noble Statue, when his own City refused him that Piece of Respect
Aeschines. Epist. 4.
.

Perhaps this ill will of the Magistracy under whom he lived, might be the
chief reason of his poor success at a Contention in Verse at Thebes, where he
lost the Prize to a Woman, the ingenious Corinna. Pausanias says, the Judges
declared in her favor, because she addressed them in their own Dialect;
whereas they were not so well acquainted with the Dorick Style of Pindar
Pausan. in Baeotic. p. 574.
. Without doubt, besides all this, her Beauty had some Influence in the Cause;
since we are assured she carried away that Prize too, from all the Ladies of
her Time Ibid.
.

His Noblest Patron was the Famous King Hiero of Syracuse, whom he has
consecrated in so many Pieces. And he should seem to have left Thebes to attend
on the Court of that Prince. For composing the Second Pythique in his Honor,
and addressing himself to the Syracusians, he says (...)
(...) --
To you from fertile Thebes I come,
Laden with Verse. --
But perhaps this might be spoken only in the Person of those who went to
Syracuse to sing his Hymn, at the Feast held there after Hiero's Victory. For
when he wrote the third Pythique, he was still in his own Country: in regard
that he tells Hiero who was then Sick of the Stone, that, could he raise up old
Chiron from the Dead by his Verses, he would come, and bring him along with
him, through the Ionian Sea into Sicily.

It Is likely he passed his whole Age in the Ease commonly allowed to Men of his
Profession; not aspiring to give his Country any other Service than that of his
Muse. We find him defending his way of Life in the Seventh Isthmique, and
declaring why he rather followed this Course, than applied himself to Arms or
serious Business. -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
Nor You, Ye Blessed Immortals, with Disdain
Look on an Idle Poet, than can raise
Equal to You his Warrior's Praise,
Yet kindly with himself dispense,
Scorning to owe his Wit to grosser Sense:
Untaught by Sight, can paint the Bloody Scene,
And, without Feeling, Consecrate the Pain.
That he his silent Track of Life pursue's,
Averse to Glorious Noise, and Martial Rage;
And begs the daily favors of his Muse,
And courts the easy steps of Gaysom Age;
He owe's to You, and Your eternal Book:
From Your sure Hands the Bent he took.
For not alone the last sad Minutes of our Date
Attend Your Nod, to turn them into Fate;
But the same Nod, but the same Sacred Power
Points out the different Paths in which we move;
Show's what we ought to Hate, and what to Love;
And to its proper Use chains up each flying Hour.


His Death was the effect of his own Wishes. For having prayed the Gods to send
him the greatest Happiness a Mortal was capable of; He is said immediately
after, to have expired suddenly in the Theater, leaning on the Knees of a Young
Boy that he admired: according to Suidas, being then Fifty Five Years Old. Though
the exact time of his Death is as uncertain as that of his Birth.

They tell us that he made Verses even after he was Dead. For, as Pausanias
gives the Relation In Baeotic. p. 575.
, fancying one Night in his latter Time that he saw Proserpina coming to him,
complaining that she was the only Deity he had left uncelibrated: Deceasing
about ten days after, he appeared to an Old Gentlewoman that was related to
him, and sung her an Hymn in honor of Proserpine; which the Good Woman
preserved in Writing.

It Is a Story generally known, that of Alexander the Greats's saving Pindar's
House (as the Lacedaemonians had done before) when he took Thebes, and entirely
razed the rest of the City. But the reason of this Honorable Act is not so
well understood. Alexander indeed professed a high respect for Pindar's
Writings in general; and made it one of his chiefest Pleasures to read them.
But this Piece of Generosity appears to have had a Foundation nearer home. For
it seems Pindar had celebrated one of Alexander's Family and Name; and had the
happiness to put a Compliment on the very Name; by accosting the Gentleman with
(...) Dion Chrysostom, Orat. 2. p. 25.

Thou Namesake to the Happy Greeks.
The Ruins of Pindar's House were to be seen at Thebes, in Pausanias's time
Baeotic. p. 578.
: who lived under Antoninus the Philosopher.

Of all the numerous Works which he is said to have composed, we have only his
four Books of Hymns of Triumph, on the Conquerors at the four Renowned Games of
Greece; the Olympian, the Pythian, the Nemaean and the Isthmian. It seems 'twas
a common thing to hire Pindar for this service, and no Victory was thought
complete 'till it had the approbation of bis Muse. To which purpose there is
one particular Story on Record: that when Pytheas had gained the Prize in the
Nemaean Games, at Wrestling, and at the Caestus, his Friends presently made
their Application to Pindar, to procure an Ode in his Honor. But the Poet
demanding so large a Reward as Three (or rather Three thousand) Drachms, they
went away in a Huff, telling him that for that Price, they could purchase their
Friend's Statue in Copper. However, upon better consideration they attended
Pindar again, renewing their suit and offering to gratify him as he desired.
Upon which occasion he began the Ode (which is the fifth Nemaean) after this
manner Grac. Schol.
. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) etc.
Not the Dull Statuarie's Art,
To form dead Figures, and to place
On moveless Pedestals the lumpish Mass,
Can boast to have engaged my Heart.
But the blessed Muse, that, with a Nobler Power,
In polished Verse can Carve a Conqueror,
Her Labors to no Basis stand confined,
Tamely expecting Fame:
But sly through every Coast on every Wind;
And to sure Glory bear the Hero's Name.


His Poems are of so difficult a Character, that the Greatest Judges are
commonly satisfied with confirming his General Title of Prince and Father of
Lyriques; without engaging in the search of his particular Excellencies. For,
that prodigious elevation of Spirit, that amazing Beauty of Sentences, that
boundless scope of Thought, and that daring Liberty of Figures and of Measures,
are as likely to deter a Critic as an Imitator. His Pegasus, as Mr. Cowley
says, Flings Writer and Reader too that sits not sure.

Horace, though he appeared his most dangerous Rival, yet had generosity enough
to give him his just Commendations, as he had Judgment enough to six them on a
due bottom. From Horace therefore, especially since he has been improved by Mr.
Cowley, we are to take our true notions of the Genius and the Style of Pindar.
Hor. Od. 2. Lib. 4. Pindarum quisquis studet aemulari, I --
-- ule ceratis epe Daedalea
Nititur pennis, vitreo daturus
Nomina ponto.
Monte decurrens velut amnis, imbres
Quem super notas aluere ripas
Fervet, immensusque ruit prosundo
Pindarus or^.
Laurea donandus Apollina^
Seu per audaces nova ^^thyrambos
Verba devolvit, numerisque fertur
Lege solutis:
Seu deos regesque canit, deorum
Sanguinem, per quos c^cidere justa
Morte Centauri, cecidit tremendae
Flamma Chimaerae.
Sive quos Elea domum reducit
Palma caelestes: pugilemve equumve
Dicit, and centum potiore signis
Munere donat.
Flebili sponsae juvenemve raptum
Plorat: and vires animumque mores --
-- que aureos educit in astra, nigro --
-- que in videt Orco.
Multa Dircaeum levat aura Lygnum,
Tendit, Antonij quoties in altos
Nubium tractus --
I
PINDAR is imitable by none;
The Phaenix Pindar is a vast Species alone.
Who e're but Daedalus with waxen Wings could sly.
And neither sink too low, nor soar too high?
What could he who followed claim,
But of vain Boldness the unhappy fame;
And by his fall a Sea to name?
Pindar's unnavigable Song
Like a swollen Flood from some steep Mountain pours along:
The Ocean meets with such a Voice
From his enlarged Mouth, as drown's the Ocean's noise.
II.
So Pindar does new Words and Figures roll
Down his impetuous Dithyrambique Tide,
Which in no Channel design's to abide,
Which neither Banks nor Dikes control,
Whether the Immortal Gods he sing's,
In a no less Immortal Strain,
Or the great Acts of God desended Kings,
Who in his Numbers still survive and reign.
Each rich embroidered line
Which their triumphant Brows around
By his Sacred Hand is bound,
Does all their Starry Diadems outshine.
III.
Whether at Pisa's race he please
To Carve in polished Verse the Conquererors Images:
Whether the Swift, the Skilful or the Strong,
Be crowned in his Nimble, Artful, Vigorous Song:
Whether some brave Young Man's untimely Fate,
In words worth Dying for he celebrate;
Such Mournful and such Pleasing words,
As Joy to' his Mother's, and his Mistress Grief affords:
He bids him Live and Grow in Fame,
Among the Stars, he sticks his Name:
The Grave can but the Dross of him devour,
So small is Death's, so great the Poet's power.
IV.
Lo, how the obsequious Wind, and swelling Air
The Theban Swan does upwards bear
Into the Walks of Clouds, where he does play,
And with extended Wings opens his liquid way!
Mr. Cowley.

Monsieur Perrault in his late Parralel, as he has managed the Charge against
all the Celebrated Authors of Antiquity, so he has been particularly severe
upon Pindar; and given him less Quarter than the rest. He censures him as a
speaker of impenetrable Galimathies (or extravagant flights) such as no Man
could ever underst and, and such as Horace slily scouted when he called him
inimitable. In short, to keep on his Custom of beginning with bold strokes, he
declares the first Verses in the first Ode to be unaccountable Nonsense; and
from that Specimen would have us frame our Notions of all the rest.

The most admirable Boileau, who in his Reflections on Longinus, has done
Perrault the honor of a Confutation; is pleased to set this passage in its
true light, and to make it so clear, as even his Adversary might understand it.
He tells us, we must remember that Pindar lived in the next times to Thales,
Pythagoras and Anaxagoras, the Famous Natural Philosophers; who had taught with
so great success. The Opinion of Thales, who made Water the first Principle of
Things was in particular esteem. Now Empedocles the Sicilian, Scholar to
Anaxagoras, and Cotemporary with Pindar, had carried matters farther than any
of them: and had not only penetrated very deep into the Knowledge of Nature,
but (as Lucretius afterward did) had adorned the whole Science in Verse. This
Poem raised his Character to such a pitch in Greece, that they scarce thought
him of Mortal Descent. The entire Work has long since perished; but there is a
Tradition that it began with the praises of the Elements; and it is not likely
the formation of Gold and other Metals should be left untouched. Now Pindar
being to compose his first Olympic Ode in honor of King Hiero, who had won
the Prize at the Horse-race, begins with the most simple and the most natural
thought in the World. That, if he were inclined to sing of the Wonders of
Nature, then in imitation of Empedocles, he would celebrate Water and Gold, as
the two most excellent and most useful things that we enjoy. But, that, having
consecrated ^is Muse to the Praises of Men, he resolved to illustrate the
Olympic Games, which were the Noblest Exercises of Mankind. And that to say
there was any other Contest so Noble as the Olympic, was the same thing, as to
pretend that there was some other Luminary in Heaven of equal Glory with the
Sun. This is Pindar's thought in it is Natural order, and as a Rhetorician would
have expressed it in exact Prose: let us see now how Pindar has set it off in
Verse. (...)
(...)
(...) --
-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
There Is nothing so excellent as Water: There Is nothing more resplendent than
Gold; which distinguishes itself among proud Riches, like Fire that blazes in
the Night. But, O my Friendly Genius, since thou art most delighted to sing of
Combats; don't thou imagine, that in the mighty Void of Heaven when Day
appears, there can be discovered any other Luminary so radiant as the Sun; or
that on Earth we can say there is any other Contest so Noble as the Olympic.

This Translation is almost word for word; at least nothing new is introduced
except [on Earth] which the Sense naturally required. And though it is not
expected that the beauty of the Original should be discovered in such a dry
Copy; because that consists in a great measure in the Numbers, the Disposition
and the Magnificence of the Words, yet there is some shadow of Majesty and
Nobleness preserved under this plain Dress. But now it is worth while to see
what a strange disguize the same substance bears in Perraults Version. L'eau
est tres bonne a la verite, and l' or qui brille comme le feu durant la nuit, e
clate merveilleusement parmy les richesses qui rendent l' homme superbe. Mais
mon esprit, si tu desires chanter les combats, ne contemple point d' autre
astre plus lumineux que le soleil pendant le jour, dans le vague de l' air; car
nous ne scaurions chanter de combats plus illustres que le combats Olympiques
Parallel. 1. p. 19.
. Truly Water's a very good thing, and Gold which glitters, as Fire in the
Night, sparkle's wonderfully among Riches that make Men proud. But thou, my
Genius, if thou desire to sing of Combats, don't look on any other Star more
radiant than the Sun, in the Day time along the empty Air. But, we don't know
how to sing of any Encounters more Noble than the Olympicks.

Either this is designed merely for a Piece of Burlesque: and then Pindar's
Character is in no Danger of suffering by it: or else the Translator has
shamefully forgot his Greek when he gravely renders the little expletives;
which were never intended to enter the Construction. But, not to insist on
lesser failings, the thing which spoils the whole Sense of the passage, is what
ignorance it self could scarce suggest, but what must be rather owing to
insincerity; and and that is, the turning the Greek (...) and the Latin ne,
into the French car, or but; whence all the connection and dependence is lost.

So that, upon the whole matter the Galimathies and the unaccountable Nonsense,
are not to be found in the Greek but in the French. And Perrault has shown no
other mark of a Translator of Pindar, but that which Mr. Cowley speaks of, the
knack of making People think, that one Madman has Translated another.

If, after all, Perrault and his modish Followers should renew the Charge, and
say, that there is as little Foundation for any Version, as for theirs; and that
they cannot by any means understand the connection here between the Water and
the Gold and the Olympic Games; not to refer them to the Greek Scholia, which
by their tedious Exposition may chance to countenance their obstinacy; they may
be pleased to look so far as the latter end of the third Ode of the same Book;
and then they will meet with the same Figure, and the same terms, more closely
tied together. (...)
(...)
(...) --
-- (...)
(...) --
As Water, first of things, maintains,
It Is useful Empire still, and widely reigns;
As Sovereign Gold darts forth the noblest power
Among the glittering tracks of Oar:
So much the high Olympian Fame
Darkens the Honors of a meaner Name.
Thus Thereon shines, and thus with happy Pace,
Has reached the farthest Mark of Painful Virtue's Race:
Passing the Pillars of Herculean force;
For here that Godlike Hero stopped his Course,
These Sacred Games he chose to bound his Height;
These Sacred Games were all the Pillars that he set.


But it were well if the new Censors had a quarrel only against some particular
places in Pindar. For indeed we find them laying a general Accusation against
him, for little less than downright distraction. They build this scandal on his
unaccountable Digressions and the furious rambles of his Wit. They think it the
highest pitch of raving absurdity; while they see him addressing one of his
Odes to some Great Man, and pretending to celebrate his Victory; when perhaps
he presently runs off to some fabulous Adventure of the Gods or ancient Heroes,
and scarce spares time to give his Patron a parting Compliment in the
Conclusion. The common Answer to this Impeachment is drawn from the nature of
Pindar's way of Writing: this Libertinism of Conduct being the very Life and
Soul of his Pieces. On which account Monsieur Boileau Art Poetique.
has fixed it as the ruling excellency of an Ode, that Son style impetueux
souvent march an hazard;
Chex elle un beau desordre est un effect de l' Art.


It Is plain Pindar was sensible of his hardiness, in wandering so loosly from
the main Subject. And therefore after a long heat of any foreign Story, we
find him very often, reprehending his Muse for shooting any of her Arrows at
Rovers, when he would have her empty all her Quiver on the chief mark. But this
might not be with design to beg pardon, but to show his skill. For, as he took
an extraordinary delight in using this Metaphor of Quiver and Arrows for his
Wit, so 'twas his Privilege, to let (as Mr. Cowley expresses it) -- his Wanton
Arrows fly
At all the Game that did but cross his Eye.
In his Tenth Pythique he plead's his Title to this Liberty, at large; comparing
his Spirit and Wit to a Boat, as he does often to a Chariot, a Bird, and the
like. He introduces the Apology by his usual sleight of correcting his Muses
fury, and advising Her to Caution and Regularity. (...) --
-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
(...)
Hold, Muse, thy heedless Oar,
Fly to the Deck, and the quick Anchor cast;
And stop the Vessel's fatal have,
And miss the Rocks to which her giddy Head she bore.
Thy Bark, that scorn's a meaner Freight,
Than Songs of Triumph and exalted Praise,
Is built for Pleasure and for State,
And run's no settled Course, and in no Channel stays.
Like the Gay Be she spread's her Silken Wings;
Robbing, with hasty dip each Flowers she meets,
No single Prise to Port the wanton Pirate bring's,
But forms with various Spoils her Golden Sweets.


But indeed, it is a kind of begging the Question, to make Pindar plead his
Prerogative for the decision of this Cause. To say, that 'twas the manner or
the way of those Odes to be so bold and so Licentious, while this manner, or
this way is the very thing that the Adversaries complain of. But if it could be
tolerably made out, that besides the hardy freedom of his Genius, he was upon
account of his Subjects, in a great measure obliged to this Conduct; then the
Cavil must necessary fall, or at least be transferred from the Poet to the
Times. Yet, upon a fair Hearing, this would be no difficult Task. For we ought
to consider that these Odes of Victory were all composed to be sung by a Chorus
of Men at Public Festivals and Meetings, assisted with the advantages of
Instrumental Music. If any question the truth of this Assertion, Pindar
himself will satisfy them, in almost every Piece. But in the 10th of the
Olympiques he will give them an account how the Custom of these Panegyrical
Hymns came to be introduced, and how he designs to carry it on. He has been
describing the Institution of the Olympian Games by Hercules, and reckoning up
the Victories in the several Exercises at their first Celebration. Whom, when
their Labors were finished, he make's to have been thus entertained. (...)
(...)
(...) --
-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
And now with beauteous Face, the Lovely Moon
That had in secret viewed the Fight,
Spread round the Combatants her Evening Light:
As if she would have formed their Crown,
Or held her Glittering Token out to show their work was done.
When straight, in decent Order placed,
The Generous Gallants crowd the Feast.
While cheerful Arts of various Harmony
First on themselves their forces try;
And Charm each other to unite
Their Voice, to reach the Victor's height;
And piercing Ecchos round the hollow Temple fly.
And we the Glorious Custom will revive,
And keep successful Worth alive:
Our Hymns shall raise the Sacred Conquest's Fame,
The Sacred Conquests in return shall lend our Hymns their Name.
And Jove, Great Patron of the Games, shall stand
High in the Front, and all our Lays command.
The Almighty Ensigns of his Power,
On their Red Wings of Lightning born,
Through the Wide Vast of boundless Verse shall roar:
The Muse may play with those dread Arms secure;
The Muse her Father's shafts may catch and may return.
Nor with presumptuous Pride will we rely
On strength of Voice, or sound of Lawless Strain;
But Strain and Voice shall with the Pipe comply,
The Pipe's sweet ruling Note shall Tune our wilder Vein.


Now it would have been an invidious, as well as a tiresom business, to fill a
Hymn that was designed for General Entertainment, with the direct Praises of a
single Man: and, now and then, of a Man, not very eminent on any other account,
but for his good Fortune in winning the Prize at some of the Public Exercises.
But the Old Relations of the Acts of Heaven and Heaven-born Heroes, were what
every Body longed for and admired; especially when they heard them given with
new improvements of Wit and Language. Therefore, as to this Conduct, Pindar's
Enemies ought rather to admire the strength of his Judgment, than rail at the
Wildness of his Fancy. And especially, since, whatever they may pretend, his
Digressions are seldom forced in without occasion. The Gods or Consecrated
Heroes do not intrude themselves uncivilly into a Poem where they are not
concerned. The Gentleman whom Pindar particularly addresses, has commonly some
near relation to them: They are either the Founders of his City, or of his
Family, or the Institutors of the Games in which he has Conquered: Or famous
for some of those Virtues, which the Poet celebrates in his Patron.

But the trouble might have been spared of attempting formally to answer these
two Objections. For, as silly or malicious Accusers generally spoil their whole
Charge by endeavoring to heighten and increase it; so the same nice Palats,
which cannot relish Pindar on the scores already mentioned, plainly show where
the Distemper lies, by adding a farther Reason of their Disgust. Their
formidable Champion Perrault is not ashamed to bring this as an Argument of the
little Merit of Pindar's Works, that their chief Use is to furnish Great
Readers and Collectors with a stock of Moral Sentences. And now we may appeal
to any one, whether Envy has not been very unhappy, to pitch on an unquestioned
Virtue for a Crime. For till Profit and Instruction are denied to be the main
ends of Poetry; Pindar, even according to this Judgment, has a fair Title at
least to half the Laurels; while he is acknowledged to advance the Work of
Virtue in the World.

Indeed, if a Man considered carefully our ignorance in those things which were
the foundation of Pindar's Writings, the various Ceremonies of the Games, and
the particularities of Times, Persons and Places; besides our weak Notions of
his Language and Numbers: he would be apt to six his Morality, for a much surer
as well as a much Nobler Praise than what we can pretend at this distance to
build on the excellencies of his Manners and of his Style. That will turn to
Use when these are only admired. If we cannot copy the Beauties of his Fancy we
may improve by the strength of his Wisdom, to which his Fancy lent it is Charms.
If his Spirit of Poetry disdain to be within our reach, his Spirit of Honesty
and Goodness will admit a more easy Imitation: And though we cannot soar beyond
the Clouds, with his Wit; we may make a nobler Flight, by the assistance of his
Piety.

Now not to make a Catalogue of all the excellent Passages we meet with in
Pindar, concerning the different Estate of Good and Bad Men after this Life,
the just inequality of the Distributions of Providence, and the incapacity of
Men to judge of the Actions of Heaven; with the Wise Lessons on almost every
particular Virtue: How Glorious it looks in an Heathen Poet, to protest against
that dangerous Vice of his Art, the delivering unworthy Stor^^s about the
Sovereign Beings? Yet this is Pindar's settled Maxim in his very first Ode,
(...)
(...) --
-- (...)
A Mortal with strict awe should name
The Heavenly Powers that grace his Theme;
And only on their Virtues dwell:
Their Virtues will excuse
The Pious Tales we tell;
And from Presumption free the harmless Muse.


And presently after, he professes his abhorrence of charging the Gods with the
Crimes of Men. (...)
(...)
But O forbid it Heaven that I
Should charge Your Happy Guests with Brutish Gluttony!


In the Ninth Olympic he gives his Muse a Caution, of the same strain of Piety
-- (...)
(...)
But strifes, and Wars, and Bloody Feats,
Move far, Ye Muses from the Immortal Seats.


And farther we find him Olymp. 1.
declaring positively that he will give the Old Relations quite different from
all that w^^t before him, rather than suffer any dishonor to be reflected on
the Divine Subjects.

So that if on other accounts Pindar claims the Sovereignty, not only in his
own Province of Lyriques, but over the Masters of all the different Strains,
excepting Homer: in this point of pious decency (when we remember the severe
Charge against the Iliad and the Odyssey for unworthily representing the
Supreme Powers of Heaven) Homer himself might yield him the Precedence: And
Horace might alter the modest Boast Lib. 4. Ode. 9. Non si priores Maeonius
tenet
Seeds Homerus, Pindaricae latent
-- Camoenae.

much to His Advantage; where he now assigns Homer the first Place in Fame as
his unquestioned Right, and only observes that Pindar's Muse is not without her
due Honor and Esteem.

AESCHYLVS.
AESchylus was by Desent an Athenian, Son to Euphorion; his Family referring
its Original to the (...) or Primitive Inhabitants Vit. per Scholiast.
. The strange difference in the accounts of his Age, has been sometimes alleged
by Learned Men, as an eminent instance of the confusion of ancient Cronology.
The Author of the Old Greek Life commonly prefixed to his Works, says he came
into the World in the 40th Olympiad; and yet just before, he has made him (as
indeed he was) Cotemporary with Pindar; who is generally placed later by an
Age. Therefore the Great Casaubon corrects the Numbers in the Old Life, from 40
to 63; in the last Year of which Olympiad Aeschylus's Birth is fixed by the
Learned Mr. Stanly, on the Faith of the Arundelian Marble.

There goes a Story of the ordinary Grecian strain, that being a Boy, and
watching the Fruit in a Vineyard, Bacchus appeared to him, and commanded him to
write Tragedies. And, that the very next Morning he set to Work, and found all
things succeed as happily as he could wish Pausan. Attic. p. 36.
. Perhaps this Tale about his Adventure with Bacchus, might give occasion to
the common report of his making all his Pieces when he was drunk; which we find
recorded by Sympos. Lib. 7. Qu. 10.
Plutarch and Encom. Demosthen.
Lucian. Thus much may be affirmed without any great Scruple, that he fell on
this Study while very Young, and quickly silenced the fame of all his
Predecessors in the Art; as well by introducing a nobler Strain of Verse, as by
reforming the rude Stage with the Ornaments of Habits and of Scenes.

He is said to have been valiant beyond the ordinary pitch of Poets; and, with
his two Brothers, to have born an honorable part in the three Famous Battles
of Greece, at Marathon, Salamis, and Vit. Graec. per Scholiast.
Plataea. In the second of these Engagements his Younger Brother Amynias was
Chief Officer of a Squadron of Ships; and had the first Prize decreed him after
the Victory; as having behaved himself the best of all the Grecian Captains,
oversetting the Persian Admiral, and killing her Commander Diod. Sicul. Lib. 11.
.

'Twas to the Courage and the Reputation of this Brother that Aeschylus
afterward happened to owe his Life. For being Condemned as a Despiser of the
Gods upon account of one of his bolder Tragedies; when the Athenians were just
proceeding to stone him to Death; Amynias getting near the Judges, pulled his
Arm from under his Garment, and showed it in the Face of the Court without a
Hand; that having been lost at Salamis in the Defense of his Country. The
Judges were so happily moved with this noble Mark of Honor, that they
immediately acquitted the Poet, on no other Plea, but the having so Brave a Man
of his Family Aelian, Var. Hist. l. 5. c. 19.
.

It Is plain from this Arraignment, that Aeschylus's Countrymen had no great
opinion of his Virtue. Which without doubt was one reason of his willingness to
leave them: though he did not put the design in execution, till upon farther
Resentments. Either, as is commonly believed, because the Judges of the Theater
had affronted him in letting Sophocles, who had been his Scholar, carry away
the Tragic Prize from him: Or perhaps, because Simonides had infinitely
outdone him, when they both composed Elegies on the Brave Grecians that fell at
Vit. Graec.
Marathon. Suidas has recorded a reason, that, if literally taken must needs
have hastened his Flight more than both these put together. That, while one of
his Plays was in Acting the Seats and Galleries of the Theater had unluckily
tumbled down. But the Younger Scaliger Anson. Lect. l. 1. c. 10.
has taught us a way of making this account of Suidas, the same in substance
with the first; if not with either of these already mentioned. For he will have
the breaking of the Seats to have been an old Ironical Expression of the
Comedians and Satyrists to signify the ill success of a Play, or other Poem in
the Theater. On the strength of which conjecture, he interprets Juvenal's --
fregit subsellia versu,
in a quite contrary manner to the Common Expositors; as if it intimated that
Statius's Thebais did not take at the Public Recitation. The only thing that
can recommend this fancy is the approbation of it by the Judicious Mr. Stanly.
But perhaps that Worthy Gentleman did not consider, that, as to the passage of
Juvenal, Scaliger himself seems to have retracted his Notion, in his Work De
Emendatione Temporum Page 484.
.

Aeschylus chose Sicily for the place of his Retirement, where he arrived just
at the time when King Hiero was Building the City Aetna: and made his first
Addresses to his New Hosts in a Tragedy, which borrowed the Name of that Town,
and was employed in prophetically describing the future Wealth and Greatness of
the Inhabitants Vit. Graec.
.

Having lived at Gela in that Island several Years, in the highest esteem with
Prince and People, he died after this unfortunate manner.

As he was walking one day in the Fields, an Eagle that had lighted on a
Tortoise, and was soaring in the Air with her Prey till she could see a Place
below hard enough to break it: unluckily took Aeschylus's bald Crown for a
Stone, and accordingly let fall the Shell directly upon his Head; which instead
of cracking itself dashed out His Brains Plin. Not. Hist. l. 10. c. 3. Val.
Max. l. 19. c. 12.
. They tell us, he had received an Oracle some time before, declaring that he
should die by a Weapon sent from Heaven Vit. Graec.
.

He was Buried very Honorably near the River Gela; all the Tragedians in those
parts performing Drama's at his Tomb Ibid.
. On which was inscribed this Epitaph, said to have been composed by himself a
little before his Death Pausan. Attic. Athenaeus l. 14.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Athenian Aeschylus, Euphorion's Son,
Lies here, where Gela hast's to wash the Stone.
Let Marathon's Proud (...) his Valor tell,
And Conquered Medes the Force they know too well.


However the Name of Aeschylus has suffered from the Critics, who sometimes
exclaim against him in as furious Language as his own; yet it will always be a
sufficient Honor to his Memory, to have him acknowledged for the Father of his
Art, and the Great Discoverer of that happy Way, which 'twas an easy matter
for those that came after him to make straighter and smoother.

It Is generally agreed that Tragedy was at first no more than a Continued Song
of the Chorus. Afterward Thespis, whom Horace Art. Poet. Verse. 275.
, calls the Inventor of the Tragic Muse, found it convenient to add one Person
above the Chorus, who to relieve them and give them Breath might entertain the
Audience with the Recital of some Illustrious Adventure. Now Aeschylus, as soon
as ever he came to compare these rude Essays with his own design; found that
this single Person tired the Audience more than he refreshed the Chorus. And
therefore he divided the Action between many Persons; one of which was
generally honored with the Principal Character, and the rest were the
Attendants of his Story and of his Fortune. Thus, as Monsieur Dacier observes,
this part of Tragedy which was at first introduced only as an agreeable Relief,
came to be the Principal Design; and the Chorus for the future served only to
ease the Persons, as the Person had been first admitted to repair the Chorus.
Before Aeschylus the Actors had not so much as a Public House to Show in; and
even under the Command of his Predecessor Thespis, were contented with the
Moveable Stage of a Cart. But Aeschylus, as he changed their open Scene to a
Theater, so he furnished them with a Masque, instead of their rude Disguize of
Soot and Lie. Besides, he set them off with the proper Ornaments of Dress,
agreeable to the several Characters they were to sustain; and by the assistance
of Buskins advanced them to the fancied pitch and size of Heroes Hor. A. P.
Ver. 280.
. Nor is it a mean addition to his Glory, that he was the first, who took care
to have all the killing business transacted behind the Scenes, that the People
might not be disgusted by such Cruel and Unnatural Sights Philostrat. Vit.
Apollon. l. 6. c. 6.
.

Yet, after all these Honorable Performances, he has found (as was at first
hinted) exceeding hard measure from many Ancient as well as Modern Judges; only
because he did not advance his Art to that Noble Degree which Sophocles and
Euripides afterward attained. His Designs are censured, as Extravagant; his
Conduct as rude and simple; and his Language, as windy Rant. It Is for this
reason that the Common Masters, when they lay down their Rules for Tragedy,
recommending only his two Successors for the Great Examples of Perfection,
seldom honor Aeschylus with their Notice; unless when he is to be corrected
for some miscarriage. The other mighty Chiefs are set for Marks and Lights to
steer by; while the Father of their Profession can assord nothing but the
Patterns of Rocks and Shelves, to be avoided.

And, yet all the while, if we may depend on the Judgment of Tully De Oratore
l. 3. c. 7.
, every Person in this Grand Triumvirate deserved almost an equal praise in a
different way of writing. Now how to assign each Author his particular
Excellency is confessed a hard task even by those who are so generous as to
allow Aeschylus any. On Aristotle's Poesy. Cap. 19.
Dacier has proposed two ways of assigning their proper Characters; the first
in relation to their Style, which he borrows from Dionysius Halicarnassaeus;
and the other on account of the different species of Tragedy: how each Man
succeeded best in some particular kind. As for Style, he attributes the rude to
Aeschylus, the Florid to Euripides, and the mixed to Sophocles. In the division
of Tragedy; he takes Aeschylus's Talent to have laid in that which he calls
simple pathetique: Sophocles to have done best in the implexe, and Euripides in
the Moral. Both these Distinctions, how true soever they may be, yet as they
divide the Laurel are like to give Aeschylus but a very inconsiderable share.
The French Critic professes after all, that he shall be obliged to any Person
who would give a more equal Judgment between them. And he might have paid these
Obligations to no less a Man than Plutarch. It Is from His decisive sentence
that we are to learn what Title each Rival had to Fame, without invading the
Prerogatives of the others. The three reigning Virtues then, which Plutarch had
the Art to discover, were (...) De Gloria Atheniens.
. The Wisdom of Euripides, the Eloquence of Sophocles, and the Loftiness of
Aeschylus.

The Graces of his Successors may be better insisted on hereafter: at present
we are only concerned to vindicate this Excellency of our Poet; which is
commonly alleged as his greatest Crime. Indeed, if Nature and the Common
Apprehensions of Men were always to be the Rules of Sublimity; Aeschylus would
perpetually be a Trangressor. But it should be remembered, that his business lay
among the Old Race of Heroes; And, as he raised them above Human Pitch by their
Buskins, so he could not but distinguish them as much, by something more than
Mortal in their Voice and Tone. Besides, those Primitive Worthies were entire
Strangers to all that fineness of Language and nicety of Manners, which served
to disguize the Weakness of their decayed Posterity. There seemed to be a
Natural Violence in their Tempers: And 'twas as hard for them to use any
calmness in their Talk, as in their Fights. It was long since the Judgment of
the Famous Orator Dion, that whatever appears in Aeschylus of extravagant
Grandeur, of ancient rudeness, and of a kind of stubbornness in thought and
expression, seems more agreeable to the Manners of the Old Heroes Dion. Orat.
51.
.

It will easily be confessed, that our Poet by aiming continually at bold and
hardy strokes, has very often fallen into gross Thoughts and harsh Expressions,
as the most admired Longinus Chap. 13.
observes of him. But then before he is condemned, he will claim the Benefit of
the same Critick's Maxim, that a Sublime Style with a great many failures, is
to be preferred to the Middle Way, how ever exactly hit Longin. Cap. 27.
. For they who venturing nothing, go on gravely in the plain Road, lie under no
great Danger of Miscarrying. While the more exalted Path is still the more
slippery, the more it shines. And it is below the Style, as well as the Persons
of Heroes to stoop to Trifles.

If Instruction be acknowleg'd for the Chief End of Poetry, Aeschylus's Pieces
may pass for Moral Lectures, as well as those of Sophocles and Euripides. And
though he may not possibly have had Art enough to dress up Virtue in all her
Ornaments and her Charms; yet he has certainly displayed Vice, in it is most
horrible Shapes: as it was indeed easier for him to Paint a Monster than a
Beauty.

At the same time it must be acknowledged that he understood little of what was
afterward called Nature and Fineness: But that possessing a vast and elevated
Fancy, he endeavored by the force of Prodigies and Fables to astonish and
Terrify the Audience, whom he could not entertain agreeably by the Rules of
Decency and Art. To this purpose, they tell a famous Story, that when his
Eumenides was Acted, the Chorus of Furies entering in a violent manner on the
Stage, the People were put into such a Fright, that the Children Swoon'd away,
and the Big-belli'd Women immediately miscarri'd Vit. Gaec.
.

Yet even in this Care of making Terror the Chief End of his Pieces, he seems
not so much to have been out in the Choice as in the Prosecution of his Design.
For, however the soft movement of the Passions may have usurped the chief place
in Tragedy, it is certain the Audience ought sometimes to be transported as
well as gently agitated. Horace reckoned it the noblest power of a Poet, when
he acts with the violence of Enchantments on the Persons he entertains, --
vanis terroribus implet
Ut magus, and modo me Thebis, modo ponit Athenis.


And Horace's Great Rival among the Moderns declares, that a Tragedian will but
lose his Labor, if he does not mix the force of Terror with the Charms of
Agreeableness and Sweetness: Si d' un beau mouvement l' agreeable fureur
Souvent ne nous remplit d' une douce terreur Boileau L'Art. Poet. Chant. 3.
.


depiction of Sophocles SOPHOCLES.
Apud Fuluium Vrsinum in marmore


SOPHOCLES.
SOphocles, was an Athenian, the Son of Sophilus as Suidas, or Theophilus, as
Diodorus Siculus calls him. The time of his Birth is placed by the Arundelian
Marble in the Fourth Year of the 70th Olympiad: So that he was Eight and Twenty
Years Younger than Aeschylus, and Twelve Years Older than Euripides.

Though he was but a Boy at the time of Xerxes's Famous Expedition into Greece,
yet he had the honor to bear no mean part in the Triumphs that followed his
Defeat. For, when upon the flight of that Prince and the entire rout of all his
Generals, the Grecians were raising Trophies to continue the memory of the
Actions: our Young Sophocles, being then at Salamis, while the Men were
employed in sixing the Monuments of the Victory, is reported to have appeared
at the Head of a Choir of Noble Boys, all naked and washed over with Oil and
Essence; and, while they sung a Paean, to have guided the Measures with his
Harp Vit. per Scholiast. and Athenaeus. l. 1. p. 20.
.

His Father was no better than a Mechanic by Profession, yet being high in
favor with Pericles, and the Chief of the City, found means to educate him in
all the Gentiler Parts of Knowledge and of Wit Vit. Graec.
. His noblest Art of Tragedy he attained under the Tutorage of Aeschylus Ibid.
, who had newly reformed and illustrated that sort of Poesy.

There cannot be a more famous Argument of his Prosiciency in those Studies,
than that his earliest Triumph was in the Conquest of his Master. For Cimon
(the renowned Athenian General, whose Life we find in Plutarch) having
performed successfully his search of Thesens's Bones, and bringing the Noble
Relics with Public shouts into the City: A solemn Contention of Tragedians
was appointed, as was usual on such extraordinary Occasions. The two Great
Rivals in the Performance were Aeschylus and Sophocles, and the Applause seemed
so equally divided, that the Archon whose business 'twas to constitute Judges
of the Prize, dared not pitch on any Persons for so ticklish an Office. At last
Cimon, and the other Commanders entering the Theater to see the Sport, the
Archon seized on them (happening to be the proper Number) and giving them the
Oaths made them sit down for Umpires of the Cause. The Contention was carried
on with all the Heat that Honor and Ambition could inspire; each Person
laboring with more than his ordinary force to gain so Honorable a Verdict on
his side. Upon a full Hearing, the Victory was adjudg'd to Sophocles, though this
were the first Play he ever presented in Public Plutarch in Cimon.
.

The Esteem and Wonder that all Greece expressed at his Wisdom, made him
conceived to be the peculiar Favorite, or rather the intimate Friend of the
Gods. They tell us that Aesculapius did him the Honor to visit him at his
House Idem in Numa.
. And it should seem that Hercules had no less respect for him, from a Story of
Tully's. For among his Instances of Divination, he thus produce's Sophocles as
a memorable Example. "There happened, (says he) a Golden Patin to be stolen
out of Hercules's Temple. Sophocles saw in a Dream the God appearing to him and
telling him the Name of the Thief. He took little notice of the Vision for that
time, or the next; but upon a frequent repetition he went boldly into Court,
and declared such a Person to be guilty of the Sacrilege. The Judges
immediately ordered the Man to be apprehended; who upon Examination confessed
the Fact, and restored the Vessel. On which account the Temple came to be
called Hercules the Discoverer's Cicero de Divinat. Lib. 1.
." The Great Impostor Apollonius Tyanaeus attribute's a much Diviner Power to
him. For in his Oration before Domitian, he tell's the Emperor, that Sophocles
the Athenian was able to check and restrain the furious Winds, when they were
visiting his Country at an unseasoble Time Philostrat. Vit. Apollon page 393.
.

The same opinion of his extraordinary Worth gained him a free Passage to the
highest Offices in the State. We find him in Strabo, going in joint Commission
with the famous Pericles, to reduce the rebellious Samians. 'Twas during his
continuance in this Honor, that he received the severe Reprimand from his
Colleague, which Cicero has left upon record. They were standing and conferring
about their Common Affairs, when there happened to run by, a very beautiful
Young Boy: Sophocles, could not but take notice of his Prettiness, and began to
express his own admiration to his Brother Pericles: To which the Grave General
returned this memorable Reply, a Praetor, Sophocles, should observe Continency
with his Eyes as well as with his Hands Tull. Offi. l. 1.
.

But whatever inclinations the Poet might then have; (as indeed his Chastity is
deeply suspected) yet they may in some measure be excused as the effects of a
Passion submitted to on no other account, but because it was unconquerable. For
thus we find him rejoicing at last, that by the Benefit of Old Age he was
delivered from the severe Tyranny of Love Philostrat. Vit. Apollon. l. 1. c.
10. Plutarch Moral.
.

Tully, in his admired Book de Senectute brings in Sophocles, as an Example to
show that the weakness of the memory and Parts, is not a necessary attendant on
the Condition he there defends. He observes that this Great Man continued the
Profession of his Art, even to his latest Years: But it seems his Sons resented
this severe Application to Writing, as a manifest neglect of his Family and
Estate: On which account, they at last declared the Business in Court before
the Judges; desiring the Guardianship of their Father, as one that was grown
delirous and so put out of a capacity to manage his Concerns. The Old Gentleman
being soon acquainted with the Motion, in order to his Defense, came presently
into Court, and recited his Oedipus of Colonos, a Tragedy which he had just
before finished; desiring to know whether that Piece looked like the Work of a
Madman. There needed no other Plea to gain the Cause. The Judges admiring and
applauding his Wit, not only acquitted him of the Charge, but as Lucian adds,
voted his Sons Madmen for accusing Him.

The General Story goes, that having exhibited his last Play, and getting the
Prize, he fell into such a Transport of Joy, as carried him off Diod. Sic. l.
13. Plin. l. 7. c. 53. Val. Max. etc.
. Though Lucian In (...)
differs from the Common Report, affirming him to have been choked with a
Grape-stone, like Anacreon.

They tell a remarkable Accident that attended his Funeral. He died, they say,
at Athens, at the time when the Lacedaemonians were besieging the City: for
which reason, the Solemnity of his Burial could not be carried on. Lysander the
Spartan General, used at the same time, frequently to have a Vision of Bacchus,
desiring him to suffer his Dearest Servant to be Interred. Upon this, Lysander
made enquiry of the Besieged, what eminent Persons had lately died in the Town:
And finding, upon Information that his Vision must needs be understood of
Sophocles, in as much as Bacchus was the Patron and President of the
Tragedians, he granted them a Truce for the decent performance of his last
Honors Pausan. Attic. p. 36. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 30.
. It is observable that this Story about Lysander does not agree with our
Marble Chronicle, which places the Death of Sophocles in the Second Year of the
93d Olympiad, whereas the Siege of Athens did not fall out 'till the Fourth
Year of the same Olympiad, the 27th of the Peleponnesian War Xenophon.
.

If Aeschylus be styled the Father, Sophocles, will demand the Title of Master
of Tragedy. What one brought into the World the other adorned with true shapes
and Features, and with all the Accomplishments and Perfections it is Nature was
capable of.

Diogenes Laertius, when he would give us the highest Idea of the Advances
Plato made in Philosophy, compares them to the Improvements of Sophocles in the
Tragic Art. The chiefest of these Monsieur Boileau has thus reckoned up and
applauded. Sophocle enfin, donnant l' essor a son Genie,
Accrut encore la pomp, augmenta l' Harmony;
Interessa le Chaeur dans toute l' Action;
De verse trop raboiteux polit l' expression;
Lui donna chez les Grecs cette hauteur divine,
Ou jamais n' atteignit la foiblesse Latin.
Then Sophocles, with happier Genius strove,
To raise the Music, and the Pomp improve:
Gave his just Chorus in the Plot their shares;
And filing rugged Words by nicest Ears,
In Grecian Grandeur reached that envied height,
Which Rome in vain affects, and ape's with weaker flight.


His Conduct and his Expressions, are the Advantages, which commonly gain him
the Prize, against the two Rivals of his own Age, and the more unequal
Contenders since. The first of these Virtues has made his Oedipus the General
Rule and Model of true Plotting. The other is that (...) which Plutarch fixes
as the distinguishing mark of his Character, and of his Fame.

One of his most judicious Artifices, and on the account of which Aristotle
Poet. cap. 4.
gives him the Preference to Euripides, was his allowing the Chorus an Interest
in the main Action, so as to make the Play all of a piece; every thing
conducing regularly to the chief Design. Whereas in Euripides we often meet
with a rambling Song of the Chorus, entirely independent of the main Business,
and as proper to be used on any other Subject or Occasion whatsoever.

Indeed the stiffest Patrons of Euripides are willing enough to allow Sophocles
the poor Glory of Mechanism and Contexture; provided they can but secure the
Nobler Talents of Wit and Style, to the possession of their Friend. At the same
time, the Applauders of Sophocles, will come to no Composition, nor yield the
least part of the Tragic Laurels to the pretensions of the opposite Party. Or
now and then, perhaps, if they are in a Generous Fit, they will acknowledge
Euripides to have attained a Clearness and Happiness of Style; but then it must
arise from ignobler means: And what Sophocles owe's only to the force of Genius
and the Native loftiness of thought, his Rival must faintly imitate, by an
exactness of care, and a skilful ranging of Words and Sentences. The
Compositions of Sophocles must relish of the World, while those of Euripides
betray the harsher twang of the School. Those must be the best Tragedies, these
the best Socratick Discourses. Those must have the Air of a Gentleman and of a
Commander, these of a Plausible Declaimer. And, in short, Sophocles must be the
greatest Poet, and Euripides the greatest Philosopher.

Now, if there were room for a moderate Judgment, though the Palm would perhaps
be divided more equally, yet Sophocles would still stand fairest to carry off
the larger share. The Ancients have been very cautious, whenever they entered on
so dangerous a point. Few Judges have had the hardiness to declare positively
on either side; except one or two, who honor Sophocles with the Title of
Prince of Tragedy. Yet we have some reason to conclude from the broad hints of
Historians and Critiques, that the Performances of the same Great Man, were not
only more applauded on the Athenian Stage, but always esteemed the highest
Seize in the Tragic Strain.

Aristotle Poet. cap. 13.
indeed, has given Euripides the honorable Epithet of (...), but it is easy to
discover, that he can mean only the most pathetick. Whereas, take him all
together, and he seems to give Sophocles the Precedence: at least in the most
Noble Perfections of Manners, Economy and Style.

Dionysius Halicarnassaeus in his Art of Rhetoric Page 69.
commends Sophocles for preserving the Dignity of his Persons and their real
Characters, whereas Euripides, he says, did not so much consult the Truth of
his Manners, and their conformity to Common Life; on which account, he is often
deficient in Grace and Decorum. He gives the Prize on the same side in his two
following Distinctions; That Sophocles wisely chose the Noblest and the most
Generous Manners and Affections to represent: while Euripides employed himself
in expressing the more dishonest, effeminate and abject Passions. That the
former never says any thing but what is exactly necessary; whereas the other
frequently amuses the Reader with tedious Oratorical Inductions. And though at
the conclusion of the Comparison, he applauds the Style of Euripides as an
happy attainment of the Middle Way; yet he seems to add his, only to temper the
severity of his former Judgment; and, for fear he should be thought to detract
too much from the Reputation of so admired an Author, by giving his Rival the
Advantage in all points.

Longinus, seems all along to favor the same Cause, as far as it was safe to
venture. And in one place Cap. 32.
he directly censures Euripides as a Writer more happy in the marshalling of
his Words, than in the sense of his Thoughts.

Dion Chrysostom the Orator, who has nicely compared the Three Famous
Tragedians in his little Piece of Philoctetes's Bow; confesses, that the Verses
of Sophocles, do not abound like those of Euripides in Exhortations to Virtue:
yet observes on the other hand, that they have such a happy mixture of Grandeur
and Delight, as to deserve the Honor the Ancients did the Poet in calling him
the BE.

It is obvious to add, that if Euripides aspires to the same Title, it must
rather be on account of his Wax, than of his Honey, rather for the Use he gives
us, than the Pleasure.

depiction of Euripides EVRIPIDES.
Apud Cardinalem Farnesium in marmore


EVRIPIDES.
EUripides, as well as his two famous Rivals, was born of a Creditable Athenian
Family. Particularly his Mother Clito, is reported of Noble Descent Suid.
: though Aristophanes In Thesmophor.
in jest calls her a Cabbageseller, and Valerius Maximus Lib. 3. c. 4.
records this as her real Profession. It Is said, while she was with Child, her
Husband Mensarchus consulted the Oracle of Apollo, to know what he might hope
for; and that he received these Verses in Answer. (...)
(...)
(...) Eusebius. Prep. Evang. l. 5. c. 33.

Happy Mnesarchus! Heaven designs a Son:
The listening World shall witness his Renown,
And with glad shouts bestow the Sacred Crown.


He was born in the Island Salamis, whither his Father and Mother had fled,
with a great many other eminent Families of Athens, upon the formidable Design
of Xerxes against Greece. His Birth is placed by the Arundelian Marble in the
Fourth Year of the 73d Olympiad: though the Learned Mr. Barnes, following the
common opinion, that he came into the World on the famous day of the Sea Fight
near Salamis, in the Streights which they called the Euripus, and that he
borrowed thence his Name, brings him down Six Years later. Indeed, Hesychius in
his Lives of Famous Men, says positively, that he was born on the day of that
Great Victory; but then he adds immediately after, that this was a good Omen of
the Athenians success: And therefore it should seem, even according to
Hesychius, only to have fallen out on the same day in a former Year. If his
Name was borrowed from the Euripus, perhaps he might not have been called so at
first; but might have received that Honor upon observation that the Noble
Engagement there, happened on his Birthday Vid. Tho. Lidiat. Annotat. in Cron.
Marm. p. 58.


At what time he removed with his Father and Mother to Athens is not certain.
However, he was so far in Love with his Native Island, as afterward to honor
it with frequent Visits: and Aulus Gellius Lib. 15. c. 20.
tells us, he himself was showed there, an old melancholy Cave, where Euripides
was reported to have written many of his Tragedies.

It seems Mnesarchus, however he might Pride himself in Apollo's Promise, yet
had put no higher sense on the words of the Oracle, than that his Son should
win the Prize in the Olympic Games. Accordingly he took care, to bring him up
in the Exercises of Strength and Activity, performed in those Solemnities Ibid.
. But Euripides, though he made so good progress in these Feats of Body as to
gain the Crown at the Athenian Sports in honor of Ceres, and of Theseus; yet
had always much greater thoughts in his Head. And therefore, whilst his Father
was laboring all he could, to forward his Proficiency in the Palaestra; he
made a Nobler Choice for himself, proving a constant Auditor to Anaxagoras in
Philosophy, and to Prodicus in Rhetoric; and diverting himself in the mean
time, with the Art of Painting, which some will have, to have been at first his
open Profession Suid.
. It is not very probable, that he learnt Morality under Socrates, as Aulus
Gellius reports. For then we must make the Scholar older than the Master. It Is
much more reasonable to believe, and much more to the Honor of Euripides, that
some part of the Philosopher's Wisdom, should be owing to his Tragic Pieces.
For Aelian Var. Hist. l. 2. c. 13.
acquaints us, that Socrates, used to frequent those Plays, as useful and
instructive Lessons; when at the same time, he despised all other
Representations on the Stage.

The occasion of our Poet's falling to Tragedy, was the extreme danger his
Master Anaxagoras had incurred by his Learning: who under the notion of a
despiser of the Public Gods, was bannish'd Athens by the fury of the Mob, and
had good fortune that he came off with his Life, Euripides was then entered on
his eighteenth year Suid.
, and not daring to run the hazard of his Wise Master's Profession, he
determined to turn his Philosophy to the use of the Stage: with this particular
resolution, to keep as far as he could, from disgusting so ticklish an
Audience, by contradicting or exposing the Superstitious Genius, and the Common
Fancies of the Age.

Yet his Prudence and Caution were not able to secure him from all trouble on
this Score. For they tell us, that upon that bold stroke in his Hippolytus,
(...)
My Tongue has sworn, but still my Mind is free,
He was indicted as a wicked Encourager of Perjury; though it does not appear,
that he suffered for it. The Answer he made to the Accuser is left on record by
Aristotle Rhetor. l. 3. c. 15.
; "That 'twas a very unreasonable thing to bring a Cause into a Court of
Judicature, which belonged only to the Cognizance of a Theater, and the Liberty
of a Public Festival. That when those words were spoken on the Stage, there
went along with them some reason to justify them: if not, on the Stage he was
ready to defend them; when ever the Bill should be once preferred in the right
Place."

Indeed there was another time, when he incensed the Audience to as high a
Degree; but then he immediately brought himself off by his Art. It was in the
Tragedy of Bellerophon; where that old Gentleman laying himself out very
eloquently in Praise of Money against Honesty, in a Rant, something like Mr.
Waller's Miser's Speech; the People were so enraged, as to rise with general
consent, to demolish the Play and the Actor. But Euripides stepping out in
time, only desired their patience 'till they should see what end this Patron of
Covetousness came to. For it seems in the sequel of the Piece, he had punished
the sordid Wretch as he deserved; and so justified the heightning of his
Character, by raising the ill Consequences of it in proportion Vid. Senec.
Epist. 115.
.

He had one happiness which Men of Wit are generally strangers to; and that is
the being as eminent for Labor as for invention. 'Twas a noble return that he
gave Alcest is, a Brother of his Profession, on this occasion. Euripides, it
seems, had been complaining that he could not get out above three Verses in
three Days; whereas Alcest is vapour'd, that he had always Three hundred at
command in the same time. Ay, but, says, Euripides, You don't consider the
difference: Your Verses are made to live no longer than those three Days, and
mine to continue for ever Val. Max. l. 3. c. 7.
.

It Is a remarkable Instance in what manner the Prizes were carried, at the
Common Trials of Wit in Athens; when we find Euripides, though he wrote
Seventy-five Tragedies, yet winning only Five, or at most but Fifteen
Victories; and frequently losing the Crown to some pitiful Contender A. Gell.
l. 17. c. 4.
. But this had been Aeschylus's Case before him; and, perhaps, Homer's before
either. Yet Euripides is generally supposed to have had a tolerable Fortune in
the World; and so not to have been obliged to depend mercenarily on the
People's Humor.

If we might believe Diogenes Laertius In Plat.
, he should seem to have been as intimate with Plato, as he was with Plato's
Master Socrates. For in the Life of Plato by that Author, Euripides is said to
have accompanied him in his Egyptian Voyage; which he made to learn the Course
of the Planets. But, though the Younger Scaliger has declared in favor of this
report, yet it cannot possibly agree with the difference of Age, between the
Poet and the Philosopher; as Mr. Barnes has most judiciously observed.

The only Great Action of those Times, with which Euripides's Story is
concerned, was the famous Overthrow of the Athenian Forces in Sicily. This sad
Disaster, described so largely by Thucydides in his 6th and 7th Books, and by
Plutarch in his Life of Nicias, happened in the Fourth Year of the 91st
Olympiad, and the 72d of Euripides his Life. After the last dreadful Battle,
wherein the Athenian Army was entirely routed, and such prodigious numbers
taken Prisoners; "It was extremely remarkable, that many were saved and
released, merely for the sake of Euripides. For, it seems of all the Inland
Grecians his Muse was in highest esteem with the Men of Sicily. Many of the
poor Creatures that were thus preserved, after they had got home, are said to
have gone and made their acknowledgments to the Poet: reporting, that some of
them had been delivered from their Slavery, upon teaching what they could of
his Verses; and how others, when straggling about after the Defeat, had been
relieved with Meat and Drink, for singing some of his Compositions."

Nor were those who fell honorably in this Unfortunate Expedition, less
obliged to Euripides, than the Survivors. For he paid the last Duties to their
Memory, in a most passionate (...), or Funeral. Elegy, a fragment of which is
thus set down in Plutarch In Nicias.
. (...)
(...)
Eight times they put all Syracuse to flight;
While Heaven stood Neuter to behold the Fight.


Sophocles and he, as the Two Great Masters of the same Trade, are commonly
thought to have maintained no great Intimacy; at least not till the latter part
of their Lives. Yet his Second Epistle is addressed to Sophocles, who was then
in the Island Chios; congratulating his safety after a Ship-wreck; and
condoling the loss of his Tragedies by that Accident, as a Common Misfortune to
Greece; yet such as might easily be repaired, in as much as the Worthy Author
of them survived. If this Epistle be genuine, there was without doubt a fair
understanding at last between these Great Persons: a point, which will be
confirmed farther when we come to take notice of Sophocles's Behavior upon the
News of Euripides's Death.

His Humor and Carriage are represented as Grave and Serious, and not much
inclined to the ordinary gaiety of Poets. Aulus Gellius Lib. 15. c. 20.
has preserved a notable Epigram of Alexander the Aetolian, on which this
account of his Temper is commonly built. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
This Spark of Anaxgoras's School
I always took for a rough Stubborn Soul.
His awkward Court never wear's a smiling Look;
Nor all the Power of Wine can raise him to a Joke.
Yet when he Writes, the Sirens crowd his Tongue,
And with fair Honey mix the flowing Song.


As to Love-matters, the common Business of his Profession, his Character runs
double: for we find him distinguished by the Title of (...) in Suidas and
Gellius; and by the quite contrary appellation of (...) in Athenaeus. But the
appearing Contradiction may be easily salv'd. His continual Care to fill his
Plays with Satyrs against Women, might well make him esteemed a Hater of the
Sex, as far as his Pen was concerned. And 'twas for this reason, that
Aristophanes in one of his Comedies set a Jury of Women to try him, for his
Offenses in that kind. Yet this does not in the least hinder, but that he might
admire the Good part of the Fair World, as much as he persecuted the Bad.
Sophocles knew very well how to make this Distinction upon his Rival. Some body
in his Company, was calling Euripides a Woman-hater; Yes, says Sophocles, He is
so indeed upon the Stage; but not in the Bed Athenaeus. l. 13.
. Accordingly it is agreed by common consent, that he had two Wives; and some
say* both at the same time.

It was about a Year after the Sicilian Defeat, when Euripides, being overcome
with the Entreaties of King Archelaus, left Athens, for the Macedonian Court.
That Excellent Prince is particularly famous for his Respect to Learned Men,
and for his robbing the Grecian Academies, of their eminent Professors. So that
there is no need of believing the Common Story, that our Poet trudged to Macedon
for no other reason, but because he was ashamed to show his Face at home, after
lie had caught one of the Actors a-bed with his Wife, and was plagued on that
score by his Enemies the Comedians.

The Veneration that Archelaus professed for his Sense and Wisdom was so high,
that Solinus Cap. 15.
tells us, he was honored with the Chief Place in the King's Council.

There are a great many smart sayings recorded which he passed on several
occasions, while he waited on that Prince. Particularly, one day a Young
sluttering Courtier joking upon him for his stinking Breath; My mouth has
reason to stink, says he, because so many honest Secrets have rotted in it
Stobaeus Sermon. 39. (...).
. The famous Answer he made Archelaus is of a Nobler Strain. The King it seems,
was continually teizing him to celebrate his Actions and Glory in a Tragic
Piece; when once pressing it more home, and seeming extremely importunate,
Euripides burst out into this serious Reply, Pray Heavens Your Majesty's Reign
may never afford the Subject of a Tragedy Diomed. Grammat. de Poem. Genesis
.

In the mean time, his Enemies at Athens did not fail to make the worst
construction of his Journey to Macedon; as if he designed for the honorable
Prosession of a Pimp or a Parasice. This was the Subject of that Epistle to
Cephisophon, which is the last of those Pieces, as we now have them. In it, he
excuses himself from having any thoughts of increasing his Honors or his
Riches, by changing his Country and Way of Life; and advises his Friend to join
with him in despising those pitiful Stories, which could never hurt any body,
but the Authors of them.

He had passed but a few Years in this Court, when an unhappy Accident
concluded his Life. Ovid tells us what it was, when he wishes his Ibis the same
Fate. Utque cothurnatum vatem tutela Dianae,
Dilanient vigilum te quoque turba canum.
Or may thou feed Diana's watchful Train,
Like the famed Master of the Buskined Strain.


Indeed, his Death is generally charged upon the King's Dogs: but whether this
happened through Envy of some of the Courtiers, or by mere chance, is very far
from a determination. Every Account gives him the same unfortunate End; and yet
differs from the rest, in the particular manner of the Action. Only some,
indeed, will not have him to have been torn in pieces by Dogs, but by a Mob of
Women; as Old Orpheus had suffered before him. Suidas places the time of his
Death in the 93d Olympiad; and the Arundelian Marble in the Second Year of that
Olympiad; which falls in with An. Mund. 3598, before our Savior 435 Years. By
this account he should have been now Seventy eight Years Old: whereas the
common Relations of his Story, fixing his Birth later, will have him die in his
Seventy fifth Year.

The News of his sad End, arriving at Athens, spread an universal sorrow through
the City. Even Sophocles was so far from rejoicing at the removal of his Rival,
that he is reported to have brought his Actors on the Stage in Mourning
Garments, and without their Crowns: and to have appeared himself in the same
melancholy Garb Tho. Magist. in Vit. Eurip.
. Nor did he long survive, deceasing according to the best Accounts, in the
very same Year.

Euripides's Corpse was removed from Promiscus where he died, to the City Pella,
and there Interred with the highest State and Solemnity. King Archelaus
himself, not contented with the Chief Concern and Expenses of his Funeral, did
him the farther Honor of Mourning for him, in the usual fashion of the
Country, and shaved his Head, for a visible token of continued Grief Solin. c.
15.
. The Monument erected to his Memory, is supposed to have been of Marble,
adorned with the Poet's Statue in the Tragic Garb, and hung about with the
common appurtenances of that Art, and the Ensigns of Bacchus, the Founder and
Patron of the Profession. The Macedonians, as Aulus Gellius Lib. 15. c. 20.
tells us, were so proud of it, that they turned their common boast into a
Proverb (...)
Thy Tomb, Euripides, shall never decay.
And therefore when the Athenians sent Commissioners to desire his Bones, for
the transporting them into the place of his Nativity: the People absolutely
denied the Request, declaring they would part on no account, with such
honorable Relics.

The City which preserved his Ashes, being seated near Pieria, the Birthplace
of the Muses, whence they took their Name of Pierides, gave occasion to this
Epitaph, which we find inscribed to his Memory in the Anthologia; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Though, by a Fate unworthy snatched away,
Thou gav'st Diana's Pack a Noble Prey;
Thou sweetest Glory of the Athenian Stage,
That with Grave Sense could mix thy Tragic Rage;
Yet shall't thou Live; while Pella's faithful Land
Hides thy Remains from Crooked Age's Hand.
Pella Pieria's Neighbor! for 'twas fit,
The Muse's Servant should attend their Seat.


Plutarch In Lycurg.
relates, that this Monument at Pella was struck with Lightning; and that such
an Accident never happened but to these Relics of Euripides, and those of
Lycurgus: which he says, may serve for a Consolation to the Poet's Admirers,
and for a sufficient Argument of his dearness to the Gods; that he should have
the same ruin befall his Remains, as had formerly dispersed those of Lycurgus,
a Man of renowned Piety, and a peculiar Favorite of Heaven.

The burning of his Monument in this remarkable manner, furnished the Grecian
Epigrammatist with a happy Subject for this little Piece, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
One Urn thy Ashes boasted to contain,
'Till Heavens quick Lightning scattered them again:
'Twas Jove's own Work to clear the Mortal Load,
And purge thy Nobler Relics to a GOD.


The People of Athens when they found it impossible to recover his Bones, were
contented to raise him an Honorary Tomb in their own Country; which was
remaining in Pausanias's Time Attic. p. 3.
. And it is to this Monument, we are to refer that pretty Distich of an Epitaph,
extant in the common Collection of Greek Epigrams. (...)
(...)
Thou art thy Tomb's Memorial, that is not Thine,
While thy fair Glory makes the Marble shine.
Which thought seems to have been imitated in the latter part of Mr. Drayton's
well known Epitaph in Westminster-Abby.

The Story how the Originals of his Works together with those of Sophocles,
came into King Ptolemy's Hands, when he was founding his Famous Library at
Alexandria, told by Lylius Gyraldus and Mr. Barnes, on the Authority of Galen,
is to this purpose. "The King sent to Athens, to desire those Books for the
increasing his Collection; but the City refused to comply: within a little time
after, there happened a great Dearth in Attica; and then Ptolemy denying them
the importation of any Corn from Egypt, unless they answered his old Demand;
they were forced to part with the Treasure, to keep themselves from starving."
Whatever authority those Great Men had for their relation, it is certain the
account in Galen, is very different. King Ptolemy, says he, sent to the
Athenians to borrow the Original Manuscripts of Sophocles, Aeschylus and
Euripides in order to transcribe them for his Library, laying down in their
hands Fifteen Talents of Silver, by way of Security. Upon receipt of the Books,
he took care to have them wrote out on the fairest Parchment, and set off with
richest Ornaments; and then, keeping the Originals, he sent the Copies to
Athens, with this Message; that the King desired the City to accept of those
Books, and of the Fifteen Talents, which he had left in their Hands. That they
had no reason to be angry, since if he had neither sent them the Originals nor
the Copies, he had done them no injury; as long as they themselves by taking
the security, supposed it a sufficient reparation, in case of a Loss Galen.
Tom. 5. Fol. 196. Edit. Ald.
.

AMONG all the hard Censures that have been passed upon EURIPIDES; whether on
account of his Conduct, his Manners or his Style; there is not one which dares
touch on the Nobler Excellencies of his Wisdom, and his Passion. It Is for this
reason, that he has been always esteemed the most useful Man of his Art, for
Human Life, though others may have the advantage of him in Delight.

The same Oracle that pronounced Socrates the Wisest of Mortals, gave Euripides
the second place in the Character of Wisdom, and honored Sophocles, only with
the lowest Degree. (...)
(...) Schol. in Aristoph. p. 131. Suidas in v. (...).

It seems a little strange, that while this Testimony is so often brought to
establish the honor of the Philosopher, we should scarce ever find it alleged
to credit the Poets. But perhaps Men were afraid of injuring the Divine
Moralist, by joining him in Character with a couple of Play-wrights. And the
Great Origin Contra. Cells. p. 335.
is of opinion, that the Devil when he delivered that Sentence, by giving
Socrates those Partners, purposely obscured his Glory, while he was forced in
some measure to applaud it.

However, as long as the End of Poesy is to Instruct, and since the Gravity of
the Ancient Tragedies made them appear something more than bare Lessons of
Virtue; it will not detract from the Glory of the Great Socrates, to call those
Persons Wise, who advanced the same Truths as himself. At least, he will be
contented to allow Euripides a share in that Title, since he was pleased to
honor his Plays with his Company, when he denied that favor to the other
Masters of the Stage Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 2. c. 13.
.

Plutarch, then, had good reason to assign WISDOM, as the peculiar Character
and Glory of Euripides's Works. For though the other Tragedians propose the same
end, the regulating of Men's Notions about Providence and Human Affairs, the
representing Vice in all it is deformities and Mischiefs, and the painting
Virtue, with the highest Beauties, and with the best rewards: yet he will
always appear to have answered that Design with so much the more advantage; as
he added the strength of Philosophy, to the powers of Action and of Verse. For
thus by a course of frequent Sentences, he instills all his Good Principles and
Counsels, by the immediate conveyance of the Ear. Whereas in the other Tragic
Pieces, the People were instructed more by what they saw, than by what they
heard. The whole Action and Scope of the Play might perhaps recommend some
Noble Virtue to their Practice: because they beheld either that Virtue thriving
happily in some Great Person, or the contrary Vice procuring as remarkable
Misfortunes. But this was rather teaching by Picture and dumb show, than by
Words and Precepts. While the Written part was all spent in bringing about and
adjusting the Intrigue, without intermixing many new Advices, for fear of
retarding the Grand Design. But now Euripides, besides their Advantage of
shadowing one great Duty by the main Action, has inserted a long train of
inferior Rules; and has given these in direct words to the Audience, without
putting them to the trouble of making inferences from what they see. And though
the first of these ways, may be thought the most artificial Instruction; the
other will be admitted as the most useful; or at least as the most suitable to
Common Apprehensions.

It Is on the account of this Wisdom, and this forcible way of teaching, that
Quintilian, when he is giving his Young Orator a List of Authors, with their
proper Characters and Uses: while he does but just mention Sophocles's Name,
passes on presently to a long recommendation of Euripides, as far the most
beneficial to a Man, who designed to rule the Forum. His Language, which some
reprehend, as inferior to the Grandeur of the Buskin, the Rhetorician for the
same reason, esteems and applauds, as approaching nearer to the style of
Oratory. Then, as to the happy abundance of his Sentences, and his delivering
the Grave Precepts of the Ancient Sages, he thinks him almost equal to the Wise
Masters themselves: and in his Speeches and Answers, comparable to the most
commanding Pleader at the Bar. And ends his Character with the most taking part
of it, the excellency of his Passions, and his unresistable force of raising
Pity.

None can deny, but that the Virtues and Excellencies which Quintilian here
recommends to his Orator's Imitation, will have their use and value in
proportion, with all Persons who are engaged in the Business of the World. They
will be better Citizens by reading Euripides, and better Versifiers by doting
on Sophocles: and will acknowledge just as much difference between the
advantages they receive from those two Authors, as they find between their
Civil, and their Poetic Capacity.

Not but that Sophocles has his Instructions too, and those the most curious
and the most refined. But, alas! his very excellencies render him of less
service to the World. All the Old Magic of Poesy has been long since
concluded: and the Muses may as well expect again to draw Stones and Trees into
Order, as Men into Virtue, by their Arts and Power. People are no more, to be
led into Societies: like Bees, by the force of Music. The World, in its
Infancy, might learn Goodness, by sweet Violences, and pleasant Deceits. But
now, it pretends to be more Manly; and scorns to be tricked, though to its own
Advantage. We as much despise a Poet, who hopes to enforce Virtue by the
Harmony and Artifice of Verse; as a Physician who endeavors to cure by Charm.
Things must be laid down in a plain way, and the course and method of Nature
exactly followed. If Virtue and Vice will come upon the Stage, they must lay
aside their Scenical Habits, and appear Naked and Unmasqu'd. Otherwise we are
apt to take the Liberty of thinking that they only indeed Act a Part, and are
just such Machines and Fancies in the World, as they are in the Theater.

Thus while Euripides, does not so much endeavor to prevail on our senses, as
to make an immediate Conquest on our Minds; and rather convinces us by
Eloquence, than amazes us by Pomp and Show: We admire and esteem him more, the
more he has failed in the formal Rules of his Art: and are ready to acknowledge
him the chief of Tragic Professors, because he kindly descends to our Level,
and wears his Buskins lower than the rest.

depiction of Aristophanes ARISTOPHANES.
Apud magnum Etruriae Ducem in marmore


ARISTOPHANES.
THE Age of Aristophanes need not come under Enquiry; since none can be at a
loss where to fix the famous Peleponnesian War, and the more famous Story of
the Divine Socrates. But then his Country or Birthplace is little understood.
The Old Illustrators, quarrel, and defy one another on the Point: and the
Oracle of his own Works, which acquaints us with most of his Circumstances and
Concerns, is but in vain consulted about this Dispute. There is indeed one
passage in the Acharnian, which seems to hint, that he sometime lived in
Aegina, and might therefore probably be Born there. The Chorus between the
Second and third Acts, are commending the Poet, as the Deliverer of their
Country by his Wisdom, and as a Man that was admired by all the World; and then
they go on, (...)
(...)
(...) Page 402. Edit. Caldor.

It Is for His sake, the Spartans seem inclined
To beg Aegina, and invite a Peace:
Not that they value the poor spot of Ground;
But hope that Claim must rob You of Your Poet.


We may only guess hence, that his Fortunes lay in that Island. And this was
pretense enough for his Enemies to accuse him to the Magistracy as a
Forreigner, and as a false Usurper of the Privileges which Athens allowed her
Citizens. They say he came off with great Applause from this Charge, by only
naming one Philip an Athenian Freeman for his Father, and proving it with two
Verses of Homer, (...)
(...) Vit. Graec. per S holiast.

I take my Mother's Word: My Mother vows
'Twas He: I know not: who can swear he knows?


Thus wherever he was born, he had the Honor to be admitted free Denizen of
Athens, whether Nature had given him a Title to it; or whether his Ingenuity
supplied him with as fair a Right.

His Native Courage and Honor and his Professed aversion to a servile
Government, deserved to procure him the highest Employments in the State. But
perhaps he did the Commonwealth as much service on the Comic Stage, as he
could have done in the Council or in the Army. 'Twas he, that dared entertain
the whole City at the Expense of the Magistrates Reputations; could inform them
of the pernicious Designs of their Leading Officers: And could himself Act a
Cleon, a Powerful Villain; when every one of the Common Players declined so
dangerous a Part (...) Graec.
. 'Twas he, that by the same bold Method of Instruction, could remind a whole
People of the defects in their Public Justice; and of the Miscariages in their
Politics, and in their Arms. And what was the hardiest Enterprise of all,
could attack their Superstitious Worship, without incurring those general
Resentments, which had fallen on Aeschylus and Euripides. for the same Good
Attempt. It looks indeed somewhat like a Prodigy, to see the Comedian blacken
the incomparable Socrates, by representing him as a despiser of the Popular
Religion: while he himself in some other of his Pieces, has exposed the same
vulgar Erros, and came off with Approbation. The reason of the strange
difference can be only this, that Aristophanes by the Force and Authority of
his Wit, held Athens more absolutely at Command, than the Good Philosopher,
with all his Wisdom and with all his Virtue.

All his Plays which are come safe to our Hands, appear to be a Set of Wise
Reflections, on the Affairs and the Conduct of the Athenian People, through as
Famous a Course of Years as any in History, the time of the Great Peleponnesian
War. And therefore Plato showed a great deal of Judgment, as well as a great
deal of private Esteem; when he recommended Aristophanes's Works to Denis the
Tyrant; who had desired to be informed of the Condition and the Polity of
Athens Vit. Graec.
.

The Chorus in the Acharnian, whom there has been occasion to cite before, take
care to let us know what Name and Character their Poet bore at home, and
abroad. They had been reminding the Audience of some Good Offices Aristophanes
had done the City by the Power of his Comic Muse; and then they carry on the
bold Vaunt in such strains as these. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) Page 401.

This is the Man, who blessed You with his Service;
And taught the wrangling Tribes to use their Power.
And now Your Tributary Friends from far
Flock to the Town to see the Sacred Poet
Who dares speak Truth, and hazard Life for Justice.
So far his Bold Exploits have spread his Fame;
That when the mighty Persica Monarch held
The Spartan Envoys, wondering at his Questions*
He first demanded which of the Rival States
Rid Chief at Sea: and next, which People lived
Under the wise Correction of our Author.
For they, cried the Great King, must needs Reform^
And, while they take the Poet to their Counsels;
Under his Conduct may Command the World.


But after all the fair parts of his Character, there lies an eternal
reflection on his good Humor at least, if not on his Virtue and Principles,
that he should profess himself a mortal Enemy to the two wisest Athenians of
his Time Socrates and Euripides.

We have a full History of his Wicked Attempt against the Philosopher,
delivered by Aelian Var. Hist. l. 2. cap. 13.
; whether truly or not may be inquired by and by, his Relation is to this
purpose. Anytus and the other Accusers who had formed a Design against
Socrates's Credit and Life, were not so senceless as to imagine, that the
Judges would be very willing to receive an Impeachment of the Wisest and the
Best of Men. And therefore they concluded it would be the best way of
proceeding to prepare the Minds of the Athenians, by raising the Scandal by
Degrees. In order to this, they hired Aristophanes, with the consideration of a
good round Sum, to expose the Philosopher on the Stage. They instructed him
too which way to direct the Satyr. To represent Socrates as an impertinent
Virtuoso, and a trifling Disputant; one that could argue Pro and Con at his
Pleasure, and prove Right Wrong, and Wrong Right in the same Breath: And
especially to hint at his introducing new kinds of Demons, and Powers unheard
of before, as if he slighted the Common Deities, and the present manner of
their Worship.

Aristophanes, who had no more honesty than his Poverty would allow, easily
swallowed the Bribe; and falling to work according to their directions,
composed the Comedy of the Clouds. The Athenians, who expected nothing less
than to see such a Great Man ridiculously personated in the Theater, at first
were in a general wonder and surprise. But being naturally envious, and apt to
detract from those Persons, whose Learning or Virtue had raised them above the
common Level; they were afterward tickled with the pleasant Satyr; and gave
the Prize to Aristophanes with universal Applause.

On the Faith of Aetian, we commonly build our Notions of this Transaction: And
agree to condemn all Athens of as much Folly and Madness for approving the
Poet's Slanders, as we do the Poet himself for venting them. Even the most
ingenious Madam Dacier, who has lately given us the two first of Aristophanes's
Comedies in so fine a Dress; is not so kind as to vindicate the Credit of the
Philosopher, or the Judgment of the Audience: While observing only In Pref.
that there was no need of corrupting the Poet with a Bribe, She seems to admit
the rest of Aelians's Story as a true Relation. But how will the Scene be
altered, if, after all, the Divine Philosopher should appear to have been
vindicated by the Common Voice of the Judges: while the profane Poet was so far
discountenanced, as to see the Comic Prize given to a much Inferior Performer?
Yet as fair a Conjecture as this may be drawn from the Play it self, as we now
have it. For that Parabasis inserted in the Chorus between the first and second
Acts Page 156.
, is nothing else but a direct Address, made by the Poet to the People,
commending himself, as the most experienced Man in his Art, and this for the
best of all his Pieces: And at the same time complaining of their unkindness;
kindness; that, with all these advantages, they should before despise and damn
his Play, and deny him the public Testimony and Reward. Now the Old Scholiasts
agree to expound this of the ill success which the Clouds met with at their
first Presenting; when Cratinus and Amipsias were Crowned for the best
Comedians; and Aristophanes exploded with universal Scorn. 'Twas very Natural
for the Poet, after the first Misfortune, to correct his Beloved Piece against
a second Trial; and to add this Speech, by way of expostulation with the
Audience; and to beg a more favorable Sentence: And therefore it may well
serve for a Prologue, according to the present Laws of the Theater, as Madam
Dacier has placed it in her Translation.

So far then the whole Body of the Athenians are justified, that they did not
encourage the Poet's first Attempt, in exposing their Great Master and
Instructor. But if it could be made out farther, that this Piece was never
revived on the Stage, though corrected by the Author; they would come off with
Honor from the whole Accusation. Yet this Point too will admit of a probable
Proof in their Defense. For one of the old Scholiasts when he is expounding the
Parabasis already mentioned, says expressly (...) page 158.
. There are no Memorials which explain the Acting of two CLOUDS: or, there are
no Memorials which make the Clouds to have been Acted twice. As for the other
Old Gentleman, who in his Illustrations prefixed to the Piece, affirms it to
have been presented a second time: He fixes that time in the very next Year
when Aminias was Archon. But now in that very Year when Aminias was Archon,
Aristophanes's other Comedy of the Wasps was Played, as all agree. And in this
Piece of the Wasps when the Chorus desire the Audience Page 50^.
, not to receive the Poets Labor so unkindly as they had done before; the
Scholiast only observes, that The Year before, he presented his first Clouds,
and came off with disgrace. Yet here he had a fair opportunity of telling us,
that it was Acted a second time more fortunately; and that in this very Year,
if the thing had been really true. This is the Argument urged by the most
Learned Palmerius In Exercitat. p. 731.
. Yet supposing that Question to be incapable of a decision, whether or no the
Clouds was twice Presented: Since we have demonstration that it was once
certainly exploded, when it came on the Stage; this is enough to alleviate in a
great measure the heavy Censure, which has lain so many Ages on the Athenian
Auditory; and to show that Aelian was more a Lover of Socrates than of Truth;
when to advance the Character of the Philosopher's Patience and Magnanimity, he
traduced the Virtue and the Sense of the whole City. There is one part of his
Narration yet behind, which may be proved grossly false; and will therefore put
a better Color on our Suspicion of the rest. He would persuade us that the
Accusers of Socrates, got him thus ridiculed in a Play, as a Preparation to his
Public Arraignment; and to try how the People would bear such an Attempt. But
now, since it appears from several Passages in the Play Palmer. Exercitat. p.
729.
that it was written, while Cleon was alive; and Cleon dying, as Euripides Lib.
5. p. 297.
has recorded, in the Tenth Year of the Peleponnesian War, that is, in the
Third Year of the 89th Olympiad: It is very strange if this should pass for the
Introduction to the Trial and Condemnation of the Philosopher; which happened
in the 95th Olympiad, above Twenty Years after Cleon's Death, and therefore
more after the Acting of the Clouds. So that there is no occasion to suppose any
other reason for Aristophanes's Undertaking, but the necessary disagreement
between the licentiousness of the Old Comedy, and the strictness of the Old
Philosophy. And then his hatred to Euripides, the Philosophical Poet, may be in
a great measure attributed to the same Cause. It is well known, that Socrates
would never by his good will enter the Theater, but to hear some performance of
that Tragedian; whom he esteemed as much a Preacher of Morality as himself. It
is therefore a most lamentable mistake of the Author of the Latin Argument Page
207.
prefixed to Aristophanes's Frogs; when he tells us, that the Comedian wrote
that Play to be revenged on Euripides, for his Tragedy of Palamedes, under
whose borrowed Name, he had upbraided the Athenians with the Murder of the
Great Philosopher: Whereas the Death of Euripides and the Acting of the Frogs,
are always placed in the 93d Olympiad, and the Condemnation of Socrates, never
before the Ninety first.

We are not informed how long Aristophanes lived; it is probable he reached a
great Age, since we may reckon near Forty Years that passed between his
Acharnian and his Plutus, the first and the last of his Comedies which we now
have.

The Honorary Distich composed on him, as is thought, by Plato, will make large
amends for the loss of his Epitaph. (...)
(...)
Seeking a Shrine, that never should be Defaced;
The Graces pitched on Aristophanes's Breast!


That Plato was indeed his Great Friend and Admirer, Olympiodorus assures us in
his Life of the Philosopher. And this Epigram, if Genuine, together with the
Recommendation of his Works to Dionysius, were sufficient marks of this Esteem.
But it happened a little unluckily, that the incomparable French Lady, in the
Preface to her Translation should remarque farther; that To testify more
particularly the Respect he entertained for the Poet, be gave him the best
Place in his SYMPOSIUM; and put under his Name the fine Discourse which he
makes of Love: giving us to understand by this, that ARISTOPHANES was the only
Man, who could talk agreeably of that Passion. For whoever compares the Speech
that Aristophanes makes in that Dialogue, to explain his foul Notion of Love,
with those of the other Speakers on the same Subject; will be far from thinking
that he has the best Place in the Banquet; and from allowing that to be a fine
and an agreeable Description of a Natural Passion, which is an open Panegyric
on the most Unnatural of Vices. This Observation cannot seem to detract from
the just Praise of Madam Dacier: A Man can scarce think on Her, and the admired
Partner of Her Studies and of Her Bed; without addressing Her with Claudian's
old Compliment, a little altered, Conjux digna viro! nam tantum caetibus extat
Faemineis, quantum supereminet Ille maritos.


It Is a received distinction of the Grecian Comedy, into the Old, the Middle
and the New. The first was a Barefaced exposing of the Greatest Persons on the
Stage; without the least disguise of the Subject or of the Name. This is the
Liberty which Horace commends at the beginning of his Fourth Satyr. But he
tells us the ill Consequences of it in his Art of Poetry. -- in vitium libertas
excidit, and vim
Dignam lege regi. Lex est accepta: chorusque
Turpiter obticuit, sublato jure nocendi.
'Till, with licentious and abusive Tongue
The Chorus wakened Laws coercive Powers,
And forced them to suppress it is Insolence.


The Middle Comedy succeeded when this was prohibited by the State; and
presented real faults and miscarriages, under the Disguise of Borrowed Names.

The New or the Third sort, was an entire Reformation of the Stage to Civility
and Decency; obliging the Poet, to suppose the Actions as well as the Names;
and without making any particular reflections, to give only a Probable
Description of Human Life.

The Question is not decided whether, when Horace speaks of the taking away the
licentiousness of the Chorus by Order of the Magistrates, he means that it was
taken from the Old Comedy, or from the Middle. The Old Interpreters, and the
Tribe of Modern Critics with Scaliger De Poet. lib. 1. c. 7. p. 30.
at their Head, declare for the first Opinion. But Monsieur Dacier Horace A. P.
Ver. 284.
, who has so often shown us Lucan's sight -- Concurrere Bellum,
Atque Virum --
advances the other exposition of the Words: as if Horace were not taking
notice of the first Reformation of Comedy from the Old to the Middle; but of
the later Regulation of the Middle into the New. But if each side were so
generous, as to retreat a few steps, the difference might possibly admit some
Accommodation. For while the first absolutely deny, and the other as positively
affirms, the Middle Comedy to have had a Chorus, it might be maintained between
both, that the Middle Species had indeed some kind of Chorus, but so moderated
and so restrained, that Horace might properly say it was shamefully silenced,
while it only lay under this Confinement. And thus both sides will be
acknowledged portly in the right: Dacier while he asserts a Chorus in the
Middle Comedy; and the other Critics when they tell us that the taking away
the injurious Liberty of the Chorus, constituted (in a great measure) the
Second Species of Comedy; and not the Third. Every one knows that the main
opportunity which the Chorus had to abuse particular Persons, and to talk
saucily of the Government, was in the Intermedes, or the long Speeches between
the Acts. Now these being entirely Banished in the Middle Comedy; the Chorus
might still retain the Part of a Common Actor, without Offense. As we see
practiced in Aristophanes's Plutus.

'Twere happy, if he, as he has left us the only Collection of Grecian
Comedies, had obliged us too with an Example of each Species. But whatever his
Ancient or his Modern Illustrators may pretend, it will be impossible to find
any more than the Old and the Middle Strain, in his Pieces which survive. And
therefore those Learned Men must neod be overseen who will have the two Attick
Laws forbidding, (...), and (...), to expose a Chief Magistate openly in a
Comedy, or, to Name any Person in those Pieces; to have been made in
Aristophanes's Time Vid. Sam. Petit. Comm. in Leg. Attic. p. 79, 80.
: Or else he must have understood those Laws, as if they prohibited rather the
Personating of a real Citizen, than the scouting him; rather the abusing him by
Action, than by Words. For in the Plutus, but now mentioned, which is owned for
the last and the most Reformed of his Pieces, he has severely reflected on
several Persons, and those of the highest Rank; and has named them too in the
Censure.

If a Man was to attempt a Character of Aristophanes's Comedies in our Times,
he would certainly begin with telling us, that we must not expect there, the
Nicety of Rules, and the regular Conduct, which has added so many Graces to the
Modern Stage. For in all his Pieces except the Plutus and the Clouds, the new
Critics might look in vain for their Unities and their Ordonnance; which
perhaps was one reason why Madam Dacier thought none of the rest fit to be put
in her Country Garb: because in them only he seems as much a French Man in
Contrivance, as her Translation makes him in Language. Though without doubt her
main Argument for stopping at these Two, was, because all the rest smell so
strongly of the Rude and Debauched Original of the Art, as very often to offend
the Chastity of Common Ears; and much more the Modesty of a Lady.

The (...) and the (...), the Decorum of the Stage, and the Natural Characters
of Men and Manners were Improvements that Comedy was then a Stranger to. The
main Beauty and Design, being the (...) the Ridicule; arising not from the real
imitation of any Person or Action; but from the representing them rather quite
different from their proper Character to make the Spectators laugh at something
very odd and very surprising. Thus, as Mr. Dryden observes, "When we see
Socrates brought upon the Stage, we are not to imagine him made ridiculous by
the imitation of his Actions; but rather by making him perform something very
unlike himself; something so childish and absurd, as by comparing it with the
Gravity of the true Socrates, makes a ridiculous Object for the Spectators
Essay on Dramat. Poes. p. 37.
."

But then this Ridicule was mixed with so much sharpness, and sometimes
virulency, that it gave the Audience not only a tickling Pleasure, but incensed
them with a real hatred toward the Person exposed. And it is for this reason
that Scaliger Poet. l. 1. c. 8.
says Horace's way in Satyr, is the same as that of Aristophanes in Comedy.

Plutarch, whose Sense and Judgment are as much respected and admired as any
thing in Antiquity, has left a most heavy Charge against Aristophanes's
Writings; in his Comparison of him and Menander. Were the entire Piece extant,
we might have some hopes of mollifying the Sentence, by some more favorable
part of the Discourse. But in the Epitome of it, which we now have among his
Moral Works, the Censure stands very severe. The chief Crimes he objects
against our Poet, are, that he makes use of base, scurrilous and nauseous
Language; and now and then affects a Tragical instead of a Comical Style. That
he observes not the difference of the Persons that speak, nor applies thoughts
and words accordingly; but without any Nature or Decorum, brings in Gods,
Heroes, Kings, Citizens, Old Men and Women, Fathers and Sons, all so exactly
like one another, in their Phrase and Talk, that they have nothing in the World
to distinguish them but their Habit. That his Jokes wound and exulcerate
instead of Curing. That he never attempts any Character, but he is sure to
spoil it: While, if he is to represent a Cunning Fellow, he does not make him
Politic, but downright Wicked: If a Countryman, instead of describing
Ignorance and Caution, he gives us the Picture of a mere Fool: If he raises
Laughter in the Audience, it proceeds from the dullness of the Jest, and is
directed not against the Subject but against the Poet: And, if he is to describe
the soft Passion of Love, from Mirth and Gaiety, he turns it to looseness, and
immodest Freedom.

Now the greatest part of this Accusation, may be easily wiped off from the
Poet and thrown upon the Times. The Old Comedy, we know, had then the Command
of the Stage: And all the nauseous kinds of obscene Ribaldry were as essential
to that, as Nature and Decency were to the New. The severity of Jests was their
main Beauty: And though this might (as he says) ulcerate and wound the Person
exposed, yet to be sure, it did not sail to tickle the Envious Audience. He
seems a little unjust when he charges the Poet's Jokes with Dullness, whereas
there are many the most merry and diverting in the World. But supposing they
did not take in so polite an Age as Plutarch's: this is no reason why they
might not make an Old Grecian Audience burst with Laughter, while the Genius of
the Times admitted nothing else for Wit. We see Horace scouts the Jests of
Plautus which were the Wonder of his Forefathers: And the Case is the same
with our Chaucer: That being now applicable enough to either of the three,
which an Ingenious Gentleman observes of the last; In vain he Jests in his
unpolish^d Strain;
And tries to make his Reader laugh in vain.


What Plutarch objects farther of the Poet's not observing the Rule of applying
the proper Language and Manners to each Sex and every Age and Condition, is
grounded on as bad a bottom. For this was a Perfection of the New Comedy; but
neglected with universal allowance in the Old. Not that such a Liberty
justified absolute Contradictions in the same Character; but only the straining
of that Character something beyond Nature and Reality; to surprise and amuse
the Spectators. Thus we find such Thoughts and Words, and Designs given to a
Parcel of Mannish Strumpets, as would almost exceed the true Boldness of the
other Sex. Thus we see an ill-manner'd Citizen, painted with the Bluntness and
Stupidity of a Rustic: And the Grave Socrates represented with as great a
mixture of Folly and Madness, as our Sir Nicholas Gimcrack.

That part of the Charge too must be confessed, where Aristophanes is said to
affect in many places, a Tragic Style. But then 'twill be as easily defended,
as granted. For even according to Horace's strict Rules, which were calculated
for the last Reformation of the Stage; though Versibus exponi tragicis res comica
non vult:
Inter dum tamen and vocem Comoedia tollit.


If Horace's Distinction is not taken for a full excuse, because it seems only
to allow here and there some Passionate and Great Strokes in a Comedy, and not
a General Loftiness of the whole Pieces. Yet this too is very pardonable, when
the Design requires a ridiculous height of affected Eloquence and Style. Thus,
in the Parliament of Women, while the Grave Matrons strut in their Husband's
Clothes, and seize the Administration of the State into their Hands; it is fit
they should Talk, as well as Act and Look like Senators.

There is indeed one Part, throughout almost the whole Course of Aristophanes's
Plays, which is written in a loftier Strain than ordinary: but which too will
be excused as soon as named. Whoever understand's the Nature and Use of the
Chorus, cannot be offended that it is Generous and Manly Part, is shown in Grave
and Elevated Verse: And that the Poet does not exhort to Virtue, in the same
merry Style which encounters Vice. To tell the Athenians in a direct Address,
the Folly of some of their Counsels, and the Benefit of others: to inspire them
with Heat and Vigor for a War: or to persuade them seriously to court a Peace:
to return solemn Thanks to Heaven for Blessings on the City; and to implore the
future Protection of the Tutelar Deities; were all Subjects too Noble for the
Common Speech of a Comedian. And as long as the Chorus had sometimes the same
Employment in both Species of the Drama, it could not be absurd if it used too
the same Language in both.

Upon the whole, Plutarch's main Quarrel with Aristophanes, is his not being
like Menander. And this is as unjust a reason to condemn him; as if he should
have fallen foul on his own Theseus for not using the same Arms as Romulus, or
censured Romulus for not fighting with the Conduct and the Discipline of Julius
Caesar. For the Old Comedy as well as the Old Method of War, was agreeable to
its proper Age. And if the later Improvements in both, should be acknowledged
to be founded on better and more universal Reason: Yet we have not so much
pretense to be angry with those ancient Masters for neglecting them, as with
Nature for not putting them into their Heads.

But Aristophanes's Credit does not need so poor a Plea, as the Rudeness of the
Times to support it. For though we should grant his Characters to be false, his
Jokes Malicious or Obscene; and his Designs irregular: Yet the Excellencies of
his pure Style will always keep up his Name at a just height in the World. He
has been long acknowledged on all hands for the happy Engrosser of all the
Charms, and all the Delicacies of the Language he adorned; and for the Great
Treasurer of the Attick Graces. And certainly we may be better contented to
scramble among some Dirt and Rubbish for all the Grecian Beauties in
Aristophanes; than to dig through much deeper heaps of Ordure for a few Latin
Elegancies in Petronius.

depiction of Theocritus THEOCRITVS.
Apud Fuluium Vrsinum in marmore


THEOCRITVS.
AMong all the Complaints that have been made against the Old Tribe of
Grammarians and Commentators, there is not one with less injustice taken up,
than that which taxes them with their hard usage of Theocritus's Story. For, as
if it were impossible for them to agree in their Verdict, though upon the
plainest Evidence; we find them strangely divided in their accounts of the Age
and Country of this Poet; when, all the while, he himself, if they would have
taken his Word, has settled both the Points beyond Dispute.

In an Epigram commonly set in the front of his Poem, and perhaps according to
the Author's Original Design, he thus acquaints us with his City and Family.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Chios can lay no Title to My Muse;
But I Am Theocritus of Syracuse,
Praxagoras and famed Philina's Son;
And I never wrote a Verse but was my own.


And then, as to his Age, one would think 'twere impossible that should raise a
Quarrel, while the two Idylliums remain, addressed to Hiero King of Syracuse,
and to Ptolemy Philadelphus of Egypt. This Hiero was the same famous Prince
whose Actions are recorded in the first Book of Polybius's History. He
recovered the Regal Honor to his Family, after it had been lost almost Two
Hundred Years: beginning his Reign in the Second Year of the 126th Olympiad, as
Casaubon has made out in his Observations on that Historian Page 127. etc.
. Though Pausanias Lib. 6. p. 365.
makes him to have obtained the Crown in the Second Year of the 120th Olympiad;
and though Casaubon, when he wrote his Lections on Theocritus Page 283.
, has followed Pausanias in the Mistake. As for Ptolemy Philadelphus, the
Commencement of his Reign is constantly fixed in the 123d Olympiad.

Hiero, though a Prince who made a great noise in the World by the Fortune of his
Arms, and by the Fame of his Good Government; yet seems to have expressed no
great Affection for Letters. Which is supposed to have been the occasion of
Theocritus's Sixteenth Idyllium, inscribed with Hiero's Name: where the Poet
asserts the dignity of his own Profession, complains of the poor encouragement
it met with in the World; and after a very Artisicial manner, touching on some
of the Noblest Virtues of the Prince, shows what a Brave Figure he would have
made in Verse, had he been as good a Patron, as he was an Argument, to the
Muses.

It Is probable, this Unkindness of Hiero was the main reason which prevailed
with Theocritus to leave Sicily for the Egyptian Court; where King Ptolemy then
sat, Supreme President of Arts and Wit. And we may guess that the Poet met with
kinder Entertainment at Alexandria, than he had enjoyed at Syracuse, from his
famous Panegyric on Ptolemy, which makes his Seventeenth Idyllium; and in
which, after the Praises of his Race, his Power, and his Riches, he extols his
Generous Protection of Learning and Ingenuity, as something beyond the degree
of common Virtues and Excellencies.

There are no farther Memorials of the Poet's Life to be gathered from his
Works, except his Friendship with Aratus the famous Author of the Phenomenon.
To Him he addresses his Sixth Idyllium; His Loves he describes in the Seventh;
and from Him he borrows the pious Beginning of the Seventeenth.

Theocrius lies under an unhappy censure in relation to his Death. For if Ovid
mean's Him by the Syracusian Poet in his Ibis, he must seem to have suffered,
either from his own, or from other Hands, the shameful Fate of a Malefactor
Vtque Syracosio praestrict a fauce Poetae,
Sic animae laqueo sit via clausae tuae.

. But it will not be very insolent to say, that in such a trivial Business Ovid
himself might be mistaken. For though the Old Commentators on the place, tell us
a grave Story of Theocritus's Execution, as there hinted at, and the occasion
of it; yet it is possible the whole matter may lie in confounding Theocritus the
Rhetorician of Chios, with Theocritus the Poet of Syracuse; though the Latter in
his Epigram already set down, has taken particular care to be known and
distinguished from his Namesake. Now it is true enough, as Plutarch Sympos. l.
2.
, and Macrobius Saturnal. l. 7. c. 3.
will witness, that Theocritus of Chios was Executed, by order of King
Antigonus: and the reason of his Misfortune was his most unseasonable Wit. For
having committed a very high Crime against that Prince, (who, by the way, had
but one Eye) and He promising him a Pardon, provided he would come into his
Presence to accept it; his Friends were very urgent in hastening his Journey to
Court, and told him he need not question having his Life saved, as soon as ever
he should appear to his Majesty's Eyes: Nay then, (cried Theocritus) I am a
Dead Man, if that be the only Condition of my Pardon. And this coming to
Antigonus's Ear, He justly esteemed the Railery an addition to the former
Treason, and accordingly ordered Justice to proceed.

It cannot fairly be omitted, that the attributing the Fate of Theocritus the
Rhetorician to Theocritus the Poet, was an easier slip, in as much as the
former also pretended to some knack in Verse, and has an Epigram or two
preserved in Laertius and Plutarch.

Though Theocritus passes in common Esteem, for no more than a Pastoral Poet; yet
he is manifestly robbed of great part of his Fame, if his other Pieces have not
their proper Laurels. For (not to speak of the few little Epigrams) as the
larger share of his Idylliums, cannot properly be called the Songs of
Shepherds, so they are in too great repute, to be banished from the Character
of their Author.

At the same time he ought, no doubt to lay his Pastorals, as the Foundation of
his Credit. And upon the Claim he will be admitted for the happy Finisher, as
well as for the Inventor of his Art; and will be acknowledged to have excelled
all his following Rivals, as much as Originals usually do their Copies. He has
the same advantage in the Rural, as Homer had in the Epick Poesy; and that was,
to make the Critics turn His Practice into Eternal Rules, and to measure
Nature Herself by his accomplished Model. And therefore, as to enumerate the
Glories of Heroic Numbers is the same thing, as to cast up the Sum of Homer's
Praises; so to set down all the Beauties of Pastoral Verse, is no more than an
indirect way of making so many short Panegyricks on Theocritus. Indeed,
Theocritus has been so much happier than Homer, as Virgil's Eclogues are
reckoned more unequal Imitations than his Aeneis.

It must be owned that the Dialect which Theocritus wrote in, has a great share
in his Honors. The old Dorian Phrase seems to have been introduced on purpose
for these Compositions: Or one would think this was the plain Language of the
Golden Age; and that the Poet had expressed the Speech of these Good Mortals,
as well as the Manners. On the other hand, many excellent Judges have
maintained, that his Muse now and then, rather show's her ill-breeding than her
simplicity: that her Country Air and Tone are both a little uncouth; at least
that they appear so to the elegancy and the niceness of Modern Times. Now to
this Censure it might, with submission, be returned; that unless the Shepherds
are allowed some ruder liberties in their Words and Carriage, they will seem to
be abridg'd of the Privileges of their Nature and their Condition. For though
they ought not to be either grossly stupid, or critically refined; yet it would
be a safer error to let them smell rank of the Field, than to deck them with
the least spruceness of the City. We see the ill effects of the contrary
practice, in the famous Pastorals of the Italians and of the French; who have
turned their Swains into Courtiers, for fear of making them Clowns.

It seems indeed, reasonable enough, that the Purity of Modern Tongues should
not admit the use of a grosser Dialect, even in Pastoral Pieces: Though, as for
our selves, the Scotch-Songs which pass with so much applause, show that it is
not impossible to revive this old Conduct among Us with Success. However,
Theocritus is not to be judged by the Manners of our Times, but by his own. We
must not conceive the Performers in His Pastorals like those in Spencer's
Feeding their Flocks upon the Hills of Kent,
But in the rude Fields of Ancient Sicily: and here they may be as rustic as
they please, without offense; though there perhaps they ought to have been more
cautious and more decent.

It Is certain Quintilian, however he has been of late misconstrued, never
intended his Judgment on Theocritus for a Reproach, when he observes, that His
Rustical Muse was not only afraid to appear in the Forum but even in the City
Instit. l. 10. c. 1.
. For the Rhetorician could mean no more, but that the Language and the
thoughts of Theocritus's Shepherds ought neither to be imitated in Public
speaking, nor in any Gallant Composure. Yet the Poet might for all this, be
admirable in his way, as indeed, Quintilian in the same place expressly
pronounces him.

But should the Dialect of Theocritus not be admitted among his Graces, he can
produce enough besides to secure his Rural Crown from the boldest Competitor.
Mr. Dryden acknowledges him to have been raised above Virgil himself, by the
inimitable tenderness of his Passions; by the propriety of his Wit, never
departing from the Plains and Cottages; and by an Art that he has of betraying
his Learning; (as his Nymphs do their Love) merely by endeavoring to conceal
it. These Excellencies Mr. Dryden Preface to the Second Miscellan.
would fix to distinguish the Sicilian Poet, from all others in the World: And
to pretend to confirm His Judgment, would be the same rashness as to oppose it.

To say nothing of Virgil, who disdain's a meaner Censor, as well as a meaner
Translator than Mr. Dryden; it will be no breach of modesty to affirm, that the
greatest part of the succeeding Pastorals, are as far distant from these
Ornaments, as from the Age that produced them for their Patterns. The Persons
introduced have not only the Speech, but the Address and the Carriage of
Gentlemen: Their Love is the highest Gallantry, and their Wit the choicest
Invention. Our own Incomparable Sir Philip Sidney has sallen into the common
humor, though not in the common fault. Some of his Shepherds talk in as fine a
Strain of Sense and Elegancy, as if each was a true Philisides: Showing Wits
(as Palladius observed) that might better become such Shepherds as Homer speaks
of, who are Governors of the People, than such Senators who hold their Council
in a Sheep-cote Arcadia. page 14.
. But then with what a matchless Judgment has that Noble Author framed a
necessity for his Practice? The Old Epique Poets, when their Heroes accomplish
any Adventure that seems placed beyond the reach of Human Force, salve the
Probability, by joining the miraculous assistance of the Gods: And, Sir Philip,
when his Rural Lovers act and talk above the Nature and Character of the Common
Inhabitants of the Plains, refers the whole Business to the eztraordinary
Influence of Heaven. He is careful to let us know that the particular favor of
Providence had not more distinguished His Arcadia from other Countries by the
Benefits of the Climate and of the Soil, than by the Parts and the Wisdom of
the People, and that these were as Common Blessings as the others: The Muses
having chose this Country for their chief repairing Place; and having bestowed
their Gifts so largely here, that the very SHEPHERDS had their Fancies lifted
to so high Conceits, as the Learned of other Nations were content both to
borrow their Names, and to imitate their Cunning Arcadia. page 9.
.

Those Idylliums of Theocritus, which are not admitted for Pastorals, are of so
different kinds, that no Man has yet attempted to reduce them into Classes.
Salmasius In Solin.
contents himself to say, that we may call them what we please besides Pastoral
Verses. And, Heinsius Lect. Theocrit. Cap. 1.
though he tells us he could distinguish them, yet wisely declares he will leave
the Task, for other Men to try their Judgments upon. But perhaps it would save
a needless Trouble to call them altogether by the Modern Name of Poems on
several Occasions. And this notion Heinsius himself must in some measure
favor; while he observes that the Ancients gave them the Title of Idylliums
for no other reason, but to express the variety of their Natures. But though they
cannot be divided into Heads fit to express their form, yet they may fall under
such as will distinguish their Praises. For the Nine first, and the Eleventh
being all that are acknowledged true Pastorals, there are abundance of others,
which are therefore only not Pastorals, because the Scene of Business does not
lie in the Plains and Feeding Grounds, but in some other part of the Country;
not among the Shepherds, but among their Neighbors as rude and simple as
themselves: Such as the Reapers in the Tenth Idyllium, the Gossips in the
Fifteenth, the Fishermen in the Twenty-first, etc. Now these Pieces have a
right to most of the fine things that are usually said of the Pastorals, to
which they are so nearly allied. Several others of the Idylliums are little
Copies directed to private Friends, on some particular account; as the Twelfth,
the Twenty-eighth, the Twenty-ninth, etc. These neither agree all in Dialect,
nor in Measures, yet for their general Air of familiar Simplicity and Morality,
meet with a common Esteem. The Nineteenth and the Thirtieth, on Cupid stung by
a Be, and on The Death of Adonis, seem both to be written with the Spirit and
the delicacy of Anacreon; the latter only having the farther Benefit of His
Numbers: though the first too has now recovered that Advantage in the English
which it wanted in the Greek.

But the most admired among these Miscellaneous Pieces, are the Panegyricks and
the Hymns, addressed to Ptolemy, Hiero, Castor, and Pollux, and Hercules; by
which Theocritus has shown, that he (as well as Virgil did afterward) could
upon occasion; raise his Sicilian Muse to a loftier Strain; that he understood
the Gaitey and Wisdom of the Court, and the Bravery of the Camp, as well as the
simple honesty and hardiness of the Country: and, in short, that he could as
well sing the Combats of Heroes, as the Contentions of Shepherds.

LYCROPHON.
LYCOPHRON was a Native of the City Chalcis in Euboea. His Father Socleus was a
Grammarian by Profession; after whose Death, he had the luck to be Adopted by
Lycus the Historiographer Suid.
. We may be satisfied of his Proficiency under both their cares, by just
looking on his Poem that survives; and we shall be ready to acknowledge, that,
whatever other Fortune they might leave him, he was certainly the full
Inheritor of their proper Arts. One would almost think, that the only design of
the Work, was to unite their Collections, as he had done their Families: and
that the Verbal Stories of Socleus, joined to Lycus's Historical Treasures, had
furnished Cassandra with all the Oracles she delivers.

It is necessary to fall thus suddenly from the Author to his remaining Labor,
because he has scarce any other Memorials to entertain us with. We are told
indeed, that he lived under Ptolemy Philadelphus, and made a Star in the
Poetical Pleias, which shone in that Reign Ibid.
, Ovid Vtque Cothurnatum periisse Lycophrona narrant,
Sic animae laqueo sit via clausa tuae,
in Ibin.
informs us farther that he died by the stroke of an Arrow. We hear too, that
he was a very Voluminous Author, though only one of his Pieces has arrived at our
Age; that besides his Critical Essays in Prose, He exercised himself with fair
Success in almost all the Fields of Poesy, from the loftiness of Tragedy to the
humble Spirit of Anagram, which lays claim to the honor of his Invention. But
these Notices are of little concern to one that is impatient to be acquainted
with his Raving Lady, and who will gladly let Cassandra's Story make amends for
the deficiency of Lycrophon's.

The common account of this unhappy Prophetess informs us, that she was
Daughter to King Priam of Troy, and that being courted in no very Honorable
way, either by Apollo, or as some will have it, by his Priests, upon promise of
the Gift of Divination, if she complied; she first got possession of the
Reward, and then honestly denied the service. But her baffled Suitor in revenge
for the Injury, found a way to turn his Grant into a Curse. For, procuring it
to be ordered by the Voice of the Oracle, that no Man should ever credit what
Cassandra said; her Inspiration proved a desperate torment to her, instead of a
Heavenly favor.

This then is the foundation of Lycophrons's Piece. Cassandra, or as she was
otherwise called, Alexandra, is supposed to be shut up in a close Tower, as
well to keep her from frighting the People; as to try whether the Solitary
Confinement might not bring her to her right Senses. During this restraint, her
superstitious Old Father commands the Keeper to come and bring him a punctual
Account of all that the Princess had said under her Fit. This Recital made by
the Keeper, is the Form of the Poem. He begins with a promise of Faithfulness,
and, having hinted to the King, how different a manner of Speech she had now
used from her common strain, appearing a mere Sphinx, and affecting the darkest
and the most perplexed thought and expression; he then proceeds to repeat her
whole intricate Speech to the King. In which, beginning at the Voyage of Paris,
who was then Sailed for Sparta on his amorous Expedition; She throws out in a
most terrible Rant, a predictiof all the Miseries that should be occasioned by
this Adventure: The Calamities of the ten Years Seige of Troy, and the no less
strange Disasters, that should happen, as well to the returning Victors, as to
the dispersed Relics of the Conquered People. At last she enquires into the
Original Cause of the Quarrel between Europe and Asia; and, having described
the stealing away of Europa, the Voyage of the Argonautes, and the other famous
Old Contentions; she looks forward to the Design of Xerxes against Greece; and
having reached the Times succeeding Alexander the Great, she there breaks off,
upon a sudden remembrance that no Body will, at present, believe Her. And then
the Keeper with a short Epilogue to the King, concludes the Poem: which is a
kind of Tragic Monody, or Narrative of a single Person.

Those who are not so equal Judges as to distinguish between the Design and the
Execution, will be sure to condemn a Poet, whose chief Ends are Instruction and
Delight, for using such a Conduct, as by rendering him wilfully unintelligible,
must needs make him appear very unpleasant. But whoever can pardon Lycophron
for the rashness of his Undertaking, cannot fail to applaud him for the
greateness of his Success. If it be reckoned so glorious in a Modern Tragedian
to hit the short Character of a raving Person, and to suit the Language to the
extravagancy of the Condition: what an Atchievment was it, to fill a whole
Piece with the single Representation of a Possessed Lady, and yet never to
transgress against nature and decency? In drawing the Image of common Madness,
it is enough to be handsomely absurd. But when the Frenzy is supposed to be
Divine, and the Fit to proceed from a Miraculous Transport; then the^e must be
a dark consistency of Speech as well an appearing distraction: There must be
the obscure certainty, as well as the open fury of an Oracle. And what could
better answer such a Project, than to join in one wild Discourse, almost all
the Terms, and almost all the Adventures of the most copious Language, and of
the most copious History in the World?

If we add to this, the liveliness of the Transporting Passion, and the
artificial strangeness of the Digressions; it will not be Honor enough, to fix
this Piece as the best Epitome of the Grecian Tongue, and of the Grecian
Fables: but Lycophron will maintain his Seat in the Constellation of Poets; how
ever some late Critiques have attempted to pull him from his Sphere. And though
we should suppose, that he formerly made but a dark Figure in that Station; yet
the Cloudy Spots are now happily removed, the Riddles and Mysteries are
explained, and Cassandra is at last come into Credit and Esteem.

CALLIMACHVS.
CALLIMACHUS was born in Cyrene Strab. l. 17. p. 838.
, the famous City of Ancient Libya. His common Title of Battiades makes the
Grammarians usually assign one Battus for his Father: But, perhaps he may as
well derive that Name from King Battus the Founder of Cyrene, from whose Line,
as Strabo Page 837.
assures us, he declared himself to be Descended. We are not informed of the
particular Year of his Birth; though sew of the Poets have been forgotten by
Eusebius. However it is agreed, that he commenced his Fame under the Patronage
of Ptolemy Philadelphus, and continued it in the Reign of his Successor Ptolemy
Euergetes; whose Queen Berenice having Consecrated her Locks in the Temple of
Venus, and a cunning Mathematician, having stolen them thence to Translate them
to Heaven, gave occasion to the Fine Elegy of this Poet, which we have now only
in the Latin of Catullus.

Whoever was his Father, the Poet has paid all his Duties and Obligations to
Him in a most delicate Epitaph, which we find in the Anthologia, and which
shows that Martial had good reason to assign him the Crown among the Grecian
Writers of the Epigram. The Old Gentleman is supposed thus to address the
Visitants at his Tomb, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Stranger! I beg not to be known but thus,
Father and Son of a CALLIMACHUS.
Chief of a War, the first enlarged his Name;
And the last sung what Envy never shall damn:
For, whom the Heavenly Muse admired a Child,
On His Gray Hairs the Goddess always smiled.


Before Callimachus was recommended to the favor of the Court, he taught
School in Alexandria, and had the honor of breeding Apollonius the Author of
the Argonauticks: who making him but an unkind requital for his Labor,
provoked Callimachus to vent his Passion in an Invective Poem, levelled against
his ungrateful Scholar, under the reproachful name of IBIS Suid. in Callim.
; which furnished Ovid with a Pattern and a Title for his Biting Piece of the
same Nature.

How capable soever our Poet might be of the highest seize in Verse; he
seems to have had a particular fancy for short Copies. And when his envious
Rivals used to allege this as their main objection against his Muse, that she
could not attempt any thing of bulk; he gave them the ingenious Answer at the
end of the Hymn to Apollo, which seems to be composed and introduced with all
that Art, which Ovid make's the Great Excellency of Callimachus. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Sly Envy in his Ear Apollo told,
He Is poor that writes less than a Sea can hold.
Apollo spurned the Monster off, and said,
See vast Euphrates how his Billows spread;
But see the Loads of Muck that press his side,
And foul the Water, while they raise the Tide.
But not with Liquor drawn at every Stream,
Great Cere's Maids regale their Heavenly Dame:
But some untainted Crystal Brook supplies
It Is spotless drops to purge the Sacrifice.


The Scholiast on this place observes, that to stop the Mouths of these
detractors, the Poet composed his Hecate, a Work of a larger size; now lost,
but frequently cited by Grecian and Roman Authors.

Those few Persons who have a right taste and a just esteem for these smaller
Compositions, will think that Callimachius needed nothing else to ensure his
Reputation. And if it be true, what Suidas reports, that he wrote above Eight
hundred Pieces, he will stand free enough from the imputation of laziness, though
he have no unweildy Labor to produce in his own Defense.

What we now have under his Name, are a few Hymns and Epigrams: the first of
which as they make far the largest part of his Remains, so they are of the
greatest Credit, and seem the main Foundation of his fair Character amongst his
Modern Friends.

It looks a little strange that Ovid Battiades toto semper cantabitur orb,
Quamvis ingenio non valet art valet.
Am. El. 15. l. 1.
when he gives him a place in his fine Catalogue of Poets, should pronounce him
immortal, barely upon account of his Art, and at the same time expressly deny
his Title to Wit.

Indeed, we have still many prodigious Instances of his Art, as (besides the
Apology already set down) the manner of bringing King Ptolemy's Praises into
the Hymn to Jupiter, the making Apollo while yet in his Mothers Belly, Prophecy
the same Prince's Victories; and the like. Yet it will be a difficult matter to
persuade any one, who has considered the surprising Delicacy of his thought and
turn, to compound for half his Applause, and to quit the credit of his
Invention, for that of his Judgment. Both the Talents seem so happily tempered
together, that it is hard to give an instance of one Virtue, without displaying
the other in the same view. What can be a nobler proof of both, than the
Gracefulness of those Transitions; where, while he is commending one Deity, he
d^aws in another with so gentle force, as not to wrong the first Subject by
obliging a new one? Of this kind is that admired stroke on Hercules in the Hymn
to Diana: (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
There, watching at Jove's Gate, 'till closing Day,
Mercury thy Arms, Good Phoebus takes thy Prey:
Phoebus thy Prey, ever Brave Alcides joined
The Immortal Host: Now Phoebus has resigned
His Glorious Task, and Blessed Alomena's Son
Unwearied waits to lift the Venison down.
Him, laughing all the Deathless Court survey's,
And most the Dame whose Envy nursed his Praise.
'Till from thy Chariot, torn with matchless power
He drags the struggling Bull, or Forest Boar
With hind-leg spurning. He, with sly address,
Commends thy Labors in the Nobler Chase.
'Scour, Goddess, scour the Forests, and pull down
'The hurtful Herd; 'till rescued Mortals own
'Thy Helping Power, like mine. Let Goats and Hares,
'Unheeded climb the Cliffs, and lose their fears:
'Are Goats and Hares injurious to Mankind?
' Boars root the Plants, Boars vex the painful Hind,
'And Bulls are Plagues: These, these must be suppress't.
Thus He, and labors with the unweildy Beast.


What can be a fairer Argument for the union of the same Talents, than those
wise and delicious Sentences; which striking us suddenly in a work where one
would not expect them, look as much like Inspiration as any thing that Poesy
can produce? Two of these in the very first Hymn, may vie with the entire
Labors of more bulky Authors. The first of them, is a fine Answer to the
Modern Libertines, who from the fancied uncertainty of a future State, take
occasion to live and die at a venture, and expect as good a Chance as their
Neighbors. The Poet is speaking of Jupiter's Title to the Empire of Heaven, as
a thing acknowledged and unenvied by his Two Brothers; and hence he reflects on
the Folly of the Ancient Story-tellers, who would make the Three Sons of Saturn
divide the Three Realms by Lot: (...)
(...)
(...)
For who, yet blessed with Senses, would submit,
A Lottery should decide his doubtful Right
To Heaven or Hell? In things of equal State
The Lot's of use, and ends the vain Debate:
But those so Wide, that Distance cannot name
The Space, for Distance is expressed by Them.


The other is the concluding Strain of the Hymn; where he makes his
Farewel-prayer to the Deity: (...)
(...)
(...)
Hail Father! Hail again! and send us down
Virtue and Gold. For Gold is quickly gone,
Unblessed with Virtue's Care; and Virtue's cold,
Naked of Wealth: send Virtue down and Gold.


Some Learned Men have endeavored to make Ovid's Judgment, speak a more
favorable sense. But whoever casts his Eyes on what Heinsius Prolegom. in
Hesiod.
has performed in that Cause, and considers how he is gravel'd in the
impossible Attempt; will be apt to imagine, that Ovid intended his Words should
be understood according to their natural import, but that through a Spirit of
Envy and Emulation, he has wilfully contracted his Rival's Praises. It Is plain
he had no higher ambition than to be thought superior to Callimachus; and he
declares he should admire a Mistress who would honor him with that preference
Est quae Callimachi prae nostris rustica dicit
Carmina; cui placeo, protinus ipsa placet.
Amor. l. 2. El. 4.
.

But the greatest testimonies of Callimachus's worth, and the foundation of his
Character with the Ancients, were his numerous Pieces in the Elegiac Strain, Of
these, we have only the Hymn on Minerva's Bath, and Catullus's Translation of
the Copy, on Queen Berenice's Hair. The former seems, like his other Hymns, to
incline most to the free Spirit of Lyriques; the curious Story of Tiresias
making the greater part of the Poem. The other is more agreeable to our Common
Notions of Elegy; and, as it is commonly printed with the Works of Tibullus and
Propertius in the same Strain; so it may vie with the sweetest and the most
exact of their Pieces. For instance, they have nothing of a more natural turn,
than that thought which makes it a greater Honor to belong to the Queen's
Head, than to have a place among the Constellations: the Star is supposed to
speak, and thus Compliments its Mistress, Sed quanquam me nocte premunt
vestigia divum,
Luce autem canae Tethyi restituor;
Non his tam laetor rebus, quam me abfore semper,
Abfore me a Dominae vertice discrucior.
Sydera cur retinent? utinam coma regia fiam,
Proximus Arcturo fulgeat Erigone.
But though all Night honored with Feet Divine,
And lodged with Tethys when I cease to shine;
The unequal Glory Banished I contemn,
Banished for ever from my Princely Dame.
Ye Gods restore me to that Sacred Head,
And let Arcture, unparted court his Maid!


This Specimen, (which to be sure has lost nothing in the Latin Version) is of
itself almost enough to justify Quintilian, when he gives Callimachus the
Crown in Elegy Lib. 10. c. 1.
; and to show that Propertius was not much out in his choice, when he pitched
on Him for his Pattern Inter Callimanchi sat erit placuisse libellos,
Et cecinisse modis, pure poeta, tuis.
Lib. 3. Eleg. 5.
.

There is indeed another passage in Propertius which seems to contradict his
former Judgment, and which is commonly alleged by those who pretend to censure
Callimachus. It is in the Thirty third Elegy of the second Book, Tu satius
memorem Musis imitere Philetam,
Et non inslati somnia Callimachi.
But, You my Friend, court sweet Phileta's Muse,
And fly the Dreams of Swollen Callimachus.


It Is true by joining non with inslati in the construction, the difficulty is
easily solved, and the supposed detraction turns into a Commendation. But it is
much more rational to imagine that Propertius here censures some particular Work
of Callimachus (at present not extant) as bombast and extravagant; advising his
Friend to apply himself to some easier and more agreeable Labor. Scaliger
judges the particular Piece to have been the (...) which Martial scout's as a
hard obscure business; and which Propertius's Friend might then probably think
of translating. This Conjecture may be farther improved from hence, that in one
of the old Epigrams in the Anthologia, Callimachus is supposed to have been
honored with the Commands of the Muses in a Dream, for the undertaking that
difficult Work. But whatever becomes of this point, it is impossible Propertius
should design any general Reflection; since he declares it for his highest
Wish, to be called the Roman Callimachus Vt nostris tumefacta superbiat Umbria
libris,
Umbria Romani patria Callimachi.

.

APOLLONIVS.
APOLLONIUS was an Alexandrian, the Son of Hilleus or Silleus; as we learn from
Suidas, and from the old Scholiasts; and these are the chief Authorities that
can be expected for the Stories of those Poets, whom we reckon so far inferior
to the rest in Age and in Wit.

He studied under the Care of Callimachus, but proved a very ungrateful Scholar
to that Great Man. Which reproach, together with the Revenge it brought upon
him, has been hinted in his Master's Life. By this, we cannot doubt, but that
he was Born under Ptolemy Philadelphus, and made his Figure in the World, in
the Reign of the Succeeding Prince, Ptolemy Euergetes.

He composed his first Essay of the Argonauticks, in the rash heat of his
Youth; and, reading the Piece in public, came off with very poor success. The
shame of this Disappointment, mortified him to such a degree, that he left his
Country, and retired to Rhodes. Here, resolving to fix a considerable time, and
setting up for a Professor of Rhetoric, he soon found his Name changed from
Apollonius of Alexandria, to Apollonius of Rhodian; which has prevailed ever
since, to the injury of his Native City.

As the chief design of his willful Banishment was to retrieve his Credit, by
polishing his Work; so he plied the Project so hard at Rhodes, that having
completed the Corrections and Improvements, and trying his Fortune once more
in a Public Recitation, he gave a general satisfaction to the People, and had
the Honor to be made free Denizen of their City. And then returning to
Alexandria, and publishing his Poem, he was received with universal
Approbation, and merited the Reward of succeeding Eratosthenes in the care of
the famous Library.

We hear no more of him, but, (what is very extraordinary) that they buried him
in the same Tomb with his ^aster Callimachus. Either to make a feigned
Reconcilement after Death between Persons that could not brook any while they
were living: Or to put a fair covering on the Quarrel, and to hide it from the
knowledge of Posterity.

Though the Subject of Apollonius's Poem, be one of the Noblest and most
celebrated Actions of Antiquity, the Expedition in search of the GOLDEN FLEECE,
yet he has scarce the happiness to be ranked with the Old Masters of Epick
Verse. One great reason of his disappointment, must needs be the advantage Ovid
has had of him, in touching on the same Adventure: All Persons being more
inclined to hear an imperfect Relation from a Gentleman, than to bear the
tedious exactness of a professed Scholar.

But though in Contentions of the present Times the partiality of the Judges be a
fair Plea for a vanquished Rival, yet it will not hold in Cases that have been
trying for many Ages together. A Thousand Years once past over, leave no more
room for injustice, than they do for Envy: And whoever is worsted in so long a
Combat, must atribute the miscarriage, not to the Credit of his Antagonist, but
to his own Default. So that to assign the reason, why the Poem of the
Argonauticks is so little in Men's Mouths, and so much less in their hands, we
should not run to the Favor of Ovid, but to the Failings of Apollonius.

If then Horace's Rule be true, of -- mediocribus esse Poetis
Non Dii, non homines, non concessere column;
Apollonius has no hard measure in being denied an honorable Place among the
Poets, since the ablest Pleaders in his Defense, could never make him rise
above the middle way. Quintilian tells us, he wrote aequali quadam
mediocritate. And though Longin gives him the fair Title of (...), yet it is plain
he can mean no more, but that the Poet has fallen into no gross absurdities,
but kept an even course of Writing. For whatever some may make of that Epithet,
it looks very Suspicious that Longin designed it for no great Commendation;
since he only brings in this Author, as an Example to confirm the Maxim, he had
just laid down, that a middle Style without any faults, is not so eligible as a
loftiness attended with many defects.

It Is probable, that what the two Grand Rhetoricians thus deliver as their
opinion concerning Apollonius, was intended to reach no farther than his
Thought and Style. But had it lain in there way to speak of his Conduct and
Contrivance, they would not, perhaps, have been more favorable Judges. For
they could never have discovered in him, the admired Arts of Institution and
Mechanism, which they would put into the Desinition of Epick Poesy. And, as
from the plain and unartificial course of the Action, they must have esteemed
him a very Historical Poet; so, they could not but have reckoned him a very
Poetical Historian too, from the liberty he has taken in measuring the time of
the Adventure.

Thus until a Second Rate be admitted in Poetry, Apollonius is not like to get
a place in the List. Parnassus will be something like Sisyphus's Mountain to
him: if his Muse cannot lift him to the very Top, she had as good never have
carried him up halfway; while the Critics, not less severe than the Infernal
Judges, cruelly thrust him down again, and force him out of her Arms.

Yet Apolloneus's Friends can never be driven to Despair, while their Poet is
acknowledged to have set Patterns for Virgil himself. As long as Dido own's her
near Kindred to Medea, and Dares, and Entellus their resemblance to Amycus and
Pollux, the Aeneis will keep up the Name of the Argonautick^ in the World; as
accomplished Statues and Paintings give a Value to their ruder Models; or, as
the Story of Creat Heroes sustains the Memory of those whom they conquered.

For the Scaliger's rigorous sentence should prevail, and the Latin Poet be
declared to have infinitely outdone the Grecian in every thing that he borrowed
from him, yet, -- non tam
Turpe fuit vinci quam contendisse decorum:
And Aeneae magni dextra cadis, ought to be as great a consolation to a
vanquished Poet, as to a dying Warrior.

depiction of Aratus ARATVS.
Apud Fuluium Vrsinum in nomismate aereo


ARATVS.
ARATUS was born at Soli Strab. l. 14.
, a famous City of Cilicia founded by the Wise Solon Diog. Laert. in Sol.
, and afwards called Pompeipolis in honor of Pompey the Great Strabo l. 14.
. His Father's Name was Athenodorus and his Mother's Lenodora, or Letophila, as
it is variously written. He was Scholar to Dionysius of Heraclea, the Stoic:
on the Principles of which Sect, His Verses (as well as those of Manilius) are
established.

He wrote under the Patronage of Antigonus Sirnam'd Gonaras King of Macedon;
who began his Reign in the Hundred and Twenty-fifth Olympiad, as it is settled
in Eusebius, and not in the Hundred and fifth, as we find it corruptly in the
Life of the Poet commonly set before his Works. This Excellent Prince, besides
his General Encouragement of Learned Men; is said to have admitted Aratus into
a particular familiarity and esteem.

The Old Scholiasts when they compile Aratus's Life complain grieviously of a
Story that was got abroad, how King Antigonus, merely for the Jests sake,
commanded Him to write of Heavenly Bodies, and Nicander of the Art of Medecin;
whereas Nicander was an expert Astronomer, and Aratus a celebrated Physician,
but both of them entire Strangers to one another's Arts. This Notion they
gravely co^^^e by observing that Aratus and Nicander, were as far from being
Cotemporaries as Twelve, (they might have said Twenty) Olympiads could make
them. The former living in the time of the first Ptolemy King of Egypt, and the
other under the Fifth Prince of that Name. But they never mention the occasion
of this Vulgar Error for fear of injuring, in some measure, the Author they
were to adorn. Otherwise, they might have fixed a Foundation for the Fancy in
Tully's account of these Two Poets, given in his First Book de Oratore, where
he tells us, "'It Was a confessed Point among the Learned, that Aratus, a Man
utterly ignorant of Astrology had written most elegant Verses about the Heavens
and the Stars; and that Nicander of Colophon was beholden for his Georgicks to
his acquaintance with the Muses, not to his knowledge of the Country."

If we omit here the Friendship Aratus maintained with Theocritus, (which has
been already hinted under that Poets History) we find no more of him; only that
he Corrected Homer's Odyssey when it had undergone a desperate Course of
Corruptions, and that he was sent for into Syria by King Antiochus, to perform
the same Good Office to the Ilias Vit. Graec.
.

His Work, which in many Old Editions passes for no more than a single Poem
with the common Name of PHAINOENA, has been thought since to make two distinct
Pieces, the first only being called PHAINOENA, and the Second Entitled
DIOSEIA. The former is properly Astronomical, giving an account of the
Situation and the Affection, of the Heavenly Bodies; the other Astrological,
showing the particular Influences, arising from their various dispositions, and
relations. Yet whoever considers the Noble Beginning of the Phenomenon, and the
plain entrance on the Diosem^ia without any Formality or Address; will still
conclude them to be one Poem divided into Two Books.

The late Italian and French Critics, extremely despise this Performance:
because the Subject of it, according to their Notions, is not properly
Poetical. Yet Cicero could tell us that Arate^ composed Ornatissimos atque
optimos versus, most Polite, and most Excellent Verses: Yet Quintilian could
declare, "that though the Matter of his Work want's Motion, having no Variety, no
Passions, no Person that ever makes a Speech; yet he has fully answered his
Argument, which was all that he proposed."

Indeed, as the Honors done the Poet by the favors of King Antigonus, by the
Labor of no less than Forty Greek Scholiasts, and above all by the Versions
and Illustrations of Germanicus Caesar, and of Tully; are sufficient Proofs
what a Value Antiquity set upon his Compositions: So he is not altogether to
seek in what may recommend him as forcibly to Modern Tastes, and to a new
Reputation. For though the Doctrine of the Stars Dominion in Heaven, be almost as
much out of fashion, as the Stories how they came thither; and though few will be
at the pains to read on a Subject which they esteem but cramp Nonsense; yet
Aratus has in some measure provided against that Misfortune, by introducing his
Work, with such a Strain of Sense, of Wit, and of Religion; as if it does not
charm Men to look quite through the Poem, yet will engage them to allow that
first Essay the Praise of an entire Labor. It cannot be amiss to set it down
in this place; because few Readers go any farther, and all ought to go thus
far. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
JOVE claims our opening Lays; by Mortal Strain
Never to be missed, never to be left unsung.
Jove, with Eternal Influence diffused,
Fills the wide Compass of extended Things.
His Hand the Spacious Earth compacted holds
Marked into various Tracks: nor, with less force
Binding, unites the Giddy Multitudes
In Towns and Tribes. Blown by His Breath, the Sea
Heaves up its liquid Vastness; or, more tame,
Sinks in low Ports, and licks the crooked Shore.
Jove with a Common Maintenance supplies
His Human Sons: the numerous Family
Live on their Universal Father's Store.
Yet He, unused to feed an idle Race,
Points out their Work; and to their daily Tasks
Prompting, by Hungers Admonition, calls.
He shows us, when the ripened Soil demands
The Spade, or laboring Oxen: when the Plants
Crave a new Seat; and when the hopeful Seed,
In Season cast, with quick Increase will thrive.
Him therefore first, Him last we praise, and serve
With earliest Offerings, and concluding Vows.
Hail Father! Hail Eternal Miracle,
Eternal Help! and Hail! Ye Jove's Firstborn!
Sweet Muses Hail! while Heaven my Voice employs,
(If not unworthy I implore Your Aid)
Assist, and raise my Numbers to my Theme.


It Is true indeed, that according to the exact nicety of Rules, it is not
esteemed good Policy in a Poet, to open all his Strength and Riches at the
first show. But perhaps that Maxim is to be understood only of Grand and
Heroical Designs; not of those plainer Subjects, which being unable to support
themselves by any real Worth and Greatness, may be ushered in with some
inviting Address. Even in Poetical Buildings it is not absurd, to make the
Front, the noblest Piece of the Work; when the Beauty of that, is to cover the
disadvantage of the other Parts, which stand farther out of common sight and
notice.

As long therefore as the happy dependence of all Natural things on the
Counsels of Heaven, is confessed to be the highest Subject of a Christian's
thoughts as well as of a Poets; Aratus his Name is not likely to be lost, while
Piety and Sense endure. Especially, since we find one of his Sentences honored
with a place in the Inspired Writings Act. 17.28. (...).
, his Wit cannot now have a shorter Period than the Glorious Bodies it
describes Cum sole and Luna semper Aratus erit.
Ovid. Am. L. 1. El. 15.
: And, if one may say so without indecency, the Situation of St. Paul will
confirm the Prophecy of Ovid.

NICANDER.
NIcander was a Colophonian, as not only Suidas, but Tully and Macrobius call
him. Therefore Tanaquil Faber had no reason to pass such a hard censure on
Suidas for not making him a Native of Claros. It Is true he calls himself a
Clarian at the end of one of his Pieces now extant, and at the beginning of the
other. But 'twas usual with the Men of Colophon to borrow an Epithet from their
Neighboring City, which the Temple of Apollo Clarius made so renowned in the
World: as may hereafter be observed in the Story of Antimachus, concerning
whom, the French Critic has published the same mistake.

Nicander lived in the time of Attalus the last King of Pergamus; who left the
Roman People Heirs to his Kingdom: that is, about the 160th Olympiad. He was
famous for the triple Profession of Physic Grammar and Poesy: and has a vast
number of Pieces in Prose and Verse, attributed to him in Ancient Authors,
which are reckoned up by Vossius in his Fourth Book de Historicis Graecis.

In all probability the Muses had the least share in his Fame. For though Cicero
indeed commends his Georgicks, as a Work of a very happy Vein, yet in his
common Character, his Learning runs much higher than his Wit. The two surviving
Poems of the Theriaca and the Alexipharmaca, (both spent in the same general
Subject of providing against the mischiefs of poisonous Creatures, though by
different Medecines) are manifestly intended more for Instruction than Delight;
more for the assistance of the Memory, than the entertainment of the Fancy or
of the Ear. So that he would most infallibly lose his place among the Ancient
Poets, if his pretensions were not supported by a juster Credit, obtained on
other accounts: every Tribe being desirous of admitting a Great Man into their
Profession, without making much enquiry whether or no he understands the
particular Business of their Art.

DIONYSIVS the Periegetick.
DIONYSIUS seems much happier than the other Grecian Poets of those later
Times, in having his History recorded by an Author of Cred^^t. Pliny in his
Natural History, speaking of the Persian Alexandria, (afterward called Antioch
and at last Charrax) could not but take that occasion of paying his Respects to
a Person who had so much obliged him, and whom he professes to follow above all
Men in the Geographical Part of his Work. He tells us then, "That Dionysius was
a Native of this Alexandria; and that he had the Honor to be sent by Augustus
Caesar, to survey the Eastern part of the World, and to make Reports and
Observations about its State and Condition, for the use of the Emperor's Eldest
Son, who was at that time preparing an Expedition into Armenia, Parthia and
Arabia Lib. 6. c. ^7.
."

This is all the certain information we have concerning Dionysius's Person and
Affairs: and this is infinitely preferable to the longest Legends of the
Scholiasts: And yet it has not been sufficient to hinder the vanity of the
Critical Disputes about his Age. For we find Barthius placing him under the
Antonini; Salmasius under the Emperor Severus; and Scaliger abusing Old
Eustathius as a Dreamer, because he had fancied him a Writer of the Augustan
Times. They all pretend some color for their Opinions, from that Verse of the
Author where he calls Rome -- (...)
and will have that to be understood of those later Emperors, who had commonly
Associates in the Supreme Power. But, besides that this might be as well spoken
in either of those junctures when Augustus shared the Sovereignty with Antony,
or with Tiberius; it does not much advance the Credit of these Learned Men,
either not to have met with this passage of Pliny, or to have opposed so Great
an Authority, after they had seen it.

Dionysius wrote a great number of Pieces, reckoned up by Suidas and by
Eustathius. His Survey of the World is the only one we now enjoy: and it would
be superfluous to say that this one of the most exact Systems of Ancient
Geography, when it has been already observed, that Pliny himself proposed it
for his Pattern.

It Is a common Fancy, that Dionysius is no more to be reckoned a Poet, than any
of those other Authors, who compelling hard Precepts into the fetters of
Numbers, have made an easier Conquest for the Memory. And we are apt always to
assign him the same Company, in which we were first acquainted with him at
School; the Grammarians and the Rhetoricians, who cramped us with their dry
Lessons in Verse.

But this is a very injurious mistake: For though he must be acknowledged to be
more valuable for the usefulness of his Subject, than for the agreeableness of
his Wit, or the Harmony of his Measures; yet he has taken care to show us, by
many instances, that He had a Genius capable of more sublime Un^ertakings, and
that he constantly made the Muses ^he Companions and the Guides of his Travels,
^ho' he did not divert himself with their finer Con^erse on every occasion. Now
not to insist on his Descriptions of the Island Leuca inhabited by de^arted
Heroes Verse. 544.
; of the Terrible and Monstrous Whales in Taprobana Verse. 596.
; of the poor Scythians that ^welt by the Maeotick Lake Verse. 663.
; the account of himself, when he comes to describe the Caspian Sea Verse. 707.
; ^f the Swans and of the Bacchanals on the Banks ^f Cayster Verse. 836.
, and many more of the same strain; (...) will be Argument enough of the
Excellency of his Poetic Spirit, only set down the concluding stroke ^f his
Work: (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
These Noblest Trains the Spacious Regions hold*
The Noblest these: but Millions yet untold
Stray here, stray there about the immeasur'd Vast;
And Mortal Art in vain attempts the rest.
The Eternal Natures can alone present
Will without Rule, and Power without restraint
They round the Chaos, round the World Unborn
First deigned their Golden Compasses to turn.
They through the Deep chalked out our ample Rod*
And broke the Lawless Empire of the Flood.
Placed the Great Aids of Human Life and Cares
Unmoved; and girt the wheeling Sphere wi^^ Stars.
They the wide Earth among their favorite Ra^^
Parting, assigned the wrangling Tribes the^^ Place.
Some in Dry Tracts they gave a boundless Scen^
And some imprisoned in the circ'ling Main.
From Them the different Soils their Temp^ take,
One's chalky White, and one a miry Black;
One turns a motly Turf: one red with Veins
Of Native Paint, the Mimick Art maintains:
Unlike the rest: as that Almighty Mind
Scatters the various Blessings of Mankind.
And now, farewell to Nature's rugged Face,
Islands, and Continents and Sacred Seas.
Farewell ye rolling Streams, ye mazie Rills,
Ye Naked Fountains, and ye shaggy Hills.
For now Great Ocean's Circuit have we run,
And over Earths wide wandering ways have gone.
But may those Powers whom all the Frame obeys,
Smile on their Poet, and reward his Lays.


OPPIAN.
OPPIAN was Born at Anazarbus a City of Cili-according to most of the Ancient
accounts of his Life. For whereas Suidas and some others from him, fix Corycus
for the Poet's Birthplace; their mistake is evident from a passage in the
Third Book of his Halieuticks Verse. 105. (...), etc.
where he seems to distinguish his own Countrymen from their Neighbors the
Corycians; though not so clearly, but that at first Glance it might give some
color to that conjecture.

The time of his Birth, is as unsettl'd, as we generally sind such matters. But
it is certain that Suidas and Eusebius are vastly out, when they place it under
Marcus Antoninus. For supposing him to have died at thirty Years old, as is
constantly reported; how could he, according to this account, have presented
his Cynegeticks to Antoninus Caracalla; though the very beginning shows them to
have been thus addressed? For all know that there passed above Thirty Years
between those Emperors. And yet the most Learned Editor of his Works
Ritterhusius has made as great a slip on the other hand, by fixing his Birth in
the Reign of Severus. For, that taking in only the Compass of Eighteen Years;
it is very unlikely he should at such an Age finish and present his
Halieuticks, as (we are certain he did) in the Life time of that Emperor. The
middle way then, must be to suppose he might be born in the former part of
Commodus's Reign; which cannot be charged with the like absurdities as the
other Opinions.

His Father Agesilaus is recorded to have been eminent for his Learning and
Wisdom, and no less remarkable for his Riches and Authority in the City. So
that Oppian had perhaps a greater advantage than any of his Predecessors, for
the polishing himself with all the Arts and Accomplishments of Human Knowledge.

He had scarce finished the entire course of his Studies, when an unhappy
accident diverted them for the present, to make them afterward the more
illustrious. The Emperor Severus, taking a Progress through Cilicia, honored
Anazarbus, among other Cities with a Visit. Now at the Procession that was made
to receive him, the Magistrates waiting on him in their Formalities; Old
Agesilaus, as a greater Philosopher than a Courtier, was the only Man missing
at the Solemnity. This piece of disrespect the Emperor resented so highly, as
to banish the old Gentleman into the Island Malta; whither his Son likewise
went, the voluntary Companion of his Troubles.

But He, with a Fate not uncommon to the Men of his Profession, owed his Glory
to his Misfortunes. For endeavoring, under this sad Confinement to amuze
himself and his Father with the diversions of Poetry: He began, after some
fortunate attempts in that way, to conceive hopes of allaying the Emperor's
Displeasure by the same means as had lessened the Effects of it. To this
purpose he engaged in the Halieuticks, dedicated to that Emperor's Son, the
design of which Work he thus gives us himself at the entrance on it. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
The Nations of the Sea, the Finny Train
Of Slaves, that own fair Amphitrite's Reign,
To Thee, Great Antoninus, I Will rehears,
Power of the World Supreme! Nor shall my Verse
Forget their Crystal Haunts, or where they feed,
Or where they Lodge; or how they raise their Breed;
Peopling the Sea with their moist Marriages,
And Propagations of the Scaly Race.
I Will sing their various Life: what Passions move
Their chilly Hearts to Quarrel, what to Love.
Tell how the Tackle, how the Plots are laid,
And the cold Secrets of the Watery Trade.


From the Greek accounts of his Life, commonly prefixed to his Works, it is
impossible to determine, whether he took his Journey to Court presently after
the finishing of his Halieuticks; or whether his Verses of Hunting, and perhaps
other pieces were not offered at the same time: though they Generally seem more
inclined to favor the last Conjecture. Yet if we consider what Sozomen the
Ecclesiastical Historian has observed, that Severus was alive when the first
Present was made to his Son Antoninus, and did himself order the Reward: and
withal, that in the Poem of Fishing, Oppian compliments both Father and Son as
then reigning with joint Power; and that in the Poem of Hunting the same
Address is not used: we might conclude with some appearance, that the former
Work only was offered to Antoninus during his Father's Life; and the other when
he was left in sole possession of the Empire.

But then, if we venture a second Reflection, and lay before us the constant
tradition of the Author's dying soon after his Journey to Court, and never find
any more Journies mentioned than one; we must be forced in some measure to
recede from this decision; and to believe that the Cynegeticks were never
presented with the Poets own hands.

However this matter is to be settled, the consequence of his Journey comes
generally attested and agreed on. That the Emperor, being ravished with the
Beauty and Art of his Compositions, in the first place ordered him a Piece of
Gold for every Verse; and then promised him the Grant of any farther Favor he
should demand. This last Happiness furnished him with an opportunity of
recalling his Father from Banishment; and was piously employed to that good
Purpose. But he did not live long to enjoy the Blessing he had restored. For a
fatal Pestilence at Anazarbus swept him away among the Multitude, soon after
his return, and quiet settltment there: he having reached no more than the
Thirtieth Year of his Age. He was Interred with the highest Honors; and had a
Noble Statue erected to his Memory, with this Inscription. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
OPPIAN, the Muse's Pride, I lived; but Fate
Hurrying me off, forbad the double Height
Of Age and Fame. Yet would the Dooming Maid
Her hasty Stroke in kindness have delayed,
'Till Years had fixed, what Nature's Force begun,
Not Human Race had shown a Greater Son.


We have at present only his Poems of the Cynegeticks and the Halieuticks, of
Hunting and Fishing; the Third which he is said to have composed on the Art of
Fowling, being yet vainly expected from the Italian Libraries, where it was
long since thought to be buried.

The dryness of his Subjects, though it offends some Modern French Critics, yet
has not hindered him from being esteemed by more knowing Judges, as an Author
little Inferior in Fancy, Art and Language, to the most celebrated Masters in
the Grecian Strain. His vast numbers of allusions and comparisons, as they
would have shown his Wit in any Design; so they give an equal proof of his
Judgment too, while they are applied to Themes that stood so much in need of
those Ornaments. The beginning and the ending strokes of each Poem have
something of so great a Spirit and Turn, as show him to have had a Genius for
much more Heroical Atcheivements in Verse. The first Lines of the Halieuticks
having been already set down, it will not be improper to add the two other
Addresses to the Emperor, at the Entrance of the other Poem, and at the
Conclusion of that. Cyneget. L. 1. V. 1. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
To Thee, Blessed Antonine, I form my Lays,
Stay of the World and of the Aenean Race;
To Thee, Sweet Offspring of the Ausonian Jove,
With whom the Immortal Dame repaid his Love;
(The Happiest Bride, the Happiest Mother shown,
In the Best Lord, and in the Fairest Son;
Assyria's Venus, an unchanging Moon.)
Worthy to Grace the high Saturnian Stemm,
( Titan give aid, and Phoebus guide my Flame.)
Whom the Great Father with his Sovereign Hand,
Formed to control the Main, and rule the Land.
For Thee fair Earth her annual Harvest yield's,
Thetis for thee the scaly Nations feed's.
For Thee wide Streams their floating Wealth convey,
And pleased Aurora smiling bring's the Day.


The Compliment at the end of the Halieuticks, is more artificial and more
just, being taken exactly from the Subject in hand, and not stretched out into
such flights as may perhaps seem too Youthful in the former Specimen. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Thus I what Works the watery Realms conceal
To Thee, Jove's Sceptered Charge, in Verse reveal.
But may thy Ships on easy Waves be born;
And may the Winds still change for their return.
Large Tributes may the fruitful Seas afford
In living Subjects to their Roman Lord.
While Neptune's Arms fair Natures Springs maintain,
And keep the World secure for Caesar's Reign.
His admirable Lessons of Morality on all occasions, especially that most wise
and elegant Reflection at the beginning of the Second Book of the Halieuticks,
on the weakness of Mankind in the smallest matters, without the influence and
the assistance of Heaven, show him to have been one of the most rational and
best Principl'd Heathens; and that his Works are able to teach us nobler
secrets, than the Mysteries of Hunting and of Fishing. 'Twas this spirit of
true Philosophy, that made him not so much as mention his own Misfortunes in
Pieces which were composed to procure their redress; except just once to insist
on the Miseries of Banishment, when the subject made it almost necessary.

To conclude, as he came into the World, when Poesy was going off the Stage, so
he made the best use of his Predecessors Labors in both Languages; whereas the
Elder Grecian Poets had only their own Countrymen for their Guides and their
Examples. And, without doubt when Julius Scaliger so often gives him the first
place in the Tribe of Greece, it is chiefly for this reason, because he has
taken care to be largely indebted to Virgil; and by not misemploying the
Treasures, has shown that he deserved to borrow them.

The End of the First Part.
THE Lives and Characters Of the Ancient GRECIAN POETS.
PART II.
OF THE Lives and Characters Of the Ancient GRECIAN POETS.
PART II. Containing those, whose Great Names and Credit have arrived at our
Age, though their Writings are for the most part lost.
LINVS.
HE has the Honor to be reckoned the first Man in the Poetic Story; though
B^^tic. p. 585.
Pausanias assures us, that he either never made any Verses, or at least that
none of his Pieces came into the Hands of Posterity. On the other side, Lib. 3.
p. 140.
Diodorus Siculus reports, that he wrote in the Pelasgian Tongue, the Acts of
the first Bacchus, and other Fabulous Pieces. For this, and many the like
reasons, we may fairly conclude, there were two of this Name, both famous for
Music and for Verse, and so Suidas has determined. But their Stories are so
confounded, that it is impossible to distinguish the Adventures of one from
those of the other. Some Authors attributing to the Elder what others report of
the Younger: and some again obliging the Younger with those Honors, which the
Elder had enjoyed in other Relations. Perhaps, it is on this account that the
Great Scaliger seems to acknowledge but one Linus; and accordingly reprehend;
In Eusebius. ad Number. DXCVII.
Eusebius, for doubling him. Indeed the most famous of the two has drowned the
Credit of his Namesake, as much as his Scholar Hercules did the Glory of the
other Heroes of that Name. And therefore as all the Actions of those Worthies
are attributed to the Grand Hercules; so whatever Linus's there may have been
in the World, they make but one Character and one History.

Linus then was either of Chalcis, Suid.
or as most agree of Pausan. Eusebius. etc.
Thebes, Son to Apollo by Suid.
Terpsichore, or by Pausan.
Psamathe; or else to Amphimarus by Suid. and Pausan.
Urania, or to Mercury by the same Lady Suid.
. He passes for the first of the Grecians who invented Rhimes and Melody: and
for this reason Virgil has done him the Honor to make him Chief Officer to the
Muses on the Aonian Mount, and deputed by them to Introduce and Complement
Gallus. Ut Linus haec illi, etc.
Eglog. 6.

His three Famous Scholars were Hercules, Thamyris, and Orpheus. Of whom, the
Ingenuity of the two last, made amends for the dullness of the first; who being
corrected once by his Master, took an occasion to knock out his Brains, with
the Harp which he was awkardly managing. Though others make Linus to have been
killed at last by Apollo, for daring to contend with him in Music and in Verse
Pausan.
.

The Old Grecians were so troubled at the loss of their admired Master, as to
introduce a solemn Custom of bewailing his Death. And every Year, before they
offered their usual Sacrifices to the Muses on Mount Helicon, they first
performed the Annual Obsequies of Linus; who for that purpose had a Statue, and
a kind of an Altar erected to Him in that Place Pausan Baeotic. p. 584.
: His Tomb being in the Temple of Apollo Lycius at Argos. Idem in Corinth. p.
118.
Homer alludes to the Custom of lamenting Linus in solemn Verses, when among
other sine Stories engraved on Achilles's Shield, he fancies the Figure of a
Boy singing to his Harp the Praise of Linus. (...)
(...)
(...) --
Iliad. 18. Here a fair Youth his tuneful Ivory strung;
While his soft Voice unhappy Linus sung.
For though (...) is rendered Chorda in this Place by the common Interpreters, yet
we have the Judgment of Baeotic. p. 585.
Pausanias to understand it of Linus the Poet.

But in one thing that most exact Historian seems to be mistaken; and that is,
when he tells us, that the sorrow for Linus's Death was so universal as to
pierce as far as Egypt: where they mourned his Fate in a solemn Song, to be
repeated at set Times Ibid. 554.
. For it appears from Herodotus, that though the Egyptians had indeed among them
a Lamentation which they called by the Name of Linus; yet it should seem they
gave it that Name only in allusion to the like Custom in Greece: Not but that
they had all the while a different reason for their Public Sorrow; and
bewailed the Death of one of their own Young Princes; under the Name of the
Grecian Poet, who had given occasion to the first Ceremony of that Nature among
his own Countrymen Vid. Herodot. Lib. 2. cap. 79.
.

It seems the Thebans laid claim to his Relics as well as the Argives: and
they had a Story among them, that when King Philip, Son to Amyntas, had
defeated the Grecians at Choeronea, he was admonished, in some extraordinary
Vision, to carry away Linus's Bones: but that being afterward countermanded by
another Vision, he took care to return them safe to Pausan. Boetic. p. 585.
Thebes. Yet in Pausanias's Age, they confessed, that Time had worn out all the
Marks of his Sepulcher Ibid.
.

ORPHEUS.
WHoever has read the Charming Story of Orpheus in Virgil, and the most
ingenious Application of it by my Lord Bacon; will be sure to despise a grave
Relation of his Life, and a dull Description of a fancied Hero. But the Poets
would take it very ill, if the Great Improver of their Art should Himself pass
for a Fable. And though Tull. de Not. Deor. l. 1.
Aristotle is said to have affirmed that there was never any such Man in the
World; yet there are Memorials enough in Authors of Credit, to prove him not
only a real Person, but one of the most considerable of Antiquity.

As to his Age, a Great Man who has had occasion lately to make use of his
Philosophy, concludes that he flourished soon after the Times of Moses.
Archaeolog. Philosoph. page 121.
Indeed Eusebius expressly sets him down cotemporary with Gideon: while Suidas
extravagantly carries him up Eleven Generations higher than the Trojan War. The
Report runs for his being born at Lebethrae in Thrace; and Calliope the Muse is
pitched on for his Mother: though he has reason to claim the Title of Father of
all the Chorus, as he is styled by the Father of all our Learning.

As the Superstition of the Old Heathens is commonly charged on the Powers of
Poetry; Orpheus must be content to bear the infamy of the first Invention, if
he aspires to the Glory of the second. It Is agreed, that, after a long Course
of the deepest Studies, and an extraordinary Skill in the Fabulous Theology; he
Traveled into Egypt, and bringing thence most of their Magic Rites, and
strange Ceremonies of Worship, he established them in Diodor. Sic. l. 4. p.
162. Pausan Eusebius. etc.
Greece. Some knowing Persons have ingeniously defended him under this Censure:
while they tell us, that he found it impossible to reclaim and instruct a
Brutish and Unthinking People, any other way, than by the grossest Notions of
Religion; and by such odd Customs and Ways of Public Worship, as might make
the greatest Impression on their Senses. That, in the mean time, he abhorred
the Polytheism he introduced; and before his Death recanted all his Absurd
Doctrines, in those Points Vid. Archaeolog. Philosoph. p. 121.
. But while the Truth of this Apology is so very uncertain, and lies under such
heavy suspicions, there is no need to advance him to such a pitch of true
Holiness, in opposition to the General Censure of his Idolatry and Impostures.
Nor will the slight excuse of -- Sic magnis componere parva solebam Archaeolog.
Philosoph. page 120.
ever stop the indignation of a Pious Man when he finds Orpheus compared with
Moses.

Those who are concerned to vindicate his Honor, may more modestly extenuate
the Crime of his Superstition, by alleging how much he deserved of Mankind,
for taming the rude Savages by the double force of his Music and of his
Precepts: and for Civilizing that Nation, which afterward spread its Arts and
Manners over the Circuit of its Barbarous Neighbors. Horace has given him his
just Commendation, as well as his just History. Sylvestres homines sacer
Interpresque Ar. Poet. Verse. 391.
Deorum
Coedibus and victu foedo deterruit Orpheus,
Dictus ob hoc lenire Tigres rabidosque Leones.
Orpheus inspired by more than Human Power,
Did not (as Poets feign) tame Savage Beasts;
But Men as lawless, and as Wild as they;
And first dissuaded them from Rage and Blood My Lord Roscommon.
.


It Is not improbable that his Music and his Verses had a large share in this
Glorious Atcheivement: And 'twas to them too he owed the Esteem and Veneration
he gained, by his Method of Expiating Horrid Wickednesses, of Curing
Distempers, and of appeasing the Anger of Heaven. For Charms and Enchantments
were always looked on, as the Divine Works of Poetry: and it is pleasant to
observe that wherever those Arts are still pretended to, the Operation is still
performed in Verse.

We are little concerned with the Philosophy of Orpheus, or with his Civil
Institutions, any farther than they were obliged to his Nobler Faculty of
Harmony and Numbers. And should we attempt an enlargement on the Passages of
his Life, History would desert us in the Enquiry; while instead of relating the
Course of his particular Adventures, it only favors us with those General
Testimonies of his Power and his Worth, which have been already produced.

The Manner of his Death is more talked of, and generally laid to the Charge of
the Thracian Dames. They say, that the Women's Quarrel with him, was occasioned
by his drawing their Husbands after him, as he past through the Country. Having
resolved on his Murder, they dared not attempt it, till the Bowl had gone
plentifully round, and inspired them with Courage for the Fact Pausan. Baotic.
page 586.
. Which gave the Hint to the Poets, to make the Villainy be committed at the
Feast of Bacchus; and the Matrons concerned in it, to be transported with the
fury of the Possessing God.

The Macedonians, who in Pausanias's time, inhabited the Country at the foot of
the Mountain Pieria, and possessed the City Dion, affirmed that Orpheus was
torn in pieces by the Women, in that very Place: There standing at about Forty
Furlongs distance from the City toward the Mount, a Pillar, with a Stone Urn
on the top, said to contain the Bones of the Poet. The River Helicon just by
this place was observed to fall under Ground, and to rise again at a
considerable distance. The Tradition of the People thereabouts, was, that
anciently the River run all along with an open Current; but that, when the
cruel Dames would have washed off Orpheus's Blood in its Stream; it immediately
suppressed it is Waters, least they should contribute to the expiation of so
horrid a Crime. There are two other accounts of his Death. The First makes him
to have perished by a Thunderbolt, for daring to disclose some Mysteries to
Mankind, which Heaven intended to keep them unacquainted with. The other
reports, that after the Death of his Wife, coming to Aornus in Thesprotia,
where there was a Necromantick Oracle, and fancying his Euridice to be always
behind him at his Heels; he at last ventured to look back, and finding himself
mistaken, was so ashamed of his Folly, as to prove his own Murderer Ibid. page
587.
.

Whatever Works he might leave behind him, it was concluded as long ago as
Aristotle's time, that there were none of his Genuine Remains in the World.
Most of the Poems under his Name (many of which we meet with in Harry
Stephens's large Edition of the Grecian Writers in Epic Verse) are adjudg'd to
one Onomacritus, who flourished near the time of Pisistratus; between the 60th
and the 70th Olympiad. Not but that some of these Pieces might have an Orpheus
for their Author; since Suidas reckons up five of the same Name, all Poets: But
then their Characters are perished though some of their Writings have been
preserved; as his Character is preserved to atone for the loss of his Writings.

MVSAEVS.
MUsaeus, like his two Famous Predecessors, has reached our Times with no
certain Testimonials, but those of an admired Name, and a general Praise. He is
said to have been Scholar Suid.
at least, if not Son to Diod. Sic. l. 4. p. 162.
Orpheus: and was like him too esteemed a Prophet, as well as a Poet. For
Strabo puts him among the (...) whom he reckons up in the Sixteenth Book of his
Geography. And In Phocic. p. 632.
Pausanias, making him one of (...), says, that he himself had seen some of his
Predictions. He had the Honor to be Priest to Ceres, and President of Her
Eleusinian Mysteries at Athens: on which account l. 4. p. 162.
Diodorus makes Hercules wait upon him in his Travels, to be initiated in those
holy Ceremonies.

He proposed Orpheus as his Pattern in all things: And therefore would not put
in for the Prize at the Pythian Games, to be bestowed on him who sung the best
Hymn to Apollo; because Orpheus had declined that Honor before him Pausan.
Phocic. p. 620.
.

At Athens within the Old Bounds of the City, over against the Acropolis, stood
a little Hill where Musaeus used to sing his Verses, and where he was
afterward Buried. It seems, it was at last, turned into a Fortification, and
called Attic. p. 46.
Musaeum.

Ibid. p. 39.
Pausanias delivers it as his Opinion, that the Pieces commonly attributed to
Musaeus in his Time, were the Works of Onomacritus, and that there were no
certain remains of Musaeus, except his Hymn to Ceres.

Indeed we have at present an admired piece of the Story of Hero and Leander
under this Name: which the Great Scaliger Poetic. Lib. 5. c. 2.
has extravagantly preferred to the Works of Homer in Age and Worth; and
pretended that it supplied the Iliad and the Odyssey with some of their finest
strokes; though they lost very much in the Copying. But in opposition to that
Tyrant in Criticism, Learned Men have generally concluded; that since we meet
so often with the Name of Musaeus, yet never with one hint about this Poem in
the Ancient Greek Authors and their Interpreters; and since a Discovery has
been made of some credible Manuscripts where the Work is inscribed (...); this
could not have the Old Musaeus for its Author, but some Learned Grammarian of
the same Name; who lived in all probability about the 5th Century, that is near
the Time of Nonnus; from whose Dionysiacs he will appear to have borrowed very
largely; upon a Collation of the two Poems Vide Dan Paraeum in Musaeum.
. However, since it has been universally acknowledged for so Correct, so Sweet,
and so Moving a Piece; it will scarce be thought unworthy of the Ancient
Musaeus; though Virgil has represented him as Foreman to the Elysian Tribe of
Poets; and bearing up his shoulders above the wondering Multitude. Musaeum ante
omnes, etc.
Aen. b. V. 667.

TYRTAEVS.
HE was born at Miletus; but lived at Athens, maintaining himself by his
Elegiac Muse, his Pipe, and his School. His story is one of the finest of
Antiquity; and the Glorious success of his Verses has advanced his Name to the
Rank of the Greatest Heroes as well as of the Noblest Poets.

The Lacedaemonians having blocked up Messene a revolted City of Peloponnesus
many Years; and having sworn to carry the Town or to die all before it: upon
consulting the Pythian Oracle were advised to apply themselves to the
Athenians, and to borrow of them a General, who should infallibly put a happy
conclusion to the Siege. The Athenians to be sure were not much inclined to
assist such powerful Neighbors. However to show some kind of Obedience to the
Oracle, and some Sense of the Honor done to their City; they sent them
Tyrtaeus, and did not much envy the Glory they were likely to get, under such a
ridiculous Commander. For, besides his poor Employment of teaching Boys; he is
reported to have been short, and very deformed; blind of one Eye, and lame into
the Bargain: and passing for little better than a Fool in the Opinion of his
Neighbors. The Lacedaemonians were, however, very glad to receive him,
desiring no other Qualification but his being lent them by the Athenians. With
him in their Train they advanced with the greatest Hopes toward Messene; and
talked of nothing but of the Victory which was to attend this Messenger of the
Fates. But being unfortunately defeated in three several Engagements; they grew
so desperate as to enrol the very Slaves whom they mortally abhorred, in the
List of Soldiers; and to promise them the Wives of those Citizens who died in
the War. And when this last ignoble shift proved ineffectual, the Spartan Kings
were resolved to lead back the Relics of their Army; and to consult at home
about some better meaning of the Oracle's Advice. To hinder this fatal Design,
Tyrtaeus began to exert all his Spirit, and all his Insinuation: And at last by
his continual Lectures of Honor and Courage, delivered in moving Verse to the
Army; he ravished them to such a Degree with the thoughts of dying for their
Country; that being all bent on another Attack, and at the same time, as it
were, sure of falling in the Encounter: every Soldier bound a little Plate of
Brass about his Arm, with an Inscription giving an account of his Name and
Family; for the use of those who should have the Care of their Interment. And
now, rushing on with a furious Transport to meet the Enemy, who came out of the
City on the Desiance sent them; after a most Bloody Field, the Victory fell to
the Lacedaemonians: and the Revolters were obliged to be satisfied with their
Ancient Subjection See Pausan. in Messen. p. 244. Diodorus Sic. l. 15. p. 492.
Justin. lib. 3. Suidas, etc.
. And thus, When, by Impulse from Heaven, Tyrtaeus sung
In drooping Soldiers a new Courage sprung.
Reviving Sparta, now the Fight maintained;
And what Two Generals Lost, a Poet Gained My Lord Roscommon.
.


Tyrtaeus returned to Athens with the surprising News of his success, and with
the Honorable Title of Free Denizen of Sparta, which had been conferred on him
among the Rewards of his Service Plato de Repub. l. 1.
.

It Is an usual confusion in Authors to attribute some things of another
Messenian War, to this in which Tyrtaeus was engaged. Neither is it well
decided whether he acted in the Twenty Years Seige, which first brought Messene
into the Hands of the Spartans; or upon the Revolt of that City under the
Command of Aristomenes. Nay, L. 15. p. 492.
Diodorus Siculus makes it a doubt whether Aristomenes himself did not flourish
in that first War. However the Cause runs much fairer in favor of the second
Messenian War, for the Age of Tyrtaeus and Aristomenes both: And Messen. p. 243.
Pausanias tells us, this began in the 4th Year of the 23d Olympiad.

Scaliger then must be a little out in his Account, when he places Tyrtaeus in
the 36th Olympiad Ad Eusebius. Number. MCCCLXXXIII.
; and gives this reason for it, because the Messenian War broke out about that
time. Whereas the War he hints at, cannot be either of those which lay any
claim to Tyrtaeus; but must needs be the Third and Last Defection of that
People from the Spartans; when they joined with the Rebellious Helotes: of
which in Lycurg.
Plutarch and Lib. 15. p. 492.
Diodorus both speak. Yet Suidas is not much righter when he sets Tyrtaeus in
the 35th Olympiad; and it is likely he and Scaliger were imposed on by the same
Cheat.

The Works of Tyrtaeus were, the Polity of the Lacedaemonians; Moral Precepts
in Elegiac Verse; and Five Books of War-Verses, Suid.
some pieces of which still remain.

ARCHILOCHVS.
HE was born at Strab. l. 10. p. 487.
Paros, a little Island in the Aegean Sea, of very mean Parents, according to
his own Account. Lib. 17. c 21.
Gellius, from Cornelius, Nepos, fixes the time of his flourishing in the Reign
of Tullus Hostilius King of Rome, who was presented with that Honor in the
Second Year of the 27th Olympiad. Dion. Halicarn. l. 3.
Therefore Eusebius cannot be much in the wrong, when he places Archilochus in
the 29th Olympiad; though he has been reprehended by Scaliger on that account.
Indeed, there are Authors who carry Archilochus somewhat higher, as to the time
of Cicero Tusc. Qu. l. 1.
Romulus, and near that of Herodot. l. 1.
Gyges: but 'twill be hard to find a Chronologer on Scaliger's side, who brings
him down almost 200 Years later, as far as the Reign of Darius Son to Hystaspis
Ad Eusebius. Numb. MCCCLIII.
.

He is commonly reckoned the Author of the Jambic Verse; chiefly on the
Testimony of Horace. Archilochum proprio rabies armavit Jambo.
But, though many have been deceived by this place of Horace, it is certain
Archilochus could be complimented with the Honor of this Invention on no other
account, but because he was the Man who had used the Jambic Strain with the
most bitterness and the most success. For that Poems of this nature were much
ancienter than Archilochus, appears from no less Authority than that of Poet.
cap. 4.
Aristotle, who assures us that Homer himself wrote a Piece in that way, called
Margites.

Archilochus then owes his Title of Prince and Father of Jambics chiefly to the
notable Execution his Invectives did upon one Lycambes, a Gentleman who had
promised him his Daughter, and afterward refused to give her, though the March
had been made and agreed on. The Poet's Resentments were so sharp, as to make
the Father and Daughter both hang themselves. Therefore Horace, when he owns
himself to be proud of having brought the manner of Archilochus's Verses in use
in Italy; at the same time declares in his own defense, that though he endeavors
to express the Numbers and the Spirit of the Grecian Poet; yet he has neither
attacked such unhappy Subjects; nor made use of the same killing Expressions:
but on the contrary has sweetened and corrected the bitter Muse of Archilochus,
by a mixture of the easy strains of Sapho and Alcaeus. -- Lib. 1. Epist. 19.
Parios ego primus Jambos
Ostendi Latio, numeros animosque sequutus
Archilochi, non res, and agentia verba Lycambes.
Temperat Archilochi musam pede mascula Sapho,
Temperat Alcaeus; sed rebus and ordine dispar.
Nec socerum quaerit quem versibus oblinet atris;
Nec sponsae laqueum famoso carmine nectit.
I first to Latium from the Parian shore
Have brought Jambics; aiming to restore
Archilochus's Genius and his Strain;
Not poor Lycambes, nor the Murdering Vein.
Here Manly Sapho with Alcaeus joins;
Sweetens the gall, and calms the furious Lines.
By me Reformed Archilochus his Muse
No destined Father labors to abuse;
Nor to her Garters drives the raving Maid;
Torn from his Wishes, and his slighted Bed.


But Archilochus may well be allowed to persecute other People in his Satires,
when it appears that he was so rigidly impartial as not to spare himself. For
Aelian tells us of one Critias who was very severe on him, for being such a
Fool as to discover his own Disgrace. "If he had not taken care to inform us
(says he) we had never known that his Mother was a Slave; nor that he himself
was forced by Poverty to quit Paros and to seek his Fortune. Nor that his Wit
was so nearly allied to Malice, as to spare neither Friend nor Foe. Nor that he
was a vile lascivious Fellow: Nor, what is worst of all, that he basely threw
away his Shield Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 10. c. 13.
."

The last part of this censure, shows him to have been like Horace in Courage
as well as Poetry. And Lib. 12. page 549.
Strabo cites the Verses in which he gives an account of that Misfortune, as
Horace has pleasantly recorded his. Perhaps it was on account of this passage
that, as Plutarch informs us in his Laconic Institutions, when he came to
Sparta, that rough People immediately expelled him their City: Because they
understood he had hinted in one of his Pieces, that 'twas better to throw away
ones Arms, than to lose ones Life.

Yet for all this, he valued himself more upon his Skill in War, than his
Talent in Verse. It Is his own Brag, (...)
(...)
The King of War does my first Service claim.
And the fair Muse inspires the second Flame.


However, this imputation of Cowardice is no very great blot to his Character.
But the other Charges of Lasciviousness, and virulency are the perpetual Stains
of his Reputation: though he was reckoned an honest Man on other accounts Suid.
.

In his Writings Quintilian long since observed, "the highest force of
Expression; Sentences that were strong, and yet short and glittering, with an
abundance of Blood and of Nerves: So as to give many People reason to judge,
that if he seemed inferior to any Poet, 'twas on the account of his Subject,
not of his Wit Quintil. Instit. l. 10. c 1.
."

Suidas tells a long Story how dissatisfied Apollo was with his Death; and how
the Oracle refused to grant any Answer to the Man who had killed him, 'till he
had appeased his Ghost. Of which vain Relation we need make no farther use,
than to observe thence that he died in Battle.

We find this ingenious Epitaph on him, in the Anthologia: The Author of which
was certainly of the same mind with the Critics Quintilian speaks of. (...)
(...)
Here lies Archilochus, whose Sacred Vein
The Muses, partial to their Homer's Praise,
Diverted in the keen Jambic Strain;
Nor taught his Hand to reach the Epic Bays.


STESICHORVS.
HE was born at Himera a City of Sicily, in the the 37th Olympiad Suid,
, which was the time of Jeremiah the Prophet Eusebius. Cron.
. His Name at first was Tisias, but was changed to Stesichorus in memory of his
being the first who taught the Chorus to dance to the Lyre (...)
. There goes a famous Story of him, much more pleasant than true Suid,
; that having in one of his Poems abused fair Helen; the Lady's two Brothers,
now advanced to Demigods, took the Affront so heinously, as to punish the poor
Poet, with the loss of his sight. But he being quickly sensible of the Cause of
his Misfortune, made his Recantation in as fine Verses as had given the injury;
and so recovered by his Panegyric the Blessing he had lost by his Satire.
Horace alleges his Case, when he is writing a Palinode of the same nature to
the injured Canidia. Infamis Helenae Castor effensus vice
Fraterque magni Castoris, victi prece,
Ademta vati reddidere lumina.
Castor, enraged at Helen's false Amor,
And Castor's Brother, could remit their Fire;
And give the Poet back his seeing Power;
Won by the Charms of his Recanting Lyre.
The Grave Socrates in Plato's Phaedrus, does not only tell the same Story, but
obliges us with the beginning of Stesichorus's Palinode. (...)
(...)
(...)
It Is False; it is Slander, all the Muse has said:
You never saw the Gallant Fleet;
You never climbed the Boat of State:
Nor knew the Scandal of a Trojan Bed.


Perhaps the Poem in which he had not been so respectful as he ought to that
Ladies Character and Honor, might be his (...) or the Destruction of Troy
cited by Pausanias Phocic. p. 659. and 661.
.

He appears to have been a Man of the First Rank for Wisdom and Authority among
his Fellow Citizens; and to have had a great Hand in the Transactions between
that State, and the Tyrant Phalaris. When the Himerians first chose that Prince
for their Commander and Protector, and were now voting to allow him a Guard for
his Person; Siesichorus, who had all along vigorously opposed the whole Design,
made them sensible of their Folly, by representing their Case in a pleasant
Fable: which, with one of Aesop's, Aristotle brings for an Example of those
kind of Discourses in his Lib. 2. cap. 21.
Rhetoric. And which now makes so good a Figure among us in the same Company In
Sir Roger L'Estrang's Aesop.
.

Upon a Dispute betwixt the Stag, and a Horse about a piece of Pasture, the
Stag got the better on it, and beat the other out of the Field. The Horse on
this affront advised with a Man what course to take; who told him, that, if he
would submit to take a Man upon his back with a Lance in his Hand; he would
undertake to give him the satisfaction of a Revenge. The Horse came to his
Terms; and for the gratifying of a present Passion, made himself a Slave all
the days of his Life.

This Horses Condition, says Stesichorus, will be yours: You have already
received a Bridle, by creating a General with Absolute Command; and now, if by
allowing him a Guard, you let him get up upon your Backs too, you will have your
Revenge, but you will lose your Liberties.

Without doubt the Himerians quickly repented of their new Settlement; and we
find Stesichorus deeply engaged in promoting the Design of a Revolt. Phalaris,
getting Intelligence that the Poet was one of his most violent Opposers, and
that he was now raising Men and Money to favor a Defection, sends him that
Epistle which is the 92d in his Works: where he first tells him, he hears of
the Plot he is driving; then laughs at the folly of it; and at last threatens
him, that though the Poets commonly fancy themselves able to escape by the help
of some Deity, yet Heaven it self shall not secure him from his Hands. Indeed,
the Himerians refused to send him to Agrigentum on Phalaris his Order. But
within a little time, He, and two more of their Agents, were intercepted by the
Tyrant's Officers in their Passage to Corinth. By the Letter which Phalaris
wrote to See Phalar. Epist. 121.
Himera on this occasion, it appears, that he immediately Executed one of the
Gentlemen; that he designed to send one of them home safe, but kept
Stesichorus, 'till he could invent a Death, answerable to his Crime Epist. 108.
. But after a little acquaintance with the Poet's Person and Excellencies, we
find the Tyrant's Fury turning into Love and Respect; and his Resolution so far
changed, as to make him restore the admired Captive with Honor to his Friends.
At the same time, he tells the Epist. 93.
Himerians, that 'twas not for their sakes he releast their Emissary, but for
the sake of those Deities and Heroes whom he served and obliged. That, he was
so far from punishing him with Death, as to wish it in his Power to preserve
such a Man eternally secure from Dying. That for the future they should let
Stesichorus enjoy his Lyre in quiet: And, if they must be managing new Designs,
they should employ such Men, as when they fell into his Power, he might kill
without any restraint from Conscience and Religion.

By this Act of Grace, Phalaris did not only show his Love and Esteem for Parts
and Learning, but his Judgment in them too. And therefore, when one
Aristolechus an impudent Tragedian, had abused him in his Verses, and hoped to
come off as fairly as Stesichorus: The Tyrant gave him to understand Epist. 63.
, that he did not pretend a kindness for Poets in general, but only for the
best of that Profession; nor would be generous to all his Enemies; but to such
only as deserved his Generosity by their own. In short, that the vain Libeller
should quickly find the difference, between himself and Stesichorus: Not, as a
Punishment for his Foolish Verses; but for his Presumption in hoping for the
same Fate with so Great a Man.

But, what is stranger than all this, Phalaris, however inclined to Jealousy
and Suspicion, would never after be persuaded to think hardly of Stesichorus
And, when a couple of Base Fellows had accused him as the Encourager of a new
Sedition by his Verses; the Tyrant gave himself the trouble of three Letters
Epist. 22.73.147.
, to express his Disbelief of their Story. In that directed to the Poet himself
Epist. 147.
, he generously exhorts him to carry on the Design of his Muse; and, if he was
was writing against Tyrants, not to baulk any Expression, for fear of his
Resentments.

Phalaris expected no great Return for these kindnesses. As for his own Person,
he positively forbad Stesichorus, to address any Verses to his Praise Epist.
79. and 146.
: And having only got him to compose something in memory of the Wife of one of
his Friends Epist. 78.
; he declared this to be a sufficient Obligation Epist. 65.
.

Stesichorus died at Catana in Sicily, in the 55th Eusebius. Cron.
or 56th Suid.
Olympiad, at above fourscore Years of Age. The People there were so sensible
of the Honor his Relics did their City; that they resolved to keep the
Treasure, whatever pretenses the Himerians should make to the Contrary. They,
on the other hand, finding all easier Methods ineffectual, determined to
recover their Poet's Body at the Expense of a War. But it is probable they might
be diverted from this Design by the Advice of their Master Phalaris, whom they
consulted on the occasion, and desired his Assistance. He tells them in his
Answer Epist. 54.
, that he was ready to undertake any entreprize for the sake of Stesichorus;
even to proclaim War against the Fates themselves for his Deliverance. But
then, he would have them consider, that wherever their Divine Poet was Buried,
he would still be reckoned an Himerian: and still belong to their City, on
account of his Birth and Life; though all other places in the World should claim
him for his Virtue. That, seeing how dangerous it might prove to quarrel with
so good Neighbors, they should venture to let the Catanians build him a
Sepulcher; while they themselves erected a Temple to his Memory, and fixed up
his Verses in all the Public Places of the City: Never counting their Friend
dead, whilst any of these Monuments remained. In short, that, they should
consider, it would be always a greater Honor to their City, to have bred a
Person of such a Character, than to the Person himself, to have deserved it.

But this was not the only Honor the Tyrant paid to the Memory of Stesichorus;
for we have still the Consolatory Epistle Epist. 103.
which he wrote to the Poet's Children; where, besides his Art of allaying
their Grief, he has given so Noble a Testimony of the Father's Worth; as is
enough to make us form much kinder Notions of Phalaris, than we draw from
common History.

When he happened (says he) to fall under my Power and Threats, he never
discovered the least fear of what he expected to suffer; but proved as Generous
a Captive, as he had been an Enemy. His Wisdom broke the force of my Tyranny;
and 'twas impossible for me to do him any Mischief, because whatever I did, he
still turned into a Benesit. When by infinite Labors I had at last gained him
to Me; or rather made my self his Captive; all that I ever desired was to make
him some return for the Favor. Therefore I don't reckon, you ought to thank
me, if these last twelve Years of his Life, I have paid him a constant Respect;
but that I rather am still infinitely in his Debt; who besides his kindness of
strengthening my Mind in other matters, was the only Man in the World, who had
the Power of persuading me to despise Death. If these Epistles of Phalaris are
not acknowledged for Genuine; (as they lie under heavy suspicions) though we lose
a great part of the true History of the Poet's Life; yet we still advance the
main point, the Esteem and the Character he bore with Antiquity. However we may
venture to borrow one more Notice from the same Memoires; And that is, that his
Daughters inherited some part of his Spirit and his Vein. The Tyrant tells one
of his Friends Epist. 67.
that having been at Himera on Business, he happened to hear Stesichorus's
Daughters singing to the Harp, partly their Fathers, and partly their own
Compositions; which though not equal to his, yet were preferable to all others in
the World.

We have no Catalogue of his Works on Record: Suidas only tells us in general
that he composed 26 Books of Lyrics in the Dorian Dialect: Of which, [a few
scraps, not amounting to threescore Lines, are set together in the Collection
of Fulvius Ursinus.

Majesty and Greatness make the Common Character of his Style. Hence Horace
gives him the Graves Camaenae. Hence Alexander, in Dion Chrysostom, reckons him
among the Poets whom a Prince ought to read: And Synesius puts him and Homer
together as the Noble Celebrators of the Heroic Race. Quintilians's Judgment
on this Works will justify all this. "The force (says he) of STESICHORUS's Wit
appears from the subjects he has treated of: while he sings the greatest Wars,
and the greatest Commanders; and sustains with his Lyre, all the weight and all
the Grandeur of an Epic Poem. For he makes his Heroes speak and act agreeably
to their Characters. And, had he but the gift of Moderation, he would have
appeared the fairest Rival of Homer. But he is too loose, and does not know how
to contain his Genius: which though really a fault, yet is one of those faults
which arise from abundance and excess Lib. 10. c. 1.
."

MIMNERMVS.
HE was born at Colophon according to Lib. 14. p. 643.
Strabo; though Smurna and Suidas.
Astypale put in their claim for the same Honor. Suidas has placed him in the
37th Olympiad; which is somewhat earlier than the seven Wise Men: Whereas it
should seem by Laertius's Life of Solon, that he was their Cotemporary. For
there, we find the Poet, wishing in a Distich to live only fourscore years
without Pain and without Cares: Presently corrected by Solon, and advised to
desire no more than Sixty Years. Though (by the way) as we have the Text of
Laertius the Answer is quite spoiled: while (...) is put in the Verses of
Mimnermus, and (...) in those of the Philosopher.

There are but few Fragments of him remaining, yet enough to show him an
accomplished Master of Elegy; which was the Strain he followed: and in which
though Quintilian has given Callimachus the Crown; yet we find Horace making
Mimnermus his Superior in the same Field. Disaedo Alcaeus puncto illius. Ille
meo quis?
Quis nisi Callimachus! si plus adposcere visus,
Fit Mimnermus; and optivo cognomine gaudet.
He owns me like Alcaeus: how must I
Return the Praise? Let him in Elegy
Reign a Callimachus: or, if that Fame
Seems slight; applaud himself with Mimnerm's Name.
And Propertius in Love Matters and in the description of the softer Pleasures,
ventures to prefer him to Homer: as the more easy, and the more moving of the
two. Plus in amore valet Mimnermi versus Homero:
Carmina mansuetus lenia quaerit amor Lib. 1. Eleg. 9.
.
Greater in Love Mimnerm than Homer reigns:
For Gentle Love demands as gentle Strains.


His Temper seems to have been as truly Poetical as his Writings: entirely
bent on Pleasures and on Love, and an Enemy to the lightest Cares of Common
Business. Horace has quoted his Opinion, about the insignificancy of all Human
Enjoyments, if not tempered with pleasant Humors, and easy Passions. Si
Mimnermus uti censet, sine amore jocisque
Nil est jucundum, vivus in amore jocisque Lib. 1. Epist. 6.

If, without Loves and Jests, as Mimnerm proves,
All things are dull: Live in your Jests and Loves.


The Greek Verses which Horace alludes to, are thus set down by Plutarch of
Moral Virtue. (...)
(...)
Venus once gone: what Life, what Pleasur's dear?
I Will gladly yield to Fate, when lost to Her.
Perhaps Lucretius might have this passage in his Eye, when he complimented the
same Goddess, with something that looks like the same thought. Nec sine te
quicquam dias in luminis oras
Exoritur; neque fit laetum nec amabile quicquam. Lib. 1.

-- Nothing New can spring,
Without thy Warmth: without thy Influence bear:
Or Beautiful, or Lovesome can appear Mr. Dryden.
.


Indeed the Grecian Poet was so far of the same Principles with the Latin; that
'twas a pleasant and a pardonable Blunder of the honest Old Commentator on
Horace to call Mimnermus an Epicurean, though he lived above 300 Years before the
Author of that Name and Sect.

The most Judicious Lib. 14. p. 643.
Strabo informs us, that Mimnermus was a Piper (...)
as well as a Writer of Elegies. And Nanno, the Lady that passes for his
Mistress, is recorded to have got her Livelihood by the same Profession.
Hermesianax in Althenaeus Lib. 13. p. 597.
makes him to have invented the Elegiac Strain to lament the Misfortunes of his
Love. (...)
(...)
Mimnermus, first, to charm his racking Care,
Framed the soft Spirit of the Pentameter.


depiction of Sappho SAPPHO
Apud Cardinalem Farnesium in numismate argenteo


SAPPHO.
THIS admired Lady who has so long enjoyed the Glorious Title of the Tenth
Muse; has yet the common Misfortune of suffering by a confused Story. For the
Critics pretend that there were two of this Name, both of the same Country;
both near the same Times, and both inclined to the same Studies. Perhaps indeed
this may have been an original mistake in Lib. 13. p. 596.
Athenaeus; on whose Authority the remark is generally built. However since
it is impossible so much as to distinguish the Persons; the Characters must lie
blended as they have hitherto done; and the surviving Nymph must own the
Faults, as well as the Virtues of her forgotten Namesake.

Sappho, then was of Strab. l. 13. p. 617.
Mittylone, the Capital of the Aeolian Cities in the Island Lesbos: And
flourished about the 44th Olympiad Eusebius. Cron.
, in the time of Pittacus, the famous Tyrant of that City, and, according to
the common account, one of the Seven Renowned Sages of Greece.

There are no less than Eight Fathers contending for her in Suidas; but Cleis
has the Honor to be owned for her Mother, without any Dispute. She Married one
Cercolas, a very Rich Gentleman, who came from Suid.
Andros. But her Famous Gallant was Phaon; whom being at first a kind of a
Ferry man, the Grecian Story-tellers make to have taken a great deal of care in
carrying Venus, once over the Stream in his Boat; and to have received from her
the Favor of growing the most Beautiful Man in the World Aelian. Var. Hist. l.
12. c. 18.
. His Unkindness in throwing off Sappho, and his leaving Lesbos for Sicily; as
they were the sad Cause of her Death, so they were the occasion of some of her
finest Pieces: and of that delicate Epistle which Ovid makes her write to her
ungrateful Spark. The best thoughts of which he is supposed to have borrowed
from her Verses: The Tenth Muse dictating what the Roman Poet wrote Le Fevre
Abrege page 24.
.

Of her own Sex, her three intimate Friends and Companions, were Attis,
Telesilla and Suid.
Megara; on the account of whom her Character suffers so much, from the Charge
of Dishonest and Unnatural Pleasure. It being a constant Tradition that her
Amorous Humor was not satisfied with the Addresses of Men; but that she was
willing to have her Mistresses too, as well as her Gallants. Indeed the
incomparable French Lady, who has lately adorned her Relics, is very
ingeniously singular in defending her from this unhappy Imputation. But however
she may defy the rest of the World, yet, since On Horace. Od. 13. l. 2.
Mr. Dacier has declared for the Common Opinion, she will certainly submit to
the Superior Judgment of her Husband.

Sappho was by no means a Beauty; but is commonly described as a Lady of very
ordinary Stature, and of a Brown Complexion. Ovid knew very well this part of
her Character; and he only had the Art to excuse it: unless perhaps he borrowed
the Apology from her own Words. Si mibi difficilis formam natura negavit;
Ingenio formae damna rependo meae.
Sum brevis: at nomen quod terras impleat omnes,
Est mihi: mensuram nominis ipsa fero.
Candida si non sum; placuit Cepheia Perseo
Andromede, patriae fusca calore suae.
Et varits albae junguntur saepe columbae,
Et niger a viridi Turtur amatur ave.
Si nisi quae Facies poterit te digna videri
Nulla futura ^ua est: nulla futura tua est.
If Nature's Curse a Lovely Form denie's,
What Shape and Features want my Wit supplies.
I own my short Dimension; that they suit
Just with my Verse; and make, like that, two Foot.
But then my Name to farthest People sounds;
And equal to the World extends it is Bounds.
I Am Brown: yet Perseus could a Nymph admire,
Scorched Browner by her sultry Climat's Fire.
White Doves will Bill with those of shining Jet;
And the Green Turtle woe a Speckled Mate.
If Thee, but what were worthy of thy Love,
No Face could move; no Face could ever move.


Finding, after all, her Dear Phaon inexorable, as if he had designed to
revenge the Injury she had done his Sex: She resolved on this desperate Remedy,
to recover herself from his Charms. It seems 'twas a common Fancy among the
Grecian Lovers; that in case their Passion met with extreme disappointment,
there was no way to Cure the Unhappiness, but by leaping down into the Sea from
the Leucas or the Leucades, a Promontory in the Island of that Name; hard by
which stood the Temple of Apollo, who they thought would assist them in that
Adventure. Sappho had Courage enough to venture on this bold attempt: and, as
some deliver, was the Inventress of the Custom. But Lib. 10. page 492.
Strabo tells us, that, they who understood Antiquity better, reported one
Cephalus to have made the first desperate Leap from that famous Precipice.

The Original of this strange Humor is not known: But, till a better comes to
light, the fancied one of Ovid, will be a pleasant Account. He represents
Sappho, as advised in a Vision to this Project; and thus acquainting her Lover
with the Counsel she had received, and her Resolution upon it. Hic ego ^^m
lassos posuissem slebilis artus
Constun ante oculus Naias una meos:
Constitit, and dixit, "quae nunc non ignibus aequis
" Ureris, Ambraciae terra petenda tibi.
" Phoebus ab excelso, quantum patet aspicit aequor:
" Acteum populi Leucadiumque vocant.
" Hinc se Deucalion Pyrrhae succensus amore
" Misit, and illaeso corpore pressit aquas.
" Nec mora: versus Amor tetigit lontissima Pyrrhae
" Pectora: Deucalion igne levatus erat.
" Hanc legem locus ille tenet. Pete protinus altam
" Leucada; nec saxo desiluisse time.
Ut monuit, cum voce abiit. Ego frigida surgo:
Nec gravidae lacrymas continuere genae.
Ibimus, O Nymphae, monstrataque saxa petemus:
Sit procul insano victus amore timor.
Quicquid erit, melius quam nunc erit, aura subito.
Et mea non magnum corpora pondus habent:
Tu quoque, mollis Amor, pennas suppone cadenti:
Ne sim Leucadiae, mortua, crimen aquae.
Here, as I bathed my weary Limbs in Tears,
A Heavenly Nymph was sent to ease my Cares.
"Maiden, she cried, that with unequal Love
"Pursu'st thy Spouse; far hence you must remove,
"High on a Cliff from the Leucadian Shore
" Phoebus over Subject Waves maintains his Power.
"Hence Mad Deucalion, urged by Pyrrha's Form,
"Plunged in the Deep, and swom secure from harm.
"When Love his Quarters changed; and burning Pain
"Seized the Proud Dame, and him as cold Disdaiu.
"This Gift high Phoebus on the Place conferred;
"And injured Love here finds a just Reward.
"Go straight, Go run to Leucade; nor fear
"With the Bold Leap to cure your wild Despair.
This said; my Aerie Friend was past my sight:
I start, and shake; and weeping own the Fright.
Come Nymphs, attend my Vow; come all; we will run,
And climb those Rocks the Generous Fates have shown.
Dauntless we will climb. Though both are in extreme;
Yet Women's Fears must yield to Women's Flame.
No Winds can drive to a more Wretched State.
Nor labor I with Limbs of hurtful weight.
And thou, soft Love, support a Lover's Load;
Thy Wings may rest me in the giddy Road;
Prevent my Fate, and clear the Guiltless Flood.
But her Apollo, at last, failed her, as basely as her Phaon. And, when she
took the fatal Leap, she quenched indeed her Passion; but 'twas with the loss
of her Life.

Her Lyriques, of which she wrote nine Books, besides her Compositions in other
strains Suid.
, have gained the Prize for Sweetness and Force with, all the Grave Judges of
Antiquity; and such as cannot be suspected of Gallantry and Compliment. The
only two Pieces which remain entire have been both preserved by the Masters of
Eloquence, while they allege them for the best Instances and Patterns of some
extraordinary Graces. One is a Hymn to Venus, which we find in Dionysius
Halicarnassus: The other an amorous Ode addressed to one of the Young Maids
that she admired; and this we meet with in Longinus. The last of the two is the
most esteemed; and is still acknowledged (as Longinus first produced it) for
the inimitable example of the most artificial Union, or rather Combat, of all
the Passions, and of all the moving Circumstances that can enliven a Piece. And
the Lady has been so happy in her Fame, as to have this her finest Work copied
by the only two Masters that were able to do her Justice; by Catullus in Latin;
and by Boileau in French.

The Mitylenians, to express their sense of her Worth, paid her Sovereign
Honors, after she was Dead; and coined Money with her Head for the stamp: The
same which we find expressed in Fulvius Ursinus, and which perhaps gave
occasion to the Epigram we meet with in the Anthologia; on Sappho's Effigies,
inscribed to the Engraver. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Thus Nature guides thy Hand; and shapes the Brass,
To bear the tuneful Mitylenian's Face.
Pegasean Fury sparkling in her Eyes
Display's the Flame her endless Wit supplies.
Her Skin not hung profuse, nor nicely wrought,
Commend's her simple, unaffected thought.
her Face, made up of Mirth and Moisture, shows,
Mixture Divine! Half Venus, Half a Muse.


ALCAEVS.
It Is a pretty fancy of Abrege des Vies des Poet. Grec. p. 25.
Tanaquil Faber, that the Story of Orpheus's Head (when thrown into the Hebrus)
being conveyed by the Tritons and Nereids to the Island Lesbos; was designed
only as an Allegory to express the eminence of this Island beyond it is
Neighbors for Arts and Wit.

We have already owned our obligations to it for Sapho, and we are not less
indebted on the account of Alcaeus, who was born in the same City, and lived at
the same time, as that admired Lady Strabo. l. 13. p. 617.
.

He seems to have been a Man of the first Rank in the Mitylenian State; and
it is certain he headed the People when engaged by Arms to assert their
Liberties against the Tyrant Pittacus. At the first opening of that Design he
met with very ill success; being expelled the City by the Tyrants Power. But
afterward he improved his Strategems, and returning with a numerous Force,
drove out the Tyrant, and restored the Ancient Privileges of his City. It Is
remarkable, that as all Authors agree he contended with Pittacus in Arms, and
had such a great hand in his Expulsion; so In Socrat.
Diogenes Laertius has recorded, that he had a Contention too with the Tyrant
in Verse; where without doubt he gained a more absolute Victory. Yet he
preferred his Knowledge in Military Affairs to his Arts of Harmony and Verse:
And when he gives us an Inventory of the Goods in his House; instead of Musical
Instruments, we find nothing but Shields and Helmets, and Belts and Ensigns;
and a mere Arsenal for the Tenement of a Poet. (...)
(...)
(...) Athenaeus l. 14. p. 627.
--
My spacious Rooms sparkle with burnish't Brass,
And Polished Helmets consecrate the Place
To the fierce God. --


But he had much better build his Character on the the Excellency of his
Strains, than on the Credit of his Feats in War, or of his Love to his Country.
For there lie too heavy charges upon his Pretensions to both those Honors.

As to the Fame of his Courage; Lib. 5.
Herodotus giving an account of a Battle between the Mitylenians and the
Athenians, in which the latter were Victorious, reports that Alcaeus being
engaged in the Action, ran away, and left his Shield to the Enemy, who hung it
u^ in Triumph, in the Temple of Pallas. And though (...)
Plutarch has censured Herodotus for this Relation; yet he does not deny the
Truth of it; but only taxes the Historian with Envy and ill Nature, for not
recording the Good Circumstances of the Action, as well as the Bad.

Now will his Glory of being a Patriot, shine much brighter than his Courage,
as long as so grave an Author as Lib. 13. p. 617.
Strabo assures us, that though he made it his continual business to oppose the
Tyrants, yet he was not himself altogether free from some Designs on the State.

He courted Sapho very warmly, but never with any Encouragement. Rhetor. l. 1.
c. 9.
Aristotle has recorded one of the Rebukes she gave him. Alcaeus accosting her
one Day, and telling her he had something, to say; but that he was ashamed to
bring it out: She smartly replied, that if he had any good thing to speak, and
not rather some piece of Dishonesty in his Mind, he would never have been
ashamed to let it come abroad.

He is generally noted for a great Drinker; and would take occasion from the
difference of each Season of the Year, to illustrate the necessity of plying
his Wine: as the Deipnosophist observes in Lib. 10. p. 430.
Athenaeus.

His Writings were all in the Lyric strain, of which some little scraps have
been picked up and put together in Print by Fulvius Ursinus.

Horace (with whom he is usually compared) has complimented him as the first
Inventor of the Barbiton, though some attribute the same honor to Terpander, and
others to Anacreon. -- age, dic Latinum
Barbite carmen
Lesbio primum modulate Civi,
Qui ferox bello, tamen inter arma,
Sive jactatam religarat udo
Littore navim:
Liberum and Musas, Veneremque and illi
Semper haerentem puerum canebat;
Et Lycum nigris oculis, nigroque
Crine decorum Lib. 1. Od. 32.

Begin, and found the Latin Song;
Begin, and sound, my deeper Lyre:
Whom first the Lesbian Captain strung,
Fierce as he was; and cooled his Fire.
The calmer Music of thy Voice,
Tempering tho Trumpet, and the Martial Noise.
Or whether, when the Tyrants hate
Of her firm Patriot robbed the Town;
He left his injured Friends to Fate:
Flying over Coasts over Seas unknown.
And hastened to secure
His battered Vessel on the Marshy Shore.
Bacchus he sung; and all the Harmonious Nine,
Commending their own Art, outvi'd.
Nor less obliged the Cyprian Queen,
And the fair Boy still holding by her side
Nor the Dear Mortal Youth, before
The God, in lovely Form; and next in Power.


The force and Nobleness of his Style, made Horace represent him as sounding
Fuller than Sapho on his Lib. 2. Od. 13.
Golden Lyre; and in another place extol his Lib. 4. Od. 9.
Minaces Camaenae. Even Sapho herself in Ovid acknowledges his Notes to be
higher than here is though not his Fame. Nec plus Alcaeus, consors patriaeque
lyraeque,
Laudis habet, quamvis grandius ille sonet.
Alcaeus, Partner of my Town, and Fire
Hears not his Fame sound louder, like his Lyre.


Instit. l. 10. c. 1.
Quintilian approves the Judgment of Horace, in giving Alcaeus the Golden Lyre
in relation to those Pieces which he wrote against the Tyrants. And adds, that
he is very often of good use in Morality, that his Style is Close, Magnificent
and Correct, and generally like Homer's. And that, though he sometimes, descends
to Sports and Love, yet at the same time he always shows himself to have been
born for greater Subjects.

EPIMENIDES.
HE was born at Gnossos in D. Laert. in vit.
Crete: or according to others at Strabo. l. 10.
Phaestus in the same Island; though Phaestus, or Phaestius be generally put for
the name of his his Laert. and Suid.
Father. He showed himself ashamed of his Scandalous Country, by his humor of
always wearing long Hair; which might hinder him from being taken for a D.
Laert.
Cretan: But much more by that Character he left of his Countrymen in his
Famous Verse; which has had the honor to be cited and confirmed by St. Paul
Tit. 1.12. (...), etc.
.

They say, that being sent, when a Boy by his Father to drive a Sheep into the
Country; he got out of the Road to a Cave; where he lay down and slept 57 Idem
and Plin. l. 7. c. 5.
, 50 Varro 7. de L. L. and Plutarch.
, or 40 Pausan. Attic. p. 26.
, Years according to the different accounts. Waking at last, he fancied he had
taken but a short Nap, and began to look about for his Sheep: till, giving over
that search, he proceeded to his Father's Country-Estate, whither he was at
first bound. But seeing the Face of things strangely altered, and the Lands
possessed by a New Master; he run back in a fright to the City. Here
endeavoring to get into his Fathers House; his Younger Brother, now grown a
Grave Old Gentleman, with much scruple admitted him; and told him how long he
had slept Diog. Laert.
.

Some Authors have discountenanced this Story of his long Dream; and make him
to have wandered all that time, in order to the improving his Natural
Philosophy by the experience of Simples. But perhaps, the sleep might be only a
Politic Fiction of his, to gain Authority to his Art. For we are told, he used
commonly to put a much greater Fallacy, on the People; pretending, as often as
the Fit took him, to die and revive again at his Pleasure D. Laert.
.

However, the report of this Accident spreading about Greece, he was presently
reckoned a peculiar Favorite of the Gods, and one whom they admitted to their
deepest Counsels. On which account the Athenians being tormented with the
double Plague of Sickness and Sedition; and, upon consulting the Oracle, having
been advised to make a solemn Purification of the City: they sent a Vessel into
Crete, with an Invitation to Epimenides to come to Athens, and manage the
Ceremony. He accepted their Offers and, accompanying the Messengers home,
performed the Lustration of the Town, in this manner. He brought a parcel of
Sheep, some Black and some White, all together to the Arius Pagus; and there
let them all loose to take which way they pleased. Persons were ordered to
follow them all, and wherever any one of them laid down, to Sacrifice it
presently to the Divine Guardian of that particular place, Quisquis foret ille
Deorum. By this Expedient the City's Health and Quiet were restored: and, in
memory of the Action, a great number of Altars were erected about the Streets;
dedicated, each to the Unknown God who had been appeased in such a Quarter.
Idem.
And, in the Judgment of many Learned Men, 'twas one of these (...), or Altars
without any Name Inscribed, which gave occasion to Saint Paul's Glorious Sermon
to the Men of Athens.

This Ceremony of the Solemn Expiation, was performed in the First Year of the
46th Olympiad according to Diogenes Laertius; or, as Eusebius has it, in the
47th.

'Twas this Journey brought Epimenides acquainted with Solon, then engaged in
his Great Design of regulating the Athenian Commonwealth. Solon took his Advice
in the weightiest matters under debate; and was by him put into a method to
compose his Laws. The Prophet particularly directed him to make the People
decent in their Worship, and to retrench a great many things in their odd
manner of Mourning, by ordering some settled kind of Sacrifices after the
Funeral; and by taking off those severe and Barbarous Ceremonies, which the
Women then u'sd to practice on such occasions Plutarch in Solon.
.

Before Epimenides left Athens, he happened on a lucky saying, which is
delivered with Triumph by the Ancients as a mighty Prophecy. Standing one day
to look on the Munychia, a new Mole, or fortified Harbor, he said to those
that were about him, How blind is Man in future things! For did the Athenians
foresee what a Mischief this would be to their City; they would demolish it with
their very Teeth, rather than let it stand Ibid. and D. Laert.
. There passed near Sixty four Olympiads before Antipater made good his
Judgment by placing a Garrison of Macedonians in those invincible Works. And we
must have owned the Wise Observer to have had a large Foresight; if it were not
easy for a Man to guess, without the Imputation of Magic, that a Tyrant would
some time or other make use of such a place, to lodge a Guard, for a Bridle to
the City. However, since we find in Plato and Laertius several others of his
Predictions relating to things at some distance, we may so far vindicate our
Poet, as not to let him lie under the Scandal Aristotle has cast upon him, when
he says, Rhetor. l. 3. c. 17.
That Epimenides was esteemed a Prophet, not because he foretold things to
come, but because he told things that were past, and which no body knew besides.

Having finished his Business at Athens, the Magistracy made him an Offer of
the richest Gifts and the highest Honors in their disposal. Plutarch in Solon.
But he, refusing the other Presents, requested only one Branch of the Sacred
Laurel, preserved in the Citadel Diog. Laert.
; and desired the Athenian People to keep a fair Correspondence with his
Country men the Gnossians: And having obtained those Favors, returned home to
Crete; where he died in a very little time after: Aged 157 Years, according to
the Common Account, though the Cretans pretended he was 299 Years Old.

He wrote 5000 Verses on the Genealogy of the Curetes and Corybantes and of the
Gods themselves; with the Building of the Ship Argos, and Jason's Expedition to
Colchos, comprised in 6500: and 4000 more about Minos and Rhadamanthus.

The Lacaedemonians procured his Body, and preserved it among them upon advice
of an Oracle Ibid.
.

In Solon.
Plutarch says he was counted the Seventh Wiseman, by those who would not admit
Periander into the Number. And Diogenes Laertius ranks him with the same
Illustrious Sages, when he writes his Life.

SIMONIDES.
HE was born at Coes Suid and Strab. l. 10.
an Isle in the Aegean Sea, about the 55th or the 56th Olympiad Suid. and Eusebius.
. Before he came to be much known in the World, he kept a School at Carthea in
that Island, teaching the Art of Singing and Dancing in Chorus: His School
being seated at a distance from the Sea, in the upper part of the City near the
Temple of Apollo Athenaus l. 10. p. 456.
.

(...)
Plutarch, when he tells us that the Poet Aeschylus left his Country and
removed into Sicily, adds that Simonides, did the same before him; whence it
should seem he went abroad on some like discontent. But whatever was the
occasion of his Travels, the success of them was owing to his Wisdom and his
Verse; which gained him the respect and Love of the three Greatest Men perhaps
then in the World, Pausanias General of Sparta, Themistocles the Athenian, and
Hiero of Sicily, the wisest and the most moderate of the Ancient Tyrants. For
the first of these Princes he composed the Inscription of the Golden Tripos
Pausan. Lacon. p. 174.
which he presented at Delphi; after the Victory at Plataea; in so arrogant an
Epigram, that the Lacaedemonians scratched it out, and put some more modest
words in its room Com. Nep. in Vit. Pausan.
. But this was owing to the Vanity of the General, not to that of the Poet. As
to King Hiero, its certain he spent much of his Life in His Pausan. Attic. p. 3.
Court, and perhaps he died there too. Then for Themistocles he could not but be
acquainted with Him, when he celebrated his Victory at Salamis: and Plutarch
tells us, that desiring once an unreasonable thing of that General, he received
this handsome Reproof: You would not be a good Poet, Simonides, if you wrote
contrary to the Rules of Verse: Nor should I be a good Magistrate, if I acted
contrary to the Rules of Justice Plut. (...).
.

He composed Poems in almost all kinds of Strains but especially in the
Elegiac: And got as much honor as he gave, by his Labors on the four
celebrated Fights at Marathon, Thermopyle, Salamis and Plataea. By his Elegy on
the first of these Battles he won the Prize from Aeschylus the Tragedian, as
has been already observed in the Account of that Poets Life. As to Salamis we
have the Testimony of Suidas to show that it exercised Simonides's Muse. And
the Elegies which he composed on the Spartans and Athenians who died at
Plataea, were in Pausanias's time to be seen, engraven on their Tombs Pausan.
Baeotic. p. 545.
.

Part of his Elegy on the brave Souls that fell in the Action at Thermopylae,
is still preserved in Lib. 11. p. 248.
Diodorus Siculus. Besides which, there is extant another piece of his on the
same occasion that has a nearer relation to his Story. Megistias the Prophet
who assisted in that Glorious Service, and who a little before the Fight upon
inspection into the Sacrifice, foretold the Death of himself and all his
Companions, was a particular Friend to Simonides; who honored him with this
Epitaph recorded by Lib. 7. p. 459.
Herodotus. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Not Unrevenged, by Median Numbers slain.
Megistias here does still his Post maintain.
Scorning the Use of Prophecy he left
The noblest proof that he deserved the Gift.
Tempted in vain from Ruin to withdraw,
And fly the Danger which his Art foresaw.


When he is represented by Quintilian and others, as a most moving and
passionate Writer, they allude particularly to his (...) or Lamentations
mentioned by Suidas; which were so powerful in drawing Tears from the Readers,
that Catullus uses as a Proverb Maestius lacrymis Simonideis.
And for the same reason Horace, after he has been bewailing the Miseries of
the Roman Wars, and at last is willing to turn from that melancholy Subject,
cautions his Muse, not to take up the Lamentations of the Caean Poet instead of
her own sportive way. Sed, ne relictis Musa procax jocis
Ceae retractes munera maeniae.


His Wit was beyond the Censure of the Critics; but the common fault laid to
the Charge of his Morals was extreme Covetousness. When he was taxed with this
Vice in his Old Age, his Answer was, that he had rather leave Riches to his
Enemies when he died; than be forced by Poverty while he lived to seek the
assistance of his Stob. Apothegm.
Friends.

Retor. l. 3. c. 2.
Aristotle gives a pleasant instance of his Covetousness. A Gentleman that had
won the Olympic Prize in the Contention of Mules, desired him to celebrate his
Victory, but offered no considerable Reward. Simonides utterly refused the
Task, and scorned, as he said, (...): to poetize upon Half-Asses. But when the
Gentleman came at last to his Terms, and laid down the Money in his Hands, he
could presently begin in a nobler strain, with (...)
Hail, Daughters of the Wind-hoof'd Steeds!


The most Learned Gyraldus had a little forgot himself, when he told his Young
Dialog de Poet. 9. page 995.
Gentlemen, that Aristotle in this place censured Simonides as a Despiser of low
and common words; which is directly contrary to Quintilian's Judgment of him,
though a late Voluminous Critic Mr. Baillet Jug. des Scavans. T. 4. p. 130.
has approved of Gyraldus his Conjecture. Whereas Aristotle's Design appears to
have been only this, to give an Example of the Rule he had just before laid
down, that the Epithets in pieces of Commendation are to be taken from the best
part of the Subject, and in pieces of Dispraise from the worst. But Gyraldus
his Memory will again be called in question, when he attributes the Olympic
Victory here mentioned to Simonides himself, which would quite spoil
Aristotle's Story.

Bating this imputation of Covetousness, he is represented as a Man of
extraordinary Piety. Tully, has given us one instance, and recorded the reward
of Heaven that followed it. Happening (says he) to find a Dead Corpse exposed on
the shore; and taking care to give it a decent Burial; he had a Vision of the
Dead Man for whom he performed the charitable Office, admonishing him not to
Sail the next day, according to his resolution, Simonides obeyed; and his
Companions putting to Sea were all Tull. de Divinat. l. 1.
drowned.

But the noblest Testimony of his Wise Notions of Religion, is that famous
Answer of his to Hiero the Tyrant who asked him What GOD was.

At first Simonides desired a days time to consider; upon the expiration of
that, he begged two days more; and when, upon a frequent redoubling of the time
Hiero demanded the reason of the delay: Because (says Simonides) the more I
think on that Subject the less able I am to explain my Tull. de Net. Deor. l. 1.
thoughts.

He is recorded by De Orator. l. 2.
Cicero and Institut. Lib. 11. c. 2.
Quintilian, as the first Inventor of Artificial Memory; and they both give a
remarkable instance of his Excellency that way. He had Composed a Panegyric on
one of the Victors in the Games, and was reading it in the Gentleman's House,
before a numerous Auditory. But happening after the usual manner of Poetical
Digressions, to spend a great part of the Poem in the Praises of Castor and
Pollux; his Chapman refused to give him above one half of the Price, and told
him he might look for the other half from the Deities that he had celebrated.
Presently after News was brought in, that two Young Gentlemen on White Horses,
were at the Gate, desiring to speak with the Poet. Simonides going out, found
no Gentlemen, but soon found their Reward. For he was but just over the
Threshold, when the House fell down, and dashed the whole Company, so miserably
to pieces, that when their Friends came to seek them out, in order to their
Interment, it was impossible to distinguish one Corpse from another, had not
Simonides by remembering in what place every Person sat, exactly solved the
difficulty.

It Is evidence enough what esteem the Ancients had for him, when we find
Xenophon doing him the Honor to make him a Speaker with Hiero in his Dilogue
of Tyranny; and Plato in his Protagoras making the Great Socrates expound his
Verses; and in another place De Repub. l. 1.
, allowing him the Glorious Epithet of Divine, which Posterity adjudg'd to
Pluto himself. It Is plain they were all of Tully's De Not. Deor. l. 1.
Opinion, and respected his Learning and Wisdom in other matters, as much as
his sweet Vein of Poesy.

He is generally supposed to have been a very long Liver. Plutarch has
preserved an Inscription, which testifies him to have won the Poetic Prize
after Fourscore. Suidas allows him 89 Years in all, and Lucian gives him above
90.

If we believe the Old Greek Epigrams made on his Person and Works, he died in
Sicily; and very probably in the Court of King Hiero, as was hinted before.

The little pieces of his Works that are to be met with scattered up and down
in Authors, may be found set all together in Ursinus's Collection, printed in
Octavo at Autwerp by Plantin, 1568. Among which, the Epigrams are thought to be
spurious, or else the Work of another Simonides.

Theognis and Phocylides.
THese two Poets, who are generally put together on account of their way of
Writing, may claim a nearer agreement with relation to their Time. For we find
them both set down in Suidas, as born in the same (the 59th) Olympiad: though
Theognis has the advantage of a few Years in Eusebius.

Theognis commonly passes for a Sicilian, chiefly on the Testimony of Suidas,
who makes him a Citizen of Megara or Megaris in that Island. Indeed the Poet
calls himself a Megarian (...). v. 23.
: But then he cannot be understood of Megara in Sicily, because, when he reckons
up his Travels, he pats Sicily among the Foreign Countries which he visited
Verse 781.
. The Megara then which has a Title to Theognis, must be that in Achaia, seated
near the Corinthian Isthmus. This too may be demonstrated from his own Verses.
For he prays the Gods to turn away a threatening War from the City of Verse 771.
Alcathous; now Ovid calls the same Megara, De Trist. l. 1.
Alcathoe.

Whatever Character Theognis bears on the account of rescuing Poesy from light
and useless Subjects, to employ it in the service of Virtue and Goodness: Yet
we find Athenaeus reckoning him among the most extravagant Voluptuaries; and
citing some of his Verses, as a sufficient justification of the Censure. And
indeed Suidas in the Account of his Works, takes notice of a Piece Entitled
Exhortations or Admonitions; which he says, was stained with the mixture of
impure Love, and other things, very different from the Principles of Honesty.

Yet the Moral Work which we have of his at present, in an Elegy of above a
Thousand Verses, must be acknowledged for an useful Summary of Precepts, and
Reflections; and is clear from the Charge of Looseness and Debauchery. Though
perhaps it might not be left in this good Condition by the. Author; but when it
came abroad in the World, the lewd and gross Notions may have been taken out,
to fit it for a true use; and the void spaces filled up with some graver
Sentences, delivered by other Wife-men of those Times, in the same kind of
Verse.

We must not expect in these Compositions, the Genius and the Fire of Poetry.
On the contrary, things are here told for the most part in the simplest manner;
without the least advantage of Ornament or Disguize. And, as we know they were
chiefly employed in the Instruction of Children; so one would imagine the
Lessons to have been put into Verse more for the assistance of the Reader's
Memory, than the Pleasure of his Wit.

Phocylides, as he has scarce any Fragments remaining, so is little talked of
in History; except that he is now and then honored with the general Praise of
being one of the best Masters of the Grecian Sentences. Suidas tells us, he was
born at Miletus in Ionia; that he wrote Heroic Verses and Elegies, and that
his Admonitions or Moral Precepts were stolen from the Writings of the Sibyls.

We have still a Moral Piece in long Verse among the Minor Poets, which goes
under the Name of Phocylides. But it will appear on the first glance to have
been the Work or some Primitive Christian; from the many passages borrowed from
the Jewish Law, and from the noble Description of the Resurrection. Some indeed
are unwilling to allow his Title to the Christian Faith, from his way of
expressing himself in this last point. (...)
(...)
(...)
'Twere impious to conceive our Beauteous Frame.
Should lie extinct. We hope from dark abodes
To raise our Relics, and be turned to Gods.


This turning us into Gods, has given offense to some nice ears, and some
scrupulous Judgments, as a sentence unworthy to come from a Christian. But
there might be a good reason for the Author's using the Language of the Pagan
Theology, on this occasion; while his Design was, to make the Heathens of that
time believe, that the Ancient Phocylides had some notion of the Resurrection.
At least, the Friends of Sannazarius cannot make so good an Apology, for his
Address to the Virgin Mary, -- Spes fida hominum spes fida DEORUM
Alma Parens.


EMPEDOCLES.
HE was born of one of the best Families in Agrigentum, now Grigenti in Sicily,
and is commonly placed between the 70th and 80th Olympiad. The constant report
of his Studying Philosophy under Telauges Pythagoras his Son, justifies the
fixing him in this Period. Yet if we believe, what some affirm, that he was
instructed by Pythagoras himself, he must needs be ancienter than the 70th
Olympiad, in which that Great Master is said to have died. On the other hand,
he is brought down somewhat lower than the 80th Olympiad by Eusebius, and In
Eusebius. ad Number. M. D. C. I.
Scaliger has approved the Judgment.

Though his Birth and Parts might have encouraged him in the Designs of Ambition;
yet he was naturally very averse to State and Command, and preferred his frugal
way of Life to the Honor of a Kingdom, when voluntarily offered to his Care.
Yet afterward being by mere Accident brought to engage himself in Public
Matters; he fell to Politics in earnest; dissolved the Old Constitution of the
City, and introduced a new Form of Government by Triennial Magistrates. This
Achievement made him much talked of, and admired in the World. So that
whenever he came to the Olympic Games, he engaged the Eyes and the Tongues of
all the Spectators, and was himself the greatest part of the D. Laert. in Emped.
Show.

He was eminent for his extraordinary skill in Physic; and Art which Var.
Hist. l. 9. c. 22.
Aelian tells us took up a good part in the Studies of the Pythagoreans. And,
Aristotle in a Work cited by Laertius, but now lost, does him the Honor to
reckon him the Inventor of Oratory. But the Character and Fame of his Wisdom is
chiefly owing to his Perfection in Natural Science. 'Twas this Talent' which
obtained him an honorable Place among the Poets, by producing that admired
Work of the Nature and Principles of things, so talked of and so applauded by
all Antiquity. Lucretius himself, though his business was to confute the Author,
yet gives us a Panegyric on his Poesy, when he condemns his Philosophy; and in
a Rapture makes him almost a God, that is, almost as Great as his Master
Epicurus. Quorum Acragantinus cum primis EMPEDOCLES est;
Insula quem Triquetris terrarum gessit in oris:
Quam fluitans circum magnis amfractibus aequor,
Ionium glaucis aspergit virus ab undis:
Angustoque fretu rapidum mare dividit undis
Italiae terrai oras a finibus ejus:
Hic est vasta Charibdis, and hic Aetnaea minantur
Murmura: flammarum rursum se conligere iras,
Faucibus eruptos iterum ut vis evomat igneis:
Ad caelumque ferat flammai fulgura rursum.
Quae, cum magna modis multis miranda videtur
Gentibus humanis regio, visendaque fertur,
Rebus opima bonis, multa munita virum vi:
Nil tamen hoc habuisse Viro praeclarius in se,
Nec sanctum magis, and mirum carumque videtur.
Carmina quinetiam divini pectoris ejus,
Vociferantur and exponunt praeclara reperta;
Ut vix humana videatur stirpe creatus. Lib 1.

Thus sung Empedocles --
In fruitful Sicily, whose crooked sides
The Ionian washe's with impetuous Tides,
And a small Frith from Italy divides.
Here Scylla raves, and fierce Charybdis roars,
Beating with boisterous Waves the trembling Shores;
Here pressed Enceladus with mighty loads,
Vomit's Revenge in Flames against the Gods:
Through Aetna's jaws he impudently threats
And Thundering Heaven with equal Thunder beats:
This Isle, who with such wondrous sights as these,
Does call forth Travelers, and the Curious please;
Is rich with men and Fruit, has rarely shown
A Thing more glorious than this Single One.
His Verse, composed of Nature's Works declare
His Wit was strong, and his Invention rare;
His Judgment deep and sound, whence some began,
And justly too, to think him more than Man.
Mr. Creech.

He is generally censured as guilty of Pride and Vanity in the highest Degree.
Out of one of his Poems that he recited to the People, we find this Sentence
recorded by Laertius. (...)
(...) --
Hail Friends! a God Immortal bids You Hail.
But Advers. Mathem. p. 60.
Sextus Empericus has excused this flight from Arrogance, and tells us that the
Philosopher meant no more by calling himself a God, than that he had taken care
to preserve a strict purity of Mind, and so had rendered his Heart a fit Lodging
for the Deity.

Besides that Great Poem of Natural Philosophy, some think him to have been the
Author of those Ancient Tragedies, which went under the Name of Empedocles. But
others have believed that Empedocles to have been Nephew to the Illustrious
Suid. in Emped.
Philosopher. However Laertius assures us, that he composed a Poem on Xerxes's
Passage into Greece, and a Hymn to Apollo, both which his Sister (or, as
others) his Daughter burnt after his Death; the first because it was imperfect,
and the other by chance.

The common Story of his Death, is, that he flung himself into the burning
Caverns of Mount Aetna; with this design, that by disappearing after so sudden
a manner, he might be thought to have gone directly to Heaven. But they say,
this concluding depiction of Alcaeus ALCAEVS.
Apud Fuluium Vrsinum in numismate aereo

stroke of Vanity proved very unfortunate, one of his slippers being found at
the foot of the Precipice, whence he had leaped in.

Lib. 6. page 274.
Strabo has taken the pains to refute this Relation gravely, by showing that
it is impossible for any Person to approach near that burning Mouth of the
Mountain, where he is said to have disspos'd of himself. Nay farther that it is
impossible to throw any thing in by reason of the violent Wind, still rushing
upwards, and bearing all before it.

Indeed, the bare passage about the slipper is enough to prove the whole
business a Sham. For, as Abrege des Vies des Poet. Grec. page 73.
Monsieur Faber wittily remarks, if a Man had taken up a resolution of breaking
his Neck down from a place, it is hard to guess, what occasion he should have to
make himself Barefoot first; unless that he might cut his Caper with a better
Grace.

Therefore D. Laertius does not fail after the Recital of this Fable, to give a
probable account of his Death from more rational Historians.

That riding to Messana in his Chariot, upon the occasion of some Public
Solemnity, he happened to have a desperate fall, which broke his Hip, and threw
him into a Fever, of which he died in the 77th Year of his Age: And to put the
thing beyond Question, that his Sepulcher was still at Megara.

EPICHARMVS.
THE General Account makes him a Sicilian, this Horace and Aristotle follow.
But Diogenes Laertius, who has given us his Life among the Philosophers, says
he was born at Coos. But his being carried into Sicily, when he was but three
Months Old, first to Megara, and afterward to Syracuse, might well justify
the calling him a Sicilian, though born in another Country. Now that he was
removed from Home so early, Laertius brings his own Word to vouch: and it is
probable therefore he made use of the same Authority in determining his
Birthplace. However, if he was not born in the same Island with Empedocles, at
least he lived in the same times, Suid.
and followed the same Sect of Philosophers; having had the honor of being
Disciple to Pythagoras D. Laert. in Epicharm.
himself. He and Phormus are said to have invented Comedy in Suid.
Syracuse: though many other Places pretended to the Glory of that Vid. Aristot.
Poet. c. 3.
Discovery.

He presented Fifty five, or, according to others only Thirty five Plays. But
his Works have been so long lost, that even their Character is scarce on
Record. Only Horace, has preserved the Memory of one of his Excellencies by
commending Plautus for copying it, and that is his judicious care of keeping
his Subjects always in view, and follwing the Chase of the Intrigue so closely,
as not to give the Reader or Spectator time to trouble themselves with doubts
concerning the Discovery. Plautus ad exemplum siculi properare Epicharmi.
L. 2. Ep. 1. ver. 58.

Besides his numerous Comedies he wrote abundance of Pieces in Philosophy and
Medicine: which gave occasion to a very Learned Man Aldroband. in Laert.
to make two Authors of this Name, One a Comedian, and the other a Philosopher.
But we may venture still to keep him undivided, because Suidas, who speaks only
of the Comedies, observes that some Persons made Coos the Birthplace of the
Author: in the same manner as Laertius does, who mentions him chiefly as a
Philosopher. Besides, when Laertius in the Life of Plato, has told us that
'twas reported as if Plato had Transcribed many things from the Writings of
Epicharmus the Comedian; he immediately after sets down an Opinion maintained
by Plato, and subjoyns the Physical Verses of Epicharmus, whence it may be
supposed to have been borrowed. And even the same Learned Man but now
mentioned, when he comes to illustrate Laertius's Life of Epicharmus; remarks,
that whereas it had been said under the Story of Plato, that the Philosopher
was much indebted to this Author; it was to be meant of his borrowing from the
Physiological Commentaries which Laertius sets among Epycharmus's Works.

He died aged 90 Years, according to Laertius; or 97 as Lucian has him among
his Long-livers. Laertius has preserved these Verses, which were the
Inscription of one of his Statues, and are a testimony of the high esteem
Antiquity had for his Worth. (...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
The Starry Train as far as Phoebus drowns,
And ancient Ocean his unequal Sons;
Beyond Mankind, we will Epicharmus own,
On whom just Syracuse bestowed the Crown.


CHOERILVS.
THere were two Poets of this Name, both much talked of, and both on very
different Accounts.

The elder Choerilus was born at Samos, or according to others at Jasis, or at
Halicarnassus; and flourished in the time of the Persian War; about the 75th
Olympiad. They say, that he was at first, a Servant to a Samian Gentleman; but
running away and applying himself to Herodotus the Historian, he grew in Love
with the Study of Eloquence. He is reported too to have been a very beautiful
Person, and Herodotus is thought to have loved him a little too Suid.
well.

The Work that made him famous, was an Heroic Poem on the Victory which the
Athenians gained over Xerxes, now entirely lost. The Athenians were so taken
with his performance, that they ordered a piece of Gold to be paid him out of
the Treasury for every Verse: And what was greater encouragement, commanded,
that for the future Choerilus his Verses should be recited annually by the
Rhapsodists, with the same Form and Ceremony as Ibid.
Homers.

He must needs have lived to a great Age, since it is agreed that he spent the
last part of his Days in the Court of Archelaus King of Macedon whose Reign is
commonly, though uncertainly, fixed at a very great distance from the time of
Xerxes. Archelaus had so high an esteem for his Parts, as to allow him a
constant Pension of four Minae a day; which we are assured he always spent, in
making much of his Vid. Athenoeum. l. 8.
Carcass.

The other Choerilus commonly passes for the Laureat of Alexander the Great,
but at the same time is reckoned such a wretched Versifier, as to do the
Emperor's Judgment as little Credit, as he formerly did his Exploits. Horace
gives the best account of the Poet and of his Patron; while he is making
Augustus as much Superior to Alexander in Wit and Genius, as he was owned to be
in Empire. Gratus Alexandro regi magno, fuit ille
Choerilus; incultis qui versibus and male natis
Rettulit acceptos, regale numisma, Philippos.
Sed veluti tractata notam labemque remittunt
Atramenta; fere Scriptores carmine faedo
Splendida facta linant. Idem Rex illi poema
Qui tam ridiculum tam care prodigus emit;
Edicto vetuit, ne quis se praeter Apellem,
Pingeret; aut alius Lysippo duceret era;
Fortis Alexandri vultum simulantia. Quod si
Judicium subtle videndis artibus, illud
Ad libros and ad haec Musarum dona vocares;
Baeotum in crasso jurares aere natum.
With Joy the mighty Macedonian Heard
His Choerilus: and that ungainly Bard,
Though Art and Nature damned his dull Design,
A Golden Philip got for every Line.
Ink tampered with by Blockheads, daub's the Hand:
And bravest Acts in nasty Verse are stained.
The same vain Youth, who brought the scoundrel Lays,
And paid so largely for his own Disgrace;
Could yet decree, no Vulgar Hand should frame
A Brazen King; nor charge the Canvass with his Fame,
Yet ask the Royal Critic, when so quaint
In Judging Statues, and so nice in Paint,
To give his thoughts of Verse, He Will be confessed
Not Jove's dread Son, but some Baeotian Beast.


The Old Grammarians and Interpreters were a little puzzled to make the Faith
of Horace, and the Honor of Alexander agree together, in relation to this
Story. But they bring off the Prince's Judgment with a couple of Fetches. First
they tell us, that the Bargain he made with Choerilus, was to give him a piece
of Gold for every good Verse, and a box on the Ear for every bad one. And then
they relate it as one of his common Sayings, that he had rather have been the
Thersites of Homer, than the Achilles of Choerilus.

The Elder In Eusebius. ad MDXXXIV.
Scaliger makes the whole Business to be a mere Blunder of Horace's. He never
heard of the Second Choerilus; and says, we have as much reason to fancy two
Plautus's and two Laberius's because Horace has given them such a deep touch of
his Satire; however admired by all the World. But that there was a Bad
Choerilus as well as a Good one, may be made out by other Authorities.
Aristotle in his Lib. 8.
Topics, when he speaks of alleging proper Examples, bids us bring such as
Homer has used, and not such as Choerilus. (...). And Lib. 8. c. 5.
Quintus Curtius to express the stupidity of one Agis an Argive Poet, says he
was the worst Versifier after Choerilus. That one Choerilus had a very happy
Talent in Poetry, Scaliger himself sufficiently proves by producing a most
delicate Fragment of his: but this damages his Cause instead of strengthening
it: for if he had been so Excellent a Poet, Aristotle would never have fixed
that Censure on him: for as to Quintus Curtius, he may say perhaps, that He
took his Choerilus from Horace. Besides if Scaliger's fragment should be owned
for the Work of that Choerilus whom we call the worst, he will still be no
better than -- Choerilus ille,
Quem vis terque bonum cum risu miror --


Monsieur Dacier indeed tells us, that it appears from the Histories of
Alexander's Life, that He had a Poet in his Court of this Name. But till he
declares who those Historians are, and where to be found, we may venture as to
this point to rely on Horaces Word: who certainly was too great a Critic to
make such a notorious Mistake; and that too when he was writing to Augustus,
and using all the Art and niceness he was Master of.

CRATINVS and EVPOLIS.
WE have so imperfect Memorials of these two Old Gentlemen, that they must
needs have lain in the same Obscurity with Magnes, Phrynichus, Strattis,
Theopompus, and the rest of the forgotten Tribe of Dramatists; had not Lib. 10.
c. 1.
Quintilian, Sermon. l. 1. Sat. 4.
Horace and Pers. Sat. 1.
Persius, all mentioned these two Authors, (and these only) together with
Aristophanes as the Great Masters of what we call The Ancient Comedy.

Cratinus, the Elder of the two was Famous in the 8 rst Olympiad Eusebius.
, some Twenty or Thirty Years before Aristophanes; and somewhat more after
AEschylus. But if we consider that he lived within Three of a Hundred Years, we
may conclude, that he enjoyed the Acquaintance and Conversation of both those
Poets, though so much a Senior to one, and Junior to the other. He was an
Athenian Suid.
born, and we don't find but that he spent all his long life in his Native
City: where, if he did not invent Comedy, he was at least the first who brought
it into some Form and Method, and made it fit for the Entertainment of a Civil
Audience. It Is true indeed, that the Art under this first Refinement, retained
too many Marks of its rude Original. Persons and Vices were exposed in
barefaced satire, and the Chief Magistrates of the Commonwealth ridiculed by
Name upon the Stage. Thus we find in Plutarch's Life of Pericles, several
passages out of Cratinus's Plays, where he reflected boldly on that Great
General; who at the same time by his Eloquence and his Arms, reigned almost
absolute Master of Athens.

He appears to have been an excessive Drinker; and the excuse he gave for the
Vice, was that 'twas absolutely necessary to the warming his Fancy, and the
putting a Soul into his Verse. Hence Horace makes use of his Judgment to show
what short-lived Creatures the Offspring of Water-Poets commonly prove. --
Prisco si credas, etc.
L. 1. Ep. 19. And for the same reason, Arislophanes in his Irene, has given a
pleasant account of Cratinus's Death, that it was caused by a fatal Swoon, at
the sight of a noble Cask of Wine split in pieces, and the Liquor lavishly
washing the Streets. -- (...), etc.


The time of his Death is preserved in the same Jest of Aristophanes; and
referred to the Year which the Lacedaemonians first beset Athens; which in all
probability was at the beginning of the first Peleponesian War, in the 87th
Olympiad.

Suidas tells us he wrote Twenty one Plays, and got Five Victories: leaving
only this short mark of his Excellencies, that he was (...) splendid and bright
in his Characters.

Eupolis was an Suid.
Athenian too, and followed the same Profession of diverting the Common People
with the Vices and Miscarriages of the Prime Ministers of State. He was but
Seventeen Years Old, when he first adventured to show himself on the Ibid.
Theater; where he seems to have been more severe and more impartial than
Cratinus; in one respect. For Pericles and Cimon being the two opposite
Patriots, and the two leading Men of the City in those times; Cratinus, though he
exposed Pericles, yet showed a great respect for Cimon, and commended him in
some Verses which are cited by Plutarch. Whereas Eupolis spared neither Party,
but ridiculed both those Great Captains; as the same Plutarch has recorded in
their Lives.

Eupolis, according to Suidas, perished by Shipwreck in the War with the
Lacedaemonians: on which occasion it was afterward publicly prohibited, that a
Poet should serve in War. It should seem, supposing this Relation to be true,
that his Body was recovered and brought to Shore: for Corinth. p. 97.
Pausanias describes his Tomb, as standing in the Road between Olympium and
Sicyonia: unless the (...) he mentions were only a (...), or, a Monument that
preserved no other Relics but his Name and Reputation.

Cicero Ad Attic. l. 6. Epist. 1.
observes that 'twas the common notion of People, that Eupolis was thrown into
the Sea by Alcibiades for traducing him in one of his Pieces: But adds withal,
that Eratosthenes had confuted this vulgar Opinion, by giving a List of the
Comedies which he wrote, after the time pitched on for that Misfortune.

He presented Seventeen Plays (the Names of most of which as cited by ancient
Authors, are collected by De Poet. Grac. temper. p. 38.
Vossius) and won Seven Suid.
Victories.

ANTIMACHVS.
THE particular time of Antimachus's coming into the World is not on Record:
but we are at no loss in sixing his Age, since that of his Great Patron
Lysander is so well understood; who won his Famous Victory against the
Athenians in the 4th Year of the 93d Olympiad Lib. 13. p. 390.
Diodorus Siculus relates from Apollonius, that the Poet Flourished under
Artaxerxes Son to Darius, which agrees with the time of Lysander.

He was born at Colophon in Ionia Suid.
not at Claros, as an ingenious Critic Le^
has mistaken. For when Ovid calls him the Clarian Poet, it is easy to
conceive, that the Old Town of Claros standing so very near Colophon, and being
so highly celebrated for the Temple of Apollo Clarius; might well give an
Epithet to the Neighboring Citizens, as it gave the chiefest Fame and Honor to
their City.

Stesimbrotus and Panyasis were his Instructors, and Grammar and Poesy the two
Professions he Suid.
followed: but it is likely he quitted the first Art, when he had raised a
sufficient Credit in the other.

He composed many Pieces in the Heroic way; that whick we find most talked of
was the Lysandria, a Poem on that Great General's Achievements. But however it
came to pass Lysander was so far from encouraging and rewarding his Labor,
that he gave away the Poetic Prize to a much inferior performer. Upon which
affront Antimachus burnt his Work. It seems Plato who was then a young Man, and
an intimate Friend of the Poets, comforted him in his Affliction with this
Consideration, that 'twas only the Ignorance of the Judges, which caused so
unjust a Sentence Plutarch in Lysand.
. They say too, that when Antimachus had called together a great Company, and
was reading that Poem to them; every one at last slipping away except Plato;
I Will read on still (cried Antimachus) Plato alone is a sufficient Audience.
Cicero in Bruto.
.

Hermesianax an Elegiack Poet, as he is cited in Lib. 13. p. 598.
Athaeneus, gives us an account of Antimachus's Lady, of his Travels for her
sake; and his sorrow for his Death, and his way of suppressing it. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Antimachus to win the Chrysean Dame
Passed old Paclole, and viewed the wealthy stream
But when interred in sam'd Dardania's soil
He left the Maid, and reached his Native Isle;
With Deathless Verse his Passion he allayed,
And his strains cured the Sorrows they displayed.


De Consolut. ad Apollon.
Plutarch tells us, this Lyde was the Poet's Wife; and that having lost Her, he
composed an Elegy inscribed to her Name: where reckoning up the strange
Misfortunes and Sufferings of other People; he lessened his own Grief and
Trouble by the recital of theirs.

He attempted a vast Poem on the Theban War; and it is commonly said he had
finished 24 Books of it, before he had brought his Heroes to sit down before
the City. Old Acron makes him the Cyclic Poet, whom Horace has exposed: and the
same too whom he has censured in that other place. Nec reditum Diomedis ab
interitu Meleagres.
Antimachus (as he says) having in Poem of the Return of Diomedes, begun the
Hero's Adventures, with the Death of his Uncle Meleager.

Lib. 10. c. 1.
Quintilian, when he has been giving Hesiod the Prize in the middle Style,
tells us, "That Antimachus or the contrary is commended for Force and Gravity,
and for his way of Expression by no means vulgar. Yet, though the common Judgment
of the Grammarians assigned him the Second place in the List of Heroic Poets;
he is very deficient, in Passion, in Pleasantness, in Disposition, and in the
whole Artifice of a Poem. So that, he gives a plain Argument, what great
difference there is between being Second to Homer, and being next to him."

The Emperor Hadrian. however celebrated as well for his Learning as his
Valor, yet has left no very good sign of his taste in Poetry; when the
Historian tells us, that he had a design of banishing Homer out of the World,
and of establishing Antimachus in his room Dio. Lib. 69. p. 790.
. Spartian in the Life of the same Emperor reports that he wrote obscure
Pieces in imitation of Antimachus. Whence the Great Casaubon has taken the
pains to prove that Poet guilty of the most affected Obscurity in those little
Fragments o^ Expressions that remain. These indeed are found chiefly among the
Glossographers, and owe their continuance in the World to the difficulty of
their Signification.

depiction of Menander MENANDER.
Apud Fuluium Vrsinum in marmore


MENANDER.
HE was born at Athens, in the same Year with the Famous Epicurus; which was
the Third of the 109th Vet. Inscript. ep. Gruder. and Meurs. de Archont. Athen.
Olympiad. The Old Grammarians give us strange relations of the early progress
of his Studies; and tells us what an odd Stratagem he invented to allay the
common Envy of the City, while he was only a Boy. But perhaps they might have
no other foundation for all these Stories, than the constant report of his
presenting his first Play, when very Young. Eusebius, has marked the Year of
this beginning of his Fame; the Fourth of the 114th Olympiad; Two Years after
the Death of Alexander the Great. But Meursius has proved a mistake of one Year
upon him in this point: and so by fixing it a Year sooner, has shown us that
the Poet was but Twenty Years Old when his first Work appeared on the Stage and
won the Prize. His happiness in introducing the New Comedy, and refining an Art
which had been so gross and so licentious in former times, quickly spread his
Name over the World. Lib. 7. c. 30.
Pliny informs us, that the Kings of Egypt and Macedon gave a noble Testimony
of his Worth; sending Ambassadors to desire his Company at their Courts, and
Fleets to bring him over: But that he himself left a nobler proof of his real
Excellencies, by preferring the free enjoyment of his Studies, to the Favors
and the Promises of Monarchs. Yet the Envy or the Corruption of his Countrymen
denied his Reputation the same Justice at home, which it found abroad. For he
is said A. Gell. lib. 17. c. 4.
to have won but Eight Victories, though he obliged them with above an Hundred
Plays.

Quintilian in his Judgment of Afranius the Roman Comedian, censures
Menander's Morals as much as he commends his Writings. And therefore in this
sense too Horace might have said Dicitur Afrani toga convenisse Lib. 2. Epist.
1. Verse. 57.
Menandro.
For our Grecian Poet was as true a Slave to Love as his Latin Imitator. But
then his Love is recorded to have been the honester of the two. For while
Afranius is charged with making lewd Courtship to his own Sex Quintilian 16.
l. 10. c. 1.
; Menander's Character at the worst makes him no more than (...) Suidas.
a Mad Fellow after Women.

We learn from Lib. 13. page 585.
Athenaeus, that his Mistress's Name was Glycera. And we may conclude she was
no extraordinary Beauty, from her odd mystical Apothegm to the Poet; by which
she gave him to understand, that an Ugly Face ought no more to prejudice one
against the Body which it belonged to; than the Scum on the top of a Mess of
Milk should hinder one from using what was underneath. It seems her Honesty had
not much advantage of her Features, for she admitted the Court of Philemon; who
had before been Menander's Rival in his Art. Hence, when Philemon in one of his
Pieces, took occasion to honor Her with the Epithet of Good; Menander, in his
next Work opposed him with this Assertion, That no Miss could be Good
Athenaeus. l. 14. p. 554.
.

Phaedrus in one of his Lib. 5. Fab. 2.
Fables, has given Menander the Gate, and the Dress of a most affected Fop,
Unguento delibutus, vestitu adfluens,
Veniebat gressu delicatulo and languido.
But it is likely that this description of his Person is the only true thing in
the Story. For Phaedrus ^ounds his Tale upon this Notion, that Menander was not
known to Demetrius Phaleraeus, except in his Works. Whereas we are assured from
good Authority they were Scholars together under D. Laert in Theophrast.
Theophrastus And farther that when Demetrius was Arraigned at Athens for
Tyranny, Menander was like to have suffered Death, for no other Crime, but the
repute of being his Idem in Demetrio Phaler.
Friend.

Menander died in the Third Year of the 122d Olympiad: as we are taught by the
same Old Inscription, to which we were obliged for fixing the time of his Vid
Meurs. de Archont. Athen. Lib. 4. c. 18. p. 182.
Birth. His Tomb, in Pausanias's Age, was to be seen at Athens, in the way from
the Piraeus to the City: close by the Honorary Monument of Pausan. Attic. p. 3.
Euripides; whom (as Lib. 10. c. 1.
Quintilian observes) he zealously imitated in a different Field. The following
Verses pass for his Epitaph in the Page 308. l. 3.
Anthologia. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Stranger! this Stone preserves Menander's Name,
And that poor Dust which escaped his Funeral Flame.
But would you find Menander, ask above:
And seek the Laureat in the Court of Jove.
Of his Works, which amounted to above an hundred Comedies, we have had a
double Loss: the Originals being not only vanished; but the greatest part of
them when Copied by Terence, having unfortunately perished by Shipwreck, before
they saw Sueton. in vit. Terent.
Rome. Yet the four Plays which Terence borrowed from him before that sad
Accident happened, are still preserved in the Roman Habit: and it is from the
Character of Terence, that most Men now judge of Menander. Whatever the Latin
Author has deserved by his exact painting of the Manners; by the usefulness of
his Sentences, or by his pleasant and Gentlemanlike Railleries; Menander
challenges a large share with him in the Applause. And this Applause is all
that we can give him upon our own Judgment. The rest of his Praises we must
take at Second-hand, and only Clap for Company.

We find the Old Masters of Rhetoric recommending his Works, as the true
Patterns of every Beauty, and every Grace of Public Speaking. Lib. 30, c. 1.
Quintilian declares that a careful Imitation of Menander only, will satisfy
all the Rules he has laid down in his Institutions. It Is in Menander that he
would have his Orator search for a Copiousness of Invention, for a happy
elegance of Expression; and especially for an Universal Genius, able to
accommodate itself naturally to all Persons, and Things, and Affections. And
it is by these Accomplishments that he owns Menander to have robbed his
Competitors in Comedy, of their Name and Credit; and to have cast a Cloud over
their unequal Glory, by the Superior Brightness of his own.

His wonderful Talent at expressing Nature, in every Condition and under every
Accident of Life, has always made the Noblest Part of his Character. 'Twas this
which gave occasion to the fine turn of Aristophanes the Grammarian; when he
asked that gentile Question, -- (...)
(...) Syrian. Comm. ad Hermogen. p. 38.

O MENANDER, and Nature,
Which of you Copi'd your Pieces from the other's Work?
And Ovid has made choice of the same Excellency, to support the Immortality he
has given him. Dum fallax servus, durus pater, improba laena,
Vivet: dum meretrix blanda, Menander (...)
erit.
Yet his Wit is recorded to have been answerable to his Art; and his Sales such
as could be supplied only from the same Waters whence Venus sprung Plutarch in
Compar. Aristoph. and Menand.
.

After all, Julius Caesar has left in short, the loftiest as well as the
justest Praise of Menander's Works, when he calls Terence only a Half-Menander
Tu quoque, tu in summis, o Dimidiate Menander. Sueton. in vii. Terent.
. For while the Virtues of the Latin Poet continually affect our Mind, and
engage almost all our Admiration; it is impossible we should raise a higher
Notion of Excellency, than to conceive the Great Original still shining with
half it is Luster unreflected; and preserving an equal part of its Graces, above
the Power of the best Copier in the World.

depiction of Philemon PHILEMON.
Apud Fuluium Vrsinum in nomismate aereo


PHILEMON.
WE cannot fully understand Menander's Story without some acquaintance with
Philemon, his double Rival in his Muse and in his Mistress. He was born at
Syracuse in Sicily according to Suidas, or, as Lib. 14. p. 671.
Strabo, in the City called Soli or Pompeiopolis in Cilicia.

He wrote in the New Comedy, like Menander, and though much inferior to him, yet
by the partiality of the Judges, often balk'd him of the Prize. Hence Menander
meeting him once in the Street, asked him, Prithee tell me fairly Philemon, if
you don't always blush, when the Victory is decreed you against me Aul. Gell.
l. 17. c. 4.
?

His Plays were very numerous, of which we have a great many Moral Fragments in
the common Editions of the Minor Poets. Plautus borrowed his Comedy of the
Merchant, from one of his, of the same Title in Greek (...)
; as is acknowledged in the Prologue. Graece haec vocatur Emperos Philemonis
Eadem Latin Mercator Marci Accii.


We are told by a good Judge Apuleius Florid. l. 3.
, that though he must yield the precedence to Menander; yet there were to be
found in him a great many handsome pieces of Wit: Intrigues pleasantly turned:
Persons accommodated to the Nature of things, and Sentences to the Use of Life:
Jests not below the Sock, and serious Reflections not so high as the Buskin.

Lucian has got him down among his Long-Livers, and given him 97 Years, making
him expire in a Fit of Laughter. Perhaps, as the most ingenious Tanaquil Faber
has conjectured, when the Ancients tell us that he and another Comic Poet
Philistion.
died with Laughing, they might mean no more than this Allegorical Sense, that
they were entire Masters of the Ridicule, and refined Buffoonry. In the same
manner, as when they report, that Democritus did nothing but Laugh, and
Heraclitus on the other hand was always in tears: they might design no more,
than to let us understand, that the first of these Philosophers, having a full
and sensible knowledge of the Vanity of all Human things, esteemed them only as
the Toys of Children, and the Sport of Wise Men. While Heraclitus took the
matter more to heart, and thought the most ordinary accidents of Life deserved
a serious pity: and that the Persons concerned in them, were to be brought to a
right sense, by a most sober Application, and the Arts of a studied condolement.

But we have two larger Accounts of his Death; from Suidas and Apuleius, which
as they don't much prejudice one another, so they are not utterly
irreconcilable to this first Notion: Since they insist only on Circumstances
that attended his Death, without expressing the immediate occasion of it.

Suidas his Story is to this purpose. When the Athenians were engaged in a War
with Antigonus; Philemon living in the Piraeus, saw in his Dream Nine Virgins
going out of the House: he fancied that he asked them what their Design was;
and for what reason they were so unkind to leave him; and thought they made
Answer, they were going to another place, it not being lawful that he should
hear them any longer. The Poet waking from his Dream told the Boy that sat by
him, the whole Business. And afterward falling to Work on finishing the Comedy
that he was then about, he wrapped himself up and went to sleep. The People who
were in the House suspected nothing for some time, till at last wondering at
his long Rest, they came into his Apartment, and found him Dead.

Florid. l. 3.
Apuleius thus gives the Relation. He was reciting in a Public place, one of
his newest pieces; and having got as far as the third Act with universal
Applause: a violent storm of Rain obliged the Company to break up; but not
without a Promise from the Poet, to give them the rest of the Play the day
after. Accordingly the next day, a vast Multitude met; great crouding there was
for places, and great expectation of the Entertainment. At last when every ones
patience had been pretty well tired; some of the fleetest in the Company were
dispatched to enquire after Philemon, and to bring him along with them. The
Messengers taking their way to his House; found him dead in his Bed: still
lying in a studious posture: his Hands clasped fast about his Book, and his
Face leaning over it.

BION and MOSCHVS.
THE Prodigious Credit of Theocritus in the Pastoral way, enabled him not only
to engross the Fame of his Rivals, but their Works too. In the time of the
later Grecians all the Ancient Idylliums were heaped up together into one
Collection, and Theocritus his Name prefixed to the whole Volumn. On which
occasion there is a pretty Greek Epigram in the Anthologia; attributed to
Artemidorus. (...)
(...)
The scattered Muses rallying on the Plains,
A single Flock, a single Fold contains.


Learned Men have not yet adjudg'd a great many of the Spoils to their proper
Owners. But they have admitted the Claims of Bion and Moschus, to a few little
Pieces, sufficient to make us inquisitive about their Character and Story. And
it happens very pleasantly, that we must be indebted to each of them, for our
knowledge of the other. For Moschus, by composing his Delicate Elegy on Bion,
has given us the best Memorials of Bion's Life; and the best Instance of his
own Vein in Poetry.

Bion then, was of Smyrna, the same Famous City, which shows the fairest Title
to the Birth of Homer; in his Name of Melisigenes, taken from the River Meles,
which slows not far from its Walls. It Is to this River that Moschus addressing
himself, makes the sweet Comparison of these two Poets. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
This, now, a Second Grief, thou Tuneful Stream,
This, a New Grief, O Meles wounds thy Fame.
Long since, alas! the Muse's sweetest Tongue
Thy Homer fell; and thou his dying Song
Born on thy hapless Current, did convey:
While thy loud Plaints ran sounding to the Sea.
A second Son now claim's thy weeping Power,
And racking Grief like Drought, consumes thy Store.
Both chose pure Fountains to refresh their Muse;
He Helicon, and He fair Arethuse.
He sung Achilles, and the Atridan flame,
And the bright Mischief of the fatal Dame.
But He, nor Arms, nor Tears, but Gentle Swains:
Nor ever left his Flock to tend his Strains.
To frame shrill Pipes was Bion's envied knack,
And please Young Lovers, while their glowing smack
Came ecchoing in his Tunes. Sometimes he bowed
To ease fair Heifers of their Milky Load.
About his Neck sweet Cupid clinging Played;
And every Kiss He gave the Boy, the Mother's Love repaid.


This is all the information we have, as to his Country, his Credit and his
Profession. The Age of him and Moschus too may be settled from the same
Authority. For Theocritus is introduced Verse. 94. (...), etc.
as bewailing Bion's Death among the Syracusians, while Moschus was mourning
the same loss in Sicily. And therefore all the Three Pastoral Poets must have
been Cotemporaries. And since Theocritus is so well known to have flourished
under the famous Ptolomy Philadelphus, Bion and Moschus, must be placed in the
same happy Times of Wit and Learning: though perhaps they had not the honor to
be encouraged by the same Royal Patron. Now Eusebius informs us that Ptolomy
Philadelphus began his Reign in the 4th Year of the 123d Olympiad, and
concluded it in the Second Year of the 133d.

Bion unhappily perished by Poison: and, it should seem, not accidentally, but
by the appointment of some Great Man. For thus Moschus describes his Fate. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Begin, sad Nymps, begin the Mournful Strains:
Poison, Poor Bion, Poison fired thy Veins.
But, ah! could Poison to thy Mouth be born,
And touch those Lips, and not the Honey turn?
Ah! could the Savage Wretch that mixed the Draught,
Deaf to thy Song still keep the Barbarous Thought!
Ah! could thy Charms not break the dire Command,
And shake the Portion from his trembling Hand!


It was not enough, what was before observed of Theocritus, that he had
engrossed the Credit and the Writings of the other Pastoral Poets; for, it
seems he had robed one of them of his very Name: Since we find some Critics
maintaining that Moschus and Theocritus are the same Person. But they are
sufficiently confuted by the remark already made, that in Moschus's Elegy on
Bion, he brings in Theocritus bewailing the same Misfortune in another Country.
Suidas will have Moschus to have been a Professor of Grammar at Syracuse. But
it is certain that when he made that Elegy, his residence was among the
Italians, (though perhaps in those parts which lay over against Sicily) where he
seems to have been Scholar to Bion; and probably his Successor in Governing the
Poetic School. Most of this may be fairly deduced from his own Words. -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
And I, Ausonia's Swain, to Verse commit
Her Tears: no Stranger to the soft Delight
Of Dorian Numbers, which thy Honored School
Boast, the dear Relics of their Master's Soul.
Thy Wealth finds other Heirs: with me remain:
Thy Noblest Gifts; with me thy Pipe and Vein.


The few Remains of these two Poets are reckoned among the sweetest Pieces of
the Ancient Delicacy. It is observable that Moschus, tho Scholar to the other
yet is always honored with the Precedence by the Critics, who have Published
or Ilustrated their Works. The occasion of this favor was probably their
finding a little nearer resemblance to Theocritus in His Conduct and Style;
than they could observe in Bion's. Not but that he and Bion both, seem in a
great measure to have neglected that blunt Rusticity and Plainness, which was
so admired an Art of their Great Rival. For they aim always at something more
polite and gentile, though equally natural, in their Compositions. Indeed, the
greatest part of their Subjects, not requiring the direct talk and Conversation
of Shepherds, may be excused, if they are adorned with more Grace and Elegancy,
as long as the Original Simplicity is not destroyed. As the Pastoral Muse is
not to be set on a Throne like a Princess, so she looks altogether as ungainly
if she always lies along, picking the Grass, or kissing the Green Turf. The
main Beauty is what Boileau calls descendre sans bassesse, to stoop without
creeping; and this perhaps may shine as fair in them, as in Theocritus.
However, they will pretend to have some advantage of him, in the Happiness of
Wit, and of Expression; in the moving softness of Passion; in the nice choice
and order of Words, and the sweet Harmony of Verse which flows from those
Graces. And, in short, if their Works are not admitted among some for so true
Pastorals, they certainly pass among most Men for better Poems.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Abel Swall, at the Unicorn in St. Paul's-Church-Yard.
CAmbden's Britania, newly Translated into English with large Additions and
Improvements, and Maps of every Country, engraved anew. Folio. Thesaurus
Geographicus, a new Body of Geography, containing the General Doctrine of that
Science, and a particular Description, Geographical, Topographical and
Political of all the known Countries of the Earth, with Maps engraven Copper.
Folio. Monsieur L. E. Du Pin's History of Ecclesiastical Writers, containing an
Account of the Lives and Writings, and an Abridgment of the Works of the
Primitive Fathers, and all Ecclesiastical Writers from the time of our Savior,
to the end of the Ninth Century. Folio, Seven Tomes. The Evangelical History,
or the Life of our Savior Jesus Christ, comprehensively and plainly related.
Adorned with Copper Cuts. 8o. The Evangelical History, Part II. being the Lives
and Acts of the Holy Apostles. Illustrated with the Effigies of the Apostles,
and a Map of their Travels, engraven in Copper. 8o. The Essays or Councils,
Civil and Moral, of Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, and Vicount of St. Alban;
with a Character of Q. Elizabeth now added in this Edition. 8o. The History of
the Revolutions in Sweden, occasioned by the Change of Religion, and Alteration
of Government in that Kingdom. Translated from French, by J. Mitchel, M. D. 8o.
Romae Antiquae Notitia: Or the Antiquities of Rome, containing a short History
of the Commonwealth; and an Account of their Religion, Government, Customs,
etc. By Basil Kennet, of C. C. C. Oxon. 8o. C. Jul. Caesaris Comment. cum Notis
and Interpretat. Joan. Goduini in usum Delphini. 8o. P. Ovidii Metamorphoseon.
Interpret. and Notis illustravit D. Crispinus in usum Delph. recensuit J.
Friend, Oxon. 8o. T. Lucretii Cari de Natura Rerum Libri. Interpretatione and
Notis illustravit. Tho. Creech. 8o. P. Virgilii Opera, Notis and Interpret.
illustravit. Carol. Ruaeus in usum Delphini. 8o. Eutropii Historiae Romanae
Breviar. cum Notis and Emendationibus Annae, Tannaq. Fabri Filiae, in usum
Delphini. 8o. The English Historical Library, Part I. A short View and
Character of most of the Writers now extant, either in Print or Manuscript,
which may be serviceable to the Undertakers of a General History of this
Kingdom. By W. Nicolson, M. A. Arch Deacon of Carlisle. 8o. The English
Historical Library. Part II. Giving a Catalogue of most of our Ecclesiastical
Historians; and some Critical Reflections upon the Chief of them. With a
Preface correcting the Errors, and supplying the Defects of the former Part. By
W. Nicolson. 8o. Medulla Historiae Anglicanae: A Compendious History of the
Monarchs of England, from the time of Julius Caesar, to the Reign of his
present Majesty, K. William 8o. The Comedies of Terence, made English; with his
Life, and some Remarks at the end. 8o. Plautus's Comedies: Amphitryon, Rudens
and Epidicus, Englished; with critical Remarks 8o. The Courtiers Oracle: Or,
the Art of Prudence, Written in Spanish by Baltazar Gracian; and now Englished.
8o. Jacobi Robaulti Tractatus Physicus, cum Ammadversionibus Ant. le Grand. cui
accessit ejusdem Rohaulti de Art Mechanica Tractatus Mathematicus, sigur.
aeneis illustrat. 8o. Jo. Clerici Physica, sive de Rebus Corporeis Libri
Quinque 8o. Liturgia Ecclesiae Anglicanae Latin. 12o.
Now newly Published, Archaeologiae Grecae: Or, the Antiquities of Greece,
containing an Account of the Civil Government of Athens. The Religion, Laws,
Customs, etc. of the Ancient Grecians. By Potter, A. M. and Fellow of Lincoln
College, Oxon. Illustrated with Sculptures. 8o. The Lives and Characters of the
Ancient Greek Poets. By Basil Kennet of C.C.C. Oxon. Adorned with their Heads
in Sculpture. 8o.


ADVERTISEMENT.
The Lives and Characters of the Ancient Latin Poets, will be Published with
all convenient speed; and Printed in the same Volume.

